The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Cumulative Book Review Digest, Volume 1, 1905
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Cumulative Book Review Digest, Volume 1, 1905

Author: Various

Editor: C. E. Fanning

Release date: November 20, 2016 [eBook #53565]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Juliet Sutherland and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CUMULATIVE BOOK REVIEW DIGEST, VOLUME 1, 1905 ***

[Illustration:

  THE
  CUMULATIVE BOOK
  REVIEW DIGEST

  EVALUATION OF
  LITERATURE
]

                               Volume I.
                                  1905

                     Complete in a single alphabet


                        THE H. W. WILSON COMPANY
                              MINNEAPOLIS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     Cumulative Book Review Digest

 VOL. I.                     DECEMBER, 1905                       NO. 10


                           PUBLISHED MONTHLY

                       _The_ H. W. WILSON COMPANY

                              MINNEAPOLIS

                            New York office
                         W. C. ROWELL, Manager
                            27 East 21st St.


                         TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION

           Per volume, ending with the December number, $5 00

THE CUMULATIVE BOOK REVIEW DIGEST subscriptions will be taken for the
volume only, the volume ending with the December number which is a full
cumulation for the year. The DIGEST will be sent to subscribers until an
order to discontinue is received with remittance for amount due.


                          TERMS OF ADVERTISING

            ───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┬───────
             SPACE │ 1 mo. │3 mos. │6 mos. │9 mos. │12 mos.
            ───────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼───────
            1 page │ $15 00│ $14 25│ $13 50│ $12 75│ $12 00
            ½ page │   8 00│   7 60│   7 20│   6 80│   6 40
            ¼ page │   4 50│   4 25│   4 05│   3 80│   3 60
            ⅛ page │   2 25│   2 15│   2 00│   1 90│   1 80
            1 inch │   1 25│   1 15│   1 10│   1 05│   1 00
            ───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴───────

Combined rate for The Cumulative Book Index, The Readers’ Guide to
Periodical Literature and The Cumulative Book Review Digest: One page
$25; one-half page, $12.50; one-inch, $2. Special rates on yearly
contracts for a full page or more.




                         Publishers’ Statement
                  _THE CUMULATIVE REFERENCE LIBRARY._


                     _SETS OF MAGAZINES FOR SALE._

We have purchased two large stocks of miscellaneous magazines which we
are classifying and collecting into sets, especially for years 1900 to
date. We shall not be able to print a list of these for several weeks
but shall be glad to quote prices for any sets, volumes or odd numbers.


                              _The Need._

THE READERS’ GUIDE TO PERIODICAL LITERATURE, 1900-1904, and the current
numbers open up a rich field to the investigator, but disappointment
often results owing to the library’s not having the articles and if the
articles are in the files, they are usually bound and do not circulate
and the student can not use the material as advantageously as though it
were in single article form.


                   _How We Propose to Meet the Need._

We have already purchased large quantities of magazines and we propose
to arrange articles cut from all magazines we index and many others in
strict accordance with the subject classification of the READERS’ GUIDE.
We shall be able to fill orders for certain articles or all articles on
a subject. When requested, we shall be able to include much that is not
indexed. Every article will be neatly stitched in a cover.


                              _The Cost._

For the first article in each order the charge will be ten cents and for
each additional article five cents. Articles may be _retained two weeks_
not including time in transit.


                       _Ready January 1st, 1906._

We shall be glad to receive a trial order any time after January first.


                            _Incidentally._

We shall collect many duplicate magazines and we propose to make up sets
of magazines, especially for the five years covered by the READERS’
GUIDE TO PERIODICAL LITERATURE, 1900-1904. We hope to be able to supply
odd numbers, volumes, or sets and shall be glad to receive lists of
wants and also lists of duplicates which libraries may wish to dispose
of.

Lists of duplicates for sale should be accompanied by lists of wants
since we can pay more in exchange than in cash.




                             Announcements


The University of Chicago Press announces the addition to its list of
publications of two new journals, to be devoted to the interests of the
Ancient Classics; viz. Classical Philology, published for the University
of Chicago, and the Classical Journal, published for the newly formed
Classical Association of the Middle West and South. The former will
contain scientific articles and critical reviews; the latter, articles
and reviews of a more general nature, with special reference to the
needs of teachers.

As usual, The Outlook’s illustrated Magazine Number for December is also
its Annual Book Number, and this is in fact the seventeenth year of the
appearance of such a yearly survey of the books of the season. In
addition to a large number of pages devoted to a classified review of
recent literature in its more important departments, there are special
features dealing with notable literary personalities, and an article
dealing with the American publisher and including a dozen or more
portraits of the heads of the most famous American publishing houses.
Half a dozen or more authors of note have been chosen as the subjects of
personal articles, accompanied in each case with a portrait.

“Russia under the Great Shadow,” by Luigi Villari, is not only one of
the most readable of the recent books on the realm of the Czar, but
decidedly valuable. In Mr. Villari’s handsome and generously illustrated
volume the reader will find a most interesting and temperate account of
existing conditions in Russia, based on the author’s recent journey
throughout the empire. It is comprehensive, impartial, well-reasoned and
trustworthy, and will undoubtedly attract wide attention.

In the December issue of the “Political Science Quarterly” (Ginn &
Company) Professor George H. Haynes of Worcester, Mass., discusses the
tendency toward popular control of senatorial elections, and the methods
taken in the various commonwealths for limiting the choice of the
legislature in the selection of United States senators. Professor Frank
Haigh Dixon of Dartmouth College describes recent attempts on the part
of the states to regulate railways; and Mr. Royal Meeker analyzes the
arguments advanced by supporters of the pending shipping subsidy bill.
Other leading articles in the December Quarterly are “The Municipal Code
of Indiana,” by Professor Fairlie of the University of Michigan;
“Communistic Societies in the United States,” by Professor Bushe of
Clark College; “Berlin’s Tax Problem,” by Professor Brooks of Swarthmore
College; and “Private Property in Maritime War” by Giulio Marchetti
Ferrante, Secretary of the Italian Legation at Berne, Switzerland.




      List of Publications from which Digests of Reviews are Made


 Acad.—Academy, London.
 Am. Hist. R.—American Historical Review, 66 Fifth Ave., N. Y.
 Am. J. Soc.—American Journal of Sociology. $2. University of Chicago
    Press, Chicago, Ill.
 Am. J. Theol.—American Journal of Theology. $3. University of Chicago
    Press, Chicago, Ill.
 Ann. Am. Acad.—Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
    Science. $6. Philadelphia.
 Arena.—Arena. $2.50. Albert Brandt, Trenton, N. J.
 Astrophys. J.—Astrophysical Journal. $4. University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, Ill.
 Ath.—Athenæum. $4.25. London, England.
 Atlan.—Atlantic Monthly. $4. Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 4 Park St.,
    Boston, Mass.
 Bib. World.—Biblical World. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
 Bookm.—Bookman. $2. Dodd, Mead & Co., 372 5th Ave., N. Y.
 Bot. Gaz.—Botanical Gazette. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
 Cath. World.—Catholic World. $3. 120-122 W. 60th St., New York.
 Critic.—Critic. $2. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New Rochelle, N. Y.
 Dial.—Dial. $2. Fine Arts Building, Chicago, Ill.
 Educ. R.—Educational Review. $3. Educational Review Pub. Co., Columbia
    University, N. Y.
 El. Sch. T.—Elementary School Teacher. University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago.
 Eng. Hist. R.—English Historical Review.
 Engin. N.—Engineering News. 220 Broadway, N. Y.
 Forum.—Forum. $2. Forum Publishing Co., 123 E. 23d St., N. Y.
 Hibbert J.—Hibbert Journal. Williams & Norgate, London, England.
 Ind.—Independent. $2. 130 Fulton St., N. Y.
 Int. J. Ethics.—International Journal of Ethics, 1415 Locust St.,
    Philadelphia.
 Int. Studio.—International Studio. $5. John Lane, 67 5th Av., N. Y.
 J. Geol.—Journal of Geology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.
 J. Pol. Econ.—Journal of Political Economy. University of Chicago
    Press, Chicago, Ill.
 Lit. D.—Literary Digest. $3. 44-60 East 23d Street, New York.
 Lond. Times.—London Times (literary supplement to weekly edition),
    London, England.
 Mod. Philol.—Modern Philology. $3. University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, Ill.
 Nation.—Nation. $3. P. O. Box 794, New York.
 Nature.—Nature, 66 Fifth Ave., N. Y.
 N. Y. Times.—New York Times Saturday Review. New York.
 Outlook.—Outlook. $3. Outlook Co., 287 4th Ave., New York.
 Philos. R.—Philosophical Review, Cornell University, Ithaca. N, Y.
 Phys. R.—Physical Review, Cornell University, Ithaca, N. Y.
 Pol. Sci. Q.—Political Science Quarterly. $3. Ginn & Co., 29 Beacon
    St., Boston.
 Psychol. Bull.—Psychological Bulletin. Princeton, New Jersey.
 Pub. Opin.—Public Opinion, 44-60 East 23d St., New York.
 Reader.—Reader Magazine. $3. Bobbs-Merrill Co., Indianapolis, Ind.
 R. of Rs.—Review of Reviews. $2.50. Review of Reviews Co., 13 Astor
    Place, New York.
 Sat. R.—Saturday Review (London).
 School R.—School Review. $1.50. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
    Ill.
 Science, n.s.—Science (new series). $5. Garrison-on-Hudson, N. Y.
 Spec.—Spectator (London).
 Yale R.—Yale Review, New Haven, Conn.


                          OTHER ABBREVIATIONS:

  =Abbreviations of Publishers’ Names= will be found in the Publishers’
    Directory at the end of The Cumulative Book Index.

  =An Asterisk (*) before the price indicates= those books sold at a
    limited discount and commonly known as net books. Books subject to
    the rules of the American Publishers’ Association are marked by a
    double asterisk (**) when the bookseller is required to maintain the
    list price; by a dagger (†) when the maximum discount is fixed at 20
    and 10 per cent, as is allowable in the case of fiction.

  =The plus and minus signs= preceding the names of the magazines
    indicate the degree of favor or disfavor of the entire review.

  =In the reference to a magazine=, the first number refers to the
    volume, the next to the page and the letters to the date.

  =In cumulated numbers=, the new entries for that number are indicated
    by an asterisk (*).

                  *       *       *       *       *

The publications, named above, undoubtedly represent the leading reviews
of the English-speaking world. Few libraries are able to subscribe for
all and the smaller libraries are supplied with comparatively few of the
periodicals from which the digests are to be culled. For this reason the
digest will be of greater value to the small libraries, since it places
at their disposal, in most convenient form, a vast amount of valuable
information about books, which would not otherwise be available.

We shall endeavor to make the descriptive notes so comprehensive, and
the digests so full and accurate, that librarians who do not have access
to the reviews themselves, will be able to arrive at substantially
correct appreciations of the value of the books reviewed.

This is particularly true in regard to the English periodicals, which
are practically out of the reach of the ordinary library; we shall
endeavor to make the digest of these reviews so complete that there will
be little occasion to refer to the original publications.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                   The Cumulative Book Review Digest
             Devoted to the Valuation of Current Literature
    Digests of reviews appearing in January—December 1905, magazines




                                   A


=Abbey, Henry.= Poems. 4th ed. *$1.15. Appleton.

  “The content-matter consists for the most part of simple ballads,
  lyrics and poems for special occasions. In the present edition the
  author has brought together all his verse that he cares to preserve
  from previous editions and to these poems he has added a number of new
  compositions.”—Arena.

  “The charm of his work lies rather in the pleasing lines that appeal
  rather to those who love the simple and quiet lays. Many of them are
  delightfully-told legends and ballads that will linger in the memory.”

       + =Arena.= 33: 341. Mr. ‘05. 460w.


=Abbot, Henry L.= Problems of the Panama canal. $1.50. Macmillan.

  Dating this discussion from the failure of the De Lesseps company,
  Gen. Abbot who is consulting engineer of the new Panama company, makes
  a technical study of the whole problem. He includes a “summary
  comparison of the routes of the old and new companies, a description
  of the physical conditions existing on the isthmus, the Chagres river
  problem, the disposal of rainfall in the basin of the stream, and the
  last chapter explains the plans proposed for the canal by the French
  company and by the former Isthmian canal commission, and the
  construction of a sea-level canal.” (N. Y. Times). Everything relating
  to the best possible canal construction is covered, and to aid in
  clearness, there are added a number of tables, maps, diagrams, &c.

  “It would be difficult to find anywhere one better qualified to
  discuss the Panama problems than General Abbot.”

     + + =Engin.= N. 53: 645. Je. 15, ‘05. 340w.

         =Nation.= 80: 459. Je. 8, ‘05. 120w.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 394. Ag. 24, ‘05. 860w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 249. Ap. 15, ‘05. 100w. (Statement of
         contents.)

  “Gen. Abbot has made a valuable contribution to the technical
  literature of the Panama canal.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 275. Ap. 29, ‘05. 830w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 394. Je. 10, ‘05. 130w.

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 766. Je. ‘05. 300w.


=Abbott, Jacob.= Rollo books. 14v. ea. 50c. Crowell.

  An attractive, new popular priced edition which retains the original
  “Rollo” illustrations and includes Rollo learning to talk; Rollo
  learning to read; Rollo at work; Rollo at play; Rollo at school;
  Rollo’s vacation; Rollo’s experiments; Rollo’s museum; Rollo’s
  travels; Rollo’s correspondence; Rollo’s philosophy—Water; Air; Fire;
  Sky.


=Abbott, Lyman.= Christian ministry. **$1.50. Houghton.

  This new book of essays is based on two courses of lectures given by
  Dr. Abbott before the Yale and Pacific Theological seminaries. It
  answers the question, Why do people go to church?

  “Dr. Abbott writes with vision, power, tact, and rare literary
  felicity.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 384. O. ‘05. 180w.

  “It is a liberal view of the ministry and of the church, arising from
  a profound faith in Christianity, not merely as a form of teaching but
  as a power derived from a Person.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 390. Je. 10, ‘05. 270w.

  “The book is pervaded by that newer and higher conception of religion
  that is becoming more and more prevalent, viz.: that religion is not
  ecclesiastical or dogmatic, but a living power in the heart of every
  individual.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 413. S. 23, ‘05. 380w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 752. D. ‘05. 160w.


=Abbott, Lyman.= Industrial problem. **$1. Jacobs.

  The William Levi Bull lectures for 1905. “The first lecture endeavors
  to define the industrial problem: the other three propose as the
  political solution, regulation; as the economic solution,
  reorganization; and as the ethical solution, regeneration.” (Outlook.)

         =Ind.= 59: 811. O. 5, ‘05. 240w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 692. Jl. 15, ‘05. 170w.


=Abbott, Lyman.= Personality of God. **30c. Crowell.

  A widely discussed sermon preached before the Harvard students, in
  which Dr. Abbott gives his definition of God. He aims to show the
  honest, sincere and rational man who is confused by the difference of
  opinion between a certain school of theologians and a certain school
  of scientists, that a belief in the Fatherhood of God is consistent
  with an acceptance of a thoroly modern scientific conception of the
  universe. The binding is uniform with the “What is worth while
  series.”

         =Outlook.= 79: 760. Mr. 25, ‘05. 30w.

  “The combined simplicity and the power of this address are great. It
  is interpretative to a rare degree. One breathes ‘an ampler ether, a
  diviner air’ while reading it.”

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 241. Jl. ‘05. 200w.


* =Abraham, Rev. W. H.= Church and state in England. *$1.40. Longmans.

  This history of the relation of church and state is written to aid the
  student of their present relations. The period preceding the conquest
  is first treated and the chapters which follow cover the Norman
  period, the troubles with the papacy from Henry II to Richard II, the
  beginning of constitutional church government, the growth of abuses,
  the beginning of reform, the subjection of the church to the state and
  later temporarily to the papacy, the Elizabethan settlement, the
  Puritans, Latitudinarian troubles, and the growth of Erastian ideas.
  In a final chapter entitled, The next step, Dr. Abraham makes
  suggestions for the future.

  * “On the whole we cannot commend this book; it ministers to prejudice
  rather than to tolerance, and its author cannot be said to be inspired
  by the spirit of true historical investigation.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 590. My. 13. 180w.

  * “There is a little fault to be found with Dr. Abraham’s narrative of
  the past. The point at which we should part company with Dr. Abraham
  is to be found in his proposals for the future.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 558. Ap. 15, ‘05. 240w.


=Acworth, William Mitchell.= Elements of railway economics. *70c.
Oxford.

  A preface states that this book is but a fragment of a complete work
  which the author has in mind, and is issued to meet the present need
  of an English text-book in railway economics. It deals with railways
  and railway business from an economic point of view and considers
  railway capital, expenditure, income, charges and rates, closing with
  a chapter upon the interference of parliament. Altho English
  experience furnishes the illustrations the discussion is applicable to
  all railways however owned or managed.

  “The ordinary reader, if he will take the trouble really to master the
  figures here tabulated and the close reasoning to which they lead,
  will find the admirable little book now at his disposal make him quite
  sufficiently conversant with the subject.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 99: 849. Je. 24, ‘05. 430w.


=Adam, Juliette Lamber (Mme. Edmond).= My literary life, **$2.50.
Appleton.

  There is a fascination about Madam Adam’s intense, vivacious
  interpretation of the meanings of things that is not easily resisted.
  Her literary career, outlined here from the time of her unfortunate
  marriage to the founding of her salon, is linked with the life of
  France during the stormy days of the second empire, and reflects the
  temper of French society, thought and politics of the day. She rambles
  on delightfully about the personal qualities of George Sand, Daniel
  Stern, Edmond About, Gustave Flaubert, Madam Viardot, Jules Simon, and
  hosts of other notables, revealing ever and anon her own radical
  notions and violent tendencies. There are a number of full-page
  pictures of men and women of the times.

  “Altogether this is a most delightful, inspiring and informative book,
  worth all the recent volumes of memoirs put together; the translation
  is quite excellent; in fact, it does not read like a translation at
  all.” Frank Schloesser.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 34. Ja. 14, ‘05. 510w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 186. F. ‘05. 310w.

  “Chief defect (or excellence) is its haphazard garrulity.
  Reminiscences give the book its value, apart from our interest in the
  very communicative lady who writes it.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 21. Ja. 1, ‘05. 350w.

  “A very readable book. In parts jerky and incoherent.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 121. Ja. 28, ‘05. 240w.


=Adams, Andy.= The outlet. †$1.50. Houghton.

  The author, who saw the beginning of the custom of wintering Texan
  cattle in the Northwest, the measure which brought the extermination
  of the bison and the confinement of the Indians to their reservations,
  and who had some experience with railway companies and their methods
  of caring for cattle, and their prices with contractors, and with the
  Congressional lobbyist has woven all these things into his story.

  “The book needs a glossary if it is to be thoroughly understood by
  English readers.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 665. Je. 24, ‘05. 390w.

  “Not the least effective part of the book consists of the dialogue.
  The success of this book is the more notable from the entire absence
  of anything resembling a love story.” Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + + =Forum.= 37: 112. Jl. ‘05. 410w.

  “He tells of the dangers of the great drive, from stampedes, from
  alkali water, from drought, from flood and from men, in a
  straightforward and convincing way.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1257. Je. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  “It is an out-door book, with no pretense to style or philosophy—a
  plain story that takes you into the herd and its daily happenings. The
  book is admirable of its kind.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 422. My. 25, ‘05. 820w.

  “A genuine American story. There is no fiction in ‘The outlet,’ but a
  true, well-defined and entertainingly written narrative.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 500w.

  “It is a fine picture of life on the plains, the relations of the men
  towards each other, episodes of treachery and sharp practices, and the
  fights against these evils.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “This is a striking foot-note to the study of conditions in the far
  West.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1015. Ap. 22, ‘05. 180w.

  “‘The outlet’ is first and foremost, a capital story; after that, it
  is a genuine contribution to the history of a typical American
  industry.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 361. Ag. ‘05. 330w.

  * “The story is somewhat colourless and lacking in breadth of
  interest.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 630. N. 11, ‘05. 70w.


=Adams, Frederick Upham.= John Henry Smith, a humorous romance of
outdoor life. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  John Henry Smith tells his own story in diary form and also the story
  of other members of the golf club and their play, among them the
  heroine’s millionaire father, who becomes a golf enthusiast and
  partner with Smith in a Wall street operation, and farmer Bishop’s
  remarkable hired man who wins an heiress. There are various
  adventures, in one an automobile gets the better of a mad bull and in
  another it outraces a tornado.

  “An effective antidote to insomnia.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 880. Ag. 26, ‘05. 480w.

  “Mr. Adams has other qualities besides humour and characterization.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 202. Ag. 12, 140w.

  “The story, told in Mr. John Henry Smith’s delightful and hearty
  style, is particularly suitable for summer reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 430. Jl. 1, ‘05. 670w.


=Adams, Oscar Fay.= Dictionary of American authors. $3.50. Houghton.

  An outgrowth of the writer’s “Handbook of American authors,” published
  in 1884. This fifth edition contains over eight thousand five hundred
  names of recognized contributors to American literature, nearly three
  thousand more names than the first edition and over one thousand more
  than the fourth. The work is intended for critics, editors, and
  publishers, who have to do with contemporary literature, as well as
  for students of American literature and librarians.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 247. Mr. 30, ‘05. 120w.


=Adams, Samuel.= Writings of Samuel Adams; ed. by H. A. Cushing. *$5.
Putnam.

  “The editor of this volume properly says in the preface that the
  writings of no one of the leaders of the American revolution form a
  more complete expression of the causes and justification of that
  movement than do the writings of Samuel Adams. Such a collection has
  long been needed.... The present volume covers the period from 1765 to
  1769, inclusive.... Nearly all the papers are of a distinctly public
  character.... Brought together from many places, from the manuscript
  collections of the Earl of Dartmouth, the collections in the Lenox
  library, the Massachusetts state papers, the Life by Wells, the Prior
  documents and other printed sources.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “Everything included here is so desirable for an understanding of the
  Revolutionary movement that the reviewer has not the courage to advise
  the omission of papers the authenticity of which is in doubt, but he
  does express the desire that succeeding volumes will make plain the
  basis of inclusion and that work of such importance as this should not
  be subjected to so serious a criticism.”

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 654. Ap. ‘05. 760w. (Review of v. 1.)


=Adams, Thomas Sewall, and Sumner, Helen L.= Labor problems: a text
book; ed. by Prof. R. T. Ely. *$1.60. Macmillan.

  The following extract from the preface of this work shows the author’s
  purpose: “The principal aim of this book is to furnish a convenient
  collection of facts that will facilitate the study and the teaching of
  the American labor problem.... Where it was necessary we have
  sacrificed both interest and general social philosophy in order to
  present concrete facts. We believe that the gravest differences of
  opinion about the labor problem and the most dangerous
  misapprehensions are caused by the failure to view the problem
  broadly, to consider its many phases and ramifications. The labor
  problem is greater than the problem of industrial peace. Impelled by
  this conviction, we have preferred to cover a broad field imperfectly
  rather than a narrow field in detail.”

  “It is written in a broad and sympathetic way, with every effort to
  state the facts fairly and clearly.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 586. My. ‘05. 190w.

  “It is professionally designed for undergraduates and teachers, but
  the general public may find in it also a range of subject-matter and a
  felicity of treatment which should make it popular.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 811. O. 5, ‘05. 300w.

  * “Is comprehensive in scope and thoro in treatment, and will be found
  indispensable to all students of industrial questions.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 63. Ja. 28, ‘05. 220w. (Statement of aim and
         scope.)

  “This last chapter ... is probably the one which is most open to the
  charge of providing students with ready-made opinions, though a
  similar charge may also be made in connection with Dr. Adams’s
  treatment of trade-unionism. It is, however, impossible to expect a
  treatise like this to be exhaustive, and nothing but praise can be
  given for the painstaking accuracy and wide research of the authors.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 503. F. 25, ‘05. 460w.

  “Text-book on labor problems, whose existence is its own
  justification. The discussion is sane and necessarily inconclusive.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 215. F. 11, ‘05. 270w.

  “Contains much valuable information.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 70w.


=Adamson, Rev. Robert M.= Christian doctrine of the Lord’s supper.
*$1.50. Scribner.

  “This volume is historical, not dogmatic. It is written in a
  historical but not an indifferent spirit; it traces the history of the
  Lord’s supper, as a symbol of faith, in all the various changes
  through which it has passed—Primitive, Roman, Greek, Lutheran,
  Zwinglian, Anglican, Puritan, Quaker.”—Outlook.

  “In general the author’s historical treatment appears to be always
  fair and generally adequate. Without agreeing with all that the author
  says ... we recall no monograph on the subject so generally
  satisfactory.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 138. My. 13, ‘05. 370w.


=Addison, Daniel D.= Episcopalians. **$1. Baker.

  Uniform with “The story of the churches” series, this presentation of
  the Episcopalians is offered by a fair-minded student of the
  denomination’s history, in which are set forth the best elements of
  the religious life and character of the denomination.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 714. Ap. ‘05. 30w.

  “Is written with more than average literary power. The essential facts
  relative to the origin and growth of the body are to be found in this
  volume in an interesting narrative.”

   + + — =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 383. Ap. ‘05. 130w.


=Addison, Joseph.= Selections from the writings of; ed. by Barrett
Wendell and Chester Noyes Greenough. *80c. Ginn.

  Representative selections from Addison’s most characteristic works in
  prose and verse for use in the schools, for advanced students, or for
  the general reader. The text is that of Tickell’s edition of 1721
  except for the correction of misprints. An introduction, full notes,
  and a bibliography are provided.


* =Addison, Mrs. Julia de Wolf.= Art of the National gallery: a critical
survey of the schools and painters as represented in the British
collection. **$2. Page.

  “A plan of the gallery, showing the location of the different schools,
  follows the index. The pictures are discussed in the text as they are
  hung,—that is according to schools in their historic order ... the
  limitation in space and particularly in number of illustrations
  precludes this manual’s being a complete history of any school. It is
  rather a guide to the treasures of the gallery, almost every picture
  being at least briefly mentioned.” (Dial.) The author’s method is
  descriptive rather than technically critical. The volume contains
  nearly fifty illustrations in duo-gravure.

  * “A book that will be particularly welcome to those who are
  contemplating a visit to London’s art treasures, but one that has also
  plenty to offer the general reader.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 386. D. 1, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 20w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 468. D. 7, ‘05. 620w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 70w.


* =Adler, Cyrus, and Szold, Henrietta.= American Jewish year-book
(1905-1906). *75c. Jewish pub.

  “This is the seventh annual issue of this work, and its regular
  appearance is henceforth assured. The special feature of the present
  issue is a sort of ‘who’s who’ compilation of biographical sketches of
  Jewish communal workers in the United States. The review of the past
  year, by Mr. Max L. Margolis, is a record of melancholy
  interest.”—Dial.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 314. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

 *   + + =Nation.= 81: 359. N. 2, ‘05. 100w.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 885. D. 9, ‘05. 270w.

 *   + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 603. N. 4, ‘05. 120w.


=Adler, Elkin Nathan.= Jews in many lands. $1.25. Jewish pub.

  The author has made a study of his coreligionists in many countries,
  at first visiting them professionally as an agent of the Holy Land
  relief fund, later to investigate their conditions for personal
  reasons. He went to Egypt in 1888, and later to Persia, the Holy Land,
  Russia and Argentina, where he studied the Hirsch colonies. He gives a
  full account of his people as he found them.

  “The author has made extensive travels and tells his story well,
  though omitting many details which would give greater value to his
  account.”

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 587. S. ‘05. 50w.

  “The work of a trained observer, and rich in curious interest for both
  Jews and Gentiles.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 391. Je. 1, ‘05. 50w.

  “Mr. Adler’s book has much interest to others besides Jews.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 277. Ap. 29, ‘05. 360w.

  “Is both interesting and enlightening.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 445. Je. 17, ‘05. 90w.

  “He has the journalist’s instinct, and knows how to describe what he
  has seen.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 125. Jl. ‘05. 100w.


=Adler, Felix.= Essentials of spirituality. **$1. Pott.

  Dr. Adler says: “In the region of mental activity, which is called the
  spiritual life, vagueness is apt to prevail, the outlines of thought
  are apt to be blurred, the feelings aroused are apt to be indistinct
  and transitory. The word ‘spiritual’ becomes a synonym of muddy
  thought and misty emotionalism.” So its purpose is first to show the
  twentieth century need for the development of the spiritual sense, and
  to define clearly with illustrations drawn from Savonarola,
  Washington, John Howard and others the meaning of “spiritual.” (N. Y.
  Times.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 606. S. 16, ‘05. 160w.

  “We commend the volume as one of very practical and very genuine
  spiritual value.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 575. N. 4, ‘05. 440w.


=Adler, Felix.= Marriage and divorce. **50c. McClure.

  Two lectures delivered before the Society for ethical culture of New
  York city. They set forth Dr. Adler’s views upon the obligations of
  marriage and his strong opposition to divorce.

  “The subjects have been carefully considered, and are treated
  judicially and temperately.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 60w.

  “Dr. Adler holds higher ground than is taken even in the churches.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 141. My. 13, ‘05. 100w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 130w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 766. Je. ‘05. 40w.


=Adler, Felix.= Religion of duty. **$1.20. McClure.

  A preface states that in response to a growing demand for a book
  setting forth the results of Prof. Adler’s work along ethical and
  religious lines, some of his lectures and papers have been gathered
  into this volume. They deal with such subjects as: First steps toward
  religion; Changes in the conception of God; Teachings of Jesus in the
  modern world; Standards of conduct, based on the religion of duty; The
  ethical attitude towards others; Pleasure; Suffering, and The
  essential differences between ethical societies and the churches.

  “An occasional good thing appears amid the long stretches of very
  ordinary paragraphs, and the general trend of the whole is toward
  noble and unselfish modes of thinking and living.”

     + — =Cath. World.= 81: 696. Ag. ‘05. 240w.

  “Dr. Adler speaks in clear voice and gives satisfactory answers in
  clear and concise language, that pulsates with the fire of a soul in
  earnest.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 384. O. ‘05. 260w.

  “Some of Dr. Adler’s most characteristic and vital lectures.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 170. S. 16, ‘05. 320w.

         =Ind.= 59: 331. Ag. 10, ‘05. 100w.

  “Stimulating and delightful book.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 110w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 70w.


Adventures of King James the Second of England, by the author of “A life
of Sir Kenelm Digby,” “Rochester,” etc. *$4.80. Longmans.

  An informal history which takes for granted the reader’s knowledge of
  the political events of the time, and presents in a wealth of
  anecdotes a characterization of the unfortunate James. His early
  military career on the continent under Condé and Turenne, his service
  to the English navy, his genuine religious convictions, are set forth,
  and he is shown to have been “a straightforward English gentleman, a
  courageous soldier, a skilful admiral, and an excellent man of
  business.” This may go far toward mitigating the world’s judgment of
  him, based on his three years of disastrous kingship. There are
  several beautiful portraits.

  “While it keeps James’s best side uppermost, and while it exhibits
  frankly Roman Catholic sympathies, the facts, except here and there
  where Restoration politics come in, are presented accurately and
  fairly. A book which, if not strikingly interesting, is nevertheless
  useful for bringing out features of James’s character which are not in
  general adequately recognized.”

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 648. Ap. ‘05. 860w.

  “We laid the book down with the conviction established that it is one
  of the most fascinating and withal instructive, historical works that
  have appeared for the past few years. For, notwithstanding its
  somewhat flippant title, it is a piece of serious work, though not
  precisely history. The narrative runs on, from first to last, in a
  brisk and lucid flow, upon the surface of which bubbles up from time
  to time a flash of the humor and good-natured sarcasm that we should
  expect from the pen that has given us the ‘Life of a prig.’ A fine
  introduction by Dom Gasquet adds another charm to the book.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 80: 684. F. ‘05. 500w.

  “The work is slightly tinged with a Catholic bias, but is on the whole
  very fair in its statement of events and impartial, if sometimes
  original, in its judgment of men.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 159. Mr. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “A pleasantly written life of King James, intended for the general
  reader and possessing no historical value.” C. H. F.

       + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 827. O. ‘05. 320w.

  “Uncommonly interesting throughout but unconvincing.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 454. Ag. 24, ‘05. 190w.

  “While less convincing than Dr. Airy’s life of Charles II. this volume
  has the merits which are represented by a fulness of information and
  incisive writing.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 503. Je. 22, ‘05. 570w.


* =Aesop.= Fables. *$2. Moffat.

  Miss Elizabeth Luther Cary furnishes a pleasing introduction to this
  new holiday edition of Æsop’s fables for which J. M. Condé has made
  many drawings, both in color and black and white.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 10w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 446. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1385. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “On the whole we find the spirit of the artist too burlesque,
  especially for an edition in which the moral is carefully preserved
  and printed in boldface type.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 70w.

 *     — =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 30w.


=Aflalo, Moussa.= Truth about Morocco; an indictment of the British
foreign office; with introd by R. B. Cunninghame Graham. *$1.50. Lane.

  This book “is in the main, an attack upon Lord Lansdowne’s policy in
  respect to Morocco and England’s commercial interests there, and
  devotes itself to showing how great the loss will be when France has
  assumed control, and how thoroughly everything done to raise British
  prestige through a long series of years has been overturned by a
  scratch of the pen.”—Dial.

  “The book presents a thorough statement of the attitude of Morocco
  toward the outer world, by one in possession of the facts.” Wallace
  Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 90. F. 1, ‘05. 150w.


=Ainger, Alfred.= Gospel and human life: sermons. $2. Macmillan.

  “The dominant note of Canon Ainger’s posthumous book is sadness.... As
  we lay the book down we feel that in the eyes of the author the times
  are religiously out of joint. For while he cannot be said to
  dogmatise, he deplores deeply the ever-increasing disregard for dogma
  and what he calls ‘the decay of worship.’”—Spec.

  “These sermons are distinctly better than the average.”

       + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 598. Jl. ‘05. 180w.

  “There is much which is beautiful in these sermons, both from a
  literary and a religious point of view, much which must add warmth to
  the affectionate memory cherished by so many of this scholar and man
  of God.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 16. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1260w.


=Akers, Charles Edmond.= History of South America, 1854-1904. *$6.
Dutton.

  The author, who has lived in South America for fourteen years and has
  had wide experience on the continent as a journalist, gives an account
  of the South American republics and their troubled history. He shows
  us the men who have made the politics of these states for the last
  fifty years and the general movements and tendencies which have been
  felt in the entire continent. Aside from his own observations he has
  drawn upon Spanish and Portuguese chroniclers for earlier history.
  There are interesting illustrations.

  “Thirty-four pages of historical introduction, in which the uninformed
  reader will be dismayed at the array of names and dates and misled by
  the generalizations. In fact the chief value of the book is that it
  can be used as a trustworthy contemporary history. It has the defects
  that the account of an eye-witness must have, even when he has been
  able to get the perspective of a few years and to hear the other side.
  But it has the advantage of being written by a writer trained to see
  clearly. The most welcome feature of the book is the comprehensive
  treatment of important events. Yet scarcely less valuable are the
  comments on existing conditions. Rarely does one find a book at once
  so useful to the specialist and so interesting to the tyro.” Hiram
  Bingham.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 671. Ap. ‘05. 770w.

  “The author tells his story clearly and with spirit, and adds some
  well condensed information about the present state of these
  countries.” E. M. Ll.

   + + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 615. Jl. ‘05. 250w.

  “There is nothing extant on this subject either so comprehensive or so
  reliable.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1189. My. 25. ‘05. 390w.

  “A useful and comprehensive volume. This is the first comprehensive
  history in English of the last half-century of the South American
  states—since they attained independence from Spanish control.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 247. F. ‘05. 190w.

  “A most readable, impartial, clear-sighted appreciation of political
  leaders and their motives.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 112. Ja. 28, ‘05. 730w.


=Alcott, Louisa M.= Jack and Jill. $2. Little.

  This new volume in the “Little women” series, is quite as attractive
  as its predecessors and contains eight full-page illustrations by
  Harriet Roosevelt Richards which show us Jack and Jill just as Miss
  Alcott must have wished us to see them.

         =Outlook.= 81: 428. O. 21, ‘05. 40w.


=Alcott, Louisa M.= Under the lilacs. $2. Little.

  Uniform with the other volumes of this new and elaborate edition of
  Miss Alcott’s famous stories, the “Little women” series, “Under the
  lilacs” contains eight full-page pictures by Alice Barber Stephens,
  which make Sancho and his friends seem, if possible, more real than
  ever before.

         =Outlook.= 81: 428. O. 21, ‘05. 40w.

 *       =Nation.= 81: 406. N. 16, ‘05. 150w.

 *   + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 766. D. ‘05. 120w.


* =Alden, Isabella Macdonald (Mrs. George R.) (Pansy, pseud.).= David
Ransom’s watch. †$1.50. Lothrop.

  “When Ben Ransom, David’s younger brother, left the old farm, he took
  $700 ... and he took his father’s old silver watch as well. David
  could ill spare the money. He had to wait another year before he could
  get married. And he was particularly sorry to part with the watch....
  Ben’s life thereafter was full of ups and downs. His restlessness and
  fickleness were his ruin.... David and the old watch both figured
  conspicuously in his later misadventures.... Two threads of
  self-sacrifice run through the tale to meet at last, making ideal
  happiness for the group, from which all the unpleasant folk have been
  eliminated by chances which the unregenerate reader will call
  blessed.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “It has the best plot that she has ever devised.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 347. My. 27, ‘05. 250w.

  * “Is a well-told, pleasing story of commonplace, likable people, with
  plenty of wholesome sentiment flavored with the humor of the soil. It
  is a good book for old and young alike.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 447. Jl. 8, ‘05. 180w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 765. D. ‘05. 60w.


=Alden, William Livingston.= Jimmy Brown trying to find Europe. 60c.
Harper.

  “This new book of Jimmy’s adventures ... deals with the travels of
  James and his friend Mike ... from West Thompsonville, somewhere in
  New York state, to Paris, by way of the fields and country roads, the
  railroad, the canal, a steamboat, and finally a freighter from
  Montreal to Havre. Jimmy is in search of his father and mother, whose
  address, he knows, is ‘Grand Hotel, Europe.’”—N. Y. Times.

         =Critic.= 47: 381. O. ‘05. 70w.

  “Jimmy does not age or grow tiresome.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 398. Je. 17, ‘05. 710w.

  “Jimmy Brown’s fortunes and the manner of telling, while quite frothy,
  are excellent vacation reading.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 160w.


* =Aldrich, Richard.= Guide to The ring of the Nibelung. $1.25. Ditson.

  A trustworthy guide to Wagner’s trilogy for the student and music
  lover. Part I. touches upon Wagner, the man and composer, and the
  circumstances leading to the composition; also gives a resume of the
  legendary sources from which material was drawn; Part II. is an
  authoritative essay upon Wagner’s musico-dramatic system; Part III.
  presents a careful analysis of the three dramas of the trilogy.


=Aldrich, Thomas Bailey.= Judith of Bethulia; a tragedy. $1. Houghton.

  A drama in four acts, written for Nance O’Neil, whose photograph
  appears as the frontispiece. Mr. Aldrich builds the drama from his
  poem, “Judith,” in which the heroine, a strong, just, refined woman,
  is impelled by her religion and patriotism to a deed of unwonted
  daring. He introduces here and there new portions which “show no
  decline of the power to evoke pictorial images and touch deep sources
  of feeling by which the early work of Mr. Aldrich was distinguished.”
  (N. Y. Times).

  “In its compact dramatic action, set forth in verse of a firm yet
  delicate beauty, it has the perennial significance that attaches to
  sincere and masterly workmanship.” Ferris Greenslet.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 422. S. ‘05. 80w.

  “As a play, ‘Judith of Bethulia’ fails to hold the interest, and as a
  poem it fails to reach inspired heights. But it is well worth reading
  in a quiet hour, because of its simplicity, its chasteness and its
  serenity.” Clayton Hamilton.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 101. Mr. ‘05. 520w.

  “A book that is dignified and impressive throughout, a book not
  unworthy of the trained artistic hand which brings it to us as a
  gift.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 48. Ja. 16, ‘05. 420w.

  “Mr. Aldrich’s mastery of poetic atmosphere is so easy, his metrical
  gift so constant, that he accomplishes a feat difficult for most
  writers of modern poetic drama, and weaves his melody and color around
  speeches of mere theatric necessity, and even around broken lines of
  swift dialogue.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 73. Ja. 26, ‘05. 520w.

  “We are the richer for a truly poetic drama, not quite so felicitous
  in imagery and expression as the earlier version and without the swift
  dramatic movement of inevitable events that marks the perfectly
  successful play upon the theatrical side, but dignified and
  imaginative and with the author’s unfailing insight into the
  passionate emotions of human nature.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 18. Ja. 14, ‘05. 400w.


=Alexander, Lucia.= Libro d’oro of those whose names are written in the
Lamb’s book of life; tr. from the Italian by Mrs. Francis Alexander.
*$2. Little.

  A collection of a hundred and twenty-four miracle stories and sacred
  legends written by fathers of the church and published in Italy during
  the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The four
  divisions are: I. Selections from the lives of the holy fathers
  together with the spiritual field; II. Selections from the lives of
  the saints and Beati of Tuscany; III. Selections from the wonders of
  God in His saints, Bologna, 1593; IV. Flowers of sanctity, Venice,
  1726.


=Alexander, Thomas, and Thomson, A. W.= Graphic statics; a graduated
series of problems and practical examples, with numerous diagrams, all
drawn to scale. *50c. Macmillan.

  “The authors first give a set of sixteen graduated problems on
  coplanar forces, solved by means of force and link polygons.... Then
  follows a set of seventeen examples showing application to roof
  trusses, girders, wall, and masonry arches.... The book is intended
  more particularly as an introduction to the author’s Elementary
  applied mechanics.”—Nature.

         =Acad.= 68: 962. S. 16, ‘05. 90w.

  “The treatment is somewhat fragmentary and arbitrary, but, if
  supplemented by the teacher, the course would prepare a student for a
  systematic study of graphic statics.”

       + =Nature.= 71: 507. Mr. 30, ‘05. 100w.


=Alexander, William.= Life insurance company. **$1.50. Appleton.

  A book adapted “to the needs of the average business or professional
  man.... It is a simple, straightforward exposition of the principles
  on which all sound insurance is conducted, including a fair and
  impartial statement of those facts in the history and present
  management of the great American companies which every prospective
  policy-holder should know.”—R. of Rs.

  “The book is certainly informing. It is not altogether solemn either.
  It has its humors, both intentional and unintentional.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 339. My. 27, ‘05. 1030w.

  “A careful and informative treatise on the general subject of life
  insurance.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 392. Je. 10, ‘05. 50w.

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 767. Je. ‘05. 130w.


=Algue, Jose.= Cyclones of the Far East. 2d (rev.) ed. Bureau of public
printing, Manila, P. I.

  This pamphlet issued from the Manila Central observatory, “is printed
  in both English and Spanish, and contains data for the month of July
  upon atmospheric pressure, rainfall, relative humidity, winds,
  magnetic disturbances, earthquakes (including microseismic movements),
  and crop-service reports from four districts and about twenty-five
  towns.” (Nation.)

  “A valuable pamphlet.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 94. F. 2, ‘05. 520w.


=Allaben, Frank.= Concerning genealogies. **50c. Grafton press.

  Suggestions of value for all who are interested in tracing their
  family history. As stated in the preface, the book aims to cover every
  phase of the subject, the sources of information, the methods of
  research, the compiling, the printing, and the publishing of a
  genealogy.

  “It is a volume of practical suggestions, pleasantly worded, and
  embodies the results of much experience in the work.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 276. Ap. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “One finds little that is new or striking in these rather cleverly
  written pages.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 191. Mr. 9, ‘05. 80w.


=Allbutt, Thomas Clifford.= Historical relations of medicine and surgery
to the end of the 16th century: an address delivered at the St. Louis
congress, 1904. *$1. Macmillan.

  A plea for the “unity of medicine,” especially in England where
  medicine and surgery “have been so radically separated as to be
  regarded as two professions.”

  “The address is well written and interesting.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 788. Je. 24, 430w.

  “The lectures are, of course, largely technical in their treatment ...
  but the general purport is clear enough.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 719. My. 13, ‘05. 210w.


=Allen, Charles Dexter.= American bookplates. *$2.50. Macmillan.

  A new and less expensive edition of a work which appeared ten years
  ago. It is hoped that its reappearance will revive and increase
  interest in book-plate collecting, which fashion has waned
  perceptibly. The book contains the bibliography of Eben Newell Hewins,
  and the rare and interesting book-plate, with few omissions, that
  appeared in the first edition.

  “A work of permanent value for guidance and reference, and freely
  illustrated with examples.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 278. O. 5, ‘05. 120w.

  “The book is simply a reprint, with all the imperfections of the first
  edition reproduced.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 330w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 277. S. 30, ‘05. 180w.


=Allen, Frank Waller.= Back to Arcady. †$1.25. Turner, H. B.

  The Kentucky rose-garden which furnishes the setting for this
  June-time idyl is a fit place for the day dreams of a lonely man who
  had “gone softly” all his days. One day he welcomes to his garden his
  “Lady of Roses,” the daughter of the only woman he had ever loved.
  Here under the jacqueminots he guards with a fatherly eye the
  love-making of this fair Marcia and his neighbor Louis. The very
  summer sunshine and rose garden perfume pervade the story thruout.

  * “It is a tender, graceful little love-story, quaintly told by a
  third person.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 150w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

  * “A sentimental romance which depends for much of its effect upon
  annoying and artificial phrases.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


=Allen, Gardner W.= Our navy and the Barbary corsairs. **$1.50.
Houghton.

  An account of this interesting period of American history written from
  original sources. The events which are scattered over a period of
  forty years (1778-1818) are brought together and tell the story of how
  the United States, in the first years of her national existence,
  rebelled at paying the tribute which all Europe paid to the Mohammedan
  states of north Africa. The story of the success of our little navy,
  the wars with Tripoli and Algiers, the deeds of Preble and Decatur,
  and the adventures of our seamen with the famous pirates is all the
  more romantic because it is true.

  “A good example of a book that is scientific and at the same time
  popular. It is popular by reason of the dramatic quality of the
  information that it contains. Its interest lies in the intrinsic
  interest of its facts. The narrative is plain, simple and
  straightforward.” Charles Oscar Paullin.

   + + + =Am. Hist.= R. 11: 174. O. ‘05. 770w.

  “Dr. Allen has made his work thorough and authoritative, but betrays a
  needless distrust of his own descriptive powers, leaving the more
  dramatic events to be described almost entirely in the words of
  eye-witnesses.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 359. My. 16, ‘05. 290w.

  “Dr. Allen’s story is really as engrossing as a romance. It is safe to
  say that, for the history of the movement as a whole, Dr. Allen is not
  likely to have a successor.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 420. My. 25, ‘05. 1870w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 197. Ap. 1, ‘05. 970w.

  “It is also a historical treatise of no small value, colligating
  clearly and compactly the results of much original as well as
  secondary research, and embodying a survey of astonishingly wide
  range. The work is well written and well balanced throughout.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 707. Mr. 18, ‘05. 280w.


=Alston, Leonard.= Modern constitutions in outline: an introductory
study in political science. *90c. Longmans.

  “Mr. Alston, who is Deputy professor of history in Elphinstone college
  at Bombay, has written a brief but lucid sketch of the constitutions
  of the chief political communities of the modern world. His little
  book was planned to meet the needs of university students; but it will
  have a wider field.... [It] consists of three opening chapters dealing
  respectively with Federalism, and the Two-chamber system, Party
  government, and the Demarcation of powers; and of a second part in
  which a special and more detailed account is given of the
  constitutions of the chief powers of the world.”—Spec.

  “Mr. Alston has done a useful piece of work, which, in its brevity and
  clearness, is a model of the expository functions of a professor.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 620. Ap. 29, ‘05. 410w.


=Altsheler, Joseph A.= The candidate. †$1.50. Harper.

  In this political novel the hero, who is a presidential candidate, is
  accompanied by his niece on a speech-making tour through the West. A
  newspaper correspondent, also in attendance, loves the girl, and is
  largely responsible for the triumph of the candidate. The path of love
  is not smooth, however, for the girl is the betrothed of a
  distinguished politician, whose enmity her uncle has no wish to incur.

  “Mr. Altsheler has given us a thoroughly readable story.” W: M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 391. Je. 1, ‘05. 550w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 135. Mr. 4, ‘05. 120w.

  “‘The candidate’ is by no means an unreadable book, but it is not in
  Mr. Altsheler’s previous best style, nor is it up to his usual level
  of interest. The various elements of plot somehow lack the cohesion
  necessary to weld them into a convincing whole.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 451. Jl. 8, ‘05. 570w.

  “From a literary point of view there is little to be said of the book,
  which merits attention chiefly through giving publicity to campaign
  methods from apparently authentic ‘inside’ information.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 60w.

  “There are certain crudities of plot and language, but one readily
  pardons them because it is a good story and does not turn out in the
  last chapter to be a brief for political reform.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 676. Ap. 29, ‘05. 320w.

  “That story is told with an almost prodigal display of intelligence
  and power.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 180w.


=Altsheler, Joseph A.= Guthrie of the Times: a story of success. $1.50.
Doubleday.

  “Mr. Joseph A. Altsheler has deserted the field of warfare for that of
  present-day journalism and politics, and has given us in his ‘Guthrie
  of the Times,’ an interesting and straightforward story of modern
  life—‘a story of success,’ he calls it, and the description is true in
  more senses than one. The scene of the novel is a state unnamed, but
  easily identifiable as Kentucky; the hero is a newspaper writer of
  resource and high ideals; the heroine is a young woman who has to
  become re-Americanized after a life spent mainly abroad. How the hero
  defeats the attempt to impeach a public officer in the interests of a
  corrupt financial enterprise, how the heroine witnessing, admires, and
  how in the end he wins both her love and an unexpected nomination for
  congress, are the chief matters which enlist our interest.”—Dial.

  “One cannot criticize this type of story, however. It is to be enjoyed
  or laid aside, according to taste and temperament. It is very
  American.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 555. My. 6. 370w.

  “The whole story is told to direct and workmanlike effect.” W. M.
  Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 15. Ja. 1, ‘05. 220w.

  “Admirable story of southern life. The fresh sane optimism of the book
  is very appealing.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 117. Ja. ‘05. 220w.


=Ames, Joseph Sweetman.= Text-book of general physics, for high schools
and colleges. *$3.50. Am. bk.

  “The general plan of treatment appears to be a general popular
  enunciation of the matter of a section, followed by the more detailed
  discussion of the experiments, apparatus, etc., and ending with a
  historical review and bibliography. This excellent plan has, however,
  at times fallen into the natural mistake of making the popular
  introduction so full as to result in an unnecessary and rather
  confusing repetition of matter, often leaving the reader uncertain as
  to whether he has read all on a given topic or not.”—Educ. R.

  “In spite of the shortcomings in many of the details, the book
  contains very much valuable matter and will prove a desirable addition
  to the library of every physicist.” William Hallock.

   + + — =Educ. R.= 29: 319. Mr. ‘05. 1640w. (Detailed review of
         contents.)

  “The combination of simplicity with accuracy of statement is the
  essential feature of a practicable book for use with beginners in
  college, and it may justly be said of Professor Ames’ volume that it
  possesses this combination of qualities to an unusual degree.” E. L.
  N.

   + + + =Phys. R.= 20: 63. Ja. ‘05. 160w.

  “A distinct defect in this otherwise excellent book is the complete
  absence of illustrative problems.” W. Le Conte Stevens.

   + + — =Science.= n. s. 22: 175. Ag. 11, ‘05. 630w.


=Ames, Oakes.= Orchidaceae: illustrations and studies of the family
orchidaceae, issuing from the Ames botanical laboratory, North Easton,
Mass. **$3. Houghton.

  “This fascicle includes descriptions and plates of five new and
  fourteen old species, a descriptive list of orchids collected in the
  Philippine islands by the United States government botanists, a
  description and figure of a hitherto unrecorded orchid in the United
  States, and a paper entitled ‘Contributions toward a monograph of the
  American species of spiranthes.’”—Science.

         =Bot. G.= 39: 431. Je. ‘05. 160w.

     + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 492. S. ‘05. 50w.

  “The volume is a valuable and interesting contribution to the
  knowledge of a part of one of the most attractive orders of flowering
  plants.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 436. Je. 1, ‘05. 250w.

  “Taken all in all this work is one which must be very highly
  commended.” Charles E. Bessey.

   + + + =Science.= n.s. 21: 786. My. 19, ‘05. 520w.


=Ames, V. B.= Matrimonial primer; with a pictorial matrimonial
mathematics and decorations by Gordon Ross. *75c. Paul Elder.

  Humorous, epigrammatic bits of advice for husband and wife are found
  in this little volume. Its friendly shafts frequently strike home, and
  one may both laugh and profit by them.

  * “The wit sometimes falls to commonplaceness but never to anything
  more objectionable.”

       + =Dial.= 39:384. D. 1, ‘05. 80w.


=Amsden, Dora.= Impressions of Ukiyo-ye, the school of Japanese
colour-print artists. **$1.50. Elder.

  “This study treats of the whole school of Japanese color-print
  artists, and is appropriately illustrated with half-tone reproductions
  of famous paintings. The whole is printed on Japanese paper, and an
  appendix shows facsimiles of the most famous signatures of color-print
  artists, presented in this volume for the benefit of collectors.”—R.
  of Rs.

  “The frequent occurrence of such misstatements as these mar what would
  otherwise be a very acceptable essay, readable, and giving in compact
  form much information useful to those who are becoming interested in
  Ukiyo-ye prints.”

   — — + =Dial.= 39: 16. Jl. 1, ‘05. 520w.

  Reviewed by Charles de Kay.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 445. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1630w.

  “A sympathetic, suggestive analysis of Japanese paintings.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 110w.


* =Andersen, Hans Christian.= Ugly duckling. *75c. Moffat.

  This “centenary edition ... is a small quarto in boards, printed on a
  sort of buff paper, with the added distinction of illustrations by M.
  H. Squire, four colored plates and some pen-drawings.”—Nation.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1385. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.
 *     + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 70w.
 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 40w.


=Anderson, Edward L., and Collier, Price.= Riding and driving. **$2.
Macmillan.

  “How to select, train and ride a saddle horse is clearly and
  practically explained by Mr. Edward L. Anderson by means of print and
  photography, and in the latter half of the same volume Mr. Price
  Collier not only tells how to drive single, double and four, but also
  gives a large amount of practical information on the care of horses in
  sickness and in health, shoeing, harnessing, feeding and
  stabling.”—Ind.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1253. Je. 1, ‘05. 70w.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 197. Je. 29, ‘05. 350w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 80w.

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 471. S. 30, ‘05. 430w.


=Anderson, Frank Maloy.= Constitutions and other select documents,
illustrative of the history of France, 1789-1901. *$2. Wilson, H. W.

  Professor Anderson says: “The practice of studying documents in
  connection with the history courses given in American universities,
  colleges and high schools, has now become so general, and the results
  attained so satisfactory, that the method no longer requires any
  defense.” This document-book has been the outgrowth of personal need
  with classes in the University of Minnesota, when work has been
  hampered by the lack of a convenient collection of documents; also the
  suggestion of compiling such a work was stimulated by the fact that
  French documents are more attractive than any others, and that the
  period of the French Revolution “deserves a volume in English
  presenting as large a portion as possible of the important documents.”
  The book is well printed and strongly bound.

  “The work of the teacher of modern French history will be rendered
  easier and more effective by the publication of Professor Anderson’s
  volume. Professor Anderson’s selection has been made with special
  reference to the requirements of practical work.” Henry E. Bourne.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 407. Ja. ‘05. 530w.


=Andrews, Rev. Samuel James.= Man and the Incarnation; or, Man’s place
in the universe as determined by his relations to the Incarnate Son.
**$1.50. Putnam.

  The author’s discussion of the creation of man, his fall, and his
  redemption through the Incarnate Son of God, is based upon “Premises
  and presupposition belonging to another age,” says the Independent,
  “an age which even saintly character and pathetic pleading cannot call
  back from its tomb.” The outlook for inharmonious man according to the
  author is nothing short of the “great tribulation” which marks the end
  of the world.

       — =Ind.= 59: 152. Jl. 20, ‘05. 70w.

  “He stands entirely outside of our modern way of looking at things.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 413. S. 23, ‘05. 190w.


=Angell, James Rowland.= Psychology: an introductory study of the
structure and function of human consciousness. *$1.50. Holt.

  Professor Angell sets forth first of all in an elementary way the
  generally accepted facts and principles bearing upon the functional
  and genetic rather than the structural phases of psychology. “In the
  second place, since the real field of psychology is consciousness, the
  purpose of the author is to show how consciousness in cognitive,
  affective and volitional aspects originates and develops.... The third
  division takes up the elementary features of volition, and follows
  this general introduction with a treatment of the relation of volition
  to interest, effort and desire, character and the will, and finally
  the self.” (Pub. Opin.)

  “The book under consideration is one which fills a very genuine and
  widely felt need in the psychological world. Its great merit can be
  stated in a word. It is a treatise sufficiently elementary to be used
  as a textbook for an introductory class, which succeeds in
  co-ordinating the outcome of the analysis of the content of
  consciousness with the functional interpretation of those contents
  which alone can give them rational organization and meaning. The
  influence of Dewey is most evident in the general standpoint, and that
  of James in many of the details of treatment. In comparison with
  James’s classic textbook, it has, however, two advantages—in its
  completeness and in its systematic unity. The affective processes,
  which James nowhere mentions, here receive due treatment, and many
  minor omissions in the older textbook are filled in. The unity of all
  conscious processes is made a central idea in the treatment of each
  one.” Helen Bradford Thompson.

   + + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 691. Mr. ‘05. 2240w.

  “The book is essentially a text-book, and has been arranged so as to
  be flexible to emphasis laid on various desired portions.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 382. Ap. ‘05. 90w.

  “The text is readable, the doctrine sound, the teaching effective.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 273. Ap. 16, ‘05. 440w.

  “One of the very best of elementary textbooks of the subject.” R. S.
  Woodworth.

   + + — =Educ. R.= 30: 312. O. ‘05. 860w.

  “Numerous works on psychology have appeared in recent years, but this,
  in our opinion, is not only the latest but also the most satisfactory
  of them all. Every sentence in this volume shows the careful
  investigator, who has not only got results, but has also made himself
  so familiar with these results that apparently without effort he
  expresses them in words that are simple and in sentences that are
  clear. Technical readers will not object to this, and untechnical
  readers will especially appreciate it.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 255. F. 18, ‘05. 540w.

  “It is essentially a text-book, and is abundantly supplied with
  cross-references.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 255. F. ‘05. 50w.

  “We feel the gratitude and satisfaction which are due to a thoroughly
  capable thinker who gives us a solid, careful and, so far as is
  desirable in a text for students, original book. There is no need to
  note in detail the many excellent features in content and form or the
  few cases of questionable facts and methods of presentation.” Edward
  L. Thorndike.

   + + + =Science.= n.s. 21: 468. Mr. 24, ‘05. 620w.


=Angus, D. C.= Japan: the eastern wonderland. $1. Cassell.

  “Supposedly ‘Japan, the eastern wonderland,’ was written by a Japanese
  for the amusement and instruction of his friends in England where he
  had received the finishing touches of his education.” (N. Y. Times).
  The narrator, Kotaro, and his sister Hana furnish representative
  Japanese types, in the portrayal of whose lives from infancy up, the
  reader gains a clear idea of conditions, customs and methods of
  Japanese education. “The past of Japan and much of its history is
  dwelt upon in this volume. Wonderful have been the changes made during
  the second half of the last century. There has been the regeneration
  of Japan, feudalism has been abolished, the samurai have had their
  privileges curtailed.... There are no tortures for petty crimes. All
  religions are tolerated. The school children learn their lessons from
  Japanese translations of foreign text books. Native literature is not
  neglected, but it is no longer used as a guide.” (N. Y. Times).

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 45. Ja. 21, ‘05. 540w.


=Angus, Joseph.= Cyclopedic handbook to the Bible: an introduction to
the study of the Scriptures. *$2. Revell.

  “Originally published in 1853, this has been an eminently useful book.
  In its present revised form much has been dropped from it, and much
  added from the gains acquired by a half-century of increasing
  knowledge, while the original plan, with some rearrangement, remains
  the same. Its two divisions, treating the Bible first as a book and
  next as a series of books taken separately, go into manifold
  details.”—Outlook.

  “With some concessions to modern criticism, the general view
  maintained is strongly conservative. For practical uses the old book
  seems likely to remain for long a favorite.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1058. Ap. 29, ‘05. 80w.


=Annandale, Nelson.= Faroes and Iceland. *$1.50. Oxford.

  This book is “occupied chiefly with natural history and ethnology ...
  and ... may be regarded as a series of sociological studies of
  isolated and rather primitive though civilized communities. As such it
  has exceptional interest and value, especially since the communities
  selected for study are of ancient establishment, and have not, in
  recent years, been the subject of any analogous description.”—Nation.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 271. Ag. 26, 700w.

  “Instructive little volume on these islands of the Far North.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 282. S. 8, ‘05. 1100w.

  “On the whole the book reaps an interesting harvest in a new field.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 225. S. 14, ‘05. 1010w.

  “A most admirable little work,” R. L.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 506. S. 21, ‘05. 580w.

  “The book is an admirable specimen of careful and intelligent
  observations.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 159. Jl. 29, ‘05. 160w.


=Annesley, Charles.= Standard opera glass. $1.50. Brentano’s.

  A new and revised edition of a useful book of reference. It contains
  sketches of the plots of 123 famous operas, with critical and
  biographical notes, dates of production, etc. There are indexes of
  titles and names, and 26 portraits of composers. The contributor of
  the preface, James Huneker, says: “‘The standard opera glass’ is much
  in miniature. It may be put in your pocket and read at home or abroad.
  The author does not burden you with superfluous comment and he tells
  his story neatly, rapidly and without undue emphasis. He reverences
  the classics, admires Wagner, and is liberal to the younger men. What
  more can one ask?”

  “A useful book of reference.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 40. Ja. 21, ‘05. 140w.


=Anthony, Gardner C.= Elements of mechanical drawing. *$1.50. Heath.

  “‘Elements of mechanical drawing’ takes the pupil in hand before he
  has seen a single instrument, and in 152 pages teaches him to make
  full-sized sectional drawings of a complete commutator from a rough
  working sketch jotted down free hand. The author is professor of
  drawing in Tufts college and dean of the department of engineering;
  his textbook, first issued ten years ago as a strictly elemental work,
  is now revised and changed for use in evening drawing schools and
  technical colleges.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 11. Ja. 7, ‘05. 230w.


=Antrim, Mrs. Minna Thomas (Titian, pseud.).= Knocks—witty, wise and—.
*75c. Jacobs.

  Cynical observations and “dark glass” digs based upon men and women’s
  foibles and weaknesses.


=Apperson, G. L.= Bygone London life: pictures from a vanished past.
*$1.50. Pott.

  “An industrious collection of odds and ends illustrative of the life
  of London in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.... The
  restaurants and coffeehouses, and their frequenters, the swells and
  beaus and macaronies, are depicted by aid of the memoirs, letters, and
  society verse of that day. The effect is much like that of a visit to
  one of the quaint old museums described in chapter IV.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “The especial value of Apperson’s treatment is the literary point of
  view.” Katharine Coman.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 687. Ap. ‘05. 320w.


=Archbald, Anna, and Jones, Georgiana.= Fusser’s book. 75c. Fox.

  An enlarged edition of the “Fusser’s book” which gives advice to
  fussers or flirts in epigrammatic phrases. “Angle for a lady’s hobby,
  and when you’ve hooked it play her. If the lady in turn angles for
  yours, don’t jump at the bait.”


=Aristotle.= Politics; tr. by B. Jowett. *$1. Oxford.

  In an introductory discussion, Aristotle’s relation to his “Politics”
  is clearly defined as that of the utilitarian philosopher, and student
  of human nature, with due emphasis on ethical values as he “treats of
  the state as one of the chief means thru which the individual obtains
  to happiness.” “The object of the ‘Politics’ is both practical and
  speculative; to explain the nature of the ideal city in which the end
  of happiness may be fully realized; to suggest some methods of making
  existent states more useful to the individual citizen than they were
  in Aristotle’s time, or had been in the past.”

  “The analysis and the index are well done.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 463. Ap. 15, 130w.

  “The reprint, which is in a small and convenient volume, will be found
  especially useful by students of political science who are not
  students of Greek.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 96. Ag. 3, ‘05. 430w.


=Armstrong, Sir Walter.= Gainsborough and his place in English art.
$3.50. Scribner.

  A biography which furnishes in nine short chapters a well-ordered
  analysis of the work of perhaps the greatest painter technically.
  “Best of all parts of the book for public guidance is the
  introduction, in which much of the best modern thought on esthetics is
  presented in a concise and clear form. There is discussion of the idea
  that ‘art is the use for subjective expression of a power which
  displays itself objectively in what we call beauty,’ and we are
  reminded that ‘mere correctness of imitation holds no higher place in
  a picture than grammar does in a poem.’ ... An interesting chapter on
  the precursors of Gainsborough traces some characteristics of British
  art back through the seventeenth century to miniaturists of a time
  even before Holbein.... The landscapes and portraits are, properly,
  treated together, for Gainsborough’s art was always that of the
  impressionist who paints hotly under the stimulus of any vision fitted
  to appeal, whether in the shape of a lovely scene in nature or a
  beautiful woman.” (Ind.)

     + + =Ind.= 59: 157. Jl. 20, ‘05. 390w.


=Armstrong, Sir Walter.= Peel collection and the Dutch school. $2.
Dutton.

  As director of the National gallery of Ireland, the author knows well
  how to interpret and value the ideals and success of a school of
  painting. The artists represented in the Peel collection “give to him
  an opportunity of writing a monograph on Dutch painting which, we are
  glad to note, includes several Flemings directly affected by Holland.”
  (Outlook). He uses for illustration the works of Metsu, Terborch,
  Vermeer, Hooghe, Jan Steen, Ostade, Willem and Adrien van de Velde,
  Wouwerman, Hobbema, Ruisdael, Cuijp, Koninck, and Hals. The book is
  interesting in itself, and of value to those who wish a better
  understanding of Dutch art.

  “An acute and valuable critical essay on the Dutch school.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 194. Mr. 9, ‘05. 670w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 591. S. 9, ‘05. 440w.

  “A particularly important contribution to the better understanding of
  Dutch art.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 452. F. 18, ‘05. 200w.


* =Armstrong, Sir Walter.= Sir Joshua Reynolds, first president of the
Royal academy. *$3.50. Scribner.

  “A popular reprint of a monumental work on the English portrait
  painter, first published five years ago, by the greatest living
  authority on the subject.... Particularly is Sir Walter Armstrong to
  be congratulated for his fine sense of selection, by which he has
  drawn what is truthful and distinctive from the early biographies;
  also for his critical estimates, which have stood the most searching
  and eager tests of five years of criticism.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Presents in conclusion to a thorough and interesting biography a
  sympathetic picture of an unsympathetic man, a guarded estimate of a
  deliberate artist.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 220w.

  * “The public is to be congratulated on having so authoritative a work
  thus brought within reasonable reach while maintaining a high standard
  of manufacture.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 445. N. 30, ‘05. 110w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 230w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 704. N. 25, ‘05. 110w.


* =Arnim, Mary Annette (Beauchamp) gräfin von.= Princess Priscilla’s
fortnight. †$1.50. Scribner.

  The author of “Elizabeth and her German garden” has written of an
  experience in the life of her grand ducal highness, the Princess
  Priscilla. “Aided and accompanied by the good old ducal librarian,
  Priscilla, feeling her ‘soul starved’ in the dull little court,
  runs away and lives for two miserable weeks the life of a
  nobody-in-particular. Just what happened, what mischief she did,
  and how it all ended, the author tells with her own arch humor....
  She pricks pretty effectually the cult and cant of ‘simple life,’
  its natural collapse being ‘a by-product of the vivacious tale.’”
  (N. Y. Times.)

  * “We may as well confess at once that Elizabeth has enchanted us
  again. Either she throws her spell over you, and then you follow with
  delight wherever she leads: or your temperament resists her spell, and
  then you take umbrage at her airs, and, in the present volume, at her
  ragged plot and occasional heaviness of phrase.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1229. N. 25, ‘05. 570w.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 682. N. 18. 230w.

  * “This volume is highly characteristic of its writer. We get the
  usual epigrammatic humor, not without cynicism, the usual liveliness
  of narration and dialogue, and, it must be confessed, the usual
  absurdities and exaggerations. The characters, though overdrawn, are
  full of interest.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 488. D. 14, ‘05. 370w.

  * “Is well worth reading, not only for the genuine enjoyment it will
  give, but for its sensible and logical ‘conclusion of the whole
  matter.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 794. N. 25, ‘05. 650w.

  * “The story, although slight and farcical, is very amusing and good
  reading for a leisure hour.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 708. N. 25, ‘05. 180w.


=Asakawa, Kanichi.= Early institutional life of Japan. *$1.75. Scribner.

  “The author devotes his first and longest chapter to a description of
  Japanese institutions as they existed about 500 A. D. Then follow two
  chapters, one on the events leading up to the reform, the other, a
  particularly good one, on the political doctrine of the Chinese by
  which the reformers were so strongly influenced. Next comes a long
  chapter on the new institutions introduced under Kotoku and his
  successor; and lastly a short chapter sketches the subsequent
  development.”—Nation.

  “Next to Mr. Chamberlain’s translation of the ‘Kojiki’ with its
  invaluable introduction and notes, this volume by Dr. Asakawa is first
  in importance of works in English upon the period of which it treats.”
  George William Knox.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 128. O. ‘05. 590w.

  “It seems hardly too much to say that he has here laid the foundation
  stone for the critical study of early Japanese institutions. The
  author’s style is clear for the most part. The author is to be
  congratulated on having successfully accomplished a difficult piece of
  pioneer work.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 57. Ja. 19, ‘05. 1060w.


=Asakawa, K.= Russo-Japanese conflict: its causes and issues. **$2.
Houghton.

  Dr. Asakawa “has made a most illuminating and complete statement of
  the needs and aspirations of the Japanese people, which led them to
  take up arms against Russia.” (R. of Rs.) “He accepts tacitly the
  economic interpretation of history upon which Karl Marx and his
  followers insist, proving that the vast increase in the population of
  Japan requires an outlet on the Asiatic mainland, and setting forth
  the right and interests recently acquired by Japan in both Manchuria
  and Korea.... The book contains portraits of the statesmen who figure
  in its pages and may be taken as a valuable contribution to
  contemporary history from the end of the war with China through the
  diplomatic correspondence immediately following the outbreak of
  hostilities.” (Dial). The author is lecturer on the civilization and
  history of East Asia at Dartmouth college.

  “No subject of a neutral power could have written a more impartial
  account of the long diplomatic engagement which preceded the outbreak
  of hostilities in the far East. The special and quite unusual virtue
  of this book is the elimination of moral standards and patriotic
  sentiment from the discussion of a present-day conflict.” Ferdinand
  Schwill.

   + + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 701. Mr. ‘05. 170w.

  “His whole statement is cool, temperate, and wonderfully free from
  heat or special pleading.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 92. Jl. ‘05. 200w.

  “A clear and logical presentation of the cause of his native land,
  with an endeavor to make an unprejudiced statement of the side of its
  adversaries also. In the latter effort he is as successful as anyone
  could reasonably expect, his desire to quote from Russian authorities
  wherever they have spoken amounting to solicitude. Of the broad causes
  leading up to hostilities, Dr. Asakawa tells us little not already
  known. But in details and the marshalling of facts he is far fuller
  than anyone preceding him.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 9. Ja. 1, ‘05. 760w.

  “It is a statement ... remarkable for both its brevity and its
  restraint. The book is so dispassionately written that the nationality
  of the author if not disclosed would hardly have been guessed. It is
  one of the strong points of Dr. Asakawa’s argument that he does not
  take very high moral ground. His statement of causes leading to the
  war is rather political than moral.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 98. F. 2, ‘05. 1060w.

  “Another thoughtful philosophical work.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 124. Ja. ‘05. 70w.

  * “His book should be indispensable to all who study the outbreak of
  one of the greatest wars, in effect as well as extent, of which
  history tells us.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 695. N. 4, ‘05. 210w.

  “A real and permanent contribution to historical and political
  science, as well as an interesting and timely book. The map leaves
  much to be desired.” Amos S. Hershey.

   + + — =Yale R.= 14: 92. My. ‘05. 940w.


=Asbury, Francis.= Heart of Asbury’s journal; ed. by Ezra Squier Tipple.
*$1.50. Eaton.

  “The memory of this main pioneer and organizer of American Methodism
  is now honored by substantial extracts, covering the forty-five years
  of his ministry in this country, in a revised and corrected text....
  The author wrote by fits and starts, under all the difficulties of a
  laborious and constant itinerary, and the compiler has not improved
  his unpretentious jottings beyond recognition, but one may find items
  of antique or curious interest.”—Nation.

  “Its chief interest is in connection with a history of early
  Methodism, with side-lights on manners and customs.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 716. Ap. ‘05. 70w.

  “It is a fascinating ecclesiastical romance which all Christian folk
  will enjoy.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 189. Ag. ‘05. 60w.

       + =Nation.= 80: 153. F. 23, ‘05. 220w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 99. F. 18, ‘05. 540w.

  “The best and almost the only record of the infancy of his church on
  this continent.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 449. F. 18, ‘05. 100w.


=Ascham, Roger.= English works of Roger Ascham: ed. by William Aldis
Wright. $1.50. Macmillan.

  Included in the “Cambridge English classics,” this volume contains
  “Toxophilus,” “Report of the affaires and state of Germany,” and “The
  scholemaster,” all of which appear in the original spelling. “The
  scholemaster” has long been “one of the original documents” in
  educational literature, but the most popular portion of the volume is
  “Toxophilus,” a treatise on archery.

  “No better edition of Ascham’s text is ever likely to be printed.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 144. F. 4. 250w.

  “Mr. Wright’s task has been to ensure the purity of the text. The
  curious and readable part of this collection is in the teaching of bow
  shooting; the immortal part lies in the chapters on education.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 112. F. 9, ‘05. 120w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 168. Mr. 18, ‘05. 340w.

  “The name on the title-page is sufficient guarantee of the care with
  which the text has been reproduced and of the editorial work done on
  the volume.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 349. F. 4, ‘05. 110w.

  “Edited by a true scholar.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 406. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1600w.


=Ashe, Sydney Whitmore, and Keiley, J. D.= Electric railways
theoretically and practically treated. **$2.50. Van Nostrand.

  The plan of this text-book is “to cover first a few essential
  principles of motor and car operation, including the testing of
  equipments. Next the component parts of the car equipment are treated
  in detail.” (Engin. N.) There are six folding plates and 172 text
  illustrations.

  “A general criticism which may be made on all parts of the work is
  that every subject is treated too briefly, in fact, one might almost
  say hurriedly. The material is excellent, and it is well arranged for
  general reading and for reference. It is undoubtedly more complete
  than any other concise treatment of the subject.” Henry H. Norris.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 532. My. 18, ‘05. 950w.


=Ashley, Percy.= Modern tariff history: Germany, United States, France.
*$3. Dutton.

  The tariff histories of Germany, France, and the United States are
  offered in brief form “for the purpose of showing how these countries
  have met the problems of free trade and protection. It is the work of
  a politician and an economist, who felt the necessity of coming to a
  clear and unprejudiced understanding of the great problem.” (N. Y.
  Times). The tariff history of Germany is outlined from the formation
  of the Zollverein to the present time. The lesson which the author
  draws from his investigation of the experience of Germany is
  summarized as follows: “Changes in tariff policy have been only one,
  and commonly not the most important, among the many causes of her
  economic progress.” “Of the French tariff legislation,” says Mr.
  Ashley, “it can be said with some confidence that, whatever it may
  have done to maintain agriculture—and even there it is arguable that
  it has encouraged the continuance of old fashioned methods—it has
  wrought little good and in various ways much harm to industry and
  commerce.” The tariff legislation in the United States is traced from
  its beginning, and in conclusion he argues that while America has in
  the past benefited by a protective policy, the time has come when the
  abandonment promises greater results.

  “Mr. Ashley’s style is remarkable for a certain freshness and vitality
  which makes his book easy reading in spite of the abstruseness of the
  subject. Taking it altogether the book is well worth while.” J. E.
  Conner.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 598. S. ‘05. 330w.

  “Derived almost wholly from secondary sources intelligently selected,
  they afford in short compass a good sketch of the history of the
  tariff during the past century in the three countries. It suffices to
  say that Mr. Ashley employs the historical method judiciously and
  effectively, with an evident knowledge of its limitations. Instructive
  as is this comparative tariff history in many other respects, it is
  peculiarly excellent as affording an insight into what is called
  neo-mercantilism, and its correlative—which might perhaps be called
  neo-libertarianism.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 138. F. 16, ‘05. 1040w.

  “He has given an interesting history of the tariff in three great
  countries, but we cannot see how the results of his studies are going
  to enlighten his countrymen very much.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 7. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1480w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 510. Ap. ‘05. 120w.


=Ashley, William James.= Progress of the German working classes in the
last quarter of a century. *60c. Longmans.

  A good economic monograph written in a spirit of moderation and of
  especial value to those who are interested in the fiscal controversy.

  “It is very readable.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 587. My. ‘05. 170w.

         =Nation.= 81: 266. S. 28, ‘05. 550w.

  “In a small compass he has collected most of the facts bearing on the
  question, and he has handled his statistics with the skill and the
  fairness which are to be expected from him.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 618. Ap. 29, ‘05. 440w.


=Ashmore, Sidney Gillespie.= Classics and modern training. **$1.25.
Putnam.

  “A series of addresses suggestive of the value of classical studies to
  education, published in the hope of interesting the general reader in
  a few matters connected with the study of Greek and Latin, and, if
  possible, to call attention to the value of the ancient language and
  literature to education.”—Bookm.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 587. My. ‘05. 30w.

       + =Dial.= 39: 70. Ag. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “Professor Ashmore’s plea for the classics in modern training is well
  considered and presented, but, naturally, does not contribute anything
  very novel to the discussion.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 273. Ag. 3, ‘05. 20w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 119. Ag. 10, ‘05. 610w.

  “Taken together, the papers have more to do with Greek than with
  Latin.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 85. F. 11, ‘05. 120w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 219. Ap. 8, ‘05. 650w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 390. Je. 10, ‘05. 120w.

  “Mr. Ashmore’s attitude is philosophic rather than polemic.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 676. My. 20. ‘05. 90w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 791. My. 27, ‘05. 360w.


At the sign of the fox, by the author of The garden of a commuter’s
wife. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  At the Sign of the fox a girl who has been an art student tries to
  retrieve her father’s shattered fortunes by serving tea to travelers
  passing in carriage or motor car. Two men enter into the story, an
  artist who had painted the heroine’s portrait unknown to her, and a
  silent sad man with a haunting past, a dog and a gun. There are other
  characters and other dogs, and much that is chatty and domestic.

  “The author has a strong love of nature, and her sketches of outdoor
  life have atmosphere and charm.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 397. S. 23. 230w.

  “The book is one of those that leave a pleasant taste behind them.”
  Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 22: 134. O. ‘05. 280w.

       + =Critic.= 47: 381. O. ‘05. 60w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “In short, a very feminine sentimental book, but not nearly so good
  reading as, say, the same author’s ‘Woman errant.’”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 476. Jl. 15, ‘05. 500w.

  “But, apart from plot, there is much to admire and enjoy in this
  spirited and cleverly written book—notably its honest thrusts at
  social pretentiousness and humbug.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 835. Jl. 29, ‘05. 160w.

  “It is all very sweet and wholesome, though we find parts of it a
  heavy tax on credulity.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 504. O. 14, ‘05. 150w.

  “The story is eminently readable, although it has not, perhaps, quite
  the subtle charm which distinguished the first book by this author.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 434. S. 23, ‘05. 140w.


=Atherton, Gertrude Franklin (Frank Lin, pseud.).= Bell in the fog, and
other stories. †$1.25. Harper.

  Ten stories which deal with both the natural and the supernatural.
  Besides the title story they include: ‘The striding place,’ ‘The dead
  and the countess,’ ‘The greatest good of the greatest number,’ ‘A
  monarch of a small survey,’ ‘The tragedy of a snob,’ ‘Crowned with one
  crest,’ ‘Death and the woman,’ ‘A prologue (to an unwritten play),’
  ‘Talbot of Ursula.’

  “The stories are not bad, considered as magazine stories. They show,
  most of them, something of Mrs. Atherton’s characteristic qualities—a
  certain rough power of presentation and an insight into character,
  especially feminine character. But there is no unifying thought
  running through all this miscellany. In some we are taken to that
  mysterious borderland, the ‘great pale world.’ But Mrs. Atherton’s art
  is not delicate enough for such a theme; neither, to speak plainly, is
  her mastery over the English language sufficient.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 127. F. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  “All are characterized by the sort of passionate virility, the
  picturesque materialism, with which Mrs. Atherton’s previous books
  have made us familiar. Its faults are want of balance, judgment and
  restraint.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 238. F. 25. 390w.

  “The dominant note of the book is—uncanny. The stories, needless to
  say, are told by one who can tell them well, but they are the result
  of introspection rather than of observation.”

       + =Cath. World.= 29: 129. Ap. ‘05. 140w.

  “The method is careless, there is no delicacy of touch, and the
  dialogue in almost all the stories is preposterous.”

     — — =Critic.= 46: 477. My. ‘05. 150w.

  “[The first is] a charming tale, having that touch of the occult
  always so fascinating—a faraway suggestion of Poe’s ‘Lady Ligeia.’ The
  other nine stories vary in everything save in the artistic manner of
  their handling.... Like Mr. Howells, Mrs. Atherton gives such
  imaginings the perfect touch by leaving everything vague and
  unexplained, and by placing them in a setting of real people and
  things thrown upon her canvas with her own surpassing skill.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 114. F. 25, ‘05. 600w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 704. Mr. 18, ‘05. 40w.

  “If anyone can tell what they are all about or why they were written
  it is Mr. James, and professional ethics will probably seal his lips.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 298. F. 25, ‘05. 140w.


=Atherton, Gertrude Franklin (Frank Lin, pseud.).= Travelling thirds.
†$1.25. Harper.

  Mr. Moulton, the reader for a publishing house, with his wife and two
  daughters, who have become accustomed to a literary atmosphere, and
  his niece, Catalina, a madcap California girl, decide to tour the
  continent. The story concerns the romances which they meet with and
  the grand passion which comes to Catalina, who finally quarrels with
  her relatives and is left the sole interest of the closing pages of
  the book. The story derives its name from the fact that the party
  traveled third class thru Spain.

  * “The story as a story is of no importance. As an invitation to
  travel in Spain it is persuasive and alluring.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1263. D. 2, ‘05. 230w.

  * “Can scarcely be considered with its writer’s more serious work.”
  Olivia Howard Dunbar.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 510. D. ‘05. 190w.

     * + =Lond. Times.= 4: 383. N. 10, ‘05. 370w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 671. O. 14, ‘05. 390w.

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 530. O. 28, ‘05. 60w.


Athlete’s garland. Rice, W., comp. **80c. McClurg.

  The compiler has gathered together from many sources, verses relating
  exclusively to athletic sports. There are no restrictions as to
  authorship, and the volume includes translations from Homer, Pindar
  and Virgil, verses by Byron, Swinburne, Emerson, Stevenson, Kipling,
  Whitman and many others, and several anonymous selections.

  “Good taste and judgment characterize this selection throughout.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 160w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05. 270w.


=Atkins, James.= Kingdom in the cradle. $1.25. Pub. house of M. E.
church S.

  After a preliminary discussion of the problems confronting the
  Christian world, the author shows that ultimate spiritual triumph will
  result only from proper “growth of the seed.” Chapters follow
  outlining the course of child development spiritually, including
  Christ’s doctrine of the child and the kingdom, The child as the
  subject of religious education, The church and the home, The child in
  the home and The Sunday school as a field of training.


=Atkinson, Edward.= Facts and figures: the basis of economic science.
**$1.50. Houghton.

  “In a volume published under the title ‘Facts and figures,’ Mr. Edward
  Atkinson has collected several essays on the protective tariff and the
  cost of war and warfare.”—R. of Rs.

  Reviewed by Winthrop More Daniels.

       — =Atlan.= 95: 561. Ap. ‘05. 420w.

  “It may also be doubted whether the science of economics will be
  greatly advanced by papers which the author admits were sent to press
  without such complete revision and condensation as would have been
  suitable.” Arthur B. Woodford.

       — =Dial.= 39: 111. S. 1, ‘05. 400w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 455. Jl. 8, ‘05. 720w.


=Atkinson, Fred Washington.= Philippine islands. *$3. Ginn.

  “The material for this book was gathered by the author when he was at
  the head of public education in the Philippine islands. Its
  information is of the encyclopaedic sort, conveyed clearly and
  pleasantly. About a quarter of the book is given to a brief summary of
  the geography and history of the islands. The rest of the book is
  devoted to an account of the people and the conditions under which
  they live. The author’s views of the character of the people and of
  the proper mode of government for them are in harmony with the present
  administration. The book is illustrated with half-tone reproductions
  of photographs.”—Outlook.

  “It is a sort of popular presentation of the subject that the ordinary
  reader will find intelligible.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 528. O. 28, ‘05. 180w.

  * “Professor Willis and Doctor Atkinson complement each other’s work.
  Profit may be drawn from both books. More specifically, however, we
  are compelled to admit that Dr. Atkinson is too complaisant as to
  present administrative tendencies.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 667. N. 18, ‘05. 250w.

  * “Of recent publications on the Philippines, one of the most useful
  from the point of view of the general reader is the work by Fred W.
  Atkinson.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 638. N. ‘05. 130w.


=Atkinson, George Francis.= College textbook of botany. *$2. Holt.

  In expanding his elementary botany of 1898 into a college text, Prof.
  Atkinson leaves many chapters on the physiological part practically
  untouched, while others are thoroughly revised especially on the
  subjects of nutrition and digestion. One subject elaborated for the
  purpose of bringing it abreast of the times is morphology of
  fertilization in the gymnosperms and angiosperms. Chapters on the
  classification of algæ and fungi, and on ecology have also been
  changed and added to. The treatment falls into five parts, Physiology,
  Morphology and life history of representative plants, Plant members in
  relation to environment, Vegetation in relation to environment, and
  Representative families of angiosperms.

  “Professor Atkinson has covered the whole general field in a way that
  indicates an unusually wide familiarity with the various divisions of
  the subject.” J. M. C.

     + + =Bot. G.= 39: 424. Je. ‘05. 310w.

  “It is certainly an excellent text-book for a general introductory
  course in college.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 270. Ag. 3, ‘05. 40w.


=Atkinson, Thomas D.= English architecture. $1.25. Dutton.

  The author aims to give the mere elements or grammar of the great
  subject of English architecture. There are chapters on Romanesque,
  Gothic and Renaissance art, on churches, monasteries, and houses; each
  subject is treated historically. A conclusion deals with the French
  influence. There are 200 tiny illustrations.

  “Succinct outline to the vast subject of English architecture, on its
  structural and what may be called its actual aspects.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 89. Je. ‘05. 230w.

  “This book is notably sensible in its historical and critical
  remarks.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 291. Ap. 13, ‘05. 620w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 759. Mr. 25, ‘05. 60w.


=Auchincloss, W. S.= Book of Daniel unlocked. *$1. Van Nostrand.

  A new edition of this study of the book of Daniel which shows the
  sidereal year to be God’s own standard of time and thereby “vindicates
  the statements of Daniel and fixes on them the seal of truth.” The
  text of the book of Daniel is given, interspersed with comments in
  red.

  “Is an interesting specimen of ingenious exegesis.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 134. S. 16, ‘05. 110w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 540. O. 21, ‘05. 190w.


* =Austin, Alfred (Lamia, pseud.).= Garden that I love. *$2. Macmillan.

  A new edition of the poet laureate’s sketches and poetical essays
  first published ten years ago. “This is an illustrated edition, the
  pictures being reproductions in colour of work by Mr. George S.
  Elgood, R. I. These are sixteen in number, and are for the most part
  what we may call ‘flower landscapes.’ ... But whatever their
  character, the pictures are most attractive.” (Spec.)

 *   + + =Acad.= 68: 1134. O. 28, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The binding is not wholly to our taste.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 475. O. 7. 70w.

  * “The color designs of George S. Elgood, R. I., are quite out of the
  common—exquisite, indeed; and in the end the purchaser may prefer them
  to the touch-and-go discursiveness of the text.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 381. N. 9, ‘05. 90w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 170w.

  * “This edition is illustrated in color with drawings that are as
  delightful as the text.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 889. D. 9, ‘05. 50w.

 *   + + =Spec.= 95: 573. O. 14, ‘05. 160w.


=Austin, Alfred (Lamia, pseud.).= Poet’s diary. $2. Macmillan.

  “Italy and things Italian—a fertile theme—are the principal topics
  discussed; and well does the diarist know his Rome and Florence....
  Changing one word of the poet’s warning to orators, we may say, ‘The
  gift of diary-writing, like the gift of writing mellifluous poetry, is
  a sorry and dangerous one unless inspired, sustained and restrained by
  ‘Reason in her most exalted moods.’’”—Dial.

  “Dexterously spinning out sentence after sentence and paragraph after
  paragraph with a facile grace of composition, a deft interweaving of
  literary allusion and quotation, a ready succession of pleasing ideas,
  that cannot but excite our admiration. The diarist’s manner is
  winsome, and it seems ungracious to damn his book with faint praises;
  but not even the most gifted of us, not even a poet laureate, can
  always attain perfection.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 129. F. 16, ‘05. 330w.

       + =Westminster Review.= 163: 115. Ja. ‘05. 400w.


=Austin, Martha Waddill.= Tristam and Isoult. $1. Badger, R: G.

  “Instead of the German legend which pictures the character of Mark as
  a mild, noble, benign old man,” Mrs. Austin uses the text of Mallory
  which views King Mark as a “base, crafty, false-hearted scheming
  coward,” and “tells how, wearied in the struggle against Mark’s
  unremitting treachery Sir Tristam after the vile betrayal and battle
  behind the chapel on the rocks, in which he came so near to losing his
  life, bore Queen Isoult into her Launcelot’s country, and there lived
  with her in the castle of Joyous Garde.”


=Austin, Mary. Isidro.= †$1.50. Houghton.

  “A tale of love and spring in Old California,” and of Isidro, whose
  proud determined father had vowed his son to the church while still in
  his cradle. The boy on his way to begin his novitiate with the fathers
  of St. Francis, meets a shepherd lad who proves to be “the one woman
  in the world.” He suffers hardships thru a series of adventures into
  which a delightful old priest, a fugitive, and a halfbreed of wild
  passion and heroic spirit enter.

  “The story is well imagined and told with a delightful swing in a
  style that is vigorous, though at times too mannered.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 810. Ag. 5, ‘05. 150w.

  “Mary Austin has achieved that admirable success, which is none too
  common, of telling a romantic tale with such vivid realism, a tale of
  bygone years with such graphic assurance of detail, as to make even
  the most melodramatic of her episodes seem quite within the range of
  credibility.” F. T. Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 601. Ag. ‘05. 530w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 210. Jl. 27, ‘05. 90w.

  * “Is a masterpiece in the particulars of literary style, and time-old
  spirit.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1154. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “That language has a character of its own and a fitness to the
  honorable service of the romance of old California. Mary Austin has
  the gift of the witchcraft of romance.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 285. Ap. 29, ‘05. 570w.

  “Not a great piece of fiction, but carefully written, and presenting
  interesting types of character well-drawn, and a charming background
  of landscape.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 445. Je. 17, ‘05. 50w.

  “A novel that will have a permanent place, not as a masterpiece, but
  as a well-wrought story of another ‘phase of American existence that,
  within the touch of present time, has passed away.’”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 974. Je. 24, ‘05. 200w.

  “Aside from the considerable charm of the story, the account given of
  the relation existing between the missions and their converts, and of
  the breaking up of these religious settlements, is well worth while.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 239. Jl. ‘05. 340w.

  “The story is pleasantly told with a wealth of local colour, and will
  please lovers of romantic adventure.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 122. Jl. 22, ‘05. 170w.


Auto fun. **$1. Crowell.

  A collection of drawings and skits, jibes and jests taken from “Life.”
  The artists contributing are Gibson, Kemble, Cushing, Bayard Jones, C.
  F. Taylor, and others. It is a novelty and sure to please the motor
  car devotees.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

  “The level of these caricatures is uncommonly high in respect of
  invention and artistic technique.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 360. N. 2, ‘05. 70w.


=Avery, Elroy McKendree.= History of the United States and its people.
In 12 vol. Vol. 1., $6.25. Burrows.

  Mr. Avery aims to cover the entire ground of American history from the
  earliest records to the present time. It is intended as a popular
  history, but there is supplied an abundance of bibliographical data
  which all students and those who wish to pursue historical
  investigations will find particularly useful. The maps, also, are more
  satisfactory than those which commonly appear in American works of
  this character. The style is easy, flowing, sometimes conversational.
  Graphic anecdotes or storiettes enliven the serious matter. Among the
  features demanding special praise the technical make-up must not be
  forgotten. The size is convenient, the paper excellent, the type clear
  and large, and there is a broad margin with notes.

  “Both in statement and conclusion, furthermore, the text is generally
  in accord with the best literature of the subjects treated. Some
  obscurities, errors, and other defects have escaped detection.”
  William R. Shepherd.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 852. Jl. ‘05. 2140w.

  “While the style has a certain pleasing smoothness, the reluctance of
  the author to interrupt this compels him to fail, at crucial points,
  to state explicitly what he is talking about, and the result for the
  reader is perplexity. Our verdict regarding Dr. Avery’s bibliography
  must also be that it might be improved.” Edward S. Corwin.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 596. My. ‘05. 1000w.

  “We incline to the belief that on the whole no treatment of the period
  of discovery has been more satisfactorily prepared. If the succeeding
  volumes equal in excellence the present book, this history will be the
  best complete history of our country yet written.” Amy C. Rich.

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 447. Ap. ‘05. 2160w.

         =Critic.= 46: 190. F. ‘05. 120w.

  “In a general way Dr. Avery is fully abreast of modern scholarship. Of
  really serious errors in the book there are none. The great weakness
  of the book lies in the absence of page references. Dr. Avery’s style
  of writing is smooth and flowing. It is altogether too flowery either
  for a permanent classic or for a serious piece of historical work.”
  Anna Heloise Abel.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 262. Ap. 16, ‘05. 1150w.

  “The advance sheets have been submitted to special students on the
  subjects treated. But they could not, without rewriting his book,
  correct his point of view. Rarely takes the trouble to come to a
  conclusion of his own. On the whole the book is well and attractively
  written and is accurate as to fact.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 380. F. 16, ‘05. 800w.

  * “While accuracy of detail has been secured thru several revisions by
  specialists, the emphasis is bad and the literary style is often
  stilted.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “Dr. Avery’s text stands well the test of critical examination. The
  narrative ... is systematically compressed, but it is well
  proportioned, and gives evidence throughout of careful use of
  authorities and of intelligent and restrained judgment. From a
  literary point of view, the history is eminently readable, though the
  style shows a tendency to ornateness.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 69. Ja. 26, ‘05. 360w.

  “Reasonably full, critical, and even iconoclastic in many respects. To
  judge then, from vol. I. this history bids fair to become popular in
  the best sense of the term. It is certainly not dry—parts of it
  reading like a stirring romance. Now and then he goes perhaps a trifle
  too far in his impartiality.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 20. Ja. 14, ‘05. 1420w.

  “He is, then, accurate. He is also the possessor of a very agreeable
  style.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 41. S. 2, ‘05. 580w.

  Reviewed by H. Addington Bruce.

     + + =Reader.= 6: 588. O. ‘05. 560w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 756. D. ‘04. 230w.




                                   B


=B., T.= Upton letters. **$1.25. Putnam.

  “To those of us who, with Stevenson, pray for the quiet mind, ‘The
  Upton letters’ by ‘T. B.’ are a help in that direction. Simple and
  natural, sane and human, these reflective utterances on literary,
  moral, and educational themes, and on the commonplaces of daily life,
  have the charm that belongs to the genuine expression of a good mind
  and heart. They are the letters of a master in an English public
  school to a friend (’Herbert’) sojourning in Madeira for his health;
  and they run through the year 1904, being brought to a close by the
  friend’s death.”—Dial.

  “For all its timidity the book is a bugle-call.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 703. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1420w.

  “The comments on certain aspects of modern life are always very
  readable, sometimes valuable; but the book is notable mainly for its
  poetical outlook and unfailing facility of expression.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 742. Je. 17. 1280w.

  * “The book is delightful enough to stand on its own merits.” H. W.
  Boynton.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 849. D. ‘05. 580w.

  “It is an intimate narrative, but the intimacy is of a highly
  self-respecting sort, and the picture of the writer which the book
  leaves upon the reader’s mind is very winning.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 110w.

  “The little volume will create no sensation (heaven forbid!), but it
  will greatly content a choice few among the readers of books.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 212. O. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  * “The letters are truly literature, and every page gives evidence of
  broad and careful scholarship, wide reading and a soul concerned with
  high and serious things. As a whole the volume is intensely
  satisfactory and is one that may be read and read again by those who
  care to think and know how to think.”

     + + =Educ. R.= 30: 530. N. ‘05. 310w.

  “‘The Upton letters’ makes excellent quiet reading for those to whom
  such a mind as the author’s is attractive.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 195. Je. 16, ‘05. 370w.

  “These letters depend solely upon their intrinsic merit. This is
  unquestionably high. Without literary affectation, the style is that
  of a literary man.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 283. S. 30, ‘05. 200w.

  “Barring a slight stiffness and an occasional assumption of weariness
  and ennui, the letters are as good as anything of the kind that have
  appeared since Huxley’s were given to the world.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =Spec.= 95: 289. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1740w.


=Bacon, Benjamin Wisner.= Story of St. Paul. **$1.50. Houghton.

  This book is the outgrowth of a series of university extension
  lectures delivered at Providence, R. I., and New Haven, Conn. It is a
  comparison of the accounts of the life of St. Paul, as found in the
  acts and the epistles, and Professor Bacon’s object is to point out
  the differences in these two sources in order that the records may
  later be harmonized.

   + + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 542. Jl. ‘05. 920w.

  “Excellent book.”

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 704. My. ‘05. 390w.

  “Although intended for popular reading, is less a life of the great
  apostle than a critical inquiry into the disputes and controversies
  connected with his life.”

       + =Cath. World.= 80: 540. Ja. ‘05. 550w.

  * “Is the clearest and ablest presentation of this subject yet made by
  an American.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “A misnomer. It should rather be called A study in St. Paul, for Dr.
  Bacon is a critic rather than a historian. Certainly his mind is
  analytical rather than dramatic. For the student who desires to get
  the latest information which a fearless and reverent scholarship has
  to give respecting our sources of information concerning Paul and his
  Epistles, we know of no book better than this volume of Dr. Bacon, but
  it is distinctly the work of a student, and requires for its
  appreciation a student’s thoughtfulness.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 192. Ja. 21, ‘05. 310w.

  “Although this is in the province of criticism, Professor Bacon’s
  treatment is of a popular nature. His book is, indeed, a union of
  constructive biography and scientific criticism.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 253. F. ‘05. 120w.

  “Dr. Bacon observes carefully and writes well; but he seems to us to
  be constantly getting a little more out of the text than is warranted;
  while the amount and complication of the alterations made in the
  history by ‘Luke’ (as he is called, in inverted commas) form a very
  serious objection to his theory.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 532. O. 21, ‘05. 430w.

  “His book will make the student think, and so far will be of service;
  but he is not a safe guide.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 444. Mr. 25, ‘04. 420w.


=Bacon, Dolores M.=, ed. Diary of a musician. †$1.50. Holt.

  A record of the experiences, hopes, and longings which lie all the way
  from the depths to the heights of a genius’ career. Short, terse
  sentences that sum up a heart full of joy or anguish, characterized
  all thru by Bohemian irresponsibility, are no more brief than were the
  moods of this interesting Hungarian. With all his musical power, he is
  human enough to say: “I adore my father; but who could keep faith with
  his father when such a woman smiles.... It is Marie Alexeievna. There
  is no superior allegiance.”

  “A decidedly clever and piquant tour de force. In very few books is
  the note struck at the beginning successfully kept up to the end, as
  here. Of its not ambitious order, the book is admirable.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 285. Mr. ‘05. 110w.


=Bacon, Edgar Mayhew.= Narragansett bay; its historic and romantic
associations and picturesque setting. **$3.50. Putnam.

  This sumptuous volume is “illustrated by the author’s sketches and a
  few photographs, and is well indexed. As the title implies, it is a
  collection of superficial descriptions and colonial legends woven into
  readable form.” (Nation.)

  “Is a worthy successor to the author’s attractive work in a similar
  style on the Hudson river.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 479. My. ‘05. 100w.

  “The book is chiefly deficient in failing to show the powerful
  influence of the bay on the social and economic development of the
  state. The volume contains many egregious lapses from fact.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 299. Ap. 13, ‘05. 540w.


=Bacon, Gertrude.= Balloons, airships and flying machines. *50c. Dodd.

  “The plainest narrative of a balloon trip told strictly from the
  airman’s point of view, in perfect equanimity, never mounting into any
  purple clouds, never soaring above any reader’s head, but sticking to
  the terra firma of plain fact, makes a far stronger impression upon
  the imagination than in any other style it ever could.” (Nation.) Such
  a narrative is Miss Bacon’s.

  “Is a little triumph, due to a bright fresh mind drawing from the
  headwaters of information ideas that sparkle with genuine interest in
  the subject, which is allowed to run on in its own natural babble.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 33. Jl. 13, ‘05. 330w.

  “Her story is well told, and, as technicalities are avoided, is
  interesting as well.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 441. Jl. 1, ‘05. 320w.


=Baddeley, St. Clair.= Recent discoveries in the Forum. $1.25.
Macmillan.

  Books and pamphlets have appeared in great numbers furnishing
  technical details, measurements, etc., of the “revelations of pick and
  spade” about this historic site. “But the average English or American
  traveler has very much needed a smaller work, of equal accuracy but
  more popular and practicable, as a guide among these new-old stones
  and pillars and pavements. Such a book is now to be had in Mr.
  Baddeley’s ‘Recent discoveries.’ The author has been in close touch
  with all the work as it went on, and fortunately has seen fit to give
  us many incidents of the eventful days, and illustrations showing the
  scenes of transition.” (Dial).

  “He is wanting in style and scholarship; almost every page is
  disfigured by odd mistakes in English or inaccuracies of reference.”

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 598. My. 13. 270w.

  “The book is interesting beyond the rule of guide books.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 129. F. 16, ‘05. 520w.

  “The expression is so poor that one rarely reads so small a book with
  such great difficulty.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1366. Je. 15, ‘05. 180w.


=Baedeker, Karl.= London and its environs: a handbook for travellers.
*$1.80. Scribner.

  “The fourteenth edition, fortified with four maps and twenty-four
  plans, its list of the principal streets, public buildings, etc. The
  total bulk has been but slightly increased. It is almost a pity that
  these successive editions could not graphically record the chief
  changes in the general aspect of the metropolis, which of late have
  been as imposing as they are extensive.”—Nation.

         =Nation.= 80: 228. Mr. 23, ‘05. 70w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 278. Ap. 29, ‘05. 180w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 760. Mr. 25, ‘05. 20w.


=Baedeker, Karl.= Northern France: handbook for travellers. *$2.10.
Scribner.

  “A new edition (the fourth) of this well-known handbook, brought up to
  date with such revision regarding hotels, routes, and places of
  interest to travelers as has been made necessary by the changes of the
  last four or five years.”—Outlook.

         =Nation.= 80: 289. Ap. 13, ‘05. 60w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 278. Ap. 29, ‘05. 60w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 1060. Ap. 29, ‘05. 40w.


=Bagley, William Chandler.= Educative process. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  A lucid exposition of the basal principles of pedagogy with
  illustrative matter showing the limits and methods of the application.
  “Its fundamental theses are, that the function of the educative
  process is to secure the transmission to each generation of the
  experience of the race, and that its end in view is to secure the
  development of socially efficient individuals—an end inclusive, as
  here defined, of livelihood, knowledge, culture, harmonious
  development, and morality.” (Outlook.)

  “His exposition of the responsibilities and duties of parents and
  teachers can be accepted with little or no reservation, but some of
  his illustrative statements and subsidiary generalizations are open to
  question.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 395. S. 23. 1080w.

  “All in all, it must be considered one of the best contributions of
  its kind to the literature of educational theory and should find an
  extensive use as a text-book in normal schools and colleges for
  covering the ground of general method.” Guy Montrose Whipple.

     + + =Educ. R.= 30: 418. N. ‘05. 1650w.

  “While Dr. Bagley is mainly concerned to teach the principles of
  pedagogy he has not failed in adequately illustrating the limits and
  methods of their rational application.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 883. Ag. 5, ‘05. 290w.

  “In spite of these and some other less important mistakes and
  misplacements of emphasis, the book is a fresh, stimulating and
  generally correct organization of the principles of education.” Wilbur
  S. Jackman.

   + + — =Science.= n.s. 22: 565. N. 3, ‘05. 1730w.


* =Bagot, Richard.= Italian lakes; painted by Ella Du Cane, described by
Richard Bagot. *$6. Macmillan.

  “In the pages of this beautiful book there have been gathered enough
  pictures of the Italian lakes ... to make those who read ... realize
  at least somewhat of the wonderful beauty of the lakes of Italy, even
  when they have not seen them.” (Ind.) “The lakes of Como, Lugano,
  Lecco, Maggiore, Orta, Isco, and others of northern Italy are
  described and painted.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The illustrator ... has given us a series of pictures which, though
  quite pretty, do not help the reader to realise the general character
  of the North Italian lakes. The material with which Mr. Bagot had to
  deal was far too extensive for the space at his disposal; and on the
  whole he has made a wise selection.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1236. N. 25, ‘05. 340w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 809. N. 25, ‘05. 470w.


=Bagot, Richard.= Passport. †$1.50. Harper.

  “Mr. Richard Bagot has written a stirring melodrama of love and
  intrigue. He has laid on his colours with a trowel. He gives us the
  lovely maiden wooed by the handsome lover whose suit is forbidden by
  the stern stepmother. He tells of wicked priests, cynical and scheming
  villains, faithful servants, secret hiding-places and sliding
  panels—all the stock-in-trade of regulation melodrama.... The scene of
  the book is laid in Rome and the ‘local colouring’ is admirable.”—Sat.
  R.

  “It is a pleasure to read so well-conceived and well executed a tale
  as this. This is a book that will certainly bear reading twice.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 927. S. 9, ‘05. 500w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 539. O. 21. 200w.

  “Frankly, the story makes rather better reading than an epitome of it
  would warrant one to expect.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 22: 234. N. ‘05. 280w.

  * “A conscientious, elaborate and able narrative. Within certain
  limits, ‘The passport’ may be honestly commended.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 90w.

  “The characters in ‘The passport’ stand out very well in the Italian
  ‘atmosphere’ which Mr. Bagot has the secret of portraying.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 287. S. 8, ‘05. 330w.

  “The book is one of much interest.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 420w.

  “Is unusual in the strength of its plot and the artistic and
  continuous development of the story. Here, as in former books, Mr.
  Bagot occasionally offends the taste of his readers quite
  unnecessarily.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 335. O. 7, ‘05. 100w.

  “But he writes well and picturesquely and his characterization,
  although totally devoid of subtlety, abounds in cleverness.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 442. S. 30, ‘05. 90w.


* =Bailey, Carolyn Sherwin.= Peter Newell Mother Goose. †$1.50. Holt.

  A prose Mother Goose which contains some of the old rhymes as Debby,
  “a real little girl with gingham aprons and stubby shoes and
  sunbonnets,” hears them in her wanderings among the Gooselanders. She
  meets the same old people of Gooseland: Dame Trot; Wee Willie Winkie;
  Jack Horner; Bo Peep; Simple Simon; and all the rest, but they are
  modernized and made almost too commonplace for imaginative children.
  There are twenty-two illustrations by Peter Newell.

  * “The text rings so true in spirit that one cannot tell which way
  first to look, at the printed pages or at the woodcuts. All in all the
  combination forms a most happy volume for children.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “Altogether a very excellent Peter Newell book with a good story to
  picture.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 795. N. 25, ‘05. 540w.


=Bailey, Liberty Hyde.= Outlook to nature. **$1.25. Macmillan.

  “The outlook to nature is, of course, the outlook to optimism, for
  nature is our governing condition and is beyond the power of man to
  modify or to correct.... The outlook to nature is the outlook to what
  is real and hearty and spontaneous.” The author applies the foregoing
  text to the four essays: The realm of the commonplace, Country and
  city, The school of the future, and Evolution: the quest of truth.

  “They exhort to public-spirited endeavor in the cause of rural
  education and they tend to foster a wholesome love of the soil and to
  replace the restlessness and discouragement of the country-bred boy
  and girl with a reasonable contentment and an impulse to improve
  existing opportunities.”

     + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 330. Ag. ‘05. 90w.

  “Some of the passages are delightful. Nor is it a one-sided view of
  life that is presented.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 250w.

  * “If there is nothing altogether new in the book, there is nothing
  that is not sensible, and very little that is not also inspiring.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 312. N. 16, ‘05. 370w.

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 306. O. 12, ‘05. 590w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 573. S. 2, ‘05. 500w.

  “His exhortations ... are hearty, spontaneous, and optimistic, and
  full of the love of nature which he wants all the world to share.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 886. Ag. 5, ‘05. 70w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 120w.


=Bain, Alexander.= Autobiography. *$5. Longmans.

  “The autobiography, as Professor Bain left it, ended with an account
  of the events of the year 1890; a supplementary chapter, relating to
  the last thirteen years of his life, has been added by his literary
  executor, Prof. W. L. Davidson. The chief feature of interest in this
  volume is its clear and candid account of the stages in the writer’s
  mental growth, under the circumstances of the time.” (Int. J. Ethics).
  His early religious life was one of unrest and doubt, but coming under
  the influence of Comte’s teachings, he soon rejected all theology, and
  found himself a thorogoing empiricist. His greatest originality lies
  in the realm of analytic psychology, and his works on this subject are
  among the classics. In logic, he was a close follower of Mill, also
  his two volumes show some important advances on the Mill method. In
  ethics, too, he is consistently empirical and utilitarian, believing
  that “General happiness or welfare is a sufficient statement of the
  final end.”

  “The plan is logically formed and elaborately carried out.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 283. Mr. ‘05. 150w.

  “Will undoubtedly be a disappointment to the reader who is looking for
  literary charm or for any strong infusion of human interest. It is a
  dry, concise chronicle, in which first place is given to facts about
  the writer’s own scientific activity and published work—professedly a
  record of his intellectual history first of all.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 94. F. 1, ‘05. 440w.

  “Curious lights are also thrown on the past history of university
  education in Scotland. Specially attractive is the account given in
  the first two chapters of the way in which the difficulties of the
  author’s early education were overcome, and of the manner in which his
  native intellectual tendencies began to show themselves.” S. H.
  Mellone.

       + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 241. Ja. ‘05. 1600w. (Abstract of book.)

  “The autobiography is much too long. What is really valuable in it is
  overlaid by a multitude of details which can interest but few.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 616. Ap. 29, ‘05. 720w.


=Bain, F. W.= Digit of the moon, and other love stories from the Hindoo.
$1.50. Putnam.

  “A digit of the moon,” “A heifer of the dawn,” “The descent of the
  sun,” and “In the great God’s hair” are four stories found in this
  volume, translated and adapted from the Hindoo by one who professes to
  have received the manuscript from a Brahman. “They possess a somewhat
  greater refinement, according to Western notions, than one often finds
  in tales of Oriental life and love as told by Orientals.” (Outlook.)

  “The fascination of the stories lies in their almost hypnotic slowness
  of movement, their lavish use of color, and the delicate mixture of
  wit and sentiment that animate them.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 90w.

  “The native atmosphere has been rather cleverly caught, and the author
  has adopted several Hindu tricks of story-telling. Many persons will
  deem his stories charming. At any rate, they are touchingly
  sentimental and written in extra-florid English.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 183. Ag. 31, ‘05. 290w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 453. Jl. 8, ‘05. 380w.

  “The stories have an undeniable charm both of matter and of language.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 511. Ag. 5, ‘05. 580w.

  “Are characteristically Eastern in delicacy, tenderness, vividness,
  gorgeousness of imagination, and floridity of language.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 836. Jl. 29, ‘05. 60w.

  “Mr. Bain has made us all his debtors by presenting us with this
  book.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 350. S. 9, ‘05. 370w.


=Bain, Robert Nisbet.= First Romanovs, 1613-1725. *$3.50. Dutton.

  An account of “the rise of socialism in Russia in its early days,
  coming down to the end of the reign of Peter the Great. So far as we
  know, the book takes new ground in that it is less a history of war
  and political convulsions than of the underlying conditions—social,
  racial, and moral as well as political—which give shape and form to
  the Muscovite civilization. Dramatic episodes and incidents have large
  place in the narrative.... There are several portraits and
  maps.”—Outlook.

  “Mr. Nisbet Bain is too faithful a chronicler. He tells his story in
  such detail that we miss the broad features and lack some perspective
  of Russia’s relationship to the rest of Europe during the seventeenth
  and eighteenth centuries.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 799. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1010w.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 940. Jl. ‘05. 40w.

  “But is perhaps unfair to carp at these minor inaccuracies (as they
  seem to us), and it is a more congenial task to praise this
  interesting book for the many pictures of old Russian life with which
  it abounds.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 133. Jl. 29. 1770w.

  “It is seldom that a book combines in so high a degree the charm of
  imaginative writing with the graver interest of history.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 246. Ag. 4, ‘05. 2040w.

  “‘The first Romanovs’ is a work which covers less ground than is
  traversed in the Scandinavian volume, and is marked not only by a
  greater fulness of detail, but by greater concentration of purpose.
  The present volume is in many respects the best he has given us.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 151. Ag. 17, ‘05. 530w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 345. My. 27, ‘05. 390w.

  “It is a conscientious, well-balanced history of that remarkable
  century. The whole story is well and interestingly told in fluent and
  often pictorial English.” Wolf von Schierbrand.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 386. Je. 17, ‘05. 1140w.

  “The work is essentially readable. Such a book as this is valuable as
  affording insight into what was really a formative period of European
  history.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 391. Je. 10, ‘05. 130w.

  “Upon the reader’s acceptance or rejection of Peter’s role as a mighty
  regenerator will necessarily depend the value and interest of Mr.
  Bain’s work. At the same time we fail to find that he brings any
  really new light to bear upon the subject.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 23. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1330w.


=Bain, Robert Nisbet.= Scandinavia: a political history of Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden. $2. Macmillan.

  The period from 1513 to 1900 is treated in this volume which deals
  with the rise, decline, and fall of Denmark, Norway and Sweden as
  powers.

  “The most comprehensive that has yet been written.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 172. F. 25, ‘05. 1000w.

  “In his conclusions he frequently differs from earlier writers, but,
  though his generalizations are often dangerously bold, his statements,
  as a rule, are well supported.” Laurence M. Larson.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 190. O. ‘05. 470w.

  “We have found Mr. Bain’s narrative clear and very readable. It is
  throughout a scholarly production.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 773. Je. 24, 2120w.

  “Mr. Bain’s narrative, however, is usually vivid and sometimes even
  eloquent. Inaccuracy rather than obscurity is the fault of the book.
  As is natural when the scope of the work is so wide, many of the
  author’s views are open to question.” W. F. R.

   + + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 608. Jl. ‘05. 590w.

  “His epitome of Scandinavian annals is clear and well arranged giving
  about equal prominence to Denmark and Sweden.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 150. Ag. 17, ‘05. 520w.

  “Mistakes are rare, and those that may be found are too insignificant
  for exposure. And he tells a good story. This failure of Mr. Bain to
  enter into the spirit of the time is glaringly apparent in his
  treatment of Christian II. of Denmark. On the whole his judgments of
  present-day men and measures are correct and well balanced.” Edwin
  Bjorkman.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 508. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1760w.

  “Keen insight into causation is manifest; social as well as political
  movements are studied, not a little light being thrown on hitherto
  neglected phases of Scandinavian history; and the facts presented have
  been carefully verified. The style, without being impressive, is
  fluent and agreeable.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 290w.

  “A very useful historical volume.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 123. Jl. ‘05. 230w.

  “Mr. Bain’s story is, by force of circumstances, highly compressed,
  but he has succeeded in making it both clear and attractive.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 435. S. 23, ‘05. 170w.


=Baker, Cornelia.= Queen’s page. †$1.25. Bobbs.

  This story is all about Pedro and Petronilla, twins of Béarne, who at
  the start could not understand why when Aunt Catalina said that they
  had some blue blood in their veins should see only red blood start
  from a knife wound. They themselves thus remind the reader that they
  are very much flesh-and-blood little mortals. Their experiences at the
  court of Francis the First, and their travels and adventures are full
  of interest for the young reader. The illustrations are the clever
  work of Fanny Y. Cory.

  “A pleasant way for any boy or girl to get acquainted with the
  sixteenth century is to read ‘The queen’s page.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 708. O. 21, ‘05. 140w.


=Baker, George P.= Forms of public address. **$1.12. Holt.

  This little volume is offered by Mr. Baker as a needed supplement to
  the ordinary oratorical work done in colleges. It is designed for
  school use, and sets forth its purpose in an introduction addressed to
  teachers. The book consists of famous historical letters, both private
  and open, editorials, inaugural addresses, speeches of eulogy,
  commemoration, dedication, welcome and farewell, and after-dinner
  speeches. There are an appendix and explanatory notes.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 445. Je. 1, ‘05. 550w.

  “The selections presented as models give a value to the volume that
  the general reader, as well as instructors and students, will
  appreciate for their historical or personal as well as literary
  worth.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 195. Ja. 21, ‘05. 120w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 250. F. ‘05. 50w.


=Baker, Henry B.= Relation of preventable disease to taxation. Michigan
State board of health.

  “We have here a valuable analytical study of local expenditures in
  Michigan during 1903 on account of indigent sufferers from dangerous
  communicable diseases: also computations of the money values of the
  lives apparently saved in 1903 through the lowered death rate from
  smallpox, typhoid fever, scarlet fever and consumption since the
  organization of the State board of health.”—Engin. N.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 185. F. 16, ‘05. 210w.


=Baker, Louise R.= Mrs. Pinner’s little girl $1. Jacobs.

  A pretty story of a little orphan, Mary Daingerfield, who is separated
  from her sister and brothers and adopted by the rich and kind-hearted
  Pinners. Thru her sweet unselfishness she succeeds in bringing home to
  them their son, Dave, and also in reuniting her orphaned family—Kit,
  Buz, the baby, and their faithful old black Aunty.


=Baker, Moses Nelson.= Sewerage and sewage purification. 50c. Van
Nostrand.

  A second revised and enlarged edition of this valuable little volume
  which was first published in 1895.


=Baker, Rev. P.= Short instructions; or, Meditations on the Gospels for
each day in Lent; ed. by Rev. W: T. Conklin. 75c. Christian press.

  “These instructions were first published in 1834 ... [and] are based
  on the holy Gospels for every day in Lent. The Gospel for the day is
  given; then follows a short instruction on the same, concluding with a
  prayer.”—Cath. World.

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 691. F. ‘05. 180w.


=Baker, William Henry.= Cement-worker’s handbook. 50c. W. H. Baker,
Wadsworth, O.

  More than 50 most important subjects on cement and its uses in
  construction are covered in this volume, which is compiled to meet the
  requirements of the common workman.

  “The description of the proper way to make cement walks is the best
  that we have seen in print.”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 636. Je. 15, ‘05. 200w.


=Baldwin, Charles Sears,= ed. American short stories. See Wampum library
of American literature, v. I.


=Baldwin, Charles Sears.= How to write, *50c. Macmillan.

  Taking the English Bible as a model of style, the author has written a
  practical little book which tells “plain people” how to prepare
  essays, how to tell stories, and how to describe.

  “The book will be very useful as a practical rhetoric.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 217. Jl. 27, ‘05. 130w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 169. Mr. 18, ‘05. 150w.

  “The author has succeeded in making his directions practical and
  untechnical enough really to help the people for whom they are
  designed.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 192. My. 20, ‘05. 130w.


* =Baldwin, May.= Girls of St. Gabriel’s. †$1.25. Lippincott.

  “A sprightly story of the experiences of an English girl of fourteen,
  who spent two years at a convent school in the north of France, on the
  Belgian frontier.... The heroine’s interests were varied by the
  neighborhood of a French uncle with a haunted château.... There are
  illustrations and a good deal of minor detail of the life of a French
  country house.”—Nation.

  * “The tale has incident enough to make it good reading for any girl
  under eighteen.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 489. D. 14, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The theme is a good one, and well worked out.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 693. N. 4, ‘05. 120w.


=Baldwin, Simeon Eben.= American judiciary and judicial system. *$1.25.
Century.

  This is the sixth volume in the “American state series” whose object
  is to describe “comprehensively the manner in which the Governmental
  agencies of the American state are organized and administered.” The
  subject matter falls under two heads: Part 1. The nature and scope of
  the judicial power in the United States, and Part 2. The organization
  and practical working of American courts.

  * “So far as description goes, it is here and there loosely written.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 471. D. 7, ‘05. 310w.

  “His work maintains the high standard set by the other published
  volumes of the ‘American state series.’” Robert Livingston Schuyler.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 480. Jl. 22, ‘05. 600w.

  “Is characterized by thoroughness, accuracy, and readableness. Laymen
  and jurists alike will find this book interesting and helpful.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 590. Jl. 1, ‘05. 390w.

  “He has accomplished his difficult task admirably.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 317. S. 2, ‘05. 140w.


=Balmforth, Ramsden.= Bible from the standpoint of higher criticism. 2v.
ea. *$1.25. Dutton.

  Two volumes devoted respectively to the Old and New Testament, which
  discuss in popular and non-technical form the results of the higher
  criticism. “The true basis of religious union is shown to be where
  Jesus put it, not in the speculative doctrines which divide men, but
  in the moral effect which unites them.” (Outlook.) Illustrations are
  drawn from the various classes of literature and periods of history.

  “Its object is to show that, after all, the Bible is worth studying.”

       + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 742. O. ‘05. 190w.

  “Some of the principal facts brought to light in recent study are
  presented fearlessly and with no little skill.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1131. My. 18, ‘05. 60w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “Mr. Balmforth’s discussions are bold, almost blunt, but they are
  reverent and well considered, and they will do good service in
  promoting familiarity with the achievements of Biblical scholarship in
  its most important field.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 640. S. 14, ‘05. 210w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “A lucid and popularly written account of the results of modern
  critical study.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 757. Mr. 25, ‘05. 50w. (Review of v. 1.)

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 694. Jl. 15, ‘05. 240w. (Review of v. 2.)


=Bandelier, Fanny,= tr. Journey of Cabeza de Vaca. **$1. Barnes.

  A new volume in the “Trail-makers library” which narrates the
  experiences and adventures of the first white man to cross the
  continent. “His journey begun in Florida in 1528 ended on the Pacific
  in 1536. The translator and editor have had a valuable idea in
  extracting from the original confused and garrulous narrative what was
  essential and important.” (Outlook.)

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 217. O. ‘05. 60w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 382. O. ‘05. 160w.

         =Nation.= 80: 458. Je. 8, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 399. Je. 17, ‘05. 300w.

  “The work is edited by no less an authority than Ad. F. Bandelier, the
  foremost in this line, and the translation is by his wife, whose quick
  intelligence and absolute familiarity with the Spanish language has
  enabled her to fathom many intricacies of the vague and confused
  record.” F. S. Dellenbaugh.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 509. Ag. 5, ‘05. 2070w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 693. Jl. 15, ‘05. 50w.


* =Bangs, John Kendrick.= Mrs. Raffles; being the adventures of an
amateur cracks-woman narrated by Bunny. †$1.25. Harper.

  “In his well-known humorous style Mr. Bangs has portrayed
  Mrs. Raffles, the widow of the famous cracksman, and her
  never-to-be-consoled admirer ‘Bunny.’ The yarns ... contain material
  for detective stories that quite surpass the plots invented for the
  original thief by Mr. Hornung.”—Critic.

  * “The yarns one and all are amusing.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “A parody of Mr. Hornung’s stories of Raffles, the amateur
  cracksman, very badly done.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 527. O. 28, ‘05. 15w.


=Bangs, John Kendrick.= Worsted man: a musical play for amateurs. †50c.
Harper.

  Eight lonely women at a summer hotel in New Hampshire attempt to get
  even with Fate for not sending a single youth their way. They
  construct a worsted man from an afghan, stuffing it with cotton. A
  certain famous spring-water brings this man of wool to life, and he
  becomes an unmanageable flirt.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 349. My. 27, ‘05. 210w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 61. Jl. 8, ‘05. 80w.


=Banks, Nancy Huston.= Little hills. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  Phoebe Rowan is widowed shortly after the ceremony which joins her in
  a loveless marriage with the village minister. It becomes a duty to
  her to call to her “wren’s nest” the destitute parents of her
  husband,—a father who is a cripple and a drunkard, and a step-mother
  “austere, ignorant, narrow-minded, with a faculty for ruling all
  around her with an iron will.” The story follows a thorny path with a
  triumphant turn out into the open.

  “It is not given to her, as it is to Mr. Howells, to write an
  interesting story about nothing. The various characters to which Mrs.
  Banks introduces us are not convincing.”

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 171. Ag. 5. 260w.

  “The score of characters who move through Mrs. Banks’s pages are
  quaint, charming, whimsical, by turns, but never exaggerated or
  burlesqued. The central thread of the story, which binds the whole
  together with a strength surprising in a plot of such fragile
  delicacy, is imbued with a simple pathos that at times evokes an
  almost painful sympathy.” F. T. Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 599. Ag. ‘05. 510w.

  “The author has a riotous sentimentality, no sense of humor, and an
  over-worked knack of detaching scenic bric-a-brac from the landscape.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 90w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 209. Jl. 27, ‘05. 150w.

  “The book is somewhat cumbered with description, and several of its
  characters have toppled over into caricatures, but it will be read
  with interest both because of a plot out of the ordinary and of the
  freshness and spontaneity of its treatment.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 479. Jl. 22, ‘05. 230w.

  “There are bits here which are gently provocative of a smile, and
  always the sentiment is sweet and gracious, but the total effect is
  rather faint.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 693. Jl. 15, ‘05. 50w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 504. O. 14, ‘05. 160w.

  “Appears as a frank imitator of Miss Mary Wilkins, and the imitation
  is not very successful.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 283. Ag. 26, ‘05. 170w.


=Barbour, Ralph Henry (Richard Stillman Powers, pseud.).= Orchard
princess. †$2. Lippincott.

  How Miles Fallon, bachelor, becomes a ready target for Cupid’s dart
  when April sunshine and the scent of apple blossoms lure him on to the
  orchard princess is lightly sketched in this love tale with a pastoral
  setting. The man is a novelist, and the girl is an artist, yet these
  two idealists are very human in the “little nothingnesses” that pave
  the way for their romance.

 *       =Critic.= 47:577. D. ‘05. 10w.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 388. D. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  * “The heroine is a real girl, which cannot always be said of romantic
  heroines.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1378. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 10w.


=Bard, Emile.= Chinese life in town and country. **$1.20. Putnam.

  Viewing China and the Chinese “with the eyes of a man of affairs,” and
  avoiding “exaggerated optimism”, the author has treated of Chinese
  traits, customs and character, of their religions, education,
  government, history and economic and social life. The book is concise
  and interesting, and contains over a dozen illustrations and a good
  index.

  “Altogether this is a clever and readable book.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 266. S. ‘05. 160w.

  “The book has no air of hasty generalization; the chapters, though
  brief, are full of information, set forth in the clearest possible
  manner.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 245. O. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  “The characteristic and chief value of the book is its freedom from
  bias. The little volume is singularly free from inaccuracies.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 753. S. 28, ‘05. 210w.

  “The translation, or rather adaptation, is one that takes away all
  stiffness and puts the reader at his ease. With index and
  illustrations, this makes one of the books on China most pleasant for
  reference and reading.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 227. S. 14, ‘05. 1210w.

  “He is a kindly, though just, observer.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 466. Jl. 15, ‘05. 2100w.

  “The translation seems well done.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 642. Jl. 8, ‘05. 250w.

  “He has come as near to an understanding of the Chinese character as
  is possible for an occidental.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 382. S. 16, ‘05. 300w.


=Barnes, James.= Blockaders. 60c. Harper.

  Thirteen short stories for girls as well as boys. The “Blockaders” is
  a tale of a Confederate blockade runner which is captured by the
  Federals and turned into a United States gunboat. Then there are
  stories of flying machines, cannibal kings, and adventures in Africa,
  where savages pursue the finders of certain diamonds. There is a story
  of an ice boat, where two boys carry a bag of money fifty miles to
  save a bank, and of harrowing experiences in an apparently
  inaccessible village of the cliff dwellers. There are many others
  equally varied.

  “The stories are well written; the plots are worth writing about; the
  boys who figure in them are real flesh and blood boys; and the style
  is crisp, direct, and natural.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 408. Je. ‘05. 130w.

  “The sort of thing boys like to read.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 148. Mr. 11, ‘05. 210w.

  “They are of all sorts—adventurous, amusing, and pathetic—and all
  good.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 652. Mr. 11, ‘05. 30w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 508. Ap. 1, ‘05. 60w.


=Barr, Martin W.= Mental defectives; their history, treatment, and
training. *$4. Blakiston.

  An interesting and practical treatment of the subject by one who has
  had long and successful experience in the training of the mentally
  deficient. The modern methods of sifting and classifying these
  children, are given in detail, and the work suitable for each class is
  described. It is an interesting book for everyone, but is intended
  primarily for teachers and parents. There are 152 illustrations.

  “In his interesting study, Dr. Barr has spoken to an audience of
  teachers and parents, rather than to scientists.” Albert Warren
  Ferris.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 65. Mr. ‘05. 700w. (Abstract of book.)

  “It is by all odds the most thorough and well written treatise upon
  the subject with which we are familiar, not excepting those of
  Ireland, Doun, or Seguin; besides it is modern.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 287. Mr. ‘05. 210w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 524. Je. 29, ‘05. 460w.

         =School R.= 13: 649. O. ‘05. 10w.


=Barr, Robert.= Speculations of John Steele. †$1.50. Stokes.

  John Steele, the hero of this story, runs the entire gamut of
  financial adventure. He starts as station master in the “lone shanty”
  known as Hitchen’s Siding where his bravery in side-tracking a freight
  train without the dispatcher’s orders, thus averting a collision, was
  the beginning of a series of promotions. He becomes the owner of a
  railroad, dabbles in wheat, loses a fortune, wins it again with the
  woman he loves thru a coup de force.


=Barrett, Mrs. Charlotte,= ed. See =Burney, Frances.= Diary and letters
of Madame D’Arblay.


=Barrington, Mrs. Russell.= Reminiscences of G. F. Watts. *$5.
Macmillan.

  Conversational reminiscences of the sculptor-artist jotted down by one
  who was his friend and neighbor. Many interesting details are given,
  which reveal his character and his attitude toward his own work and
  the work of other artists.

  “An extremely readable story of her long and intimate friendship with
  Watts.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 790. Je. 24. 1820w.

  “Comprehensive volume.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 474. N. ‘05. 170w.

  “At times it must be admitted she rather overloads her pages with
  minor details. The book is written pleasantly, interestingly, tho
  without any great distinction of style—but it is only fair to add that
  there is no pretension to style.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 809. O. 5, ‘05. 800w.

  * “The most important book about that painter yet published.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  * “Mrs. Barrington combines in an unusual degree the literary and
  artistic gift.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 27: 181. D. ‘05. 390w.

  “We cannot help thinking that the author would have done better to
  hand over her notes to the biographer who, under the general direction
  of Mrs. Watts and with access to the painter’s private papers, is at
  work upon a complete biography.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 183. Je. 9, ‘05. 720w.

  “Mrs. Barrington’s book, with all its enthusiastic fervor and intimate
  outpourings, adds practically little to what has already been
  published.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 367. N. 2, ‘05. 830w.

  “Mrs. Barrington’s is not a biography, but a personal work, which
  incidentally reveals a good deal of the writer’s personality.” Charles
  de Kay.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 617. S. 23, ‘05. 2230w.

  * “A noble biography of a noble man.”

       + =Outlook.= 81:703. N. 25, ‘05. 420w.

  * “This volume, while perhaps not exhaustive, is certainly accurate.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 100w.
       + =Sat. R.= 100: 150. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1110w.
         =Spec.= 95: 158. Jl. 29, ‘05. 210w.


=Barritt, Leon.= How to draw. **$2. Harper.

  The author “here sets forth, in a simple and practical manner, the
  basic principles of illustration in pen and ink and pencil.” After
  describing fully the materials necessary, he outlines the steps of
  procedure. The first lesson is on a block letter alphabet. Next are
  rules for drawing the human head and features, the hands, feet, and
  the human figure. “How to measure an object by the eye” is followed by
  an explanation of how to draw from life, studies in expression, animal
  drawing, perspective, landscape drawing, spatter work, water studies,
  comics, cartoons, wash lampblack drawing, drawing on silver prints,
  distemper drawings, lettering, foliage study, and the reproduction of
  drawings. The last part of the book is devoted to the well-known
  American illustrators and cartoonists.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 22. Ja. 14, ‘05. 260w.


=Barren, Leonard,=, ed. Roses and how to grow them. **$1. Doubleday.

  Omitting everything that does not bear directly upon the subject of
  practical rose growing, this manual teaches the American amateur all
  that is necessary for him to know “in order that he may intelligently
  make a rose garden, select his varieties and grow a harvest of bloom.”
  A number of half-tone illustrations accompany the text. The book
  belongs to the “Garden library.”

  “The book is freely and attractively illustrated, most of the
  inscriptions being amply descriptive of the purpose of the pictures.”
  Edith Granger.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 110. S. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “To those who desire roses and know nothing about them this little
  volume will be an especial boon, so precise and unveiled by the
  drapery of unnecessary words are the instructions.” Mabel Osgood
  Wright.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 537. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1170w.


=Barry, Richard.= Port Arthur: a monster heroism. *$1.50. Moffat.

  Under such chapter headings as, The city of silence, A battle in a
  storm, Cost of taking Port Arthur, and A contemporary epic, are told
  the horrid things, pitiless and true, which the author saw in the East
  on the field and in the trenches where the little brown men fought so
  bravely.

  “Barry knows how to tell a story in words and sentences that seem part
  of the war itself.” William Elliot Griffis.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 265. S. ‘05. 140w.

  “This book is that of an eye-witness profoundly and sympathetically
  impressed, still young enough to have every impression deep and clear,
  and old enough to set it down justly and vividly.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 417. Je. 16, ‘05. 900w.

  “Not strictly a well-written book, this is nevertheless full of the
  vitality of the field, and the impression that it gives of a record
  made on the spot is heightened by the numerous illustrations from the
  author’s own camera.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 144. Ag. 17, ‘05. 520w.

  “The book is on the whole more to be commended for its material than
  the manner in which the material is used.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 470w.

  “He gives a series of vivid pictures of Japanese methods of warfare,
  of life in the besieging trenches, of the characteristics of the
  Japanese soldier and his commanding officers.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 246. My. 27, ‘05. 120w.


=Barry, William (Francis).= Life of Ernest Renan. **$1. Scribner.

  Beginning with a chapter which discusses the widely known scholar and
  writer as “The Breton peasant,” Mr. Barry traces the career of Renan,
  describing his youthful struggles to understand the Catholic faith,
  his giving up the priesthood, his lectures as a teacher of Hebrew, the
  influence of his sister, his travels and his work upon his “Life of
  Jesus,” and his other books.

  “Is in many respects an excellent and most instructive biography, but
  he is somewhat too prone to argue with Renan’s opinions without trying
  to ‘place’ him amid the powerful influences of the nineteenth
  century.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 585. Je. 3, ‘05. 1060w.

  “It chiefly consists of translation or paraphrase of books within
  reach of every one, and the moment Dr. Barry essays to be original he
  falls into blunders.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 271. Ag. 26, 1000w.

  “This work is finely wrought as a piece of literature, is judicious,
  brave, and reverent.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 527. Jl. ‘05. 1220w.

  “From the able pen of a keen and sympathetic critic.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 40w.

  “He has written a superficial book on a subject worthy of more
  intelligent treatment.”

       — =Lond. Times.= 4: 169. My. 26, ‘05. 650w.

  “The thesis is cleverly maintained, and the book, in spite of its
  obvious dogmatic purpose, is interesting throughout.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 36. Jl. 13, ‘05. 270w.

  “Falls several points short of being satisfactory as an exposition of
  the reality behind the man who was an atheist, ‘devoutly and with a
  sort of unction.’”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 316. My. 13, ‘05. 1220w.

  “Interesting, well written, appreciatively critical.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 191. My. 20, ‘05. 210w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 766. Je. ‘05. 120w.

         =Sat. R.= 100: 278. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1290w.

  “It says much for the wealth and variety of Dr. Barry’s resources,
  both as a scholar and as a literary artist, that he has achieved this
  task with eminent success.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 526. O. 7, ‘05. 1000w.


=Barton, George Aaron.= Year’s wandering in Bible lands. *$2. Ferris.

  This volume is made up of home letters written by the director of the
  American school of Oriental research, and it contains no dry
  archaeological detail, but is an account of the experiences of the
  author and his party, and a description of the localities visited,
  including Athens, Corinth, the churches of Asia, the Holy land,
  Alexandria, Italy, and the Alps. There are 145 illustrations in
  half-tone, from views taken during the trip.

  Reviewed by Wallace Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 385. Je. 1, ‘05. 140w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 901. Ap. 20, ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 350w. (Survey of
         contents).

  “Its fine and numerous illustrations give it special value as a
  pictorial companion book to the Bible.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 655. Mr. 11, ‘05. 40w.


=Barton, Samuel Marx.= Elements of plane surveying. *$1.50. Heath.

  To form a connecting link between the mathematical branches as taught
  in the secondary schools and the practical work of surveying is the
  author’s chief purpose in presenting this text. It is subdivided into
  the following chapters: (1) Instruments, their adjustments and uses;
  (2) Chain surveying; (3) Compass surveying; (4) Computation of areas;
  (5) Transit surveying; (6) Leveling; and (7) Tables. The last 111
  pages are devoted to several useful and practical tables: a table of
  squares, cubes, square roots, and cube roots; of chords; stadia
  tables; six-place logarithms of numbers and of trigonometric
  functions; the natural functions to five places; and an auxiliary
  table for small angles. The author enters a plea against the insertion
  of six-place tables in texts on plane surveying as wasteful of time
  and labor.

  “He has quite well met the needs of one class. The class whose
  interests seem to have been consulted, in the main, is that of the
  strong high-school, or early college, student of mathematics who feels
  he would like to know for what all these years of barren formalism are
  supposed to prepare one, at any rate. From a mathematical student’s
  point of view the book is a clear, simple, and educative treatment of
  the fundamental problems of surveying.” G. W. Myers.

     + + =School R.= 13: 85. Ja. ‘05. 550w. (Detailed statement of
         contents.)


=Bashore, Harvey Brown.= Sanitation of a country house. $1. Wiley.

  “This little volume tells simply and clearly how to locate and build a
  country house to insure the most healthful conditions, how to provide
  a pure water supply, and how to dispose of the waste in an economical
  and sanitary manner.”—Outlook.

  “The suggestions that he offers to the prospective builder of a
  country house are eminently practical, based on a scientific study of
  rural conditions.”

     + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 492. S. ‘05. 80w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 935. Ag. 12, ‘05. 40w.


* =Bassett, Mrs. Mary E. Stone.= Little green door. †$1.50. Lothrop.

  “A French romance of the time of Louis XIII. The scene is partly
  placed in a retired garden belonging to the King and entered by a
  ‘little green door.’ The book is not of the swashbuckling type,
  although there is an occasional clash of swords.”—Outlook.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 557. Ag. 25, ‘05. 220w.

  * “The attempt is for quiet charm rather than for strenuous dramatic
  effect.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 44. S. 2, ‘05. 50w.


=Bate, Percy.= English table glass. *$2.50. Scribner.

  “The early pages tell of the author’s own proceedings as a collector
  and his growth as a connoisseur.... There are 254 separate glasses
  illustrated, all arranged upon the black backgrounds of sixty-seven
  half-tone plates.... There are many historical curiosities among these
  pieces, and of course Jacobitism in abundance.” (Nation.) 1586 is the
  date of the earliest glass shown.

  “A book at once pleasing and packed with information, personal and yet
  of broadest application.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 521. My. 13, ‘05. 440w.

  “The author is very enthusiastic, and has much knowledge of his
  subject, and his guidebook will be a welcome help to the large body of
  students of an attractive subject. We rarely find Mr. Bate at fault.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 442. S. 30. 510w.

  “As far as it goes, however, the book is a careful account, rather by
  way of classification than of historical or technical discussion, of
  English table glass up to 1800.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 219. Jl. 7, ‘05. 260w.

  “Full of the knowledge and the insight of the enthusiastic collector.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 530. Je. 29, 05. 1130w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 405. Je. 17, ‘05. 430w.


=Bates, Oric.= Madcap cruise. †$1.50. Houghton.

  The story of a young Harvard man whose uncle refused to supply him
  with funds for a trip to Europe. As the girl he loves is already
  there, nothing can stop him, so he takes his chum with him, steals his
  uncle’s yacht, cruises from Maine to the Mediterranean, wins the girl
  and comes home to be forgiven. There are many amusing and stirring
  adventures, such as a race with an English yacht, smuggling art
  treasures out of Italy, and a storm at sea.

  Reviewed by Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 115. S. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “Lively narrative and clearcut description, written for the most part
  in excellent English. A thoroughly wholesome and readable book.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is light, but simple and pretty.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 244. Ap. 15, ‘05. 460w.

  “The story is cleverly told, remarkably so for the author’s first
  attempt, and is entertaining in spite of the superabundance of slang.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 961. Ap. 15, ‘05. 80w.

  “The author’s style is buoyant, and he rides blithely over choppy seas
  that have brought to grief many an older writer.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 360. Ag. ‘05. 310w.


=Batten, Rev. Loring W.= Hebrew prophet. $1.50. Macmillan.

  “Dr. Batten seeks to realise the actual conditions under which the
  Jewish prophets lived and worked. He inquires how they gained a
  subsistence, what they did for their countrymen, what was thought and
  expected of them, and whether they wrote down their utterances in
  advance.... These and other questions are discussed with an
  open-mindedness and sobriety which are not always in evidence on
  either side of the ‘Higher criticism controversy.’”—Spec.

  “An excellent handbook for the use of intelligent Bible students. The
  method of presentation is clear and simple, and the underlying
  principles are scholarly and safe.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 239. S. ‘05. 30w.

  “The book is popular yet critical, neglecting neither the problems of
  scholars nor the practical applications of the history.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 279. S. 30, ‘05. 140w.

  “A very sensible and seasonable book.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 229. Ag. 12, ‘05. 110w.


=Battine, Cecil.= Crisis of the confederacy: a history of Gettysburg and
the Wilderness. $5. Longmans.

  “This volume is substantially a history of the American civil war,
  though special attention is given to the Gettysburg campaign (June
  27th-July 14th, 1863), and to Grant’s operations in the Wilderness in
  May and June, 1864.... The story of years of serious fighting is
  compressed into something less than four hundred pages. Then comes a
  chapter in which the lessons of the war are drawn in a very
  instructive way.” (Spec.) There are six maps in the book, and a
  colored frontispiece showing the battle flags of the confederacy.

  “Captain Battine has done faithful and able work in his book, and it
  must remain a permanent contribution to the history of the crisis of
  the Confederacy.” J. P. S.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 178. O. ‘05. 1330w.

  “If he has nothing very new to say on the subject, he has the gift of
  writing a clear narrative. Would be improved by a better index and by
  more references to authorities.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 195. Je. 16, ‘05. 590w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 201. Ap. 1, ‘05. 350w.

  “Capt. Battine tries to be fair, and is on the whole.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 258. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1270w.

  “Excellently lucid narrative. Our readers can hardly find a more
  satisfactory narrative, with so much matter in so moderate a space.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 411. Mr. 18, ‘05. 100w.


Battle of Maldon, and short poems from the Saxon chronicle, ed. by
Walter John Sedgefield. 40c. Heath.

  A volume in section I. of the “Belles-lettres” series. The text of The
  battle of Maldon has been collated with Hearne’s transcript of the
  lost Cotton MS. and the variants noted. Notes, bibliography and
  glossary are provided.


=Bauer, G.= Marine engines and boilers; their design and construction: a
handbook for the use of students, engineers and naval constructors,
based on the work, “Berechnung und konstruktion der schiffsmachinen und
kessel.” *$9. Henley.

  “The work as a whole is divided into eight parts.... Part 1. deals
  with the main engine.... Part 2. deals with pumps.... Part 3 takes up
  shafting, resistance of ships and propulsion.... Part 4. treats of
  piping and connections.... Part 5. deals with steam boilers.... Part
  6. is occupied with measuring instruments.... Part 7. deals with
  various details.... Part 8. comprises a large collection of tables and
  tabular matter.... Illustrative material has also been most generously
  furnished.”—Engin. N.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 115. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1040w.

  “This work constitutes an addition of the highest value to the
  available literature on the subject.” W. F. Durand.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 636. Je. 15, ‘05. 1270w.

  “The book has been excellently and competently translated. The general
  arrangement of the book is convenient.”

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 453. S. 7, ‘05. 1100w.


=Baum, Lyman Frank.= Queen Zixi of Ix. †$1.50. Century.

  Printed in large type, which will attract child readers, and profusely
  illustrated in color by Frederick Richardson, this story of the magic
  cloak which gave to each of its wearers the fulfilment of one wish
  will delight all who read about the fairy-folk, the witch queen, Bud,
  the little boy who became king of Noland, his charming sister, the
  invading Roly-rogues, Aunt Rivette, who wished for wings and got them,
  and all the rest.

  * “Is more of real fairy-tale than the ‘Wizard’ but just as
  delightful.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1387. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 50w.

  “It bids fair to be a popular holiday book for children.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14, ‘05. 60w.

 *   + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 768. D. ‘05. 100w.


* =Bayliss, Sir Wyke.= Seven angels of the renascence. **$3.50. Pott.

  “The ‘Angels,’ or messengers, are: Cimabue, Leonardo da Vinci, Michael
  Angelo, Titian, Raphael, Correggio and Claude. The author opens his
  book where his earlier volume, ‘Likeness of Christ Rex Regum,’
  closed.... Each chapter has prefixed to it a portrait of the artist
  discussed, with a facsimile of his signature. The other illustrations
  (all are, by the way, in half-tone) are reproductions of some of the
  works of the masters.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 150w.

  * “It is also a pity that he clings to convention and regards Cimabue
  as ‘the first painter of the renaissance,’ when that honor rightly
  belongs to Giotto.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 470w.


=Bayly, Elizabeth Boyd.= Under the she-oaks. †$1.25. Union press.

  Opening with a bushman’s hut and ending with a heaven sent rain which
  delivers the parched country from the great drought, this love story
  of Australia tells of the hardships which the gently-bred English
  gallantly encounter in that new country, where the wind wails drearily
  thru the long spines of the she-oaks.


=Beach, Rex Ellingwood.= Pardners. †$1.50. McClure.

  Ten stories of life in Alaska and the West, including besides the
  title story, The test, North of forty-three, The scourge, The shyness
  of Shorty, The thaw at Silsco’s and others.

  “There is no faint-hearted mincing of words in them, the pictures they
  present are sometimes repulsive, but always virile.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380. Je. 10, ‘05. 560w.

  “Strenuous tales of the wild West and the frozen North, ranging from
  the grimly tragic to the grimly humorous.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 394. Je. 10, ‘05. 20w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 60w.


* =Beach, Seth Curtis.= Daughters of the Puritans. *$1.10. Am. Unitar.

  The group of women whose biographies are sketched here includes
  Catherine Maria Sedgwick, Mary Lovell Ware, Lydia Maria Child,
  Dorothea Lynde Dix, Sarah Margaret Fuller Ossoli, Harriet Beecher
  Stowe and Louisa May Alcott.

  * “In writing about them, therefore, the author assumes a frankly New
  England point of view, judges men, women, and things by New England
  standards, and takes all his saints seriously.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 895. D. 16, ‘05. 420w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 140w.


=Beaconsfield, Benjamin Disraeli, earl of.= Endymion; with a critical
introd. on his writings by Edmund Gosse. $1.50. Cambridge soc., 135 5th
av., N. Y.

  “In ‘Endymion’ ... the hand of the author has dealt with matters with
  which he was more than familiar, the political complications and
  developments of the thirties and forties of the last century. It is in
  reality an autobiography, and the figures which move through the
  varied scenes of the story are thinly disguised personages of high
  rank and great importance.”—Pub. Opin.

  “Despite its priggish tone and frequent sneers, the book has a human
  quality which is likely to give it a life that even the great fame of
  its author could not have assured it had those qualities been
  wanting.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 549. Ap. 8, ‘05. 290w.


=Beale, Joseph Henry, jr.= Law of foreign corporations and taxation of
corporations both foreign and domestic. sh. *$6. W: J. Nagel, 6
Ashburton place, Boston.

  “In this country alone of great modern commonwealths, every state
  jurisdiction is a ‘foreign’ jurisdiction in every other state; and
  every corporation chartered by one state is a foreign corporation in
  every other.... It is made more complicated still by the concurrent
  existence of still a third (federal) jurisdiction.... The subject of
  taxation is naturally involved.... The author has devoted considerable
  space to the statutory provisions of states and territories, as well
  as of Great Britain and Canada.”—Nation.

  “There is, we believe, no other which covers the field explored by Mr.
  Beale, to the exclusion of other topics, and this fact alone would
  make the work professionally important.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 339. Ap. 27, ‘05. 590w.


=Beard, Lina, and Beard, Adelia.= Indoor and outdoor handicraft and
recreation for girls. **$1.60. Scribner.

  “When the eye and hand can be trained, the mind informed, and the
  child at the same time entertained, a needed work is indeed being
  accomplished; and in ‘Handicraft and recreation for girls,’ the
  parents will find a valuable aid in accomplishing this triple task.
  The first half of the volume ... is devoted to the handicrafts. Here
  the most explicit directions are given for spinning, weaving, ... as
  well as for making complete miniature copies of a Japanese village, a
  Russian village, an Indian village and an old colonial kitchen....
  Besides these there are numerous suggestions for the very tiny
  folk.... The second half ... contains many delightful suggestions for
  Easter and Hallowe’en games as well as for simple amusements for very
  small children.”—Arena.

  “All the directions in the book are so detailed and simple, and the
  illustrations are so copious that the work is far more valuable than
  many similar volumes. One would search far to find a book of this kind
  so varied in its interests and so clear and explicit in its practical
  directions.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 221. F. ‘05. 440w.


=Beardsley, Aubrey.= Last letters of Aubrey Beardsley: with an
introductory note by the Rev. John Gray. *$1.50. Longmans.

  “A series of notes and letters written by Aubrey Beardsley during the
  last three years of his life.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =Cath. World.= 81: 250. My. ‘05. 240w.

  “In a sketchy way, these indicate something of the writer’s mind and
  tastes.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 379. Ap. ‘05. 130w.

  “Altogether the book seems to throw some light on the artistic
  temperament in general, as well as upon the character and ways of
  thought of the young artist. For all that, it is quite impossible to
  see how the inclusion of many of the utterly trivial notes of thanks
  or regret adds to the light the book affords, and the trouble is that
  such idle conclusions are apt to make the reader scoff at the rest,
  much of which is not matter for scoffing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 68. F. 4, ‘05. 660w.

  “These letters are interesting as throwing side-lights upon that
  remarkably sensitive, artistic soul.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 381. Mr. ‘05. 60w.


=Becke, (George) Louis.= Tom Gerrard. †$1.50. Lippincott.

  A series of episodes in the life of an Australian stockman who, after
  many and varied misfortunes, finds happiness thru a lovely girl whom
  he has rescued from an alligator. The setting is Queensland, and there
  is much local color.

  “His new manner, because of its inequality, is inferior to the old:
  here and there he climbs almost to the heights; a moment later he has
  fallen into the mud of the ridiculous.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 857. Ag. 19, ‘05. 320w.

  “If his people are stereotyped, the incidents of Mr. Becke’s tale are
  numerous, and mostly picturesque.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 74. Jl. 15. 300w.

  “The story contains the usual Australian elements of interest.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 404. Je. 17, ‘05. 330w.

  “But for the local colour, in fact, the novel would be entirely
  commonplace.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 251. Ag. 19, ‘05. 230w.


=Becke, Louis.= Under tropic skies. †$1.50. Lippincott.

  “Mr. Becke, like Mr. Kipling, Mr. Lafcadio Hearn, Mr. Norman Duncan,
  and some few other fortunate ones in this generation, discovered a new
  corner of the earth with which he had a special talent for making the
  rest of mankind acquainted.... His element is, without doubt, the
  throwing of just such flashlights upon the far Paumotos, the
  Carolines, Fiji, and other fascinating dots in the Pacific solitudes
  as fill the pages of the volume which is called ‘Under tropic
  skies.’”—N. Y. Times.

  “Has returned to the writing of those delightful sketches of life in
  the remote islands of the South Pacific that first brought him into
  favorable notice. But one cannot read through to the end of this
  volume without coming to the conclusion that Mr. Becke still writes
  very good stories, that his store of incidents is simply enormous, and
  that he knows the South Sea Islands—natives, traders, and all their
  ways, past and present. He makes us know them too.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 27. Ja. 14, ‘05. 500w.


=Beebe, C. William.= Two bird-lovers in Mexico. **$3. Houghton.

  These two bird-lovers, the writer and his wife, spent a winter camping
  in the Mexican interior and here they found not only birds, but
  mammals, insects, flowers, and scenery worth observing. This record of
  the things they saw includes ornithological information, new material
  upon the food-habits of the Mexican species, and also incidents of
  travel and camp life and glimpses of the natives whom they met while
  “roughing it.”

  * “His observations and his pictures will be of great value to the
  scientist as well as a pleasure to the untrained reader.” May Estelle
  Cook.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 373. D. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “He has aimed at an interesting running narrative and commentary,
  rather than an exhaustive study. He may justly be proud of the
  information gathered on the habits of birds.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 341. O. 26, ‘05. 270w.

  “The whole story is told with much good humor and with evident
  enthusiasm.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 940w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 943. D. 16, ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 636. N. 1, ‘05. 130w.


=Beecher, Willis Judson.= Prophets and the promise. **$2. Crowell.

  The substance of this theological text-book is that of the lectures
  delivered by the author 1902-03 on the L. P. Stone foundation in the
  Princeton theological seminary. It presents a scholarly study of the
  prophets of the Old Testament and their messages relating to the
  coming of the Messiah. The author has searched for the truth
  unhampered by considerations of the orthodoxy of the results; but he
  feels that the truth as he found it while it contains some new
  elements is “simply the old orthodoxy, to some extent transposed into
  the forms of modern thought.”

  “The point of view is essentially conservative.”

       + =Bib. World.= 26: 398. N. ‘05. 40w.

  “Among recent books adverse to the modern critical view of the Old
  Testament, Dr. Beecher’s work has the rare and distinctive merit of
  commanding the respect of the critics whom he opposes.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 630. N. 11, ‘05. 230w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 752. D. ‘05. 80w.


* =Beeson, Rebecca Katharine,= comp. Child’s calendar beautiful. $1.
Burt-Terry-Wilson co., La Fayette, Ind.

  A collection of poems and prose selections to be memorized by
  children. The selections are arranged to cover the eight years of the
  grammar school course and each of these years is divided into months
  beginning with the first school month, September. This arrangement
  makes the book ideal for a teacher’s use. The selections are not only
  appropriate to the time of year but they include the thoughts of our
  best English writers upon subjects which appeal to the child’s
  patriotism, love of nature, human sympathy, and ideals.


=Beldam, George W., and Fry, Charles B.= Great batsmen: their methods at
a glance. *$6.50. Macmillan.

  A series of six hundred instantaneous photographs illustrating the
  stages by which the best cricket batsmen make their most
  characteristic strokes.

  “It is the most scientific work and the most practical work on batting
  that has yet appeared, a combination of example and precept which
  could not be bettered.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 1036. O. 7, ‘05. 260w.

  * “An intensely interesting book, and it will be found invaluable by
  all who are concerned with the higher philosophy of cricket.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 683. N. 18, 680w.

  “The cricketers of the future, when the present giants of the game are
  but memories, may find in Mr. Beldam’s marvellous photographs and Mr.
  Fry’s concise and lucid descriptions much fascination.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 275. S. 1, ‘05. 440w.

  * “The book is full of a great variety of most interesting and
  instructive points.” C. G. K.

     + + =Nature.= 73: 82. N. 23, ‘05. 1680w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 625. S. 23, ‘05. 310w.


=Beldam, George W., and Vaile, P. A.= Great lawn-tennis players. *$4.
Macmillan.

  A book of action photographs illustrating the positions taken by
  players for particular strokes, with comments by Mr. Vaile, who calls
  attention to their good or bad points. There is a chapter on “advanced
  tactics of the single game,” by Mr. E. G. Meers, and one upon “The
  half-volley,” by Mr. C. A. Caridia.

  “Mr. Vaile can play lawn-tennis and can talk about it, but he
  certainly cannot write. However, Mr. Beldam’s photographs make an
  excellent album.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 148. F. 18, ‘05. 790w.

  * “The book is in fact spoilt by the text.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 683. N. 18, 420w.

  “Valuable contribution to the literature of lawn tennis. The lawn
  tennis reader will find, therefore, much to think over in these pages,
  and particular attention is drawn to the first chapter, in which the
  racket, per se, and the methods of holding it are discussed.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 436. Mr. 9, ‘05. 160w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 186. F. 4, ‘05. 160w.


=Bell, Archie.= Scarlet repentance. 50c. Broadway pub.

  A beautiful Italian woman plays upon the weakness of a young American
  whom she meets in a sleeping car in the Rockies, “where the mountains
  cover their sins.” They spend one day at Banff together, a day in
  which the young man learns much, and, having eaten of this tree of
  good and evil, he returns to the East where, at the written command of
  the woman he has left, he confesses all to his innocent young fiancee,
  and receives her forgiveness and, incidentally, an Italian estate.


=Bell, John Joy.= Mr. Pennycook’s boy, and other stories, †$1.25.
Harper.

  A dozen short stories of Scottish child life. Wee Macgreegor himself
  reappears in this volume, and there are others as wee and canny as he.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 80w.

  “They are very good stories of their kind—informed by the appropriate
  sentiment and not too much obscured by dialect—humorous also in the
  sad Scottish fashion of humor.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 291. My. 6, ‘05. 220w.

  “The undercurrent of tenderness serves to bring out in higher relief
  the sometimes unconscious humor of the sketches.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 141. My. 13, ‘05. 60w.

  “It would be difficult to find a volume more refreshing than ‘Mr.
  Pennycook’s boy.’”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 758. Je. ‘05. 130w.


=Bell, Lilian Lida.= At home with the Jardines. †$1.50. Page.

  “In this volume the heroine of ... ‘Abroad with the Jimmies’ appears
  in the role of a young matron seeking to establish a home in New York
  city. The efforts of herself and her husband to secure ... peace and
  quiet amid the vicissitudes of flat-life in the great metropolis prove
  so futile that at last they conceive the idea of withdrawing to a
  beautiful little town on the Hudson, where they find a delightful
  old-fashioned house which they transform into an ideal country
  home.”—Arena.

  “The book is written in a bright, breezy style and abounds in humorous
  situations. It is just the volume for an idle summer afternoon.” Amy
  C. Rich.

       + =Arena.= 33: 455. Ap. ‘05. 180w.


=Bell, Malcolm.= Sir Edward Burne-Jones. $1.25. Warne.

  A volume in the “Newnes’ art library.” The book contains a tinted
  half-tone frontispiece and fifty-seven plates in black and white
  illustrating Burne-Jones’ work. There is an introductory essay by
  Malcolm Bell, who describes the pictures and tells of the artist’s
  struggles for public recognition.

         =Critic.= 46: 379. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

  “In his undoubtedly triumphant accomplishment of the difficult task of
  writing with freshness on a subject he has already treated
  exhaustively, the author ... assumes, perhaps, rather too much
  knowledge on the part of his readers. But for this small drawback, ...
  the brief account of the prolific artist must satisfy his most ardent
  admirers.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: 181. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “... Ten page preface, lightly but clearly, sketching his life and
  work.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 39. Ap. ‘05. 190w.

  “As the text is the work of Mr. Malcolm Bell, however, it bears the
  marks of the same authority and illumination which we find in his
  other and larger volumes. The execution of the illustrations is of
  rather unequal merit, but they are well chosen and are deeply
  interesting.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 398. F. 11, ‘05. 80w.


=Bell, Nancy R. E. Meugens (Mrs Arthur Bell) (D’Anvers, pseud.).= Paolo
Veronese. $1.25. Warne.

  An addition to the “Newnes’ art library.” The volume contains a sketch
  of Paolo Caliari, called Veronese, and his works, a list of his
  paintings and their present locations, and sixty-four illustrations in
  half-tone, reproduced from photographs.

  “Here the introduction by Mrs. Bell is clear and direct. The
  half-tones do not average as well as in other volumes.”

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 379. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “Is typical of that writer’s clear insight into the salient
  characteristics of the painter.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 100. F. ‘05. 130w.

  “This text is much above the average of these publications, and gives
  some real idea of the range and force of Paolo’s genius, though Mrs.
  Bell seems entirely to have missed the humor of the artist’s defence
  of himself before the Inquisition, and to sympathize altogether with
  the inquisitors.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 194. Mr. 9, ‘05. 60w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  “Interesting text. We could wish that the many illustrations in the
  present volume were more adequate in quality.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 401. F. 11, ‘05. 230w.


=Bell, Nancy R. E. Meugens (Mrs. Arthur Bell) (N. D’Anvers, pseud.)=
Tintoretto, bds. $1.25. Warne.

  About sixty illustrations well reproduced, with an introductory essay
  on the painter and his work.

  “In the introductory essay Mrs. Arthur Bell, from her extensive
  knowledge of Italian painting, throws much light on the surroundings
  of the painter, giving, by her interesting way of writing, a chapter
  which adds greatly to the value of the book.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 25: 180. Ap. ‘05. 120w.

  “The text is of no value.”

       — =Nation.= 80: 523. Je. 29, ‘05. 470w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 696. Jl. 15, ‘05. 50w.


=Belloc, Hilaire.= Emmanuel Burden, †$1.50. Scribner.

  The days of Butler and his memorial “Hudibras” are suggested thruout
  Mr. Belloc’s brilliant satire with its exaggerated gravity. It
  satirizes the speculative methods developed by the modern
  imperialistic movement in England. “No small part of the humor of his
  satire lies in its travesty of many contemporary biographies, in which
  the values of small incidents is greatly exaggerated, uninteresting
  details of family are furnished, and insignificant pedigrees traced
  back as if they led to royal sources.” (Outlook).

  “Mr. Belloc has drawn his characters with a delicate irony.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 407. Je. ‘05. 310w.

  “No piece of social and political satire was ever more elaborately
  worked out in each incident, reference and detail, even to the titles
  of the amusing pencil sketches.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1191. My. 25, ‘05. 100w.

  “A brilliantly written satire. An Englishman would appreciate the
  satire much more than an American, because of more intimate knowledge
  of the conditions with which it deals; but the story is sufficiently
  distinct in its satirical outlines to make the purpose of the author
  clear to an American reader and to give the story, for an American,
  interest.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 94. Ja. 7, ‘05. 120w.


=Bennet, Robert Ames.= For the white Christ; a story of the days of
Charlemagne. $1.50. McClurg.

  Oliver the northman, and his foster brother, Roland, are the heroes of
  this dramatic story, which is filled with stirring scenes and wartime
  adventures. The Danes, joining with the Franks in their cry of “Christ
  and the king,” repulse the Saracens; and Oliver, by his chivalrous
  daring, wins King Karl’s daughter, in spite of the beautiful and
  wicked Fastrada, who, by means of spells and poisons, succeeds in
  making herself a queen. It is a story true to those rough times in all
  details, and is an old time romance rather than an historical novel.

  “The author has taken pains over his work, and should content readers
  who enjoy that kind of fare. The delineation of character is
  conventional. A defect ... is the tendency to force the heroic note
  too insistently.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 75. Jl. 15. 280w.

  “All this portentous historical material, blended with much intrigue
  and passion, together with some of the gentler elements of romance, is
  skilfully brought into a tale of much action and dramatic vigor,
  couched in language that makes a fair pretense of archaism (of the
  conventional type, naturally), and brought to a satisfactory issue.”
  Wm. Morton Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 390. Je. 1, ‘05. 250w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 237. Ap. 8, ‘05. 260w.

  “This story is somewhat high-flown and super-romantic in style, but
  its intensity is not without dramatic force.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 856. Ap. 1, ‘05. 50w.

  “He has covered dry bones with rosy flesh.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 788. My. ‘05. 610w.


=Benson, Allan L.= Socialism made plain. Social Democratic publishing
company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

  “A simple explanation of the principles of socialism as advocated by
  American socialists—a work suited for the busy man on the farm, in the
  shop, the factory and the store, who has little time to give to
  abstract treatises.... This work contains fifteen chapters” in which
  “the various phases of socialism are so elucidated as to be easily
  grasped by the individual.”—Arena.

  “The treatment of the subject is so admirable that we take pleasure in
  recommending it to our readers.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 454. Ap. ‘05. 350w.


=Benson, Arthur Christopher (Christopher Carr, pseud.).= Life of Edward
FitzGerald. **75c. Macmillan.

  A volume recently added to the “English men of letters” series. The
  life of the man known to the world mainly thru his “Omar Khayyám” is a
  “fair subject of public discussion, not only because he was a poet of
  special charm and fineness, but also because he was a peculiarly
  interesting specimen of human nature.” (Outlook.)

  “Mr. Benson has analyzed the mind of FitzGerald with rare
  penetration.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 677. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1390w.

  “Mr. Benson has perhaps made of the brief biography required by the
  scheme of this series all that could be made of it.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 198. Ag. 12. 1610w.

  “Mr. A. C. Benson was a capital choice for the writing of this book.
  Not only is he sympathetic with FitzGerald, but he is a delightful
  writer.” Jeanette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 158. Ag. ‘05. 1090w.

  “This new life of FitzGerald ... meets no crying need. The literary
  strictures, however just, seem not exactly called for in ‘Old Fitz’s’
  case; and all else is a twice-told tale.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 69. Ag. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  “The biographical sketch and general characterization are excellent,
  the specific criticisms of FitzGerald’s writings sound and fair.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 697. S. 21, ‘05. 200w.

  “If he is not quite a satisfying biographer, he is certainly a
  satisfying editor, and often a very clever commentator upon
  FitzGerald’s literary achievements.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 197. Je. 23, ‘05. 2760w.

  “Mr. Benson’s book will be found to contain all that any reader needs
  to know about FitzGerald, and it is an excellent cheap substitute for
  those who cannot afford Mr. Wright’s massive illustrated volumes.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 126. Ag. 10, ‘05. 1340w.

  “His treatment on the whole, scarcely touches us with quite that
  personal and affectionate feeling for FitzGerald that doubtless most
  of us have involuntarily formed.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 560. Ag. 26, ‘05. 840w.

  “A literary portrait simple and direct in its method of treatment, but
  full of expression and character.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 837. Jl. 29, ‘05. 450w.

  “Mr. Benson sets forth very clearly and succinctly the noteworthy
  facts in a career that was decidedly lacking in the spectacular,
  whatever may be said of its deeper notes.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 509. O. ‘05. 120w.

  “We do not of course deny to Mr. Benson’s work such merits as may
  always be found in his biographical efforts—care in the weighing of
  facts, an educated taste, and a practised hand in the manipulation of
  phrases.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 500. O. 14, ‘05. 1410w.

  “He has marshalled the facts which are already known with considerable
  skill; he has criticised FitzGerald’s few works with sound judgment
  and surprising moderation.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 48. Ag. 8, ‘05. 1540w.


=Benson, Arthur Christopher (Christopher Carr, pseud.).= Peace and other
poems. *$1.50. Lane.

  “Mr. Benson’s verse resembles Matthew Arnold’s not only in its
  culture, but in its gentle brooding over the dark and mysterious facts
  of life, and in the strong resolution which confronts the mischances
  of human experience.... Most of the poems in this volume [about forty
  in number] record Mr. Benson’s own reflections upon nature and
  life.”—Forum.

  “The longer poems as a rule are the most successful, elegy and not
  epigram being Mr. Benson’s forte.”

       + =Ath.= 1905: 2: 107. Jl. 22. 300w.

  “Tender, sincere, and refined, Mr. Benson’s verse appeals to our
  highest spiritual nature, and delivers its message with persuasive
  grace.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 272. N. 1, ‘05. 460w.

  “Mr. Benson’s verse resembles Matthew Arnold’s: there is in it a
  warmth of sympathy redeeming it from austerity and even imparting to
  it a tone of friendliness and geniality.” Herbert W. Horwill.

       + =Forum.= 37: 247. O. ‘05. 560w.

  “Mr. Benson maintains a deliberately chosen level of good verse. He is
  always correct, always perfectly plain.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 267. Ag. 25, ‘05. 320w.

  “Maintains the even comfortable level of his earlier books.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 303. O. 12, ‘05. 380w.


=Benson, Edward Frederic.= Act in a backwater. $1.50. Appleton.

  “Mr. Benson has given us a slight but pleasing study of life in a
  small cathedral town. The brother and sister of a poor nobleman settle
  there, and introduce a novel element into the placid life of the place
  which gives many opportunities for comedy. The son of a canon, an
  artist, and therefore a rebel against the tyranny of the close, falls
  in love with the sister, and the progress of their romance is the main
  interest of the book.”—Spec.

  “All this has the makings of a capital light comedy, which no one
  could have done better than Mr. Benson. But for some obscure reason he
  has seen fit to introduce episodes entirely out of all harmony that
  ruin his effect. They give the impression of heartlessness and, what
  is worse, are bad art.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 106. F. 4, ‘05. 300w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 203. F. 18. 590w.

  “A flat little story without construction or sustained interest.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 477. My. ‘05. 80w.

  “As an example, not of Mr. Benson’s power, but of his wit, cleverness,
  and knowledge of human nature, ‘An act in a backwater’ is a delightful
  bit of work.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 149. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1030w.

  “It has some pleasant bits of human nature and one or two lovable
  characters, but, considered as a novel, it is wretchedly constructed.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 604. Mr. 4, ‘05. 60w.

  “A novel which starts out admirably and ends in sheer vacuity.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 757. Je. ‘05. 100w.

  “It is a pleasant, wholesome story.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 184. F. 4, ‘05. 260w.


=Benson, Edward Frederic.= Image in the sand. †$1.50. Lippincott.

  A love story dealing with the occult. “It is in fact the old story of
  the struggle between the powers of light and darkness, the black magic
  and the white for the possession of a girl’s soul—a Faust legend in
  effect, or its parallel expressed in terms of ancient and modern
  occultism.” (Acad.)

  “The climax, itself, however, the struggle of Ida’s friends and
  household with the demoniac, has a vivid force, and, if the tale is to
  stand by its power to conjure up horror, Mr. Benson must be credited
  with a considerable success in a difficult ‘genre.’ His detail is
  effective, his society sketches are admirable.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 710. Jl. 8, ‘05. 520w.

  “The story is carefully conceived and well written, and with excellent
  restraint. Mr. Benson wanted to ‘make our flesh creep,’ and he has
  not.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 73. Jl. 15. 200w.

  “That he has failed ludicrously, pathetically, merely marks his
  limitations by proclaiming his total innocence of the one quality that
  would make success possible. The machinery of the story is clumsy, its
  progress slow, and its conclusion an absurd evasion of whatever
  problem might conceivably be raised. Whether from carelessness or
  sheer ignorance, the book is a storehouse of weak, awkward, slovenly
  writing.” Edward Clark Marsh.

     — — =Bookm.= 22: 69. S. ‘05. 1560w.

  “The reason why Mr. Benson has not succeeded better is that he lets us
  too much behind the scenes.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 575. S. 7, ‘05. 190w.

  “In the would-be serious parts the author carries no conviction, and
  in lighter passages he is far below his own best level.”

       — =Lond. Times.= 4: 209. Je. 30, ‘05. 540w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 120w.

  “The quiet, intense conviction of Mr. Benson’s pages cannot fail
  entirely of a certain impressiveness.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 479. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1100w.

  “This tale is cleverly written, but disappointing.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 884. Ag. 5, ‘05. 150w.

  “His quick, vivacious talent is not well adapted for a tale of
  intangible mystery, which wants an atmosphere beyond Mr. Benson’s
  powers. The second part of the story would be convincing and powerful
  were the reader properly impressed by the first.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 261. Ag. 19, ‘05. 400w.


=Benson, Rev. Robert Hugh.= By what authority? *$1.60. imp. Benziger.

  “Mr. Benson, after making an effort at religious impartiality,
  abandons the attempt, and frankly turns his novel into a Roman
  Catholic historical pamphlet.... [He] takes for his subject the
  religious persecutions of the Roman Catholics in the reign of
  Elizabeth.... The greater part of the novel is occupied by theological
  discussions.... Mr. Benson has a gift of word-painting which enables
  him to give vividly lifelike pictures of the court of Elizabeth, and
  particularly of the queen herself.”—Spec.

  “Is an unusually fine piece of work. In fact we regard it as one of
  the most excellent Catholic stories that we possess in English, and by
  far the best that has appeared for a long time.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 403. Je. ‘05. 970w.

  “On the whole, the book is well worth reading, though spoilt, if
  judged from the standpoint of a work of fiction, by the intrusion of
  too much theology.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 221. F. 11, ‘05. 340w.


=Benton, Josiah H.= Notable libel case: the criminal prosecution of
Theodore Lyman, jr., by Daniel Webster, in the Supreme judicial court of
Massachusetts, November term, 1828. **$3.50. Goodspeed.

  “The trial here described was on an indictment alleging that Lyman had
  charged Webster with having conspired with other leading Federalists
  in 1807-‘08 to break up the union on account of the Embargo acts, and
  to re-annex the New England states to the mother country.” (Dial). The
  case was submitted to the grand jury in the supreme judicial court,
  and an indictment returned. It was then tried with the result that the
  jury disagreed, and when the solicitor-general proclaimed that every
  resource had been exhausted, the case was dropped. The trial, based as
  it was upon political rather than personal motives, did not disturb
  the relation of friendship between the two men.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 718. Ap. ‘05. 100w.

  “The history of the episode is well worked out by Mr. Benton, and the
  letters and other documentary materials are so skillfully employed in
  the text that the story almost tells itself from the records.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 128. F. 16, ‘05. 590w.


=Berenson, Bernard.= Lorenzo Lotto: an essay on constructive art
criticism. *$2.50. Macmillan.

  A reprint of a book which was first published ten years ago. It
  catalogs and describes Lotto’s paintings and attempts to present the
  man, Lotto, altho there is little material available for his
  re-construction. There are a large number of full-page reproductions
  of Lotto’s works.

       + =Acad.= 68: 368. Ap. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “A model of systematic investigation.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 398. My. 18, ‘05. 270w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 450. Jl. 8, ‘05. 600w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 141. My. 13, ‘05. 100w.


=Bernheimer, Charles Seligman,= ed. Russian Jew in the United States:
studies of social conditions in New York, Philadelphia and Chicago, with
a description of rural settlements. **$2. Winston.

  A series of papers contributed by well-known Jewish writers who
  “present the rise and development of the Russian Jews who have come to
  the United States during the past twenty-odd years, to show the
  qualities they brought with them, to present the facts as to their
  adjustment to the conditions here, and to look a little into the
  future.”

  “The manner of presentation of the papers is not uniformly happy, and
  for the whole we wish for a specific statement of dates. In spite of
  this, however, Dr. Bernheimer has undoubtedly done a service in
  bringing out this book. Considering its structure, he is to be
  congratulated on having it so free of injudicious statements and as
  complete as it is in the important matter on this serious subject of
  the assimilation of so alien a people.” Walter E. Kruesi.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 598. S. ‘05. 560w.

         =Critic.= 47: 380. O. 90w.

  “It is a splendid argument for the Jew.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 579. S. 7, ‘05. 240w.

  * “Naturally, the authors speak from the inside, and as each deals
  with conditions which have come within his own observation and
  experience, there is a variety of intimate information not easily
  obtainable by alien investigators.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 785. N. 18, ‘05. 300w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 70w.


* =Bernstein, Hermann.= Contrite hearts. †$1.25. Wessels.

  The life of a group of Russian Jews is here pictured in a fashion
  simple to the point of crudeness. The two daughters of the orthodox
  cantor, Isroel Lambert, follow their own hearts and become outcasts
  from both the faith and the home of their father. Later, contrite in
  heart and chastened in spirit, they are reunited with him in America.
  Thruout the book strict observance of Jewish rites seems to bring a
  happiness denied to those who merely love.


=Berry, Charles William.= Temperature-entropy diagram. $1.25. Wiley.

  “Mr. Berry’s book ... presupposes a knowledge of thermodynamics, also
  of the working and behavior of the various kinds of heat engines, ...
  it ... is divided into twelve chapters. The first chapter treats of
  reversible processes and cycles, and in the following eleven chapters
  the T Phi diagram is applied to the following processes and engines:
  perfect gases, saturated steam, superheated vapors, the flow of
  fluids, hot-air engines, the liquefaction of gases, compressors and
  refrigeration, the actual steam-engine cycle as recorded by the
  indicator.”—Engin. N.

  “The book is very clearly written. The author has covered quite an
  extensive field, and on the whole he has done it very well.” Storm
  Bull.

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 527. My. 18, ‘05. 420w.


=Berton, Guy.= Art thou the man? †$1.50. Dodd.

  A Denver murderer who daintily strangles a trio of women and in each
  case leaves behind thirteen carnations as a clue is sought thruout
  this detective story. The adventures of a “cub reporter” who becomes
  involved in the search, the clearing of an innocent man by a skilful
  lawyer who holds a mob at bay to protect his client, and the influence
  of Elise, the wicked and beautiful woman of the French quarter, are
  vividly drawn.

  “The gloom is not lightened by any gleam of humor, but the style has
  the force which comes from a lurid intensity of feeling.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 844. Ap. 13, ‘05. 140w.

  “Local color has been laid on here in great crimson splashes.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 237. Ap. 8, ‘05. 380w.

  “A rather clever detective story couched in somewhat overwrought
  language.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 30w.

  “The tale is lacking in action, compactness, and sequence.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 714. My. 6, ‘05. 110w.

  “Lacks neither freshness nor power.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 763. Je. ‘05. 110w.


=Bertouch, Beatrice, Baroness de.= Life of Father Ignatius, O. S. B.
*$3. Dutton.

  The life of this “devout but pugnacious Anglican monk” is interwoven
  with questions of church doctrine and church union so as to represent
  an episode in church history. His biographer reveals him as “a son of
  thunder,” “magnificently human,” and with an “oceanic personality.”

  “Will be received with grains by those not of the fold.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 154. F. 23, ‘05. 750w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 172. Mr. 18, ‘05. 630w.

  “The story of his life is a curious episode in the history of the
  modern church, an interesting study for the psychologist, and an
  instructive commentary on the worth of a formal sort of church union
  that is too much thought of.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 450. F. 18, ‘05. 150w.

  “A book which, so far as it is a narrative of facts and an exposition
  of opinions, has an unquestionable interest. It, too, answers in its
  way the question about the Anglican ideal. The author has a copious
  vocabulary of slang, but cannot write English.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 180. F. 4, ‘05. 170w.


=Besant, Walter.= London in the time of the Tudors. *$7.50. Macmillan.

  “The gravitating point in this great historical period lay principally
  in London.... As London was England to so large an extent, we are
  naturally curious to learn all that we can about the city at that
  interesting period. The late Sir Walter Besant’s quarto volume on
  ‘London in the time of the Tudors’ goes far towards gratifying our
  curiosity. It is in the same sumptuous form as the same author’s
  ‘London in the eighteenth century’.... The illustrations are for the
  most part reproductions of contemporary prints; chief among them is a
  panorama of the city, extending over three double pages of the book,
  originally drawn by Anthony Van den Wyngaerde, in 1543, well
  illustrating the map folded into the cover, embracing 12 pages, and
  being a reduced reproduction of Ralph Agas’s map of about 1560.”—Dial.

  “Work is rightly called a survey. It is not a history; it is not a
  story. It is especially happy in its accounts of how people lived and
  dressed, what they ate and drank, what customs they pursued at their
  weddings and at the burial of their dead,—from the king and queen down
  to ‘prentice. The author has drawn largely upon contemporary authors.”
  Arthur Howard Noll.

     + + =Dial.= 88: 121. F. 16, ‘05. 1230w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 143. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1450w.


=Best, Kenelm Digby.= Rosa mystica: the fifteen mysteries of the most
holy rosary, and other joys, sorrows and glories of Mary. *$6. Herder.

  A book written in honor of the Immaculate conception jubilee. It is
  illustrated with 46 full-page illustrations, copies of the rosary
  frescoes of Giovanni di San Giovanni and other artists.

  “It contains nothing fresh, original, or thoughtful that we have
  discovered. Its occasional references to history are grotesquely
  false: its theology is often repulsively extravagant; and its general
  method and spirit make it impossible for intelligent people to read it
  with either profit or patience.”

   — — — =Cath. World.= 80: 830. Mr. ‘05. 220w.


=Bevan, Edwyn Robert.= Jerusalem under the high priests. $2.50.
Longmans.

  Five lectures on the period between Nehemiah and the New Testament.
  “Into his attractive narrative of political events Mr. Bevan weaves a
  sketch of the development of Jewish thought, including therein notices
  of the Book of Daniel and of all the great Apocryphal works of the
  time except the Wisdom of Solomon.... One of the most noteworthy works
  of the period is Ben-Sira or Ecclesiasticus.... Mr. Bevan’s account of
  the book is full and interesting. He properly devotes much space to
  the invasion of Jewish society by Hellenism, including the attempt of
  Antiochus Epiphanes to Hellenize his realm.... Other important points
  forcibly brought out are: the character of Judas Maccabæus, the
  results of the Hasmonean rule, the conflicts between the Pharisees and
  the Sadducees, and the policy and character of Herod. The volume is
  provided with an index and tables of the Hasmoneans and the
  Seleucids.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “Mr. Bevan’s picture of the period, while popular in style, is
  thorough and accurate in matter.” C. H. Toy.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 681. Ap. ‘05. 320w.

  “The style is clear and sympathetic, and occasionally even brilliant.
  The topics dealt with by Mr. Bevan are so successfully worked out that
  we should have liked to see the book enlarged so as to embrace other
  pertinent points as well.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 522. Ap. 29. 610w.

  “It is not a comprehensive work; but a scholar who knows a period of
  history deeply and scientifically, can put a great deal of information
  into a small book. And beyond doubt, Mr. Bevan’s acquaintance with his
  subject is thorough and methodical. We only regret that he did not add
  a little bibliographical detail to his interesting pages.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 829. Mr. ‘05. 230w.

  “The author has certainly succeeded in his purpose of giving ‘in a few
  strokes the general outline and colour’ of the period.” G. B. G.

     + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 604. Jl. ‘05. 180w.


=Beveridge, Albert J.= Young man and the world. **$1.50. Appleton.

  “The young Indiana senator writes of young men from the point of view
  of a young man who has found success coming his way. These papers are
  collected from the periodical in which they first appeared.... Learn
  your limitations, and start out in the direction for which you are
  fitted, is his first suggestion. Also keep working, and working hard,
  and don’t worry. Read, and mingle with people, and cultivate nature.
  Take vacations. Courage, nerve, faith in one’s self are necessary. Mr.
  Beveridge has given a great deal of good advice that ... will
  stimulate and help to strengthen.”—N. Y. Times.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 669. O. 14, ‘05. 530w.

  * “It is all on good, safe, and sound commonplace ground.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 777. N. 18, ‘05. 370w.

  * “His book covers a great deal of ground, and covers it well; it
  contains sayings to think over, sayings to remember, sayings to
  follow; it is a book decidedly worth having.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 140w.

  “The writer’s terse, vigorous style is well suited to his text.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 530. O. 28, ‘05. 40w.

  * “Will occupy a permanent place with books of their general
  character.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 100w.


=Beveridge, W.= History of the Westminster assembly. *$1. imp. Scribner.

  “In a very clear and orderly manner, within a brief compass, this
  volume sets forth the events leading up to the calling of the
  assembly, its character, deliberations, and findings.”—Bib. World.

  “The calling, the personnel, and proceedings of the assembly are
  concisely related.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 376. Ap. ‘05. 170w.

  “Of the many histories of the assembly this seems to us best suited to
  the needs of the general reader.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 25: 316. Ap. ‘05. 80w.


=Bharati, Baba Premanand.= Sree Krishna, the Lord of love. *$2. Lane.

  This work prepared by the distinguished Brahman of Calcutta, who was
  recently elected vice-president of the Peace congress, is intended to
  interpret the Hindu belief as to the origin and meaning of life and
  the evolution of the universe. It purports to be “the history of the
  universe from its birth to its dissolution. Baba Bharati has aimed to
  impress his readers with the substance of Hindu thought on religion
  and philosophy, in purely Eastern dress. The volume is really a clear
  history of the origin, nature, and evolution of the universe as the
  Oriental mind perceives it; it is a clear statement of the doctrine of
  Karma; an exposition of the caste system; a beautiful story of the
  Oriental Christ, and perhaps the clearest statement ever published of
  the Hindu cosmogony.” (R. of Rs.)

  “Style is direct, simple, and clear, and his thinking high and sane.
  It is an extraordinary book,—the fascinating exposition of an exalted
  philosophy.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 255. F. ‘05. 250w.


Bible. Book of Ecclesiastes: a new metrical translation, with an
introduction and explanatory notes by Paul Haupt. 50c. Hopkins.

  “A rhythmical rendering and rearrangement of the contents of
  Ecclesiastes, involving many transpositions of verses and many
  excisions of glosses. The notes are numerous and suggestive. The book
  belongs to the ‘Polychrome’ series.”—Bib. World.

       + =Bib. World.= 26: 398. N. ‘05. 30w.

  “A highly valuable companion to the popular versions.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 574. N. 4, ‘05. 170w.


Bible, Twentieth century New Testament *$1. Revell.

  “‘The twentieth century Testament’ is a translation into modern
  English made from the original Greek by a company of about twenty
  scholars representing the various sections of the Christian church.”
  (N. Y. Times). In spite of the radical efforts of religious and
  literary formalists the world over to oppose modernizing the form of
  the Scriptures, “the demand of the people for a Gospel in their own
  tongue is too strong to be checked.” (Ind.)

  “There can be no question that this work is equaled by few, if any, in
  its earnestness, scholarship, and success. It deserves to be studied
  and publicly read, not in the place of, but along side of, the
  American standard revision.” C. W. V.

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 76. Jl. ‘05. 350w.

  “The most popular [modernized translations], and in our opinion
  deservedly so, is the Twentieth century New Testament. It is not an
  old version patched up so as to last a little longer, but a new
  rendering expressed in words and style such as might be used if it
  were written for us of to-day, as, indeed, we believe it was. The
  translators write idiomatically, not pedantically.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 435. F. 23, ‘05. 360w.

  “There need, we suppose, be no real fear that this book will make any
  progress in displacing that of which it is in effect a part burlesque,
  or that it will be otherwise valued than as a literary curiosity.”

   — — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 88. F. 11, ‘05. 143w.


=Bicknell, Edward.= Territorial acquisitions of the United States,
1787-1904: an historical review. 3d ed. rev. and enl. **50c. Small.

  “A clear and concise statement of the superficial facts concerning our
  accessions of territory.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “It contains a few errors. The style is too colloquial, but as a whole
  the book is better than many more pretentious ones.”

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 445. Ja. ‘05. 160w.


* =Bigelow, Poultney.= History of the German struggle for liberty. v. 4.
**$2.25. Harper.

  With the appearance of this fourth volume of its series the “History
  of the German struggle for liberty” stands complete from the battle of
  Jena in 1806, to the rebirth of national spirit in 1848. This latest
  volume contains a spirited account of the stirring events in Germany
  during 1844-1848, culminating in the declaration of Frederick William
  IV. and the meeting of the German national assembly at Frankfort. It
  brings out the similarity in the character of the Vienna, Berlin, and
  Munich revolutions, and discusses the growth of the influence of the
  laboring classes, and of socialistic doctrines.

  * “Is refreshingly unconventional, spasmodically clever, and
  interesting throughout. Taken as a whole, this latest piece of work of
  Poultney Bigelow’s is most stimulating, breezy, entertaining, and yet
  instructive as well.” Wolf Von Schierbrand.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 846. D. 2, ‘05. 1600w. (Review of v. 4.)

  * “Comprises a succession of vivid pictures of persons and events
  rather than a sober, detailed, and connected history.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 889. D. 9, ‘05. 120w. (Review of v. 4.)

  * “A return to the orderly arrangement of the earlier volumes of the
  history would afford a deserved relief to those who have been forced
  to flounder about in the disorder, back tracks, and false leads of Mr.
  Bigelow’s fourth volume.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 796. D. 16, ‘05. 470w. (Review of v. 4.)


=Bigg, Charles.= Church’s task under the Roman empire. *$1.75. Oxford.

  The four lectures brought together here are “Education under the
  empire,” two on “Religion under the empire,” and “Moral and social
  conditions of the empire.” The object is the directing of attention
  “to the extreme importance of studying the relation between the Empire
  and the Church even in those days which preceded the recognition of
  Christianity by Constantine, and further, of ascertaining as clearly
  as possible the conditions, intellectual, moral and material of the
  people who filled the rank of the church.”

  “Written with an ease of style which at times almost disguises the
  author’s profound knowledge and with a charm that rarely falls to the
  lot of scholarly writers.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 262. Ag. 26. 1010w.

  “Dr. Bigg is, of course, master of his subject, and able to handle it
  with lightness of touch, breadth of sympathy, and gentle humour.”
  Alice Gardner.

     + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 547. Jl. ‘05. 510w.


=Bilse, Oswald Fritz (Fritz von der Kryburg, pseud.).= Dear fatherland.
$1.50. Lane.

  “The story of a young lieutenant in the German army, from the time he
  entered the service to his downfall, the result of a debt brought upon
  him by the false standard of living prescribed by army life. The novel
  is a pen picture of the evil social and moral effects of army life
  existing in Germany.”—Bookm.

  “Besides being an interesting story of the realistic school, the work
  has a two-fold value. It presents a striking picture of present-day
  garrison-life in Germany and illustrates how degrading and subversive
  of all that is worthiest in man is such an existence.”

       + =Arena.= 33: 673. Je. ‘05. 350w.

  “The chief interest and the strongest conviction are found less in the
  story than in the talk.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 234. Mr. 23, ‘05. 400w.

  “Its revelations are sordid and sickening to the last degree, and
  there is no obvious excuse for its English publication, except as that
  of giving an awful warning to the English-speaking nations to guard
  their own war machines from ever sinking into such abysmal depths of
  immorality and inefficiency as are here charged against the soldiery
  of Germany. The book seems to be written by a man of devoted and
  intelligent patriotism, who has risked what he prized most in order to
  remedy the evils which he deplores. To say that the narrative is of
  any value as an example of the novelist’s art would be a decided
  stretching of the truth.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 50. Ja. 28, ‘05. 740w.


=Bingham, Joel Foote,= tr. See =Manzoni, Allessandro.= Sacred hymns and
Napoleonic ode.


* =Birrell, Augustine.= Andrew Marvell. **75c. Macmillan.

  This volume in the “English men of letters” series, contains a
  biography of the man who is remembered as “a colleague and friend of
  Milton, a wit, a diplomat, a traveler, and a member of Parliament from
  the Stuart Restoration until his death in 1678.... But ... ‘a more
  elusive non-recorded character,’ laments Mr. Birrell, ‘is hardly to be
  found.’ Consequently, it is not surprising to find the biographer
  dwelling mainly on his subject’s writings, quoting from them freely,
  and relating much of the history of the day necessary to explain them
  and assist in forming some idea of the writer’s personality.”
  (Outlook.)

  * “On the whole, it may be said that ‘Andrew Marvell’ holds its own
  successfully against any other volume in the new series of Messrs.
  Macmillan’s ‘English men of letters.’”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 976. S. 23, ‘05. 1440w.

  * “We have not space here to enter into his treatment of Marvell; it
  is admirable; we should end by quoting too much from Mr. Birrell
  himself, as a delightful performer in the intimate style.” H. W.
  Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 844. D. ‘05. 360w.

  * “But the book is not a good one for it falls between two stools. If
  it was to deal only with the permanent part of Marvell’s charming
  poetry it is nearly two hundred pages too long; if it was really to
  explain the politics of his day (which heaven forbid!) it is not long
  enough. And we resent some of the conversational ease of Mr. Birrell’s
  manner.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 303. S. 22. ‘05. 840w.

  * “Whatever may be thought of the truth of this style of biographical
  writing, it must be admitted that Mr. Birrell is master of its art,
  and that when provided with a favorable opportunity he is at least
  invariably entertaining.” Wm. A. Bradley.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 842. D. 2, ‘05. 3010w.

  * “A study which is not so much a biography as a contribution to the
  history of English politics and literature. As such it deserves a
  cordial greeting, for it is scholarly and sound.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 714. N. 2, ‘05. 260w.

  * “A pleasant ramble with an intelligent and illuminating guide
  through a time of great interest.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 34: 765. D. 9, ‘05. 170w.


=Bismarck-Schonhausen, Otto Eduard Leopold von.= Bismarck’s speeches and
letters; by Herman Schoenfeld. *$1.50. Appleton.

  A worthy addition to historical literature. The introduction is a
  biography and a philosophic interpretation of the character of
  Bismarck, and is supplemented by a chronology and a bibliography. The
  book is indispensable to the study of contemporary history as affected
  by Germany, but especially to the study of the unification of Germany
  itself, an accomplishment due, in most part, to Bismarck’s genius.
  Much has been learned about Bismarck’s personality thru the various
  biographies by Lowe, Headlam, Stearns, and Jacks by M. Adler, by Herr
  Busch, thru Mr. Ford’s edition of “The correspondence of William and
  Bismarck.” and thru Bismarck’s own “Reflections and reminiscences,”
  above all thru his “Love letters,” but no one serves to sum up
  Bismarck’s life work as does Schoenfeld’s.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 448. F. 18, ‘05. 190w.


* =Blackmar, Frank Wilson.= Elements of sociology. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  This working manual for students is divided into seven parts: Nature
  and import of sociology; Social evolution; Socialization and social
  control; Social ideals; Social pathology, dealing with practical
  subjects such as charity, poverty, crime, social degeneration; Methods
  of investigation; and History of sociology, in which are brought out
  the ideas found in the works of Spencer, Gumplowicz, Schaeffle,
  Lilienfeld, Mackenzie, Tarde, Le Bon, Letourneau, De Greef, Giddings,
  Small, Ward, Ross, Ely, Mill, Malthus, Warner, Henderson and others.

  * “The chief merit of the book from the theoretical side is that it
  gives an intelligent statement of the view-points of all the leading
  sociological writers. The chief merit from the practical side is that
  it touches upon a variety of vital and interesting problems in such a
  way as to tempt the student to go forward and specialize. The style of
  the book is easy, and free from any ambitious flights or phrasing, but
  clear and agreeable.” Jerome Dowd.

   + + + =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 422. N. ‘05. 720w.

  * “It is comprehensive in scope, is written in simple and direct
  diction, and the arrangement of its parts is sequential and orderly.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1157. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 888. D. 9, ‘05. 30w.


=Blackmore, Richard D.= Lorna Doone. $1.25. Crowell.

  This tale of the deeds of the outlaw Doones sheltered in the depths of
  the Bagworthy Forest appears in new dress almost every year. Here the
  reader has it in handy volume form, bound in limp leather, with clear
  type and thin paper.


=Blair, Emma Helen, and Robertson, James Alexander,= eds. Philippine
islands, 1493-1898. 55 v. ea. *$4. Clark, A. H.

  The purpose of these 55 volumes is to set forth as briefly as possible
  from original sources the whole history of the Philippine islands and
  their people, that all who are interested in their future may be able
  to form their own opinions with a full understanding of the conditions
  that exist to-day and that have existed since the discovery of the
  islands. To this end the volumes are mainly devoted to exact
  translations from rare original manuscripts, Spanish, French, Italian,
  Latin, etc., illustrated with facsimiles of manuscripts, portraits,
  maps, and views. There is an analytical index, and notes and an
  historical introduction have been provided by Edward Gaylord Bourne,
  and special contributions by well known scholars and bibliographers.
  The whole covers the history of the islands from their discovery to
  the present time, including explorations by early navigators,
  descriptions of the islands and their peoples, their history, and
  records of the Catholic missions as related in contemporaneous books
  and manuscripts, showing the political, economic, commercial and
  religious conditions of those islands from their earliest relations
  with European nations to the end of the nineteenth century.

  “The work of the editors has ... shown steady improvement. The
  translating staff is, ... as nearly as one may judge without having
  the original texts for comparison, doing more effective work than at
  the beginning.” James A. Le Roy.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 392. Ja. ‘05. 1230w. (Review of XVI, XVII
         and XVIII.)

  Reviewed by James A. Le Roy.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 875. Jl. ‘05. 1140w. (Review of v. 19 and
         20.)

  “It is an indispensable addition to every large library and collection
  of American or Spanish history.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 94. Ja. ‘05. 50w.

  “Much of this matter is by no means light reading, but it is all a
  valuable contribution to the early history of the islands.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 80w. (Review of v. 21.)

         =Ind.= 58: 264. F. 2, ‘05. 650w. (Review of vols. XVIII, XIX
         and XX.)

         =Nation.= 80: 231. Mr. 23, ‘05. 430w. (Review of v. 19.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 21. Ja. 14, ‘05. 510w. (Survey of contents
         of vols. XIX and XX.)


* =Blake, J. M.= Reasonable view of life. *35c. Meth. bk.

  Essays towards the understanding of the methods and working of eternal
  love. A late addition to the “Freedom of faith” series.


=Blake, Katherine Evans.= Heart’s haven. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  The Rappite community of celibates first in Pennsylvania and later in
  Indiana furnishes the setting for this story. It portrays the struggle
  between the Rappite conscience which repudiates all sentiment relating
  to ties of flesh, and the natural cravings of the human heart. First
  in the love of a parent for her child, later in this son’s love for a
  fair girl, is shown the triumph of governable sanity over religious
  fanaticism.

  * “There are a number of flaws easily apparent in Miss Blake’s scheme
  of the Harmonists. The author has made the mistake of padding too
  heavily in spots.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 857. D. 2, ‘05. 450w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 576. N. 4, ‘05. 100w.


=Blanchard, Amy Ella.= Frontier knight. †$1.50. Wilde.

  Miss Blanchard’s new “Pioneer series” story follows the fortunes of a
  young man and his two sisters who emigrate from Kentucky to Texas
  shortly before the Mexican war breaks out. There is excellent use made
  of the opportunities to portray border life, in which the Mexican
  peasant, the rancher, and the Texas ranger all have part.


=Blanchard, Amy E.= Little grandmother Jo. $1. Jacobs.

  A story of school life fifty years ago, when a grandmother of to-day
  left a happy southern home to endure the hardships of the
  old-fashioned boarding-school where the methods were cruel, the
  teachers unjust, and many of the little girls, the products of this
  system, were spiteful.


=Blanden, Charles Granger.= Chorus of leaves. **$1.25. Elder.

  In this gift-book, artistic and attractive in both print and binding,
  are to be found some fifty verses very slight and very sentimental.

  * “It strikes no lofty note, but it is singularly graceful in rhythm
  and dainty in conceit, and makes no pretension to be more.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 60w.

  * “Has written some pleasing verse under the title of ‘A chorus of
  leaves.’”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1379. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.


=Blind, Mathilde.= George Eliot. $1.25. Little.

  This new edition of Mathilde Blind’s “George Eliot” “has been greatly
  enhanced in value by the introduction of able and carefully prepared
  chapters by Frank Waldo, and G. A. Tarkington, in which we have a
  charming description of the friends and home-life of George Eliot, and
  a critical estimate of her place in literature, together with an
  exhaustive bibliography.” (Arena).

  “The excellent life of George Eliot, by Mathilde Blind, will remain a
  standard biography. It is a volume that we take pleasure in
  recommending to our readers as a book which should find a place in all
  well-ordered libraries and a work that every young person should read
  as a part of his general culture.”

     + + =Arena.= 33: 109. Ja. ‘05. 260w.

  “The very full bibliography, filling some thirty pages, is to be
  particularly noted and commended.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 563. Je. ‘05. 60w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 755. D. ‘04. 90w.


=Blondlot, (Prosper) Rene.= “N” rays, tr. by J. Garcin. *$1.20.
Longmans.

  A collection of papers communicated to the academy of sciences; with
  additional notes and instructions for the construction of
  phosphorescent screens.

         =Nation.= 80: 374. My. 11, ‘05. 400w.

  Reviewed by John G. McKendrick.

         =Nature.= 72: 195. Je. 29, ‘05. 780w.

         =Spec.= 94: 780. My. 27, ‘05. 100w.


=Bloomfield, Maurice.= Cerberus, the dog of hades: the history of an
idea. 50c. Open ct.

  “This essay ... is concerned with the origin and meaning, judged by
  comparative mythology, of Cerberus.”—Acad.

  “Interesting and suggestive little essay.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 337. Mr. 25, ‘05. 260w.

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 227. Jl. 14, ‘05. 590w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 568. Ag. 26, ‘05. 90w.


=Blundell, Mary E. (Sweetman) (Mrs. Francis Blundell; M. E. Francis,
pseud.).= Dorset dear: idylls of country life. $1.50. Longmans.

  “The seventeen tales reprinted here from various periodicals ...
  embrace a variety of incidents and emotions, grave and gay, no one
  trenching upon the borders of another; and the characters are distinct
  types of Dorset-folk.... ‘Witch Ann’ gives a pretty and touching
  account of the way a harmless old woman came to be considered a
  witch.... ‘The spur of the moment,’ and ‘The worm that turned,’
  present amusing pictures of unromantic rustic wooings. ‘A woodland
  idyll’ and ‘Postman Chris’ are charming love-stories.”—Acad.

  “There is something in it better than cleverness and skill: the truth,
  charm, and goodness of it leave a grateful memory of pleasant hours in
  delightful company.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 494. My. 6, ‘05. 480w.

  “All the stories are well worth reading.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 716. Je. 10. 200w.

  “They are fascinating from their unpretending simplicity, their pure
  goodness, and their warm, human interests.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 543. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 20w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 371. Je. 10, ‘05. 340w.

  “The movement of the tale is slight, but not without its dramatic
  incidents and occasional tragedies.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “It has a charm and interest.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 391. Je. 10, ‘05. 70w.

  “It is a book into which one may dip with pleasure, but the stories
  are for the most part so slight that it is unwise to handle the whole
  string of beads at once.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 813. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “Seldom has it been the present writer’s fate to read so delightful a
  collection of country idylls as Mrs. Francis Blundell’s new volume of
  short stories, ‘Dorset dear.’ ... The characters in the little
  sketches are vividly drawn.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 789. My. 27, ‘05. 170w.


=Bocock, John Paul.= Book treasures of Maecenas. $1. Putnam.

  “It is rather startling to pick up a volume with this title and open
  immediately to a poem on ‘Funston of Kansas.’ It appears, however,
  that the book’s title is that of the first poem, and that the volume
  includes many fugitive verses on all sorts of topics, which have been
  welcome to the columns of many newspapers and magazines.”—Outlook.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 133. Mr. 4, ‘05. 280w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 501. F. 25. ‘05. 60w.


* =Bölsche, Wilhelm.= Evolution of man; tr. by Ernest Untermann. 50c.
Kerr.

  “This is a little work of real value in which an able German scholar
  gives a succinct, graphic and general outline of the evolution of man.
  It contains in the briefest possible compass a summary of the
  demonstrations brought out by the revolutionary school of physical
  scientists.”—Arena.

  * “The subject matter is presented in lucid style, easy of
  comprehension, and the book is valuable as a short exposition of a
  subject about which no well-informed man of the present day can afford
  to be ignorant.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 553. N. ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 256. Ag. ‘05. 40w.


=Bolton, Charles E.= Harris-Ingram experiment. $1.50. Burrows.

  By far the greater portion of Mr. Bolton’s book is devoted to an
  account of the domestic, social and financial affairs of the Harris
  and Ingram families. The process of accumulating millions, descriptive
  journeys thru Europe, matrimonial schemes, a strike which involves the
  use of dynamite and firebrands furnish subjects for the first 395
  pages. The remaining forty pages are occupied with the “Experiment,” a
  Utopian scheme for establishing mills on the co-operative plan to
  demonstrate that capital and labor can unite on a common basis. The
  reader is introduced to a “Utopian mill in a Utopian village where
  there were no politicians, no saloons, no graft, no crime, nothing but
  that which was serene and restful and frightfully educational and
  instructive ... in that land of Somewhere to which there are no
  railroad guides.” (N. Y. Times).

     — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 112. F. 18, ‘05. 690w.


=Bolton, Henry Carrington.= The follies of science at the court of
Rudolph II., 1576-1612. *$2. Pharmaceutical review pub. co., Milwaukee.

  A book which “occupies itself with a medley of charlatans and
  charlatanism in the sixteenth century and with the most splendid
  patron of such matters, Rudolph II., King of Bohemia and Hungary, and
  Emperor of Germany.” (N. Y. Times). This ruler, a contemporary of
  Queen Elizabeth, neglecting his royal duties, drew around him a
  strange company of men, more or less learned in the occult sciences.
  These various personages, couched in the oriental luxury of the court,
  work amazing tricks of alchemy, discover formulas for wonderful
  elixirs, and claim a recipe for the philosopher’s stone. Incidentally,
  there is given much information concerning the manners of the time,
  the people, and their mental characteristics.

         =Ind.= 58: 1073. My. 11, ‘05. 160w.

  “Rather extraordinary volume. Altogether the book contains a deal of
  queer information about queer people and things of a time (in some
  ways) more credulous than ours. Readers with a taste for the
  out-of-the-way, for historical junk, in short, will find much to
  entertain them.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 39. Ja. 21, ‘05. 350w.


* =Bolton, Sarah Knowles (Mrs. Charles E. Bolton).= Famous American
authors. $2. Crowell.

  These essays were first published in 1887, and they are now re-issued
  “in a handsomely bound volume with two dozen illustrations portraying
  in fine half-tone reproductions the persons and the homes of six
  representatives of the old New England school, ... Emerson, Hawthorne,
  Longfellow, Whittier, Lowell, and Holmes.” (Dial.)

  * “Aside from its literary interest, it ought to be popular as a
  holiday gift-book.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “She manages to tell the familiar facts in a genial, lively way,
  interlarding them with anecdotes or personal impressions, and making
  her main theme in every case the essential quality of the author
  discussed.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 387. D. 1, ‘05. 160w.


* =Bombaugh, Charles Carroll.= Facts and fancies for the curious from
the harvest-fields of literature. **$3 Lippincott.

  “Forty-five years ago Dr. Bombaugh published the first edition of his
  famous book, ‘Gleanings for the curious.’ ... An entertaining
  collection of curious things in letters. His book lasted for nearly
  fifty years; it would have lasted longer had not its plates been
  destroyed by fire. Instead of merely resetting the book, Dr. Bombaugh
  has made a second volume along the same lines only with more recent
  matter.... The new volume contains the results of the most recent
  discoveries in many branches of literature ... and presents various
  jokes that have a very recent ring.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The total amount of curious information is so vastly greater than
  the amount compressible within a single volume that a book of this
  type is more useful for random reading than for reference purposes.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 391. D. 1, ‘05. 140w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 845. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.


=Bonner, Geraldine.= Pioneer. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  A story of the early days of California and Nevada when fortunes were
  made and unmade daily among the mines. There are many characters
  typical of those mixed times, but the real hero is the old colonel,
  who for the sake of his love for the woman who jilted him twenty years
  before, devotes himself to her two daughters, and allows their weak
  father to unscrupulously rob him. He finds happiness in serving the
  girl who resembles her mother, and seeing her safely thru a heart
  crisis.

  “Though her treatment is perhaps too conventional to please the
  realist the story is thoroughly unhackneyed, while the human interest
  is strong throughout.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 551. N. ‘05. 420w.

  “It is an unpleasant and rather sensational narrative.”

     — + =Critic.= 46: 477. My. ‘05. 50w.


* =Bonner, Robert John.= Evidence in Athenian courts. *75c. Univ. of
Chicago press.

  “Mr. R. J. Bonner, ‘formerly of the Ontario bar,’ deals with the
  subject from the point of view of a man trained in English law. The
  material is classified accordingly under such heads as Irrelevant,
  Hearsay, Written, Oral, Real, and Expert evidence, Evidence of slaves,
  Competency of witnesses, Challenges, Oaths, etc. In a number of cases
  the view presented in Meier-Schömann’s ‘Der Attische process’ is
  disputed.”—Am. Hist. R.

  * “The work is carefully done, and will be found interesting and
  suggestive by teachers who have not had the advantage of a legal
  training.” A. G. L.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 187. O. ‘05. 180w.

  * “Mr. Bonner seems to have exhausted his sources, both original and
  secondary. He has shown acuteness in his deductions. The only real
  doubt as to his conclusions arises from the fear that he was
  overzealous in his search for a body of law on evidence in Athens.”
  Clarke B. Whittier.

   + + — =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 424. N. ‘05. 880w.


=Boole, Mrs. Mary E.= Preparation of the child for science. *50c.
Oxford.

  The author’s purpose thruout this volume is to offer “suggestions as
  to the means by which the scientific condition of mind can be induced”
  in children. Five chapters deal respectively with the scientific mind,
  the unconscious mind, hygienic sequence in development, mathematical
  imagination, and ethical and logical preparation.

  “Information and salutary wisdom are to be drawn from it everywhere.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 18. Ja. 5, ‘05. 1570w.

  “Her book may be warmly recommended to parents anxious to adopt sane
  methods of educating their children and to teachers responsible for
  the training of the lowest classes of schools.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 316. F. 2, ‘05. 300w.


=Booth, William H.= Steam pipes: their design and construction. $2.
Henley.

  “This book ... is a compilation of various formulas and tables having
  to do with steam piping, together with such individual practice or
  designs as have been adopted by several large English corporations or
  manufacturers.... The author does not attempt to give any but English
  practice, and the book would not necessarily meet the exact demands of
  American engineers.”—Engin. N.

  “For the American engineer the perusal of the book, considering that
  the title seems to promise well, leaves a keen sense of
  disappointment, and a feeling that little of value has been added to
  our scanty knowledge of steam piping.” Charles K. Stearns.

       + =Engin. N.= 53: 340. Je. 15, ‘05. 970w.


=Borrow, George.= Romano lavo-lil; word book of the Romany or
English-Gypsy language. $2. Putnam.

  “‘Romano lavo-lil’ contains not only Borrow’s remarks on the history
  of Romany, and his vocabulary of the language, occupying fifty-odd
  pages, but a batch of Gypsy proverbs, in Romany and English, some
  scraps of the scriptures rendered into Gypsy, the “Book of wisdom of
  the Egyptians,” a list of favored Gypsy names of countries and towns,
  and many quaint odds and ends of folk-lore.” (N. Y. Times.)

       + =Acad.= 68: 751. Jl. 22, ‘05. 2260w.

  “It is in fact, a book in which the admirer of Isopel Berners may find
  much to entertain him for an hour or so.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 656. O. 7, ‘05. 180w.

  “A very serviceable edition in size, weight, and typography.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 384. O. 14, ‘05. 170w.


=Bosanquet, Rev. Bernard Hugh, and Wenham, Reginald A.= Outlines of the
synoptic record. *$1.70. Longmans.

  This volume “sets forth present opinion as to the synoptic question,
  and gives an outline of the life of Jesus and a summary of his
  teaching according to the first three gospels.”—Ind.

  * “The object of the writers of the book was to prepare a narrative
  based strictly on the three gospels which would embody the results of
  recent investigations in England unobtrusively and impartially, and
  their efforts have been successful.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 460. Ap. 15. 470w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1013. My. 4, ‘05. 40w.

  “A reticence is observable in dealing with miraculous narratives which
  contrasts with the freedom exercised in the non-miraculous. With this
  limitation, the book, while not professing to be a life of Jesus, is a
  good critical outline of his career as exhibited in the first three
  Gospels.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 196. Ja. 21, ‘05. 70w.


=Bosworth, Edward Increase.= Studies in the life of Jesus Christ. 90c;
pa. 60c. Y. M. C. A.

  “In two parts: the first based on the synoptic Gospels, following Mark
  with supplementary references to the other two Gospels; the second
  based on the fourth Gospel, well planned, neglectful neither of the
  historical growth of Judaism nor of the literary character of the
  different Gospels.”—Outlook.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 654. Mr. 11, ‘05. 50w.


* =Boulton, William B.= Sir Joshua Reynolds. **$3. Dutton.

  “Mr. Boulton’s work is the fullest in biographical interest of any of
  those which have appeared since Leslie and Taylor in 1865. To the
  students of technical processes of Reynolds’ art the book makes but
  slight appeal.... Reynolds entered very fully into the social and
  intellectual life of his time, and the wealth of anecdote of
  contemporary diarists and letter-writers has been aptly laid under
  contribution.... The illustrations ... are well selected and
  excellently reproduced.”—Ath.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 652. N. 11. 1180w.

  * “Mr. Boulton has written a most useful handbook, entirely
  trustworthy and keen on the elaboration of what others have suggested.
  Of a wealth of material he has also made splendid and always
  proportionate use.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 180w.

  * “In saying that the present volume is less interesting than Sir
  Walter’s we do not say that it is less valuable. More people probably
  will agree with Mr. Boulton’s critical estimate of the great president
  of the Royal academy than with Sir Walter Armstrong’s estimate. Sir
  Walter’s book is only the more interesting of the two because it is
  less conventional and more original.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 892. D. 9, ‘05. 170w.


=Bourget, Paul (Charles Joseph).= Divorce. $1.50. Scribner.

  “The scenes of this novel are laid in France. It concerns Gabrielle, a
  woman divorced from her husband, whose remarriage to another man is
  one of highest ideals. Owing to religious fervor, however, Gabrielle
  becomes estranged from her second husband. The other thread in the
  story deals with the love affair of the heroine’s son, who has been as
  thoroughly educated and cared for by his mother’s second husband as by
  an own father.”—Bookm.

  “M. Bourget has constructed a diagram to illustrate his view of the
  sacredness of marriage, and has called it a novel.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 380. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “M. Bourget sketches his characters and states their opinions with
  great fairness.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1005. My. 4, ‘05. 1490w.

  “Distinctly the strongest piece of fiction which M. Bourget has
  written. Whether the reader agrees with its extreme position or not,
  he cannot fail to be impressed by its sincerity of conviction, its
  powerful analysis, and its admirable style. It is a piece of fiction
  of very unusual strength and dignity.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 142. Ja. 14, ‘05. 270w.

  “There is a certain finesse about the plot that is commendable with
  the mental reservation that only a Frenchman will commend it. There is
  not enough beef and iron in Paul Bourget’s psychology to commend him
  to the average American.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 25. Ja. 5, ‘05. 410w.

  “Paul Bourget’s latest work is ostensibly a novel, but to English
  readers it will appear as a purely pathological presentation of the
  relation between the Roman church and its adherents in the matter of
  divorce. It is really the story of an intense mental and moral
  struggle between religion and love.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 383. Mr. ‘05. 100w.


=Bourne, Robert William (John Wright, pseud.).= Home mechanic: a manual
for industrial schools and amateurs. *$2.50. Dutton.

  An English book, the usefulness of which in the United States is
  qualified by the necessity of making allowances for the difference in
  prices, measures, and shop practice. It teaches the use of tools and
  the construction of machines. There are many diagrams and cuts.

  “Very comprehensive and practical work.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 270. F. 2, ‘05. 50w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 199. Ap. 1, ‘05. 310w. (Survey of scope).

  “Carefully designed to teach the use of tools and the construction of
  machines.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 245. Ja. 28, ‘05. 20w.


=Boutmy, Emile.= English people: a study of their political psychology
from the French by E. English; with an introd. by J: E: Courtenay
Bodley. *$2.50. Putnam.

  “This work is divided into five distinct parts: (1) the national type,
  (2) the human environment, (3) the Englishman—moral and social, (4)
  the Englishman as a politician, (5) the individual and the state. At
  the very outset the author sounds the keynote of his book in pointing
  out the disdain of the English people for abstractions and their love
  of fact.... While primarily a psychological analysis of the English
  people, at the same time the author gives a considerable insight into
  French character.”—Ann. Am. Acad.

  “While there is too much of generalization, which detracts greatly
  from the scientific value, the book is full of interest, and possesses
  an easy flowing style which will commend it to the majority of
  readers.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 335. Mr. ‘05. 350w.

  “It is piquant, varied, plausible in spots, interesting all over,—and
  fatally unconvincing. The solution is too neat to be true. The English
  dress which the work bears is fair on the whole, but the translator’s
  unsure foothold in the region of idiom occasionally reminds one of its
  Gallic origin.” Winthrop More Daniels.

     + — =Atlan.= 95: 551. Ap. ‘05. 390w.


=Bouton, Archibald Lewis.= See Lincoln and Douglas debates.


=Boyd, James E.= Differential equations, 60c. James E. Boyd, Columbus,
O.

  A little book well adapted to serve as a basis for the study at home
  of this branch of calculus which is often not fully covered in the
  engineering courses of the technical colleges.

  “It is clear in its exposition.”

   + + + =Engin.= N. 53: 641. Je. 15, ‘05. 200w.


* =Boyesen, Bayard.= Marsh: a poem. $1. Badger, R. G.

  A tragedy in poem-drama form. A gaunt mother and an aged father are
  left alone in the castle of Nyarva by Luxander, their only son, who,
  followed by Nyassa, “a vague faint flower on a waving stem” who loves
  him, goes out into the darkness accursed of God at the call of the
  “blind marsh and restless surge,” led by a spirit within him “stronger
  than life, or Christ, or love.”


=Boyle, Mrs. Virginia (Fraser).= Serena †$1.50. Barnes.

  “A story of the South during the Civil war, thoroughly provincial. The
  plot turns upon the cowardice of the twin brother of the heroine. The
  latter takes her brother’s place in the Confederate army, leading his
  deserted men to victory. This is the one blot upon Southern chivalry
  in the tale, while the author evidently holds that both civilians and
  soldiers north of Mason and Dixon’s line were knaves and coarse
  mercenaries.”—Outlook.

  “Is written in a spirit that few readers nowadays will find
  sympathetic.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 40w.

       — =Ind.= 59: 210. Jl. 27, ‘05. 70w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 324. My. 20, ‘05. 250w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 16: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 247. My. 27, ‘05. 70w.

  “The plot is conventional, the love affair ordinary, and the whole
  story commonplace. Its atoning feature is its easy wording.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 869. Je. 3, ‘05. 90w.

  ... “The amateurish plot construction, the lack of connection between
  parts, the absence of a well-defined story motive.”

     — + =Reader.= 6: 596. O. ‘05. 220w.


=Brace, Benjamin.= Sunrise acres. †$1.50. Dodd.

  A young athlete and football player is made heir to half a million
  dollars by his uncle on condition that he seek out and thrash a man
  who had once beaten this uncle in fair fight for a lady. The nephew
  finds his man and also finds him to be the father of a pretty
  daughter, but the fight takes place nevertheless with amusing
  complications.

  “The author has an excellent idea for a farce comedy. He has
  unfortunately lacked some skill in execution.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 651. O. 7, ‘05. 190w.

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 579. N. 4, ‘05. 50w.


=Braddon, Mary Elizabeth (Mrs. John Maxwell).= Rose of life. †$1.50.
Brentano’s.

  “Miss Braddon must be congratulated on having described a real human
  being in her new novel. Daniel Lester, the poet, to whom the reader is
  introduced in the very first line, is a remarkable creation, and a
  creation which would only have been possible in the present day....
  Indeed, readers of the book will almost be persuaded that they are
  familiar with his personal appearance, so intimately will they seem
  acquainted with the huge man whose delicate tact, colossal
  selfishness, unfailing amiability, and atrocious greed make him such
  an amusing companion.... The book, beyond the figure of the poet, is a
  little commonplace, and the beautiful but unscrupulous Lady
  Beauminster is entirely conventional and melodramatic. But the novel
  as a whole is a not uninteresting background to its principal figure,
  and is worth reading solely for the one admirable piece of
  character-drawing which it contains.”—Spec.

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 651. My. 27. 210w.

  “This latest of many canvases is as big as any.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 161. My. 19. 490w.

  “The merit of the story lies in the first part, and particularly in
  the artistic perfection of the character of Daniel Lester.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 555. Ag. 26, ‘05. 350w.

     + — =Spec.= 94: 717. My. 13, ‘05. 370w.


=Bradford, Amory H.= Inward light. **$1.20. Crowell.

  The author says: “The teaching of the book may be condensed as
  follows: There is in every man light sufficient to disclose all the
  truth that is needed for the purpose of life: that light is from God
  who dwells in humanity as He is immanent in the universe; therefore
  the source of authority is to be formed within the soul and not in
  external authority of church, or creed or book: that light being
  divine must be continuous; it will never fail; it will lead to all
  truth and show things to come; and it may be implicitly trusted.”

  * “The analytical critic will pass it by because it is neither
  analytical nor polemical, but the devout soul will find spiritual
  nutriment in it, and for the devout soul it has been written.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 752. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Bradford, Gamaliel, jr.= Pageant of life. $1.25. Badger, R: G.

  Poems for book lovers grouped under the headings: A pageant of life;
  The villa of Hadrian; Song of the sirens to Ulysses; A verse of
  Isaiah; Leopardi; Sonnets; Songs and lyrics; Prologue and lyrics from
  a mad world; Translations.

  “Besides these, and other sonnets, Mr. Bradford’s volume gives us some
  charming lyrics, a deeply-sympathetic poem placed upon the lips of
  Leopardi, and two successful translations from that world-wearied
  singer.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 68. Ag. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “‘A pageant of life’ ... is the intelligent verse of a scholarly man
  of fine sensibilities, who has meditated the literary history of the
  world long and minutely.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 130w.

  “Although he occasionally sinks into ... banality ... his muse is on
  the whole sturdy and self-respecting.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 406. Je. 17, ‘05. 390w.


=Bradford, Gamaliel, jr.= Private tutor. †$1.50. Houghton.

  “An artist manqué” accompanied by “the graceless son of an American
  millionaire,” makes a tour thru Europe, and records his experiences in
  a manner to call forth the following statement from the Dial:
  “‘Glorified Baedeker or Hare’ would do fairly well as a
  characterization of these pages, which are the result of a sympathetic
  intimacy with the scenes described.”

  “Is an amateurish production, without much to tell in the way of a
  story, but having some very pretty pages descriptive of Rome, where
  the action is laid. The author exhibits no power of characterization
  worth mentioning, and therein is the essential failure of his novel.
  This defect is hardly to be offset by style and observation, which
  qualities are in fair measure his.” W. M. Payne.

       — =Dial.= 38: 128. F. 16, ‘05. 230w.

  “It is a very good story, told with sufficient humor to make it almost
  a comedy.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 394. Ag. 17, ‘05. 130w.


=Bradley, A. C.= Shakespearian tragedy: lectures on Hamlet, Othello,
King Lear, Macbeth. $3.25. Macmillan.

  “Besides the lectures on the tragedies themselves, Prof. Bradley, of
  the University of Oxford, writes on ‘The substance of Shakespearean
  tragedy,’ ‘Construction in Shakespeare’s tragedies,’ and
  ‘Shakespeare’s tragic period.’ His purpose in presenting these four
  tragedies is, as he states, ‘to increase our understanding and
  enjoyment of these works as dramas; to learn to apprehend the action
  and some of the personages of each with a somewhat greater truth and
  intensity, so that they may assume in our imagination a shape little
  less unlike the shape they wore in the imagination of their creator.’
  “To the single task of interpretation he accordingly devoted himself,
  examining each of the tragedies individually, after a preliminary
  inquiry into such questions germane to all four as Shakespeare’s
  conception of tragedy and the form in which he expressed that
  conception.”” (Outlook).

  “Every question, every controversy, theory, view, or supposition which
  arises, he subjects to the same test. It is another merit of the book
  that every question is submitted to common-sense argumentation. The
  arrangement of the book is admirable.” R. Y. Tyrrell.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 229. Mr. 11, ‘05. 2240w.

  “In our opinion a book like that which is before us is not much less
  essential for the complete comprehension of Shakespeare’s tragedies
  than an atlas is for the fruitful study of geography.” R. Y. Tyrrell.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 266. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1350w.

  “In thoroughness of workmanship the book recalls German models.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 602. My. 13. 2270w.

  “But there can be no doubt as to the gratitude which every student who
  has been puzzled by these familiar problems must feel to Professor
  Bradley for the help afforded by his careful and sympathetic volume.”
  R. W. Chambers.

   + + + =Hibbert J.= 4: 213. O. ‘05. 1630w.

  “Is an excellent example of sedate English critical scholarship.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 839. Ap. 13, ‘05. 440w.

  * “It is the best piece of Shakespearean criticism published for some
  time.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1163. N. 16, ‘05. 110w.

  “The book is worthy of its theme; and it will carry the reader deeper
  into the mind of Shakespeare—deeper, I believe, than of any other
  commentator.” Henry Jones.

   + + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 16: 99. O. ‘05. 2920w.

  “A great mass of erudition, thoroughly digested, reasoned, and
  ordered, is brought to bear not merely on the four tragedies
  professedly dealt with, but incidentally on the other plays as well;
  the ideas are expressed in a style always admirably clear and often of
  a finely restrained eloquence.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 506. Je. 22, ‘05. 1890w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 24. Ja. 14, ‘05. 340w.

  “An intellectual treat. The originality, the analytical ability, the
  poetic perception.... Into all phases of his task he throws himself
  with enthusiasm. If he is not always convincing, he is always helpful,
  the sum total of his efforts being to produce a work which is really a
  welcome and distinctly useful addition to the already voluminous
  literature on the subject.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 247. Ja. 28, ‘05. 190w.

  “From the beginning to the end the level is sustained, exact criticism
  never sinks, and at times there is in the interpretation an
  imagination and a poetry which make the book in the truest sense a
  work of creation. His explanations are so lucid, so compelling that,
  novel though many of them are, we are almost invariably convinced. We
  have no hesitation in putting Professor Bradley’s book far above any
  modern Shakespearean criticism that we know, worthy to rank very near
  the immortal work of Lamb and Coleridge.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 138. Ja. 28, ‘05. 2120w.


=Bradley, Henry.= Making of English. *$1. Macmillan.

  The avowed object of this book is “to give educated readers unversed
  in philology some notions of the excellencies and defects of modern
  English as an instrument of expression.” The author discusses first
  the grammar, second the vocabulary, of our language. The history of
  the decay of inflection and the development of the new machinery which
  took its place is given, and the principles of composition, derivation
  and root creation are discussed at length. The closing chapter deals
  with the contribution of individual writers.

  “English-speaking people, especially Americans, whose interest in
  their own language has always been conspicuous, will ask nothing
  better than to study its history under Dr. Bradley’s guidance.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1054. Ap. 29, ‘05. 2060w.


=Bradley, William Aspenwall.= William Cullen Bryant. **75c. Macmillan.

  A volume in the “English men of letters series.” While he deals
  particularly with Bryant as the “poet and man of letters, Mr. Bradley
  touches upon his qualities as a man of affairs and his participation
  in the politics of the time; and as the beloved citizen and foremost
  figure at the civic celebrations of New York city.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Is what seems a perfectly reasonable estimate of Bryant as a poet.”
  H. W. Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 275. Ag. ‘05. 600w.

  “The story of Bryant’s life is told plainly and succinctly,
  accompanied by very sensible comment on his writings and a not
  illiberal estimate of his position in literature.” Edward Fuller.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 246. S. ‘05. 480w.

  “A convenient, clear, and thoroughly readable biography.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 116. S. 1, ‘05. 560w.

  “Is more critical than sympathetic.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1128. My. 18. ‘05. 150w.

  “While his story lacks something of the ‘detailed verisimilitude of
  his predecessors,’ it does present a view of Bryant the poet that is,
  perhaps, a little more integral and impressive. No one has yet written
  at length of Bryant with a firmer hold on the American origins of his
  poetry or a wider perspective of general literature.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 443. Je. 1. ‘05. 1010w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 200. Ap. 1, ‘05. 180w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 338. My. 27, ‘05. 1280w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 144. My. 13, ‘05. 150w.

  “Little that is valuable or striking is added to the sum total of
  estimates of Bryant’s place in American literature. From the
  biographical side the book deserves great praise.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 94. Jl. 15, ‘05. 90w.


=Brady, Cyrus Townsend.= Conquest of the Southwest: the story of a great
spoliation. **$1.50. Appleton.

  “A story of the struggle for independence in Texas, also, of the
  Mexican war, beginning with the Treaty of 1819 and concluding with the
  Compromise of 1850. The volume, which is well illustrated with
  drawings and maps, is an addition to ‘The expansion of the republic
  series.’”—Bookm.

  “The author has made a careful study of the vast literature bearing
  upon the subject.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 80w.

  “It is written simply and effectively, and with less elaboration of
  detail than previous works from the same hand.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 275. Ap. 16, ‘05. 220w.

         =Ind.= 58: 727. Mr. 30, ‘05. 60w.

  “The book is written in an easy, pleasant, and decidedly popular
  style. It is, indeed, a popular account of the Mexican war and events
  leading up to it, rather than what the author insists on calling it—a
  monograph.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 156. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1050w.

  “... An outline narrative in which shall be presented, lucidly,
  impartially, and in proper proportion, the salient aspects, episodes,
  and personalities. Such a presentation may fairly be said to be
  embodied in Dr. Brady’s book.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 604. Mr. 4, ‘05. 260w.


=Brady, Cyrus Townsend.= Indian fights and fighters. **$1.30. McClure.

  “The material for this book has been secured from various documents,
  and from officers and men who were in the engagements. It is divided
  into two parts: Protecting the Frontier, and the War with the Sioux.
  An account of Custer’s defeat is given in the appendix. It is an
  addition to the ‘American fights and fighters’ series.” (Bookm.) “Mr.
  Brady seems a bit hampered as a story teller in many of the chapters
  by the wealth of facts he has to deal with and cling to, but is at his
  best in the description of the battle of the Wichita, where Custer led
  his troops against the Cheyennes under the leadership of Black
  Kettle.” (N. Y. Times).

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 720. Ap. ‘05. 130w.

  “The book, like its three predecessors, is fairly authentic history,
  and every endeavor has been made to set down the facts without fear or
  favor.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 202. Mr. 16, ‘05. 300w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 52. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1160w.


* =Brady, Cyrus Townsend.= My lady’s slipper. **$1.50. Dodd.

  “Francis Burnham, an American midshipman, finds himself in the power
  of the villainous Marquis du Tremigon, and is forced to assume a
  disguise and enter the apartments of the beautiful Comtesse de Villars
  to steal a token for the Marquis—a slipper worn by her, if
  possible, ... and because he refuses to do the Marquis’s bidding there
  are dark days in prison and other dangers in store for him. But the
  slipper is a talisman of good fortune, and ... the Comtesse is made
  happy for life, and so is Burnham. The book is in a pretty binding of
  blue and gold, the illustrations are gracefully designed by Charlotte
  Weber Ditzler.”—N. Y. Times.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “The story of their love affairs is a pretty trifle, well adapted to
  its ornate setting.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 447. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 80w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 3, ‘05. 180w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 30w.


=Brady, Cyrus Townsend.= Three daughters of the Confederacy. †$1.50.
Dillingham.

  The history and romance of three Southern girls with the Civil war
  setting which Mr. Brady is past master of. The adventures of the first
  take place on the Atlantic coast during the blockade at the beginning
  of the war, while the Mississippi river furnishes the background for
  the experiences of the second who marries a Yankee non-combatant and
  straightway rues it. The third is a girl of such great daring that she
  faces the enemy with her lover on the battlefield during “Stonewall
  Jackson’s greatest day.”


=Brady, Cyrus Townsend.= Two captains. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “A story of Nelson and Bonaparte in the troubled times of France’s
  struggle to free herself from monarchy. The long, detailed accounts of
  sea fights and naval maneuvers will doubtless interest some readers,
  but the popular taste will find more gratification in the love story
  of the bold young Irish sea captain and the unhappy French countess
  whom he rescues from many perils and finally wins for his
  wife.”—Outlook.

  “A brightly contrived romance of an interesting period, which suffers
  somewhat from the intrusion of the two gigantic historical figures.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 460. Ap. 15. 310w.

  Reviewed by Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 390. Je. 1, ‘05. 260w.

     — + =Ind.= 59: 582. S. 7, ‘05. 250w.

  “A very creditable and entertaining book.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 126. F. 25, ‘05. 560w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 505. F. 25, ‘05. 70w.

  “The story itself is not of great significance. Mr. Brady has a sure
  touch in his pictures of battles, whatever one may think of his
  romantic passages. Nelson, too, is impressively presented. If it does
  nothing else, the book may at least inspire some of its readers with
  the desire to study in sober history the progress of the events which
  are here so rapidly but glowingly sketched.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 391. Mr. 11, ‘05. 260w.


=Brain, Belle Marvel.= All about Japan; stories of the sunrise land told
for little folks. **$1. Revell.

  “Miss Brain is already favorably known as a writer of ‘missionary’
  stories for children, and in her present volume she manages to
  incorporate, in a style peculiarly adapted to the juvenile mind, a
  great variety of interesting facts concerning the history, life,
  customs and manners of the Japanese, as well as brief biographies of
  some of the most successful of those who have given themselves to the
  task of spreading the gospel of Christ throughout the islands.”—Lit.
  D.

  “An excellent gift-book in every sense.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 626. O. 28, ‘05. 110w.

  “In it we have not only a capital book for little folks but a welcome
  volume for their elders.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 234. S. 23, ‘05. 110w.


=Brainerd, Eleanor Hoyt.= Concerning Belinda. $1.50. Doubleday.

  The experiences of an attractive western girl as “Youngest teacher” in
  a fashionable New York finishing school for girls are most
  entertainingly narrated here. Belinda’s initiation into the mysteries
  of responsibility took place the night of her arrival when she was
  delegated to chaperone twelve strange maidens to the theatre, whom at
  the close she utterly forgot when Jack Wendell dropped into the midst
  of her homesick gloom. The chapters all furnish disconnected bits
  taken from life in a fashionable school, with now and then the least
  suggestion of romance.

  “Is written with the same lightness and sprightly humor that
  characterized the author’s previous stories.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 651. O. 7, ‘05. 150w.

  * “There are a number of other stories, all equally bright and
  entertaining, and a private love affair or two for the pretty Belinda
  herself.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.


=Brainerd, Henry C.= Old family doctor. *$1. Clark, A. H.

  It might be fancied that this family doctor is some kin to Dr.
  McLaren’s much beloved old Scotch doctor. At least there are
  characteristics, sacrifices and experiences in common. One chapter of
  the six, “Views,” showing the superstitious beliefs of a quack
  concocter of unheard-of remedies, is exceedingly clever.


=Braithwaite, William Stanley.= Lyrics of life and love. **$1. Turner,
H. B.

  “The poems of that rising young negro poet, William Stanley
  Braithwaite have been collected under the general title ‘Lyrics of
  life and love.’”—R. of Rs.

  “A poet of the race in which both the gloom of life and its wildest
  joys meet with prompt response. Neither his metres nor his moods are
  classic in suggestion, and his wayward rhythms have the attractiveness
  of undisciplined grace, but his melody is unmistakable and his images
  are haunting.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 50. Ja. 28, ‘05. 150w.

  “Verse is musical, clear, and forceful.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 30: 759. D. ‘04. 30w.


=Branch, Anna Hempstead.= Shoes that danced and other poems. **$1.10.
Houghton.

  “In the present volume ... there are sinewy dramatic sketches,
  meditative monologues, child verses, lyric odes, and fragments of
  dramatic narrative, all marked by fluent, unconventional music, and
  strong, unconventional phrase. Yet the mood of wonder that underlies
  all of it is singularly integral.”—Nation.

  “Poetry that is at once full, sometimes a little too full, of
  temperament, and in the truest sense of the word, ‘significant’, both
  in its own quality, and in its relation to some of the deeper moods of
  the hour.” Ferris Greenslet.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 421. S. ‘05. 680w.

  “Miss Branch’s work exhibits a mind saturated with English
  poetry—particularly its naive older forms—and prettily echoes a
  variety of manners. It is touched with mysticism, and has considerable
  imaginative reach. Many of the pieces are marred by obscurity and an
  obvious straining for effect.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 64. Ag. 1, ‘05. 220w.

  “For all the intellectual energy and sincerity of Miss Branch’s work,
  and its frank preoccupation with the more passionate issues of life,
  it never ceases to be finely feminine in a certain lurking wistfulness
  and tenderness in little things.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 16. Jl. 6, ‘05. 750w.

  “Miss Branch is extremely fortunate in her descriptions of life in
  studios and courts, and strikes a deeply poetic note in her
  unpretentious drama of the time of Watteau which she calls ‘The shoes
  that danced.’”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 406. Je. 17, ‘05. 340w.


=Brandenburg, Broughton.= Imported Americans: the story of the
experiences of a disguised American and his wife studying the
immigration question. **$1.60. Stokes.

  “The author, a newspaper correspondent, with his wife, lived for a
  time in the Italian quarter of New York. Thence they go in the
  steerage to Italy, and make a study of the districts from which
  emigration is most pronounced.... Then with a group of Sicilians, Mr.
  and Mrs. Brandenburg return in the guise of immigrants, observing the
  snares laid for the credulous incomer whose great fear is that he may
  be kept out of America, suffering the ill treatment meted out to
  steerage passengers on board ship, and learning the laws of this
  country are constantly evaded.... The revelations made of the
  debasement of our naturalization papers furnish food for thought.”
  (Ann. Am. Acad.)

  “The most interesting and important study yet made of present-day
  immigration into the United States.”

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 125. Ja. ‘05. 320w.

  “A most interesting narrative of, really, the epitomized experiences
  of thousands of Italian wayfarers.”

   + + + =Charities.= 14: 641. Ap. 1, ‘05. 880w.

  “The book is not remarkable either in a sensational or a scientific
  sense.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 382. Ap. ‘05. 160w.

  “The most earnest efforts to provide proper laws for the exclusion of
  undesirable aliens, with an efficient system for securing the
  enforcement of such laws, has resulted in little more than an evasion
  of them by the least desirable emigrants. Mr. Brandenburg traces the
  causes of this failure by an investigation as thorough and complete as
  it perhaps is possible to make.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 52. Ja. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  “Is of special interest for the reason that it offers a radical remedy
  for existing immigration evils.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 625. Ap. ‘05. 270w.


=Brandes, Georg Morris Cohen.= Main currents in nineteenth century
literature. 6v. v. 4. Naturalism in England. *$3. Macmillan.

  The period known as the romantic movement in English poetry at the
  beginning of the nineteenth century is treated in this volume. “Mr.
  Brandes seems to approach literature not wholly from the side of
  art.... He is concerned rather with the moral and spiritual progress
  of the world ... he ... takes poet after poet, and, with a skilful
  handling of biographical material and an ardent critical appreciation
  makes a rapid and interesting sketch of the motives and performances
  of the particular writer.” (Acad.)

  “As one reads one becomes aware that the volume is rather a
  sympathetic interpretation of certain great figures, from Mr. Brandes’
  point of view, than a piece of masterly generalisation. It is a mine
  of apposite biographical illustration, of delicate appreciation and of
  felicitous criticism of a high order.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 583. Je. 3, ‘05. 1260w.

  “Dr. Brandes is marvelously well read, illuminating in analysis,
  comprehensive and balanced in his historic outlook. Always searching
  for the leading idea, he is guilty at times of reading into an author
  what he is determined to find.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905 2: 168. Ag. 5, 1040w.

  “It is one of its author’s most brilliant performances.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 18. Jl. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “There is no attempt in Mr. Brandes’ case to suppress the personal
  equation, or to conceal the bias.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 157. My. 19, ‘05. 2290w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 345. My. 27, ‘05. 290w.

  “It is as candid as the ‘tendenz’ will allow, very well informed,
  highly entertaining, frequently striking, and even useful.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 360. Je. 3, ‘05. 960w.

  “As a proof of Prof. Brandes’s specific judgments of poets and of
  poems which are chosen for individual mention, they do not always
  commend themselves as agreeing with the opinion which English critics
  have given authority.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 461. Jl. 15, ‘05. 3010w.

  “The chapters on Byron are the best part of Dr. Brandes’s book; they
  will be read with pleasure by Byron’s countrymen.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 429. S. 23, ‘05. 1970w.


=Brastow, Lewis Orsmond.= Representative modern preachers. **$1.50.
Macmillan.

  “Nine notable men are considered ... five broad churchmen,
  Schleiermacher, Robertson, Beecher, Bushnell, and Brooks; two high
  churchmen, Newman and Mozley; two low churchmen, Guthrie and Spurgeon.
  The book is the result of repeated studies of these men with classes
  of students of the Yale Divinity school.”—Atlan.

  “The estimates of these various masters are made with deep sympathy
  and substantial justice.”

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 706. My. ‘05. 180w.


=Breal, Auguste.= Velazquez, tr. by Mme. Simon Bussy. *75c; lea. *$1.
Dutton.

  This volume declares itself to be merely an invitation to visit Madrid
  and see the works of the great Spanish painter, but it also serves as
  an inspiration for the journey. There are many illustrations.

  “He does succeed in giving a clear idea of the nature of Velazquez’s
  genius, of what he was, and what he was not, together with all that is
  necessary of biographical information regarding an entirely uneventful
  life. Mme Bussy is as accurate as readable.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 440. Je. 1, ‘05. 630w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 515. Ag. 5, ‘05. 210w.

  “A good little guide.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 542. Je. 24, ‘05. 20w.


* =Breasted, James Henry.= History of Egypt from the earliest times to
the Persian conquest. **$5. Scribner.

  This volume, designed for the general reader as well as the scholar,
  traces the history of Egypt from earliest times thru the days of the
  Old kingdom, the Middle kingdom, and the New empire, down to the
  Persian conquest. There are many new translations from original
  documents in the book and two hundred illustrations and maps. “Nowhere
  can we find a clearer account of the general history of Egypt, as
  known to us by the latest studies and excavations carried on by the
  numerous societies and individuals at work in the Nile valley.” (Ind.)

  * “This is a most valuable and interesting work.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1109. N. 9, ‘05. 660w.

  * “A history that may fairly claim to be, for the immense period which
  it covers, more close to facts than any of its predecessors.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 940. D. 16, ‘05. 490w.


=Brewer, David Josiah.= United States: a Christian nation. *$1. Winston.

  The first of these three lectures, “The United States a Christian
  nation,” shows that our Republic should be so called because it has
  been so declared by the Supreme court of the United States, by many of
  the highest state courts, by colonial charters, by nearly all of the
  state constitutions, by state legislatures, and by popular sentiment
  and practice: the second, “Our duty as citizens,” discusses the
  compatibility between Christianity and patriotism, and the reasons why
  Christianity is entitled to the tribute of respect: the third, “The
  promise and the possibilities of the future,” is an eloquent appeal to
  young men to temper their devotion to country with fidelity to the
  teachings of the Gospel.

  “We do not think, however, that these addresses represent the eminent
  jurist at his best.”

     + — =Arena.= 34: 557. N. ‘05. 280w.

  “The three chapters of this volume are three lectures delivered at
  Haverford college. We are glad that they now command a wider
  audience.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 530. O. 28, ‘05. 140w.


=Brewster, H. Pomeroy.= Saints and festivals of the Christian church.
**$2. Stokes.

  “This single volume of hagiology is conveniently arranged in calendar
  form, giving for each day in the year some details of the life and
  legends of the saints whose festivals are celebrated according to the
  Roman Catholic and Episcopal churches. A great deal of curious
  information, difficult to find elsewhere, is here given on sacred art
  and the symbols, ceremonies, superstitions, stones and colors
  associated with saints and their days.”—Ind.

  “Mr. Brewster is not a Catholic, but he endeavors to tell the story of
  the saints in a devout spirit, and he succeeds.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 256. My. ‘05. 130w.

  “Is an unusually terse and at the same time comprehensive church
  year-book. The greatest merits of the work are its entire freedom from
  denominational bias, and the wide knowledge which it shows of profane
  and ecclesiastical history and canon law.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 203. Mr. 16, ‘05. 170w.

         =Ind.= 58: 673. Mr. 23, ‘05. 70w.


=Brewster, William Tenney,= ed. See =Representative= essays on the
theory of style.


=Briggs, Le Baron Russell.= Routine and ideals. **$1. Houghton.

  Perhaps no man in America is better fitted to write authoritatively on
  the subject of college routine than Dean Briggs of Harvard and
  Radcliffe. There are included in the volume with the title essay, A
  school and college address, Harvard and the individual, Address to the
  school children of Concord, Commencement address at Wellesley college,
  Discipline in school and college, The mistakes of college life, and
  Mater fortissima.

  “Admiration of the author’s style should not blind the reader to his
  essentially one-sided presentation of an intricate subject.” Henry D.
  Sheldon.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 271. Ap. 16, ‘05. 210w.

  “The essays and addresses that compose his little volume are therefore
  more than they seem: they state his creed; they are the guiding laws
  of one of the most powerful influences brought to bear, within our
  generation, on college students in the United States.” G. R.
  Carpenter.

   + + + =Educ.= R. 29: 422. Ap. ‘05. 640w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 95. Jl. 13, ‘05. 830w.

  “One that all who have to do in any way with college or school
  administration may profitably read.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 128. Ja. ‘05. 190w.


=Bright, James Wilson,= ed. Gospel of St. John in West-Saxon. 60c.
Heath.

  A volume in the Belles-lettres series. The text of the gospel of St.
  John, based upon the original manuscripts, also an exhaustive
  introduction, full notes, and a glossary.

         =Nation.= 80: 436. Je. 1. ‘05. 70w.


=Bright, James Wilson,= ed. Gospel of St. Matthew in West-Saxon. 60c.
Heath.

  This little volume belongs to section I, English literature from its
  beginning to 1100, of the Belles-letters series. It contains the text
  of the gospel of St. Matthew in West-Saxon, as found in the copy of
  the version preserved in Ms. CXL of the library of Corpus Christi
  college, Cambridge; the rubrics have been carried into the text from
  Ms. A. The variant readings of all other surviving copies of the
  version are subjoined to the text.

         =Ath.= 1905, 1: 529. Ap. 29. 150w.

         =Nation.= 80: 436. Je. 1, ‘05. 70w.


=Bromley, George Tisdale.= Long ago and later on; or, Recollections of
eighty years. *$1.50. Robertson.

  The autobiography of a happy-go-lucky soul, who began work at the age
  of ten in his father’s ropewalk. His callings were many and varied, he
  worked on whalers, steam boats, and railroads, dabbled in politics and
  ran a hotel. Born in Connecticut, he made his home on the Pacific
  coast, and spent two years in China as consul to Tien-Tsin. The story
  of his long and eventful career is full of interesting detail and
  anecdote.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 296. Ap. 13, ‘05. 650w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 141. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1030w. (Abstract of book).


=Bronson, Walter Cochrane=, ed. See =English= essays.


=Brontë, Charlotte.= Jane Eyre. $1.25. Crowell.

  “Jane Eyre” proves a better companion than ever in the handy form of
  the “Thin paper classics” series.


* =Brooke, Stopford Augustus.= On ten plays of Shakespeare. *$2.25.
Holt.

  A delightful discussion of ten plays of Shakespeare in which is
  reflected a wealth of suggestion from extended research and sound
  judgment. The author’s side light revelations of Shakespeare himself
  are suggestively framed in the following: “Deeply as Shakespeare felt
  the woe, wickedness and weakness of humanity, he was still their
  master.... This power to stand outside as well as inside of human
  sorrow belonged to Shakespeare, because at the deepest root of him,
  was, I repeat, delight of life; even rapture—the word is not too
  strong—with the playfulness of its spring and the fulness of its
  summer.”

  * “Will be sure of a welcome when he comes forward with these acute,
  thoughtful, sympathetic studies in the plays of Shakespeare.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 406. N. 24, ‘05. 970w.


* =Brookfield, Charles, and Brookfield, Frances.= Mrs. Brookfield and
her circle. 2v. **$7. Scribner.

  Mrs. Brookfield, the charming, witty and beautiful niece of Hallam,
  the historian, and her well known husband, William Henry Brookfield,
  fashionable preacher and ready writer, were the center of an exclusive
  intellectual circle and numbered among their friends Thackeray,
  Carlyle, FitzGerald, Tennyson, Mrs. Proctor, Lady Ashburton and many
  other interesting people. In this account of them which has been
  prepared by their son Charles and his wife, extracts from letters and
  diaries aid in furnishing much chatty information and many anecdotes
  concerning the social and literary London of their time.

  * “This is one of the most delightful books of memoirs which we have
  seen for many years.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 1143. N. 4, ‘05. 1740w.

  * “As illustrative of a great and vigorous age which has passed away,
  these letters possess no inconsiderable value.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 678. N. 18. 1030w.

  * “We close the volumes, feeling that it is well to have been
  admitted, even for a few hours, to the bright and joyous company of a
  merry-hearted husband and wife and their brilliant circle of
  high-souled friends.” Percy F. Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 370. D. 1, ‘05. 2070w.

  * “The letters and anecdotes which Mr. and Mrs. Charles Brookfield
  have here collected are so rich and abundant that the most copious
  extracts must give an inadequate idea of what they contain.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 382. N. 10, ‘05. 1760w.

  * “Whether it be grave or gay, the book is always interesting, and we
  are peculiarly grateful to it, for it has added to our literary
  acquaintance one of the best men who ever published a book, and a lady
  whose charm of manner and quick sensibility are evident in every
  letter she wrote, in every line of her diary.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 929. D. 2, ‘05. 370w.


=Brooks, Elisabeth Willard.= As the world goes by. †$1.50. Little.

  Bohemia with much of its usual abandon is pictured here, but there is
  reared in its surroundings a clever, philosophical girl who after
  eighteen years of loyal devotion to her worldly actress mother none
  the less finds it natural to fit into the cultured corner of her
  father’s world. Her romance forms the undercurrent of the story—a
  romance of the intense subjective order which thru its
  misunderstandings tries and purifies.

  “It’s rather a dim, inconclusive sort of story, the heroine being
  particularly dim.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 404. Je. 17, ‘05. 360w.

  “The author ... keeps a quiet control over her material, and produces
  a decidedly interesting and valuable study of character development.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 190. My. 20, ‘05. 180w.

  “The lack of a villain, the complex psychology and rarefied philosophy
  carry no great appeal to the multitude, but the reflections will
  attract the thoughtful, and the musical interpretations charm the
  initiated.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 359. Ag. ‘05. 210w.


=Brooks, Geraldine.= Dames and daughters of the French court. **$1.50.
Crowell.

  These women, who for brilliancy, courage, charm, and occasionally
  intrigue, cannot be surpassed have been much written about as
  salonists, and literary successes, but the personal side of their
  lives has been omitted. These sketches aim to supply the inner view,
  and trace the motives and formative influences from their source. In
  the group are Madame de Sevigné, Mademoiselle de Lespinasse, Madame
  Roland, Madame de Staël, Madame de Rémussat, Madame Le Brun, Madame de
  Lafayette, Madame Geoffrin, Madame Recamier, and Madame Valmore.

  “About these women ... much has already been written, and better
  written than in the present volume.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 187. F. ‘05. 70w.

  “Readable sketches of Mesdames de Staël, de Lafayette, Récamier, Le
  Brun, and other notable French women. Charmingly written.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 30: 755. D. ‘04. 70w.

  “Interesting and instructive volume.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 140w.


=Brooks, Rt. Rev. Phillips.= Christ the life and light. **$1. Dutton.

  “A group of selections from the writings of Phillips Brooks, chosen
  and arranged with reference to their use for Lenten readings, the
  whole collection having as its keynote Christ as the life and light of
  the world.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 855. Ap. 1, ‘05. 60w.

         =Spec.= 94: 750. My. 20, ‘05. 320w.


=Brooks, Sarah Warner.= Garden with house attached. $1.50. Badger, R. G.

  It is of a Cambridge garden that the author writes which “for twenty
  years was the property of one who had in the Harvard botanical garden
  ‘a friend at court,’ and was able thus to obtain choice shrubs and
  herbaceous plants. The author describes the rose, foxglove, iris,
  Canterbury bells, violets, hollyhock, and other plants in this
  garden.” (N. Y. Times). “The general theme is plant and plant-life. It
  contains good suggestions in regard to the cultivation of flowers.”
  (Bookm.)

  “The style is somewhat diffuse and parenthetical, except where direct
  advice is given, in which case it is clear enough.” Edith Granger.

       + =Dial.= 38: 382. Je. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “Writes in a semi-practical, semi-meditative manner in regard to the
  comforts and enjoyments of a small country home.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 6. Ja. 7, ‘05. 300w.

  “Instructive and entertaining. The healthy love of nature which
  outdoor life awakens in most of us has pervaded it and has transferred
  itself to the reader.”

       + =South Atlantic Quarterly.= 4: 95. Ja. ‘05. 180w.


* =Brooks, William Keith.= Oyster, The; a popular summary of a
scientific study. *$1. Hopkins.

  “Fourteen years ago Prof. Brooks made a rational appeal to Marylanders
  on the subject of oyster culture, in the hope of reviving a decaying
  and contentious industry. His tract ... failed, as he sorrowfully
  admits in his preface to a second and revised edition, to penetrate
  the ignorant conservatism of a State ruled hitherto by Gorman.
  However, in returning to the fray, he adds a chapter on the peril of
  the oyster as a vehicle of collection for cholera and typhoid germs,
  and perhaps this aspect will do something to help the economic
  reform.”—Nation.

 *       =Dial.= 39: 449. D. 16, ‘05. 50w.

 *       =Nation.= 81: 463. D. 7, ‘05. 100w.

  * “It is written in an interesting manner. An index would increase the
  value of the book many times; it deserves to have one.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 871. D. 9, ‘05. 940w.


=Broughton, Rev. Leonard Gaston.= Soul-winning church. **50c. Revell.

  Some of the most effective addresses of the well-known revivalist are
  found in this volume. They have been delivered here and in England,
  and concern the work and workers of the church to-day, its doctrine
  and its hope.

  “They are plain, pungent, and spiritually quickening, though blended
  with archaic matter that is intellectually offensive to the educated.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1016. Ap. 22, ‘05. 50w.


* =Broughton, Rhoda.= Waif’s progress. $1.50. Macmillan.

  The waif is a young minx of eighteen who, learned in the ways of the
  French demi-monde, is brought to England on her mother’s death and
  saddled upon the relatives of her father, a lax lord. She creates
  havoc in the straight-laced families which shelter her, but the end of
  all her schemes being to win a permanent home or to make a creditable
  match, she finally marries a peer, the widower of her first hostess.

  * “Her new novel shows the old daring and spirit in the dialogue,
  though not quite the old raciness and spontaneity that kept everything
  and everybody alive.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 503. O. 14. 400w.

  * “Miss Broughton herself is more puzzled to know what to make of her
  and what to do with her than all the people in the book put together.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 383. N. 10, ‘05. 360w.

  * “While not up to her best work, it is still Rhoda Broughton—and that
  is a guarantee of interest and of quality unusual and piquant.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 759. N. 11, ‘05. 370w.

  * “A good many of the details introduced to complete the picture are
  frankly repellant. It is rather melancholy to see Miss Broughton’s
  fine talent wasted on the conscientious delineation of ineffectual or
  uncomely types of goodness and decadence.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 531. O. 7, ‘05. 1000w.


=Brouner, Walter Brooks, and Fung Yuet Mow.= Chinese made easy; with an
introd. by Herbert A. Giles. *$6. Macmillan.

  “This is a handsomely got-up book, with a red cloth cover and a gilt
  dragon impressed on it. The title-page is on the right hand and the
  pages of the book follow from right to left as in a Chinese book....
  What ‘Chinese made easy’ teaches is one of the dialects spoken in the
  Canton province.... To be pronounced useful the book should have for
  title ‘Cantonese made easy,’ and the spelling should be made to
  correspond with that adopted in all other works on the subject, local
  deviations and solecisms being changed into their proper equivalents
  in standard Cantonese.”—Nation.

  “Only those who are to work among the Cantonese natives, including
  many of the Chinese residents in the United States, may find it of
  some use.” F. Hirth.

     + — =Bookm.= 20: 457. Ja. ‘05. 1160w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 179. Mr. 2, ‘05. 510w.


* =Brown, Abbie Farwell.= Star jewels, and other wonders. †$1. Houghton.

  “A collection of original, modern fairy stories, with the starfish as
  the theme—five stories, five little poems, and five pictures, like the
  points of the starfish.”—Critic.

  * “Will be liked by children.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “A collection of wonder stories told in a simple and familiar way,
  but with a touch of poetry, a little play of imagination, and a
  refinement of feeling which separate them from most works of the same
  kind.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 631. N. 11, ‘05. 40w.


* =Brown, Alice.= Paradise. †$1.50. Houghton.

  “Here, in a little story of country life and country character, we
  have at least five personalities clearly and entertainingly sketched,
  with a story of love, disappointment, and sacrifice, at times poignant
  in its depth of feeling, but nevertheless always treated with an
  underlying sense of humor.... Almost all of the characters are quaint
  and in a gentle way queer.” (Outlook.) The heroine is an orphan, who,
  after a varied experience is trying to train herself as a nurse.

  * “The end rallies to a justification of the beginning, and stamps the
  whole as a little human document of fine quality.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 488. D. 14, ‘05. 280w.

  * “The present story is not quite as ambitious to fill the place of a
  fully rounded-out novel as some of its predecessors, but it is perhaps
  none the less acceptable for that reason.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 578. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.


=Brown, Anna Robeson (Mrs. C. H. Burr, jr.).= Wine-press. †$1.50.
Appleton.

  The daughter of a New England mother and an Italian poet who deserted
  his wife for an actress who could interpret his dramas, meets her
  irresponsible half sister, the child of her father and this actress,
  at a woman’s college, and after graduation takes charge of her and
  witnesses her tragic end. Disillusioned, disgusted with both men and
  women, she is brought back to a normal attitude thru the influence of
  a nice young doctor.

  “It is a study in feminine psychology carried out with uncommon
  insight, and deserves to be read with attentive interest.” Frederic
  Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 22: 38. S. ‘05. 230w.

  “The book is unconventional in its interest, and above the average of
  contemporary fiction.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1, ‘05. 190w.

         =Ind.= 59: 208. Jl. 27, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is due to Miss Brown to say that she has been most conspicuously
  successful where her task has been hardest; namely, where the homely
  and the tragic confront one another. Where weakness chiefly lies is in
  the limp into commonplace situation which all her ability has not
  averted.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 123. Ag. 10, ‘05. 750w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 362. Je. 3, ‘05. 440w.

  “The author has developed an idea, not novel in itself, in a striking
  and unusual way.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 346. Je. 3. ‘05. 100w.


=Brown, Arthur Judson.= New forces in old China: an unwelcome but
inevitable awakening. **$1.50. Revell.

  A study of the new forces now developing in China. The work “has for
  its object the description of those features which he thinks are to
  effect changes in China, and this will be due to Western trade,
  Western politics, and Western religion. D. C. Boulger’s words are:
  ‘the grip of the outer world has tightened around China. It will
  either strangle her or galvanize her into fresh life.’” (N. Y. Times).
  “Dr. Brown deals with many timely points in this book. Among them are
  the stupendous proportions of the economic revolution in China; the
  growth of the newspaper, of which there were none a decade ago and
  nearly a hundred to-day; Japan’s plan to arouse, organize and lead
  China; a question as to the responsibility of the missionaries for the
  trouble in China; the rapid development of American trade with China;
  an up-to-date statement of the Chinese railway system, and many other
  salient points.” (Bookm.)

  “In rapid and highly interesting style, and in compact form, he arrays
  the evidences that make for the preservation, on a nobler plane, of
  the best ideas and the nobler outlook of the oldest of empires.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 91. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

  “Mr. Brown’s volume deserves general reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 3. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1280w. (Summary of ideas of
         book.)

  “This is a volume which will well repay careful study.”

     + + =Spec.= 94:23. Ja. 7. ‘05. 550w.


=Brown, E. Burton-.= Roman Forum, *$1. Scribner.

  “A popular account of the excavations in the Roman Forum from 1898 to
  1904 in handy form.... The book is intended not only to present
  information concerning the excavations, but also an account of the
  light they have thrown upon the religion and history of the Romans and
  through these upon the character of the people.... Well-known facts
  contained in the many previous publications about the Forum have been
  omitted; but the monuments that were not recently excavated have been
  noticed in their place, in order to make the little volume a complete
  handbook.”—N. Y. Times.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 182. Mr. 25, ‘05. 350w.

  “Summarises in a clear, methodical and scholarly way all the latest
  discoveries.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 602. My. 6, ‘05. 90w.


=Brown, G. Baldwin.= William Hogarth. *$1.25. Scribner.

  “A fresh and independent treatment of Hogarth’s life and art.” As his
  life was spent at his work save for his runaway marriage, his French
  visit and arrest at Calais, and some sharp political controversy, the
  book deals chiefly with his paintings, their value, influence and
  humor. There are many illustrations.

  “Mr. Brown gives a fairly satisfactory and correct summary of the
  leading incidents in the painter’s life but he has little that is
  original or enlightening to say concerning his art.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 839. Ag. 12, ‘05. 220w.

  “Concise, yet, within its necessary limits, really admirable
  monograph.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 248. Ag. 19. 1780w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 474. N. ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 150w.

  “Professor Baldwin Brown has written a very good book on Hogarth, and
  one which, in spite of its moderate size and price, will give the
  general reader a juster understanding of the true nature of Hogarth’s
  art than he is likely to get elsewhere.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 249. Ag. 4, ‘05. 1760w.

  “The volume is much better than the average of the series to which it
  belongs.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 187. Ag. 31, ‘05. 1860w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 861. D. 2, ‘05. 600w.


=Brown, Horatio Robert Forbes.= In and around Venice. *$1.50. Scribner.

  Mr. Brown’s new volume has characteristics in common with his “Life on
  the lagoons,” viz., full sympathy with the people, love for their
  customs, their legends and their life. “The short papers vary as
  widely in subject as in treatment. Here one finds a careful account of
  the Campanile of San Marco and the loggetta of Sansovino, followed by
  a diagrammed description of the columns of the Piazzetta, which an
  architect might prize.... His trips to the mainland, including a
  voyage to Istria, furnish several papers on out-of-the-way places,
  which one is glad to see through his eyes.” (Nation.)

  * “His book is compact enough to be taken abroad as a companion to the
  ordinary guidebooks, and may be heartily commended to the tourist as
  well as the general reader.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 70w.

  “Has made a charming book out of a number of facts about Venice,
  soberly told.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 339. O. 13, ‘05. 350w.

  “Some of his papers are slight, and in others there are repetitions;
  but, taken as a whole, this volume is a worthy successor to ‘Life on
  the lagoons.’”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 189. Ag. 31, ‘05. 490w.

  “If the publishers had provided an index, or even a table of contents,
  its value, already considerable, would have been enhanced greatly.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 675. O. 14, ‘05. 630w.

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 576. N. 4, ‘05. 160w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 432. S. 23, ‘05. 1470w.


=Brown, John.= See =MacBean, L.=, jt. auth. Marjorie Fleming.


=Brown, Katharine Holland.= Diane. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  “‘A romance of the Icarian settlement on the Mississippi river’: a
  small body of French colonists with communistic views who had been
  brought to America by Pére Cabet; the story opens in 1856, when most
  of them were thoroughly tired of him.... But the schisms of the
  commune pale in interest beside the affairs of the American
  abolitionists who come into the story.... In one chapter Robert
  Channing is carrying runaway slaves to safety; in the next Pére Cabet
  is preaching his flock into rebellion. The petty affairs of the
  Icarians and the quarrel that shall shake the states run side by side.
  Their separate currents meet in the loves of Robert and Diane.”—Acad.

  “The value of the story depends on its description of the commune, and
  to English readers on its sympathy with the intimate, tremendous
  issues forced on American men and women by the abolition of slavery.
  The novel is worth reading for the sake of its pictures of people so
  near us in point of time, so immeasurably removed from us in sentiment
  and surroundings. They have charm.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 128. F. 11, ‘05. 240w.

  “But the tale, though full of faults, is a creation, and not a mere
  echo.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 237. F. 25. 330w.

  “Diane is thoroughly lovable; other characters are vividly drawn and
  full of genuine pathos. The book is well written.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 117. Ja. ‘05. 50w.

  “There is, altogether, a great deal to read in ‘Diane,’ and although
  it suffers a little from faults of construction, it is on the whole a
  very good story.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 519. Ap. 8, ‘05. 150w.


=Browne, George Waldo.= St. Lawrence river: historical, legendary,
picturesque. **$3.50. Putnam.

  The great river is described from the ocean to the lake, and the men
  who were connected with it are brought in in chronological order,
  Cartier, Champlain, Frontenac, LaSalle, Wolfe, Montcalm, and the early
  voyageurs. There is an account of Indian wars, and a fine blending of
  past scenes and present scenery. There are one-hundred full page
  illustrations.

  “The text appears not to be inadequate, ... but no one can think the
  style good or graceful.”

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 949. Jl. ‘05. 110w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 70w.

  “Within its limits the book is satisfactory, and a good map adds to
  its value.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 210. O. 1, ‘05. 420w.

  “The author of the book before us has told the story of the St.
  Lawrence and of early Canada in a most interesting manner.”

       + =Engin. N.= 53: 642. Je. 15, ‘05. 460w.

  “Mr. Browne manifests no great originality or literary power, but he
  weaves together history and geography, legend and description with
  sufficient skill to make it all readable to one who has any interest
  in the subject.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1256. Je. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “It is a choice company of readers who will hail its appearance with
  cordial greetings.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 497. O. 7, ‘05. 800w.

  “Of course in a book of 365 pages there are some good things; the
  index, for example, so far as it goes, is one of them.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 375. Ja. 10, ‘05. 620w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 394. Je. 10, ‘05. 80w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 190w.


=Browne, Henry.= Handbook of Homeric study. *$2. Longmans.

  Opening with a discussion of the Homeric poems this volume contains
  commentaries on the Homeric bards; historical outlines of the Homeric
  controversy, chapters on Homeric life, the Homeric people, and “The
  epic art of Homer.” There are twenty-two illustrations in half-tone,
  an “approximate” chronology, and an index.

  “It is an honest, candid, careful, and within its limits, it is a
  lucidly arranged book.” Andrew Lang.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 487. My. 6, ‘05. 1540w.

  “The book would have gained greatly had the author waited a few years
  to digest his material. We also complain that there is no
  bibliography.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 39. Jl. 8, 840w.

  “Deserves the highest commendation.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 842. S. ‘05. 350w.

  “An eminently modern, although probably not final, word on the study
  of Homer.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 573. S. 2, ‘05. 410w.

  “Treated with conspicuous judgment and moderation the complex topic of
  the Homeric literature.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 814. Je. 17, ‘05. 300w.


=Browne, John Hutton Balfour.= South Africa: a glance at current
conditions and politics. $2.50. Longmans.

  A description of a voyage from England to Cape Town, Johannesburg, and
  Pretoria with a rather superficial treatment of present social and
  political questions.

  “A two-hundred-page volume of impressions, views, opinions,
  deductions, and half-baked facts which can only be characterized as
  superficial and misleading when they are not absolutely inaccurate.
  Has committed to paper a vast amount of untrustworthy information.”

   — — — =Acad.= 68: 242. Mr. 11, ‘05. 270w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 210. Ap. 8, ‘05. 220w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 459. Jl. 8, ‘05. 670w.

  “His book is very loosely put together. Mr. Balfour-Browne often fails
  either in observation or in accurate description.”

   — — + =Sat. R.= 99: 743. Je. 3, ‘05. 1060w.

  * “Whatever he says is forcible and lucid.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 503. O. 7, ‘05. 560w.


=Browne, Mary.= Diary of a girl in France in 1821; with introd. by
Euphemia Stewart Browne. *$2.50. Dutton.

  The self-illustrated diary of a little fourteen year old English girl,
  who spent the summer of 1821 in France. She regards her fine scorn for
  all things French as loyalty to everything that is English. At times
  her comments run close to humor though no one tells her that they do,
  and she could not discover the fact herself.

  “This is a perfectly irresistible book, a pure delight to all lovers
  of children and quaintness.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 708. Jl. 8, ‘05. 740w.

         =Ath.= 1905, 2: 175. Ag. 5. 510w.

  * “Incidentally the book is an interesting picture of French life
  almost a century ago as seen through juvenile British eyes.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 90w.

  “Since Marjorie Fleming wrote the ill-spelled pages of her delightful
  journal, no child’s diary has been published more fascinating, because
  none have been more unconscious or sincere, than ‘The diary of a girl
  in France in 1821.’”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 244. O. 16, ‘05. 300w.

  “Little Mary is an accomplished grumbler.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 211. Je. 30, ‘05. 570w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 609. S. 16, ‘05. 160w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 278. S. 30, ‘05. 120w.


=Brownell, Leverett White.= Photography for the sportsman naturalist.
**$2. Macmillan.

  A book describing hunting with a camera in all its details, and
  illustrated with pictures made from life. There is much practical
  information concerning camera plates, the best methods to use in
  taking pictures, and the best processes to employ after they are
  taken.

  “In the present work Mr. Brownell has gone into the subject
  thoroughly. The book may be called a first-rate guide to hunting with
  the camera.”

     + + =Baltimore Sun.= : 8. Mr. 8. ‘05. 440w.

  “This book is packed full of practical directions.”

     + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 221. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 900. Ap. 20, ‘05. 270w.

  “It is essentially a book for the novice.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 263. S. 28, ‘05. 490w.

  “The book is by no means dry reading, the technical details being
  enlivened with numerous and appropriate anecdotes. Mr. Brownell has,
  in fact, succeeded in producing a treatise on practical field
  photography which it will be very hard to beat.” R. L.

     + + =Nature.= 71: 483. Mr. 23, ‘05. 600w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 255. F. ‘05. 30w.


=Brownell, William Crary.= French art; classic and contemporary painting
and sculpture. $1.50. Scribner.

  This new and enlarged edition contains a chapter on “Rodin and the
  institute” and the identical text of the illustrated edition of 1901.

         =Dial.= 38: 396. Je. 1, ‘05. 50w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 440. Je. 1, ‘05. 230w.


=Browning, Elizabeth Barrett.= Sonnets from the Portuguese. $1. Century.

  These sonnets which have had so large a share in immortalizing one of
  the “most exquisite love-histories of which the world has knowledge,”
  once more make their appearance with a few of the love poems of Robert
  Browning, and this time in the dainty workmanship of the “Thumb nail
  series.” A frontispiece of Mrs. Browning, and an introduction by
  Richard Watson Gilder add to the value of the volume.

 *   + + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 30w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 682. O. 14, ‘05. 80w.


=Browning, Oscar.= Napoleon: the first phase: some chapters on the
boyhood and the youth of Bonaparte, 1769-1793. *$3.50. Lane.

  Napoleon’s boyhood in Corsica, his education at Brienne and Paris, his
  relations with Paoli, and his career down to Toulon are given in
  detail. Appendices contain three selections from Napoleon’s writings
  and some original documents from the British museum concerning the
  siege of Toulon. The illustrations are largely taken from old
  paintings and drawings.

  “Comparison is inevitable, and recent Napoleonic literature has
  established so high a standard in this branch of history that Mr.
  Oscar Browning suffers by being inopportune.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 694. Jl. 1, ‘05. 360w.

  “In regard to historical accuracy as distinct from literary
  presentment, the volume is, on the whole meritorious.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 774. Je. 24. 1140w.

  “Altogether this is an important contribution to the study of
  Napoleon’s early career, clearing away the accretions of legend and
  presenting the known facts with satisfactory fulness.” Henry B.
  Bourne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 241. O. 16, ‘05. 920w.

  “The author tells his story in a business like way, with no
  superfluous adornments save in the matter of panegyric, and that he
  leaves on the reader’s mind a distinct impression of the young
  Bonaparte as a brave, eager, lovable, and virtuous youth. Whether the
  picture is altogether true to life will perhaps be doubted by those
  who weigh carefully the evidence, even as here presented in the
  narrative and in Appendix I.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 226. Jl. 14, ‘05. 930w.

  “Carelessness, to use no more unpleasant word, is the predominant note
  of the book.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 151. Ag. 17, ‘05. 730w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 399. Je. 17, ‘05. 330w.

  “There is in it practically nothing new, nothing that has not been
  told earlier and told better.”

     — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 571. S. 2, ‘05. 450w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 509. O. ‘05. 50w.

  “If Mr. Browning had refrained from pushing his hero-worship to such
  extravagant lengths, he might have written a book of greater weight,
  but in spite of these slips he has given us a treatise of deep
  interest which will not detract from the reputation he has already
  attained in this field of historical inquiry.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 811. Je. 17. ‘05. 1610w.

  “Presenting his results in a readable and lively style which marked
  his ‘Age of the Condottieri’ and his notable little biography of
  ‘Swedish Charles.’”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 495. O. 7, ‘05. 2780w.


=Browning, Robert.= Select poems; ed. with introd. and notes,
biographical and critical, by Andrew Jackson George. $1.50. Little.

  The poems selected here range from “Pauline” to “Asolando”, and are so
  chosen as to reveal the principles which formed the mind and fashioned
  the art of Browning.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Browning has everything to gain and nothing to lose from such
  intelligent editorship as that shown in this volume.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 230w.


=Browning, Robert.= Blot in the ‘scutcheon, Colombe’s birthday, A soul’s
tragedy, and In a balcony. 60c. Heath.

  This is a volume in section 3, “the English drama from its beginning
  to the present day,” in the Belles-lettres series. The texts are those
  of the latest editions, and there is a scholarly introduction and
  brief biography, bibliography, and glossary.

  “If Browning is to be considered as a dramatist, and by an editor who
  is willing to accept him as a dramatist, perhaps the present edition
  is all that we have the right to expect.” Brander Matthews.

     + — =Educ. R.= 29: 198. F. ‘05. 340w.


=Browning, Robert.= Pied piper of Hamelin. $1.25. Wessels.

  Browning’s poem made attractive for children by numerous ingenious
  colored illustrations, the work of Van Dyck.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 30w.


=Brudno, Ezra Selig.= Little conscript. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  The little conscript is a Jew pledged to the synagogue whose life is
  devoted against his will to the service of the czar. A truthful
  picture of Russia of to-day is presented, including military and
  peasant life. There is sidelight information on the methods of force
  and fraud employed in organizing and maintaining the army.

  “Throughout his book, Mr. Brudno’s style is deliberately simple at
  times to the verge of crudeness. It would have been improved by a
  certain amount of relentless pruning.”

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 37. S. ‘05. 280w.

         =Ind.= 59: 581. S. 7, ‘05. 90w.

  “He is a Russian who has much English yet to learn. Is not a novel,
  though it may contain some ugly chapters of Russian history.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 444. Jl. 1, ‘05. 660w.

  “The end is black and depressing but the value of the book as a great
  human document and as a strong indictment of the political and
  military methods of a great nation remains with the reader.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 190w.

  “Is a much more appealing piece of literature than ‘The white terror
  and the red,’ but not, we suspect, so trustworthy an account of actual
  conditions.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 763. Je. ‘05. 140w.


=Brumbaugh, Martin Grove.= Making of a teacher. $1. S. S. times co.

  “This book is on ‘How to teach.’ Its emphasis all through is where the
  emphasis needs to be laid, upon the trained teacher. The first part of
  the book is a simple, clear series of lessons on pedagogy; then follow
  chapters on the Teacher, the Courses of study, the Educational
  principles of Jesus; and finally several wise chapters on the scope of
  religious education. The illustrative materials, the captions, and the
  arrangement are excellent, and the book is made admirable as a
  text-book for normal classes by suggestive questions at the close of
  each chapter.”—Bib. World.

  “It is no exaggeration to say that the book by Dr. Brumbaugh is just
  now the one most needed in the Sunday-school world.” Wm. Byron
  Forbush.

   + + + =Bib. World.= 26: 395. N. ‘05. 170w.

  “He has done his work well.”

   + + + =Ind. 59=: 811. O. 5, ‘05. 140w.


=Bryan, Michael.= Dictionary of painters and engravers. 5v. subs. *$30;
hf. mor. *$50. Macmillan.

  The present volume (S-Z) is the fifth and last of the 1904-5 edition
  of this valuable reference work, and contains over a hundred full-page
  illustrations. This is the fourth edition of the work which has
  appeared since 1816 when it was first published, and it includes 1200
  new biographies.

  “The revision has been very thorough throughout the volume.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 368. Ap. 1, ‘05. 210w.

  “The dictionary is now as complete as it can be made, and the work has
  been done with the greatest care.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 379. Ap. ‘05. 140w.

  “A work which should be absolutely indispensable to every one
  interested in art or artists.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1480. Je. 29, ‘05. 300w.

  * “Another great and invaluable work of historical narrative and
  critical comment, ranking in its field with Grove in the field of
  music.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1161. N. 16, ‘05. 40w. (Review of v. 5.)

   + + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 87. Je. ‘05. 340w.

  “Thoroughness of research and fulness of detail are the most salient
  characteristics of the text of a work that will be an inexhaustible
  mine of wealth to all future students of art history.”

   + + + =Int. Studio.= 27: 88. N. ‘05. 210w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  “The conclusion must be that the great new ‘Dictionary’ is not well
  and strongly edited; that no proportionate scale has been maintained.
  In spite of all that, it is still the most useful dictionary of
  painters we have, and also a relatively good dictionary of engravers.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 488. Je. 15, ‘05. 1200w. (Review of v. 5.)

  “We may be pardoned, therefore, in the face of the fulsome praise
  already uttered, if we make two items of adverse criticism—one is in
  regard to judgment and the other concerns facts. The biographical
  sketches attached to the names actually included in the volumes are
  meagre, careless, and inaccurate.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 401. Je. 17, ‘05. 340w.

  “The fifth volume has the merits and defects of the rest.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 187. Ag. 5, ‘05. 140w.


=Bryce, James.= Constitutions. *$1.25. Oxford.

  This volume includes six of the sixteen essays by Mr. Bryce, published
  in 1901 under the title, “Studies in history and jurisprudence.” The
  essays are as follows: Flexible and rigid constitutions: The action of
  centripetal and centrifugal forces on political constitutions;
  Primitive Iceland; The constitution of the United States as seen in
  the past; Two South African constitutions; The constitution of the
  commonwealth of Australia.

         =Nation.= 81: 75. Jl. 27, ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 613. S. 16, ‘05. 560w.


=Bryce, James.= Holy Roman empire. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  “Not only has Mr. Bryce rewritten the work with a view to a clearer
  presentation of the theories it elaborates, but he has met and
  admirably overcome the criticisms to which it was formerly exposed—the
  seeming neglect of certain striking personalities and events, the
  inadequate treatment of the Byzantine empire, and the expression of
  views rendered untenable by the political developments of the past
  quarter of a century.... The more important changes ... of his work
  may be briefly summarized. In chapter V. Mr. Bryce, discussing the
  reluctance of Charles the Great to assume the imperial title,
  incorporates the theories of Dahn and Hodgkin; in chapter VII, he
  enters into a broader explanation of the theories that went to sustain
  the empire through the middle ages; chapter XIII., on ‘The fall of the
  Hohenstaufen,’ he considerably enlarges by the inclusion of a fuller
  account of the momentous struggle between Louis IV. and Pope John
  XXII.; in chapter XIV. he develops the early electoral system under
  the Germanic constitution; in chapter XV. the theories regarding the
  source of civil authority, a vexed question subsequent to the struggle
  of the investitures, are discussed more largely; chapter XVI., ‘The
  city of Rome in the middle ages,’ contains new studies of Arnold of
  Brescia and Cola di Rienzo. Chapter XVII. is entirely new, embodying
  an account of the Eastern empire and affording a comprehensive idea of
  the impress made on history by the people and rulers of New Rome;
  finally, in Chapter XVIII., the attempts to reform the Germanic
  constitution are disclosed in greater detail. To this it should be
  added that the text is more fully annotated, that greatly needed maps
  are supplied, and that, in addition to the chronological list of popes
  and emperors found in previous editions, there is a compact and
  helpful table of salient events connected with the empire.”—Outlook.

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 50w.

  “The two new chapters exhibit Mr. Bryce’s capacity for brilliant
  historical generalisation at its best.” H. A. L. F.

   + + + =Eng. Hist.= R. 20: 605. Jl. ‘05. 320w.

  “The identity of the book is by no means lost in the revision, for the
  changes have not been such as to alter the general mode of treatment,
  nor to increase the size of the work beyond the limits of a single
  volume.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 234. Mr. 23, ‘05. 560w.

  “But not since the edition of 1873 has it shown such changes as are
  now apparent—changes which, while not materially affecting the main
  argument, are nevertheless of a character and extent that make the
  present edition completely supersede its predecessors. He has met and
  has admirably overcome the criticisms to which it was formerly
  exposed. The revision he has found it necessary to make in his
  exposition of the rise, decline, and fall of the ancient empire is of
  an elucidatory rather than a corrective nature.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 443. F. 18, ‘05. 2010w.

  “Now more than ever before deserves high rank as a text-book. It is
  still centered upon a single idea and institution, empire and popedom
  in the middle ages. On this subject it is the standard English
  authority.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 26. Ja. 5, ‘05. 250w.

  “This latest edition has taken into account fully the results of
  modern historical research. A concluding chapter, sketching the
  constitution of the new German empire and the forces which have given
  it strength and cohesion, has been appended. A chronological table and
  three maps have also been added, and the book has been revised
  throughout. Typographically it is very satisfactory.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 247. F. ‘05. 100w.

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 408. Mr. 18. ‘05. 2120w.


=Buchanan, Thompson.= Judith triumphant. †$1.50. Harper.

  The siege of the Assyrians under Holofernes against the Jews of
  Bethulia is the field of this romance. Judith, its heroine, goes forth
  into the camp of the enemy at the risk of her life and honor, in the
  hope of saving her people. The dangers she encountered, the brutality
  of Holofernes, the intrigues of Nin-Gul, the dancing girl, whom she
  has supplanted in the affections of Holofernes and her love for the
  Ammonite captain, who devotes himself to her interests, form the theme
  of the story.

  “Appears to possess no unusual or particular qualities to distinguish
  it from the vast number of other equally interesting and entertaining
  narratives of the same period. For quick and easy reading, however,
  with plenty of spirit and no little action it can be highly
  commended.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 279. Ap. 29, ‘05. 190w.

  “Told with some skill and much vigor.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 60w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 27. Jl. 1. ‘05. 120w.


=Buckham, James.= Wayside altar. *$1. Meth. bk.

  A collection of poems which contain a mellow philosophy and treat of
  the hereafter, and the deep contentment attending true Christian
  living.


=Buckmaster, Martin A.= Descriptive handbook of architecture. *$1.25.
Dutton.

  There is a strong plea in Mr. Buckmaster’s preface for the study of
  historical architecture in our elementary schools. “Though this
  historian of architecture does no more than merely to outline the
  various styles and briefly to trace their development, he does this in
  such untechnical, though not over-picturesque language, that those who
  read his text to the end will wish to learn more about architecture
  and in greater detail.” (Outlook.)

  * “As a popular elementary text-book on the history of architecture
  this little book is certainly welcome. It is brightly and clearly
  written.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 475. O. 7. 550w.

  * “It would probably have been better had the author dealt with one
  period of architecture, and have done that thoroughly, rather than
  have taken up so large a field. It has resulted in an essay which is
  ‘scrappy.’”

   + — — =Nature.= 73: 52. N. 16, ‘05. 370w.

  * “A valuable vade mecum for the student of the history of
  architecture.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 861. D. 2, ‘05. 330w.

  “To the average reader Mr. Buckmaster’s text is particularly useful;
  first, because he has appended thereto a glossary of architectural
  terms, and secondly, because he has illustrated that glossary.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 381. O. 14, ‘05. 270w.


=Buell, Augustus C.= History of Andrew Jackson, pioneer, patriot,
soldier, politician, president. 2v. **$4. Scribner.

  A comprehensive biography based upon public and private documents, and
  personal recollections of eminent men and women. The long life of the
  man of many-sided character and varied activities is given in full
  with the history of his time in the background.

  “Against Mr. Buell’s style of expression one cannot bring the charge
  of dullness. He has written with alertness and clearness. He has given
  us a personal biography in which an abundance of incident and many
  amusing anecdotes are introduced. Mr. Buell’s facile narrative is full
  of errors great and small. There are in the book serious omissions of
  facts.” John Spencer Bassett.

   + + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 667. Ap. ‘05. 450w.

  “Mr. Buell gives the fullest and most elaborate description [of the
  battle of New Orleans] which we have seen.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 76. Jl. 15. 540w.

  “From such tokens—as from laxities of style sufficient to rouse a
  suspicion that every statement will not bear scrutiny—the reader finds
  his confidence in the historical value of the book impaired. To the
  author’s credit it must also be said that he has performed with marked
  success the difficult task of giving a fairly intelligible account of
  the two great battles of Jackson’s life,—the battle of New Orleans,
  and the fight against the United States bank. This is manifestly one
  of the works to which future students of the man and period must have
  recourse.” M. A. De Wolfe Howe.

   + + — =Atlan.= 95: 132. Ja. ‘05. 710w.

  “The work is written in a spirit that may well be characterized as
  judicial, although in places the author leans far too heavily on
  Parton. We are inclined to class the work, at this writing, as the
  best biography of Jackson that has appeared.”

   + + + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 810w.

  “As a mass of biographical material, pleasantly and honestly
  presented, these volumes have a real value, especially to the student
  who can remove the chaff.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 152. Jl. 20, ‘05. 710w.

  “There are occasions also, it is to be feared, where Mr. Buell suffers
  his personal Anglo-phobism to interfere with his facts.”

       — =Lond. Times.= 4: 231. Jl. 21, ‘05. 460w.

  “It is not a balanced work in execution. It exhibits a singular
  incapacity to weigh testimony and to judge the contemporaries. It
  would be a fruitless task to follow Mr. Buell in his many errors of
  statement, for no chapter is free from them.”

   — — — =Nation.= 80: 77. Ja. 26, ‘05. 1460w.


=Bullen, Frank Thomas.= Denizens of the deep. **$1.75. Revell.

  “A study-built book.... The subjects of Mr. Bullen’s collection of
  short stories are animals that cause the reader to have a vivid
  conception of the life of the inhabitants of the deep. There are many
  different specimens of these denizens considered, whales and sharks
  and seals and sea lions, or sea elephants, as Mr. Bullen calls them,
  and the birds of the sea as well as the fishes. We find that there is
  a story about every one of the more important birds.... And the
  narratives are not all fictional.”—Baltimore Sun.

  “When the narrative is not fiction it is full of information conveyed
  in a delightful manner. The author writes easily and accurately, and
  his work, whether taken as a collection of interesting stories of fish
  and of bird life or as contribution to popular natural history, is
  deserving of praise.”

     + + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 380w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 242. Ap. 1, ‘05. 250w.

  “Is certainly as charming in style and graphic in description. All
  sorts of representatives of the reptilian and finny tribes are
  introduced and made as familiar as men we know.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 124. Ja. ‘05. 110w.


* =Bumpus, T. Francis.= Cathedrals of England and Wales. **$4. Pott.

  “This volume is a detailed account of the architectural features of a
  number of English cathedral churches, prefaced by a sketch of the
  general characteristics of cathedrals and of the development of
  cathedral building in England and Wales. It is, of course, copiously
  illustrated from photographs of the exteriors and interiors of the
  edifices treated, and the author takes up each cathedral
  historically.... The book is intended for students (or at any rate
  connoisseurs) of cathedral architecture.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The book has all the marks of close observation and a real
  knowledge of what is and what is not good art and good archaeology.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 426. N. 23, ‘05. 430w.

  * “It is not a popular but a serious work.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 230w.

  * “Mr. Bumpus’ style has a refreshing air of the gossiping antiquary.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 528. O. 21, ‘05. 1140w.

 *     + =Spec.= 95: 324. S. 2, ‘05. 150w.


=Bunyan, John.= Pilgrim’s progress: from this world to that which is to
come. $2. Macmillan.

  Just the text and Gertrude Hammond’s eight pictures, “good in
  themselves, and excellent examples of modern processes of color
  printing” make up this new edition of “The Pilgrim’s progress.”

  “We are inclined to doubt whether Mr. White, in his otherwise
  admirable monograph, need have given a fifth of his space to what is
  really an abridgement of the famous narrative.”

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 358. Je. ‘05. 460w.

  “Attractive edition.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 87. F. 11, ‘05. 290w.

  “This is an admirable edition, so far as paper type, and size go.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 504. F. 25, ‘05. 40w.


=Burdett, Sir Henry.= Hospital and charities annual, 1905; being the
year book of philanthropy and the hospital annual. *$2. Scribner.

  An account of the hospitals and charities of the United Kingdom,
  India, the British colonies and the United States. The work of various
  branches, such as free dispensaries and military hospitals is
  described, and hospital administration, officials, details of staff,
  the number of patients and the income of each institution are given. A
  copious index renders the book convenient for reference.

  “A wonderfully complete record of hospitals and charitable
  undertakings.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 144, Mr. 4, ‘05. 130w.


=Burgoyne, Frank J.=, ed. History of Queen Elizabeth, Amy Robsart, and
the Earl of Leicester: being a reprint of “Leycester’s commonwealth,”
1641. *$2.50. Longmans.

  This work, of unknown authorship, was first printed 1584, it was
  translated into French and Latin, was proscribed by the queen in
  England and burned whenever found, by the officers of the law. It
  depicted Leicester as an “inhuman monster” and charged him with many
  crimes among them the murder of Amy Robsart. The queen officially
  denied the charges and Leicester’s nephew, Sir Philip Sidney, wrote an
  indignant answer to them.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 708. Ap. ‘05. 130w.

         =Critic.= 46: 383. Ap. ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 11. Ja. 7, ‘05. 300w.

  “The editor has done little beside write a necessary introduction.”

       + =South Atlantic Quarterly.= 4: 93. Ja. ‘05. 260w.


=Burke, Edmund.= American taxation: ed. by James Hugh Moffatt. 25c.
Ginn.

  A fully annotated copy of Burke’s speech for class room use.


=Burkitt, F. Crawford.= Early eastern Christianity: St. Margaret’s
lectures, 1904, on the Syriac speaking church. *$2. Dutton.

  “It is far Eastern Christianity with which these lectures are
  concerned, not that of the Greek and other Eastern churches within the
  ancient Roman world. Its chief seat was Edessa, in the Euphrates
  valley, the ancient ‘Ur of the Chaldees, the fatherland of
  Abraham.’ ... Into this unfamiliar field these lectures conduct the
  reader, through an interesting account of the Bible, the theology, and
  the internal life of a long extinct but once flourishing and
  distinctively characterized church.”—Outlook.

         =Ind.= 58: 1367. Je. 15, ‘05. 90w.

  “It is, then, especially in this fertility of ideas and suggestion
  that the value of Mr. Burkitt’s book lies.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 105. Ag. 3, ‘05. 1360w.

  “The task is difficult, and despite the careful study made by Prof.
  Burkitt the result leaves much to be desired. The data is uncertain
  and mixed up with legend and fable. Lectures have their value, if only
  to make comparisons between the beliefs of to-day and those of the
  past.”

     + — =N. Y Times.= 10: 92. F. 11, ‘05. 580w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 245. Ja. 28, ‘05. 120w.


=Burland, Harris.= Black motor car. †$1.50. Dillingham.

  An exciting story of a man who, when young, stole some money for a
  woman’s sake and on the death of his neglected wife turned against
  her. She in anger betrayed him to the police. He serves his term in
  prison, and twenty years later builds the black motor car, commits
  burglaries and murders, captures and tortures a man who turns out to
  be his own son, and seeks out the woman who had ruined his life to
  kill her, but is foiled in his revenge, for she is already dead. The
  whole thing culminates one night in a race for life, he in his black
  car, the whole country aroused and armed and waiting for him. The
  criminal maniac escapes them all, however, but meets his death in a
  quicksand.

  “Mr. Burland does not waste words in his story. He has a good yarn to
  tell, and does not stand on art to do it.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 197. Ap. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  “It is a story with thrills and shivers.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

  “For those who love horrors and melodrama, this book will furnish a
  feast.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 70w.

  “May be characterized as a freak tale.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 714. My. 6, ‘05. 90w.


=Burnaby, Andrew.= Travels through the middle settlements of North
America; ed. by Rufus Rockwell Wilson. **$2. Wessels.

  “Another volume of the ‘Source books of American history,’ and a
  notable one; first published in 1775, reprinted the next year, soon
  translated into French and German, and reissued in enlarged form in
  1798, from which this new reprint is made. It is hardly necessary to
  say that a book with such a history, and long out of print, richly
  deserves to be rescued from the obscurity into which it had fallen in
  the lapse of more than a century.”—Critic.

  “Of critical notes there are none, which seems unfortunate. The form
  of the book is, however, very attractive, and the narrative was well
  worth reprinting even without editorial annotations.” F. H. H.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 445. Ja. ‘05. 220w.

         =Critic.= 46: 286. Mr. ‘05. 80w.

       + =Ind.= 58: 1016. My. 4, ‘05. 130w.

         =Nation.= 80: 51. Ja. 19, ‘05. 200w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 509. Ap. ‘05. 220w.


=Burne-Jones, Georgiana.= Memorials of Edward Burne-Jones. 2v. **$6.
Macmillan.

  While the attitude of the real man towards his thoroly idealized art
  fills the pages of Lady Burne-Jones’s “Memorials,” “it is not the
  painter to whom we are introduced so much as the man, and a very
  straightforward, single-minded and lovable character we find him.” (N.
  Y. Times). “The author has very wisely avoided any artistic
  appreciation of her husband’s work as a painter, but has taken great
  pains to collect all the facts relating to his family, its origin, his
  education and early tendencies, his friendships and ideas, often
  quoting his own words from letters to friends.” (Nation).

  “The whole book is filled with the poet’s personality, and little
  anecdotes of his sayings and doings. G. B.-J. has worthily carried out
  her task, and the world is the richer for the story of a great artist
  and a lovable and much-loved man.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 24. Ja. 7. 2290w.

  “She presents him in a wise Boswellian way, mainly by the record of
  his daily speech and acts. The result is a very clear impression of a
  personality of great, of surprising power and charm.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + + =Atlan.= 95: 423. Mr. ‘05. 1130w.

  “It is a wonderful revelation of an intensely interesting and lovable
  personality. A striking feature of these volumes is the never-failing
  humour of Burne-Jones’s letters and of the many comic sketches that
  enliven the text. Lady Burne-Jones has given us a biography that is at
  once a life record of deep human interest and an invaluable
  contribution to the history of English painting in the Victorian era.”

     + + =Contemporary R.= 87: 294. F. ‘05. 1980w.

  “It is a true and an appreciative record of the man and his
  life-work.” Jeanette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 118. F. ‘05. 1090w.

  “It is only fair to Lady Burne-Jones to say at once that she has
  avoided every pitfall that lay along her path, and has made the most
  of every pleasure that the excursion afforded.” Edith Kellogg Dunton.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 145. Mr. 1, ‘05. 1930w.

  “She reveals in this book a skill in construction and a charm of style
  that would do credit to a writer of established reputation.” Herbert
  W. Horwill.

     + + =Forum.= 36: 553. Ap. ‘05. 2170w.

  “She would have shown a finer devotion to his memory had she reduced
  the bulk of these two volumes to one. Having made our own abridgement,
  we have little but praise for Mrs. Burne-Jones’s work. To our mind the
  best part of the narrative is that which contains the experiences of
  Burne-Jones at Oxford and during the first years in London, while the
  Oxford influence was still upon him. Mrs. Burne-Jones has a happy
  knack, all the more artful for its extreme simplicity, of hitting off
  the great men of the day as they come into her circle.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 263. F. 2, ‘05. 720w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “No more deeply interesting biography has appeared of late years than
  this tribute to the memory of Sir Edward Burne-Jones from the pen of
  his widow. Its one drawback is the fact that the illustrations are not
  in the least representative of Sir Edward Burne-Jones.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 24: 367. F. ‘05. 420w.

  “Lady Burne-Jones seems especially endowed with the qualities needed
  for the task; she writes with convincing sincerity and a sense of
  humor, and has the gift of literary style. Her readers cannot fail to
  get a vivid impression of Burne-Jones’s fascinating personality.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 115. F. 9, ‘05. 2780w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 383. Mr. ‘05. 140w.

  “Lady Burne-Jones writes from a standpoint of knowledge and sympathy
  impossible to anyone else, and we can but admire the skill with which
  she has arranged the material. The narrative is full, but never
  confused, and the characters of the men and women who pass through the
  pages are drawn with rare ease and distinctness.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 111. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1920w.


=Burnett, Frances Hodgson (Mrs. Stephen Townesend).= In the closed room.
†$1.50. McClure.

  The father and mother of Judith, a strange visionary child of the
  tenements, are called to be caretakers of the big empty house with the
  closed room where a little girl has died. Judith mysteriously passes
  thru the locked door and plays with the child who is dead and her toys
  until this strange spiritual bond is tightened and little Judith is
  drawn into the land of spirits.

  “She is artistically vague and not dogmatic. The story is accomplished
  with a fleeting, caressing touch; it has a considerable charm and is
  very suggestive.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 785. My. ‘05. 370w.


=Burnett, Frances Hodgson (Mrs. Stephen Townesend).= Little princess:
being the whole story of Sara Crewe now told for the first time. †$2.
Scribner.

  The story of Sara Crewe and what happened at Miss Minchen’s school,
  which charmed its young readers years ago, appears once more in
  holiday garb with a dozen beautiful colored plates by Ethel Franklin
  Betts. The book has grown and the present volume includes all the new
  matter which was put into the successful play called the “Little
  princess,” and also much matter newer still which was inserted when
  the play came to be transformed once more into a story.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1389. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 406. N. 16, ‘05. 230w.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 708. O. 21, ‘05. 380w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 527. O. 28, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Is the leading child’s book of the year.”

   + + + =R of Rs.= 32: 764. D. ‘05. 470w.


=Burney, Frances (Madame D’Arblay).= Diary and letters of Madame
D’Arblay; ed. by her niece, Charlotte Barrett. 6v. ea. *$2.50.
Macmillan.

  A new edition of the famous diary, with preface and notes by Austin
  Dobson, photogravure portraits and other illustrations. It extends
  from the issue of “Evelina” to the author’s death (1778-1840).

         =Acad.= 68: 16. Ja. 7, ‘05. 240w. (Review of Vol I.)

         =Acad.= 68: 331. Mr. 25, ‘05. 620w. (Review of Vols. II and
         III.)

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 743. Jl. 15, ‘05. 250w. (Review of v. 6.)

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 709. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 233. Ag. 19. 2870w.

         =Nation.= 80: 92. F. 2, ‘05. 70w. (Reviews of vols. 1-3.)

         =Nation.= 80: 317. Ap. 20, ‘05. 1510w. (Reviews of Vols.
         I.-III.)

  “The foot-notes are precisely what one must desire for such a text.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 113. F. 25, ‘05. 1910w. (Reviews of v. 1 and
         2.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 213. Ap. 8, ‘05. 640w. (Review of Vols. III.
         and IV.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 343. My. 27. ‘05. 160w. (Review of v. 5.)

       + =Outlook.= 79: 349. F. 4, ‘05. 210w. (Reviews of v. 1 and 2.)

  “The value of this edition is greatly increased by the complete
  general index in the last volume, each volume having its own index as
  well. On the mechanical side the edition leaves nothing to be desired,
  while on the editorial side Mr. Austin Dobson has brought thorough
  knowledge and ... sympathetic appreciation.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 245. My. 27, ‘05. 160w. (Review of v. 5.)

  “Madame D’Arblay’s diary is her masterpiece, and it is no exaggeration
  to say that it is as good as a novel, for it is composed in all
  respects like a work of fiction. The diary from beginning to end is
  written in Miss Burney’s characteristic style; it is not marred in a
  single page by Johnsonese, and we believe that it will be read even
  when ‘Evelina’ itself has become a curiosity.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 141. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1340w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)


* =Burr, William Hubert, and Falk, Myron Samuel.= Design and
construction of metallic bridges. $5. Wiley.

  This book is based upon the ninth edition of Prof. Burr’s standard
  work, “The stresses in bridge and roof trusses, arched ribs and
  suspension bridges.” “The book consists of ten chapters, the first of
  which is A historical sketch of bridge building.... Chapter II. is
  devoted to the general types of trusses, loads and specifications, and
  contains the most recent practice in railroad and highway bridges....
  Chapter III. treats of moments and shears, and of the design of plate
  girders.... Chapter IV. and V. treat of all kinds of trusses with
  parallel and horizontal chords and with chords not parallel.... To the
  chapter on swing bridges has been added the treatment of these bridges
  by the method of deflections, with examples in each case.... The book
  concludes with chapters on wind stresses and details of
  construction.”—Engin. N.

  * “It may be stated that the book reflects well the advance in the
  design of metallic bridges, and is a worthy successor to the old
  standard which it replaces.” Leon S. Moisseiff.

     + + =Engin.= N. 54: 531. N. 16, ‘05. 930w.


=Burrage, Champlin.= Church covenant idea: its origin and its
development. **$1. Am. Bapt.

  “Mr. Burrage has reproduced a great many covenants of the early
  Baptist and Congregational churches. They are, like the early
  Christian oaths, pledges of loyalty to standards of right living to a
  remarkable degree. The beginnings of the covenant idea are found among
  the German Anabaptists of the reformation period. Mr. Burrage is very
  modest in the claim he makes for any Anabaptist roots of the Scotch
  covenants. These, culminating in the Solemn league and covenant of
  1643, were quite apart from the main course of the development of the
  covenant idea. They were all covenants to maintain a fixed order of
  belief and worship. In conclusion, it is confessed that ‘the covenant
  idea has ceased almost entirely to have for us the great significance
  it had for the early New England colonists.’”—Nation.

  “It is a splendid specimen of scholarly method and interest.”

     + + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 383. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

       + =Nation.= 80: 135. F. 16, ‘05. 370w.


=Burrage, Henry Sweetser.= History of the Baptists in Maine. $2. Marks
ptg. house, Portland, Me.

  This history “covers the period from about 1675 to the present time.
  It treats freely the educational and temperance activities of the
  denomination, its connection with the anti-slavery agitation, its
  missionary labors, and the growth of its church organizations.”—Am. J.
  of Theol.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 720. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

  “Leaves little to be desired by persons interested in the Baptist
  history of the state of Maine.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 383. Ap. ‘05. 90w.


=Burrill, Katharine.= Corner stones. *$1.25. Dutton.

  A book which pleads for the old-time leisurely courtesy and a home
  education for girls. “The volume is made up of essays, several of
  which appeared in a London magazine, to girls on friendship,
  cleanliness, duty to parents, letter writing, cooking, etc. In her
  ‘Foreword,’ the author speaks of the modern girl. She does not believe
  in sending a girl away from home for her education. The mother is the
  best teacher. ‘It is better,’ she writes, ‘to keep a girl at home, if
  all she learns is spelling and simple arithmetic.’” (N. Y. Times).
  While it appeals strongly to English girls, it is no less a book with
  a mission for the American girl.

  “The ethical purpose of the book and its pleadings for sweeter manners
  are sufficiently plain, and are handled so wittily, with such lurking
  fun and brimming humor, that their assimilation is an easy and
  pleasant process. In its pages it never outsports discretion. As a
  gospel of goodness it is eminently reasonable, and its style has the
  charm of unconsciousness.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 107. F. 18, ‘05. 450w.

  “It is a series of monitory chapters upon all sorts of social and
  moral observances delivered in slangy English.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 348. F. 4, ‘05. 100w.


=Burroughs, John.= Far and near. **$1.50. Houghton.

  “My life has gone on, my love of nature has continued, my habit of
  observation has been kept up, and the combined result is another
  collection of papers dealing with the old, inexhaustible, open-air
  themes.” So says Mr. Burroughs. The “far” scenes described are those
  in “green Alaska” and Jamaica. The “near” pictures are of the wild
  life around his home on the Hudson river. Nearly half of the book is
  devoted to an account of his Alaskan trip in 1899 as a member of the
  Harriman expedition. The only heretofore unpublished essay of the
  group is that in which he tells how he lost February and found August
  in Jamaica. Mr. Burroughs’s northern soul however, takes little
  pleasure in nature in her tropical aspect. He “cannot make love to her
  there.” She “has little winsomeness or tenderness. She is barbaric;
  she is painty and stiff; she has no sentiment; she does not touch the
  heart.”

  “Humdrum, undistinguished style. It is kindly wholesome stuff.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 271. F. 25. 180w.

  * “He records impressions however slight and incidents however
  trivial, but it is all done with that charming double gift of his for
  seeing everything as if for the first and only time, and of making
  others see it in the same way.” F. M. Colby.

     + + =Bookm.= 20: 475. Ja. ‘05. 190w.

  “The records of far journeys in this new book may not add greatly to
  his reputation, but they serve the gracious purpose of showing us an
  old friend in new surroundings.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 19. Ja. 1, ‘05. 440w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10:5. Ja. 7, ‘05. 300w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 757. D. ‘04. 100w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 223. F. 11, ‘05. 300w.


* =Burroughs, John.= Ways of nature. **$1.10. Houghton.

  In these essays Mr. Burroughs, who has ranged himself upon the side of
  those who protest against animal stories which humanize animal life,
  not only sets forth his own views, in which he declares that animals
  share our emotional but not our intellectual nature, but also defends
  himself from recent attacks upon his theories and gives counter
  arguments.

  * “This book succeeds in presenting what may be judged as a rational
  view of Nature’s methods.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘06. 70w.

  Reviewed by May Estelle Cook.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 374. D. 1, ‘05. 420w.

  * “One reads the little volume with extreme pleasure, drawing from its
  pages an uplifting sense of air and light.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 80w.

  * “The whole discussion is pervaded by Mr. Burroughs’ well-known charm
  of style and clearness of statement.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 754. D. ‘05. 130w.


=Burton, Charles Pierce.= Boys of Bob’s hill; adventures of Tom Chapin
and the “band” as told by the “secretary.” †$1.25. Holt.

  The summer vacation of eight healthy-minded boy bandits who live at
  home and are petted and disciplined by turns, like most everyday boys,
  but when they climb Bob’s hill and enter their cave they are outlaws.
  They do many plucky things, and incidentally they start a forest fire,
  almost wreck a train, call out the fire department on the Fourth of
  July, and try to smoke real tobacco. The reader, whether he be boy or
  a grown-up, will follow their adventures with interest and will agree
  with the band that the hermit’s gold rightfully belongs to Tom.

         =Outlook.= 79: 1012. Ap. 22, ‘05. 40w.


=Burton, E. D.= Short introduction to the Gospels. *$1. Univ. of Chicago
press.

  An introduction to Biblical literature which may become a distinct
  treasure to the student. Dr. Burton’s work is concise, and reveals a
  careful examination of the four gospels. There is added a chapter on
  the synoptic problem. “The chapter of ‘the gospel according to
  Matthew’ closing with a table of contents which exhibits excellently
  its general plan, will be welcome to all students of that difficult
  New Testament book.... The notes appended to the chapter on Luke’s
  gospel merit particular attention. Note II is on ‘The enrolment in the
  governorship of Quirinius.’ ... Dr. Burton’s view of the Johannine
  problem will command attention.” (Bib. World).

  “Has a definite aim, and without superfluous words goes straight to
  its mark. It uses chiefly internal evidence, and asks each gospel to
  disclose its own secret. To expound the synoptic problem in less than
  twenty small pages of English is to do the impossible. No other book
  that the reviewer knows of does it so well as this.” Wm. Arnold
  Stevens.

       + =Bib. World.= 25: 150. F. ‘05. 610w.


=Burton, E. D.= Studies in the Gospel according to Mark. *$1. Univ. of
Chicago press.

  The “Studies” in Mark’s gospel is a book “for secondary classes.”

  “The lessons have already borne the test of actual use by experienced
  teachers, and all the material appears to be admirably arranged. The
  appended dictionary, filling twelve pages, is an important feature.”
  Wm. Arnold Stevens.

       + =Bib. World.= 25: 150. F. ‘05. 80w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1012. My. 4, ‘05. 40w.


=Bury, John B.= Life of St. Patrick and his place in history. *$3.25.
Macmillan.

  “The book opens with a chapter on the diffusion of Christianity beyond
  the Roman empire, followed by the story of the life of St. Patrick.
  The appendices contain the descriptions of the writings of St. Patrick
  and other documents from which the author drew the material for his
  biography; notes on the different chapters, and an excursus.”—N. Y.
  Times.

  “Speaking generally, what chiefly impresses us in narrative and
  appendices alike is the constant presence of a wide and just sense of
  historical perspective which should not in the least dwarf the
  particular interest of the book.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 899. S. 2, ‘05. 2250w.

  “A life of St. Patrick in which careful and minute research has not
  quenched a bold and vivid imagination. The index ... is wholly
  insufficient and not prepared with a fraction of the care required.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 101. Jl. 22. 2360w.

  “Although, as we have seen, the Professor is absolutely beyond
  suspicion of any religious bias in favor of his hero, he gives us a
  picture of Patrick which may be called sympathetic.” James J. Fox.

     + + =Cath. World.= 82: 145. N. ‘05. 5550w.

  “Perhaps some readers regret that Professor Bury has found it
  necessary to reject so much picturesque material, but students of the
  middle ages are likely to agree that in writing this biography the
  author has done a real service to the cause of Irish history.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 277. N. 1, ‘05. 490w.

  “The appendix ... is in many respects better reading than the body of
  the book. For the main portion is a little confusing from the way in
  which it gives all the legends and no clear criticism of them.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 239. Jl. 28, ‘05. 2390w.

  “The volume is built of hypotheses.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 619. S. 23, ‘05. 980w.

  “A work whose technical merit is commensurate with its intrinsic
  interest. The main part of the work spreads before the general reader
  the sifted results of historical criticism.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 280. S. 30, ‘05. 240w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 509. O. ‘05. 100w.

  “The sources are meagre, and Dr. Bury’s examination of them is
  masterly.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 438. S. 30, ‘05. 2270w.


=Butcher, S. H.= Harvard lectures on Greek subjects. *$2.25. Macmillan.

  If in the intense modernism of the present century we sometimes
  vaingloriously forget the debt we owe to the ancients, such scholars
  as Mr. Butcher do a real service in commanding a mindful attitude.
  While given at Harvard, the author addresses himself not only to
  scholars but to a mixed audience. “The first lecture compared in a
  singularly able and effective fashion the Greek spirit with the Jewish
  spirit, the Greek influence and the one other comparable with it....
  Then he passes in the next lecture to a comparison of the Hellenes and
  the Phoenicians. These represent the pure commercial spirit. The next
  lecture deals specifically and enlighteningly with the quality of the
  Greek passion for knowledge. Still further lectures deal with ‘Greek
  art and inspiration,’ and with ‘Greek literary criticism.’” (N. Y.
  Times).

  “These lectures are not only full of thought, they are also written,
  it is superfluous to say, in admirable English.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 48. Ja. 14, ‘05. 320w.

  * “The style throughout is admirable. It would be difficult to say too
  much in praise of this most scholarly book.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 717. N. 25. 1500w.

  “Mr. Butcher’s own style is admirably suited to such essays as these.
  No one can read them without recognizing how desirable it is that a
  synthetic mind like his should handle these larger questions of
  classical scholarship.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 233. Mr. 23, ‘05. 1700w.

  “The title of Greek to retain its ancient place in education of the
  broader kind is convincingly supported by Mr. Butcher in this volume.
  The book needs no recommendation to Hellenists. It may be cordially
  commended to the attention of the more open-minded and liberal of
  those who consider Greek a cumberer of the modern stage.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 52. Ja. 28, ‘05. 600w.

  “So illuminating an interpretation of the Greek spirit. Knows his
  subject, and he deals with it in the freshest way and in the most
  human spirit.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 449. F. 18, ‘05. 260w.

  “It is their naturalness, their contagious freshness and vivacity,
  rather than their learning, which strike the reader first.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 179. F. 4, ‘05. 1630w.


=Buxton, E. M. Wilmot.= Ancient world: outlines of ancient history for
the middle form schools. *$1. Dutton.

  A “wonderful story” of the civilization of bygone days. The “author
  writes about the first ages of man, the history of Egypt, ancient
  Babylonia, the Medes and Persians, Phoenicia, the land of the merchant
  carriers, the Hebrews, the story of Carthage, the Hindu people, China,
  the story of Alexander, and of Parthia, and gives some glimpses of the
  ancient Romans and Greeks.... For those who wish for a bird’seye view
  of the great landmarks of the history of the ancient world, the author
  has provided a full summary, with approximate dates, embracing the
  period from 4400 B.C. to the Christian era.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Gives a striking picture of the mind, manners, customs, myths and
  legends of the different ancient nations and describes the influence
  exercised by these nations on one another.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 265. Ag. 3, ‘05. 30w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 89. F. 11, ‘05. 280w.


=Byles, C. E.= Life and letters of Robert Stephen Hawker. *$5. Lane.

  “A visionary, a poet, a humorist, a priest.... His love of fighting
  was perhaps the only quality in which he differed from the gentlest of
  the saints. There are still some who believe that modern science is a
  tool the devil has put into the hands of sinners, but Hawker’s
  certainty of that is only equalled by his belief in witchcraft,
  charms, pixies, mermaids, evil eyes, the immediate answer of prayers,
  the damnableness of dissent, and much else allied to these. But he
  made his parish of Morwenstow. He rescued and tended the shipwrecked,
  he consoled the wicked, he spent his income on charity.... He was a
  very wild, naughty boy, and, as a youth, full of practical jokes and
  uncomfortable animal spirits.”—Acad.

  “The Reverend R. S. Hawker has left behind him no literary remains
  which point to the possession of any extraordinary genius, and yet a
  baffling and beautiful soul leads us to examine every record and study
  every poem for a key. In ‘The life and letters of R. S. Hawker’ just
  published we turn page after page and only manage to catch the flying
  skirts of the vicar. Of Hawker’s own poems, his fragment of the ‘San
  Graal’ is worthy to be compared with Tennyson’s treatment of the
  subject, and his ballads earned the praise of Sir Walter Scott.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 168. F. 25, ‘05. 2310w.

  “Mr. Byles has performed his task—by no means an easy one—with skill
  and good taste.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 363. Mr. 25. 1070w.

  “Its contents are a product of unusual skill and discretion.” H. W.
  Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 277. Ag. ‘05. 710w.

  “Must be regarded as one of the best biographies of recent years.” H.
  W. Boynton.

   + + + =Bookm.= 21: 358. Je. ‘05. 810w.

  “Mr. Byles has given us an excellent presentment of a most interesting
  and picturesque figure of the last century.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 563. Je. ‘05. 100w.

  Reviewed by Percy F. Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 308. My. 1, ‘05. 2260w.

  “His ‘Life and letters,’ by his son-in-law, C. E. Byles, leaves
  nothing to be desired.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 292. Ap. 13, ‘05. 350w.

  “His book therefore, demands acceptance as the real biography of the
  Vicar of Morwenstow.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 222. Ap. 8, ‘05. 850w.

  “This book, written by Hawker’s son-in-law with such fairness and
  discretion as may well eradicate even the memory of an unhappy effort
  by another hand.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 778. Je. 10, ‘05. 750w.


=Byron, George Gordon.= Complete poetical works; ed. by Paul Elmer More.
$3. Houghton.

  For this Cambridge edition of Lord Byron’s poems, the editor has
  chosen the text of 1832-33 in preference to that of 1831 because of
  its more satisfactory use of capitals, italics and punctuation marks.
  It is unexpurgated and contains the recently resurrected poems of
  Byron.

 *   + + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 15w.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 391. D. 1, ‘05. 70w.

  “A thoughtful and scholarly estimate of Byron’s genius and character
  introduces the volume.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 875. O. 12, ‘05. 310w.

     + + =Nation.= 81 :278. O. 5, ‘05. 90w.

  “Mr. Paul Elmer More edits the book with judgment and restraint.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 332. O. 7, ‘05. 110w.


=Byron, George Gordon.= Confessions of Lord Byron; sel. and arr. by W.
A. Lewis Bettany. *$2.50. Scribner.

  In discussing this compilation the London Times says: “There is
  nothing new in it; but it gives a convenient synoptic view of the poet
  in his various relations with his times and his contemporaries. Thus
  seen, Byron strikes one chiefly as that distinctively English
  product—the brilliant amateur who can beat the professionals at their
  own business, likes to do so, but absolutely refuses to take the
  business seriously.”

  “The whole tone of his writing is more that of the literary
  ‘gobemouche’ than of the man of letters. The reader gains no very
  clear idea of Lord Byron as a letter-writer, and may be well advised
  to skip the introduction and proceed to the letters themselves. Mr.
  Bettany’s volume is only a piece of book-making pure and simple, and
  has very little claim to be dignified by the title of a scientific
  analysis of correspondence.”

     — + =Acad.= 68: 653. Je. 24, ‘05. 1410w.

  * “These excerpts give a rather more favorable impression of him as a
  man and a man of letters than he desired to give his contemporary
  public.” H. W. Boynton.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 846. D. ‘05. 560W.

  Reviewed by Anna B. McMahan.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 235. O. 16, ‘05. 1530w.

  “These editorial lapses are not, however, very numerous; and the
  compilation is on the whole satisfactory and instructive.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 217. Jl. 7, ‘05. 1030w.

  * “Mr. Bettany’s selections are, however, judicious, and, in spite of
  frequent detachment from illuminating context, do the writer no
  injustice.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 940w.

  “The selections are full of interesting matter for those who wish to
  approach Byron’s personality in this way.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 618. S. 23, ‘05. 970w.

  “Mr. Bettany has made an excellent arrangement of the matter with
  which he deals.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 21. Jl. 1, ‘05. 170w.


=Byron, George G. N.= Love poems of Byron. 50c. Lane.

  Among the sixty poems found in this group are “When we two parted,”
  “She walks in beauty,” “Maid of Athens,” “Stanzas written on the road
  between Florence and Pisa,” “She walks in beauty like the night,” and
  “There be none of beauty’s daughters.” “This volume is one of a series
  of little works entitled ‘The lover’s library’ which constitutes a
  veritable treasure-house of poetry sentiment.” (Arena).

  “Love poems of Byron is a dainty little volume, bound in flexible
  violet cloth, stamped in gold, with gilt edge, and of vest-pocket
  size, contains more than sixty poems and selections from Byron’s verse
  devoted to love.”

       + =Arena.= 33: 222. F. ‘05. 140w.




                                   C


* =Cabell, James Branch.= Line of love. †$2. Harper.

  “The tales have been culled from French ‘romans’ and dull English
  chronicles, and the mediaeval atmosphere has been preserved by the
  quaintly, though never obscurely, archaic style of narration. Ten
  pictures and cover vignette by Mr. Pyle, richly colored and ...
  perfectly in keeping with the literary atmosphere, together with
  conventional floral borders in color, make a singularly attractive
  giftbook.”—Dial.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1378. D. 14, ‘05. 90w.

  * “Is worthy of its predecessors.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

  * “They are written in the richly colored, tapestry-like style.
  Unfortunately in the present volume the tapestry gives the impression
  of being machine-made and a little threadbare.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 682. N. 18, ‘05. 70w.

  * “A collection, told in exquisite poetical way, of some of the most
  picturesque but less-known love-stories of history.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32 :752. D. ‘05. 100w.


* =Cadogan, Edward.= Makers of modern history: three types: Louis
Napoleon, Cavour, Bismarck. **$2.25. Pott.

  “The struggle between conservative principles and revolutionary forces
  constitutes the framework of the history of the nineteenth century.
  With this great movement are closely associated the names of Louis
  Napoleon, Cavour, and Bismarck, the subjects of the three essays
  included in this volume.... It is on the epoch making, the history
  making, actions of these men that emphasis is here laid.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The volume contains no new materials, but it summarises the careers
  of the three Machiavellian personages in question clearly and
  sensibly.” W. M.

       + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 615. Jl. ‘05. 100w.

  * “In general, however, these essays may safely be recommended to the
  unprofessional reader, who will be dull indeed if he does not discover
  in them the absorbing interest of the three dissimilar men whom they
  describe.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 492. D. 14, ‘05. 680w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 671. O. 14, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The faults of the book are greatly those of immaturity, and the
  writer may possibly in time produce historical work of permanent
  value.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 311. S. 2, ‘05. 860w.

  * “The author’s statements and interpretations of facts are clear,
  vigorous, original, and sufficiently tinctured with philosophy, and he
  never slides into what Mommsen called the ‘dressing-gown’ style of
  narrative.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 123. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1820w.


=Caffin, Charles Henry.= How to study pictures. **$2. Century.

  Mr. Caffin unfolds the gradual progress of art from its liberation
  from the shackles of Byzantine traditions down to the impressionist
  school of Monet. A comparative method of study is employed,
  contrasting the motives and methods of two artists in each of the
  twenty-eight chapters, sometimes of the same school, often of
  different schools. And the author maintains that the first necessity
  for the proper seeing of a picture is to try and see it thru the eyes
  of the artist who painted it, that it is an understanding of the
  individuality of the artist’s experience and feeling that enables one
  to be an intelligent judge of merit.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 474. N. ‘05. 160w.

  * “While possessing a simplicity of method which conveys to the
  average reader a general insight into pictorial methods and motives,
  the author’s work is characterized by elegance of style, grace of
  feeling, and elevation of thought; it will do as much good in the
  direct service of art as any treatise published in recent years.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 311. N. 16, ‘05. 400w.

  * “Mr. Caffin’s book was needed and will be found to contain much
  information not easily obtainable elsewhere.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1375. D. 14, ‘05. 80w.

  * “Except for this driving ideas in double harness, the material and
  judgments are not unfamiliar; but the task is done thoroughly and many
  things are happily put.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 190w.

  “What Mr. Caffin has to say is always worth reading, for he puts each
  painter’s character forcibly before one, and manages to be
  entertaining as well as instructive.” Charles de Kay.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 742. N. 4, ‘05. 570w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 260w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 704. N. 25, ‘05. 160w.

  * “It is the one most completely adapted to the needs of the person
  entirely ignorant of art, its history and its development.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 665. N. 18, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32 :640. N. ‘05. 90w.


=Caffyn, Mrs. Kathleen Mannington (Iota, pseud.).= Patricia, a mother.
†$1.50. Appleton.

  Patricia, whose husband, a hypocrite and a humbug, leaves both his son
  and his estate to the guardianship of his mother, goes to live with
  her mother-in-law and sees her son slowly estranged from her because
  she will not speak and blacken the character of her dead husband to
  the mother who reveres his memory. There is much of gossipy country
  society and in the end an old family servant sets things right and
  Patricia comes to her own.

  “A most moving story, full of feeling and insight into human
  character. Certainly it is a story that ‘counts.’”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 397. Ap. 8, ‘05. 650w.

  “The cleverness of the novel lies not so much in its plot as in the
  graphic characterization. It is a piece of work of which the author
  has reason to be proud.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 492. Ap. 15. 300w.

  * “Her story makes a thoroughly interesting book.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 310. N. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  “There is considerable strength in this novel. There is some lack of
  artistic proportion in the general working out of the story.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 578. N. 4, ‘05. 100w.


=Cahan, Abraham.= White terror and the red. $1.50. Barnes.

  A story of inner Russia by a member of the Revolutionary party who was
  forced to flee from Russia to avoid Siberia. The plot concerns the
  tragic events of a quarter of a century ago, when czar Alexander II.
  was assassinated by the Nihilists and an antisemitic outbreak
  followed, but it is the Russia of to-day that we see, drawn from a
  practical knowledge of the subject. The hero of the book is a Russian
  prince who steps out of his class to uphold the cause of the people,
  marries a Hebrew woman and finally suffers imprisonment.

  “The intelligent reader will find in it much sound workmanship and no
  little insight into the psychology of the Russian intellectuals.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 472. Ap. 29, ‘05. 430w.

  “But the style has a curious impenetrability about it, which reminds
  one of a bad translation.”

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 588. My. 13. 240w.

  “In ‘The white terror and the red’ we have something far more
  interesting than a narrative of sensational episodes, or a gallery of
  interesting types, more valuable than a vivid picture of melodramatic
  history in the making. We have a work of art of the highest class. As
  a guide to the full understanding of Russian political and social life
  it is probably the most valuable ever written in the English
  language.” Edwin Lefevre.

   + + + =Bookm.= 21: 186. Ap. ‘05. 1380w.

  “It is a sound, firm piece of work; and it shows an easy familiarity
  with the subject and with the method. As an addition to its historical
  importance, a sweet, fully realized piece of fiction.” Hutchins
  Hapgood.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 560. Je. ‘05. 860w.

  “This book gives one a more realistic and vivid impression of the
  Terrorist movement than any we have read. It has no definite plot or
  literary coherency, but consists of a series of sketches written in an
  unexaggerated and impassioned style.”

     + + =Ind.= 58 :502. Mr. 2, ‘05. 250w.

  “To those who seek an education on underground’ Russia Mr. Cahan’s
  latest novel can be recommended.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 258. Ap. 22, ‘05. 450w.

  “A well-constructed, forceful, and ably sustained piece of work. Has
  given us a picture of Russian conditions which we may accept as
  essentially correct. Of no small merit from the purely literary
  standpoint.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 654. Mr. 11, ‘05. 140w.

  “It would be more exact to characterize this book as a study of
  Russian social conditions than as a work of fiction, although there is
  a story as a whole.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 430. Mr. 18, ‘05. 280w.

  “The book is written in an admirable style,—keen, quiet, full of
  reserve power. The book is a valuable contribution to present-day
  literature, considered either as fact or fiction. It tells with
  judgment, with conviction, with emotion, the sad story of a sad
  people.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 784. My. ‘05. 380w.

  “A book that impresses one with its power, competence, and fairness.
  It is a profoundly interesting sociological document that the public
  may thank Mr. Cahan.”

   + + — =R. of Rs.= 31 :763. Je. ‘05. 90w.


=Caine, Hall.= Prodigal son. †$1.50. Appleton.

  This latest of Hall Caine’s novels has all the strength and the heart
  sadness found in his other works. Iceland is the home of the tragic
  story and its characters are the simple folk of the Northland: the
  factor and his daughters, Thora and Helga; the old governor and his
  sons, Magnus and Oscar. Magnus resigns Thora, his promised wife, to
  Oscar, his more fascinating brother, bearing the odium of the broken
  betrothal that they may be happy. Helga, however, breaks in upon this
  dearly bought joy, and wins Oscar’s love. The sad death of Thora and
  the wanderings of the exiled Oscar are strong and dramatic, and his
  final return home as the renowned Icelandic composer has not the joy
  of that first prodigal’s home coming, but holds the full sorrow of the
  years.

  “The story shows a confused sense of moral values, and fairly reeks
  with cheap sentimentality. Its style is common and its situations
  theatrical. Altogether it is a poorer performance than was to be
  expected even from the author of ‘The Christian’ and ‘The eternal
  city.’” W. M. Payne.

     — — =Dial.= 38: 17. Ja. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “Though the plot is horribly tragic, there are no melodramatic
  climaxes to detract from the dignity of the style in which it is
  written. There are exquisite touches of pathos in the descriptions,
  and in the delineation of character the author shows a keen knowledge
  of the various phases of human nature. It is intensely emotional, and
  certainly the strongest book that Hall Caine has ever written.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 499. Mr. ‘05. 450w.

  “Here, as in all his books, Mr. Caine has the power of wringing his
  readers’ vitals, yet not the power of convincing them that he is
  working out a tragedy rather than a melodrama.”

   + + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 116. Ja. ‘05. 230w.


=Caird, Edward.= Evolution of theology in the Greek philosophers.
*$4.25. Macmillan.

  This second course of Gifford lectures is closely allied to the first,
  delivered ten years earlier at the university of St. Andrew’s, which
  treated of the evolution of religion. This course treats of the
  evolution of theology in its first great period. There are lectures
  upon the relation of reason to religious faith; the three stages in
  the evolution of theology; the precursors of Plato, the two
  distinctive tendencies of Plato; Aristotle; post-Aristotelian
  philosophies; Stoicism; Neo-Platonism; Philo; and Plotinus.

  “The theology of the earlier Greek philosophers seems inadequately
  treated. There is at times a tendency to interpretation which seems
  formal and doctrinaire. The book is entirely free from pedantry.
  Nevertheless statements occasionally occur which stand much in need of
  a reference to authorities. It may be questioned whether the author’s
  horror of mysticism does not lead him into misunderstanding and
  exaggeration. The advantages of a point of view steadily maintained
  throughout a discussion ... gives lucidity to the exposition and is a
  constant challenge to investigation of its adequacy.” H. N. Gardiner.

   + + — =Philos.= R. 14: 204. Mr. ‘05. 3560w.


=Cajori, Florian.= Introduction to the modern theory of equations.
*$1.75. Macmillan.

  “The present work falls into two nearly equal parts. The first 103
  pages treat the following topics: Elementary properties and
  transformation of equations; location and approximation of the roots
  of numerical equations; solutions of cubic, biquadratic, binomial and
  reciprocal equations; the linear and Tschirnhausian transformations.
  The remaining 120 pages are devoted to substitution groups and
  Galois’s theory of the solution of algebraic equations.”—Science.

  “The work has much that may be praised; in particular, its very
  moderate size, its choice of topics, copious references for further
  study, and a large number of illustrative examples and problems. Lack
  of explicitness is manifest.” James Pierpont.

   + + — =Science,= n.s. 21: 101. Ja. 20, ‘05. 850w.


=Caldecott, Alfred, and Mackintosh, H. R., eds.= Selections from the
literature of theism. *$2.50. Scribner.

  Professor Caldecott has edited selections from Anselm, Aquinas,
  Descartes, Spinoza, the Cambridge Platonists, Berkeley, Cousin, Comte,
  and Janet. While the sections under Professor Caldecott’s care include
  Kant, Schleiermacher, Mansel, and Latze. There are full notes and
  references.

  “A well-selected collection.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 401. Ap. ‘05. 30w.

  “The plan of this book, therefore, is excellent, and the careful notes
  and introductions show that it has been well carried out.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 616. Mr. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “The editing of these selections fell into excellent hands. The
  misgivings of the editors as to the wisdom of the selections made are
  quite needless, for nothing better could have been desired. The notes
  and biographical notices are very fine—fresh, scholarly, interesting.
  Though I have deemed it necessary to say some things of more or less
  critical character, yet, taking the work as a whole, it is a welcome
  and highly useful addition to theological literature.” James Lindsay.

   + + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 247. Ja. ‘05. 1610w. (Survey of
         contents.)


=Caldecott, Rev. W. Shaw.= Tabernacle—its history and structure; with a
preface by Rev. A. H. Sayce. *$1.75 Union press.

  A study of the Old Testament itself has furnished the material for
  this unconventional, original, and withal, scholarly work on the
  history and architecture of the tabernacle. The book is divided into
  four parts: The history of the tabernacle. The triple cubit of
  Babylonia, The triple cubit of Babylonia as used in the construction
  of the tabernacle. The triple cubit in Babylonia and in Palestine. The
  index is complete and the illustrations are good.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 139. Jl. 29. 460w.


=Caldwell, Otis William.= Handbook of plant morphology. *$1. Holt.

  This volume is based upon the handbook of plant dissection, by J. C.
  Arthur, Chas. R. Barnes, and John M. Coulter, which Prof. Caldwell has
  revised, rewritten and extended in order to bring it down to date.
  There is a preliminary chapter for both teacher and students upon the
  use and equipment of the laboratory. Eight lessons are devoted to the
  cyanophyceæ and chlorophyceæ, five to the fungi and lichens, five to
  the bryophyta, three to the pteridophyta and five to the
  spermatophyta.

  “The types selected illustrate very well the probable steps in the
  evolution of plants, and the discussions are exceedingly clear and
  suggestive.” R. B. Wylie.

     + + =Bot. G.= 39: 424. Je. ‘05. 260w.

  “A preliminary chapter on the use and equipment of the laboratory
  contains some very practical suggestions for the teacher and student.
  The comparison of the morphological characters that appear in the
  concise annotations attached to each exercise materially enhances the
  value of the book.” Carlton C. Curtis.

     + + =Educ. R.= 29: 425. Ap. ‘05. 270w.

  “It is an excellent guide for study of plant structures in a college
  course.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 270. Ag. 3, ‘05. 40w.


=Calhoun, Alice J.= When yellow jasmine blooms. $1.50. Neale.

  A story of the southland, with a heroine of the old-fashioned type, of
  rare beauty and unyielding pride, and a hero who, when he is not
  trusted without explanation, seeks to hide his wounded heart at the
  ends of the earth. By the aid of an opal which foretells disaster, and
  a railroad wreck, all is happily ended “when the jasmine blooms.”


=Calkins, Ernest Elmo, and Holden, Ralph.= Modern advertising. **$1.50.
Appleton.

  “‘According to various estimates the amount of money spent to-day in
  America for advertising ranges from six hundred to one thousand
  million dollars a year.’ This statement gives some measure of the
  important part which the art of advertising has come to play in the
  methods of business in the twentieth century. This volume gives an
  interesting account of the methods of modern advertising, and attempts
  to formulate some of the principles which underlie successful
  publicity.” (Outlook.) The volume belongs to Appleton’s “Business
  series.”

  “Is overloaded with a special plea for the general advertising agent.
  Yet the authors have their subject practically and thoroughly in hand,
  and supply an illustrated manual that will be of value particularly to
  the business man who is planning a campaign of publicity.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 60w.

  “It is as interesting to read as a novel.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1074. My. 11, ‘05. 180w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 340. Ap. 27, ‘05. 540w.

  “Though the authors have not succeeded in supplying a concise and
  altogether satisfactory definition of their subject, they have
  certainly produced a very readable book.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 195. Ap. 1, ‘05. 610w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 80w.

  “The book is written primarily for the general reader, and as such it
  will be found to be a most interesting exposition of the subject of
  advertising and sales-management.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32:128. Jl. ‘05. 390w.


* =Calkins, Harvey Reeves.= Mind of Methodism. *25c. Meth. bk.

  “This little tractate was written by a British Wesleyan missionary for
  his people in India. It is an excellent description of a catholic
  Christianity that in general is not particularly distinctive of
  Methodism from other evangelical ‘isms’ as known among us.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 40w.


=Call, Annie Payson.= Freedom of life. **$1.25. Little.

  “Interior freedom rests upon the principle of non-resistance to all
  things painful to our natural love of self,” sums the trend of Miss
  Call’s arguments. Many of the chapters contain comfort, and good
  advice, and are the result of sure insight: among them are
  ‘Self-consciousness,’ ‘Human sympathy,’ ‘Dependence and independence,’
  ‘Self-control,’ ‘About Christmas,’ and ‘To mothers.’

  Reviewed by Edward Fuller.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 248. S. ‘05. 80w.

  “Contains sound logic—and some sophistries; much good sense—and just a
  little nonsense. Although we have entered a demurrer in regard to
  certain parts of the book, be it understood that we criticise only the
  universal application which the author makes of her fundamental
  principle of non-resistance. The excellent little volume should be
  widely and thoughtfully read; it is written in a style at once
  succinct and limpid, and it holds much truth upon which it is safe to
  build.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 204. Ap. 1, ‘05. 660w.

  “‘The freedom of life’ is directed not so much against the bondage of
  doing wrong as against the bondage of doing right in the wrong way.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 634. Ap. 22, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is a pity that a book always excellent in intention and usually in
  performance should be marred by such absurdities.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 591. O. ‘05. 390w.


=Call, Annie Payson.= Man of the world. **50c. Little.

  The man of the world as Miss Call characterizes him is one who must
  know evil in order to renounce it, must be capable of understanding
  all phases of life, must recognize the beauty and power of the things
  of this world as servants to our highest law, must be in the process
  of gaining freedom from the world’s evils, must be a citizen of the
  world sustained by the mind and heart of God.

  * “A little book, but sound and sensible as its larger predecessors.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 50w.


=Calthrop, Samuel R.= God and his world: sermons on evolution. *$1.25.
Ellis.

  Eight scholarly sermons by this venerable Unitarian minister which set
  forth the doctrine of evolution and “fill that idea full of God.” The
  sermons are entitled: God, Religion and evolution, One Lord and His
  name One, Jesus and the evolution of the kingdom of God, Experimental
  theology and experimental religion, Fate and freedom, God minus man
  and God in man, and Immortality.

  “Dr. Calthrop is a theist, and more thoroughgoing than very many
  theists. He is also a Christian theist, and distinct as such from many
  who share with him the name of Unitarian.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 837. Jl. 29, ‘05. 300w.


=Calvert, Albert F.= Life of Cervantes. $1.25. Lane.

  This story of Cervantes’ romantic life and adventures was written for
  the tercentenary of the publication of the first part of “Don
  Quixote.” The illustrations of the first edition of that book are
  reproduced, and there is a bibliography, a list of proverbs traceable
  to Cervantes, and a table giving the editions of “Don Quixote” as
  brought out in various countries.

  “Is a little too obviously written for the tercentenary.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 99. F. 4, ‘05. 130w.

  “Mr. Calvert is evidently unacquainted with the recent literature of
  his subject.”

     — — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 366. Mr. 25. 500w.

  “The first brief and satisfactory monograph to be written in English.
  This narrative is compact and well considered.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + + =Atlan.= 96: 280. Ag. ‘05. 120w.

  “With some simulation of scholarship, however, this ‘Life’ lacks its
  essence.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 355. My. 4, ‘05. 580w.

  “It contains a good short account of Cervantes’s adventurous and
  romantic life, about the only one of convenient size and real fullness
  known to us.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 296. Ap. 15, ‘05. 450w.

  Reviewed by R. B. Cunninghame Graham.

 *     — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 3. O. 14, ‘05. 2650w.

  * “The ‘Life’ is sufficiently well done.”

       + =Spec.= 95: sup. 798. N. 18, ‘05. 210w.


* =Calvert, Albert Frederick.= Moorish remains in Spain. **$15. Lane.

  A brief record of the Arabian conquest and occupation of the peninsula
  with a particular account of the Mohammedan architecture and
  decoration in the cities of Cordova, Seville, and Toledo, illustrated
  with eighty-four colored plates and over four hundred black and white
  illustrations and diagrams. A series of two hundred designs to
  illustrate the composition and development of various schemes of
  Arabian ornament, will be found of especial interest to students of
  Moorish art.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 36. D. ‘05. 280w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.


Cambridge modern history; planned by Lord Acton; ed. by A. W. Ward, G.
W. Prothero, and Stanley Leathes. 12v. ea. **$4. Macmillan.

  A comprehensive history of modern times which will be complete in
  twelve volumes. Two volumes will be published each year, appearing in
  two series beginning respectively with vol. I and vol. VII. Volumes I,
  II, III, VII, and VIII have already appeared. The series will consist
  of—vol. I, The renaissance; vol. II, The reformation; vol. III, Wars
  of religion; vol. IV, The thirty years war; vol. V, Bourbons and
  Stuarts; vol. VI, The eighteenth century; vol. VII, The United States;
  vol. VIII, The French revolution; vol. IX, Napoleon; vol. X,
  Restoration and reaction; vol. XI, The growth of nationalities; vol.
  XII, The latest age.

  (Vol. II). “The present volume is quite up to the standard of the
  first: it has the same virtues and the same defects. In only two of
  the chapters, the first and the last, are those results of
  clarification which come from the highest kind of specialization
  really clear.” J. H. Robinson.

   + + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10:382. Ja. ‘05. 1420w.

  (Vol. VIII). “Whatever doubts remain concerning the construction of
  the book, it should be welcome for the wealth of information it
  supplies and for the impartial review of fiercely-debated questions
  which it affords. As a rule it exhibits the tested results of sound
  scholarship.” A. L. P. Denis.

   + + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 403. Ja. ‘05. 1770w.

  “The length of some of the chapters and paragraphs is somewhat
  disproportionate to the importance of the matters of which they treat.
  And there are some rather startling omissions. There are moreover a
  considerable number of misprints and minor errors. Despite all these
  minor defects, however, there can be no doubt that the third volume of
  this great work is in every way worthy of the high standard set by the
  earlier ones.” Roger Bigelow Merriman.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 145. O. ‘05. 960w. (Review of v. 3.)

  (Vol. VIII). “No single-volume history of the French revolution in the
  English language, and possibly none in the French, contains so much
  and such well-organized information as that embodied within the
  compass of this book. In breadth and accuracy of treatment, in the
  opinion of the reviewer, it is superior to any that has yet appeared
  in the series.” James Westfall Thompson.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 139. Ja. ‘05. 2110w.

  “Presents too much accidental selection and grouping. The paramount
  excellence of some of the chapters is so evident that the weakness of
  the others is made especially evident.” Wm. E. Lingelbach.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 598. My. ‘05. 1010w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “The index of the present volume is, we are glad to see, a great
  improvement on its predecessors.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 583. My. 13. 2520w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “With one exception, beyond painstaking fidelity and unflagging
  industry which gathers in every scrap of fact that can be crammed into
  the work, there is nothing remarkable in the treatment of the
  subjects. And the devotion to detail seems to have been carried too
  far.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 82: 91. O. ‘05. 3900w. (Review of v. 8.)

  “There is a certain lack of homogeneity, produced partly by
  divergencies both in opinion and in style, and partly by repetitions
  due to the treatment of a single subject in its different phases. A
  graver objection is the absence, both from this volume and from that
  devoted to ‘The reformation,’ of a sufficient statement of the Roman
  Catholic side. The work would be indispensable to students for its
  bibliographies alone.”

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 278. Mr. ‘05. 1280w. (Review of v. 3.)

  Reviewed by E. D. Adams.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 165. S. 16, ‘05. 1140w. (Review of v. 3.)

  Reviews Vols. III and VIII.

         =Ind.= 58: 669. Mr. 23, ‘05. 700w.

  * “A fine, scholarly catalog of events, with little sense for literary
  form or emphasis. It is learned and fair, but cold and unsympathetic;
  useful as an encyclopedia, and having little dramatic interest.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1155. N. 16, ‘05. 60w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “It is generally accurate; it is critical; it is clearly written; it
  is dispassionate. The attitude of pure science is worthily
  maintained.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 314. Ap. 20, ‘05. 2930w. (Review of Vol. III.)

  “It is everywhere conscientious and never hurried.” Christian Gauss.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 209. Ap. 8, ‘05. 4100w. (Detailed review of
         Vol. III.)

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 398. F. 11, ‘05. 250w. (Review of v. 3.)


Cambridge natural history. *$4.25. Macmillan.

  This new work upon systematic ichthyology, “in line with modern
  concepts respecting the vertebrates or chordates, includes not only
  the lower types of the vertebrates of the old naturalists, but also
  the hemichordata and urochordata or tunicates. The old class of
  fishes ... is replaced by the three classes for more than a generation
  past adopted in America, that is, the ‘cephalochordata’
  (leptocardians), the ‘cyclostomata’ (marsipobranchs) and the ‘pisces’
  (teleostomes or fishes proper).” (Science.)

  “As a whole the work is good; it ranks higher than any of its
  forerunners on the same lines of comprehensiveness and in the general
  quality of its contents. The third section ... is most open to attack;
  in places it bristles with vexatious little errors, indicating lack of
  acquaintance with the subject, and shaking one’s faith in portions
  better treated.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 423. My. 25, ‘05. 1140w.

  “Surveyed as a whole, both authors and editors alike are to be
  congratulated on having produced a work of sterling merit. The
  psychologist and the student of evolution will find in these chapters
  of Mr. Boulenger a perfect mine of information.”

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 103. Je. 1, ‘05. 1990w.

  “We shall be grateful, also for the new light which the co-authors of
  the ‘Cambridge natural history,’ and especially Dr. Boulenger, have
  thrown and will continue to throw on mooted questions of morphology
  and classification.” Theo. Gill.

   + + — =Science=, n.s. 21: 653. Ap. 28, ‘05. 5080w.


=Campbell, Gerald=, comp. See =Fitz Gerald, Edward and Pamela.= Letters
and portraits of.


=Campbell, Reginald John.= Sermons addressed to individuals. **$1.25.
Armstrong.

  As the author states in his preface, these eighteen sermons “are not
  literature, they are extempore speech.” Each one was suggested by some
  life story or called out by some confession, or some cry for pastoral
  aid, and to the text of each sermon is prefixed a short account of the
  particular case which it was designed to meet. Mr. Campbell is an
  evangelist, and minister of the City Temple of London.

  “But these occasional sermons are not sermons for an occasion merely.
  Their appeal is a very wide one.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 154. Ag. ‘05. 130w.

         =Ind.= 58: 897. Ap. 20, ‘05. 80w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 149. Mr. 11, ‘05. 200w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 453. F. 18, ‘05. 220w.


=Candler, Edmund.= The unveiling of Lhasa. $5. Longmans.

  An account of the Lhasa mission from the standpoint of the
  correspondent of the Daily Mail. He relates the predetermining causes,
  the diplomatic and historical matters bearing upon the expedition, and
  a detailed account of the actual journey and of the encounters with
  the Tibetans. A vivid description of Lhasa, of the monasteries, and of
  the people follows.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 147. F. 4, 2320w.

  “A series of clear-cut sketches depicting the every-day life of the
  people ... form the most striking feature of that portion of Mr.
  Candler’s book given over to Lhasa.” H. Addington Bruce.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 305. My. ‘05. 490w.

  Reviewed by Wallace Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 384. Je. 1, ‘05. 490w.

  “There is in his pages a breezy personal element, which lends the
  charm of reality to all he sees and does. His descriptions are brief,
  and his summing up of the results of the mission clear and forcible.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 273. Ap. 6, ‘05. 440w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 116. F. 25, ‘05. 1080w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 427. Mr. 18, ‘05. 670w.

  “A book of remarkable interest. The manner of writing is as admirable
  as the matter. Other books on the expedition may be written fuller of
  detailed information, but none can be more thoroughly imbued with its
  romance. One of Mr. Candler’s most notable gifts is a power of vivid,
  sympathetic delineation of scenery.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 178. F. 4. ‘05. 1260w.


=Canfield, Dorothea Frances.= Corneille and Racine in England: a study
of the English translations of the two Corneilles and Racine with
special reference to their presentation on the English stage. **$1.50.
Macmillan.

  “A valuable feature of this book is the presentation of well-chosen
  excerpts from the various translations, illustrative of the author’s
  critical comments. These selections are accompanied by the original
  text.... Pleasantly suggestive sketches are given of the writers who
  figured as translators from the time of Charles I to the earlier years
  of the nineteenth century. Among a crowd of obscure hacks may be noted
  the names of Katharine Philips (the ‘Matchless Orinda’), Waller,
  Cotton, Otway, Steele, Young (of the ‘Night thoughts’), and Colley
  Cibber.”—N. Y. Times.

  “A quiet, high-bred humor and a marked felicity of phrase brighten
  many of these pages.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 205. Ap. 1, ‘05. 320w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 250. F. ‘05. 50w.


=Canfield, William Walker.= Legends of the Iroquois: told by the
Cornplanter. **$1.50. Wessels.

  The legends and bits of folk-lore here reproduced were told by the
  Seneca chief, the Cornplanter, to a pioneer of western New York, whose
  note-book with the valuable jottings came into the possession of Mr.
  Canfield. Enough of the wild poetry, religious undertone, and
  imagination was transmitted to enable the author to catch the spirit
  of the tales, which he has preserved with full understanding and
  sympathy.

  “A valuable and entertaining edition to the literature of our
  aboriginal folk-lore.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 191. F. ‘05. 30w.

  “Present what is from several points of view the most fascinating side
  of Indian character, the poetic and imaginative side. It has a
  distinct value to the student of ethnology, or anyone who is
  interested in the study of Indian life and character, it will also
  appeal with equal force to the reader who seeks only entertainment;
  for we venture to say that anyone who dips into this book of legends
  will find them as fascinating as a book of verses or a metrical
  romance.” L. J. Burpee.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 121. F. 16, ‘05. 290w.


=Canning, Albert Stratford George.= Literary influence in British
history. *$2.25. Wessels.

  In a prefatory note the author states that “In this republished and
  revised volume I endeavor to trace the influence of literature in
  British history, with the hope that the book may be of use to readers
  not familiar with larger works on the subject.” Then follows a review
  of representative English literature in every period of England’s
  history from Chaucer and Shakespeare to Scott and Froude. There is
  much not only of historical and literary but also of biographical
  interest.


=Cannon, Edwin=, ed. See Smith, Adam. Wealth of nations.


=Capart, Jean.= Primitive art in Egypt; tr. * by A. S. Griffith. *$5.
Lippincott.

  “This exhaustive volume dealing with the early decorative work of the
  Egyptians on implements and buildings, deals with its subject more
  from an archaeological than from an artistic standpoint.” (Critic.)
  The work is largely based upon the discoveries of Prof. Flinders
  Petrie, and is richly illustrated.

  * “Has been ably translated.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 599. Je. 3, ‘05. 530w.

  * “M. Capart’s own part in the book appears to have been mostly
  confined to the selection of the matters to be reproduced, and this
  task has been discharged with both skill and judgment. The translation
  by Miss Griffith is adequate to its purpose.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 557. My. 6. 170w.

  * “For the student of the problem of the origin of art the author has
  probably made a valuable contribution, with his clear text, and
  plentiful illustrations. For the casual reader, however, the often
  insisted upon details are liable to become wearisome.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “A distinctive up-to-date book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 861. D. 2, ‘05. 500w.

  * “Is full of curious and interesting reading.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 261. Ag. 19, ‘05. 120w.


=Capen, Edward Warren.= Historical development of the poor law of
Connecticut. *$3.50. Macmillan.

  Volume XXII. of the “Columbia university studies.” An historical study
  of the treatment of the poor in Connecticut from the earliest colonial
  period to the present day, in which the town system of relief is
  considered as opposed to the state and county systems. There is an
  excellent bibliography, and there are indexes covering not only the
  subjects treated but the decisions and statutes cited.

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 496. My. 6, ‘05. 220w.

  “The history is interestingly set forth, each statement of fact is
  verified by references.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 587. My. ‘05. 140w.

         =Dial.= 38: 276. Ap. 16, ‘05. 50w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 933. O. 19, ‘05. 40w.

  “In his present monograph Dr. Capen has provided us not only with a
  most exhaustive exposition of the development of the law from early
  colonial days, but also with a useful commentary on its workings,
  pointing out clearly its advantages and defects.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 220w.


* =Capen, Oliver Bronson.= Country homes of famous Americans. **$5.
Doubleday.

  “The profusion of pictures large and small with which the book is
  embellished ... throws a welcome light upon the surroundings of many
  of our celebrated men, representing, as Mr. T. W. Higginson says in
  his introduction, ‘not merely the tastes and habits of the man’s
  household, but the private background of his public life.’ Not all
  the houses chosen are of equal interest, nor are their owners of
  equal celebrity.... In all, the homes of eighteen men are chosen,
  including those of Lee at Arlington, of Jefferson at Monticello,
  Lowell’s Elmwood, Longfellow’s Craigie house, and Madison’s
  Montpelier.”—Nation.

  * “There has, of late, been much journeying (on paper) to the homes of
  great men, but none of these journeys has ended in such a fortunate
  meeting of text and pictures as have those of Mr. Capen.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 492. D. 14, ‘05. 460w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 769. N. 11, ‘05. 200w.


* =Capes, Bernard.= Lohengrin. $2. Page.

  “This is the third of a series of romances founded on the themes of
  grand operas.... The illustrations, in black and white, are by Sarcadi
  Pogany, and fancifully, yet not without plenty of vigor and action,
  depict the dramatic incidents of the legend, which is repeated in
  description and dialogue and dramatic succession in the form of the
  modern historical romance.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Mr. Capes tells his story well and strongly, his descriptions are
  vivid and significant, and all the drama of the story clearly brought
  out. But because you are writing of distant days, need your style be
  such ‘genuine antique’ stuff as this?”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 833. Ag. 12, ‘05. 300w.

  * “This is monstrous fine writing; so fine that for the life of us we
  cannot tell whether it is meant to be in blank verse or not. Much of
  it is; some of it is not; and the mixture is merely annoying. There
  are, too, the inevitable lapses of one who sets out to play a part
  without conviction.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 233. Jl. 21, ‘05. 400w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 707. O. 21, ‘05. 140w.


=Capwell, Irene Stoddard.= Mrs. Alderman Casey. 75c. Fenno.

  In rich Irish brogue the wife of Alderman Casey tells of her
  experiences in trying to keep up with the social aspirations of her
  pretty daughter, Mary Ann, who in the end forsakes tennis clubs,
  Browning clubs, summer hotels and euchre parties for Tom Donovan, the
  pride of the police force.


* =Carey, Rosa Nouchette.= Household of Peter: a novel. (†)$1.50.
Lippincott.

  “A story of life in a small English country town. Peter is a young
  doctor, and his household consists of himself, his three sisters, and
  a faithful serving-woman. There is the usual complement of nobility
  and gentry.”—Outlook.

  * “Altogether this is a soothing and cheerful story.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 539. O. 21. 130w.

  * “Peter’s household is a wholesome, affectionate set of folks; but at
  times they are tiresome, and their conversations are too long drawn
  out.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 382. O. 14, ‘05. 60w.


=Carl, Katherine A.= With the empress dowager. **$2. Century.

  Miss Carl, thru the influence of Mrs. Conger, wife of the United
  States minister, was called to Pekin in the summer of 1903 to paint a
  portrait of the empress dowager. She remained eleven months, and
  painted four portraits one of which was exhibited at the St. Louis
  exposition, and during all this time she lived at the Chinese court,
  and came in daily contact with the empress dowager and the court
  ladies. She gives a simple, straightforward account of her unique
  experiences, telling with frank enthusiasm all about her life and the
  life of those around her in the summer and the winter palaces, until
  her readers also come under the spell of the empress dowager’s
  fascinating personality and come to see the Chinese social customs and
  religious rites in all their picturesque dignity.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 150w.

  * “There is much entertaining tittle-tattle in the volume about
  Chinese court life, but Her Majesty is lost in the distant
  perspective.” H. E. Coblentz.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 379. D. 1, ‘05. 440w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1378. D. 14, ‘05. 100w.

  “Unfortunately Miss Carl is not an observer or a writer; she was very
  greatly affected by the divinity that hedges royalty; and her book of
  more than 300 pages is much such a record as a school girl with an
  easy pen might send to an admiring club of friends.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 752. N. 4, ‘05. 670w.

  * “Her book is of great interest.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  “It is believed that the present volume contains the first accurate
  and satisfactory information concerning the personal appearance and
  characteristics of an interesting imperial personage.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 580. N. 4, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 755. D. ‘05. 140w.


=Carling, John R.= Weird picture. (†)$1.50. Little.

  A story concerned mainly with the machinations of an Italian artist
  whose madness and villainy actuate him to follow the Giotto method of
  stabbing his model to produce a realistic picture. There are some
  weird effects, exciting discoveries, and thru it all runs the romance
  of a matter-of-fact Englishman and his beautiful cousin.

  “A well conceived and constructed story, which contains some crisp
  dialogue and characterization.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 139. Jl. 29. 150w.

  “Those whose blood is yet uncurdled and whose detective sense has
  never been baffled by literary mystery might try this.”

       — =Ind.= 59 :753. S. 28, ‘05. 40w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 395. Je. 10, ‘05. 80w.

  “The plot is absorbing and well-concealed.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 868. Je. 3, ‘05. 110w.


=Carlyle, R. W., and Carlyle, A. J.= History of mediaeval political
theory in the West. 3v. v. I. **$3.50. Putnam.

  “The object of the joint authors of the present work is to carry in
  several volumes the history of political theory down to the early
  seventeenth century.... It is to be strictly a ‘history of theory, not
  of institutions.’ ... Part I or the introduction of the work devotes
  two chapters to the political theory of Cicero and Seneca.... Part II
  is devoted to the political theory of the Roman lawyers.... Part III
  has for its subject the political theory of the New Testament and the
  Fathers.... Part IV, the political theory of the ninth century....
  Each chapter and each part is followed by a very useful summary, and
  at the foot of each page are given very lengthy extracts from the
  sources.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “The author of the present volume has brought to his work a thorough
  knowledge of the early church writers ... and has succeeded in
  expressing himself in such admirable and lucid English, free from all
  philosophical abstractions and obscurities, that at no time does his
  exposition fail to instruct and to interest the reader. This clearness
  is largely due to the admirable arrangement of the subject-matter and
  to the method of treatment. No claim could be made that the author has
  discovered any new theories or new theorists, but he has certainly put
  many matters in a new light. Throughout his work he seldom shows any
  familiarity with the researches of modern scholars in the field of
  political theory, and with but few exceptions he never refers to any
  secondary authorities. This is a glaring and inexcusable fault in an
  otherwise highly meritorious work.” James Sullivan.

   + + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 629. Ap. ‘05. 780w.


=Carlyle, Thomas.= French revolution. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  Three volumes uniform with “Bohn’s historical library,” edited by John
  Holland Rose. The text and foot notes of the author are reproduced
  verbatim, and there are in addition notes by the editor which
  supplement the text with more modern information. There is an
  introduction, and there are appendices and numerous illustrations.

         =Nation.= 80: 229. Mr. 23, ‘05. 60w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 123. F. 25, ‘05. 260w.

  “An excellent library edition.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 4w.


=Carlyle, Thomas.= Oliver Cromwell; with a selection from his letters
and speeches. *60c. McClurg.

  “An abridged and newly edited volume of Carlyle’s Cromwell.” It is
  uniform with “Standard biographies.”


=Carman, Albert Richardson.= Ethics of imperialism; an enquiry whether
Christian ethics and imperialism are antagonistic. **$1. Turner, H. B.

  “This is a defense of imperialism by a very radical method of
  discrediting altruism as an ethical ideal and extolling egoism,
  personal and national, as the best of all possible principles. This,
  of course, leads to extreme libertarian views of social policy.”—Ind.

  Reviewed by John J. Halsey.

         =Dial.= 39: 270. N. 1, ‘05. 1000w.

         =Ind.= 59: 818. O. 5, ‘05. 90w.

         =Nation.= 81: 287. O. 5, ‘05. 340w.


* =Carman, (William) Bliss.= Poems. 2v. *$10. Page.

  This sumptuous edition has been compiled from Mr. Carman’s various
  published works, and includes a number of poems which have seen print
  in magazines but have never before appeared in book form.

  * “His work is done so much in the open, his qualities are so frankly
  and immediately affirmed in it, he is so free from subtleties and
  intricacies of meaning, that the province of the reviewer properly
  ends with pointing the way to his books as a source of many kinds of
  intellectual and emotional pleasure—all wholesome, rich, and strong.”
  Elisabeth Luther Carey.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 849. D. 2, ‘05. 1140w.

  * “He has a true gift of song, an artist’s joy in beautiful words, and
  that passion for the moods of Nature which of itself transmutes verse
  into poetry. His defect is to fall occasionally into facile jingles,
  and now and then into inapposite conceits.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 192. Ag. 5, ‘05. 140w.


* =Carman, (William) Bliss.= Poetry of life. **$1.50. Page.

  A volume of essays which contains besides the title essay, The purpose
  of poetry; How to judge poetry; The poet in the commonwealth; The poet
  in modern life; The defence of poetry; Distaste for poetry;
  Longfellow; Emerson; Mr. Riley’s poetry; Mr. Swinburne’s poetry; The
  rewards of poetry; Cheerful pessimism; Masters of the world; The
  poetry of to-morrow; The permanence of poetry.

  * “That Mr. Carman is a master of a stimulating style in verse and
  prose alike is evidenced by this sane, hopeful, yet discriminating
  study of varied phases of art and life.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 312. N. 16, ‘05. 380w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 786. N. 18, ‘05. 170w.

  * “Its value is permanent by reason of the broadly comprehensive
  treatment which he has given to the subject of poetry in its larger
  aspects. I am not sure but he is at his best as a critic.” Jessie B.
  Rittenhouse.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 910. D. 23, ‘05. 1290w.


=Carnegie, Andrew.= James Watt. **$1.40. Doubleday.

  Mr. Carnegie has woven into his biography of the inventor of the
  steam-engine, out of which he made his fortune, his own philosophy of
  success, drawing upon his personal experience to point the morals
  found in his hero’s life.

  “In Mr. Carnegie he has found a worthy and sympathetic biographer.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2:115. Jl. 22. 880w.

  “The wonderful career of James Watt is here ably retold by a most
  appreciative countryman with a wealth of comment bearing on or
  suggested by Watt’s life or inventions, which is scarcely less
  interesting than the narrative itself.”

       + =Engin. N.= 53: 625. Je. 15, ‘05. 220w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 991. O. 26, ‘05. 350w.

  “It is in the expression of the author’s views of life and the world
  that the work’s value mainly lies, for as a biography, it adds naught
  to the store of available information. Extremely interesting and
  helpful.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 21: 94. Jl. 15, ‘05. 560w.

  “Its lively, not to say jerky, style would hardly be a sufficient
  inducement to read this book. The preface names two highly competent
  engineers as having revised the technical passages, but here and there
  a sentence may be found to which they can hardly have lent their
  deliberate approval.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 527. Je. 29, ‘05. 1600w.

  “Mr. Carnegie has written a really helpful book, and one which is
  especially helpful to the young man entering into life’s battles.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 246. My. 27, ‘05. 320w.

  “There is a good deal of useful information in the book, but the best
  feature of it is the romantic cast that the author has given to an
  intrinsically dry subject.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 837. My. 27, ‘05. 180w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 124. Jl. ‘05. 50w.

  “Mr. Carnegie’s book is of the kind to put in the hands of a promising
  boy. It will stimulate him to work, but not at the expense of the
  simple moralities and pleasures of a well-regulated life.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 396. S. 16, ‘05. 200w.


* =Carpenter, Joseph Estlin.= James Martineau: theologian and teacher.
*$2.50. Am. Unitar.

  A book written “at the invitation of the British and Foreign Unitarian
  association, to describe the life and work of Dr. Martineau in briefer
  compass than was possible to his first biographers.... Professor
  Carpenter has had the advantage of the use of certain additional
  letters which have become available since the publication of the Life
  and has utilized other papers and correspondence hitherto unused....
  The result is an exceedingly valuable ‘study,’ in which the incidents
  of the life and the characteristics of the man and the thinker are
  made to throw light upon one another in a way which is possible only
  to one who, having mastered every detail of his subject, is able to
  select the essential and significant elements in every case.”—Hibbert
  J.

  * “It is difficult to imagine any class of readers who will easily set
  down this biography when once they have opened it. The stress of
  interest will indeed vary, but the admirable lucidity of Mr.
  Carpenter’s arrangement will render the process of skipping easy and
  comparatively safe.” Philip H. Wicksteed.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 560. My. 27, ‘05. 1530w.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 623. My. 20. 150w.

  * “The book is written in a style which, while it gives the impression
  of perfect accuracy, is yet so clear and graceful that the reader is
  never either puzzled or wearied.” James Seth.

     + + =Hibbert J.= 4: 210. O. ‘05. 2150w.

  * “It is an original study, based to some extent on new materials, and
  everywhere showing care and ripe reflection.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 219. Jl. 7, ‘05. 910w.

  * “Appearing in Dr. Martineau’s centenary year, it is a timely and
  permanent memorial of a spiritual leader unsurpassed in the English
  speaking world.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 941. D. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  * “This admirable work is a worthy memorial of a great man. His
  development is traced with such skill that Mr. Carpenter makes us
  realize the continual interplay of the outer and inner life. We see in
  these pages the organic growth, not only of a great intellect but of a
  great moral force.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 757. N. 11, ‘05. 2340w.


=Carpenter, Rt. Rev. William Boyd, bp. of Ripon.= Witness to the
influence of Christ; being the William Belden Noble lectures for 1904.
**$1.10. Houghton.

  Six lectures entitled—Two aspects of Christ’s influence; Christ the
  perfect type of consciousness; Christ the teacher of principles;
  Christ the law of the soul; Christ verified in experience; Christ as
  authority.

  “The thought is worthy and is set forth with exceptional literary
  skill, with recurring pregnant expressions of much suggestiveness.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 152. Jl. 20, ‘05. 100w.

  * “Exhibits his well-known versatility and literary skill.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “A happy combination of poetic feeling and logical clearness
  characterizes the entire argument.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 248. My. 27, ‘05. 150w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 70w.


=Carr, Clark.= Illini. $2. McClurg.

  “A story of the prairies, written from the memories of over half a
  century lived in Illinois. The author has endeavored to present his
  views of the position and influence of Illinois among the states, to
  give an estimate of events, and of those Illinoisans who were
  conspicuous actors in them, from 1850, the year in which the
  Fugitive-slave law was enacted, to the opening of the Civil
  war.”—Bookm.

  “Is a pleasant combination of history, biography, and romance.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 80w.

  “The story is not sufficiently interesting to have any advantage over
  the ordinary historical form.”

       — =Ind.= 58: 844. Ap. 13, ‘05. 160w.


=Carroll, John S.= Exiles of eternity: an exposition of Dante’s Inferno.
*$3. Gorham.

  “‘Exiles of eternity’ is an exposition canto by canto, in a simple,
  popular, yet thoroughly literary style, reaching the aim of bringing
  before the reader, who may or not be acquainted with the Italian
  language, the general scope of Dante’s ethical teaching as studied
  from a broad Anglican point of view, not uncolored by an intense
  poetical appreciation. This exposition is preceded by a brief sketch
  of the poet.” (N. Y. Times). The book makes no attempt at special
  research from original sources, hence there are reproduced several
  errors of earlier commentators. The author states, however, that his
  purpose is rather to present his subject in its “broad outlines” than
  to go into those “mere niceties, ingenuities and intricacies of
  interpretation” which too often lead Dante scholars astray.

  “Characterized by broad general reading among English and American
  commentators rather than by special research. An English reader who
  wishes to make the acquaintance of the ‘Inferno’ through a broad and
  pleasant way with Dante’s ethical rules of action brought strictly up
  to date, cannot do better than to read Mr. Carroll’s book.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 38. Ja. 21, ‘05. 310w.


=Carryl, Guy Wetmore.= The garden of years, and other poems. **$1.50.
Putnam.

  A volume of genuine poetic value, posthumously published, is the gift
  of Guy Wetmore Carryl to the literature of our time. “In the long poem
  which lends its title to the present collection, we have a true love
  poem marked by exquisite feeling and rare felicitous grace of
  execution. We may but say retrospectively, using Mr. Stedman’s so
  fitly characterizing words,—‘Still in the strength of youth, he seemed
  quite equal to either experiences or work, and likely to take his fill
  of both.’” (Critic).

  “Its varied but everywhere irrefragable proofs of poetship. There is
  abundant evidence in ‘The garden of years’ that Guy Carryl had
  received the muse’s accolade; and we might add, that, in his own range
  of inspiration and execution, this young Lycidas ‘hath not left his
  peer.’” E. M. T.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 182. F. ‘05. 220w.

  “It is a volume of manly sentiment embodied in facile and vigorous
  measures.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 199. Mr. 16, ‘05. 270w.


=Carson, Thomas G.= Man’s responsibility; or, How and why the Almighty
introduced evil upon the earth. **$1. Putnam.

  “All of Mr. Carson’s argument is to the effect that phrenology is an
  exact and useful science, and that it should be used in the government
  of the world and the reclamation of mankind.”—N. Y. Times.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 258. Ap. 22, ‘05. 390w.


=Carter, A. Cecil=, ed. Kingdom of Siam. **$2. Putnam.

  A volume prepared by native Siamese in connection with the commission
  to the St. Louis exposition. “The materials used by the author are
  largely furnished by high officials in different departments of
  government service.” (N. Y. Times). The view of Siam includes a sketch
  of King Chulalongkorn, and his son, the Prince Maha Vajiravudh, a
  description of Siam itself,—“the Land of the White Elephant,” a
  summary of its resources, and a glimpse of the capital city, Bangkok,
  where modern invention has given crowning touches to the city’s
  mechanism. The chapter on agriculture is perhaps the best in the book.
  There are many illustrations, chiefly, however, of temples and public
  buildings.

  “The style will not interest the general reader.”

       + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 125. Ja. ‘05. 70w.

  “Well-written and skilfully arranged work.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 381. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “It contains everything that a stranger needs to know of a fascinating
  country. The book has no literary endeavor manifest in its pages,
  being rather a complete handbook of the kingdom, with numerous
  illustrations of persons and places,—an encyclopedia in little.”
  Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 91. F. 1, ‘05. 150w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 36. Jan. 21, ‘05. 620w.


=Carter, Thomas.= Shakespeare and the Holy Scriptures, with the version
he used. *$3. Dutton.

  “Following the plays of Shakespeare in the probable order of their
  composition, Dr. Carter exhibits the extent to which Biblical ideas
  and phraseology appear in them. Citations from Shakespeare are from
  the text of the First folio, published in 1623; citations from the
  Bible are from the Genevan version (edition of 1598), the popular
  version of that time, and from the Genevan New Testament of 1557. ‘No
  writer,’ says Dr. Carter, ‘has assimilated the thoughts and reproduced
  the words of the Holy Scripture more copiously.’”—Outlook.

  “In consequence of this fatal want of judgment, the book may be
  pronounced to be practically valueless.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 388. N. 9, ‘05. 600w.

  “To say the best for it, it is a curious book and a monument of
  industry.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 682. O. 14, ‘05. 250w.

  “Dr. Carter proves a parallelism between Shakespeare and the Bible
  abundantly sufficient for his purpose, and need not have overloaded
  his book with much that is conjectural and doubtful.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 529. O. 28, ‘05. 160w.

  “Dr. Carter’s book, in fact, though it displays a minute familiarity
  with the text of the Bible and puts before the student the full
  materials for judging for himself, is an absurd overstatement.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 437. S. 30, ‘05. 1560w.

  * “Enough has been said to show that this large book, notwithstanding
  the labour spent upon it, is entirely useless for its main purpose;
  while for the further purpose of estimating Shakespeare’s knowledge of
  the Bible it is almost as useless, since nine-tenths of the parallels
  suggested are not parallels at all.”

     — — =Spec.= 95: 687. N. 4, ‘05. 2010w.


=Cartwright, Julia (Mrs. Henry Ady).= Life and art of Botticelli. *$4.
Dutton.

  This is an expansion of a study published a year or so ago, and is
  copiously illustrated with reproductions from the famous works of the
  painter. “This clear narrative restates the results of modern research
  and gives a trustworthy account of the Florentine painter’s career.
  What he owed to Savonarola and Dante is set forth in straightforward
  fashion, and his works are surveyed in chronological order, one by
  one.” (Atlan.)

  Reviewed by Royal Cortissoz.

       + =Atlan.= 95: 278. F. ‘05. 90w.

  “Her work forms ... a homogeneous whole, that is, however, somewhat
  marred here and there by certain strange mannerisms.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 24: 369. F. ‘05. 200w.

  “A notable contribution to the descriptive literature of art. The
  author is evidently steeped in artist-lore, and in this handsome
  volume has presented a treatise of an art school as well as a
  biography of Botticelli.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31 :252. F. ‘05. 70w.


=Carver, Thomas Nixon.= The distribution of wealth. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  In treating the value-and-distribution problem, “Professor Carver has
  earned high praise in that he has, with perfect clearness, defined
  precisely his point of view, systematically presented his doctrinal
  position, and carried it out with consistent argument.” The relation
  between values and distributive shares is traced out by Professor
  Carver as follows: “The value of the agent is determined by the value
  of the product. But what determines the value of the product? The
  relative want. And what determines the relative want? The relative
  supply. And what determines the relative supply? The cost of
  production. And what determines the cost of production? The value of
  the agents employed. And what determines the value of the agents? The
  value of the product; etc., etc.” The foregoing questions are
  discussed and answered. The law of diminishing returns is made the
  central feature of the theory of distribution. The author “pronounces
  strongly in favor of preserving the distinction between land and
  capital both for static and dynamic purposes; he sees, indeed, as
  bearing upon the relations of land and capital to cost, no
  significance in the distinction between static and dynamic.”
  Quotations from J. Pol. Econ.

  “The reader has only to study a few pages before the earnestness with
  which the subjects are expounded infects him. The exposition is clear,
  and occasionally graphic representations are given to make it
  impossible for the student to escape comprehension.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 51. Ja. 14, ‘05. 110w.

  “The work under consideration is admirable as a theoretical discussion
  in that it is centralized about the shares in distribution, preceded
  by what the author considers necessary by way of introduction, namely
  ‘value,’ ‘diminishing returns,’ and ‘forms of wealth and income.’ The
  concrete is everywhere uppermost throughout the book. The style is
  characterized by a certain vivacity which greatly enlivens the
  discussion and claims the attention of the reader whether he agrees or
  disagrees with the conclusions.” J. E. Conner.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 346. Mr. ‘05. 540w.

  “The book is in the main a clear and careful restatement of the
  prevalent ideas on the theory of distribution as now accepted. The
  book is moderate in tone and in conclusions.” H. Parker Willis.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 266. Ap. 16, ‘05. 790w.

  “The power and significance of the work. Too much can hardly be said
  in commendation of the book for its clarity and simplicity of style,
  its skill and effectiveness of statement, and its logical and
  attractive arrangement of material. It seems worth while to express
  forthwith the conviction that Professor Carver’s theoretical position
  is untenable, for the reason that he attempts to make of value and
  distribution two distinct problems.” H. J. Davenport.

   + + — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 131. D. ‘04. 3050w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 290. Ap. 13, ‘05. 120w.


* =Gary, Elisabeth Luther.= Novels of Henry James: a study. **$1.25.
Putnam.

  “An attractive volume illustrated with a new portrait of Mr. James and
  an etching of his home at Rye in England; and supplemented by a
  bibliography zealously compiled by Mr. Frederick A. King.... Miss
  Carey ... reviews all his work from the beginning; traces his
  development step by step, and treats in separate chapters of the power
  of his imagination and the value of his philosophy.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “If there is weakness anywhere in this interesting and luminous
  study it is in the chapter on ‘Philosophy.’ One wishes that more
  expansion of Mr. James’s moral and psychologic messages had been
  included.” Annie Russell Marble.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 441. D. 16, ‘05. 820w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 782. N. 18, ‘05. 160w.

  * “A remarkably interesting and well-rounded piece of contemporary
  criticism.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 890. D. 9, ‘05. 290w.


=Castaigne, Andre.= Fata Morgana. †$1.50. Century.

  This romance of art student life in Paris easily draws into one circle
  a circus rider, the daughter of a Chicago millionaire, the Duke of
  Morgana, the various critics, models, artists and poets of greater or
  lesser degree. The setting is Bohemian rather than artistic, and the
  characters are often coarse. The career of Phil Longwell, a young
  American painter, is followed through years of struggle from the time
  when he first falls in love with Hella, the pretty circus-girl friend
  of his boyhood, to the time when he wins honors, success and the
  admiration of the young American heiress. His paintings of the Fata
  Morgana, its strange legend and the simple faith of the people of
  Morgana, form striking contrast to the cynicism of Parisian life. The
  book is illustrated by the author.

  “Unquestionably the plot is thin and the construction faulty. Is a
  typical artist’s book, full of life and colour.”

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 183. Ap. ‘05. 280w.

  “Charming as is Monsieur Castaigne’s narrative, the chief interest
  will probably centre in the illustrations. In it the layman ... will
  find a rich store of interest and entertainment.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 104. F. ‘05. 400w.

  “No less striking in plot than in title, it rests the reader wearied
  of stereotyped and hackneyed situations.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 116. Je. ‘05. 320w.


* =Castle, Mrs. Agnes (Sweetman), and Castle, Edgerton.= Heart of Lady
Anne. †$1.50. Stokes.

  In the time of powder, masks and patches, Squire Day married the
  spoiled beauty, Lady Anne, and the story of her heart is the story of
  how she chafed at life on her young husband’s estate, how she went up
  to London as guest of Lady Kilcroney, who was Kitty Bellairs, and how
  she encountered the scheming, cruel world of fashion which taught her
  that her husband, who knew how to reveal himself as an heroic figure
  at the critical moment in each of her sad experiences, and who even
  aroused her jealousy toward the last, was the real master of the
  situation and of her heart.

  * “A tale in Dresden china, so dainty and clever as fully to satisfy
  the taste for Dresden, but arousing no very strong feeling.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1154. N. 4, ‘05. 510w.

  * “No authors know better how to use romance than Mr. and Mrs. Castle,
  and none can give the air of this artificial century with so excellent
  a grace.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 680. N. 18. 340w.

  * “Dainty bit of eighteenth century romancing.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 110w.

  * “‘Tis a beguiling tale.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1483. D. 21, ‘05. 250w.

  * “Has quite the dash of the authors’ earlier stories.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

  * “Has, in a less degree, the sparkle and liveliness of the authors’
  former work.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 1040. D. 23, ‘05. 90w.


=Castle, Agnes, and Castle, Egerton.= Rose of the world. †$1.50. Stokes.

  “The story opens in India, where the reader has a glimpse of official
  English life. The tragedy of widowhood descends upon a girl wife, who
  lives to realize the meaning of her sorrow.”—Outlook.

  “This is, perhaps, the finest book that Mr. and Mrs. Egerton Castle
  have as yet produced—daring, original, moving. The plot is developed
  with that reticence which is the soul of art; the tension is relieved
  by delightful touches of humor, charming descriptions of scenery,
  clever character-drawing.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 519. My. 13, ‘05. 1170w.

  “If this is not the best of their novels, it takes high rank among
  them.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 713. Je. 10. 500w.

  “At one stroke a delicate psychological study is metamorphosed into a
  Wilkie Collins melodrama.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 366. Je. ‘05. 710w.

  “As a piece of story-telling, it is almost good. Only, unfortunately,
  the heroine does not in the least belong to this era of the world.”

     + — =Critic.= 46: 563. Je. ‘05. 200w.

  “The charm is essentially one of style, for the plot is not
  remarkable, and the situations verge upon the melodramatic.” W. M.
  Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 388. Je. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  “In this second and more critical reading the careful workmanship of
  the writers is everywhere apparent.” Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + + =Forum.= 37: 109. Jl. ‘05. 670w.

  “A tale which, had it but broken off 100 pages from the end, might
  have ranked with the few things which bear reading more than once.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 153. My. 12, ‘05. 580w.

  “In their latest book they have lost none of their brilliancy of
  description.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 322. My. 20, ‘05. 430w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “The tale is well written, with touches of comedy in minor
  characters.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 40w.

  “A story that is touched by a rosy glamor and strengthened by apt
  characterization.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 796. My. 20, ‘05. 190w.

  “The story, in fact, for all its wildness, claims attention as a
  serious study in character, while the events are sensational enough to
  attract the unpsychological.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 778. Je. 10, ‘05. 310w.

       — =Spec.= 94: 789. My. 27, ‘05. 280w.


* =Castle, Frank.= Machine construction and drawing. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  “The author first describes the necessary drawing instruments, and
  explains their use. He then sets out in detail, with proportional
  dimensions, various forms of common fastenings, such as rivets, bolts,
  keys, etc. Then come some chapters containing examples of mill work,
  followed by others dealing with steam-engine details. The final
  chapter gives a short account of the physical properties of materials
  used in construction. Sets of useful exercises occur at intervals, and
  a few calculations of strengths are given.... The drawings which
  abound throughout the work represent good practice, are fully
  dimensioned, very clearly printed, and will be appreciated, by
  teachers and students alike.”—Nature.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 962. S. 16, ‘05. 160w.

  * “While not free from minor defects, the book can be cordially
  recommended for use in drawing classes, and to young engineers who are
  seeking after knowledge on which to base subsequent work in machine
  design.”

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 533. S. 28, ‘05. 280w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 710. O. 21, ‘05. 210w.


Casual essays of The Sun; editorial articles on many subjects, clothed
with the philosophy of the light side of things. $1.50. Priv. ptd.

  Extracts from the editorial pages of the New York Sun, which “touch
  lightly upon many subjects—upon the passing of the negro minstrel and
  the banjo, upon mince pie, ... famous men and institutions ... upon
  college yells, hairpins, Solomon, and the impropriety of addressing
  the president of the United States as ‘Excellency.’ There is some
  delectable and curious matter about poets old and new.... You may find
  also essays on English and reformed manners of spelling it, ... essays
  upon women of all ages, upon sweethearts and loves, essays upon
  mothers-in-law, and even essays upon the cup that cheers.” (N. Y.
  Times.)

  “One likes to save it for the choice hours, when one is really alone.”
  Edward Fuller.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 247. S. ‘05. 280w.

  “There is no evidence that the writer is restrained by any limitations
  of conscience, consistency or charity from putting down anything
  interesting or amusing that comes into his head.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 639. S. 14, ‘05. 160w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “There is much excellent fooling here.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 92. My. 6, ‘05. 130w.


Catch words of cheer, compiled by Sara A. Hubbard. **$1. McClurg.

  Printed in dark green ink with green marginal decorations and a touch
  of red in the headings, this attractive little volume pleases the eye,
  while the catch words culled from St. Paul, Cicero, Maeterlinck,
  Carlyle, Tennyson, Shakespeare, Helen Keller, Ruskin, Goethe,
  Longfellow, and a host of other writers of all ages, are wisely chosen
  to bring help and comfort. There is a quotation for each day of the
  year.

  * “An excellent combination of high seriousness and enlivening humor.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 80w.

  * “A collection of bright, comforting, helpful sayings.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 40w.


=Cather, Willa Sibert.= Troll garden. †$1.25. McClure.

  Seven short stories of artist life, emotional psychological, and
  pathetic, under the titles: Flavia and her artists, The sculptor’s
  funeral, The garden lodge, A death in the desert, The marriage of
  Phædra, A Wagner matinee, and Paul’s case.

  “Is a collection of freak stories that are either lurid, hysterical or
  unwholesome, and that remind one of nothing so much as the colored
  supplement to the Sunday papers. The ‘purple patches’ of learning in
  the book, like the thrills, seem sewed on here and there, with one eye
  closed to get the effect.” Bessie du Bois.

   — — + =Bookm.= 21: 612. Ag. ‘05. 1320w.

  * “There is real promise in these half-dozen stories. Miss Cather has
  sincerity and no small degree of insight.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 200w.

  “Taken as a whole, the book indicates more than usual talent for close
  delineation.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 394. Je. 1, ‘05. 140w.

  “There is promise of something greater in them all.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1482. Je. 29, ‘05. 260w.

  “In this collection of seven stories the author has shown a great deal
  of deep feeling and real ability, but many of the stories are too
  ambitious, and seem to be more the work of promise than of
  fulfillment.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 303. My. 6, ‘05. 230w.

  “They are singularly vivid, strong, true, original, and they have
  withal a richness of quality one might almost say of timbre, like a
  contralto voice.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 477. S. ‘05. 170w.


Catherine of Siena, St., tr. by Vida D. Scudder. *$2.50. Dutton.

  Selections from the letters of Catherine for long counted among
  Italian classics. “Mystics are not good letter writers, for mystics
  are bound to be without humor, and Catherine’s are all religious
  letters, full of obscure and jarring medieval imagery. But they are
  human documents. She only learned to write by miracle three years
  before her death, and until then she employed young aristocrats as
  secretaries. Her correspondence was wonderfully varied. ‘She wrote to
  prisoners and outcasts; to great nobles and plain business men; to
  physicians, lawyers, soldiers of fortune; to kings and queens, and
  cardinals and popes; to recluses ... and to men and women of the
  world.’” (Lond. Times.)

  “Excellent, too, are the small forewords to the various letters,
  giving vivid glimpses of the young saint’s various correspondents, and
  incidentally of the composite society of that time.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 681. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1880w.

  “For once we are in the pleasant position of finding nothing to blame;
  and this because the editor has not only done what was needful, but
  also (a rarer thing in editors) refrained from doing what was
  unneedful.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 430. S. 30. 1390w.

  “Miss Scudder’s translation is finely made; and, in the passages we
  have compared with the original, is perfectly faithful. A more
  readable version could hardly have been attempted.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 82: 112. O. ‘05. 1430w.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 278. N. 1, ‘05. 360w.

  “Miss Scudder has done her task admirably both as translator and as
  editor.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 224. Jl. 14, ‘05. 1400w.

  “The perfervid language of religious ecstacy in which they are couched
  does not fit the English tongue.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 499. Jl. 29, ‘05. 480w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 1073. Ag. 26, ‘05. 180w.

  “It would be difficult to praise Miss Scudder’s work too highly.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95:497. O. 7, ‘05. 1630w.


=Cator, Dorothy.= Everyday life among the head-hunters, and other
experiences from East to West. $1.75. Longmans.

  “We needn’t pretend here to follow Mrs. Cator in her wanderings, but
  she spent two years in Borneo and lived among the gruesome
  ‘head-hunters’ while her husband dealt with lawbreakers among them.
  She visited China and Japan, (before the last war) and has spent
  several years upon the worst parts of the African west coast, living
  there much of the time in mud huts among the natives and seeing them
  as they are.” (N. Y. Times.) Her narrative is of exceptional interest.
  Many photographs illustrate the volume.

  “Mrs. Cator writes simply and straightforwardly, just, we should
  imagine, as she talks: and her book is not only chatty and amusing,
  but contains some very fresh and clear-sighted comments on government,
  civilization, foreign missions, etc.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1111. O. 21, ‘05. 230w.

  * “Her narrative has sufficient charm and vivacity to justify its
  publication.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 759. D. 2. 370w.

  “Writes with a mixture of girlish simplicity and womanly shrewdness
  which is nothing short of charming.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 745. N. 4, ‘05. 840w.


=Cattell, Henry Ware.= Post-mortem pathology: a manual of post-mortem
examinations and the interpretations to be drawn therefrom. *$3.
Lippincott.

  A second revised and enlarged edition of this “practical treatise for
  students and practitioners,” copiously illustrated. “Several
  improvements over the first edition have been introduced, including
  the chapter on the bones and joints, and nearly thirty new
  illustrations. Important changes have also been made in various
  chapters during the revision.” (Science.)

  “There are but few things connected with autopsies that will not be
  found mentioned in the volume.” Lewellys F. Barker.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 21: 784. My. 19. ‘05. 1340w.


* =Cavendish, George.= Life and death of Cardinal Wolsey. *$7.50.
Houghton.

  “A large and handsome quarto, printed on light, English made paper, in
  large, clear type, and bound in green boards with buckram back, the
  Wolsey arms being stamped in gold on the cover. The edition is
  believed to be from the most authoritative text and contains the
  full-page photogravures, reproduced in sepia and red chalk tints, of
  Wolsey, Henry VIII., Thomas Cromwell, Catherine of Aragon, Anne
  Boleyn, Mary Tudor, and Charles Brandon, and others mentioned in the
  book, reproduced from paintings by Holbein and others.”—N. Y. Times.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

 *   + + =Atlan.= 96: 842. D. ‘05. 230w.

  * “The volume is of interest not only as an unusually early
  biographical attempt, but as well because of its dramatic presentation
  of this great chapter in English history.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 110w.

  Reviewed by Edward E. Hale, jr.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 375. D. 1, ‘05. 650w.

  * “It is certainly a work of great interest for the historical
  student, and is now presented in a most beautiful and appropriate
  setting.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 654. O. 7, ‘05. 350w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 715. N. 25, ‘05. 240w.


=Cawein, Madison Julius.= Vale of Tempe. *$1.50. Dutton.

  “‘The Vale of Tempe,’ by Madison Cawein is a volume which, along with
  some crudities and weakness, has both the old glamour of poesy and an
  individual tang, so to say, that is uncommon in contemporary verse.
  Mr. Cawein draws his inspiration in equal draughts from the Kentucky
  landscape and from the world of pagan poetry, and in at least two of
  the aptitudes of the poet he stands pretty much by himself. His turn
  for vivid imaginative phrase is of the first order.... His command of
  the technique of tone-color is also exceptional.”—Nation.

 *     — =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 90w.

  * “Mr. Cawein is a ‘true poet,’ both in his art and in his
  inspiration.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 302. O. 12, ‘05. 560w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10:593. S. 9, ‘05. 280w.


=Chadwick, H. Munroe.= Studies on Anglo-Saxon institutions. *$2.50.
Macmillan.

  Mr. Chadwick says that his book “makes no claim to offer a
  comprehensive survey of the problems of ancient English sociology,”
  that his object has been “to call attention to those branches of the
  subject which seemed not to have been sufficiently regarded by
  previous writers. For example, in sketching the history of the
  kingdoms I have given special attention to the evidence relating to
  Kent, Sussex, Essex, and the Hwicce. On the other hand Mercian and
  Northumbrian history has been treated of more briefly, because I had
  little or nothing to add to what had already been said.” Following a
  discussion of the monetary system, he describes the coins, their
  values, terms for money, etc. He also discusses the social system, the
  administrative system, and the origin of the nobility.

  “Too many of his conclusions are based on very little or very
  questionable evidence; some are probabilities merely. Mr. Chadwick’s
  work is a remarkably suggestive study: new interpretations are
  proposed and the possibilities of certain neglected materials are
  clearly indicated.” Laurence M. Larson.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 135. O. ‘05. 660w.

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 333. Ag. 10, ‘05. 340w.

  “For the Heptarchic period in particular Mr. Chadwick’s results are of
  real value.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81 :185. Ag. 31, ‘05. 580w.

  “Great caution marks all of Mr. Chadwick’s work.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 380. F. 23, ‘05. 290w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 118. F. 25, ‘05. 340w.

  “He has handled some of the most perplexing problems of ancient
  English sociology with painstaking industry.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 210w.

  “He investigates the subject with the most scrupulous care, accurately
  weighing the evidence of various documents, and maintaining an
  entirely scientific attitude. His book is a valuable contribution to
  the study of historical origins.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 222. F. 11, ‘05. 250w.


=Chadwick, John White.= Later poems. *$1.25. Houghton.

  The best verses in this volume deal with the common weal and woe of
  humanity, and the “deep things of God.” The poet also sings of the
  lighter phases of human existence, “his thoughtful love of nature
  finds charming expression in many fugitive pieces” (Outlook). In
  others, especially in “Timeo Danaos,” a high and nobly exigent
  patriotism shines forth.

       + =Critic.= 46: 565. Je. ‘05. 130w.

  “A pleasing addition to our store of occasional and memorial verse.”
  Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 66. Ag. 1, ‘05. 370w.

  “It is some compensation for the over-polemical character of Mr.
  Chadwick’s verses that their serious thoughtfulness leaves an
  impression of sobriety and dignity.” Herbert W. Horwill.

     + — =Forum.= 37: 246. O. ‘05. 700w.

  “His poetic product was of a ripeness which shows, if not genius, at
  any rate talent of the first order.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 18. Jl. 6, ‘05. 290w.

  “As they stand, however, they represent the fine warm masculine
  intellect of which they, with many other virtues and felicities, are
  the fruit.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 264. Ap. 22, ‘05. 350w.

  “His poems are not without their singing quality, but this is never
  merely the lilt of the care-free warbler. The mystery and wonder and
  tragedy and spiritual meaning of life are ever with him.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1060. Ap. 29, ‘05. 560w.


=Chadwick, Samuel.= Humanity and God. **$1.50. Revell.

  “The author ... is known in England for his success as a Wesleyan
  missioner.... A vein of mysticism runs through his thought, but his
  speech is pointed and vigorous. He is a skillful Biblical expositor,
  and his discourse on ‘The extra mile’ is one of the best in the
  multitude of those on Jesus’ doctrine of non-resistance. The theology
  underlying all is a blend of old and new, largely old, but on the
  bed-rock of the new, the identity of the human and the divine. This
  gives to the collection its title.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 450. F. 18, ‘05. 100w.


* =Chamberlain, Charles Joseph.= Methods in plant histology. *$2.25.
Univ. of Chicago press.

  A two-part work which has grown out of a course in histological
  technique conducted by the author at the University of Chicago. The
  first part deals with the principles of fixing and staining, and the
  various other processes of microtechnique; the second, with the
  application of these principles to specific cases.


=Chamberlain, Esther, and Chamberlain, Lucia.= Mrs. Essington. †$1.50.
Century.

  The scene of the little drama enacted in this story is a hospitable
  California country house, and the actors are mainly the daughter of
  the hostess, young, strong, athletic, and a charming widow, who side
  by side run an altogether modest race for the affections of the one
  ineligible young man of the party, a poor composer.

  “‘Mrs. Essington’ is a book which commands the reader’s interest—nay,
  more, his admiration.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 365. Je. 3, ‘05. 310w.

  “It is a story filled with dramatic possibilities, and of these the
  authors ... have taken ample advantage.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “This is a clever book in several ways, with plenty of atmosphere and
  nothing out of drawing, but this study of loss and renunciation
  carries it beyond cleverness into quite another class.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 393. Je. 10, ‘05. 100w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 230w.


=Chamberlain, Georgia Louise.= Introduction to the Bible for teachers of
children: a manual for use in the Sunday schools or in the home. $1.
Univ. of Chicago press.

  “A most admirable elementary course in Biblical introduction,
  designed to give children of the fourth grade, or about ten years of
  age, familiar acquaintance with the various books of the Bible and
  their varied character, and the ability to use the Bible
  intelligently.”—Ind.

  “The most prominent—and evidently the most purposeful—omission is that
  of any reference to the inspiration of the Bible.”

     — — =Cath. World.= 80: 820. Mr. ‘05. 780w.

  “The lessons are well arranged, the suggestions to teachers are clear
  and stimulating, and the entire work shows diligence and thoroughness
  in preparation.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1012. My. 4, ‘05. 320w.


=Chambers, Robert William.= Iole. †$1.25. Appleton.

  A rather gushy poet with soft white fingers brings up his eight lovely
  daughters to roam the fields in pink pajamas, talk Greek, and keep
  near to nature. When the mortgage on his home is to be foreclosed the
  agent falls in love with the oldest daughter, the owner with the
  second one, and they all leave nature for the city. The remaining
  daughters also have romances.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 395. Ag. 17, ‘05. 110w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 366. Je. 3, ‘05. 710w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 220w.

  “Originally a fantastical bit of extravaganza printed as a short
  story, this has been expanded into a book, and thereby much of its
  cleverness and freshness lost.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 392. Je. 10, ‘05. 140w.

  * “Skipping boldly, now, from Japanese ancestor-worship to
  contemporary satire, we hail Robert Chambers prince of the last
  half-year’s production.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 760. D. ‘05. 190w.


=Chambers, Robert William.= Reckoning. †$1.50. Appleton.

  “The city of New York, loyal at heart, and sorely besieged by the
  English, within and without, is the scene of this romance.... A brave
  youth is selected by his Excellency, Mr. Washington, acts as a spy in
  the city, and finally escapes the peril of his position, to be
  rewarded as a courageous soldier in open battle. The heroine, a belle
  in the gay Tory circles, bewitches the hero, after much banter and
  playing at love-making. Emerging from a tangle of cross-purposes, she
  proves herself a noble woman, brave enough to sacrifice all for her
  lover and his country.”—Outlook.

  “This is emphatically the best work yet done by that very promising
  author. But for one fatal blot it might almost be counted a
  masterpiece, as in writing, vigour, interest and the other attributes
  of a good novel it far excels any former attempt of the writer. But he
  has had the perversity to make his hero a spy.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 1026. O. 7, ‘05. 270w.

  “A stirring romance, full of action and of the savor of the period and
  scenes described.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 504. O. 14. 260w.

  * “The new work is as good as ‘Cardigan.’ He gives us historical
  truth, wholesome excitement, and no small measure of literary art all
  at once; and for so much of good it would be churlish not to give
  thanks.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 309. N. 16, ‘05. 120w.

  “Incidents, after all, never make up for people; and the end of the
  war, which ends the book, comes as a very considerable relief. The
  tale is an anti-climax only because the author struggles too
  frantically to urge the pace and exhausts our energies prematurely.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 341. O. 13, ‘05. 440w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14, ‘05. 110w.

  “In spite of unreality and preposterous over-coloring, he gives the
  impression of reality. It is good reading for a quiet evening.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 504. O. 14, ‘05. 310w.

  * “Exceedingly good reading.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 762. N. 11, ‘05. 240w.


* =Chamblin, Jean.= Lady Bobs, her brother and I: a romance of the
Azores. †$1.25. Putnam.

  “A pleasant little romance told in letters to her friend by the girl
  most involved. Incidentally some graphic descriptions of the Azores
  and their inhabitants are introduced among the junketings of a group
  of American and English visitors to the islands.”—Outlook.

  * “Besides this pleasing little romance, however, the story has its
  charm in witty descriptions and quaint turns of phrases.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 825. D. 2, ‘05. 230w.

  * “Kate is a witty letter-writer and is capable of flashing out bits
  of spontaneous humor.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 80w.


=Champlin, John Denison, and Lucas, Frederic Augustus.= Young folks’
cyclopaedia of natural history. $2.50. Holt.

  Taking its place with the Champlin cyclopaedias of “Literature and
  art,” “Common things,” “Persons and places,” and “Games and sports,”
  this work “includes in a single compact volume, at a moderate price,
  an outline of the entire animal kingdom, from the largest mammal down
  to the tiniest insect that has to be studied under a magnifying
  glass.”

  “The book will be most useful to children, who will find it too
  interesting to be considered mere study.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 50w.

  * “A treasure-house for the young naturalist.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1390. D. 14, ‘05. 20w.

  “The text in general shows little systematic grasp in the arrangement
  of facts, either in the articles as a whole or in any article in
  particular. The text throughout bears testimony to painstaking
  compilation rather than to ready knowledge.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 509. Je. 22, ‘05. 510w.

  “Is a mine of information.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 491. Jl. 22, ‘05. 380w.

  “The articles are clearly written and the subjects are treated in good
  proportion as to relative importance.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 196. My. 20. ‘05. 100w.

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 70w.


=Champney, Elizabeth Williams.= Romance of the French abbeys. **$3.
Putnam.

  Mrs. Champney gives the result of last summer’s wanderings among the
  abbeys of France. She weaves into her descriptions the history and
  romance that cling to these fast decaying relics of the life and
  culture of the mediaeval times. The illustrations are many and
  excellent, including photogravures from historical paintings, and
  architectural half-tones.

  * “The author is neither archaeologist nor sociologist, but a woman
  who has placed her descriptions and told her stories with unusual
  charm of manner.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 110w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 386. D. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “A pleasantly readable mixture of history and legend.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 815. O. 5, ‘05. 240w.

  “The book, then, will hold its own as a collection of attractive and
  instructive pictures, while the text is found to be just such a
  collection of fantastical, pathetic, and half-humorous stories as
  tradition associates with the monasteries of France.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 299. O. 12, ‘05. 250w.

  “She tells fourteen stories.... All are picturesque and are told with
  ingenuity and with a certain fidelity to the atmosphere and spirit of
  the times to which they relate.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 654. O. 7, ‘05. 320w.

  * “The combination of Mrs. Champney’s art with history and romance is
  beyond measure taking; the book is irresistible.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 732. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  * “Mrs. Champney writes pleasantly and has a good subject—though
  sometimes she is tiresome, especially in her treatment of legends in
  the picturesque style.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 14. D. 9, ‘05. 200w.


=Chancellor, William E.= Our schools. $1.50. Heath.

  “In this treatment of school management, the subject is defined, not
  as the control and the instruction of individual pupils, but as the
  organization, maintenance, administration, direction, and supervision
  of schools, and the planning of schoolhouses. The book is designed for
  all persons interested in the control of schools and school systems.”

  “Mr. Chancellor’s style throughout the volume is direct and practical.
  His composition is inelegant, if not occasionally ungrammatical.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 78. Jl. 15. 650w.

  “As a guide to the novice, the work will undoubtedly prove useful. As
  a study in social control, it is a masterpiece. Anyone interested in
  knowing the schools as part of the social machinery of the country
  will find the work profitable.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 270. Ap. 16, ‘05. 290w.

  “All persons engaged in the practical work of administrating and
  managing schools will be glad to get hold of this volume, and will be
  grateful to its author for the vast wealth of concrete instances which
  he has adduced to illustrate the attitudes and conduct of those with
  whom school officers have to deal in their work of directing public
  schools.” Samuel T. Dutton.

     + + =Educ. R.= 29: 195. F. ‘05. 1210w. (Survey of contents.)

  “It is a book of high ideals and much common sense.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 273. Ag. 3, ‘05. 60w.

  “It impresses us as being crammed full of suggestive material that
  will prove of great value for classroom use in departments of
  education and in normal schools.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 274.* Mr. ‘05. 110w.

  “The greatest weakness is in the method of treatment. This is
  strikingly unscientific. The second great weakness in this work is the
  narrow point of view. A third characteristic weakness is seen in the
  trivialities with which the book is loaded.” Junius L. Meriam.

   — — — =School R.= 13: 517. Je. ‘05. 1350w.


=Chancellor, William Estabrook, and Hewes, Fletcher Willis.= United
States: a history of three centuries, 1607-1904; population, politics,
war, industry, civilization. 10 pts. pt. 1. **$3.50. Putnam.

  The purpose of the joint authors in offering a new work on American
  history is “to present in a comprehensive and carefully proportioned
  narrative an account of the beginnings of the national existence and
  of the successive stages in the evolution of our distinctive national
  qualities and institutions.” Colonization, 1607-1697, forms the
  subject matter of this first part, which is divided into four
  sections: “Population and politics,” “War,” “Industry,” and
  “Civilization.” “The second section presents the record of war and of
  conquest, chiefly in their military phases,” while the fourth section
  is devoted to “religion and morality, literature and art, education
  and social life.”

  “In none of the four divisions [of Vol. I] is anything like a serious
  study of institutions attempted. The unique separateness of treatment
  is so faithfully observed that the historical trains on this
  four-track road of American development rarely graze one another in
  passing. They appear to run quite free from any essential
  interconnection. The Bibliography is a hodgepodge. The titles of the
  ‘authorities’ are frequently misquoted, none of the references cite
  pages, and the notes are numbered consecutively. As the work
  progresses the number of notes steadily decreases, but the grade of
  intelligence displayed in their selection remains the same. The index
  ranges itself alongside of the notes and references. As for literary
  composition, whatever be the claims of the publishers, the book
  abounds in cheap comments, efforts at fine writing and big words. Of
  the making of positive errors, misstatements, and slipshod phrases
  there is no end. Wrong dates, misspellings, and misuse of proper names
  and places are so common as to call for no special remark.” William R.
  Shepherd.

   — — — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 642. Ap. ‘05. 1130w.

  “It would hardly be correct to say that it makes no contribution to
  historical literature; in parts three and four, ‘Industry’ and
  ‘Civilization,’ a good many interesting facts have been brought
  together, but it would be difficult to say who will profit by them.”
  David Y. Thomas.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 601. S. ‘05. 350w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “The ‘Perspectives’ at the close of certain chapters are more valuable
  than the chapters themselves, being completer chronologies. Dark
  sayings, easy verdicts, drippings of philosophy and misquotations in
  the style of ‘popular lecturers’ are characteristic of the book.”

   + — — =Ind.= 59: 814. O. 5, ‘05. 630w.

  Reviewed by H. Addington Bruce.

     — — =Reader.= 6: 588. O. ‘05. 560w.


=Chancellor, William Estabrook, and Hewes, Fletcher Willis.= United
States; a history of three centuries. 10 pts. pt. 2, Colonial union,
1698-1774. **$3.50. Putnam.

  Part 2 is divided into five sections which cover the western movement
  of the people and their political history, wars, industries and
  agriculture, religions and social conditions, and contemporaneous
  European history.

  “The volume is on the whole an interesting result of much labour,
  written with considerable vigour and insight, and summing up better
  than any other work yet produced the various phases and aspects of
  that surprising development—the birth of a new race.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 851. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1230w. (Review of v. 2.)

         =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 80w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “It is to be regretted that a work so attractively got up should thus
  far exhibit so slight intrinsic merit of either substance or form.”

       — =Nation.= 80: 435. Je. 1. ‘05. 280w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “In short, the style of Messrs. Chancellor and Hewes grows monotonous
  and fatiguing. They occasionally get hopelessly entangled in the
  meshes of inaccuracy and irrelevancy. Historical errors are extremely
  common.”

   — — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 434. Jl. 1, ‘05. 750w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “It is defective in almost every essential.”

     — — =Outlook.= 81: 42. S. 2, ‘05. 610w. (Review of v. 1. and 2.)

  “Full of great and varied interest.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 900. Je. 17. ‘05. 270w.


=Chandler, Mrs. Izora Cecilia, and Montgomery, Mary W.= Told in the
gardens of Araby. *75c. Meth. bk.

  Nine stories translated from the Turkish. The emerald roc; The story
  of the beautiful girl who had her wish; The story of the beautiful one
  who did not have her desire; Story of the crying pomegranate and the
  laughing bear; Story of the bird of affliction; Story of the
  water-carrier; Story of the coffee-maker’s apprentice; The crystal
  kiosk and the diamond ship. A prelude gives a description of the
  manners and customs of the people with whom the stories deal.

  “Told with varying success.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 481. Je. 15. ‘05. 310w.

  “Neither very good nor very bad.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 358. Je. 3. ‘05. 290w.


=Chandler, Katherine.= In the reign of coyote. 40c. Ginn.

  A little book of folk-lore from the Pacific coast, in which the
  coyote, the wisest and most efficient of the four-footed creatures,
  occupies the chief place. The setting of the book gives a glimpse of
  child life in colonial California.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1387. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 90w.


=Channing, Edward.= History of the United States. 8v. v. I, Planting of
a nation in the New world. **$2.50. Macmillan.

  Volume I., of a history of the United States which is designed to
  trace as one unbroken development the founding of the thirteen
  colonies by immigrants, mainly from England, the achievement of
  independence from English control, the Union under the Constitution,
  the growth of the United States, territorially and socially, and the
  final welding of the American people into a great nation. The present
  volume carries the account down to 1660. At the end of each chapter
  have been placed for advanced students in history technical
  discussions and bibliographical matter.

  “In scholarship the work easily leads any other attempt of the kind.
  The style is clear, pleasing and admirably simple. If it lacks the
  literary flavor of some of the more popular histories, there is the
  compensating charm of deep knowledge and plain-spoken truth. The only
  adequate estimate of this work is to state frankly that it stands in
  the forefront of scholarly efforts to tell the history of this
  country.” C. H. Van Tyne.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 602. S. ‘05. 420w.

  “Professor Osgood’s ‘American colonies in the seventeenth century’ is
  far more detailed on the institutional side, and upon some points
  gives what seems to the reviewer a better interpretation of the
  documents. On the other hand, President Tyler’s ‘The English in
  America’ is richer in detail of narrative, but is by comparison much
  less accurate in parts,—in the treatment, for example of the Dutch
  colonies.” St. George L. Sioussat.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 83. Ag. 16, ‘05. 1580w.

  “The scholarship easily surpasses that in any other undertaking of the
  kind, and the clear, pleasing and simple style makes the book
  eminently readable.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1479. Je. 29, ‘05. 510w.

  * “As a study of the growth of the nation, from the political,
  institutional, industrial and social point of view, it stands without
  a rival.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1155. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

  “We do not know of a better brief discussion of the discovery of
  America, nor any so good of the intimate relation between the
  English-Spanish commercial rivalry of the sixteenth century and the
  English colonizing enterprises of the seventeenth.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 40. Jl. 13, ‘05. 1500w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 225. Ap. 8, ‘05. 260w.

  “It is thoughtful and well written, and deserves the attention which
  should be accorded to the work of any scholarly man whose writing is
  the result of careful study and mature reflection.” Robert Livingston
  Schuyler.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 464. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1360w.

  “It is in this constant striving to grasp the spirit of the times and
  to assist to a better understanding of movements and events as they
  appeared to those participating in them that the special significance
  of Professor Channing’s work lies.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 41. S. 2, ‘05. 640w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 220w.

  “Professor Channing’s treatment of the colonies and their social
  institutions, is interesting throughout, but is especially strong in
  those chapters which deal with New England.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 765. Je. ‘05. 170w.


=Chapin, Anna Alice.= Makers of song. **$1.20. Dodd.

  “A collection of sketches, the aim of which is to point out the men
  who have in the most marked degree influenced the development and to
  enable students to understand more thoroughly the history of
  song.”—Bookm.

  “Miss Chapin’s work is both statistical and narrative, and her
  well-written story of the origin of song will be read with interest.”
  Ingram A. Pyle.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 237. Ap. 1, ‘05. 220w.


* =Chapin, Anna Alice.= True story of Humpty Dumpty, how he was rescued
by three mortal children in Make Believe Land. **$1.40. Dodd.

  This brand new story of Humpty Dumpty is illustrated with “many
  delightful full-page colored pictures and black and white sketches ...
  by Ethel Franklin Betts. It is long, in prose, a history of the
  experiences of Meg, Bab, and Dick. The three are not the best children
  that ever were, they complain about always having eggs for tea—that is
  where Humpty comes in—and through this they have many novel
  experiences.” (N. Y. Times.)

  * “It is a good modern fairy tale for very little folk.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1386. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Marks an advance in matter and manner over her last year’s ‘Babes
  in toyland.’”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 489. D. 14, ‘05. 140w.

  * “A very nice new book.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 210w.


=Chapin, Henry Dwight.= The theory and practice of infant feeding.
*$2.25. Wood.

  “The second edition of Dr. Chapin’s book on infant feeding contains
  what appears to the layman to be an extremely clear and sensible
  exposition of the conditions which have to be met in providing a
  proper diet for very young children.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The book is plentifully provided with scientific data, tables, and
  facts, but it is neither technical nor dull. On the contrary, it makes
  rather good reading for anybody with an appetite for curious and
  useful knowledge.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 103. F. 18, ‘05. 300w.


=Chapin, Henry Dwight.= Vital questions. **$1. Crowell.

  Dr. Chapin’s prominence in the medical world argues much for the
  authoritativeness of this little volume which in plain terms sets
  forth some of the “vital questions” of society and the individual.
  Among them are Inequality, The unfit, Poverty, Health, Education,
  Success, Happiness, Religion and Death.

  “Altogether, one must account the book exceedingly readable, earnest
  and useful.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 664. O. 7, ‘05. 550w.

  “Dr. Chapin’s book is a valuable help to the thoughtful living which
  is the proper basis both of the simple and the strenuous life.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 580. N. 4, ‘05. 180w.


=Chapman, Edward Mortimer.= Dynamic of Christianity. **$1.25. Houghton.

  This study of the vital and permanent elements in the Christian
  religion takes the stand that an effort to reconcile science and
  religion would be “like an attempt to harmonize the fact of sunrise
  with the joy of walking and working in the light.” “The inevitable
  conclusion of his study is the conviction of the truth and value of
  Christ’s own doctrine of the spirit as the imminent and resident force
  in the universe, the ground of phenomena, physical and spiritual.”
  (Pub. Opin.)

  “In the first place, its style is excellent, possessing the easy
  dignity of true culture, and the simple directness of a finished
  instrument of English expression; in the second place, the book shows
  wide reading in the modern literature of religious experience and
  criticism. Mr. Chapman’s philosophy is not solid enough, and his
  history is totally inadequate.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 80: 541. Ja. ‘05. 780w.

  “Is a valuable addition to current religious thinking.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 58. Ja. 12, ‘05. 160w.

  “While it appeals at the same time to the religious people and to the
  men of science, is written with the assumption that there is no
  quarrel between the two. Mr. Chapman develops his theme in an
  interesting way through citations from the writings of famous men.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 254. F. ‘05. 130w.


=Chapman, George.= Bussy D’Ambois and The revenge of Bussy D’Ambois, ed.
by F: S: Boas. 60c. Heath.

  A volume in section III. of the “Belles-lettres” series, the English
  drama. In it “an attempt is made for the first time” to edit these
  plays “in a manner suitable to the requirements of modern
  scholarship.” The texts are from the quartos of 1641, 1646, and 1657
  collated with those of 1607, and 1608, with variants noted. A
  biography of Chapman, an introduction, full notes, bibliography and
  glossary are provided.


=Charlton, John.= Speeches and addresses: political, literary, and
religious. $2. Morang & co.

  “John Charlton, member of the Canadian house of commons from 1872 to
  1904 ... has collected some of his speeches and addresses on various
  subjects. Those which will be of special interest here are those on
  the National transcontinental railway; the Brown draft reciprocity
  treaty of 1878, which failed to be ratified by the United States
  senate; Self-protection, reciprocity and British preference. There is
  also an able parliamentary speech on ‘Irredeemable currency,’ and in
  the platform addresses there are two of interest as giving a
  Canadian’s view of Washington and Lincoln.”—Ind.

  * “His speeches are marked with vigor and common-sense argument.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 933. O. 19, ‘05. 220w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 690w.

  “Mr. Charlton is qualified to speak with authority on all matters
  pertaining to the political and economic life of the country he has
  served so well.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 136. S. 16, ‘05. 320w.


=Chase, Arthur Wesley.= Elementary course in mechanical drawing for
manual training and technical schools; with chapters on machine
sketching and the blueprinting process. 2 pts. Pt. 1. $1.50. H.
Speakman, Congress and Honore sts., Chicago.

  “As its title implies, this work presents in the usual style an
  introduction to the elements of mechanical drawing. The problems have
  been arranged so as to omit all finished sheets; the student is given
  the layout of a drawing only; in this way any direct copying of
  finished work is prevented. Specifications are fully given in every
  case so the student receives a drill similar to the experienced in
  practical work.”—Engin. N.

  “The text is lucidly but not always concisely written.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 186. F. 16, ‘05. 90w.


=Chaucer, Geoffrey.= Facsimile reproduction of the first folio of
Chaucer, 1532; with an introduction by Prof. Skeat. *$50. Oxford.

  “The folio of 1532, compiled by William Thynne, clerk of the kitchen
  to Henry VIII, a man of means and an ardent admirer of Chaucer, was
  the first collection which claimed on its title-page to be the works
  of Geoffrey Chaucer; and this it is which is here reproduced. As the
  First folio, it possesses great bibliographical interest.”—Nation.

         =Nation.= 80: 251. Mr. 30, ‘05. 1530w.

  “Dr. Walter Skeat has added largely to the literary value of the book
  by his biographical introduction.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 333. Mr. 4, ‘05. 140w.


* =Cheney, John Vance.= Poems, **$1.50. Houghton.

  Mr. Cheney “has now brought together in a single volume of ‘Poems’ all
  of his work that he wishes to preserve.... It is a limited
  achievement, no doubt, for few of the pieces extend beyond a single
  page, and many of them are but the briefest bits of song.... His
  lyrics are of acceptance, coupled only with the gentlest and most
  apologetical sort of questioning ... but they ... should endear the
  author to us, at least in our less strenuous moods.”—Dial.

  Reviewed by Wm. M. Payne.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 274. N. 1, ‘05. 640w.

  * “The selected collection of his ‘Poems’ is remarkable for its
  variety and readability.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 508. D. 21, ‘05. 390w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 240w.


=Cheney, Warren.= Way of the North: a romance of the days of Baranof.
$1.50. Doubleday.

  A young Russian doctor, deported to Sitka, tells the story of life in
  this Alaskan town while the country was still under Russian rule. He
  falls in love with a girl who goes to Alaska to fulfil a childhood
  betrothal, and in relating the events which lead up to his happiness,
  he gives vivid descriptions of the lives of the settlers and of the
  civil and military personages prominent in that wild country.

  “Handling his material simply and unaffectedly, as befits the bold and
  sturdy pioneer spirit, but not without a certain monotony of style.”

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 652. Ag. ‘05. 220w.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 335. Ag. 10, ‘05. 170w.

  “The reader’s interest is awakened at the outset and fairly well
  sustained. The characters are sharply drawn and the style is simple
  and entertaining. As a whole, however, the book is not of unusual
  interest.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 214. Ap. 8, ‘05. 250w.

  “A novel of unusual setting and some extraordinary power.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 910. Ap. 8, ‘05. 100w.

  “Book that can be enjoyed for its style alone. ‘The way of the North’
  is, beyond doubt, the best written American book of the season.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 150w.


=Chesebrough, Robert A.= Christmas guests and other poems. $1.50.
Little, J. J.

  The author has dedicated these eighteen poems to his granddaughter,
  but they are verses which appeal to his age rather than to hers, the
  ghosts of the past flit thru them, regrets, happy memories, thoughts
  of death and the hereafter, while they all breathe forth the mellow
  philosophy which comes with years.


=Chesnut, Mary Boykin.= Diary from Dixie: being her diary from November
1861 to 1865; ed. by Isabella D. Martin and Myrta Lockett Avary.
**$2.50. Appleton.

  The author was the wife of James Chesnut, jr., United States senator
  1859-1861, and afterwards aide to Jefferson Davis, and a brigadier
  general in the confederate army. The diary gives a clear picture of
  the social life during the war, and of the events which took place in
  Charlestown, Montgomery and Richmond.

  “It is for the picture of social life in the South under the stress of
  an unsuccessful struggle that this lively and fascinating book will be
  chiefly read.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 76. Jl. 15. 90w.

  “Her diary could not have been more entertainingly written if she had
  intended it for publication.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 507. Je. ‘05. 460w.

  “Full of vivid pictures of the social life of the time and of the
  varied experiences of the war.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “The style is crisp and bright, and the tone frank and good tempered.
  It is on the subject of negroes and slavery that Mrs. Chesnut’s diary
  will prove most valuable to historians, but the general reader will be
  chiefly interested in the accounts of the home life of the beleaguered
  people.” Walter L. Fleming.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 347. My. 16, ‘05. 1060w.

     + — =Nation.= 80:485. Je. 15, ‘05. 2230w.

  “This diary has decided historical value. Further, it is an intimate
  record of an intelligent looker-on in Richmond during a greater
  portion of the war. There are some discrepancies.” William E. Dodd.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10:260. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1910w.

  “The two editors of the book are to be congratulated on having
  discovered and having thrown into such readable form this biographical
  material.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 907. Ap. 8, ‘05. 230w.


=Chesnutt, Charles Waddell.= Colonel’s dream. (†)$1.50. Doubleday.

  The story of an ex-Confederate officer who when the war is ended,
  seeks his fortune in New York, and twenty years after returns to the
  South to enjoy life and incidentally to put into practice some of his
  Northern business training. “It is frankly up to the times, with the
  clash of race and the convict camp, and the decayed old gentry.”
  (Ind.)

  “The style is easy, apparently practised, and the story does not lack
  for abundant incident.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 816. O. 5, ‘05. 130w.

  “It must be acknowledged that the author does not spare the faults of
  the negro any more than he spares those of the white man—and in both
  cases many of his pictures are true.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 605. S. 16, ‘05. 360w.

  “Taken all in all, the book is not as successful as one could wish,
  and certainly is distinctly inferior to the author’s earlier work.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81 :278. S. 30, ‘05. 140w.


=Chesterton, Gilbert Keith.= Club of queer trades. (†)$1.25. Harper.

  No one is eligible to this club unless he has invented a brand new
  occupation by which he earns a living. The members include a man who
  offers himself to dinner hosts as a butt for repartee, another who
  guarantees to provide any commonplace soul as well as the more gifted,
  with a suitable romance. The founder of the club earns his livelihood
  by seeking out new members and has all sorts of unique experiences.

  “It is neither here nor there; neither veritable romantic
  extravaganza, true detective literature, nor consistent satire upon
  either of those forms of fiction.” H. W. Boynton.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 614. Ag. ‘05. 930w.

  * “Clever and amusing as the stories are, the book is not altogether
  happy.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 453. N. ‘05. 260w.

  “Funmaking of the most fantastic kind characterizes the six short
  stories.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05, 610w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “Mr. Chesterton is undeniably clever. These stories are whimsical and
  ingenious rather than humorous. The stories are uneven in merit.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1058. Ap. 29, ‘05. 80w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 796. My. 20, ‘05. 80w.

  “Utter and unredeemed extravaganza.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 758. Je. ‘05. 90w.

  “With the exception of the first episode the execution is hardly up to
  the level of the conception. The book, in fine, gives one the
  impression rather of a series of brilliant improvisations than of a
  finished work of art.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 597. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1000w.


=Chesterton, Gilbert Keith.= Heretics. *$1.50. Lane.

  Mr. Chesterton “has described nearly every strong man of our day,” and
  in these essays “he is calling out from the housetops to happier
  uncontemplative men, to come out and be sad, like himself, in thinking
  of supreme happiness.... He praises an abstract Chestertonian man of
  whom he is hopelessly and continually in pursuit. That everything he
  recommends is right, we indeed believe; but he cries in the
  wilderness, and with no human voice, no trace of suffering or
  experience at all, but only an anchorite’s imagining.” (Acad.)

     + — =Acad.= 68: 655. Je. 24, ‘05. 930w.

  * “‘Heretics’ goes farther than any of its forerunners toward
  convincing us that the humorist really has something worth saying and
  worth understanding. The trouble with his method is that while it is
  infallible for getting the attention, it is not well calculated to
  keep it.” H. W. Boynton.

     + — =Atlan.= 96: 848. D. ‘05. 500w.

  “With all his daring, he succeeds in keeping to windward of sheer
  silliness and mere sensationalism.” H. W. Boynton.

       + =Bookm.= 22: 165. O. ‘05. 1580w.

  * “Between the covers of ‘Heretics’ there is not a little excellent
  critical doctrine. Yet the writer ought to trust his readers to
  understand him without preliminary shouts to attract their attention.”
  Edward Fuller.

       + =Critic.= 47: 565. D. ‘05. 640w.

  “One page amuses by its originality of conception and expression, the
  next provokes by its insecurity of argument, the third charms by its
  suggestiveness. It is a book to be relished, not as a whole, but in
  snatches. With all its half-playful cynicism, it seems to be in the
  main sincere.” Edith J. R. Isaacs.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 204. O. 1, ‘05. 1560w.

  “The general comment on Mr. Chesterton is that he is extremely
  ingenious, but so inordinately whimsical that it would be absurd to
  take him seriously. The true account of him is that he is not
  ingenious at all, but exceptionally straight forward and
  matter-of-fact.” Herbert W. Horwill.

       + =Forum.= 37: 255. O. ‘05. 1660w.

  “Mr. Chesterton is quite as trenchant and exuberant as he was, and we
  are, after all, not much older than we were; yet we join in the fun
  with perceptibly less eagerness now. The truth is that Mr. Chesterton
  has done in this book what he always did ostensibly, and always
  avoided really; he has given himself away.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 183. Je. 9, ‘05. 1140w.

  * “His ideas are sounder than many a casual reader will be willing to
  admit. They are sound in spite of Mr. Chesterton’s perversity.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 728. D. 2, ‘05. 490w.

  “For in the things that really matter Mr. Chesterton is on the side of
  the angels. He is orthodox. He handles his heretics sometimes like
  Bishop Bonner, with firmness and jocosity; sometimes like Socrates,
  turning their pet phrases inside out, and showing their hollowness;
  but all are handled paradoxically.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 224. Ag. 12, ‘05. 1150w.


=Cheyne, Thomas Kelly.= Bible problems and the new material for their
solution. *$1.50. Putnam.

  A lecture which “is in part a presentation of the new facts which
  require better attention, and in part a plea for bolder Biblical
  criticism, as justified by these facts, and as necessary to the now
  imperative work of theological restatement.” (Outlook). Among the
  strongly insisted upon “new facts” are the study of the New Testament
  in the light of mythology, and due regard for Winckler’s discovery in
  Assyrian inscriptions of North Arabian names that suggest numerous
  corrections in our present text of the Old Testament. On the other
  hand, Professor Cheyne states that his views “tend to increased
  conservatism in the rendering of the text of the Jewish Old
  Testament.”

  Reviewed by A. Jeremias.

   + + — =Hibbert= J. 4: 217. O. ‘05. 1550w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1131. My. 18, ‘05. 50w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 398. F. 11, ‘05. 250w. (Statement of Cheyne’s
         position.)

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 384. Mr. ‘05. 40w.


=Cheyney, Edward Potts.= Short history of England. *$1.40. Ginn.

  In making clear the fundamental facts of English history, Professor
  Cheyney emphasizes full descriptions of early institutions and
  conditions, the study of really great movements and influential men,
  and the necessity of adhering to the thread of one’s country’s
  history. Each chapter is followed by a list of works and portions of
  works suggested for general reading.

  “It has many good points, one of which is that Professor Cheyney has
  very definite ideas of what a school-book should include.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 47. Ja. 14. ‘05. 240w.

  “The book is well planned throughout. From printers’ and other errors
  the work is remarkably free.” Norman MacLaren Trenholme.

   + + + =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 851. Jl. ‘05. 650w.

  “Apparently this one is better in the earlier than in the later
  portions. The book ... must be regarded as a compendium, rather than
  as an original inquiry, and, as such, it will be found useful.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 333. Ap. 27, ‘05. 410w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31:510. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  Reviewed by W. H. Cushing.

     + + =School R.= 13: 356. Ap. ‘05. 110w.


Child and religion. See =Stephens, Thomas.= ed.


=Christian, Eugene, and Christian, Mrs. Eugene.= Uncooked foods and how
to use them. $1. Health culture.

  The authors contend that “the application of heat in the cooking of
  food destroys some of the important food elements that were vital and
  organic by rendering them inorganic, including those that are needed
  in the building up of the system and the maintenance of bodily and
  mental health.” Recipes for the preparation of uncooked food,
  healthful combinations and menus for the benefit of those who wish to
  try the experiment, follow the arguments.

         =Arena.= 33: 565. My. ‘05. 290w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 479. Jl. 22, ‘05. 200w.


* Christmas carols, ancient and modern, ed. by Joshua Sylvestre. $1.
Wessels.

  Illustrated from photographs of well known paintings, and with
  marginal decorations of conventionalized Christmas greens, this
  collection of carols, many of which are reprinted from old
  broad-sides, begins with In excelsis gloria, and includes Welcome
  yule, sung in the time of Henry VI; several Elizabethan carols;
  Herrick’s Ode on the birth of our Saviour; The three kings, in the
  version of Henry VII’s time; Joy to the world, a popular favorite in
  Devon and Cornwall; and many popular carols whose time and authorship
  are unknown. The explanatory note given at the head of each carol,
  telling all that is known of its history adds much to the interest of
  the collection as its value is historical rather than poetical.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1379. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 120w.


=Christy, Robert=, comp. Proverbs, maxims, and phrases of all ages;
classified subjectively and arranged alphabetically. **$3.50. Putnam.

  In this new edition, the first since 1887, the two original volumes
  have been compressed into one, the work is apparently otherwise
  unchanged.

         =Nation.= 81: 240. S. 21, ‘05. 90w.

  “The collection needs careful revision, and is worth it even as it
  stands; it contains the material for a good treasury of proverbial
  sayings.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 350w.


Church of Christ. See =Phillips, Thomas W.=


Cincinnati southern railway (The): a history; edited by Charles G. Hall.

  A novel municipal experiment is recorded in the history of the origin,
  construction and financial organization of this railroad. As early as
  1836 the need of a railway between Cincinnati and the South was felt
  so strongly that at a mass meeting held in Cincinnati one million
  dollars was subscribed for the enterprise. Before anything definite
  could be accomplished, the Civil war came and checked all such
  projects. After many delays, authority was secured from the
  legislature of Ohio as well as from those of Kentucky and Tennessee,
  and in 1873 the actual work of construction began, necessary funds
  being lent by the trustees from their own pockets. In July, 1877, the
  first division of the road was opened for business. Millions of
  dollars were raised by the sale of bonds, and the road is at present
  in the possession of the Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific
  railway co. as lessee, while the Cincinnati Southern holds the legal
  title for the city of Cincinnati. The lease expires in 1906.

         =Dial.= 38: 130. F. 16, ‘05. 330w.


=Cipperly, John Albert.= Labor laws and decisions of the state of New
York. pa. *$1. Banks & co.

  This compilation includes statutes as well as cases. “Besides its
  value for purposes of reference, it shows almost at a glance what has
  been done in this state for ‘Labor,’ and how far we have advanced (or
  fallen away) from a state of society in which the laborer shifts for
  himself. On paper our laws are very paternal.” (Nation.)

  “A useful compilation.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 312. Ap. 20, ‘05. 310w.


=Clark, Charles Heber (Max Adeler, pseud.).= Quakeress. †$1.50. Winston.

  A pathetic story of a Quaker maid, living the quiet life of the
  Friends and all but betrothed to a serious minded young neighbor. A
  dashing southerner and his frivolous sister come into the peaceful
  community, the sister to prove to the stern young Quaker that he has
  his frailties, and her brother to win the heart of the little Quaker
  maid. There is a description of a visit to their southern plantation,
  and then comes the war—and heart break and disaster. An Anglican
  minister and his devoted wife add humor to the story.

  “Taken as a whole, the book is weak and commonplace. Max Adeler should
  by all means go back to his old humorous methods.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 880. Ag. 26, ‘05. 410w.

  “The character drawing is excellent. There are some highly dramatic
  passages and the story is replete with incidents and adventures.
  Perhaps its greatest value lies in its worth as a careful, interesting
  and faithful psychological study.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 108. Jl. ‘05. 460w.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 681. N. 18. 200w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 393. Je. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “One of the best novels of the season. This book is remarkable because
  it is not viciously witty, altho it comes from the pen of a
  professional wit.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1420. Je. 22, ‘05. 600w.

  “About the book as a whole there is a kind of sweet, old-fashioned
  fragrance which inclines one, no doubt for sentimental reasons, to
  look back on it kindly.”

     — + =Lond. Times.= 4: 279. S. 1, ‘05. 300w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 275. Ap. 29, ‘05. 420w.

  “The usual intermingling of joy and sorrow, love and life, appears in
  the quiet story, simply told.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 60w.

  “It cannot be said that the story as a whole is evenly strong, or that
  it realizes all the climaxes that its plot affords. It is never
  dramatic, and it is often amateurish.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 243. Jl. ‘05. 180w.

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 442. S. 30, ‘05. 110w.

  “The book leaves a tranquilly sad impression on the reader’s mind, the
  workmanship is highly finished and the plot is well thought out.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 532. O. 7, ‘05. 340w.


=Clarke, James Langston.= Eternal Saviour-judge. *$3. Dutton.

  “The familiar principle that the proper design of punishment is
  reformatory, not vindictive, is here applied in a new line of argument
  to the problem of retribution. Mr. Clarke works out a Biblical
  doctrine that aims to avoid the objections made severally to the
  theories of endless retribution, annihilation, and universalism.
  Substantially, it is a purgatorial scheme. In this the Biblical
  antithesis to ‘salvation’ is not ‘damnation’ but ‘judgment,’
  corrective as well as punitive.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 652. Mr. 11, ‘05. 160w.

  “This thesis is stated with much ability.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 368. Mr. 11, ‘05. 290w.


* =Clarke, William Newton.= Use of the Scriptures in theology; the
Nathaniel William Taylor lectures delivered at Yale university in 1905.
**$1. Scribner.

  The fundamental premise of this volume is “that a rationally sound
  theology depends on the soundness of the method of using the Bible as
  a source of theology. Dr. Clarke shows that the traditional method is
  unsound, and what mischief has been done by it. He then discusses the
  problem created by the search for a sound method, what this method is,
  and what its results, both negative and positive.”—Outlook.

  * “Dr. Clarke has written a book which every minister should buy or
  beg or borrow.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1229. N. 23, ‘05. 620w.

  * “Though this is a small book, it may be reckoned equal to the best
  productions of its author.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 336. O. 7, ‘05. 240w.


* =Clemens, Samuel Langhorne (Mark Twain, pseud.).= Editorial wild oats.
†$1. Harper.

  This volume contains half a dozen short stories all of which bear upon
  the general subject of youthful journalistic experiences, which
  Clemens has been pleased to call, Editorial wild oats. The sketches
  are entitled: My first literary venture; Journalism in Tennessee;
  Nicodemus Dodge—printer; Mr. Bloke’s item; How I edited an
  agricultural paper; and The killing of Julius Caesar “localized.”

  * “Mark Twain’s fund of humor seems inexhaustible, so here again it
  remains at its old-time high level.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 60w.

  * “Extravagant tales of newspaper life.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 15w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 637. N. 11, ‘05. 140w.


=Clement, Clara Erskine.= Women in the fine arts. **$2.50. Houghton.

  “A compendium of miscellaneous information about all the women artists
  that the author could discover between the seventh century B.C. and
  the twentieth, A.D. Among the thousand names included, the late
  nineteenth century is the most fully represented. As the greater part
  of the material about contemporary painters was furnished by
  themselves, we may assume that it is correct.... Being alphabetically
  arranged, the book is a convenient manual from which to extract
  information about artists who have not yet got into the encyclopedias.
  A number of full-page illustrations add interest to the text, and a
  fifty-page introduction gives a general idea of what women have
  accomplished in art.”—Dial.

         =Dial.= 38: 22. Ja. 1, ‘05. 160w.

     + — =Spec.= 95: 262. Ag. 19, ‘05. 30w.


=Clement, Ernest Wilson.= Christianity in modern Japan. **$1. Am. Bapt.

  “Professor Clement ... here attempts a survey of the moral forces
  which are now in full energy in Japan.” (Nation.) The book gives a
  “bird’s-eye view of the work of Christianity in Japan. It is not
  intended to cover the work in great detail; it is rather planned to be
  a general outline with reference to books, pamphlets, and magazines,
  where more complete information can be obtained on each special
  topic.” (Pub. Opin.)

  “With index, tables and other equipment for a book to be studied, this
  has also a decided literary charm.” William Elliot Griffis.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 265. S. ‘05. 200w.

  * “Orderly arrangement, historical development, engagingly shown,
  philosophical insight, and a brisk luminous style make this a model
  handbook, pleasing and valuable.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1478. D. 21, ‘05. 80w.

 *   + + =Lit. D.= 31: 626. O. 28, ‘05. 270w.

  “In literary proportion and breadth of view and in keenness of
  insight, this book is a model. It is all the more likely to be
  permanent in its influence because of its cool, judicial temper.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 63. Jl. 20, ‘05. 1090w.

  “The book is intended for mission-study classes, and is interesting.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 591. Jl. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “Mr. Clement’s book is a comprehensive discussion of the development
  of Christianity in Japan.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 160. Jl. 29, ‘05. 80w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 253. Ag. ‘05. 120w.


=Clement, Ernest Wilson.= Handbook of modern Japan. **$1.40. McClurg.

  The introduction states: “The book endeavors to portray Japan in all
  its features as a modern world power: It cannot be expected to cover
  in great detail all the ground outlined, because it is not intended to
  be an exhaustive encyclopedia of ‘things Japanese.’ It is expected to
  satisfy the specialist, not by furnishing all materials, but referring
  for particulars to works where abundant materials may be found. It is
  expected to satisfy the average reader, by giving a kind of bird’s-eye
  view of modern Japan. It is planned to be a compendium of condensed
  information, with careful references to the best sources of more
  complete knowledge.”

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 945. N. 30, ‘05. 80w.


=Clement, Ernest W.= Japanese floral calendar. 50c. Open ct.

  A prettily illustrated book showing the flowers popular each month of
  the Japanese year. Descriptive bits, snatches of folk-lore, and poems
  with a chapter on Japanese gardens make the whole a charming book. The
  flowers for the months, beginning with January and ending with
  December, are the pine, plum, peach, cherry, wistaria, iris,
  morning-glory, lotus, “seven grasses,” maple, chrysanthemum, and
  camellia.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 11. Ja. 7, ‘05. 360w.


=Clements, Frederick E.= Research methods in ecology. $3. Univ. pub.,
Neb.

  “This work ... is intended ... as a handbook for investigators and for
  advanced students of ecology, and not as a text book on the
  subject.... The book is presented in four chapters ... the first of
  which deals with the scope, historical development, present status and
  important applications of ecology.... The second chapter is concerned
  with the habitat and methods of its investigation.... The third
  chapter has to do with the plant, the stimuli which it receives, the
  nature of its response, its adjustment and adaptation especially to
  water and light as stimuli.... The fourth chapter ... has for its
  general subject the formation or vegetation unit consisting
  essentially of plants in a habitat.”—Science.

  “Altogether, Clements’s ‘Research methods in ecology’ is a notable
  contribution to the literature of ecology.” Conway MacMillan.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 22: 45. Jl. 14, ‘05. 670w.


=Cleveland, Frederick Albert.= Bank and the treasury. *$1.80. Longmans.

  “Timely and valuable is this critique of the American currency and
  banking system.... Holding that the time has come when changes in the
  National bank act are imperative, in the direction both of securing
  more effective governmental control and of insuring greater currency
  ‘elasticity,’ Dr. Cleveland contends that whatever financial reforms
  be undertaken, they should be in the way of adapting, not
  revolutionizing, the existing system.”—Outlook.

  “There is no disputing the fact that it is a contribution, and indeed
  a very worthy one, even if it does not contain the final word on the
  subject. As to the ground covered, however, those who are interested
  in such problems cannot do better than to consult this volume; indeed,
  they cannot afford not to do it.” J. E. Conner.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 603. S. ‘05. 430w.

  “The instructed reader will find not a few things in the book that
  will arouse his wonder.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 61. Jl. 20, ‘05. 800w.

  “The work of an acute observer and careful reasoner, of one who has
  gone deeply and intelligently into every phase of his subject.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 190. My. 20, ‘05. 520w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 509. O. ‘05. 80w.


=Cleveland, (Stephen) Grover.= Presidential problems. **$1.80. Century.

  If in times of weighty new matters, there are any who have a moment
  for a backward glance, they would do well to review with Mr. Cleveland
  some of the problems of his administration which “illustrate the
  design, the tradition, and the power of our government.” The chapters
  are four: “Independence of the executive,” “The government in the
  Chicago strike of 1894,” “The bond issue,” and “The Venezuelan
  boundary controversy.”

  Reviewed by Winthrop More Daniels.

   + + + =Atlan.= 95: 552. Ap. ‘05. 800w.


=Clifford, Chandler Robbins.= Philosophy of color. 50c. Clifford &
Lawton.

  The treatise is an attempt to analyse and understand the law which
  governs the use of colors, so that we may know how to produce harmony
  and not strike a jarring note. The author makes practical suggestions
  for the use of colors in house furnishings. There are many
  illustrations.

  “The author of this interesting little treatise has brought the
  subject within the understanding of any one.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 17. Mr. ‘05. 310w.


=Clifford, Ethel.= Love’s journey. **$1.50. Lane.

  “The rustle and patter of leaves, the trilling of birds, the whisper
  of rain make April music in Miss Clifford’s poetry; for all that these
  sounds have been caught and tamed in rhyme and measure, it is still
  the natural elementary melodies of the earth, not the artificial music
  of man, that her songs suggest. Lyric succeeds lyric and mood follows
  mood like sun and shade in the forest on a day in spring.”—Lond.
  Times.

  “But it is difficult to quote enough to convey the faint charm of
  these poems, a charm which is diffused rather than distilled. As a
  maker of haunting refrains Miss Clifford is often felicitous.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 107. Jl. 22, ‘05. 510w.

  “The charm of Miss Clifford’s poetry lies in the woodland simplicity.
  She is at her best when she pays no heed to the works of man.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 168. My. 26, ‘05. 350w.

         =Nation.= 81: 303. O. 12, ‘05. 190w.

  “Miss Clifford’s new volume is less interesting than her first. The
  dramatic poems are the best; few of the other pieces are more than
  merely pretty and tuneful.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 50. Ag. 8, ‘05. 260w.


=Clouston, J. Storer.= Lunatic at large. $1. Buckles. also pub. by
Brentano’s.

  A young doctor without a practice receives a tempting offer of £500
  and expenses to travel with a wealthy youth mentally unbalanced.
  Fearing to trust himself to the caprice of a lunatic, a friend of his
  represents the patient, while the “sane lunatic” is drugged and left
  in a private asylum. The amazing doings of this clever and worldly
  wise young man constitute the book. His methods of escape, his
  escapades in London, his periodical change of name, scene, and history
  are skilfully and amusingly handled.

       + =Ind.= 59: 44. Jl. 6, ‘05. 70w.

  “Is not at all probable, and not very edifying, but it is certainly
  well written and entertaining.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 148. Ag. 17, ‘05. 310w.


=Clute, Willard Nelson.= Fern allies. **$2. Stokes.

  A well-illustrated manual of the families of non-flowering plants,
  other than the ferns, found in North America north of Mexico.

  “The book is a valuable addition to our literature of less-known
  American plants.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 278. N. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  “There can hardly be a more convenient guide for the beginner who,
  having busied himself somewhat with ferns, wishes to glance at their
  relatives. The text is interesting and the drawings are clear.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 382. N. 9, ‘05. 100w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 525. O. 28, ‘05. 20w.


=Coates, Florence Earle.= Mine and thine (poems). **$1.25. Houghton.

  A volume of eighty sonnets and poems including personal tributes to
  Mr. Stedman, Mr. Yeats, Madame Bernhardt, and Helen Keller, Beethoven,
  Picquart, Whistler, E. N. Westcott, Stevenson, Millet, and Joan of
  Arc, and verses to England, Paris, and Buffalo, and to the “War for
  the liberation of Cuba.”

  “Their chief merit is not spontaneity but thoughtfulness.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 288. Mr. ‘05. 30w.

  “Of the excellence of Mrs. Coates’s sentiments there can be no doubt;
  her nature is warmly responsive to whatever is worthy in life and
  beautiful in art. But her expression does not often exhibit
  spontaneity or achieve distinction.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 200. Mr. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  “Miss Coates’s verses may be described in a general way as topical.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 218. Jl. 27, ‘05. 190w.

  “The best of the poems ... are those which deal with persons. These
  are always sympathetic to the essential quality of the man.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 160w.

  “The distinguishing marks of Mrs. Coates’ verse are simplicity and an
  unashamed gravity.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 619. Ap. ‘05. 340w.


=Cobb, Benjamin Franklin.= Business philosophy. **$1.20. Crowell.

  A clear, level-headed exposition of the problems facing every business
  man from the least to the greatest, and suggestions regarding how to
  meet and handle them. Such subjects are treated as choosing a
  profession, system, credit, collections, office management, relations
  to employes, advertising, use of trading stamps, etc.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 10w.

  * “A little volume of practical suggestions, written from personal
  experiences.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 20w.


Cobden club. Burden of armaments; a plea for retrenchment. 90c. Wessels.

  In view of the steady increase in military and naval expenditure by
  the British government, the Cobden club has issued this volume which
  deals with the subject in the spirit of Cobden and carries his
  narrative and arguments down to the present date. Part 1, is a
  condensed restatement of Cobden’s arguments in “The three panics”
  (1863), part 2, Retrenchment, deals with the economic reaction between
  1863 and 1884, part 3, The growth of militarism, gives an account of
  the relapse into extravagance, part 4, is a plea for disarmament.

  “The book under consideration is much more than a mere recall to right
  feeling: it is no less than an appeal to common sense.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 18. Jl. 1, ‘05. 390w.

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 421. My. 25, ‘05. 1200w.


=Cochrane, Charles H.= Modern industrial progress. **$3 Lippincott.

  “The tremendous industrial progress of the past few decades is
  recorded in this volume in brief descriptions of many inventions and
  discoveries and new applications of old discoveries.” (Outlook).
  “Among the numerous subjects discussed are electricity, including the
  progress made by Marconi, great canals and tunnels, bridges, tools of
  destruction, great farms and farming machinery, the iron horse and the
  railways, foods, engineering enterprises, newspapers and periodicals,
  instruments of science, cotton, wool, and texture manufactures, etc.”
  (Bookm.) There are over four hundred illustrations.

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 496. My. 6, ‘05. 300w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 95. Ja. ‘05. 60w.

  “In a straightforward, practicable manner, makes clear the recent
  steps in the field of mechanics and invention.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 383. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 203. Mr. 16, ‘05. 230w.

  “Such books as this are especially useful in school and public
  libraries. Not as interestingly written as might be, but full of
  information.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 270. F. 2, ‘05. 70w.

  “The work is therefore encyclopædic in scope, and, as it is the
  production of a single mind, is neither profound in treatment nor
  remarkable for accuracy. Carelessness in composition and revision
  makes many of the sentences, to say the least, ambiguous. As a
  scientific treatise, the book is worthless. As a popular survey of
  modern progress, were it more carefully written and more generously
  indexed, it would be useful.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 191. Mr. 9, ‘05. 240w.

  “Mr. Cochrane’s subject is large, and he has pretty well covered it.
  His book is as full of meat as an egg; and good meat it seems to be,
  too.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 147. Mr. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  “The volume is obviously intended for popular consumption, having no
  orderly or logical arrangement of subjects, and the treatment being
  absolutely untechnical.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 451. F. 18, ‘05. 70w.

  “A book full of attractive materials.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 512. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  “A remarkable piece of work, encyclopaedic in its scope.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 619. Ap. 29, ‘05. 620w.


=Coe, George Albert.= Education in religion and morals. **$1.35. Revell.

  Professor Coe finds the essence of religious education “on the part of
  the teacher self-revelation and self impartation; on the part of the
  pupil, self-expression and self-realization.” In other words, all
  religious education is the “genuine mingling of a developed life in
  the interests and occupations of an undeveloped life.” (Bib. World).
  The best field for religious training is in the home, where the most
  free and natural relations exist. It is by revealing a sincere and
  self-sacrificing attitude toward life that a religious influence can
  be exerted.

  “It is in the breadth, courage and sanity of his survey of the social
  situation that the chief merit of his work is found.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9:388. Ap. ‘05. 300w.

  “This is a great book—the greatest on its subject since Bushnell’s
  ‘Christian nurture’ in 1847. It takes religious education off its apex
  of formal dogmatic instruction, and sets it down on the broad, stable
  base of sharing the concrete experiences of life. It gives us a point
  of view; and in the light of that point of view goes forth to
  challenge all unreality and insincerity. This book should be in the
  hands of every Christian.” William DeWitt Hyde.

   + + + =Bib. World.= 25: 154. F. ‘05. 1300w. (Statement of its
         teachings.)

  “The treatment of the problem in hand is thoroughly in accord with
  good psychological and pedagogical practice. The whole work, a worthy
  complement to Professor Coe’s previous publication on ‘The religion of
  a mature mind,’ is vitalizing and illuminating in its character and
  effect.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1011. Ap. 22, ‘05. 910w.


=Cohen, Alfred J.= (Alan Dale, pseud.). Wanted, a cook. (†)$1.50. Bobbs.

  A humorous account of the trials and tribulations of a newly married
  couple. “Two babes in the woods in this wilderness of flats make a
  pathetic attempt to have a real home, which comes to grief through a
  succession of disasters in the shape of incompetent or dishonest or
  impossible cooks. The mistress of the tiny ‘flat’ knows many things,
  but not how to cook; her experiences are enough to have turned her
  pretty hair gray, and one wonders if there is for her and women like
  her any other solution than the ‘apartment hotel,’ which is the only
  one the book offers.” (Ind.)

         =Acad.= 68: 366. Ap. 1, ‘05. 510w.

  “Seldom has it been our pleasure to read a more delightful satire on
  one phase of our present-day urban life. Has treated the servant-girl
  question in an inimitable manner. Though exaggerated at times as is
  the wont of the humorist, it is from first to last broadly true, and
  on the whole the story will prove as excellent a cure for the blues as
  the first reading of Mark Twain’s ‘Innocents Abroad.’”

     + + =Arena.= 33: 222. F. ‘05. 140w.

  “There is a fund of humour and entertainment in ‘Wanted a cook’ which
  makes it delightful reading.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 493. Ap. 15. 200w.

  “An airy variation of a very well-worn theme.”

       — =Critic.= 46 :480. My. ‘05. 50w.

  “Perhaps the most feeling, altho somewhat farcical, presentment of the
  vexed problem is the latest by Alan Dale.”

       + =Ind.= 58:210. Ja. 26, ‘05. 210w.


=Cohen, Isabel E.= Legends and tales in prose and verse. 75c. Jewish
pub.

  A compilation of prose and verse on Jewish subjects, most of which
  concern Bible characters.

  “Pleasant and instructive reading for the young.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 277. Ap. 16, ‘05. 60w.


=Colby, Frank Moore.= Imaginary obligations. *$1.20. Dodd.

  A volume of dogmatic essays. “Some of his best chapters have to do
  with ‘The business of writing,’ and ‘Literary compulsion.’ ‘The
  literary temperament’ is treated in a way that makes the reader squirm
  in his chair. ‘The temptation of authors’ contains a warning to
  successful and prolific writers. ‘The danger of spreading oneself thin
  is that the time surely comes when it is done unconsciously. A man
  thinks it his thought flowing on like that, when it is only his ink.’
  The fitness of Mr. Colby’s title, ‘Imaginary obligations,’ is somewhat
  imaginary.... But a book must have a title, and for a collection of
  loosely related essays one will serve about as well as another.”
  (Dial).

  “The range of topics is wide, the comments are pointed, and the style
  is, on the whole, decidedly racy. No reader can fail to enjoy the wit
  and the satire even when they are directed against some pet hobby of
  his. The fun is harmless and it may be found to be accompanied by
  wisdom.”

       + =Boston Evening Transcript.= :7. F. 10, ‘05. 250w.

  “Mr. Colby possesses a good measure of shrewd sense, a wholesome
  hatred of humbug and a keen eye to detect it, a practised pen, and a
  knack of terse, incisive, and often striking expression. But with
  these qualities go their defects: aiming to be brilliant and
  sententious, he occasionally exaggerates and makes phrases.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 20. Ja. 1, ‘05. 430w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 60w.


=Cole, Samuel Valentine.= Life that counts. **75c. Crowell.

  This book grew out of a series of addresses given before young people.
  It deals with some aspects of service but chiefly with certain
  qualifications of the useful life; viz. sympathy, courage,
  perseverance and aspiration. These are symbolized by four faces, the
  face of a man, a lion, an ox, an eagle, the emblem of the four
  evangelists.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 733. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


=Coleridge, Samuel Taylor.= Select poems; ed. by Andrew George. 60c.
Heath.

  This volume of the Belles-lettres series contains select poems of
  Coleridge arranged in chronological order, with introduction and notes
  by the editor.

         =N.Y. Times.= 10: 104. Ap. 1, ‘05. 180w.


=Collier’s self-indexing annual for 1905=: a contemporaneous
encyclopedia and pictorial history of men and events of the past year as
recorded and described by the world’s foremost specialists in every
department of human progress. $5. Collier.

  Here the time saver finds in ready-to-use form the “political history
  of the world and of important current events in the fields of labor,
  industry, science, invention, the arts, sport, education, religion,
  and sociology.” “The material has been collated from ‘Collier’s
  Weekly,’ is preceded by a sketch review of the year 1904, which is to
  be highly praised as a model of condensed statement, and is arranged
  in alphabetical order, with many illustrations.” (Outlook).

       + =Outlook.= 79 :501. F. 25, ‘05. 100w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 768. Je. ‘05. 80w.


=Collins, F. Howard.= Author and printer: a guide for authors, editors,
printers, correctors of the press, compositors and typists. *$2.25.
Oxford.

  “The want of uniformity in spelling, capitalization, punctuation, and
  use of italic type causes continual trouble to all who are responsible
  for the editorial supervision of scientific literature in any form....
  Mr. Collins has prepared his book to help in this end.... The volume
  contains more than twenty thousand separate entries of words arranged
  alphabetically. Included among these are abbreviations, disputed
  spellings, foreign words and phrases, divisions of words, and various
  rules and explanations which should prove of service to authors and
  editors.”—Nature.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 560. My. 6. 450w.

         =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 70w.

  “In conclusion we can pronounce this compilation useful, if almost
  without rhyme or reason and certainly not highly authoritative.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 203. S. 7, ‘05. 1220w.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 100. Je. 1, ‘05. 200w.


* =Collyer, Robert.= Augustus Conant, Illinois pioneer and preacher.
*60c. Am. Unitar.

  This second volume in “True American types” series contains the
  charmingly simple record of the plucky career of a typical New
  Englander who was born in Vermont in 1811, went west in the early days
  as an Illinois pioneer and later became a minister with the staunch
  support of his young wife. After triumphing over circumstances he met
  his death in the Civil war as chaplain in the Union army. The author’s
  account is supplemented by quotations from the quaintly brief entries
  in his various journals, and the whole forms a significant story of
  the life of man who wrested happiness and success from a barren
  environment.


=Colton, Arthur Willis.= Belted seas. (†)$1.50. Holt.

  Captain Buckingham enlivens a winter afternoon by recounting his
  adventures in South America and elsewhere. Leaving the town of
  Greenough and the girl he had “agreed” to marry, he traversed the
  belted seas for thirty years, drifting back at last to his old harbor
  to gaze on the tombstone of his sweetheart, and assist in her
  daughter’s elopement. His story includes humorous yarns of hotel
  keeping in a ship carried inland by a tidal wave, of a hidden treasure
  over which a squatter had calmly built his cabin, and of a whale which
  put forth to sea with a hen roosting on a harpoon embedded in its
  side.

  “His work is never commonplace, but never before has he been so
  light-hearted, so effervescent of spirit as here.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 382. O. ‘05. 160w.

  “Some of his turns of thought are provocative of the heartiest
  laughter, and he never permits his auditors an instant of boredom.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 394. Je. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “The dry, whimsical old captain spins a yarn worth hearing.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1250. Je. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “It is a toy, very ingenious and puzzling, we must admit, but not a
  genuine specimen of literary handicraft.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 318. S. 2, ‘05. 340w.

  “Captain Tom’s description of his eccentric mates is occasionally
  exaggerated to the point of caricature, and his style is inconsistent,
  wavering between the style of the plain mariner and that of a clever,
  versatile, even brilliant writer.”

     + — =Nation.= 80 :442. Je. 1, ‘05. 370w.

  “A certain knack of conversation and characterization, a certain
  largeness of view where the differing morals and madnesses of men are
  concerned, which gives them not only interest, but a sort of oneness.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 222. Ap. 8, ‘05. 450w.

  “Its humor is both spontaneous and demure, and its comedy pointed and
  subtle.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “This is of the grotesque, distorted type of humorous story. His
  observations on human nature are often shrewd and amusing.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 959. Ap. 15, ‘05. 110w.

  “Mr. Colton’s sailor men are flesh and blood, though their adventures
  are the wildest flights of fancy.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 633. Ap. 22, ‘05. 150w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 241. Jl. ‘05. 150w.


=Colton, Olive A.= Rambles abroad. $2. Franklin ptg. and engr. co.

  The author “recounts at the outset her visit to Naples and Rome,
  interspersing her narrative of travel with historical discussion....
  From Rome she takes us to Vienna, Budapest, Munich, Wartburg and
  Weimar, thence to Paris. A visit to England and Windsor castle
  concludes the trip. The pictures are excellent throughout.”—Boston
  Evening Transcript.

  “Miss Colton has nothing new to tell, in this narrative of a brief
  European trip; but she tells her story simply and well.”

       + =Boston Evening Transcript.= F. 8, ‘05. 130w.


=Colyar, Arthur St. Clair.= Life and times of Andrew Jackson;
soldier—statesman—president. 2v. $6. Marshall & B.

  Mr. Colyar is a lawyer and an enthusiastic admirer of Jackson. His
  object in writing these books is to give a sympathetic account of the
  great Tennesseean, and he has produced a democratic biography which is
  at times historically biased.

  Reviewed by J. S. Bassett.

     + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 667. Ap. ‘05. 530w.


=Coman, Katharine.= Industrial history of the United States for high
schools and colleges. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  In this volume Prof. Coman aims “to bring the essential elements of
  the economic history of this country within the grasp of the average
  reader, and she has also adapted it for high school and college
  students.... There are many illustrations in half-tone in the book, as
  well as a number of maps and diagrams, and, besides the authorities
  given in the margin, the book is supplied with a list of books and
  their authors for the general reader.” (N. Y. Times.)

  * “It supplements in a highly interesting way the ordinary narrative
  text-book, and will prove a valuable adjunct in the teaching of the
  subject.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 390. D. 1, ‘05. 40w.

  * “A carefully executed work, packed with information.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 641. S. 30, ‘05. 280w.

  * “The book is exceptionally accurate in detail.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 775. N. 18, ‘05. 160w.

  “While the author has not always satisfactorily exhibited the economic
  forces underlying the great movements and events in the history of the
  United States, she has, on the whole, performed a difficult task well.
  It is by no means easy to marshal the facts in an interesting way and
  at the same time bring out their significance; but this the author has
  succeeded in doing to a praiseworthy degree.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 180w.

  * “The book as a whole is a model of clear statement and systematized
  information.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 637. N. ‘05. 90w.


=Commons, John Rogers=, ed. See =Trade= unionism and labor problems.


Companion to Greek studies; ed. by Leonard Whibley. *$6. Macmillan.

  “‘The companion to Greek studies’ differs in scope from other books of
  the same class; for, besides a survey of Greek life, thought, and art
  in their different branches, it includes a chapter on the physical
  conditions of Greece, another containing chronological tables of
  politics, literature, and art, and a chapter on certain branches of
  criticism and interpretation. While each article has been intrusted to
  a writer who has made a special study of the subject, it has been the
  aim of the work to give the substance of our knowledge in a concise
  form.... It is hoped that the full table of contents and the indexes
  of proper names and Greek words will increase the value of the book
  for purposes of reference. Bibliographies have generally been appended
  to each article to help those who seek further information. Plans,
  views, and reproductions of ancient works of art have been carefully
  chosen and inserted in those articles in which illustration seems most
  necessary.” Preface.

  “The lack of references is a serious drawback. As a companion to the
  reading of Greek authors, a handbook for reference about Greek things,
  the book is convenient, well arranged and, in all essentials,
  trustworthy.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68 :102. F. 4. ‘05. 1270w.

  “It is not a book, but a compressed encyclopedia, a vast collection of
  facts crammed into the smallest possible compass. Almost the whole
  book is interesting, in spite of its compression.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 616. My. 20. 1010w.

  “Few volumes have a stronger claim to their places in the library of
  the classical scholar.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 120. Ag. 10, ‘05. 650w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 114. F. 25, ‘05. 340w.

  “What Dr. Smith’s ‘Dictionary of antiquities’ was for students half a
  century ago this is for those of to-day. In concise form it exhibits
  the larger and more accurate knowledge gained by recent research, and
  also treats of subjects not heretofore presented in works of this
  kind. As a book of reference it is all that could be desired. Its
  illustrations are both numerous and fine. In this work British
  scholars have again scored most creditably. In their index of scholars
  and modern writers Americans are scarcer than the facts require.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 652. Mr. 11, ‘05. 250w.

  “If the object of the compilers was to give the maximum of information
  in the minimum of space, they have certainly succeeded in the
  attempt.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 152. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1400w.

  “Of its value there can be no question.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 919. Je. 24, ‘05. 940w.


Compatriots’ club lectures. Compatriots’ club lectures: first series.
*$2.75. Macmillan.

  The Compatriots’ club, a non-partizan body, was constituted in March,
  1904, with the object of advancing the ideal of a united British
  empire. The present volume contains eight lectures. The principles of
  constructive economics as applied to the maintenance of empire, by J.
  L. Garvin; Tariff reform and national defense, by H. W. Wilson;
  Imperial preference and the cost of food, by Sir Vincent Caillard; The
  evolution of the empire, by Hon. St. John A. Cockburn, K. C. M. C.;
  The proper distribution of the population of the empire, by H. A.
  Gwynne; Political economy and the tariff problem, by Prof. W. J.
  Ashley; Colonial preference in the past, by John W. Hills, and Tariff
  reform and political morality, by the Rev. Dr. William Cunningham.

  “No better text-book could be accepted both by friends and opponents
  as a starting place for discussion.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 46. Jl. 8. 450w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 191. Je. 16, ‘05. 1170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 347. My. 27, ‘05. 270w.

  “These lectures we believe will have a wide-reaching educative effect
  in preparing opinion for the part which the state will take in the
  future in many matters from which the individualist theory has
  excluded it.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 742. Je. 3, ‘05. 1450w.

  “It is the work of a group of well-known men, who obviously believe
  what they write, and who in many respects have advanced beyond the
  crude fallacies and cheap-Jack promises which have disfigured Mr.
  Chamberlain’s presentment of his own case. It is worth while to see
  why such men are protectionists, and where the flaw in their reasoning
  lies.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 192. Ag. 5, ‘05. 2700w.


=Condit, Edgar Mantelbert.= Two years in three continents: experiences,
impressions and observation of two Americans abroad. **$2. Revell.

  The author and his wife, starting from Ireland, visited all the
  capitals of Europe, and then Russia and the Orient. The account of
  their journey is both humorous and interesting, and they give many
  valuable and homely details not found in the ordinary book of travels.

  “The book is replete with humor, and is all the better because it is
  so thoroughly American in quality. Mr. Condit’s descriptive powers are
  excellent. In this the good spirits of the writer always predominates
  and it is easy reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 128. F. 25, ‘05. 190w.


=Condivi, Ascanio.= Life of Michelangelo Buonarroti, tr. by Herbert P.
Horne. *$7.50. Updike.

  “Condivi wrote a great biography, tho no longer than a Plutarch. It
  puts Michael Angelo before us a genius yet a man. It is rich in choice
  anecdote, it describes the rivalries and reverses, the successes and
  triumphs incident to one of power and resource and ambition, and over
  all its style and treatment give the time as Castiglione describes it.
  The work itself and Addington Symond’s praise should have before this
  prompted a popular English edition. Mr. Horne’s translation is close
  and con amore, but the book is published in a very limited
  edition.”—Ind.

  “Altogether, the volume is one in which the bibliophile no less than
  the art student will rejoice.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 51. Ja. 16, ‘05. 290w.

  “The format is less notable than the biography of the translation. Mr.
  Horne designed the type which is here first used. It is chaste and
  clearly cut, yet the page is not clear.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 569. Mr. 9, ‘05. 490w.

  “Condivi’s narrative is always delightful, it is so unaffected and
  sincere. The present translation is pleasant to read, having plenty of
  character.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 114. Ja. 28, ‘05. 110w.


=Conley, John Wesley.= Bible in modern light: a course of lectures
before the Bible department of the Woman’s club, Omaha. **75c. Griffith
& R.

  In this series of lectures the author “treats the character and
  composition of the Bible, manuscripts, translations, light from the
  monuments; and deals with such problems as the relation of the Bible
  to science, art, ethics, woman, education, progress.” (Am. J. of
  Theol.)

  “A series of simple, clear and popular lectures.” Charles Richmond
  Henderson.

     + + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 390. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  “In a class where a competent leader could fill gaps and expand
  outlines, the book might serve as a suggestive textbook.” Henry M.
  Bowden.

   + + — =Bib. World.= 26: 157. Ag. ‘05. 280w.


* =Connolly, James Bennet.= Deep sea’s toll. †$1.50. Scribner.

  Eight stories of the Gloucester fishermen entitled: The sail-carriers;
  The wicked “Celestine”; The truth of the Oliver Cromwell; Strategy and
  seamanship; Dory-mates; The saving of the bark Fuller; On Georges
  shoals; and Patsie Oddie’s black night.

  * “They are admirably drawn pictures of the hardest life a man can
  choose.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 448. N. 30, ‘05. 360w.

  * “Well sustains the reputation won for him by his previous stories in
  the same field.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 712. N. 25, ‘05. 140w.


=Connolly, James B.= On Tybee knoll: a story of the Georgia coast.
†$1.25. Barnes.

  “This is a short, simple but interesting story of rivalry between some
  contractors on river and harbor work at Savannah, Ga. The young hero
  and his older partner have various exciting experiences in executing a
  contract that involved cutting and rafting some poles for dipper
  dredges. The rafts were stolen, rescued, cut adrift and finally
  rescued again. Incidentally there are races, fights and rescues on the
  water.”—Engin. N.

  “One forgives the extravagance of the story for the sake of the
  exhilarating sea breeze that seems to blow through all the pages.”
  Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 518. Jl. ‘05. 290w.

       + =Engin. N.= 53: 635. Je. 15, ‘05. 100w.

       — =Nation.= 81: 102. Ag. 3, ‘05. 300w.

  “The present tale might be an early effort.”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 194. My. 20, ‘05. 40w.


=Connor, Ralph, pseud.= (=Charles William Gordon.=) Prospector. $1.50.
Revell.

  The story of the life of a young minister who goes from the university
  of Toronto to his work of self-sacrifice in the wilds. He is
  affectionately called the Prospector because he untiringly seeks out
  lonely ranches and brings their owners into touch with their distant
  neighbors. There are vivid pictures of Canadian frontier life and
  character, and there is, of course, a love interest.

  “From cover to cover physical strength is glorified; but it is the
  physical strength of teachers and preachers, of earnest, deadly
  earnest, muscular Christians. Literary merit has nothing to do with
  the author’s success. His English is fairly sound, and that is as much
  as may be said for the writing.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 43. Ja. 14. 320w.

  “The vein is worked a little too hard, and the results forced.”

     + — =Critic.= 46: 477. My. ‘05. 90w.

  “The splendors of home missionaries’ sacrifice have never been more
  vividly portrayed.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 269. F. 2, ‘05. 170w.

  “Interesting as a novel as well as valuable as a picture of Canadian
  life.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 57. Ja. 14, ‘05. 190w.


=Conrad, Joseph (Joseph Conrad Korzenlowski).= Nostromo: a tale of the
seaboard. $1.50. Harper.

  Late writers have often turned to the “new lands” of South America for
  picturesque settings for their stories. Mr. Conrad has laid the scene
  of his new novel in a republic on the western coast. “In this country
  an English family has long been settled and has had for its stake the
  government concession of a silver mine, handed down from father to
  son, and entailing much disagreeable ‘squeezing’ from successive
  presidents and dictators. The descendant to whom it has fallen when
  the present narrative opens is the first one to make it a really
  valuable property, and in the development he becomes the greatest
  power in the state, enlisting foreign capital, building railroads, and
  carrying governments on his pay roll. A final desperate effort on the
  part of greedy politicians to get control of the goose that lays his
  golden egg is the main feature of the plot ... but the psychological
  interest predominates over the adventurous or romantic interest which
  justifies the author in naming this novel after one of its
  characters ... one upon whom Mr. Conrad has concentrated his
  analytical powers.” (Dial).

  “A novel ought not to be a snap-shot, it should be a firmly and richly
  woven fabric. Such is ‘Nostromo.’ Flexible and vivid style.” O. H.
  Dunbar.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 377. Ap. ‘05. 480w.

  “Readers will find in the book ample reward for their pains in
  perusing it, will often reach the point of exasperation at its lengthy
  analyses, its interminable dragging-out of incident, and its frequent
  harking back to antecedent conditions. The work is a very strong one,
  and we can think of no other writer, unless it be Mr.
  Cunningham-Grahame, who could have done anything like as well with the
  same material.” W. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 125. F. 16, ‘05. 420w.

  “As a study of South American revolution the book is a monument of
  realism. There is ever present a psychological question, a moral issue
  that is as modern as Ibsen.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 557. Mr. 9, ‘05. 700w.

  “The love element is slight and in its development irregular, and the
  adventurous element is not absorbing. The stream of the story is
  always slender. It glimmers and shimmers most poetically—what there is
  of it—but even at its broadest and strongest it gives no hint of
  bearing the reader along with it, and again and again it sinks wholly
  out of sight amid the silver sands of picturesque description.”

     + — =Reader.= 5: 618. Ap. ‘05. 310w.


=Conrad, Stephen, pseud. (Stephen Conrad Stuntz).= Mrs. Jim and Mrs.
Jimmie. †$1.50. Page.

  A recital of the experiences of Mrs. Jim at quilting parties, picnics,
  sociables, weddings, commencements, and fires, interspersed by
  comments of Mrs. Jimmie. There is much real village life, much satire,
  and not a little homely philosophy.

  * “This story sustains the same relation to love that an old-fashioned
  ‘experience meeting’ sustains to religion.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 986. O. 26, ‘05. 130w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 513. Ag. 5, ‘05. 370w.

  “A tedious story of a country town.”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 935. Ag. 12, ‘05. 30w.


=Conway, Moncure Daniel.= Autobiography, memories and experiences. 2v.
**$6. Houghton.

  A frank autobiography of a long life. Mr. Conway says of himself: “A
  pilgrimage from pro-slavery to anti-slavery enthusiasm, from Methodism
  to Freethought, implies a career of contradictions.” Born in Virginia
  of a slave-holding family, 1832, he prepared for the Methodist
  ministry; but at twenty-one, alienated from his family and old
  beliefs, he turned to the Unitarian ministry and took an active part
  in the anti-slavery movement in the early fifties. In 1863 he went to
  England to lecture in behalf of the North, and remained in London,
  where he formed lasting friendships with the “good and great” of his
  time. His account of his experiences and his pictures of the people
  whom he knew are of exceptional interest.

  “Two very entertaining volumes that will prove of marked interest to
  the general reader, and may be of considerable service to the
  historical student. Commendation for their general readableness and
  attractiveness.”

     + + =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 701. Ap. ‘05. 170w.

  Reviewed by M. A. De Wolfe Howe.

         =Atlan.= 95: 128. Ja. ‘05. 1730w.

  * “On the whole Mr. Conway’s volume is the most important book of its
  kind that has been published during the present year.” R. W. Kemp.

   + + + =Bookm.= 20: 481. Ja. ‘05. 750w.

  “Two large volumes, and I do not think there is a dry page in either
  one of them.” Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 120. F. ‘05. 920w.

  “He has, therefore, won the gratitude due for a compilation that makes
  easy and attractive reading. But it is emphatically the work of a
  clever journalist and genial clubman, not of a trustworthy historian.
  It will not be safe to use the material here collected unless it is
  otherwise confirmed. Mr. Conway is surprisingly careless even in
  matters closely connected with his own career.” Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + — =Forum.= 36: 564. Ap. ‘05. 1930w.

  “In a vivid and picturesque manner ... Mr. Moncure D. Conway tells the
  story of a strenuous life.” Walter Lewin.

     + + =Hibbert J.= 3: 614. Ap. ‘05. 1300w.

  “A man who has lived in such times and amid such associations must
  from the nature of the case have an interesting story to tell.
  Fortunately, Mr. Conway is too good a literary craftsman to let the
  story suffer in the telling.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 755. D. ‘04. 240w.

  “We may say without hesitation that it is an instructive, as it is a
  transparently sincere, record of human experience. The first volume is
  meant for American more than for English readers.”

     + + =Spec. 94=: 181. F. 4, ‘05. 230w.


=Cook, Albert S.=, ed. See Judith.


=Cook, Albert S., and Benham, A. R.= Specimen letters. *60c. Ginn.

  “The range of the selection is unlimited, since it includes Cicero,
  Pliny, Tragan, Mme. de Sevigné, and Voltaire.... The other
  eighty-eight letters ... are English or American, beginning with
  Addison and ending with ‘Ellen G. Starr.’”—N. Y. Times.

  “The collection is an admirable one, representative of every form of
  the epistolary art, and made particularly attractive to the general
  reader by its freedom from editorial encumbrances.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “As an avowed supplement to Scoones, such of their work as he has not
  anticipated would have a distinct value.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 344. My. 27, ‘05. 880w.


=Cook, Joel.= Switzerland; picturesque and descriptive. **$2.40. Coates.

  A book designed for students and tourists, as well as general lovers
  of fine book workmanship. Six sections of Switzerland are
  covered—Western Switzerland, Eastern Switzerland, the Upper Rhine, the
  Middle Rhine, the great Rhine gorge, and the Lower Rhine, and in
  addition to the descriptive matter, there are numerous half-tone
  illustrations. He opens with a rapid survey of the history of the
  Swiss confederation, followed by descriptions of the Lake of Geneva,
  Lausanne, Vevey, and Montreux, coming next to the Castle of Chillon.

  “He has here attempted to do for Switzerland what he has already done
  for America, England, and France, by emphasizing with personal
  impressions those points of human interest which usually receive mere
  perfunctory notice in the guide books.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 2. Ja. 7, ‘05. 330w.


* =Cook, Theodore Andrea.= Old Provence. 2v. **$4. Scribner.

  “The first volume deals with Provence under the Greeks and Romans. Mr.
  Cook writes entertainingly of the traces of Marius in Provence. He
  follows his march, camp by camp, through the country until he met the
  Teutons and the Ambrons on the bank of the Lar.... Volume II of the
  account of Provence is no less discursive than the first, and no less
  interesting in the same discursive way. It covers the period from
  about the time of Charlemagne, say, 900 A. D., to the death of the
  good King Réné in 1480, with excursions back to Greek, Roman, and
  Teutonic days and forward to modern times.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “We heartily congratulate him on the interest of his book, but are
  not satisfied with it, for we feel certain that he can and will do
  better. The book seems to us wanting in plan, and from absence of
  design to be somewhat confused for the general reader.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 505. O. 14. 710w.

  “Mr. Cook has not achieved a history of Provence. But he offers us a
  guide, indefatigable, vigorous, vivacious, eager to discourse on every
  subject, and primed with valuable information.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 357. O. 27, ‘05. 940w.

  * “There is room for many books about a region so replete with
  interest, and it can do nobody any harm to read this one; but, while
  it will not spare the traveller abroad the need of his guide-books, it
  has not the light and graceful touch and the gift of vivid
  presentation that will satisfy the reader who stays at home—the
  ultimate test.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 468. D. 7, ‘05. 1520w.

  “A work containing much of interest and importance, and little that is
  trivial in itself, yet all so badly arranged that the reader has to
  pick and choose to find what he wants.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 675. O. 14, ‘05. 1060w.

  * “Mr. Cook knows his Provence well, but he does not know how to tell
  about it. Nevertheless the volumes are worth buying and worth reading,
  for their contents cannot be obtained elsewhere.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 706. N. 25, ‘05. 110w.


=Cooke, Grace MacGowan.= Grapple. †$1.50. Page.

  The principal figure in this labor-problem story is Mark Strong who
  from the ordinary miner’s lot rises to the ownership of a mine.
  Although once a member of the United mine workers, and still a
  believer in unions, he will not be bound by the inflexible rules of
  labor organizations, and employs non-union help. The struggle that
  ensues gives an opportunity for an exposition of arguments on both
  sides of the question.

  * “The seriousness of the book is relieved by an element of humor
  which is perhaps better than nothing, although it is a humor of a
  rather cheap sort.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 307. N. 16, ‘05. 140w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 279. S. 30, ‘05. 110w.


=Cooke, Marjorie Benton.= Dramatic episodes. $1.25. Dramatic.

  Ten short plays, each in a single scene, which satirize the follies of
  the foibles of to-day.

         =Dial.= 38: 276. Ap. 16, ‘05. 60w.


=Cooper, Edward Herbert.= Twentieth century child. $1.50. Lane.

  A glimpse into the new nursery, where smart children who make epigrams
  dwell. Their prayers, lessons, play, social life, punishments and
  health are discussed.

  “The style is a mixture of slap-dash, slang, and fine writing.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 461. Ap. 15. 1020w.

  “It is rich in insight, sanity, a wise and sympathetic understanding
  of his delightful circle of juvenile acquaintance. The whole book is
  blessedly free from any touch of the patronizing.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 475. N. ‘05. 170w.

  “The value of his book lies largely in its very personal tone.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 46. Jl. 16, ‘05. 360w.

  “Written in a pseudo-serious vein.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05. 400w.

  “The volume as a whole is a clever and unusual combination of
  anecdote, fiction, biography, and serious discussion.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 110w.

  “We do not take Mr. Cooper seriously; and the whole performance has an
  air of artificiality which produces irritation at every page.”

     — — =Sat. R.= 99: 710. My. 27, ‘05. 220w.

       — =Spec.= 94: 398. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1640w.


=Cooper, James Fenimore.= Last of the Mohicans. 80c; lea. $1.25.
Crowell.

  In the thin paper and flexible cover of the “Thin paper classics” this
  favorite Indian story becomes a handy pocket companion.


=Cooper, James Fenimore.= Spy. 60c; lea. $1.25. Crowell.

  A volume recently added to the “Thin paper classics.”


=Cooper, Walter G.= Fate of the middle classes. *$1.25. Consolidated
retail booksellers.

  “The only way to make sure of the general good is to guard the
  interests of every class with jealous care. This end is best attained
  when each class realizes that self-protection is the best protection,
  self-help the best help, and self-respect the surest guaranty of the
  respect of others.” This forms a part of the watchword of the volume.

  * “Force is not lacking in much of what Mr. Cooper advances.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 774. N. 18, ‘05. 540w.

  “Despite these criticisms, we think this volume a real contribution to
  the thought of the day, because characterized by three qualities not
  too often found in combination in treatises on our industrial
  problems, namely, a careful study of existing conditions, a sane and
  non-partisan judgment respecting them, and something of prophetic
  vision regarding the tendency of industrial progress and the direction
  in which it should be guided.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 360w.

  * “He has no very definite plan of organization, but he has at least
  sounded a note of warning.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 763. D. 9, ‘05. 210w.


=Cooper, William Colby.= Immortality: the principal philosophic
arguments for and against it. $1. W: Colby Cooper, Cleves, O.

  “A serious and very able discussion, from the purely philosophical
  viewpoint, of the logical arguments for and against the theory of the
  persistence of life after the crisis of death.” (Arena.) The author is
  a physician.

  “The method of presentation, however, is less open to criticism than
  the typography.”

   + + — =Arena.= 33: 674. Je. ‘05. 590w.

  “The argument seems conclusive for the survival of life and
  consciousness, but less conclusive for the survival of the
  individuality.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 93. My. 6, ‘05. 90w.


=Corelli, Marie (Minnie Mackay).= Free opinions, freely expressed on
certain phases of modern social life and conduct. **$1.20. Dodd.

  The essays collected in this volume attack newspapers, Americans, and
  certain unfortunate tendencies which the author discovers in modern
  English society.

  “The style of the essays ... is perhaps even more fervidly
  enthusiastic than that of the author’s fiction.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 80w.

  “The disputatious, not to say censorious, tone of these essays moves
  the reviewer to remind the writer that people are seldom to be argued
  or scolded into wisdom. Have the merit of brevity and at times of
  sprightliness.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 43. Jl. 16, ‘05. 530w.

  “Violence, prejudice, a painfully narrow view of life, and a lack of
  proportion ... shockingly mar her present book.”

     — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 280. Ap. 29, ‘05. 850w.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 191. My. 20, ‘05. 180w.


* =Cornes, James.= Modern housing: houses in town and country,
illustrated by examples of municipal and other schemes of block
dwellings, tenement houses, model cottages and villages. *$3. Scribner.

  Mr. Cornes, who as a member of the Leek town council has made a study
  of the question of housing the working classes, and has conducted some
  interesting experiments in Leek itself, now writes of these
  experiments, makes suggestions which will lessen the cost of house
  construction and “furnishes some suggestive contrasts between the
  opportunities for building in town and country by the inclusion of
  some admirably executed plans and pictures of the cottages now on view
  at the Cheap Cottages exhibition at Letchworth.” (Spec.)

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: 181. D. ‘05. 330w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 347. O. 26, ‘05. 330w.

 *     + =Spec.= 95: 191. Ag. 5, ‘05. 290w.


=Coryat, Thomas.= Coryat’s crudities hastily gobbled up in five moneths’
travells in France, Savoy, Italy, Rhetia commonly called the Grisons
country, Helvetia alias Switzerland, some parts of High Germany and the
Netherlands; newly digested in the hungry aire of Odcombe in the county
of Somerset, and now dispersed to the nourishment of the travelling
members of this kingdome; reprinted from the edition of 1611. 2v.
*$6.50. Macmillan.

  Altho the humor of the three-score panegyrics which gave the book
  unusual vogue in its first appearance has somewhat faded with time,
  there remains much to interest and amuse in this quaint account of
  travels afoot, of dangers, and of butterflies, of manners and of
  customs.

  “Careful reprint.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 488. My. 6, ‘05. 1360w.

  “His latest edition is luxuriously produced, and in every way worthy
  of him, given the publishers’ rule of not altering or pointing out his
  mistakes.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 394. S. 23. 920w.

  “Coryat’s style, whatever its defects, has often the true Elizabethan
  richness.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 213. Jl. 7, ‘05. 1600w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 80. Jl. 27, ‘05. 1570w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 444. Jl. 1, ‘05. 670w.

  “The quaintness of the original has been preserved, and it would be
  difficult, indeed, to imagine anything exceeding this work in
  precisely that quality.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 138. My. 13, ‘05. 350w.

  “Those who go through these hundred pages of the ‘Crudities’ do
  penance indeed.”

     — + =Sat.= R. 99: 816 Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.


=Couch, Arthur Thomas Quiller- (“Q,” pseud.=). Mayor of Troy. †$1.50.
Scribner.

  “A quaint tale of the Cornish coast. The setting is historical, being
  that of the threatened Napoleonic invasion.... The mayor of Troy, who
  is also major of the volunteer artillery ... is ... snatched by
  ruthless fate from the scenes of his glory, seized by a press-gang ...
  and carried off to become an ornament of the British navy. The ship
  which bears him is blown up.... He is rescued by the enemy, and
  languishes ten years in a remote military prison. Meanwhile ... he is
  given up for dead, his wealth is distributed according to the terms of
  his will, and Troy does him all sorts of posthumous honors. When he
  returns—but we will not reveal what happens, remarking only that it is
  the unexpected.”—Dial.

  * “The book presents us with one humorous situation after another,
  crowned by an invention so extraordinary that the author may fairly be
  said to have surpassed his own best previous efforts.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 309. N. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Taken all in all, we should say that Mr. Quiller-Couch has never
  done much better work than in his ‘Mayor of Troy,’ and that is to
  praise it highly.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 839. D. 2, ‘05. 780w.


=Couch, Arthur Thomas Quiller-.= Shakespeare’s Christmas and other
stories. †$1.50. Longmans.

  “A collection of ripe and forcible stories, of which the least
  successful is the one which gives its name to the book.” (Lond.
  Times.) They “range in date from the sixteenth to the beginning of the
  nineteenth century, and range in characters from Shakespeare and
  Wellington to the fishwives of Saltash and the highwaymen of
  Tregarrick.” (Ind.)

     + + =Acad.= 68: 925. S. 9, ‘05. 710w.

  “We note the usual flavour of distinction in the writing, the
  scholarly attention to details, the little touches of observation
  which show how thoroughly the writer has identified himself with the
  beings of his invention.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 368. S. 16. 250w.

  “His abundant knowledge of archeology and local color is effectively
  used without being made unduly conspicuous.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 580. S. 7, ‘05. 90w.

  “In most of these stories he does himself justice, and that is high
  praise.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 279. S. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  “Has become, for the moment and with exceptions, dull.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 259. S. 28, ‘05. 200w.

  “Is as good a collection of stories as its title promises, and as this
  vivacious, ingenious, and voluminous writer always can be depended
  upon to furnish at wonderfully short intervals of time.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 620w.

  “The material and setting of each story are striking and original, the
  manner of narration attractive and ingenious, yet the general effect
  is disappointing and unsatisfactory.”

     + — =Sat.= R. 100: 441. S. 30, ‘05. 270w.


=Couch, Arthur Thomas Quiller- (“Q.” pseud.).= Shining ferry. †$1.50.
Scribner.

  John Rosewarne, a stern, proud old man, looking back upon a reckless
  youth, his son, who follows the Bible after reading into it his own
  desires, the gentle Peter Benny and his eleven children, a blind boy,
  and many others enter into this story of a sleepy little sea port
  town.

  “In the last third or so of the book the interest, to our mind,
  suddenly filters away. The fault is one of structure. The interest of
  the novel dribbles out along several lines, none of which assumes a
  principal position and concentrates attention. And such is the reason
  why we are disappointed with what is in large measure a well-written
  book, with plenty of character and written in excellent English.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 520. My. 13, ‘05. 460w.

  “In this book he seems, for the first time, to have achieved a novel
  really complete in character, incident, and construction.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 394. Ap. 1. 720w.

  “Admirable studies of character. Its charm resides in the touches of
  gentle sentiment, of quaint humor, and tender feeling with which it is
  enriched in every chapter. It is a wholesome and human book, to be
  read with keen delight from beginning to end.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 41. Jl. 16, ‘05. 170w.

  “There is a savor in it—a distinction not only of style, but of
  thought and temper—which will enable it to outlive much fiction that
  is more strongly wrought.” Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + — =Forum.= 37: 111. Jl. ‘05. 270w.

  “Is one of the best stories of the year.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1071. My. 11, ‘05. 300w.

  “These figures are all well drawn—not over-drawn—neither too
  diabolical nor too angelic.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 21: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 810w.

  “Quiller-Couch has a deft hand at character sketching, and in this
  latest story of his, one finds many character sketches and little
  story. Mr. Quiller-Couch has a goodly humor which saves his story from
  a certain melancholy gloominess which it might otherwise possess too
  abundantly.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 244. Ap. 15, ‘05. 430w.

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 712. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.

  “There is not a forced or a strained note anywhere. The sense of
  proportion is everywhere evident in the book, so that when one closes
  it one is in possession of a little corner of the tapestry of life
  where not a stitch has been dropped.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 242. Ag. ‘05. 430w.

  “One of those novels made to be enjoyed rather than criticised.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 636. My. 13, ‘05. 430w.


=Coudert, Frederick René.= Addresses, historical—political—sociological.
**$2.50. Putnam.

  The twenty-one addresses of this eminent international lawyer, which
  his editor has selected for this volume include: International
  arbitration; The Anglo-American arbitration treaty; The rights of
  ships; Christopher Columbus; Louis Kossuth; Andrew Jackson; Charles
  O’Conor, Montesquieu; Chief Justice Waite; France, Morals and manners;
  Reply to Dumas’s advocacy of divorce; Lying as a fine art; The bar of
  New York from 1792 to 1892; Young men in politics; and Columbia
  college.

  * “In selecting from among his subject’s addresses those for use in
  this book ‘P. F.’ has been wholly successful, and has made a volume of
  much interest.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 791. N. 18, ‘05. 860w.

  * “They are valuable as specimens of a style worth studying by nascent
  writers and speakers.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 523. O. 28, ‘05. 170w.


Course of Christian doctrine; a handbook for teachers. 50c. Dolphin
press.

  “The aim of the new Sunday-school manual is, as stated in its preface,
  ‘to bring the new education to bear on the old sacred and unchangeable
  truths, and to lead the children not only to know, but to love and
  practice them.’ ... The book suggests such new features as blackboard
  work, historical tablets, the use of the sandboard, pictures, poems,
  and the like.... The course mapped out is divided into eight grades,
  each including instruction in prayers, catechism, Bible history—both
  Old and New Testament—and Catholic devotions and practices.”—Cath.
  World.

  “The scholarship and originality which mark the first chapter prevail
  throughout the work.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 670. F. ‘05. 1540w.


=Coutts, Francis.= Musa verticordia. *$1.25. Lane.

  From the first poem of this group the volume takes its name. The trial
  of Dreyfus furnishes the theme of one poem; two others are
  interpretations of Parsifal and Meistersinger; still others are
  commemorative in nature. There are also some interesting Spanish folk
  rhymes.

  “Mr. Francis Coutts stands out head and shoulders from the generality
  of our modern minor poets in that in addition to its technical
  excellence his verse strikes a strong individual note.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 61. Ja. 21, ‘05. 280w.

  “Mr. Coutts’ muse would to us be austere were he not somewhat too
  vague, too nebulous, for austerity. A mastership of whatever form of
  verse he essays, a lofty purpose, withal a rooted fealty to poetic
  sorrow, must be conceded to Mr. Coutts.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 192. Ag. ‘05. 170w.

  “This attitude of intellectual challenge is characteristic of the
  entire volume, and it is such touches of ‘sæva indignatio’ that give
  the author’s work its most distinctive quality.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 273. N. 1, ‘05. 300w.

  “It is impossible to read Mr. Coutts without admiration. But he lacks,
  through nearly all this volume, the human sweetness that is the
  preservative of poetry.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 168. My. 26, ‘05. 400w.

  “Mr. Coutts is always thoughtful and always sensitive to the
  imaginative import of his ideas.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 293. Ap. 13, ‘05. 280w.

  “He has extreme simplicity and chastity of style, what Stevenson has
  called ‘the piety of speech,’ a perfect taste, and an instinct for
  rendering in delicate poetry, evasive moods and fancies. There is also
  a gravity and austerity. The slightly forced reflectiveness seems to
  us to be a blemish in much of his work.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 114. Ja. 28, ‘05. 310w.


=Cowan, Rev. Henry.= John Knox, the hero of the Scottish reformation,
1505-1572. **$1.35. Putnam.

  In this seventh volume in the “Heroes of the reformation” series, the
  writer has aimed to “describe those portions of the career of Knox
  which are most likely to be of general interest: to place his
  life-work in its historical setting.” This he has done, giving a clear
  picture of the reformer and his times. References to original
  authorities are given in foot-notes and there is a complete index.

  “Both popular and scholarly.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 400. N. ‘05. 70w.

  “While less piquant than Lang’s, is perhaps the better book for the
  student. With a quick penetration into the particular subject or
  episode in hand, a strong grasp of the situation, and with clear and
  rapid movement of style, he makes a good story as well as a
  trustworthy one.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 381. O. ‘05. 110w.

  “The author is an advocate, but he is fair, dignified, and moderate in
  his advocacy of Knox’s side of these questions and of the general
  course of his conduct as a Puritan leader.” Charles H. Cooper.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 206. O. 1, ‘05. 840w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 190. Je. 16. ‘05. 210w.

  “Dr. Cowan’s way of looking at Knox is, of course, not Mr. Lang’s way.
  Naturally Dr. Cowan’s biography is less interesting.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 432. Jl. 1, ‘05. 650w.

  “Dr. Cowan’s work is that of a professor unable to apprehend the
  spirit of a religion outside his sphere of thought.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 440. S. 30, ‘05. 510w.


=Cowen, Thomas.= The Russo-Japanese war: from the outbreak of
hostilities to the battle of Liao Yang. *$4.20. Longmans.

  “A trained observer, for many years a war correspondent, describing
  for newspapers the Boer war, the Japanese-Chinese war, phases of the
  Spanish-American war, both in Cuba and the Philippines, the Boxer in
  China, and the siege of Peking, Mr. Cowen treats of the war in the
  East with exceptional facilities for getting at the facts.” (N. Y.
  Times). He analyses the reasons for Japanese success, he sums up the
  cause for Russia’s failures in the statement that “Indecision in
  emergency has been a characteristic weakness of Russia.” He follows
  the steps taken by Japan in her preparation for war, showing the
  methods adopted for meeting the peculiar difficulties to be overcome
  in opposing the host of Russia’s forces. “Remarkably effective as word
  pictures are his descriptions of the naval operations in the early
  days before Port Arthur.... And with it all there is a constant
  succession of pictures of army and navy life that is positively
  fascinating in the simple old-fashioned manner in which it is told
  with no attempt at ‘fine writing.’” (N. Y. Times).

     + + =Nation.= 80: 74. Ja. 26, ‘05. 3220w.

  “With the simplicity of a tactical primer the reasons for success and
  the causes of failure are alike made plain.”

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 2. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1430w.

  “He writes with a graphic touch and an intimacy with affairs Japanese
  that give a value to his volume which it otherwise would not possess.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 57. Ja. 12, ‘05. 590w.


* =Cowley, Abraham.= Poems: Miscellanies, The mistress, Pindarique odes,
Davideis; verses written on several occasions. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  “A very convenient single-volume edition printed in large type, the
  text edited by Mr. A. R. Waller from the first collected edition of
  Cowley’s works, published in 1688, the year after his death. This
  volume presents the variations noted in a collation of the 1668 text
  with the folio of 1656, the volume of 1663, and the edition of ‘The
  mistress,’ which appeared in 1647. Errors which have been discovered
  in the poems are indicated by brackets and are explained in the
  notes.”—Outlook.

 *   + + =Acad.= 68: 1026. O. 7, ‘05. 1370w.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 309. S. 29, ‘05. 2110w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 631. N. 11, ‘05. 120w.


=Cox, Kenyon.= Old masters and new: essays in art criticism. **$1.50.
Fox.

  “This volume makes no pretensions to be a history of art. It is, as
  Mr. Cox explains, a series of appreciations of individual masters,
  and, incidentally, gives a view of the course of painting since the
  sixteenth century. The artists principally discussed are Michelangelo,
  Dürer, Rubens, Frans Hals, Rembrandt, William Blake, F. M. Brown,
  Burne-Jones, Meissonier, Baudry, Puvis de Chavannes, Whistler,
  Sargent, Saint-Gaudens, Veronese, Perugino, and the Venetian artists,
  the Pre-Raphaelites, some of the lesser painters of the nineteenth
  century, and the sculptors of the early Italian renaissance.”—N. Y.
  Times.

  “Kenyon Cox is a master of essays in art criticism, and this
  collection ... shows him at his best.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 563. Je. ‘05. 120w.

  “If his style lacks that brilliancy which marks the man of great
  genius ... we have in their stead the sound technical knowledge of the
  artist, coupled with a keen sense of discrimination.” Albert E.
  Gallatin.

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 259. S. ‘05. 520w.

  “Keen insight and a peculiar warmth of description.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 422. Je. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  * “In its new dress, therefore, and with its score of excellent
  half-tones, the book should find a wider public than ever.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 447. D. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  “Taken altogether, perhaps the most notable and significant book of
  art criticism pure and simple, not only of the year, but of several
  years.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 691. S. 21, ‘05. 640w.

  * “For incisive analysis and illuminative appreciation Mr. Cox’s
  little book of essays, ‘Old masters and new,’ is the most significant
  and the most valuable work in art criticism pure and simple issued in
  many a long day.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “Mr. Cox’s ideas are sound and put with candour and balance.”

   + + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 88. Je. ‘05. 190w.

  “Where Mr. Cox speaks as an artist (and he nearly always does), it is
  not easy to take issue with him, for he knows remarkably well what he
  is talking about. Now and then one may disagree with him about other
  matters.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 461. Je. 8, ‘05. 830w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 299. O. 12, ‘05. 60w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 282. Ap. 29, ‘05. 300w.

  “Short as they are, these ‘Essays in criticism,’ expressed in an
  excellent style, may be warmly recommended to lovers of art.” Charles
  de Kay.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 741. N. 4, ‘05. 600w.

  * “The author knows his subject, and expresses his thoughts in simple
  and concise language, so as to make himself intelligible to those of
  limited observation and experience.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.

  “There is in all the essays a most unusual clarity of style and
  probity of judgment.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 879. Ag. 5, ‘05. 760w.

  * “Mr. Cox’s essays are vivid, delightful, and spirited discussions of
  great events in art, and they have a vivacity and surety of judgment
  which can not but delight the more matured art student.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 666. N. 18, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Is a practical book of art criticism. It ought to be helpful to
  novices in art appreciation.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 30w.


=Craddock, Charles Egbert, pseud. (Mary Noailles Murfree).= Storm
center. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  A Civil war story whose scene is laid in the mountains of Tennessee.
  “The Federal officers who court Southern women in Charles Egbert
  Craddock’s new story ... are more credible types, and it is the first
  time in its history that the Civil war has been reduced to a
  neighborhood affair, but the story of their wooings is the best this
  author has written in years.” (Ind.)

  “This sincere feeling for style, though occasionally it is overdone,
  is certainly the best thing about a story which barely misses being
  exceedingly dull. Suffers from a general vagueness and faulty
  construction.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 234. Ag. 19. 210w.

  “The outline of the story has scarcely a single point of novelty, and
  yet the narrative does maintain its interest.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 140w.

  “Slight in substance, and of moderate interest only.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 116. S. 1, ‘05. 150w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 210. Jl. 27, ‘05. 50w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “The machinery of the story seems to creak at times. But there are
  elements of power in the novel; ‘it goes.’”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 480. Jl. 22, ‘05. 440w.

  “It hardly has the force and depth of the author’s earlier books. Its
  plot is a little conventional, but there are novel and entertaining
  incidents.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 695. Jl. 15. ‘05. 80w.


=Crafts, Wilbur Fisk.= Successful men of today, and what they say of
success. $1. Funk.

  A new edition, revised, enlarged, and made thoroughly up-to-date, of
  this popular description of the road to success, based on facts and
  opinions gathered by letters and personal interviews from five hundred
  prominent men who tell of their experience along this royal highway,
  and give helpful hints for those who would follow.


=Craigie, Pearl Mary Teresa (Richards) (John Oliver Hobbes, pseud.).=
Flute of Pan. †$1.50. Appleton.

  The author has converted her play, which was produced in England with
  small success, into a novel, which, while entertaining, retains the
  weakness of the stage comedy. The plot hinges on a slight
  misunderstanding between a young English earl who has gone to Venice
  to paint and lead the simple life, and the Princess of Siguria who
  comes to ask him to be her prince consort; other aristocratic
  characters enter into and complicate the story.

  “From the beginning of the book to the end we have not met with a
  stroke of genuine drollery, or of the humour that is composed of
  mingled laughter and sympathy.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 615. Je. 10, ‘05. 710w.

  “It is indeed, impossible to criticise ‘The flute of Pan’ away from
  the footlights. Its plot is thin, and it may be styled a comedy of
  intrigue. But it is very readable and bright and pleasant.”

     + — =Ath.= 1: 746. Je. 17, ‘05. 250w.

  “The story is without background; it is a collection of sketches and
  notes, giving the impression that the writer has never quite made up
  her mind as to what she is aiming at.”

       — =Lond. Times=, 4: 193. Je. 16, ‘05. 450w.

  * “In the present story we miss the clever epigrams and the brilliant
  dialogue which characterized much of her previous work, and there is
  nothing to take their place.”

     — + =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 50w.

  “It is as a psychologist that she would make her appeal. But
  psychology is not her strong point. Her methods are those of the
  dilettante.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 847. Je. 24, ‘05. 1070w.


=Craik, Dinah Maria (Miss Mulock, pseud.).= John Halifax, gentleman.
$1.25. Crowell.

  All friends of John Halifax will be pleased to see it as one of the
  attractive “Thin paper classics” series.


=Cram, Ralph Adams.= Impressions of Japanese architecture and the allied
arts. **$2. Baker.

  Ten papers which show the development of Japanese art and help the
  Western mind to a better understanding of it makes up “this series of
  impressions of the esthetic voicing of Japanese civilization.”
  Beginning with The genius of Japanese art, the author covers the early
  and later architecture of Japan; Temples and shrines; Temple gardens;
  and Domestic interiors. There are also chapters upon The minor arts; A
  color print of Yeizan; A note on Japanese sculpture; and the Future of
  Japanese art. The volume is illustrated with some original plans and
  many unusual pictures.

  * “At last we have a volume doing justice to Japanese architecture.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1478. D. 21, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 35. D. ‘05. 210w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 280w.

  * “It is rare that in a discussion of this sort one finds such
  brilliant diction, fervent imagery, and such a reverent attitude as
  Mr. Cram manifests. Judged from the standpoint of its purpose the book
  is beyond criticism. Mr. Cram’s book is one of the most important of
  the year.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 666. N. 18, ‘05. 220w.


=Cram, Ralph Adams.= Ruined abbeys of Great Britain. **$2.50. Pott.

  “The ruins described and illustrated are Glastonbury, Whitby,
  Lindisfarne, Beaulieu, Netley, Tintern, Gisburgh, Bolton, Jedburgh,
  Kelso, Rievauix, Byland, Melrose. Dryburgh, Kirkstall, Malmsbury,
  York, and Fountains. In the concluding chapter Mr. Cram ... estimates
  the position of the abbeys in English social and economic life and the
  effect of their suppression upon the moral and religious condition of
  the people. The book is fully illustrated and has a full index of
  names and places.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The subject is pursued rather with an interest in the significance
  of the religious houses in English life and their fortunes in their
  relations with the State than from an exclusively artistic
  standpoint.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 36. D. ‘05. 150w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 717. O. 21, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.


=Cramp, Walter S.= Psyche, a romance of the reign of Tiberius. $1.50.
Little.

  The horrid cruelty of Tiberius and his time is graphically set forth.
  The story is of Psyche, a beautiful Greek dancing girl, and her lover
  Gyges, a charioteer in the Roman circus, and the troubles which came
  upon them through their knowledge of a fatal secret connected with the
  ambitions of Sejanus, commander of the Praetorian guards, to make
  himself emperor. The story is the result of a careful study of the
  times, and consequently is unpleasant and full of horrors.

  “Mr. Cramp’s story is the result of considerable study and painstaking
  care, but it lacks ... that strong imaginative quality that makes its
  characters convincing.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 221. Ag. ‘05. 350w.

  “An ambitious and gratifying bit of interpretation.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “Written with conscientious care, but rarely touched by the charm of
  imagination.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 94. My. 6, ‘05. 60w.


=Craven, John J.= Prison life of Jefferson Davis. **$1.20. Dillingham.

  A former edition of this book was published in 1866. The author was
  surgeon at Fortress Monroe during the time of Mr. Davis’ imprisonment,
  and the volume gives a full account of the “details and incidents of
  his captivity, particulars concerning his health and habits, together
  with many conversations on topics of great public interest.” Copies of
  the official reports sent by the author to the commanding officer,
  concerning the prisoner’s physical and mental condition are given in
  full.

         =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


=Crawford, Francis Marion.= Fair Margaret: a portrait. †$1.50.
Macmillan.

  “Margaret Donne is an English girl, daughter of an Oxford don and his
  American wife—a girl the description of whose parentage implies a
  career of unusual interest. When the book opens her parents are dead
  and she is in Paris with a close friend of her mother cultivating her
  voice. Three men figure as her admirers, one of them mysterious and
  probably royal. Margaret becomes an opera singer and meets with
  success.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Abounds in action and shows its author at his best—and his best is
  very good.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

  * “Mr. Crawford is a born story-teller, but a good deal of the writing
  in this volume is very commonplace and lacking in distinction of any
  kind; but the book is worth reading for the sake of the picture of the
  old artist.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 711. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.


=Crawford, Francis Marion.= Salve Venetia: gleanings from history. 2v.
**$5. Macmillan.

  “Brushing aside the didactic history formed by a rapid succession of
  events and the chronological sequence of great and little names, Mr.
  Crawford extracts from tradition and monument a narrative which
  reveals the life of the islanders, the causes of their rise and glory
  and of their dismal decay, far better than a formal history even when
  accompanied with skillful and enlightening commentary. Concerning the
  stories revealed by the monuments, Mr. Crawford’s text is set off with
  a series of illustrations by Joseph Pennell—splendidly true in their
  grasp of art and history and delightful as pictorial records of a
  dying race and its dead culture.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 883. D. 9, ‘05. 310w.


=Crawford, Francis Marion.= Southern Italy and Sicily and the rulers of
the South; with 100 original drawings by Henry Brokman. *$2.50.
Macmillan.

  “No one should by any chance visit Sicily or southern Italy without
  first having read Mr. Crawford’s book. This new edition puts into one
  volume, not at all bulky or inconvenient, what was formerly presented
  in two. The illustrations are capital and are well printed.”—Outlook.

  * “Countless touches show that Mr. Crawford thoroughly understands his
  ground and his people, with a psychological insight that renders
  especially interesting his theories and deductions.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 90w.

  * “Indeed, it is hard to see wherein, within the limits, the work
  could have been better done. Mr. Crawford’s work is an unexcelled
  resumé for the historical scholar, the student of history, or for just
  the lover of good literature.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 753. N. 18, ‘05. 550w.

         =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 90w.

  “In every way the edition is satisfactory.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 336. O. 7, ‘05. 50w.


=Crawford, F. Marion.= Whosoever shall offend. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “Mr. Crawford’s technique becomes, if anything, more refined with each
  new work that he puts forth, but his substance grows thinner than
  ever. A forced mechanical invention marks the plot of ‘Whosoever shall
  offend,’ and the characters are but slightly modified variations of
  the types that he has been fashioning for the past score of years. The
  new novel is concerned with a polished villain, who murders his wife
  and seeks to murder his stepson, all with the sordid object of gaining
  their fortune for himself, and in the end is trapped and punished
  according to his deserts. It is all very cleverly managed, but the
  interest is of the mildest.”—Dial.

  “It is a well-written, highly interesting melodrama.... The characters
  are all good types, the plot is strong, and the Italian atmosphere
  tempers the sensational occurrences to the colder northern
  imagination.”

     — + =Critic.= 46: 477. My. ‘05. 100w.

  Reviewed by W. M. Payne.

         =Dial.= 38: 16. Ja. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  “In this last novel Crawford is at his best. He writes with the charm
  and the originality of a man at the full tide of his powers.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1133. My. 18, ‘05. 260w.

  “The story is ingenious, the sketches of scenery and peasantry
  admirable, the comments by the way philosophic and thoughtful; the
  English, of course, of the best-regulated. The reader for the most
  part, however, remains outside.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 98. F. 2, ‘05. 320w.

  “Notwithstanding its horrors, and partly on account of them,
  ‘Whosoever shall offend’ is simply an agreeable and diverting story,
  the work of an accomplished writer, who always turns out his creations
  in graceful form and who has established the right to be called the
  ‘Norris’ of American fiction.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 496. Mr. ‘05. 370w.

  “His theme, as in not a few of his earlier books, is a particularly
  grewsome and mysterious crime. He appears to tell the story not for
  the sake of its sensational elements, however, but for the sake of
  character and social analysis. Contains a fascinating story, a
  puzzling mystery and its solution, elements in a book which, if well
  handled, as here, have never yet been known to fail of their effect.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 115. Ja. ‘05. 160w.


=Crehore, Albert Gushing.= Synchronous and other multiple telegraphs:
some methods of obtaining independent telegraph circuits on a single
wire both with and without synchronism. *$2. McGraw pub.

  “The multiple telegraph systems other than synchronous systems
  discussed in the book are modifications of the Edison Phonoplex, the
  Varley and other somewhat similar systems; sometimes termed
  superimposed systems.... The first part of the book is taken up with a
  description and discussion of instances of the type of telegraph
  systems just mentioned. The second and third parts of the book relate
  to methods of obtaining synchronism at distant points; and to
  synchronous telegraphs, respectively.”—Engin. N.

  Reviewed by Wm. Maver.

 *       =Engin. N.= 54: 535. N. 16, ‘05. 590w.


=Creighton, Louise (Mrs. Mandell Creighton).= The life and letters of
Mandell Creighton. *$9. Longmans.

  The “Life and letters” of Bishop Creighton, the English Phillips
  Brooks, given to the public by Mrs. Creighton, portray a broadminded,
  steadfast man, a man who was “intensely loyal to the church and its
  mission.” “It is a long time since there was published any memoir or
  volume of letters which shows the Church of England on its best and
  most lovable side than do these memoirs of Creighton. But their
  interest is by no means confined to the Church of England. They
  contain many social studies of England in the second half of the old
  century; and in particular the chapters which deal with Creighton’s
  life at Emberton will long be remembered as a classic study of mining,
  fishing and farm life in the villages on the bleak northeast coast of
  England.” (Ind.)

  “In the hands of Mrs. Creighton the English language is not as apt and
  flexible an instrument as in those of Lady Burne-Jones, but she shows
  an equal skill in the selection and arrangement of her material, and
  perhaps a somewhat greater readiness to admit the weaknesses and
  limitations of her subject.” Herbert W. Horwill.

     + + =Forum.= 36: 558. Ap. ‘05. 3120w.

         =Ind.= 58: 324. F. 9, ‘05. 670w.

  “His widow and biographer, ... has not, although a lady of
  distinguished literary ability, succeeded in presenting an entirely
  coherent and harmonious portrait. Mrs. Creighton’s biography is a
  model of sound literary judgment particularly in its accurate
  proportion. She has also displayed tact.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 95. F. 2, ‘05. 2120w.


=Crewdson, Charles N.= Tales of the road. $1.50. Thompson & Thomas.

  “The author’s object is not merely to tell amusing anecdotes about his
  own and others’ experiences as commercial travellers ... but to give
  some practical hints and suggestions to young men just beginning to
  ‘go on the road’; yet the book is, after all, chiefly a collection of
  anecdotes.”—Outlook.

  * “Some of these are amusing; others are rather tedious. Perhaps it
  may most aptly be compared with such a book as ‘Letters from a
  self-made merchant to his son,’ but it lacks the originality and
  shrewd homely humor which made that book so deservedly popular.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 283. S. 30, ‘05. 120w.


=Crockett, Samuel Rutherford.= Cherry ribband: a novel. †$1.50. Barnes.

  “Raith Ellison, the son of a grim, blind, old Scotchman, lets his eyes
  rest on Ivie Rysland, the daughter of Sergeant Grif Rysland of his
  majesty’s dragoons, quartered in Scotland for the express purpose of
  suppressing the conventicles. For this he is cast off by his father
  and enlists in Rysland’s troop. In the course of time he comes to be
  one of the jailers of his majesty’s prison on the Bass, where his own
  father and brother are confined. Later on, by an unexpected turn of
  events, he assists at a jail delivery by which his father and brother
  gain their freedom again. Of course it ends happily.”—Pub. Opin.

  * “Is a thrilling drama-novel of the joyous old type of Dumas and
  Hope—and Crockett.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 470w.

  * “This romance is full of charm and vigor. The story shows the author
  at his best.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 574. N. 4, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 160w.


=Crockett, Samuel Rutherford.= Loves of Miss Anne. $1.50. Dodd.

  “The story is on the old theme of the apprentice’s love for his
  master’s daughter—in this case a shepherd boy and a very capricious
  and spirited girl, who treads the narrow path between fun and
  ill-breeding with rather uncertain steps. The boy becomes a
  land-agent, helps to rescue the girl from the insults of a drunken
  brother, and marries her after some pretty love-making on the hills by
  moonlight. The tale is told by Miss Anne’s faithful companion.”—Spec.

  “Her story may be read with a good conscience.” W. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 126. F. 16, ‘05. 140w.

  “There is about the whole book a good humour and good health. It is a
  pity that Mr. Crockett will not realize that vulgarity is in itself
  bad art, and in no way contributes to the realism of a narrative.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 145. Ja. 28, ‘05. 340w.


=Crockett, Samuel Rutherford.= May Margaret. †$1.50. Dodd.

  The heroine of Mr. Crockett’s story is the Scottish May Margaret of
  the famous house of Douglas. The tale reveals how this high-spirited,
  quick witted maiden presides in turn over the destinies of three
  wooers. “It is all a fearful matrimonial tangle, but history and not
  Mr Crockett, is responsible for that, and canonical laws find a way
  for the legalizing of it—as is with much sly humor set forth in the
  text.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Is in Mr. Crockett’s best vein. It may be doubted whether the author
  has made the most of this Æschylean drama; but he has emphasized the
  actors, and his additions to history tend to fix the picture in our
  memory.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 714. Je. 10. 170w.

  “While not a masterpiece, the tale is strong in its appeal to the two
  elemental human passions, war and love, viewed through the magic
  mirror of imagination and set in the enchanted land of Long Ago.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31 :666. N. 4, ‘05. 240w.

  “This is not, perhaps, one of his best, but it goes with the gait of
  the ‘true romance’ ... and is good to read.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 435. Jl. 1, ‘05. 440w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 445. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “Liberties are taken with history, and there are a hundred flagrant
  anachronisms of style and matter; but the real blemish is that the
  whole atmosphere is sham antique, and aggressively false.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 196. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1100w.


=Crockett, Samuel Rutherford.= Raiderland: all about Grey Galloway, its
stories, traditions, characters, humors. **$2. Dodd.

  “A sort of literary guide-book to that part of Galloway which is the
  locale of the bulk of his fiction. The result is a pleasant medley of
  facts and fiction, of descriptive touches and old legends, of
  character sketches and those intuitions which a land gray with history
  is certain to arouse.” (Pub. Opin.) Of his purpose, the author says:
  “It is my desire not so much to write a new book about Galloway as to
  focus and concentrate what I have already written for the use of
  Galloway lovers and Galloway travelers.”

  “A collection of more or less doubtful history but of excellent
  literary material. The drawings of Mr. Joseph Pennell are, as always,
  delightful.” Wallace Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 89. F. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “To a native of Galloway, or to a person steeped in Mr. Crockett’s
  books as some are steeped in Stevenson or Scott or Thackeray, the
  whole may well be delightful. To the ordinary Philistinic reader much
  of it will appear superfluous—though even he must catch at times the
  infection of Mr. Crockett’s enthusiasm and feel the charm of this bit
  and that of panegyric, of reminiscence or local color.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 29. Ja. 14, ‘05. 560w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38 :26. Ja. 5, ‘05. 200w.


* =Crockett, Samuel Rutherford.= Sir Toady Crusoe. (†)$1.50. Stokes.

  This new story for boys of all ages tells how that very charming
  little fellow, Sir Toady Lion, became Sir Toady Crusoe, and of the
  many remarkable adventures which he and Saucy and Dick and some others
  had on Isle Crusoe on the Scottish coast, how he befriended a poacher
  in his father’s covers, how he played the part of local assistant to
  Providence in behalf of his big brother, Hugh John, and Cissy Carter,
  by threatening Cissy’s father with two large pistols, and how he did
  many other strange things in a way very unlike any one else and very
  like Toady. There are many illustrations by Gordon Browne.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 895. D. 16, ‘05. 120w.

  * “He is an amusing, if improbable little chap, but other children
  will certainly learn from him neither good English nor good manners.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 1040. D. 23, ‘05. 80w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 765. D. ‘05. 120w.

  * “Is superior to the ordinary story for children, in its style,
  humour, characterisation and atmosphere. And yet Mr. Crockett’s tale
  is not altogether satisfactory, there is too large a mixture of
  grown-up sentiment in it.”

     + — =Sat.= R. 100: sup. 10. D. 9, ‘05. 130w.

 *       =Spec.= 95: sup. 907. D. 2, ‘05. 60w.


=Croiset, (Marie Joseph) Alfred, and Croiset, Maurice.= Abridged history
of Greek literature; authorized tr. by G. F. Heffelbower. **$2.50.
Macmillan.

  “This manual is a compression of the great history of Greek
  literature, which the authors of this work have published in five
  volumes, appearing 1887-1899. In accord with this conception of Greek
  literature as a whole we find their admirable development of each
  period.... It is the peculiar excellence of this work that it gives no
  partial and incomplete view of Greek literature, but carries the
  account of it not only through the Hellenistic period, but through the
  Christian writers of the first three centuries as well.... Their
  closing chapters on the Hellenic revival and the last days of Hellenic
  literature are most illuminating and valuable.”—Educ. R.

  “The subject is developed with the beautiful French lucidity which
  makes readable an account of the dullest epoch, and the brilliant
  phrasing which is a Frenchman’s birthright cannot be altogether lost,
  even in translation. The translation by Professor Heffelbower exhibits
  some curious phenomena.” Grace Harriet Macurdy.

   + + — =Educ. R.= 29: 314. Mr. ‘05. 900w.

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 152. Ja. 19, ‘05. 1290w.

  “Mr. Heffelbower’s translation is fluent enough, but full of
  infelicities when reproducing MM. Croiset’s rendering of gems of Greek
  literature.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 38. Ja. 12, ‘05. 1440w.

  “The translation preserves the spirit, while giving us the idiomatic
  English so necessary for the young student.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 274.* Mr. ‘05. 140w.

  “In spite of these lapses—which, after all, are few in number
  considering the extent of the work—the book as a whole may be
  commended to students of Greek literature, who are unable to use the
  original, as a measurably satisfactory presentation in English of a
  work of unquestioned excellence.” John C. Rolfe.

   + + — =School R.= 13: 738. N. ‘05. 540w.


=Crosby, Ernest.= Broadcast. *75c. Funk.

  Mr. Crosby, the poet reformer and Tolstoyan, shows thru his verses,
  pictures, messages and meditations, the tyranny which the world’s
  systems exercise over its powerless victims. His remedy for the times
  so out of joint lies in making “men pull together” as only “love,
  cooperation, equal service, true honor and honesty” can accomplish.

  “The present volume, though inferior to ‘Plain talk in Psalm and
  parable’, contains much that is thought-stimulating and helpful. The
  more we read Mr. Crosby’s writings, the more profoundly are we
  convinced that he is above all else a moralist and a teacher, and that
  prose is the field of literature in which he is most effective.”

     + — =Arena.= 34: 334. S. ‘05. 930w.

  “But in spite of unpoetic poetry and illogical logic to be found in
  abundance on the strident little pages of this outcry against our
  social organization, there are also the results of observation
  definitely outlined.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 678. O. 14, ‘05. 220w.


* =Crosby, Ernest.= Garrison the non-resistant. 50c. Public pub. co.

  Mr. Crosby, the disciple of Tolstoy, has taken the facts relating to
  the life of Garrison as related in “The story of his life by his
  children” and explains thru them the anomaly that the cause of
  abolition fathered by a non-resistant was at last decided by the
  greatest war of history.


=Crosland, Thomas William Hodgson.= Wild Irishman. **$1.25. Appleton.

  As Mr. Crosland has numbered the “Egregious Englishman,” and the
  “Unspeakable Scot” among the scalps of his satire, so now does he
  display just such designing intentions towards the “Wild Irishman.”
  His attacks are merciless, and “such chapters as those on ‘Pigs,’
  ‘Potatoes,’ ‘Dirt,’ ‘Whiskey,’ and ‘Blarney’ are not exactly
  calculated to make the native of Erin enthusiastic in the writer’s
  praise.” (Dial.)

       — =Dial.= 39: 210. O. 1, ‘05. 520w.

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 620. S. 23, ‘05. 780w.

       — =Outlook.= 81: 336. O. 7, ‘05. 80w.

  “As an exercise in literary pyrotechnics the work is out of the
  ordinary—but we cannot help a disappointment in that Mr. Crosland has
  not devoted an unusual brilliancy to better uses than mere display.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 447. S. 30, ‘05. 210w.

 *     + =R of Rs.= 32: 636. N. ‘05. 90w.


=Cross, Wilbur Lucius.= Development of the English novel. **$1.50.
Macmillan.

  The seventh edition of Professor Cross’ work which first appeared in
  1900. Not only has use proven its principles authoritative, but
  judgments which the author offered five years ago have stood the test
  of change and advancement.

  “The best of its kind, no doubt, in the language.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 261. Ag. 3, ‘05. 20w.

         =Nation.= 80: 435. Je. 1, ‘05. 70w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 691. Jl. 15, ‘05. 30w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 159. Jl. 29, ‘05. 310w.

  “Professor Cross has done a thorough and useful work.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


=Crowley, Jeremiah.= The parochial school: a curse to the church, a
menace to the nation. $1. Published by the author, Chicago.

  In a chapter dedicating his work to the “Emancipate Catholic laity of
  tomorrow” the author makes an appeal to the laity. “‘The parochial
  school’ lays bare clerical immorality in the United States in a way to
  rival the story of the church in Latin countries or in Germany before
  Luther’s day. Sad as is this picture, it is, however, far less
  painful, than to read how thoroughly good men combine to hide, gloss
  over, or condone clerical crimes.... Father Crowley devotes much space
  to the dangers of the parochial school. They are an incubus on the
  church and a serious menace to her.... The surest way in the world to
  kill off Catholicism is to give over education to priests and nuns.
  Witness France.” (Ind.)

       + =Ind.= 58: 207. Ja. 26, ‘05. 1030w.

  “He does not attack the Catholic church, but arraigns its priests and
  prelates who have become corrupted.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 165. Mr. 18, ‘05. 350w.


=Crowley, Mary Catherine.= Heroine of the strait. 75c. Little.

  A popular edition of this romance of Detroit in the time of the Ottawa
  chief, Pontiac. An account of the thrilling events connected with the
  pitiless siege of Detroit, through which runs the love story of the
  young Scotchman, Sterling, and Angelique Cuillerier, a brave daughter
  of the frontier.


=Crowley, Mary Catherine.= Love thrives in war: a romance of the
frontier in 1812; with front, by Clyde O. De Land. 75c. Little.

  A new popular edition of a lively romance in which Perry, Tippecanoe,
  and Tecumseh figure. The heroine, a Scotch girl, who has a trio of
  suitors, promises to marry the man she loathes in order to save the
  life of her lover. The author has made a thoro study of the scenes and
  times which she depicts.


=Cruttwell, Maud.= Verrocchio. *$2. Scribner.

  “To her biographies of Mantegna and the Robbias our author now
  presents one of Verrocchio, perhaps the least known and appreciated of
  fifteenth century masters.” (Outlook). The biographer has aimed to
  show “upon what dubious evidence the attribution to Verrocchio of such
  work as the Tornabuoni relief and other inferior sculpture and
  painting is based, to trace his steady development from the immature
  work of the Baptism to the full burst of his powers in the statue of
  the Colleoni, and to arrive at a truer estimate of his artistic
  capabilities by the rejection of all inferior work, the attribution of
  which is merely hypothetical, taking as the standard of judgment only
  such works as are proved beyond possibility of doubt to be authentic.”
  The book is fully illustrated.

  “It is in her purely aesthetic judgments that we find Miss Cruttwell
  least satisfactory. Taken as a whole, Miss Cruttwell’s study is the
  most accurate, impartial, and complete that has yet been made on the
  subject; but it leaves room for some writer touched more deeply by the
  imaginative aspect of Verrocchio’s work to give him his exact place in
  the temple of fame.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 116. Ja. 28. 1670w.

  “It is a thorough-going essay, notable for its clarification of the
  master’s works. Her book has gusto; it is written with equal knowledge
  and enthusiasm. It is one of the best of those monographs to which I
  have referred as based on system and industry rather than on an
  original impulse.” Royal Cortissoz.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 277. F. ‘05. 540w.

  “The author has grasped the value of giving attention to the study of
  the artist’s works at the expense of vague surmises as to his
  biography.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 186. F. ‘05. 80w.

  “A scholarly and appreciative monograph of great importance.” George
  Breed Zug.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 320. My. 1, ‘05. 890w.

  “Her book is altogether the best on Verrocchio that we have, in
  English at least.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1364. Je. 15, ‘05. 180w.

       + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 16. Mr. ‘05. 100w.

  “Generally speaking, Maud Cruttwell’s work is sober and well informed.
  One may regret the vagueness of her general views. Few comprehensive
  works of recent years are as useful.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 77. Ja. 26, ‘05. 920w.

  “She leaves us with an impression not to be gained by other readings
  of the exaltation of the Verrocchio ideal. The biographer and critic
  renders an equally important service in discriminating between
  Verrocchio’s own work and those far feebler achievements of his
  followers sometimes attributed to him.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 96. Ja. 7, ‘05. 240w.


=Culbertson, Anne Virginia.= Banjo talks. $1. Bobbs.

  A group of about fifty negro dialect poems, some of which sing, others
  dream, and many talk sound common sense.

  “Here are many songs, poems and lullabies phrased in the homely terms
  and picturing the life and character of the Southern negro more
  accurately than labored essays. And more than this, these simple
  folk-lore songs, ditties and lullabies are composed with due regard to
  the laws of versification.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 554. N. ‘05. 990w.

  * “Showing very little of the philosophical temper that makes Mr.
  Dunbar’s work unique, and being considerably less perfect in dialect,
  they have to their credit a decided imaginative quality, much
  picturesqueness of diction, and a charming spontaneity of conception
  and treatment.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 386. D. 1, ‘05. 200w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 746. N. 4, ‘05. 220w.

  * “The volume as a whole, with its humor, its pathos, its jumbled
  ratiocinations, gives a fairly complete portrait of the southern
  negro.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 70w.


=Cullum, Ridgwell.= In the brooding wild. †$1.50. Page.

  “The tragedy of ‘The brooding wild’ consists in the enmity sown
  between two brothers, trappers of a straightforward primitive type, by
  a woman whom they believe to be a mysterious white squaw, queen of an
  Indian tribe. She is really a very ordinary half-breed conspiring with
  a rascally trader to rob the brothers.... The climax, in which a
  lunatic filled with the lust of slaughter breaks away into the
  wilderness, unfortunately passes the border-line of the
  grotesque.”—Sat. R.

  “The human interest is subsidiary to the landscape. We wish the author
  had trusted for his effects to the realities of his mighty background,
  for his conspirators are made of pasteboard while his wolves and dogs
  and bears are of flesh and blood.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 736. Jl. 15, ‘05. 310w.

  “Unfortunately his ambition has outsailed his power of execution, and
  from unskilful treatment the story loses the interest promised at the
  outset.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 619. My. 20. 300w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 457. Jl. 8, ‘05. 450w.

  “The story is told with fervor, with a rough, crude force.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 221. Ag. 12, ‘05. 130w.

  “The book is garishly melodramatic.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 745. Je. 3, ‘05. 270w.


=Cunningham, William.= Growth of English industry and commerce during
the early and middle ages. v. I. 4th ed. *$4. Macmillan.

  “In this new edition of the first volume ... substantial additions are
  found, together with corrections on various points of detail and
  increased precision of statement.... As it now stands, this volume,
  which traces the course of industrial progress through early and
  mediæval England, more nearly than ever before fulfills its author’s
  purpose of indicating clearly the interconnection between the economic
  and political facts of the periods reviewed, and of making plain not
  only the events but the ideas of the time.”—Outlook.

         =Nation.= 80: 373. My. 11, ‘05. 140w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 192. My. 20, ‘05. 180w.


=Curtis, Francis.= Republican party. Vols. I and II. **$6. Putnam.

  “The work should command serious interest. The very fact that it is
  honored by a foreword over the name of President Roosevelt, and that
  the introductory notes ... were written by Senator William P. Frye and
  Speaker J. G. Cannon, at once arouses interest. By copious extracts
  from government documents, party platforms and newspaper files, the
  author shows first the republican party owes its origin neither to
  enthusiasts nor to a single movement. The party has been consistent
  through its career, and to-day stands for the three great policies for
  which it stood at its birth, ‘liberty, honor, and progress.’”—Ann. Am.
  Acad.

  “But in spite of the fact that the author is neither exact nor
  entirely conservative in all his statements, the work as a whole must
  command lasting respect.”

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 127. Ja. ‘05. 300w.

  “The period of the Civil war is handled skilfully and with less
  partisanship than might have been expected. It will be easily seen
  that Mr. Curtis’s work will be accepted only by loyal party men, and
  yet it is of great value to the historical student; in fact, it is a
  very elaborate historical argument.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 268. F. 2, ‘05. 400w.

  “It would be ridiculous to call this kind of stuff ‘history’, since it
  entirely lacks the historical spirit or sense of proportion, still Mr.
  Curtis has compiled a useful record.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 99: 599. My. 6, ‘05. 1400w.


=Curtis, William Eleroy.= Egypt, Burma and British Malaysia. **$2.
Revell.

  “Another descriptive informational volume, so many of which have
  already come from the pen of the same author. Mr. Curtis tells of
  things he has seen, and garnishes his narrative with a great deal of
  historical and descriptive information which makes very interesting
  reading. There are a number of excellent illustrations in this
  volume.”—R. of Rs.

  * “To add anything new to these old familiars would be impossible; but
  Mr. Curtis’s view-point is at times refreshing.” H. E. Coblentz.

       + =Dial.= 39: 377. D. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  * “There is in the present book the same easy, confident, and
  confidential style of sketching and statisticizing (if the word may
  pass) that makes not unpleasant reading in Mr. Curtis’s previous
  volume.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 403. N. 16, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Its reading will amply repay any one interested in either the
  ancient or the modern development of the countries treated.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 575. N. 4, ‘05. 210w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 755. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Curtis, William Eleroy.= Modern India. **$2. Revell.

  A vast deal of information has been brought together here, and the
  author’s method “is to combine with a mass of observations and
  deductions of his own—the observations taken hastily upon his travels
  and the deductions—not too carefully checked—statistics, fragments of
  history, geography, ethnology, guide book information, and what not
  gathered together from all available sources.” (N. Y. Times.) “The
  author is happier in his delineation of modern life, and the casual
  reader will enjoy the descriptions of town and country, plague and
  famine, peasant and priest.” (Nation.)

  * “It is a strange medley of wit and wisdom with error and ignorance,
  of fun and burlesque with serious study, the good qualities, however,
  predominating.”

     + — =Ath.= 2: 639. N. 11, ‘05. 1560w.

  * “A very helpful book for those who wish data upon which to base a
  reasonable judgment of the actual state of affairs in that country.”
  H. E. Coblentz.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 377. D. 1, ‘05. 300w.

  “With much that is statistically accurate, the book unfortunately
  abounds in printer’s and author’s errors.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 240. S. 21, ‘05. 180w.

  “It would, no doubt, be hard to find in another single volume such a
  variety of information about India and Indian affairs, but the
  assemblage with all its facts and figures, lacks that authority which
  is necessary to give full value to a work of this kind.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 1160w.

  “A feature of particular value to Americans is the exposition of the
  activities of their countrymen in the religious, educational, economic
  and social life of India.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 135. S. 16, ‘05. 180w.

  * “Another of Mr. Curtis’ encyclopaedic but entertaining books.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 636. N. ‘05. 100w.


=Cuthbert, Father.= Catholic ideals in social life. *$1.25. Benziger.

  Father Cuthbert’s “desire has been to give expression to the Catholic
  mind touching some of the most urgent questions of the hour in regard
  to social life and conduct.” His essays include: The church and
  personal liberty, The Christian state, The education of women,
  Marriage, The value of work, The priest and social reform, The
  responsibility of wealth, The idea of responsibility, Religious
  aspects of social work, The working man’s apostolate, and St. Francis
  and you.

  “Fresh, hopeful, and courageous essays.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 681. F. ‘05. 540w.


=Cuthell, E. H.= My garden in the city of gardens. **$1.50. Lane.

  Gardening in India from October to June furnishes the theme of this
  “memory with illustrations.” There is a goodly amount of incidental
  knowledge worked in, such as descriptions of prevalent Indian customs
  and bits of gossip concerning Hindu every-day life.

  “In spite of these faults and such others as an awkward style of
  writing and the lack of a glossary of Indian words, the book contains
  a good deal that is of interest in regard to life and nature in
  India.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 243. O. 16, ‘05. 390w.

  “As garden-books go, this one is sufficiently entertaining, and the
  descriptions are as good as the photographs.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 183. Ag. 31, ‘05. 150w.

  “Much of it is good enough reading if the mood fits.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 478. Jl. 22, ‘05. 690w.

  “But good as much of the book is, it is a little spoiled by an excess
  of carelessness in style and a too pointed assertion of individual
  mannerisms.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 291. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1470w.


=Cutler, James Elbert.= Lynch law: an investigation into the history of
lynching in the U. S. **$1.50. Longmans.

  Beginning with the origin of the term Prof. Cutler traces the
  development of the lynch law from 1830 down to date. He discusses the
  present situation, suggests remedies, and gives charts and statistics.

  “The volume will repay careful study, even if exception is
  occasionally taken to some of the author’s conclusions. The volume
  represents a great amount of research work and the author is to be
  congratulated upon the manner in which the material is presented.”
  Carl Kelsey.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 606. S. ‘05. 280w.

   + + + = Ath.= 1905, 2: 296. S. 2. 1860w.

       + =Cath. World.= 81: 543. Jl. ‘05. 510w.

  “The book is sane, temperate in tone, moderate in statement, and
  judicial in conclusions. It is the only really valuable treatise on
  the subject, and is not likely to be superseded.” Walter L. Fleming.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 34. Jl. 16, ‘05. 1310w.

  “Dr. Cutler has done much to solve the problem by his laborious,
  careful, and candid study of the question, which has already made him
  the leading authority upon a dangerous social disease.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 57. Jl. 20, ‘05. 2110w.

  “In his final chapters on the justification of lynching and the
  remedies for it, Mr. Cutler shows a spirit remarkable for its fairness
  and an appreciation of the force of circumstances and the historical
  facts of the situation.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 374. Je. 10, ‘05. 1850w.

  “Careful and dispassionate study of the phenomenon known as lynching.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 393. Je. 10, ‘05. 380w.

  “A well-considered and thoughtful analysis of the facts and figures.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 911. Je. 10, ‘05. 470w.

  * “Mr. Cutler’s book should be valuable for its summary of facts, and
  for the solemn warning that thoughtful Americans may read between the
  lines.”

       + =Spec.= 95: sup. 909. D. 2, ‘05. 380w.


=Cutting, Mary Stewart.= Little stories of courtship. †$1.25. McClure.

  “Tales of plain, everyday, middle-class people—people who are not
  overburdened with the world’s goods, but who are educated, cultured
  and refined—in short, the people we meet daily about us. The eight
  stories which make up this volume are very pleasant reading,
  indeed.”—N. Y. Times.

  “This collection does not fulfill all the expectations excited by its
  unique predecessor, ‘The little stories of married life.’”

       + =Bookm.= 21: 545. Jl. ‘05. 320w.

       + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 180w.

  “Stories of the book are all simple in their theme, but they gain much
  by Mrs. Cutting’s sympathetic handling of them.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 390w.

  “The charm of all the stories lies in their perfect naturalness.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “Some of these ‘little stories of courtship’ are excellent in their
  way, indicating shrewd observation and a kindly sympathy. But they are
  of very uneven merit.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 796. My. 20, ‘05. 110w.

  “They are gracefully spun, and, without being intense, they have the
  human touch. They portray life in its usual phases, yet they are not
  without variety, and they are very genuine in feeling.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 358. Ag. ‘05. 220w.


Cyclopedia of applied electricity; a practical guide for electricians,
mechanics, engineers, students, telegraph and telephone operators, and
all others interested in electricity. Prepared by a corps of experts,
electrical engineers and designers. 5v. $30. Am. school of
correspondence.

  The text is divided in five parts and contains over 2,000
  illustrations. Part I. treats of current measurements, part II. of
  dynamos, part III. of lightning, part IV. of alternating currents and
  power transmission, and part V. of telephony.

  “We give, therefore, without comment on our part, the opinion passed
  by the publishers themselves: ‘The practical value of the work as a
  whole can hardly be questioned.’”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 294. Mr. 16, ‘05. 990w.

  “A practical guide and encyclopedia of electrical knowledge that
  should be of great value to the everyday worker with electricity in
  all of its applications.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 428. Mr. 18, ‘05. 250w.


=Cynewulf.= Dream of the rood: an old English poem attributed to
Cynewulf; ed. by Albert S. Cook. *90c. Oxford.

  With the reproduction of this poem from the Vercelli book, the editor
  offers complete sidelight information including an introduction which
  discusses the manuscript, translations, authorship—sometimes
  attributed to Caedmon—and literary characteristics of the poem. There
  are full notes, an appendix and a glossary.

  “This little book is full of valuable and all but convincing facts.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 445. Ap. 22, ‘05. 600w.

  “The notes proper are full and interesting, and the glossary unusually
  helpful.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 686. Je. 3. 280w.

         =Dial.= 38: 277. Ap. 16, ‘05. 60w.

         =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 40w.




                                   D


=Dale, Alan, pseud.= See =Cohen, Alfred J.=


=Dale, Thomas F.= Polo, past and present. *$3.75. Scribner.

  An authoritative polo handbook. “Mr Dale has succeeded in
  accomplishing what no previous writer on polo has ever done, that is
  to present a concise, even graphic, view of the present status of polo
  throughout the world. The chapters on polo in England, America, India,
  Australia, and New Zealand, while technical, as the rules of each
  country are presented in full with illustrative comment, are of
  peculiar interest at the present time owing to a growing sentiment for
  an international code of rules.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Mr. Dale has the happy faculty of writing entertainingly for the
  general reader as well as for the scientific student. His book
  combines both elements.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 482. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1090w.

  “A short chapter on the elements of polo is as instructive as it can
  be; and the later portions of the work, which deal with training
  ponies, stable management, and polo-pony breeding, contain much
  excellent matter.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 471. S. 30, ‘05. 600w.


=Daniels, Mabel W.= American girl in Munich. †$1.25. Little.

  A Boston girl’s account of a year spent as a student of music in
  Munich. The German life in the little pension, the trials and joys of
  her fellow students, her professors, and the operas and symphonies she
  enjoyed, are described in a series of chatty letters to her chum. She
  meets several real celebrities in the world of music, and weaves into
  her story a pretty little German love idyl.

  “Pleasantly written and full of delightful humor.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 326. My. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “There is not a ponderous page, yet she has attempted to enliven her
  narrative by weaving into it a boarding-house love story. It would
  have been wiser to study her German and read her proofs carefully.”

   + + — =Nation=, 81: 83. Jl. 27, ‘05. 680w.

  “Delightfully readable are the letters. The book will be primarily
  interesting to another girl who has been or is thinking of studying
  abroad, but it is written in a chatty, gossipy manner which makes easy
  reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 198. Ap. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “A series of bright and entertaining letters. They have a flavor of
  genuineness quite apart from their mention of real notabilities and
  places.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 959. Ap. 15, ‘05. 70w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 835. My. 27, ‘05. 70w.


=Dante Alighieri.= Divina commedia; tr. by H. F. Tozer. *$1. Oxford.

  “A translation into English prose intended primarily for readers who
  are not acquainted with Italian. Mr. Tozer has endeavored to give
  Dante’s meaning as fully and clearly as possible without adhering too
  literally to the words; and at the same time to present the poem in a
  fairly readable form.”—Bookm.

  “In rendering the poem itself Mr. Tozer’s prose contrasts lamentably
  with the noble, beautiful, living English and the unerring good taste
  of Professor Norton.” Abbott Foster.

     — + =Bookm.= 21: 418. Je. ‘05. 970w.

  “The translator has coped successfully with the difficult task of
  rendering Dante in English prose suitable for the student. From an
  artistic standpoint, much is necessarily lacking in the way of music
  and connotation of style.”

     + — =Critic.= 46: 288. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

  “The most obvious quality of Mr. Tozer’s translation is its
  readableness; its inferiority to Mr. Norton’s lies in a less profound
  Dante scholarship, and in a certain looseness of style which springs
  from a tendency to paraphrase, and now from the use of inappropriate
  words.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 298, Ap. 13, ‘05. 750w.

  Reviewed by W. L.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 184. Mr. 25, ‘05. 700w.


=Dante Alighieri.= Inferno: a translation and commentary, by Marvin R.
Vincent. **$1.50. Scribner.

  “While owning up to the ‘disenchantment’ of any translation,” the
  author, who is professor of sacred literature in the Union theological
  seminary, offers his own as a help to ‘make the study of Dante what it
  should be—a part of the curriculum of every theological institution.’
  The translation “is fortified with about 125 pages of notes which
  comprise a commentary on words and phrases and ideas gathered and
  sifted from H. F. Tozer’s convenient book of explanation, and from
  similar publications. The author has also scattered some things of his
  own with lavish hand—principally in the departments of religions and
  ethical interpretation, altho there are some of historical fact.” (N.
  Y. Times).

  “The student is led without useless ornamentation directly to the
  poet’s conception; and that is what most students want.”

       + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 379. Ap. ‘05. 210w.

  “Dr. Vincent has made a very strong, accurate and readable
  translation.”

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 418. Je. ‘05. 2890w.

  “It is far from being a successful translation, for the figurative
  meanings have almost entirely disappeared with the rhythmical. It is
  just as far from being a successful poem, for all that Dr. Vincent
  gives us has already been more concisely expressed in plain prose.
  These notes are of uniform excellence, and are, as the author
  intimates, the result of class-room debates. On the chance that there
  are certain intellects which will more rapidly grasp a blank verse
  ‘Inferno’ rather than one in genuine poetry like Cary’s or in
  rhetorical prose like Norton’s, Dr. Vincent’s book may not be deemed
  entirely superfluous. For such intellects his notes can hardly fail to
  be otherwise than enlightening and stimulating.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 38. Ja. 21, ‘05. 560w.

  “Dr. Vincent announces that he has made a literal translation based on
  the Oxford text of Dr. Moore.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 30: 759. D. ‘04. 80w.


=D’Arblay, Madame.= See =Burney, Frances.=


=Dargan, Edwin Charles.= History of preaching from the apostolic fathers
to the great reformers. **$1.75. Armstrong.

  “This, the first of three volumes, carries the subject to the close of
  the Reformation period. The two that are to follow will treat of
  modern European preaching and the history of preaching in the United
  States. Thus a field at present but partially worked will be fully
  covered. The present volume treats successively of the patristic
  preaching, its decline after the fourth century, mediæval preaching
  from the eleventh to the fourteenth century, and the subsequent
  renaissance.”—Outlook.

  “Dr. Dargan gives us a careful view of the historic settings and
  abundant biographical detail.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 598. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “The author appears to have done very little original research, but he
  writes a readable style, and has made use of good sources of
  information.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 271. Ag. 26. 130w.

  “We know of no other work of this character in which the combination
  of pleasing diction and abundant information is more satisfactory. Our
  author has depended largely upon Protestant authorities on matters
  connected with the Catholic church. The erudition of the author, his
  pleasing style and his spirit of equity give to the book a large
  value.”

   + + — =Baltimore Sun.= : 8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 490w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 139. Mr. 4, ‘05. 370w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 449. F. 18, ‘05. 190w.

  * “The book is a treasury of learning of a certain kind, but the
  learning is scarcely helpful. As a bibliography, indeed, the volume
  may be useful.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: sup. 910. D. 2, ‘05. 190w.


=Dasent, Sir George Webbe.= Heroes of Iceland; adapted from the
translation of Dasent by Allen French. $1.50. Little.

  A tale adapted from Dasent’s translation of “The story of burnt Njal,”
  the great Icelandic saga, with a preface, introduction and notes by
  Mr. French. It pictures Iceland in the tenth century, the old pagan
  life, the dawn of Christianity, and the struggle of mighty heroes.

  * “In his comprehensive introduction as well as his notes, the author
  gives a thoro setting.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1387. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 471. Jl. 15, ‘05. 100w.

  “A very convenient form of the greatest of Icelandic stories.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 526. O. 28, ‘05. 30w.

  * “We have no criticism to make on Mr. French’s execution of his
  task.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: sup. 904. D. 2, ‘05. 280w.


=Dasent, Sir George Webbe.= Popular tales from the Norse. *$2.50.
Putnam.

  The third edition of an 1859 English classic. “The book contains
  besides the ‘Tales,’ the introduction of the original edition, which
  considers broadly the origin and diffusion of folk tales in general,
  and of the Norse popular tales in particular.... A new part of the
  book is a memoir of the author by his son, Arthur Irwin Dasent, who
  gives an account of his father’s career from the time of his birth, on
  the island of St. Vincent, in 1817, to his death in England, in 1896.
  It is the story of an extraordinarily full and busy life, and a
  typically English record, at the same time, of recognition and merited
  reward.” (Nation).

  “These, because of their manner and matter, are as fresh as on the day
  when they were first given in English garb. Scarcely a writer of
  recent time has been the possessor of such an English vocabulary or
  the master of such an English style. Dasent’s ‘Tales’ are in this way
  not only a singularly remarkable instance of felicitous translation
  from a foreign language into our own, but are at the same time a well
  of English, pure and undefiled, and a model of what English prose
  happily may be.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 114. F. 9, ‘05. 530w.


=Daumier, Honore.= International Studio. Daumier and Gavarni. *$2; *$3.
Lane.

  A number devoted to Daumier and Gavarni, the two great French
  cartoonists of the last century. There are two dozen reproductions of
  their work in color and photogravures, and a hundred illustrations in
  black and white. Critical and biographical notes on Daumier are
  translated from an essay of M. Henri Frantz, and there is an essay
  upon Gavarni by M. Octave Uzanne.

  “Will be greatly prized by collectors of the works of the great
  satirical cartoonists and illustrators. It will prove a valuable
  addition to the art-collector’s library.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 338. Mr. ‘05. 690w.

  “The essays are after all mere introductions to the plates.
  Incidentally the cartoons furnish a fascinating interpretation of
  Parisian life and manners. The special numbers of ‘The studio’ are
  always interesting, but this one is unusually unique and suggestive.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 51. Ja. 16, ‘05. 260w.


=Davenport, Frederick Morgan.= Primitive traits in religious revivals: a
study in mental and social evolution. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  “This is a purely sociological interpretation of revivals, having no
  evangelistic bias or motive. In his development of this theme the
  author has introduced accounts of various revivals of this country and
  Great Britain.”—R. of Rs.

  “His collection of materials in this field is highly interesting, and
  a valuable supplement to Stoll’s ‘Suggestion and Hypnotismus in der
  Völker-psychologie.’” W. I. Thomas.

     + + =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 272. S. ‘05. 160w.

  * “It is a valuable contribution to our knowledge. Every minister
  should read it carefully and take its lessons to heart. The social
  student will find it helpful in explaining phenomena which have not
  received the attention they deserve.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 750. N. ‘05. 190w.

  Reviewed by E. T. Brewster.

     + — =Atlan.= 96: 688. N. ‘05. 500w.

  “The treatment of his subject is logical and fairly clear, though with
  a number of repetitions.” Rolvix Harlan.

   + + — =Bib. World.= 26: 237. S. ‘05. 570w.

  “The latter chapters of the book are somewhat disappointing. Instead
  of calm, scientific analyses or a logical drawing of conclusions,
  Prof. Davenport indulges in an exposition of his own theories and
  ideas.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 390. Ag. 17, ‘05. 580w.

  “The book is a valuable and highly interesting contribution to the
  many recent discussions of the place and value of the emotions in
  moral and religious development.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 20. Jl. 6, ‘05. 1080w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 437. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1660w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 767. Je. ‘05. 140w.


=Davidson, Andrew Bruce.= Theology of the Old Testament. **$2.50.
Scribner.

  Principal Salmond has compiled this treatise in Old Testament theology
  from the manuscripts left by Dr. Davidson. Under the doctrine of God,
  of man, of sin, of redemption, and of the last things, is given his
  theological interpretation of the Old Testament.

  “It is a pleasure to note throughout both volumes the keenness of
  observation, the gift of interpretative insight, and the incisive
  style which are conspicuous in all the writings of the lamented
  biblicist. It treats the Old Testament as not only a literary, but a
  moral unit. This is really the essence of the inadequacy and
  untimeliness of the book. The fact is that these lectures must be
  repudiated by biblical science in as far as they fail to indicate
  Israel’s progress in religious thought and make the Old Testament
  literature an illustration either of the New Testament teaching of our
  modern creeds. They must also be disowned by the ‘higher criticism,’
  of which Mr. Davidson was more or less an exponent, because they fail
  to apply an ethical test to religious belief.” James Frederick
  McCurdy.

     + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 346. Ap. ‘05. 5160w.

  “There are many fine discussions of particular problems, and many
  brilliant individual passages that one would like to quote; but there
  is no history of the religion of Israel. Will be useful to the
  preacher who wishes to gather up the teachings of the Old Testament on
  any given point; but it will be of little value to the student who is
  trained in modern historical methods.”

     — + =Bib. World.= 25: 283. Ap. ‘05. 2340w.

  “Containing incisive, profitable, and helpful discussions of some of
  the fundamental doctrines of the Old Testament.” Ira M. Price.

       + =Dial.= 38: 45. Ja. 16, ‘05. 600w.

  “The book contains much good material and is of real value.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 327. F. 9, ‘05. 320w.


=Davidson, Rev. John.= St. Peter and his training. *30c. Lippincott.

  “Following the New Testament account of the apostle, and setting aside
  the critical questions it raises, the author finds evidence of its
  truth in its consistent realism as a portrait from life.”—Outlook.

  “The psychological problem involved in the story of Peter’s denial of
  his Master is better handled, and more justly to Peter, than by most
  expositors.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 452. F. 16, ‘05. 70w.


=Davidson, John.= Selected poems. *$1.25. Lane.

  “Mr. Davidson has drawn from his seven earlier volumes with a shrewd
  critical sense.... Unusual mastery of narrative construction in verse,
  his energy of conception and readiness in the fundamental mind-work of
  poetry, are all shown here at their best in the ‘Ballads,’ which make
  the bulk of the book.”—Nation.

  “He handles the metre with masterly skill, filling it with imaginative
  life and power. The chief virtue of his ballads is the virile energy
  of the shaping strength that we feel working in them.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 329. Mr. 18. 850w.

  “Mr. John Davidson’s poetic view of the world is as tragical as Ernest
  Dowson’s; but there is a grim irony of intellectual strength in his
  work that marks him of a different race of men.” Ferris Greenslet.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 417. S. ‘05. 340w.

  “Uncommonly masculine volume.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 293. Ap. 13, ‘05. 330w.


=Davidson, Rt. Rev. Randall Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury.= Christian
opportunity. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  The sermons, addresses and speeches delivered by the Archbishop of
  Canterbury during his recent visit to America make a volume not only
  temporarily significant but monumental. “The most interesting contents
  of the volume, of course, are the sermons in Trinity church in Boston,
  and the address at Faneuil hall. None however, surpasses in excellence
  of material or stamps Dr. Davidson as a broader scholar than his
  cordial address to the evangelical ministers at Boston university. ‘We
  in England,’ he said, ‘have learned in these latter days to recognize
  better than ever before how splendid an element in the growth of
  English life and character is due to our Puritan forefathers, and you
  in New England have come to see that even among those whom your
  great-great-grandfathers thought were very black, there is something
  worth having and holding and thus we join hands in behalf of the
  common cause—the setting forward of our Master’s kingdom in the old
  world and in the new.’” (Pub. Opin.)

         =Atlan.= 95: 705. My. ‘05. 180w.

  “The title is happy, for the burden of them all is the greatness of
  the opportunity here in this new continent. Their level judgment,
  catholic spirit, and fraternal feeling ...”

     + + =Boston Evening Transcript.= : 7. F. 10, ‘05. 160w.

       + =Ind.= 58: 500. Mr. 2, ‘05. 90w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 58. Ja. 12, ‘05. 190w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 252. F. ‘05. 90w.


=Davidson, Thomas.= Education of the wage earners. *75c. Ginn.

  “The record of a unique experiment among the Russian Jews of New York
  city. As the result of a challenge at the close of a lecture,
  Professor Davidson organized a class composed almost exclusively of
  wage-earners from the tenement houses. With them he successfully
  studied the history of civilization, modern literature, and the
  history of philosophy.... The volume which is edited by Mr. Charles M.
  Blakewell, contains a brief biography and characterization of
  Professor Davidson by the editor.”—Dial.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 128. Ja. ‘05. 80w.

  “With the interpreting touch of the editor, the inspiring letters of
  Davidson, and the final words from the pupils, we have a book of very
  real and personal force.” Lucy Wright.

     + + =Charities.= 14: 642. Ap. 1, ‘05. 540w.

  Reviewed by Henry D. Sheldon.

         =Dial.= 38: 271. Ap. 16, ‘05. 210w.

  Reviewed by J. Lawrence Laughlin.

 *   + + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 611. S. ‘05. 370w.


=Davies, D. Ffrangçon-.= Singing of the future; with an introd. by
Edward Elgar. *$2.50. Lane.

  “In the old warfare between technique and intelligence as regards
  musical interpretation, Mr. Ffrangçon-Davies declares himself, as we
  might expect, on the side of intelligence. With him the meaning is
  everything, and he contends that if the singer thinks the words he is
  singing, all the rest will follow of itself.... Far from despising
  vocal technique, the author lays great stress on a sound method, and
  explains what the basis of that method should be.”—Lond. Times.

  “It is a pity that by the copious use of footnotes and parentheses the
  author should have weakened his case, for by these and other means he
  qualifies almost everything he says till the reader is at a loss to
  keep the main drift of his argument in view.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 306. S. 22, ‘05. 610w.

 *   + + =Nation.= 81: 467. D. 7, ‘05. 420w.


=Davies, Gerald Stanley.= Franz Hals. $1.75. Macmillan.

  This latest addition to the “Great masters in painting and sculpture
  series” is devoted to that Dutch artist of the early 17th century,
  Franz Hals. All that is actually known or surmised concerning his life
  is given and there are 35 half-tone reproductions of the author’s best
  known paintings. There is also a chronological list of his most
  important pictures, and a catalog of his works arranged according to
  the galleries in which they are hung.

  “Mr. Davies’s work is a fine example of what a sympathetic,
  imaginative, and withal a learned man may produce from very slender
  accepted data.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 157. Mr. 11, ‘05. 520w.


=Davies, Rev. John Llewelyn,= ed. Workingmen’s college, 1854-1904.
*$1.25. Macmillan.

  Records of its history and its work by members of the college. For
  half a century the workingmen’s college has played an important part
  in the sociological evolution of England, and its history and
  development are of general interest. The editor has written a chapter
  on F. D. Maurice, who was the real founder of the college. Mr. G. W.
  Trevelyan writes a chapter on “The college and other universities.”
  Mr. J. P. Elmslie describes “Art teaching in early days,” Mr. C. B.
  Lucas tells of “The college clubs.” There are many other chapters
  illustrating the development of this great work from a simple night
  school to a model institution of its kind.

  “The value of the book is enhanced by some excellent portraits; but it
  lacks an index.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 35. Ja. 14, ‘05. 200w.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 337. Mr. ‘05. 100w.

         =Nation.= 80: 290. Ap. 13, ‘05. 120w.

         =Spec.= 94: 18. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1520w.


=Davies, W. W.= Codes of Hammurabi and Moses. *75c. Meth. bk.

  A comparison of the laws of Hammurabi and Moses which is designed to
  help all Bible students. To this end the text of the Hammurabi code is
  given in small pica type, selected parallels from the Old Testament in
  long primer, and remarks and comments in brevier.

         =Outlook.= 81: 332. O. 7, ‘05. 150w.


=Davis, Foxcroft.= Mrs. Darrell. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  In this novel of Washington life Elizabeth Brandon marries Darrell and
  finds out too late that she loves his friend and cousin Hugh Pelham.
  Upon Darrell’s death his estate goes to Pelham, who is in Africa, and
  his lawyers press Elizabeth sorely. This destroys her faith in Pelham
  and she all but falls into the clutches of an unscrupulous senator,
  who wishes to divorce his wife and marry her, when Pelham returns. The
  senator’s daughter also plays an important part in the story.

  “The story is slight, the characters shadowy, and the style, except
  for a strange abundance of ‘non-sequiturs,’ exceedingly commonplace.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 148. Ag. 17, ‘05. 310w.

  “Not only does he reveal the actions of his characters, but also the
  train of thoughts that lead up to those actions. Nevertheless ‘Mrs.
  Darrell’ is a book full of interest.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 379. Je. 10, ‘05. 610w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 210w.

  “The book as regards plot and constructive power and development
  cannot be praised highly, but the love story is in some ways unusually
  interesting.”

     — + =Outlook.= 80: 393. Je. 10, ‘05. 80w.


* =Davis, John Patterson.= Corporations: a study of the origin and
development of the great business combinations and their relation to the
authority of the state. 2v. **$4.50. Putnam.

  “This treatise is of great helpfulness to the student of what is now
  familiarly known as the ‘corporation problem.’ ... The subject is here
  attacked chiefly from the historical standpoint, from the earliest
  manifestations of corporate activity in the ecclesiastical
  organizations of the primitive Christian church to the colonial
  companies, forerunners of the development companies of to-day. There
  are, however, chapters dealing with contemporary phenomena at a length
  sufficient to make the writer’s views concerning the structure,
  operation, and future of the modern corporation clear.”—Lit. D.

  * “Without fully concurring with him, we find his views highly
  suggestive and stimulating, and ... ‘a particularly welcome addition
  to economic literature.’”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 580w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 654. O. 7, ‘05. 680w.


=Davis, Norah.= Northerner. †$1.50. Century.

  The hero of Miss Davis’ first published book is a young New York
  capitalist who buys a street railway and a lighting plant in an
  Alabama town. Titanic and aggressive, young Falls underrates the
  momentum of sectional prejudice even where it carries with it the
  sanity of a whole town. Mob violence, strikes, and a lynching form the
  dramatic phase of the story whose other side portrays the loyalty and
  courage of Joan Adair. This southern girl, tho reared to the fanatic
  prejudice of her townsmen, could, one is led to believe, champion
  right and justice impersonally, even tho the process had not been
  terribly confused with her love for the much misunderstood and
  ostracized hero.

  * “The supreme merit of the book lies, however, in the subtle
  delineation of Southern life with its love, its fear, its pride, its
  idealism, and its prejudice.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 664. D. ‘05. 500w.

  * “The serious questions of the Northerner are vigorously stated, and
  some characters and scenes very forcibly presented. The construction
  is bad, and there is a lot of tiresome talk.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 510. D. 21, ‘05. 340w.

  “The principal value of the story is in its depicting of the life of
  the half-asleep, half-awake southern town with its new-formed
  ambitions obscured by the rubbish of old traditions.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 200w.


=Davis, Richard Harding.= Miss Civilization. **50c. Scribner.

  “A comedy in one act, founded on a story by the late James Harvey
  Smith. By means of strategy, the daughter of a wealthy man succeeds in
  holding three thieves in her home until the arrival of the police,
  whom she had summoned by telephone when she first heard the burglars
  trying to file their way into the house.”—Bookm.

  “This playlet is admirably suited for parlor and amateur theatricals,
  where it will furnish both to actors and audiences unalloyed delight.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 783. Ap. 6, ‘05. 80w.

  “This is a lively and amusing play. It is not badly suited for amateur
  rendering.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 605. Mr. 4, ‘05. 30w.


=Davison, Charles.= Study of recent earthquakes. $1.50. imp. Scribner.

  “This copiously illustrated volume ... gives a popular account of the
  results which have been arrived at by modern seismology.... Rather
  than grouping seismic phenomena, as we should expect to find them in a
  text-book, the author has given a concise history of eight
  disturbances, each of which has a special interest.... A subject
  attractive to the general reader which is referred to in several
  chapters as an account of signs which have given warning of a coming
  earthquake.”—Nature.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 404. Ap. 1. 710w.

  “Mr. Davidson’s book is well worth reading, whilst the manner in which
  its contents have been arranged should obtain for it a circulation
  amongst those who seek for general information.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 532. Ap. 6, ‘05. 630w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 677. My. 6, ‘05. 290w.


=Davitt, Michael.= Fall of feudalism in Ireland. **$2.50. Harper.

  “The land league revolution of the Irish people, their struggles to
  regain possession of the lands confiscated under Cromwellian
  settlement,—which was virtually continued during two hundred and fifty
  years,—is set forth in this book.... Parnell is, of course, Mr.
  Davitt’s hero; and the personal portraiture he gives is both
  interesting and valuable.”—Critic.

  “He writes from a partisan viewpoint and, as might have been expected,
  makes no attempt to conceal his partisanship. Despite this fact he has
  done good service to contemporary history by the care he has bestowed
  on the documentary part of his exhaustive work.” E. P.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 454. Ja. ‘05. 230w.

  “Is of great value both as a record and as literature.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 95. Ja. ‘05. 230w.


* =Dawson, Miles Menander.= Business of life insurance. **$1.50. Barnes.

  “Mr. Dawson writes as an actuary of long experience, addressing
  himself primarily to those holding or contemplating the purchase of
  life insurance. The comparative merits and defects of the various
  systems of insurance and forms of policy, the methods whereby rates
  are or should be fixed, the ‘schemes’ adopted by companies to increase
  their business—in short, almost every topic connected with the subject
  is discussed with a mingling of criticism, advice, and
  warning.”—Outlook.

  * “Practical suggestive, and soundly informative, this book should
  find a wide audience.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 680. N. 18, ‘05. 320w.


=Dawson, Samuel E.= Saint Lawrence, its basin and border-lands. *$1.35.
Stokes.

  “In orderly fashion and in often luminous phrase Dr. Dawson sets forth
  the story of the discovery, exploration, and occupation of the
  northeastern part of the North American continent. The text is
  accompanied by some good illustrations and by some especially good
  maps.”—Outlook.

  “This learned Canadian not only enjoys a wide personal knowledge of
  the region he deals with but is likewise possessed of the critical
  faculty, which has enabled him to deal satisfactorily with a subject
  involving a good many disputed points.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 116. Jl. 22. 1210w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 382. O. ‘05. 90w.

     + + =Ind.= 49: 876. O. 12, ‘05. 230w.

  “His present volume is a critical and scholarly study of the most
  fruitful era of early North American exploration.” Cyrus C. Adams.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 585. S. 9, ‘05. 1920w.

  “This volume should appeal to the student of history and to the lover
  of romance.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 60w.

  “It is a rare treat to read Dr. Dawson’s scholarly and delightful
  volume.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 478. O. 7, ‘05. 160w.


=Dawson, Thomas C.= South American republics, pt. 2. **$1.35. Putnam.

  “Descriptive rather than analytical,” this work presents “an excellent
  summary of the events leading up to the independence of the South
  American republics. The first volume, dealing with Argentina,
  Paraguay, Uruguay, and Brazil, was written during the period when he
  [Mr. Dawson] was secretary of the United States legation to Brazil.
  During the interval between the appearance of the first and second
  volumes the author was appointed minister to Santo Domingo. This
  second volume deals with Peru, Chile, Bolivia, Ecuador,
  Venezuela.”—Ann. Am. Acad.

  “His exposition of contemporary history is disappointing. There are
  too many names and dates and too few explanatory remarks. There is a
  tendency to dwell on the period of the conquest and to leave untouched
  the difficult business of untangling the innumerable revolutions of
  the past eighty years. Even as a collection of historical primers its
  value is seriously impaired by evidences of hasty or inaccurate
  compilation. To attempt to read the volume through is sufficiently
  confusing, but the publishers have not improved matters. The
  illustrations do not illustrate. Moreover, the maps are inadequate and
  out of date.” Hiram Bingham.

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 671. Ap. ‘05. 520w.

  “The author has shown great skill in the presentation of the economic
  situation in compressing the history of eleven republics into two
  small volumes. In the presentation of the political situation the
  author has been careful to keep himself free from partisanship or
  bias. This work when read in connection with Stanford’s ‘Geographical
  compendium of South America,’ will furnish a clear-cut picture of the
  present situation in the South American republics.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 338. Mr. ‘05. 250w.

       + =Ind.= 58: 1189. My. 25, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Excellent, useful, and most readable book. Mr. Dawson, however,
  largely owes the remarkable completeness of this work to his familiar
  acquaintance with the Spanish literature on the subject, and his great
  personal opportunities for compiling the history of the nineteenth
  century in South America.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 696. N. 4, ‘05. 330w.


=Dawson, W. J.= Evangelistic note, *$1.25. Revell.

  A book of addresses on evangelical topics by a man well known as a
  successful international revivalist. He resigned the pastorate of the
  Highburg quadrant church in England to enter a more evangelistic
  field, and his sermons defend liberal theology and set forth the value
  of his work.

  “His sermons are models of manly appeal to the thinking people of
  to-day.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 897. Ap. 20, ‘05. 180w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 958. Ap. 15, ‘05. 230w.

  “Among the various essays, addresses and sermons in the book the one
  which gives the whole its title is the best and most adequate, with
  the additional advantage of being written in clear, forceful,
  convincing English such as is seldom found in current literature.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 390. Mr. 11, ‘05. 640w.


=Dawson, William James.= Makers of English fiction. *$1.50. Revell.

  Dr. Dawson begins with Daniel Defoe and discusses the writers of
  novels of sentiment from Richardson to Fielding, and to Jane Austen,
  then he takes up the works of Sir Walter Scott, Thackeray, Dickens,
  the Bronte sisters, George Eliot, Charles Reade, Charles Kingsley,
  George Meredith, Thomas Hardy, Robert Louis Stevenson, and others,
  closing the book with chapters on “Religion in fiction” and a
  “Concluding survey.”

  “He is a patient and systematic reader; his powers of analysis are
  considerable, his sympathies are broad, and he has, what is an
  extremely valuable gift, the historic sense.” E. C.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 757. N. 11, ‘05. 1070w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 429. O. 21, ‘05. 220w.

  * “The book is well worth reading, as a comprehensive survey of a
  development, and as painstaking a work of criticism as has come to us
  for many a day.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 664. N. 18, ‘05. 280w.


=Day, Emily Foster.= Menehunes. *75c. Elder.

  A folklore tale of the Menehunes, the tiny dwarfs of Hawaii,
  illustrated by Spencer Wright.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 90w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 210w.


=Day, Thomas Fleming.= Hints to young yacht skippers. $1. Rudder pub.

  Mr. Day says this handbook is offered in response to many letters from
  boys and young men “asking for hints on all manner of subjects
  relating to the care, handling, buying and equipping of small yachts.”
  Being a practical sailor and yachtsman himself, he knows the necessity
  of the sort of information he compiles, in fact declares that had he
  owned such a book in the beginning, it would have saved him time,
  money, hard work and anxiety.

  “The book is full of useful information.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 39. Ja. 21, ‘05. 330w.

  (Detailed statement of contents.)


=Dealey, James Quayle, and Ward, Lester Frank.= Text book of sociology.
*$1.30. Macmillan.

  A text book founded upon the sociological writings of Dr. Ward, and
  especially upon his work, “Pure sociology.” This epitome is stamped
  with the same characteristics that are emphasized thruout Dr. Ward’s
  study, viz., the mastery of the impersonal tone over the human. “He
  carries from his work in physical science a certain abstractness of
  statement which is partly inseparable from all generalization, but
  which has the effect of holding the interpretation farther aloof from
  actual life than is desirable or necessary.” (Am. J. Soc.)

  “Comes nearer than any predecessor to satisfying reasonable demands
  for an elementary textbook in general sociology.” Albion W. Small.

   + + — =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 266. S. ‘05. 1190w.

  * “The abridgment has been excellently done.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1157. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “It is therefore a wide field that is traversed here under the lead of
  a stimulating if not always convincing teacher.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 887. Ag. 5, ‘05. 290w.


Decennial publications of the University of Chicago. 1st series, 10v.
*$40. Univ. of Chicago press.

  Ten imposing quarto volumes, well bound in red cloth, compose the
  first series of the Chicago university decennial publications and
  contain two volumes of reports and eight volumes of investigations,
  the latter consisting of a collection of articles representing the
  work of research of the several departments of the university,
  organized during the decennium. Vol. I and II contain President
  Harper’s report for the first ten years of the life of Chicago
  university; vol. III contains, part I, Systematic theology, Church
  history, Practical theology; part II, Philosophy, Education; vol. IV
  is devoted to Political economy, Political science, History, and
  Sociology; vol. V includes the Semitic languages and literature,
  Biblical and patristic Greek; vol. VI deals with the Greek language
  and literature, the Latin language and literature, Sanskrit and
  Indo-European comparative philology, classical archæology; vol. VII
  turns to the province of Romance languages and literatures, the
  Germanic languages and literatures and to English; vol. VIII invades
  the field of Astronomy and Astrophysics; vol. IX treats the subjects
  of Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics, and Geology; and vol. X deals with
  Zoology, Anatomy, Physiology, Neurology, Botany, Pathology, and
  Bacteriology.

         =Bib. World.= 25: 240. Mr. ‘05. 50w. (States contents of v. 5.)

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 44. Jl. 6, ‘05. 410w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 164. Mr. 18, ‘05. 760w. (Survey of
         contents).

  “The whole series is a remarkable presentation of the intellectual
  activity which has prevailed at this youthful university during the
  brief period of its existence.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 593. Ap. 15, ‘05. 410w.


=Deecke, W.= Italy: a popular account of the country, its people, and
its institutions (including Malta and Sardinia); tr. by H. A. Nesbitt.
$5. Macmillan.

  A book which gives a German professor’s account of Italy. “Beginning
  with the boundaries of the country and the ancient attempts at
  geographical description, it proceeds to treat of the orography and
  general features of the surface, goes on to the geology and the
  climate, giving incidentally an account of the volcanic phenomena and
  touching briefly on the animals and plants. The various elements of
  the population are then described, with a short sketch of the history,
  and a fuller account of products, trade and manufactures, political
  institutions, finance, internal communications, and education, the
  church, language, and science, and a topographical description of
  various parts of the peninsula and the adjoining isles.” (Nation.)

  “It is popular in the very best sense of the word. In the first place,
  it is comprehensive. In the second place, it is compact. The work is
  simply a marvel of condensation. In the third place, the book is
  exceedingly readable. The only adverse criticism we have is that the
  statistics are not quite up to the present, and the reader will want
  constantly to refer to later tables. But in other respects we do not
  know of another book on Italy at once so comprehensive, so accurate,
  and so interesting.”

   + + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 378. Ap. ‘05. 250w. (States contents of
         Vol. V.)

  “Is all done carefully and well.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 588. My. ‘05. 100w.

  “That the book is dull is therefore not surprising; but that it is
  also full of errors is both surprising and inexcusable.”

     — — =Dial.= 38: 95. F. 1, ‘05. 410w.

  “It is really nothing more than a compilation of the facts that may be
  found in condensed form in a half dozen well selected books.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1070. My. 11, ‘05. 170w.

  “When we turn to subjects wherein the element of time does not enter
  so immediately we find reason for little save praise.”

   + + — =Lit. D.= 31: 498. O. 7, ‘05. 760w.

  “An elaborate account of Italy, worked out with true German
  thoroughness. It covers pretty nearly every aspect in which the land
  and its inhabitants can be regarded. Taking the book as a whole, it is
  a careful and intelligent piece of work, clearly and simply written,
  and generally accurate. We have noted a certain number of errors in
  fact, but none of great importance, though there are some errors in
  nomenclature, and some mistakes in the accounts given of particular
  places. A book which amounts to an encyclopaedic description of Italy
  from so many points of view. The topographical part is really
  something between a gazetteer and a guidebook, fit to be used for
  reference rather than to be read continuously.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 250. Mr. 30, ‘05. 2290w.


=Deeping, Warwick.= Slanderers. †$1.50. Harper.

  “Gabriel Strong is the son of a tea merchant ... is a dreamer, an
  idler.... Partly to please himself, partly to please his father,
  partly to save trouble, he makes love to and marries a fine sleek
  tiger-cat of a woman, and as soon as it is too late repents.” He finds
  that he loves the daughter of a miser, but swears to love this Joan
  only in spirit. “Meanwhile the sleek, handsome wife gets bored, goes
  off elsewhere, and the gossips of the village get busy with the
  greenwood meanderings of Gabriel and Joan. Hence the name of ‘The
  slanderers.’ ... They are the parson’s wife, the doctor’s wife, the
  members of the church guilds, and like fine charitable organizations.
  And these women are allowed no virtues at all to temper the malignity
  of their tongues and their feminine proneness to think evil of other
  people.” (N. Y. Times).

  “The style is good and the texture of the English is durable.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 93. Jl. ‘05. 110w.

  “Mr. Deeping is somewhat crass and crude in his methods with these
  slanderers. You get the idea that Mr. Deeping imagines religion is a
  mere cloak for hypocrisy, or a grindstone for sharp knives to slay the
  reputations of indiscreet idealists. Really the trouble with Mr.
  Deeping is the lack of enough humor to adjust his burning ethical
  sentiments, his opulent fleshly imaginings, to each other and to the
  meridian of average sanity. The story is dragged violently by the hair
  of its head into an ending which satisfies—if it does nothing else—the
  average reader’s supposed demand for a happy outcome, but it is
  distinctly disappointing in spite of patches of purple language.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 117. F. 25. ‘05. 610w.

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 654. Mr. 11, ‘05. 120w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 429. Mr. 18, ‘05. 290w.

  “Mr. Deeping’s tapestry has not acquired that soft glory which makes
  its best beauty. And as for the modern design, it is quite atrocious.”

     — — =Reader.= 6: 92. Je. ‘05. 370w.

  “Many of his pages glow with genuine romantic beauty.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 477. S. ‘05. 170w.


=Dekker, Eduard Douwes.= (Multatuli, pseud.). Walter Pieterse: a story
of Holland. $1.50. Friderici & Garies.

  “Walter is in a way a Dutch ‘Sentimental Tommy,’ and the growth of his
  vivid imagination and literary aspiration among rather sordid
  surroundings and stolid people is told with minuteness and perhaps a
  little over-elaborated humor. ‘Multatuli’ is not exactly a Dutch
  Dickens, but he has some Dickensy qualities.”—Outlook.

  “His story is immensely detailed and told in a bygone style of
  confidentialness, but a style highly animated and frequently witty.
  The translator, though a Ph. D., affronts style and even grammar at
  moments.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 234. Mr. 23, ‘05. 520w.

  “In fact, you may see in Dekker now touches of Fielding, now of Heine,
  (he has been called the Holland Heine), now the contemporary
  iconoclast. Bernard Shaw, whose hatred of ‘respectability’ he shares.
  Adherents of the new school of novelists, Ibsenites, &c., who are not
  already familiar with Dekker’s work will not regret a perusal of Mr.
  Evans’s rendering, nor will the more catholic seekers after real life
  in fiction—real, yet divorced from sentiment.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 39, Ja. 21, ‘05. 430w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 248. Ja. 28. ‘05. 50w.


=De la Pasture, Mrs. Henry.= Peter’s mother. †$1.50. Dutton.

  “The realm of the wholesome commonplace” is chosen for this story.
  There is Peter’s widowed mother, Lady Mary, whose gentleness is
  contrasted with the tyrannical selfishness of her son; there is the
  brilliant Sarah who adores the mother, and to spare her the suffering
  inflicted by the caddish son, sets to work to wind the youth about her
  finger. How she succeeds forms one side of a story whose other phase
  deals with a middle-aged romance involving Lady Mary and two men—“one
  strong, serene, patient, understanding, the other with a passion so
  lofty as to sacrifice itself upon its own altar.”

  “It is a delightful story, told with a certain distinction and much
  charm. The whole thing is in harmony.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 149. F. 18, ‘05. 210w.

       — =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 30w.

         =Ind.= 59: 986. O. 26, ‘05. 120w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 510. Ag. 5, ‘05. 430w.

  “This book is a good illustration of the fact that normal characters
  can be made interesting.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 984. Ag. 19, ‘05. 100w.

  “An excellent entertainment in which sentiment and humour are most
  agreeably blended.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 258. F. 18, ‘05. 720w.


=Deledda, Grazia.= After the divorce. †$1.50. Holt.

  The author, a young Sardinian, has written a sad story of Italian
  peasant life. The hero is condemned to twenty-seven years imprisonment
  for the murder of his uncle. During his confinement, before the
  confession of the real murderer frees him and establishes his
  innocence, his baby dies and his pretty young wife, who lacks both
  money and character, secures a divorce, under the new law which
  liberates the wife of a convict, and marries a wealthy lover whom she
  had once rejected. The story is a pitiful one, and when at last the
  two are reunited they are saddened, disillusioned, and their young
  happiness is gone forever.

  “In style she is as simple and unaffected as Verga himself. She
  effaces herself almost wholly, she makes you see the primitive life of
  her little island almost as vividly as though you were there in
  person.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 270. My. ‘05. 400w.

  “The translation appears competent and sympathetic.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 93. Jl. ‘05. 340w.

  “As a picture of peasant characteristics and modes of thought it is
  perfect.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1007. My. 4, 05. 270w.

  “As a thing of beauty and a joy forever, the book is a failure; as a
  manifesto against divorce, it might be adopted by all good Catholics.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 190w.

  “It is a human story, and the fact that it apparently has lost
  something in the translation does not alter the fact that it is still
  well worth reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 267. Ap. 22, ‘05. 690w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 92. My. 6, ‘05. 20w.

  “The translator has apparently preserved the color and flavor of the
  original; her chief fault is a too slavish following.”

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 592. O. ‘05. 390w.


=Dellenbaugh, Frederick Samuel.= Breaking the wilderness: the story of
the conquest of the far West. **$3.50. Putnam.

  It is the aim of this book to “present a review in chronological order
  of the important events which contributed to breaking the wilderness
  that so long lay untamed west of the Mississippi, mentioning with as
  much detail as possible in a single popular volume the principal
  persons and happenings in proper sequence, but paying special
  attention to the trapper and trader element, which, more than any
  other, dispelled the mysteries of the vast region.”

  “Barring the deficiencies which mar its critical value, Mr.
  Dellenbaugh has produced a fairly satisfactory work.” Isaac Joslin
  Cox.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 169. O. ‘05. 840w.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 183. Ag. 5. 620w.

  “The greatest interest of the book will probably be found to lie in
  the innumerable and fully authenticated tales of trappers and traders
  with which its pages abound.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 274. Ap. 16, ‘05. 290w.

  “In most, if not all, respects Mr. Dellenbaugh’s book is admirable.
  The text is a rare combination of history, observation and story
  telling, and it is beautifully illustrated. The ‘breaking of the
  wilderness,’ the once savage region west of the Mississippi, by
  explorer, fighter, trapper and settler is pictured to us as by a
  vitascope.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 727. Mr. 30, ‘05. 50w.

  “Is naturally one of great interest and value.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 140. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1110w.

  “The chief value of Mr. Dellenbaugh’s work is the presentation of the
  chronological review of Western exploration in unbroken sequence.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 508. Ap. ‘05. 250w.

  “His style is too abrupt, and the separate phases of the history have
  the appearance of being thrown together.”

   + — — =Spec.= 94: 923. Je. 17, ‘05. 270w.


* =Denk, Victor Martin Otto (Otto von Schaching, pseud.).= Violin maker;
trans, by Sara Trainer Smith. 45c. Benziger.

  The story of the gentle, pious Matthias Klotz, son of a poor tailor of
  Mittenwald, of how he herded his father’s goats and how Jacob Strainer
  found him, discovered his ambition to become a violin maker, and took
  him away to his own school at Absam. From him Matthias went to other
  masters in Italy, and after years of faithful work returned to his
  father and his old home and founded his own celebrated school in
  Mittenwald.


=Dent, Edward J.= Alessandro Scarlatti: his life and works. *$3.50.
Longmans.

  “An ambitious work dealing with the Neapolitan composer.... Without
  blind adoration of his hero, he has brought himself into thorough
  sympathy with Scarlatti’s personality, and has studied all his
  circumstances and his relations to Italian art.”—Acad.

  “Appreciation of Mr. Dent’s adventurous excursion into a new path is
  called for by the attempt as such, and the result of his labours is a
  handsome volume which should find a place in every music-lover’s
  library. Accuracy, not elegance of style, has been aimed at, yet there
  are occasional sentences where Mr. Dent has endeavoured to impart
  interest to the manner as well as the matter.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 147. F. 18, ‘05. 1470w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 538. Ap. 29. 470w.

  * “A work of high importance, which must be accepted as the standard
  authority on the life and writings of the Verdi of his time.” W. J.
  Henderson.

   + + + =Atlan.= 96: 852. D. ‘05. 240w.

  “An exhaustive study at first hand from original documents and
  scores.” Richard Aldrich.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 780w.


=De Pue, Edward Spence.= Dr. Nicholas Stone. †$1.50. Dillingham.

  An exciting detective story in which Dr. Stone and the Pacific coast
  manager of a great life insurance company discover that several policy
  holders have been skilfully murdered. Their investigations bring them
  thrilling adventures in the Chinese quarter, Dr. Stone narrowly
  escapes cremation; but they relentlessly follow the strange evidence
  of strange drugs until they discover the criminal, a wealthy and
  respected old man, who devises unusual methods of murder for the mere
  joy of achievement without detection, letting the life insurance money
  go to an accomplice. There is also a love interest.

  “To those who crave in the reading the temporary excitement that
  attends the perusal of a story filled with murders and murder plots,
  the detection of crimes in spite of highly scientific methods employed
  to divert suspicion, and the tragic self-death of the murderer when he
  discovers that his deeds are known, this book may possess interest.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 204. Ap. 1, ‘05. 420w.


=De Selincourt, Beryl D.= Home of the first Franciscans in Umbria, the
borders of Tuscany and the Northern Marches. *$1.50. Dutton.

  “The author describes Assisi, the district of Lake Thrasymene, Monte
  Casale, and Vallingegno, two Umbrian solitudes, the valley of Rieti,
  the Marches and La Verna. She has also written an introduction in
  which she touches on the influence of the personality and temperament
  of St. Francis, of the places to which he retreated. The thirteen
  half-tone illustrations are reproductions of photographs taken by
  Mildred Bicknell.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Discriminating and sympathetic introduction. Mrs. de Selincourt’s
  style, in any liberal spirit of criticism, is of a high average.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 387. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1190w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 143. Jl. 29. 340w.

  “A successful attempt to show to what a degree the character and
  teachings of St. Francis of Assisi were shaped and illustrated by his
  surroundings.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 120. S. 1, ‘05. 170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 225. Ap. 8, ‘05. 260w.

  “A manifest labor of love.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 344. Je. 3, ‘05. 100w.

  “Shows much diligence and contains some interesting and out-of-the-way
  information.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 502. O. 14, ‘05. 970w.

  “The book is full of beauty and pathos, but it leaves us with but a
  vague idea of what St. Francis really thought.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 598. Ap. 22, ‘05. 320w.


=Deutsch, Leo.= Sixteen years in Siberia, tr. by Helen Chisholm. $3.
Dutton.

  A new and cheaper edition of “this well-written and convincing account
  of penal methods and conditions in Siberia by one who has known them
  to his cost ... the new edition contains ... a preface, in which the
  translator seeks to estimate the influence of recent events in giving
  impetus to the reform movement in Russia” and “an appendix, ... a
  reply by Count von Bülow to a Reichstag interpellation concerning the
  Königsberg trial of last July, when certain German subjects were
  prosecuted for smuggling revolutionary literature into Russia.”
  (Outlook.)

  “The volume deserves a wide reading.”

     + + =Ann.= Am. Acad. 26: 588. S. ‘05. 120w.

  “Very interesting and informing book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 505. Jl. 29, ‘05. 410w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 643. Jl. 8, ‘05. 170w.


=Devine, Edward T.= Principles of relief. **$2. Macmillan.

  Dr. Devine’s experience as general secretary of the New York charity
  organization society has put him in vital touch with the practical
  aspects of a great cause. His convincing treatment is arranged under
  four heads: Part I “is a strong, clear, logical presentation of the
  essential ‘principles of relief.’ The fundamental and most fruitful
  idea of this discussion is that there is a normal standard of living
  which can be known and approximately measured, and that all relief
  work is to be judged by its success in aiding social debtors to find
  their place in a normal and well-balanced life.... In Part II is
  printed a most interesting and instructive collection of typical
  relief problems.... Part III is a sketch of certain aspects of relief.
  Part IV gives the story of relief methods at times of disaster.” (Am.
  J. Soc.)

  “While a certain amount of repetition of thoughts already published
  was inevitable in a systematic treatise, every chapter and paragraph
  has its justification. Looking back over the literature of charity
  produced during the last twenty years in America, we are bound to
  place this volume in the very front rank, with few companions in the
  specific field; and we must regard it as indispensable to the serious
  student of the general subject.” Charles Richmond Henderson.

   + + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 554. Ja. ‘05. 670w.

  “In it are brought to consciousness, perhaps for the first time fully,
  the underlying principles on which the charity organization society
  movement is based. Moreover it undertakes to give a comprehensive
  statement of the elementary principles upon which all relief giving,
  whether public or private, should rest; and it correlates these
  principles with the general facts of economics and sociology in such a
  way as to leave no doubt in the mind of the reader that the author has
  mastered his subject. The point of view of the book is constructive
  throughout; and it is safe to say that for many years to come it will
  be, both for the practical worker and for the scientific student, the
  authoritative work upon the ‘principles of relief.’ I cannot help
  feeling, after careful reading, that the book shows too much the bias
  of the author’s personal field of labor. Its point of view is too
  exclusively that of the charity organization society worker.” Charles
  A. Ellwood.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 143. Ja. ‘05. 870w.

  “No one who is interested either historically or practically in the
  subject of charity can afford to neglect this volume.” Winthrop More
  Daniels.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 556. Ap. ‘05. 340w.

  “The book will help us to give a quantitative value to our vague
  notions about the standard of living and the minimum wage; and no
  writer has applied this definite standard to the methods of poor
  relief more thoroughly. Especially valuable to a student is the
  analysis of typical relief problems, which enables one to arrive at
  principles of relief much as a study of court decisions takes one to
  the heart of legal principles. The work will be recognized as one of
  the chief contributions on this vital subject.” Charles Richmond
  Henderson.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 155. Mr. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “The book as a whole will be a standard to all charity workers and
  professional philanthropists, but while not exactly over technical it
  is too heavy for the average reader, and will probably not interest
  him to any great extent.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 900. Ap. 20, ‘05. 300w.

  “While Mr. Devine’s statement of principles is not very lucid, his
  practical suggestions are instructive.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 235. Mr. 23, ‘05. 610w.

  “The first [volume] stirs the sympathies and supplies the motives for
  Christian charity; the second broadens the horizon and shows the
  problem in its world aspects; the third gives the practical and, so
  far as we can judge, wise counsel in dealing with the problem as it
  presents itself in American cities.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 902. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1440w.

  “Dr. Devine’s book is a manual at once of theory and of practice.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 760. D. ‘04. 190w.

  “Aside from these few passages [pp. 12, 13, 462], which appear
  somewhat visionary, the book is eminently sane and practical.” David
  I. Green.

   + + — =Yale R.= 14: 81. My. ‘05. 1190w.


=Devins, John Bancroft.= Observer in the Philippines. $2. Am. tract.

  This report is the result of two months’ careful investigation in
  Luzon. It gives interesting notes of travel and fully covers the
  social, political and religious field. It tells what American
  missionaries are doing and shows that many of the Americans in the
  Philippines are of a type as greatly in need of missionaries as the
  Filipinos themselves.

  “Dr. Devins’s book is non-discriminating and simple-minded in a high
  degree.” H. Parker Willis.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 37. Jl. 16, ‘05. 390w.

  “Has included in his volume much useful information and much matter
  interesting and entertaining for one reason and another.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 580. S. 2, ‘05. 1080w.

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 142. My. 13, ‘05. 270w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 767. Je. ‘06. 140w.


=Dexter, Edwin Grant.= History of education in the United States. **$2.
Macmillan.

  The work comprises in less than seven hundred pages of text “a survey
  of education in this country from the landing of the Cavaliers and of
  the Puritans to the opening of the twentieth century, including in it
  an historical survey and an analysis of contemporary conditions of
  education in every state in the Union, of every stage of education
  from kindergarten to popular lecture courses for adults, and of every
  phase of educational activity from an account of early schoolbooks to
  newspapers and periodicals of the various periods, the publication of
  learned societies and the work of libraries.... The general
  organization of the work is into three parts: the growth of the
  people’s schools, higher and special education, and educational
  extension.” (Educ. R.)

  “This book is very attractive in its make-up, but it will prove
  disappointing to those who hold that the history of education should
  be history. The declared purpose of the author is to present a mass of
  fact rather than discussions of historical trend. But instances are
  far too numerous in which the fact is not even fact.” Elmer Ellsworth
  Brown.

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 657. Ap. ‘05. 420w.

  “To compress so much in one volume is a task of no small magnitude,
  and to say that Professor Dexter has done this with excellent judgment
  and discrimination is only to give due praise. It is no detraction
  from the character of the text to say that the most valuable feature
  of the work is the elaborate bibliography at the end of each chapter
  and the marginal references which are to be found on every page.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 128. Ja. ‘05. 310w.

  “The best work of its class yet published. So far as it goes, it is
  most thoroughly and skilfully done.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 286. Mr. ‘05. 100w.

  “The handling of statistics is skilfully done. There is no unity,
  whole episodes in the history of education are absent, as are also the
  majority of the important personalities. A more accurate title would
  have been ‘A historical encyclopedia of American education.’” Henry
  Davidson Sheldon.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 270. Ap. 16, ‘05. 330w.

  “The merits of this book are those of comprehensiveness, organization,
  accurate analysis and classification, and excellent selection of the
  material to be included in a single volume dealing with so extended a
  subject; its demerits are an unfortunate lack of accuracy in many
  details, not all of them unimportant, and a tendency ... to accept
  stereotyped generalizations without adducing facts to support them,
  and the omission of any attempt to interpretation. No other single
  work, of even more than one volume, has ever attempted so much, so
  that there is little basis for comparison, and little room for
  criticism, so helpful is the general result. It is easily first of
  treatises upon the subject.” Paul Monroe.

   + + — =Educ. R.= 29: 202. F. ‘05. 2320w.

  “A work of truly encyclopedic comprehensiveness, but nevertheless
  readable.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 273. Ag. 3, ‘05. 80w.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 147. Je. 15, ‘05. 1550w.


=Dexter, Edwin Grant.= Weather influences; an empirical study of the
mental and physiological effects of definite meteorological conditions.
**$2. Macmillan.

  A monograph based upon a series of investigations of the committees of
  New York and Denver, and the effects of the weather changes of their
  divergent climates, upon their inhabitants. A comparison of the
  school, criminal, hospital, mortuary, and other records with the
  meteorological charts of the weather bureau gives the principal data
  for statistics as to the effect of wind and weather upon disease,
  drunkenness, insanity, crime, suicide, natural depravity of school
  children, errors of bank officials, etc.

  Reviewed by E. T. B.

         =Atlan.= 95: 135. Ja. ‘05. 320w.

         =Ind.= 58: 728. Mr. 30, ‘05. 510w.


=Dexter, Henry Martyn, and Dexter, Morton.= England and Holland of the
Pilgrims. **$3.50. Houghton.

  “The history of the Mayflower ‘Pilgrims’ is an important part of the
  history of the Protestant reformation in England.... Their most
  eminent historian was the late Dr. Dexter. The present volume, left
  unfinished at his death, completes their history by a full account of
  the environment and experience in which the reforming movement slowly
  struggled and groped towards the decisive venture, by which the door
  was opened at Plymouth rock to its great success.... Dr. Dexter’s
  draft of history, rewritten and edited by his son after further
  researches in England and Holland, now stands in a completeness to
  which it is likely that little can be added.”—Outlook.

  * “It is a book made by bookmen. Sometimes, as we read, our vision is
  obstructed; we cannot see the forest on account of the trees. The
  grand human story seems lost in a mass of antiquarian detail.” Wm.
  Elliot Griffis.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 306. N. 16, ‘05. 860w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 762. N. 11, ‘05. 600w.

  “A loving hand and diligent investigation of the original sources of
  information to the minutest details are apparent throughout the work.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 575. N. 4, ‘05. 420w.


=Dicey, A. V.= Law and opinion in England. *$3. Macmillan.

  Professor Dicey “lays bare to the general reader the dominating
  influences, intellectual and moral, which characterize the general
  body of law-making or operating to change it.” (Ath.) “His careful
  soundings and observations lead him to mark on his chart of the
  nineteenth century three main currents—the first, the period of old
  Toryism or legislative quiescence extending from 1800-1830; ... the
  second is designated as the period of Benthamism or individualism; ...
  the third is described as the period of ‘collectivism,’—the growth of
  opinion ‘which favors the intervention of the State even at some
  sacrifice of individual freedom.’” (Lond. Times.)

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 727. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1130w.

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 5. Jl. 1, 1820w.

  “Mr. Dicey adds a familiarity with English literature and a simplicity
  of style in dealing with the most intricate topics and summarising the
  most extensive developments that will save his work from being
  relegated to the shelves of law libraries alone.” Robert C. Brooks.

     + + =Bookm.= 22: 282. N. ‘05. 1260w.

  “A masterly exposition of the forces which have promoted the course of
  our modern legislation and a penetrating analysis of the
  counter-currents and cross-currents of opinion which have delayed or
  diverted it.” R.

   + + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 829. O. ‘05. 250w.

  “This is a careful examination of a complex subject.”

   + + — =Lit. D.= 31: 626. O. 28, ‘05. 500w.

  “We know no better piece of work of its kind.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 214. Jl. 7, ‘05. 1930w.

  “His chapter on judicial legislation—a most difficult subject—is a
  model.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 102. Ag. 3, ‘05. 2180w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 884. D. 9, ‘05. 1000w.

  “A work of unusual incisiveness and value.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 571. O. 28, ‘05. 460w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 90w.

  “We get a history of public opinion from a special point of view, and
  if it is far from being a history of opinion in its wider aspects
  during the nineteenth century, it deals with sufficient breadth and in
  sufficient detail with opinion as it affects the practical interests
  dealt with by legislation. Much of the best reading in Professor
  Dicey’s book consists of personal sketches.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 86. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1810w.

  “Granted the difficulty of the subject, it may be fairly said that
  there is no other living scholar who could have handled it in a style
  so masterly and yet so attractive. Like all Professor Dicey’s books,
  it is easy to read, and the simplicity and orderliness of the
  narrative disguise the labour and thought involved in its preparation.
  There is no novel dogma propounded, but an accepted doctrine is
  brilliantly worked out in detail. For anyone who wishes a guide to
  that difficult thing, the intellectual life of a nation, we can
  imagine no more lucid and stimulating handbook.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 16. Jl. 1, ‘05. 880w.


=Dick, Stewart.= Arts and crafts of old Japan. **$1.20. McClurg.

  “If we would understand Japanese art we must accept the conventions,”
  says the author. The sympathetic attitude which grows out of a careful
  survey of the forces of Japanese development is necessary for
  connoisseur and beginner alike. Painting, color printing, sculpture
  and carving, metal work, keramics, lacquer, and landscape gardening
  and the arrangement of flowers are covered in the treatment.

  “It is by far the best short introduction to the subject of which it
  treats that has yet appeared.”

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 278. N. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  * “He talks entertainingly and correctly, and yet rather as a student
  and reader in Europe, than as an observer in Japan itself.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1478. D. 21, ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 523. O. 28, ‘05. 90w.


=Dickberry, F.= Storm of London. $1.50. Turner, H. B.

  The earl of Somerville, weary of purposeless social life, decides upon
  suicide one night during a violent storm. When he awakens he looks
  upon a London from which every vestige of clothes and furniture had
  been swept away thus removing all outward signs of social distinction.
  “Yet even when we recognize that the book is in a way an allegory, and
  a satire upon the shams of modern life, nothing can alter the fact
  that here is a story which, chapter after chapter, pictures the
  fashionable life of London, the crowds in the street, the dinners and
  receptions and public functions, all thronged with men and women in
  the garb of Adam and Eve before the fall.” (Bookm.)

  “The volume may have a certain incisive irony, but it is sadly
  deficient in good taste.”

       — =Bookm.= 22: 37. S. ‘05. 300w.

  “An elaborate and tiresome extravaganza, in which the author handles
  the idea of an unclothed society with cumbrous and offensive satire.
  There is enough ability in the book to suggest that the writer might
  do something better.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 40w.

  “It is worth reading. It is undeniably smart.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 468. Jl. 15, ‘05. 500w.


=Dickens, Charles.= Christmas carol, and Cricket on the hearth. $2.
Baker.

  The illustrations of George Alfred Williams add much to this very
  attractive edition of the two Dickens’ stories which have come to be
  perennially a part of the holiday season.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 388. D. 1, ‘05. 150w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1389. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 381. N. 9, ‘05. 80w.

  * “On the whole it is an excellent book to put into the hands of young
  people who are nevertheless old enough to appreciate the qualities
  both of literary and artistic workmanship.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 110w.


=Dickens, Charles.= Tale of two cities. $1.25. Crowell.

  Dickens’ “popular and picturesque” and thoroly authentic aid to the
  understanding of the terrible days of the French Revolution has ever
  taken its place beside the histories. This reprint is uniform with the
  “Thin paper classics.”


* =Dickens, Charles.= Tales from Dickens, ed. by Hallie Erminie Rives.
†$1.50. Bobbs.

  A short cut to the best selections from the best of Dickens’ works has
  been provided here for the uninitiated Dickens reader as well as the
  Dickens lover who desires to refresh his memory. On an average of four
  or five tales have been taken from each story, and many characteristic
  drawings reproduced.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 450. D. 16, ‘05. 50w.


* =Dickerson, Mary Angela.= Wonderful wishes of Jacky and Jean. †$1.
Wessels.

  The story of two children who had a fairy sparrow that made wishes
  realities for them. But the sport had trials too which mingle with the
  wonders of the tale.


=Dickerson, Mary C.= Moths and butterflies. *$1.25. Ginn.

  An elementary text-book for use in the upper grammar grades and lower
  high school classes. The life histories of eighteen moths and nine
  butterflies are given in parts 1 and 2. Part 3 is devoted to
  Relationship—practical suggestions. There is also a chapter on how to
  collect, keep, and study moths, butterflies and caterpillars. The book
  contains a glossary, an index and over 200 photographs made from life,
  by the author.

  “It will be found a very useful book for the nature study library in
  schools and for private ownership by pupils of the upper grammar and
  high school grades.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 272. Ag. 3, ‘05. 70w.

  “A great deal of useful general information is given in the book, and
  it seems on the whole to be careful and accurate.”

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 76. My. 25, ‘05. 280w.

  “None more suitable from thoroughness of treatment, photographic
  illustration, and moderate price to do its work in the schools for
  which it was intended.” Mabel Osgood Wright.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 538. Ag. 19, ‘05. 100w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 867. Je. 3, ‘05 100w.

  “The work is untechnical, and well adapted to cultivate the
  intelligent minds of young persons in America.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 919. Je. 24, ‘05. 130w.


=Dickinson, Edward.= Study of the history of music; with an annotated
guide to music literature. **$2.50. Scribner.

  An aid to the understanding of musical history and criticism prepared
  by the professor of the history of music at Oberlin. “This volume is
  intended to clear the way by indicating the problems, the method and
  the materials” necessary for the study; further, “the narrative and
  critical portions give a terse and comprehensive summary of music
  history, show what are the important subjects involved and their
  connections and relations. The bibliographical sections lead the
  student to the best critical commentaries in the English language on
  every phase and detail of the subject.”

  “His book is certainly almost unique in its clearness of statement and
  general usefulness; it is a marvel of condensed information.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 304. O. 12, ‘05. 780w.

  “There is nothing else in English that is comparable in completeness
  and suggestiveness for students of musical history.” Richard Aldrich.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 604. S. 16, ‘05. 540w.

  “We know of no short history of music which is its equal. This volume
  is about equally valuable for reading, for study, and for reference.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 384. O. 14, ‘05. 190w.

  “A very thorough and illuminating work on the development of music.
  The biographical and explanatory notes to this volume are very
  valuable, supplying, with the text, a consecutive narrative of the
  history of music.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 110w.


* =Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes.= Modern symposium. **$1. McClure.

  “This purports to be an account of a meeting of philosophers
  representing all the various political and social systems of the
  world. The Conservative, the Radical, the Socialist, the Anarchist,
  the Scientist, the Poet, and many more, each pleads his own cause. The
  closing speaker, noted simply as a man of letters, distinctly
  represents Mr. Dickinson’s theories of life, and attempts to sum up
  all the virtues of all the other systems.”—Dial.

  * “The charm of his style adds a pleasing force to his arguments.”

       + =Dial.= 39:314. N. 16, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 636. N. 11, ‘05. 130w.


=Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes.= Religion: a criticism and a forecast.
**50c. McClure.

  An attempt to discover a religious ideal that can be accepted by the
  logically constituted mind of modern man, which involves a keen,
  reverential analysis of the virtues and failings of established
  religions.

  “Not merely is the writer a man of genius; not merely is he master of
  a style which seems to sweep the whole gamut of human emotion, and to
  make language rise and fall like the notes of a violin; but he has
  written a book which should make many think. Its importance lies in
  its object.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 110. Jl. 22. 230w.

  “Mr. Dickinson is especially happy in stating certain general
  attitudes of mind in order to give us a clear glimpse of where we or
  others stand in so important a subject as religion.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 220. Ag. 12, ‘05. 480w.

  * “These articles were frank and definite discussions of the relation
  of religion to knowledge. Mr. Dickinson has a clear and suggestive
  style.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 766. Je. ‘05. 180w.


=Dickson, Harris.= Ravanels. (†)$1.50. Lippincott.

  The setting of this story is the South just after the reconstruction
  period, and its hero haunted by the memory of his father’s murder in
  those troublous times, feels called upon to avenge it. But his revenge
  is not sweet, for he is overwhelmed with the horror of his deed, and
  is only saved from insanity by the soothing influence of the girl he
  loves.

  “Is even better than his first novel.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 93. Jl. ‘05. 150w.

  “The novel has both strength and character, besides a romantic plot of
  much dramatic interest.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 208. O. 1, ‘05. 100w.

  “While Mr. Dickson possesses a peculiarly charming literary style and
  a gift for portraying genial human qualities, he has blundered in the
  symmetry of his story.”

     + — =Ind.= 58 :1423. Je. 22, ‘05. 150w.

  “The tragedy of the story is admirably mellowed with its pathos. The
  characters are skillfully drawn and a genuine depth of interest is
  aroused which never flags until the books ends, amid all its sorrows,
  with happiness and cheer.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 246. Ap. 15, ‘05. 480w.

  “A dramatic and skilfully written romance of the South, exceptional
  for the conspicuous absence of all reference to the issues usually
  raised in novels of this section.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1015. Ap. 22, ‘05. 30w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 713. My. 6, ‘05. 150w.

  “Is an interesting story, well told, which holds the reader’s
  attention to the end.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 242. Ag. ‘05. 350w.

  “The book contains one of the best trial scenes in recent fiction.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Dilke, Lady Amelia Frances Strong.= Book of the spiritual life, with a
memoir of the author by the Rt. Rev. Sir Charles W. Dilke. *$3. Dutton.

  The larger part of this volume is taken up with the memoirs of Lady
  Dilke by her second husband. “It shows her as a girl, as an art
  student, as the wife of Mark Pattison, and the correspondent of many
  eminent persons, as an art critic, and as the cultured and kind friend
  of young people and of all movements for the amelioration of human
  life. ‘The book of the spiritual life’ ... is a series of Lady Dilke’s
  mature reflections on the problems of existence and our duty as
  sojourners here.”—Lond. Times.

  “Not even her work, however, remarkable as it was, and in so many
  spheres of art and thought, will erect in the future such a monument
  to Lady Dilke as that raised to her by her husband in the brief memoir
  which precedes ‘The book of the spiritual life.’”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 774. Jl. 29, ‘05. 2300w.

  “Sir Charles Dilke, in writing the memoir, has accomplished his
  difficult task with tact and dignity.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 679. Je. 3. 3150w.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 435. N. ‘05. 680w.

  “The little memoir ... is a model of what such work should
  be—informing, sympathetic, and restrained. ‘The book of the spiritual
  life’ ... gives evidence of wide reading and a sympathetic outlook.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 179. Je. 9, ‘05. 730w.

   + + — =Nation.= 81 :305. O. 12, ‘05. 970w.

  “The memoir dwells (naturally) much upon spiritual and literary
  aspects, and will be found dull by readers who are not already
  immensely interested in the woman which it commemorates.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 467. Jl. 17, ‘05. 530w.

  “To come into appreciative touch with such a life as hers is to
  receive an inspiration.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 835. Jl. 29, ‘05. 240w.

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 843. Je. 24, ‘05. 1450w.


=Dill, Samuel.= Roman society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius. *$4.
Macmillan.

  “Prof. Samuel Dill, in his new volume ... deals principally with the
  inner moral life of the time, and gives very little space to its
  external history and the machinery of government. He treats at some
  length of the relation of the senate to the emperor in the first
  century, and the organization of the municipal towns. He also gives a
  complete survey of the literature and inscriptions of the period.” (N.
  Y. Times). Each page is supplied with explanatory and reference notes.

  “He has mastered with praiseworthy assiduity every authority on his
  subject, old and new. Yet, though this material is ample, the author
  makes no attempt to co-ordinate it in such a way as to give the reader
  a picture of the age as a whole, and of the great psychological laws
  which governed its development.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 47. Ja. 14, ‘05. 540w.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 125. O. ‘05. 1520w.

  “In view of the great importance of this book, and the certainty that
  it will be regarded as the best work on this period in English, we
  have taken some trouble to collect matter which will help towards its
  improvement.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 362. Mr. 25. 1600w.

  “Taking the volume as a whole, Professor Dill’s Roman society from
  Nero to Marcus Aurelius must, it seems to me, occupy a place in the
  first rank of the histories of social life. That place is secured for
  it by the sanity of its judgments on social phenomena, by the vigour
  of its not-faultless literary style, and by its very great learning.”
  Henry Jones.

   + + + =Hibbert J.= 4: 200. O. ‘05. 2800w.

  “Nowhere else can so full and true an account be found of the
  conditions of Roman society at this time as in this admirable book.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 870. O. 12, ‘05. 1070w.

  “And, aside from its inherent importance, its thoughts are so lucidly
  and attractively expressed that no intelligent reader, whether a
  Latinist or not, can fail to find it pleasant reading.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 356. My. 4, ‘05. 2890w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 64. Ja. 28, ‘05. 370w.

  “There is an almost incredible richness and fulness of detail, and yet
  it is so presented that an intelligible and well-proportioned picture
  is the result.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 601. S. 16, ‘05. 1320w.

  “Professor Dill has laid under lasting obligation those readers who
  seek to understand the inner life and moral condition as well as the
  political and external affairs of a given period. While Professor
  Dill’s prescribed limitation seems to forestall criticism, the
  question can hardly be repressed whether his picture of society in
  pagan Rome is quite complete without mention of the great regenerative
  force which was gathering strength within its bosom and advancing
  through bitter conflict to victory.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 499. F. 25, ‘05. 880w.

  “This is preëminently a book for scholars.”

     + + =R of Rs.= 31: 509. Ap. ‘05. 40w.

  “His style is rather that of an essayist than of an historian, and he
  lacks that precision, that careful explicitness, and, above all, that
  direct citation of authorities which in a learned work are
  indispensable, while in the selection and use of his materials he
  often disappoints our hopes. Mr. Dill has learning, industry, and, as
  numerous passages show, a brilliant pen. If his separate chapters had
  been published as single essays, they would most of them, we think,
  have been justly considered excellent. They are rich in what is
  interesting and delightful.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 291. F. 25, ‘05. 2040w.

  “The author’s literary skill has enabled him even to make the dry
  bones of the inscriptions part and parcel of the literature of the
  period, with which he is indisputably more familiar than any other
  Englishman living. A work that deserves to rank with Lecky’s ‘History
  of European morals.’”

   + + + =Westminster Review.= 168: 231. F. ‘05. 210w.


=Dionne, Narcisse Eutrope.= Samuel de Champlain. $5. Morang & co.

  “For material, M. Dionne has gone chiefly to Champlain’s own writings
  and to the reports of missionaries. Designed as a contribution to a
  popular series [“Makers of Canada”] we do not meet in this book with
  any long discussion of disputed or technical points; but M. Dionne
  takes time to consider large issues such as the expediency of
  Champlain’s attack upon the Iroquois, and is not prevented from
  breaking a lance at intervals with Faillon. For us the most
  interesting portion of the narrative is concerned with the taking of
  Quebec by the English in 1629.”—Nation.

  “We do not think that Mr. Dionne praises him too highly in a volume in
  which the only serious fault we detect is a certain lack of sequence.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 314. S. 29, ‘05. 560w.

  “These and all cognate topics are dealt with by M. Dionne with both
  sympathy and information.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 145. Ag. 17, ‘05. 490w.

 *       =Spec.= 95: 822. N. 18, ‘05. 200w.


=Ditchfield, Peter Hampson.= Picturesque English cottages. **$2.
Winston.

  To “Old cottages and domestic architecture in southwest Surrey,” and
  “The old cottages, farm houses and other stone buildings of the
  Cotswold district” “must now be added Mr. Ditchfield’s ‘Picturesque
  English cottages,’ less technical than the others, equally well
  illustrated, and covering the field more broadly.... The text,
  covering as it does such subjects as methods of construction,
  influence of material, the evolution of the cottage, foreign influence
  upon it, the cottage garden and its flowers, is entertaining, and by
  no means too technical for the uninstructed reader.” (Nation.)

  “Were it not for its binding, the book would be wholly without
  blemish. So tasteless, so utterly inappropriate a cover.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 267. S. 28, ‘05. 910w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 240w.


=Dix, Beulah Marie.= Fair maid of Graystones. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  Graystones is a great country house in Suffolkshire, and the action
  takes place in the time of Cromwell after the surrender of the
  Cavalier stronghold of Colchester to the Parliamentary forces. The
  story opens upon a group of Cavalier prisoners. “The hero, Jack
  Hetherington, prisoner, is fighting a big Roundhead for kicking a
  dying Cavalier.... All through the brilliantly told tale, Jack fights
  his way against great odds. He weds the Fair Maid, a neglected orphan,
  dependent of a great family, and the two young things go out penniless
  to seek a home.” (Outlook.)

  * “The plot, which hinges on a case of mistaken identity, is
  ingenious, if scarcely probable, and the interest fresh and well
  sustained.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 794. D. 9. 160w.

  * “The story reads agreeably, and adds another leaf to its author’s
  wreath of laurel.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 488. D. 14, ‘05. 260w.

  * “There is not much history to trouble about ... but there is good
  style here, and lively characterization in Miss Dix’s now known
  manner.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 839. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.

  “While there is nothing extraordinary about the plot, it has no tinge
  of the commonplace, and it is handled with so high an appreciation of
  artistic values and human interest that one wishes there were more
  writers like Miss Dix.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 381. O. 14, ‘05. 160w.


=Dixon, Amzi Clarence.= Lights and shadows of American life. William H.
Smith, 25 Stanhope St., Boston.

  Christian talks which will find favor in many Christian homes because
  they combine orthodox thought, humorous expression, and broad common
  sense. Such subjects as: Our homes; Our money makers; Our boys and
  girls; Our amusements; Our Sabbath; Our politics; Our churches; and
  Our destiny, are discussed.


=Dixon, Thomas, jr.= Clansman. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  “The clansman” is the second book of Mr. Dixon’s trio of historical
  novels. The first, “The leopard’s spots,” as the author states in his
  preface, “was the statement in historical outline of the condition of
  the negro from the enfranchisement to the disfranchisement.” “The
  clansman” is the sequel, and “develops the true story of the Ku Klux
  Klan which overturned the revolution régime.” The great issues of the
  reconstruction period create a giant force which the dignity and
  strength of Lincoln grapple with for a brief period, and which the
  evil genius of “The great commoner,” Austin Stoneman, Thaddeus Stevens
  in thin disguise, dominates thruout the story. Congress’ policy of
  revenge towards the new South, the impeachment of Johnson, the radical
  faction’s determination to bestow civic rights upon negroes, the
  resulting reign of terror in the South under the sway of negroes and
  carpetbaggers, and the rise of the Ku Klux Klan provide stirring
  scenes thru which runs a double love story.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 336. Mr. 25, ‘05. 180w.

  “The clansman may be summed up as a very poor novel, a very ridiculous
  novel, not a novel at all, yet a novel with a great deal to it; a
  novel that very properly is going to interest many thousands of
  readers, of all degrees of taste and education, a book which will be
  discussed from all points of view, voted superlatively good and
  superlatively bad, but which will be read.” F. Dredd.

   — — + =Bookm.= 20: 559. F. ‘05. 920w.

  “One reads not far in the present volume until he is convinced that
  Mr. Dixon is not to be waved aside as a mere argumentative
  pamphleteer, but that he has in him literary possibilities of a high
  order. The advance from the crudities of ‘The leopard’s spots’ is
  marked, and is seen in every feature.” W. H. Johnson.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 277. Mr. ‘05. 780w.

  “Book shows from beginning to end the effort of an unscrupulous
  partisan to become an artist. The story appears to have been got out
  of the Congressional Record and pieced together with two or three
  charming love affairs.”

   — — + =Ind.= 58: 325. F. 9, ‘05. 1050w.

  “A thrilling romance. It is by no means equally certain that the book
  paints in any too vivid colors the chaos of blind passion that in the
  North followed Lincoln’s assassination or the reign of terror that
  resulted in the South.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 34. Ja. 21, ‘05. 1020w.

  “Deliberately uses such talent as he has to arouse the worst passions
  in his readers. There is less vulgarity in the story than might be
  expected, but restraint has not yet done its full work. The best men,
  both North and South, will turn from this repellant portrayal of our
  country and our countrymen.”

   — — + =Outlook.= 79: 348. F. 4, ‘05. 230w.

  “The dramatic intensity, the color, the incisiveness of Mr. Dixon’s
  style. It is in the expression of personal opinion, and the
  characterization of individuals that the strong partisan bias of the
  book is most plain. Three-fourths of the book are given up to the
  epoch-making events and radical legislation, that prepared the way for
  the Ku Klux Klan. ‘The clansman’ consists of a bitter arraignment of
  Thaddeus Stevens, some vivid portrayals of great scenes, some
  impassioned pleading, and a modicum of fiction. As a novel it may
  reinforce, but it will not displace the more artistic presentment of
  the reconstruction period that another Southerner has given us in ‘Red
  rock.’”

   + + — =Reader.= 5: 379. F. ‘05. 500w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 508. Ap. ‘05. 160w.

  “Mr. Dixon ... is so impressed with the tremendous interest of his
  country’s history that he has lost his sense of perspective.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 636. My. 13, ‘05. 250w.


=Dixon, Thomas, jr.= Life worth living. **$1.20. Doubleday.

  This group of essays and papers sets forth the beauties of nature and
  the joys of country life. The opening chapter, Dreams and disillusions
  shows the “horrors of city life”; there are other chapters upon such
  subjects as—The music of the seasons, The fellowship of dogs, Some
  sins of nature, The shouts of children, In the haunts of wild fowl,
  and What is life?

  Reviewed by G. W. Adams.

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 70. S. ‘05. 620w.

       — =Ind.= 58: 1422. Je. 22, ‘05. 150w.

  “It is not often we are given such an insight into a public man’s
  private life.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 974. Je. 24, ‘05. 220w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 160w.


=Dods, Rev. Marcus.= Bible, its origin and nature. **$1. Scribner.

  “This is the first volume published on the foundation which
  Lieutenant-Governor Bross, of Illinois, provided in 1879, with a view
  to the defense of ‘the religion of the Bible ... as commonly received
  in the Presbyterian and other evangelical churches.’” (Outlook.) It
  contains the lectures given at Lake Forest college in May, 1904.

  * “The book is a polemic, but a gracious polemic.”

     + + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 741. O. ‘05. 670w.

  “His work will be of service in disarming prejudice and allaying fears
  as to the critical study of the Bible.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 214. Jl. 27, ‘05. 200w.

  “What is peculiar to himself is the clarity of exposition, the
  brightness of sympathy, the sound sanity and sincerity of his
  treatment of a subject which more than anything lends itself to
  exaggeration and lip service.”

     + + =N. Y. Times= 10: 364. Je. 3, ‘05. 750w.

  “He states his argument with great ability, and meets objectors with
  ingenuity and skill.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 758. Mr. 25, ‘05. 90w.


=Dole, Nathan Haskell.= comp. Latin poets: an anthology. $2. Crowell.

  A companion volume to the author’s “Greek poets.” There have been
  included Latin poets from Plautus and Terence to Juvenal and Lucian. A
  sketch of each poet’s life followed by representative selections from
  his works, bringing together material for a complete survey of Roman
  literature.

  * “As far as the originals are concerned, the selections are
  excellently made, but the versions are very uneven, and had to be.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 408. N. 16, ‘05. 400w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 863. D. 2, ‘05. 380w.

  “It is, however, a charming collection in which few will miss any
  favorites.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 577. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.


Dolly Winter: the letters of a friend which Joseph Harold is permitted
to publish. †$1.25. Pott.

  Letters from the hero to his friends give the romance of a man of the
  world who, while temporarily following the simple life in a secluded
  village, becomes interested in Dolly, whose mother as a result of ill
  doing, is insane.

  “The letters are written in a graceful style and unfold a romantic
  story with much keenness of wit and other elements of the now almost
  lost art of letter writing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “An innocuous tale upon well-worn lines.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 16w.


=Donne, William Bodham.= William Bodham Donne and his friends; ed. by
Catharine B. Johnson. *$3. Dutton.

  “A volume of letters to and from ‘William Bodham Donne and his
  friends,’ ed. by Donne’s granddaughter, Catherine B. Johnson.... The
  letters selected attempt to give a connected idea of W. B. Donne’s
  life and to illustrate his character.... [He] numbered among his
  ‘friends’ the best-known literary personages of his day.... There are
  16 illustrations, including portraits of William Bodham Donne, Fanny
  Kemble, FitzGerald, John Mitchell Kemble, Trench, Bernard Barton,
  Blakesley, and others.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Considering the difficulty of the task before her, Mrs. Johnson has
  succeeded remarkably well.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 233. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1120w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 431. Ap. 8. 770w.

  “Most of the letters in this book were written by Donne, but a great
  many were written to him, and it is hard to say which are the more
  interesting.” Jeanette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 159. Ag. ‘05. 1580w.

  “The workmanship of both editor and printer is good.” Percy F.
  Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 10. Jl. 1, ‘05. 2380w.

  * “Miss Johnson has done her part admirably in editing the letters.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 989. O. 26, ‘05. 260w.

  “It is altogether a model of what such a record should be.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 206. S. 7, ‘05. 720w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 281. Ap. 29, ‘05. 170w.

  “They are the letters of a true literary man, letters that are worth
  the permanent form in which they are now embodied.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 602. S. 16, ‘05. 570w.

  “These letters of Donne and his friends ... form a worthy memorial of
  him.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 593. Jl. 1, ‘05. 170w.


=Donnell, Annie Hamilton.= Rebecca Mary; with eight illustrations in
color by Mary Shippen Green. †$1.50. Harper.

  Rebecca Mary, a little New England girl, figures thru these sketches.
  She lives with a prim severe aunt with whom she possesses in common
  certain family traits. “Being a Plummer meant a great deal. It meant
  that by no chance must one ever display any of the emotions that one
  experiences. Neither must one ever show one’s affection; one must have
  courage to do what is right, no matter how unpleasant; one must be
  conscientious to a fault, and above all one must do one’s duty if it
  kills one.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “On the whole, Rebecca Mary is worth knowing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 650. O. 7, ‘05. 270w.

  * “There is no doubt that Rebecca will find her niche in the
  affections of readers beside that occupied by the immortal Emmy Lou.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  * “A charming study of child life.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 711. N. 25, ‘05. 30w.


=Dopp, Katharine Elizabeth.= Place of industries in elementary
education. *$1. Univ. of Chicago press.

  In this third edition a chapter upon “Ways of procuring a material
  equipment” and “Ways of using it so as to enhance the value of
  colonial history” is added in order to make the book serviceable as a
  teacher’s manual. The chapters are entitled—Significance of industrial
  epochs, Origins of attitudes that underlie industry, and Practical
  applications. The illustrations are from photographs.

  “The most suggestive single work that can be placed in the hands of
  teachers.” W. I. Thomas.

     + + =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 272. S. ‘05. 120w.
     + + =Dial.= 39: 170. S. 16, ‘05. 180w.

  “It is a great satisfaction to meet with a book that moves along an
  unbeaten path to new points of view on current problems. Such a book
  is this.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 446. Je. 17, ‘05. 270w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 90w.


=Dorman, Marcus R. P.= History of the British empire in the 19th
century, v. 2. The campaigns of Wellington and the policy of Castlereagh
(1806-1825). *$4. Lippincott.

  “A consecutive account of British foreign and domestic policy.... Mr.
  Dorman pays little attention to affairs in France and central Europe.
  His point of view is always British and his desire is to elucidate the
  part played by British statesmen and soldiers in continental
  affairs.... He introduces a considerable body of new information drawn
  from the correspondence of British representatives in other countries.
  He throws light on the Welcheren expedition, on the part played by
  General Chitroff in betraying information to the British government,
  on the negotiations between Alexander and Napoleon in 1811, and on the
  position of Prussia in February, 1812.... The second portion of the
  history, dealing with the period from 1815 to 1825, is chiefly
  concerned with the policy of Castlereagh.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “The attitude assumed throughout is that of a fair-minded and
  impartial narrator.” Charles M. Andrews.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 664. Ap. ‘05. 1560w.


=Dorsey, George Amos.= Mythology of the Wichita. $1.50. Carnegie inst.

  A volume “collected under the auspices of the Carnegie institution by
  the Curator of anthropology of the Field Columbian museum of
  Chicago.... In this collection are sixty myths. The author has written
  an introductory chapter of twenty-four pages, telling of the history
  and social life of the Wichita, a group of the Caddoan stock who have
  stood high among the Indians as regards home life and morality.”—Ann.
  Am. Acad.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 339. Mr. ‘05. 120w.

         =Nature.= 71: 417. Mr. 2, ‘05. 230w.


=Dorsey, George Amos,= ed. Traditions of the Skidi Pawnee. *$6. Pub. for
the American folklore society by Houghton.

  “As a faithful narrator, Mr. Dorsey translates the indecorous into
  Latin. The stories he divides into several groups, the ‘Cosmogonous,’
  the ‘Boy heroes,’ ‘Medicin,’ ‘Animal tales’; then comes ‘People marry
  animals or become animals.’ Then there are many stories which are
  placed under the general heading of ‘Miscellaneous.’ ... The Pawnee
  delighted in boy heroes.... Indian maidens figure as heroines. A
  fairly ideal one is ‘the girl who married a star.’ ... The coyote
  figures in many of the traditions.... The Pawnees have also their
  medicine bundles. Some of these bundles are believed to have the power
  of inducing rain to fall.”—N. Y. Times.

  Reviewed by Frederick Starr.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 166. S. 16, ‘05. 1570w.

  “The book is a very important contribution to American folk lore.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 10. Ja. 5, ‘05. 230w.

     + + =Nature.= 71: 417. Mr. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  “The notes at the conclusion of this volume add very much to one’s
  comprehension of the folk-lore of the Pawnees.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 52. Ja. 28, ‘05. 540w.


=Doub, William Coligny.= History of the United States. *$1. Macmillan.

  To show that civics forms an integral part of the history of a nation,
  Professor Doub combines the two subjects in one text, doing away with
  the necessity of separate books.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 217. O. ‘05. 30w.

  “In the hands of a well-equipped educator this volume will render a
  separate study of civics unnecessary.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 267. Ag. 3, ‘05. 70w.

  “The author is successful, it appears to us, in his desire to make
  government so completely an integral part of the history of a nation
  that the people will rightly see and understand this relationship.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 692. Jl. 15, ‘05. 70w.


* Double-knot and other stories. †$1.25. Benziger.

  Mary T. Waggaman, Anna T. Sadlier, Magdalen Rock, Mary E. Mannix, Mary
  G. Bonesteel, Eugene Uhlrich, Maurice Francis Egan, and seven other
  Roman Catholic writers have written the thirty stories which make up
  this volume. Nearly all of them are sweet, simple little love stories,
  but some are merry ones, like the story of the pretty stenographer,
  who, thru a misdirected letter, succeeded in marrying a millionaire,
  and some are sad, like the story of the two lovers who, parted for a
  life time, met at last as inmates of the Home which the Little Sisters
  of the Poor provide for the needy and aged.


=Dougall, Lily.= Summit House mystery. $1.50. Funk.

  The events recorded here transpire in the shut-away section of the
  mountains of northern Georgia, where two women seek seclusion. “The
  story concerns a mysterious crime, and a strong-willed, long-suffering
  religious woman is the central figure. It recalls, in the solution of
  the mystery, and in one powerfully dramatic passage, Miss Braddon’s
  famous ‘Henry Dunbar.’ It also recalls (as vividly) superficial facts
  of the Borden murder mystery at Fall River about sixteen years ago.”
  (N. Y. Times).

  “One class of fiction lovers will read it for the ‘mystery,’ while
  another will care more for its delicate, and subtle observations of
  nature and character, and the admirable English the author commands.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 477. My. ‘05. 220w.

  “Miss Dougall’s frequently too fluent descriptive facility is freely
  exercised. There is beauty, however, in her descriptive phrases, and
  she can place a scene before the reader’s eyes with just the effect
  she aims at. The plot is ingenious and sufficiently original, and is
  remarkably well worked out. Miss Dougall is one of the cleverest of
  contemporary story tellers. Better still are the studies of character.
  The novel has value, too, as an impartial comparison by an outsider of
  Northern and Southern traits of character. It is a readable book, and
  it deserves success.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 102. F. 18, ‘05. 280w.

  “The plot is ingenious and original and remarkably well worked out.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “The plot of this novel is managed with much skill, holding one’s
  interest without disclosing the solution of the puzzle until the very
  end. It is a cleverly told tale, with many original points.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 504. F. 25, ‘05. 80w.

  “This book was published in England under the title ‘The earthly
  purgatory,’ and the title was well chosen. For the lover of adventure
  the book is to be commended.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 429. Mr. 18, ‘05. 190w.


* =Douglas, Amanda Minnie.= Little girl in old San Francisco. †$1.50.
Dodd.

  “The little girl first reached San Francisco in its earliest days.
  When the book closes, San Francisco is the great metropolis of the
  West. Giving the life story of the ‘little girl’ from her childhood
  past her wedding-day, the author also pictures the changes and growth
  of the city.”—Outlook.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 780. N. 18, ‘05. 80w.

  * “The book has not only human interest but some historical value.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14, ‘05. 60w.


=Douglas, James.= Old France in the new world. $2.50. Burrows.

  This detailed description of Quebec in the seventeenth century forms a
  study of the French occupation of Canada, their explorations into the
  wilderness, and their struggle with England for supremacy. The volume
  is fully illustrated with reproductions of old pictures, maps,
  diagrams and portraits.

  * “An important addition to the historical literature of Northern
  America.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 80w.

  “In fact, though Dr. Douglas has trod in paths that had been pretty
  well blazed out and explored before him, he has achieved a work of
  value.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 673. O. 14, ‘05. 630w.

  “Dr. Douglas’s book may find fit place alongside Sir Gilbert Parker’s
  ‘In old Quebec,’ Sir John Bourinot’s ‘The story of Canada,’ and the
  dozen volumes of Parkman’s histories.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 528. O. 28, ‘05. 50w.


=Douglas, James.= Theodore Watts-Dunton: poet, novelist, critic. *$3.50.
Lane.

  Mr. Douglas has exhibited Mr. Watts-Dunton to the world mainly as a
  novelist and poet. This view does not accord with Mr. Joseph Jacobs’
  notion, for instance, which maintains that Mr. Watts-Dunton’s highest
  place is one among the critics. “The work comprises: (1) Reminiscences
  and anecdotes concerning Watt-Dunton’s distinguished friends and
  associates; (2) Watts-Dunton’s last words about Rossetti, and the
  campaign of slander in connection with his relations with his wife;
  (3) Unpublished poems by Watts-Dunton; (4) Letters from George
  Meredith, Thomas Hardy, and other distinguished men; (5) An account of
  the life at the Pines, and the relations between Swinburne and
  Watts-Dunton; (6) Extracts from Watts-Dunton’s articles in the London
  Athenæum.” (Int. Studio). The illustrations include Welsh and English
  landscapes, works of art by Rosetti and others, and both outside and
  inside views of the Pines, the joint home of Watts-Dunton and
  Swinburne.

  “The volume is precisely what it claims to be—a biographical and
  critical study, and the subject has been extremely fortunate in his
  biographer; for Mr. James Douglas is not only a fascinating and
  discriminating critic, but is in such perfect rapport with
  Watts-Dunton and his dearest literary companions that the rare
  sympathy of deep friendship lights up a story that even without warmth
  would have been fair and fascinating, and gives to it a peculiar
  charm.”

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 336. Mr. ‘05. 990w.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

         =Atlan.= 95: 426. Mr. ‘05. 510w.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

         =Atlan.= 95: 837. Je. ‘05. 1030w.

  “The author is an enthusiastic admirer of his subject, not a calm and
  critical biographer.” Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + — =Critic.= 46: 451 My. ‘05. 900w.

  “The object of Mr. Douglas in this work is to give a general view of
  the man and his writings. As far as the man is concerned, the work is
  by no means a formal biography, but rather a series of dissolving
  views of a strong personality. His [Douglas’] own commentary is
  rambling and possibly overwrought, but will be found serviceable as a
  sort of connective tissue whereby the reprinted passages are held
  together.” W. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 78. F. 1, ‘05. 2880w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 157. Jl. 20, ‘05. 300w.

 *   + — =Ind.= 59: 1163. N. 16, ‘05. 70w.

  “There is no doubt whatever that Mr. Watts-Dunton’s reminiscences,
  collected and arranged by one so eminently able as Mr. James Douglas,
  form a very important addition to contemporary records of the leading
  lights of the nineteenth century in the literature and art of America
  and England.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 100. F. ‘05. 280w. (Detailed statement
         of contents.)

  “Mr. Douglas’s vicarious autobiography of the mind of Theodore
  Watts-Dunton is in plan and execution pretty much everything that a
  study of a living man of letters ought not to be. The chief value of
  the book is as an anthology of Mr. Watts-Dunton’s scattered and too
  little known work in criticism, in fiction, and in verse.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 176. Mr. 2, ‘05. 1710w.

  “Mr. Douglas in this book has chosen to represent Mr. Watts-Dunton as
  critic by very few, and those for the most part badly selected,
  specimens. This book does less than justice to the great position of
  Mr. Watts-Dunton in contemporary English letters. He lays stress upon
  the wrong thing, praises his hero for his lesser qualities, reproduces
  too little of his criticism, and too much of his poetry. Whoever wants
  to know Mr. Watts-Dunton in his capacity as poet and novelist will
  find his merits more than sufficiently exemplified and insisted upon
  in Mr. Douglas’s book.” Joseph Jacobs.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 4. Ja. 7, ‘05. 2890w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 381. Mr. ‘05. 60w.


=Dowden, Edward.= Montaigne. **$1.50. Lippincott.

  The initial volume in the “French men of letters series.” With a
  clever distribution of detail which Montaigne bequeathed to the world
  about himself, Professor Dowden “seeks to interpret the author not
  merely by the facts of his life but also by what he reveals of himself
  in his writings. And ... Montaigne lays himself bare for the
  inspection of the reader.” (Dial.)

  “He has told the old tale clearly and simply, as far as possible in
  Montaigne’s own words, and we know no handbook better fitted to
  enlighten those readers who have not the time or industry to read the
  essays themselves.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 975. S. 23, ‘05. 1470w.

  * “In the admirable biography ... Montaigne’s life and work are
  considered with sympathetic discretion.” Edward Fuller.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 566. D. ‘05. 790w.

  “It is no cut-and-dried biography, but an illuminated record of the
  mind and soul of the man whom Sainte-Beuve called ‘the wisest
  Frenchman that ever lived.’”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 168. S. 16, ‘05. 790w.

  “For the book itself is evidently no quickly commissioned and
  machine-made production. It is the result rather of affectionate
  assiduity, or serious collection of materials, and collation of
  authorities.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 293. S. 15, ‘05. 1760w.

  “What makes this volume specially pleasing is that, in the spirit of
  ‘entente cordiale,’ it shows the desire to appreciate, with the
  graceful help of a winning style, the essentially French writer, who
  nevertheless finds a literary home in all countries.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 383. N. 9, ‘05. 300w.

  “Prof. Dowden’s ‘Montaigne’ has the quality we always look for in the
  work of that capable critic. This writer is not a virtuoso among
  biographers; but what he lacks in brilliancy is more than made up for
  in sober force.” H. W. Boynton.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 665. O. 14, ‘05. 2280w.

  * “And it is the distinctive characteristic of Mr. Dowden’s work that
  in it Montaigne lives for us again. This effect, moreover, is produced
  with a deftness which defies analysis. The treatment is essentially
  impressionistic but it is none the less convincing.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 715. N. 25, ‘05. 280w.

  “A critical and sympathetic account which every genuine lover of
  Montaigne will prize.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 542. O. 21, ‘05. 390w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 40w.

  “He makes Montaigne as interesting as a man’s biography can be made
  whose real life is contained in his books. Our feeling about the book
  is rather that it is too much biographic; and that more space should
  have been given to the study of Montaigne’s influence on French and on
  English literature.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 501. O. 14, ‘05. 1640w.

  * “Professor Dowden’s work is entirely worthy of its attractive
  setting. We do not think he has ever made a literary sketch so
  satisfactory.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: sup. 908. D. 2, ‘05. 500w.


=Dowson, Ernest.= Collected poems. *$1.50. Lane.

  This volume contains all of the poetical works of Ernest Dowson,
  including “Verses,” published in 1896; “The Pierrot of the minute,” in
  1897; and a posthumous collection entitled “Decorations.” Mr. Arthur
  Symons has written an appreciative memoir to the book.

  “[He] wrote in verse with sad sincerity, and in exquisite lingering
  rhythms and a diction poignant in its reserved perfection.” Ferris
  Greenslet.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 416. S. ‘05. 700w.

  “The delicate talent of Ernest Dowson is appraised with intelligence,
  and the subtle sympathy which it so peculiarly needs, in the
  introductory essay by Mr. Arthur Symons which accompanies the final
  edition of Dowson’s ‘Poems.’” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 272. N. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  “We quote a poem which will illustrate both his musical grave way and
  the destructive and unpoetical philosophy that he had acquired.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 177. Je. 9, ‘05. 910w.

  “A volume of decadent poetry, so called, of exceptionally fine
  quality.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 302. O. 12, ‘05. 440w.

  “The poems before us justify the praise Mr. Symons bestows upon them.
  They vibrate with feeling, and are stamped with reality, as having
  been lived before they were phrased.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 678. O. 14, ‘05. 660w.

  “We may well believe that a few of these poems at least will live and
  be treasured, never indeed by the many, but by those who are sensitive
  to music and choice expression, and to sentiment that is genuine,
  however fatally stamped with too much sadness, born of disease.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 99: 808. Je. 17, ‘05. 1430w.


=Doyle, (Arthur) Conan.= Return of Sherlock Holmes. $1.50. McClure.

  Thirteen short stories which chronicle the last adventures of the
  famous detective, who now retires from the public gaze to end his days
  on his Sussex bee-farm. There is the story of the mystery of the
  second stain, the adventure of the priory school, the adventure of the
  six Napoleons and others of equal mystery.

  “Mr. Holmes is so interesting that he might easily be more so.
  Moreover, he is not so accurate as of yore.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 397. Ap. 1. 530w.

  “The novelist has not shown anything like as much ingenuity in the
  construction of fresh problems as the detective shows in solving
  them.” Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + — =Forum.= 37: 106. Jl. ‘05. 1340w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “Speaking generally, this volume does not average as high as its
  predecessors; but this is only because its best are not quite equal to
  the best he has told before.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 708. Mr. 18, ‘05. 360w.

  “The stolen examination paper, the missing foot-ball player, and the
  professional blackmailer, for all his miserable death, seem rather
  small game for the redoubtable Holmes after the stirring scenes of his
  earlier days.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 346. Mr. 4, ‘05. 380w.

  “The new stories are not so fresh as the old, not so ingenious, nor do
  they offer that full measure of breathless suspense without which the
  fiction of crime is only weariness and vexation.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 170w.


=Doyle, Edward.= Haunted temple and other poems. $1. Edward Doyle, 247
W. 125th st., N. Y.

  “The haunted temple” by the blind poet of Harlem is a criticism of
  life. The temple is builded of “the lifeless dross of the heart and
  the spirit,” the law of construction is “antipodal—not one, with that
  of the ascending stars and the sun.” Introspection and poetic fervor
  mark this work and the accompanying poems.

       + =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 50w.

  “A daring and somewhat unregulated imagination is the chief
  characteristic.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 68. Ag. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “Many of his verses are deeply religious in tone and are healthily,
  almost buoyantly trustful, with an entire absence of morbidness.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 585. S. 9, ‘05. 270w.


=Drayton, Michael.= Poems. $1.25. Scribner.

  “The latest edition to the ‘Newnes’ pocket classics.’ ... Instead of
  attempting to show every side of Drayton’s work in so narrow a
  compass, the editor has wisely selected only the best side, and has
  accordingly presented a very full collection of his shorter
  pieces.”—Outlook.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 296. My. 6, ‘05. 80w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1015, Ap. 22, ‘05. 90w.


=Driscoll, Clara.= Girl of La Gloria; il. by Hugh W. Ditzler. †$1.50.
Putnam.

  This love story of Texas, which pictures the rough but romantic life
  on the plains, is the story of a young New Yorker who falls in love
  with a girl who is the last of an old Mexican family whose estates
  have gradually been taken from them by the Americans.

  “Miss Driscoll can tell a tale with freshness and an engaging
  individuality. She has not quite got the knack either of omitting
  unessential details, or of saving essential ones from being a trifle
  tedious.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 495. My. 6. ‘05. 310w.

  “The author’s diction is commonplace, and her grammar none too sound.”

     — — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 556. My. 6. 120w.

  “The story is really too good, as stories go, to be treated altogether
  flippantly.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 601. Ag. ‘05. 170w.

  “It is a very little story and very simple.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 160. Mr. 11, ‘05. 270w.

  “And nothing in particular to recommend or condemn it.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 20w.

     + — =Reader.= 6: 120. Je. ‘05. 90w.


=Drummond, William Henry.= Voyageur, and other poems. **$1.25. Putnam.

  The new French-Canadian poems which make up this volume sing sadly and
  gayly, by turns, of the hunter, and the pioneer, of home and of
  country, of youth and of “The last portage” when “De moon an’ de star
  above is gone, yet somet’ing tell me I mus’ go on.”

  “It is only when the author forsakes his patois, and writes in the
  English tongue, that he lays himself open to serious fault-finding.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 300. S. 2. 390w.

  “Heartily can we commend every page of Dr. Drummond’s latest volume.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 190w.

  “The patois is not beautiful in itself, and to many readers it may
  seem a little barbarous; but it is Mr. Drummond’s true material, for
  the dialect songs have a merit which is absent in the few pieces
  written in ordinary English.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 391. S. 16, ‘05. 500w.


=Dubois, Dr. Paul.= Psychic treatment of nervous disorders; tr. from the
French by Smith Ely Jelliffe, and William A. White. *$3. Funk.

  The author both a psychologist and physician gives in this volume of
  nearly 450 pages the experience and principles of psychic treatment of
  nervous disorders based upon twenty years of successful specialization
  and practice in this branch of medical skill. “The strong optimistic
  tenor of the book, its simple untechnical language, and the directness
  with which its philosophy is applied to life, make it capable of
  becoming a vital fact not merely to physicians but to every one who
  has pondered on the relations between the psychic and the physical.”

  “The charm of Dr. Dubois’s style is preserved in spite of the
  difficulties and occasional errors of translation. The entire absence
  of pedantry, the constant good nature and wit, a marked dramatic and
  rhetorical instinct and honest zeal make his book one of the most
  readable in medical or psychological literature.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 497. O. 7, ‘05. 940w.


=Duckworth, W. L. H.= Morphology and anthropology: a handbook for
students. *$4.50. Macmillan.

  “Mr. Duckworth defines the subject-matter of his book as an inquiry
  into (1) man’s zoölogical position: (2) the nature of his ancestry....
  In the classification adopted by Mr. Duckworth, man retains the
  position assigned to him by Huxley.... Nor has the evidence which has
  accumulated in the last thirty-three years permitted Mr. Duckworth to
  make a more definite statement as to the ancestral chain ... of man
  than was made by Darwin in his first edition of the ‘Descent of man’
  in 1871.”—Nature.

  “Within the limits at his disposal he has been able to marshal his
  facts and inferences in a methodical and convincing manner.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 533. Ap. 29. 740w.

  “It would not be just to close this review without acknowledging the
  number of original facts and fresh opinions that mark the pages of
  this work. The opening chapters are perhaps too condensed. The
  chapters on the cerebral organization are specially well done, and
  contain the best exposition yet published of our knowledge of that
  part of the Primate organization.” A. K.

   + + + =Nature.= 71: 433. Mr. 9, ‘05. 1690w.

  “Duckworth’s observations strike us in the main very favorably, as
  both candid and judicious. A very good and useful handbook.” T. D.

     + + =Science,= n.s. 22: 398. S. 29, ‘05. 680w.

  “Is an invaluable piece of exact work, somewhat beyond the needs of
  the general reader, but admirably adapted to those of the student.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 787, My. 27, ‘05. 180w.


* =Duclaux, Mary (Mary Darmesteter) (Agnes Mary Frances Robinson).=
Fields of France: little essays in descriptive sociology. $6.
Lippincott.

  Madame Duclaux’s interesting description of France and the French is
  now reissued as “a beautiful quarto with twenty reproductions of
  water-color sketches by W. B. Macdougall, chiefly in illustration of
  French dwellings from farm-houses to chateaux.... The seven divisions
  of the book carry one from Normandy to Provence with apparently equal
  sympathy and shrewd observation.” (Nation.)

  * “One of the most gorgeous of holiday books, and one that deserves to
  be read from cover to cover, not only because of its subject but for
  its literary style as well.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “Altogether this is a delightful book.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 446. N. 30, ‘05. 310w.

  * “Altogether she has made an instructive and attractive book.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 877. D. 9, ‘05. 420w.

  * “The artist’s work is often amateurish and the arrangement of the
  pictures awkward.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 692. N. 25, ‘05. 180w.


=Dudley, Albertus True.= In the line. †$1.25. Lee.

  The third volume in the “Phillips Exeter” series tells the story of a
  sturdy Boston boy who having worked up to the position of guard on the
  football team is forbidden by his father to play in one of the crucial
  games of the season. Opportunity is thus given for arguments on both
  sides of the much-discussed football question.

  “Except in so far as it lends encouragement to football ... the book
  is bent to encourage all sorts of good things—honesty, democracy,
  morality, courage, a harmless gayety.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 572. S. 2, ‘05. 230w.


=Duff, Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant.= Notes from a diary,
1896-1901. 2v. *$4. Dutton.

  These volumes close the notes from a diary which contains the record
  of half-a century ending as the reign of Edward VII. begins. Sir
  Mountstuart has avoided the chief interests of his life, politics and
  administration but has preserved “some interesting and amusing things
  that would otherwise have soon disappeared,” anecdotes, bits of verse,
  stories of travels, of dinners, and of visits among the most brilliant
  men of his time.

  “Very entertaining volumes. They paint the manners of the time more
  graphically than any novelist has been able to do.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 356. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1090w.

  “They are a treasure-house of entertainment. There is a good deal of
  pleasant classical lore; there are riddles, too, and jokes galore, so
  that the ordinary man as well as the scholar should be pleased.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 456. Ap. 15. 1610w.

  * “A mirror of the times indeed and it is with sincere regret that I
  read Sir Mountstuart’s ultimatum that these volumes are his last.”
  Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 508. Je. ‘05. 950w.

  “Though by no means dull reading are a little cloying if taken in
  course and at a sitting.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 419. Je. 16, ‘05. 450w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 508. Je. 22, ‘05. 1080w.

  “They are bed-candle reading. As such they will divert, interest, and
  offer diverse suggestion to different people.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 316. My. 13, ‘05. 1350w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “Not an unkind word enters these pages. The author is amiable both by
  nature and grace. He is an accomplished raconteur.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 542. Je. 24, ‘05. 1020w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 124. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

  “He has made such a contribution to the gaiety of the world as seldom
  comes from a single pen.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 641. Ap. 29, ‘05. 1960w.


=Duignan, W. H.= Worcestershire place names. *$2.40. Oxford.

  A glossary which brings the history and place names of Worcestershire
  down to date and “has more than a merely local interest; for the
  English place names, which nearly all have their root in Anglo-Saxon,
  occur again and again throughout the whole country, and in them
  England’s early history is latent.” (Nation.)

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 236. Ag. 19. 250w.

  “It is not surpassed in excellence by any other work of its class with
  which I am acquainted.” Henry Bradley.

   + + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 603. Jl. ‘05. 590w.

         =Nation.= 80: 501. Je. 22, ‘05. 200w.


=Dumas, Alexandre.= Three musketeers. $1.25. Crowell.

  This novel running almost to the six hundred page limit, depicting the
  court life of France during the closing years of Louis XII’s reign and
  the opening years of the Grand Monarch is in this edition fashioned
  after the “Thin paper classics” model. It offers a complete revised
  translation with introduction and cast of characters by J. Walker
  McSpadden.


=Dumas, Alexandre.= Twenty years after. $1.25. Crowell.

  An edition of Dumas’ novel which is uniform with the “Thin paper
  classics.”


=Dunbar, Agnes B. C.= Dictionary of saintly women. 2v. ea. *$4.
Macmillan.

  In volume one “the author has collected the facts and legends
  concerning thousands of Catholic saints, canonized or beatified maids
  and matrons, from ancient Britain to the Japan of the seventeenth
  century, their austerities and charities, their martyrdoms and
  miracles.” (Outlook.) Volume two draws its material mainly from the
  “Acta sanctorum,” and “the author’s survey extends over the whole
  church before the parting of the East from the West, the Western
  church as a whole to the Reformation, and afterward the Roman church.
  Besides being of value as a pious work, the dictionary will also be
  useful as a work of reference.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “It is written with ardent sympathy and with a highly respectable
  erudition.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 843. S. ‘05. 160w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “Every statement is accredited to a certain writer.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 261. Ap. 22, ‘05. 280w. (Review of v. 1.)

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 110w. (Review of v. 2.)

  * “But Miss Dunbar has worked out the problem in each case, and made a
  remarkably complete book—the only one of the kind in English we
  think.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 899. D. 16, ‘05. 480w. (Review of v. 2.)

       + =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 90w. (Review of v. 1.)

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 574. N. 4, ‘05. 60w. (Review of v. 2.)


=Dunbar, Charles Franklin.= Economic essays. **$2.50. Macmillan.

  “The volume now before us brings together fifteen essays which had
  been published in various journals, chiefly in the Quarterly journal
  of economics, and adds thereto five others which have never before
  seen the light. With the former, the task of the editor was
  comparatively simple; the latter, by the pious care of a disciple,
  have been brought ‘as nearly as possible into the form which the
  author would have wished’ to give them. The introduction by Professor
  Taussig, carefully avoiding mere eulogy, is the fit tribute of a
  student to a revered master. While the book cannot repair, except in
  slightest measure, the loss which economic science suffered in
  Professor Dunbar’s death, it is a worthy memorial to one who
  contributed so much, as teacher, editor, and investigator, to the
  progress of economic study in the United States.”—Nation.

  “Especially helpful are the chapters on the panic of 1857 and the
  description of the state banking systems in the middle of the century.
  Serve as admirable examples of interesting and intelligible
  generalizations based upon trade and banking statistics.” D. R. D.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 203. O. ‘05. 300w.

  “Some of those essays are models of careful research. The easy
  literary style in which they are written should make the volume one of
  unusual interest to the general public as well as of value to the
  student.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 339. Mr. ‘05. 250w.

  “He separates fact from fancy, and presents the results of scientific
  inquiry, largely in the field of banking and currency, in an eminently
  judicious and scholarly manner.” Arthur B. Woodford.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 112. S. 1, ‘05. 320w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 395. Ag. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “While it does not do full justice to his attainments, the present
  volume gives sufficient evidence of Professor Dunbar’s firm hold upon
  his science in its broadest relations, his skill in handling questions
  of the day, and his special aptitude for patient and fruitful
  historical research. All [the five now printed for the first time]
  display the nice workmanship of the author, and must be reckoned with
  by him who would write the definitive history of our banking system.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 159. F. 23, ‘05. 830w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 510. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  * “It is hardly too much to say that an hundred pages may be selected
  from Professor Dunbar’s writings which are as well worth preservation
  and careful study as a similar number of pages in the works of any of
  the great masters of the science since Adam Smith. Certainly there is
  no American economist whose writings deserve a higher rank.” G. S. C.

   + + + =Yale. R.= 14: 328. N. ‘05. 1000w.


* =Dunbar, Paul Laurence.= Howdy, honey, howdy. **$1.50. Dodd.

  “In this collection of verse the ... many-gifted lyrist of his race
  strikes again almost exclusively those chords of pathos and humor, in
  purely dialect verse, which have won for the author a quite unique
  position among America’s ‘minor poets’ of to-day. The publishers have
  rendered the volume very attractive by adding to the racy metrical
  text characteristic photographs and tasteful decorations; the former
  by Leigh Richmond Miner; the latter by Will Jenkins.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “Mr. Dunbar’s part in the volume needs no description, save to say
  that it is in his characteristic vein and well up to his usual
  standard in quality.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 386. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 381. N. 9, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 746. N. 4, ‘05. 290w.


=Dunbar, Paul Laurence.= Lyrics of sunshine and shadow. **$1. Dodd.

  About eighty poems are grouped here which range from the grave to the
  gay. The author keeps well to his special field of folk lore. A number
  of the poems are in negro dialect, “portraying the pranks and
  plottings of a rollicking pickaninny world.”

  “His present volume is in no wise disappointing: as in its
  predecessors we find in ‘Lyrics of sunshine and shadow’ a rich
  sympathy with the homely characteristic themes treated and a happy
  deftness in the management of rhyme and rhythm.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 100w.

  “Mr. Dunbar’s poetic inspiration is slender but sincere. He is at his
  best in simple ballad measures, writing of the common joys of health
  and out-of-doors.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 17. Jl. 6, ‘05. 190w.


=Duncan, Edmondstoune.= Schubert. $1.25. Dutton.

  Modern methods of compilation are employed, modern demands for the
  conditioning forces of a career are met, and the modern accompaniment
  of illustrative matter is supplied in this complete life of Schubert
  recently added to the “Master musicians series.” The biography of
  Schubert, Schubert the man, and Schubert the musician constitute the
  three divisions for treatment.

  * “His little book is for the most part dull, flat and prosy,
  overloaded with trivial details, in the midst of which the real
  essentials are lost sight of.”

     — — =Ind.= 59: 990. O. 26, ‘05. 250w.

  “The chief fault of Mr. Duncan’s book is a curious habit of repeating
  biographic details or criticisms in different sections of it. Some of
  his best and most important things are printed in footnote type in the
  bibliography.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 170. Ag. 24, ‘05. 700w.

  “An agreeable and generally trustworthy biography.” Richard Aldrich.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 604. S. 16, ‘05. 730w.

  “It brings out facts not before known, though it is far from being an
  ideal biography.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 695. Jl. 15, ‘05. 330w.

  * “His own observations are marked not only by the warm personal
  affection which Schubert invariably inspires in his admirers, but by
  excellent taste and sound critical judgment.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 763. N. 11, ‘05. 310w.


=Duncan, Frances.= Mary’s garden and how it grew. †$1.25. Century.

  Mary is typically the child enthusiast, while her instructor, the kind
  Herr Trummel, “gardener, horticulturist, retired florist, and above
  all, Switzer,” teaches her the simple forms of practical, scientific
  gardening. Aside from the tale of good comradeship existing between
  the gray haired gardener and the little “Liebchen,” the book is a
  practical handbook of instruction for all garden makers. It covers the
  possibilities for the different months, showing what may be
  accomplished in winter as well as in the favorable summer time. The
  illustrations by Lee Woodward Zeigler are suggestively good.

  “Miss Duncan’s little book, with its helpful illustrations, will do
  the best sort of missionary work. Her knowledge of her subject is
  intimate and her teaching technically sound; her graceful English....”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 287. Mr. ‘05. 160w.


=Duncan, Norman.= Dr. Grenfell’s parish, the deep sea fishermen. **$1.
Revell.

  In this book the author’s “freight is fact ... and the language is
  vigorous. What he calls Dr. Grenfell’s parish is the long, rocky coast
  of Labrador and of Newfoundland ... where Dr. Grenfell has labored,
  and is laboring, sailing the icy seas in fog and storm and tending the
  bodies (and minding somewhat also the souls) of the scattered dwellers
  in a vast, drear, country, which is less desolate since he came into
  it. Dr. Wilfred T. Grenfell is an Englishman, and he is commissioned
  by the ‘Royal national mission to deep sea fishermen.’ ... Mr.
  Duncan’s account is chiefly concerned, not with the doctor, but with
  his monster parish and the inhabitants of it.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It is a better and more interesting piece of work than either of its
  predecessors from the same pen.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 591. My. 13. 450w.

  “By his literary gift Mr. Duncan opens the eyes of the least
  imaginative to the significance of the work he describes.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 471. My. ‘05. 280w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 182. Mr. 25, ‘05. 670w. (Condensed narrative
         of book).

       + =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 170w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 508. Ap. 1, ‘05. 130w.

  “This is indeed a different, and a better tale from any figment of the
  imagination. It reaches the heart with the force of verity.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 117. Je. ‘05. 460w.

         =Spec.= 94: 598. Ap. 22, ‘05. 500w.


=Duncan, Norman.= Dr. Luke of the Labrador. †$1.50. Revell.

  Mr. Duncan “has added a new province to the realm of literature. The
  gray ice-bound fields of Labrador, those stern, grim seas, that
  virile, simple folk, and its life of tragic monotony,—these things are
  now possessions to the imagination, possessions of enduring value.”
  (R. of Rs.) “Doctor Luke is a philanthropist, who, putting aside an
  early career of dissipation, devotes his life to relieving distress on
  the bleak coasts of Labrador.” (Ind.)

  Reviewed by G. W. A.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 543. Jl. ‘05. 500w.

  “With his keen faculty for seizing the essentials and dismissing the
  superfluous, Mr. Duncan has brought us face to face not only with the
  rigors and romance of life on the Labrador coast, but with its humor
  as well—and a varying humor it is, now droll and again grim, but
  always an accurate depiction. A romance full of interest and charm.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 210. Ja. 26, ‘05. 280w.

  “There is a group of figures of excellent variety and of the best sort
  of originality, self-stamped as made up of discovery and sympathetic
  interpretation. The story is perfectly fitted into the strange, wild
  surroundings.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 97. F. 2, ‘05. 540w.

  “As an organic, thoroughly-developed novel, it is a failure.”

     + — =Reader.= 5: 789. My. ‘05. 210w.

  “A novel of unusually high merit. But Mr. Duncan has not only a new
  field to exploit, he has style. The swift yet long and undulating
  sentences move with a distinctive rhythm that is as fresh as it is
  new. They tell a strong, beautiful love story. Altogether, ‘Dr. Luke
  of the Labrador’ is one of the season’s two or three best books.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 118. Ja. ‘05. 170w.


=Duncan, Norman.= Mother. †$1.25. Revell.

  Mr. Duncan “lets heaven into the attic shekinah of a vaudeville
  actress, where she kept her child. Her love for him was the holy
  effulgence that covered her pitiful, painted life, and sanctified her.
  It is a fine argument for the way to heaven in women, dramatically
  expressed and quaintly proved, even if we leave out the philosophy of
  the ‘dog-face’ man, which to appreciate one must read.”—Ind.

  * “The treatment is at once realistic and idealistic, and the two
  elements do not at all times blend quite harmoniously.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 170w.

  “Norman Duncan’s new story, ‘The mother,’ gives the impression that he
  wrote it with his light turned a trifle too high and with his keynote
  of pathos taken an octave above where the reader’s sympathies reach
  comfortably.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 986. O. 26, ‘05. 130w.

  * “Altogether, in delicate balance of humor and pathos, in quick
  clutch upon the heartstrings, in revealing vividness of imagination,
  the art and spirit of ‘The mother,’ put it in the noble class of ‘Rab
  and his friends.’”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 753. N. 18, ‘05. 540w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 60w.

 *   + — =Outlook.= 81: 711. N. 25, ‘05. 50w.

  “Mr. Duncan has consistently progressed in his art, but in no instance
  more than in ‘The mother.’”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 574. O. 28, ‘05. 200w.


=Duncan, Robert Kennedy.= New knowledge: a popular account of the new
physics and the new chemistry in their relation to the new theory of
matter. **$2. Barnes.

  “A popular account of the new theory of matter and the relations of
  the new physics and new chemistry to other sciences.... The discovery
  of Becquerel and the Curies and its consequences form mainly the
  subject matter of the book. The author treats of current conceptions,
  the periodic law, gaseous ions, natural radio-activity, the resolution
  of the atom, inorganic evolution, and the new knowledge and old
  problems. There are numerous illustrations.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Although some little fault might be found with the arrangement of the
  book, Prof. Duncan has succeeded in his main object. When allowance is
  made for the faults here enumerated, the book remains the best of its
  kind that we have read.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 787. Je. 24. 1450w.

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 100w.

  “It is not too much to say that no intelligent person can afford to
  permit this book to go unread. We have failed to find in the book any
  important inaccuracy, despite the fact that the field covered is so
  large and the subject-matter so difficult.”

   + + + =Educ. R.= 30: 310. O. ‘05. 740w.

  “The style out-flammarions Flammarion in its vividness and its
  occasional verse quotations. So also is its all-embracing scope an
  expression of the author’s literary enthusiasm rather than of his
  scientific earnestness.”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 641. Je. 15, ‘05. 490w.

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1015. My. 4, ‘05. 360w.

  “This work is the first attempt which I have seen to bring into
  suitable compass, in an intelligible manner, the various problems
  which are occupying the attention of many physicists and chemists.
  There are few errors, and these are unimportant. Whether the author
  might not have omitted much fine writing is a question of taste.” W.
  R.

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 241. Jl. 13, ‘05. 1310w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 121. F. 25, ‘05. 300w.

  “His descriptions and explanations are clear even to a layman.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 514. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1060w.

  “The author has the rare faculty of infusing life into scientific
  discussion.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 194. My. 20, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Its author shows himself to be a man of wide reading, thorough
  scholarship, broad horizon and unmistakable literary talent. I do not
  find in it one single incorrect statement of fact.” R. A. Millikan.

   + + + =Science,= n.s. 22: 787. D. 15, ‘05. 520w.

  “His book shows an admirable power of exposition, and the only fault
  that one can find with it is that its proofs have not been read with
  sufficient care, so that a certain number of slips have crept into its
  pages.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 154. Jl. 29, ‘05. 820w.


* =Dunham, Edith.= Jogging round the world. †$1.50. Stokes.

  A book with an educational value for children. It is designed to give
  an idea of interesting characteristics of many parts of the world; it
  shows riders and drivers, with curious steeds or vehicles in strange
  lands and at home. Their story is further told by the pictures which
  give glimpses of the life and manners of remote people.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 503. D. 21, ‘05. 30w.


=Duniway, Mrs. Abigail Scott.= From the West to the West: across the
plains to Oregon. †$1.50. McClurg.

  This account of a trip by wagon from Illinois to Oregon is too homely
  to be romantic. The details or daily hardships are given, and there
  are many characters each with its own story. The squaw-man, the
  Indian, the run-away slave, and the Mormon all appear in the course of
  the long journey. Death by the wayside, cholera, a stampede of cattle,
  and other happenings accentuate the reality of the story and of the
  long list of characters playing a part in it.

  “The book affords an interesting though somewhat idealized picture of
  the early days, but makes no pretensions to historical or geographical
  accuracy.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 45. Jl. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “The book is one which possesses no value as a novel, though it may
  inspire interest as a curiosity, not of literature, to be sure, but of
  story writing.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 547. Ag. 19, ‘05. 370w.


=Dunkerley, S.= Mechanism. *$3. Longmans.

  This new text book “opens with an introductory chapter in which the
  usual definitions occur relating to machines, kinematic chains, lower
  and higher pairs ... this is followed by a chapter ... on simple
  machines and machine tools. Chapters 3 and 4 deal chiefly with
  mechanisms of the quadric crank and double slider crank chain
  forms ... the pantograph finds an important place here.... The next
  two chapters deal with velocity and acceleration diagrams.... The
  remainder of the book deals with gear wheels, non-circular wheels and
  cams.... There is also a section devoted to gear-cutting machinery....
  The illustrations are mainly line drawings.... A series of numerical
  examples at the end of the book will be of much value to
  students.”—Nature.

  “A valuable text-book on mechanism.” E. G. C.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 4. My. 4, ‘05. 610w.


=Dunn, Henry Treffry.= Recollections of Dante Gabriel Rossetti and his
circle. **$1. Pott.

  The author was at one time a pupil of Rossetti’s and an inmate of the
  house on Cheyne walk, and he gives reminiscences of the painter-poet
  and his circle, which are interesting, reliable, and full of anecdote.

  “The editor has made too much of his function; the copiousness of his
  annotation is out of keeping with the sketchy character of the text,
  and his introduction is turbid and grandiloquent. Mr. Dunn’s
  reminiscences are rendered engaging by a certain simplicity and
  suavity. He gives a clear human outline to that figure of Rossetti of
  which the commentators have seemed disposed to make a kind of
  bogy.”—H. W. Boynton.

   + + — =Atlan.= 95: 422. Mr. ‘05. 760w.

  “Simplicity of style. A graphic contribution to Rossettiana.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 283. Mr. ‘05. 60w.


=Dunn, Jacob Piatt, jr.= Indiana: a redemption from slavery. $1.25.
Houghton.

  “A revised edition of ‘Indiana’ in the ‘American commonwealth series.’
  The author has increased its value in the revision by adding a chapter
  of about fifty pages on the history of the state since its admission
  to the Union. Otherwise, the changes made are slight.”—Am. Hist. R.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 724. Ap. ‘05. 60w.

         =Dial.= 38: 277. Ap. 16, ‘05. 50w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 64. Jl. 20, ‘05. 270w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 358. Je. 3, ‘05. 710w.


=Dunn, Martha Baker.= Cicero in Maine, and other essays. **$1.25.
Houghton.

  Nine delightful essays republished from the “Atlantic,” including,
  besides the title essay: A plea for the shiftless reader; The
  meditations of an ex-school committee woman; Piazza philosophy; The
  Browning tonic; The book and the place; Concerning temperance and
  judgment to come; Book dusting time; and Education.

  “Mrs. Dunn’s style is delightful.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 242. O. 16, ‘05. 500w.

  “Thorough comprehension of the value of a sound, sensible, and
  cultivated upbringing for young people, added to clear-sighted
  judgment of present conditions and the mellowing glow of good reading
  spread over all, make an enviable equipment for a writer. All these
  are evident.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 428. O. 21, ‘05. 310w.

  “Whether dispensing a mild dose of ‘Piazza philosophy’ or a strong
  potion of ‘Browning tonic,’ Mrs. Dunn may be counted on to cheer and
  not inebriate.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 636. N. 11, ‘05. 150w.


* =Dunning, William Archibald.= History of political theories from
Luther to Montesquieu. **$2.50. Macmillan.

  This volume “carries forward to the middle of the eighteenth century
  the work begun in the former volume, which was confined to ancient and
  mediaeval history.... Beginning with the reformation, Professor
  Dunning traces the history of anti-monarchic doctrines of the
  sixteenth century, the work of the Catholic controversialists and
  jurists, the law of nations as developed by Hugo Grotius, English
  political philosophy before and during the Puritan revolution,
  Continental theory during the age of Louis XIV., and finally, the
  epoch-making work of Montesquieu himself.”—R. of Rs.

  * “The book is a piece of sound and conscientious work, and bears
  abundant testimony to the wideness of the Professor’s reading.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1134. O. 28, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 758. N. 11, ‘05. 550w.

  * “The author is not obscure and is judicial.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 886. D. 9, ‘05. 610w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 110w.


=Durham, M. Edith.= Burden of the Balkans. $4. Longmans.

  The author was sent to the Balkans by sympathetic English people to
  distribute relief to the starving inhabitants. She gives an
  interesting account of the discomforts she endured in the performance
  of her numerous duties, and the things which she saw among the
  peasants and in the hospitals. There is much of politics, and she
  pictures vividly the “lava bed of raw primeval passion ... into which
  no power dared thrust its fingers for fear of having them burned off.”

  “It is easily and pleasantly written, and will give the reader who
  knows not the Near East a clearer insight into an irritating and
  unsolved problem than other more weighty and pretentious works.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 338. Mr. 25, ‘05. 610w.

  “A parting tribute must be paid to Miss Durham’s nervous and idiomatic
  English, characteristically that of an educated and refined woman,
  unspoiled by grammars.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 384. Je. 1, ‘05. 560w.

  “Gives a positive picture of conditions there.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 245. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1370w.

  “Her enthusiasm adds to the charm and does not detract from the value
  of these descriptions by an intelligent eyewitness of little known
  conditions in obscure places.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 241. Jl. ‘05. 310w.


=Dwight, Henry Otis,= ed. Blue book of missions for 1905. **$1. Funk.

  A book containing detailed facts and statistics regarding all missions
  and missionary societies, both Protestant and Roman Catholic thruout
  the world. Its information is indexed in handy compendium form for
  clergymen, missionaries and students.

         =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 110w.


=Dwight, Henry Otis; Tupper, Henry Allen R.; and Bliss, Edwin Munsell=,
eds. Encyclopedia of missions; descriptive, historical, biographical,
statistical. **$6. Funk.

  In this second and revised edition there is less than two-thirds the
  amount of matter given in the first edition of thirteen years ago. It
  contains “data relating to some 5000 cities and towns and villages
  which are of present importance to the missionary enterprise.” There
  is also a number of special articles of unusual value, prepared by
  experts. Another excellent feature is the bibliography that follows
  special articles upon countries, mission boards, religion and races,
  as well as some other subjects. (Ind.)

  “We commend the general appearance of the work, its clear typography
  and evidence of careful editing. There is much in this new and
  admirable encyclopedia to commend. The absence of an index is
  inexcusable.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 614. Mr. 16, ‘05. 770w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 574. S. 2, ‘05. 680w.


=Dyer, Henry.= Dai Nippon: a study in national evolution. *$3.50.
Scribner.

  The latest book on Japan by Dr. Henry Dyer, “a hard-headed,
  thick-skinned Scotchman,” belongs to the literature of knowledge, and
  will interest especially those who like unembroidered facts and plenty
  of statistics and tables, and who hate anything like “fine writing,”
  eloquence or “gush.” The author who established the College of
  engineering in Japan, has since his return to Great Britain kept in
  touch with the makers of modern Japan, and “out of the intellectual
  kinship thus engendered has grown the present work, designed to afford
  the foreign reader an adequate idea of the spiritual, moral, mental,
  and material Japan of to-day.” (Outlook). The book does not aim to be
  a history of Japan, but is rather a study of the influences which have
  made the country “a member of the community of nations.” The subjects
  discussed at length are education, the army and navy, means of
  communication, industrial development, art industries, commerce, food
  supply, colonization, constitutional government, administration,
  finance, international relations, foreign politics, social results,
  the future, and recent events.

  “Excellent as the present volume is—among the most lucid and fruitful
  that have appeared in recent years upon Japan—it is, of necessity,
  uncritical—accepts the Japanese estimate of themselves and the
  estimates of their perfervid admirers almost without examination.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905. 1: 8. Ja. 7. 1430w.

  “States all that he sees and knows in terms of plainest common sense.
  In one point Dr. Dyer has excelled all other writers on Japan. He
  shows clearly and forcibly, as well as copiously, what the great army
  of Yatoi, hired assistants and salaried organizers and advisers, in
  the days of their youth and strength thirty years ago, did for the
  Japanese in raising their ideals and pointing the way to future
  success.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 92. F. 1, ‘05. 540w.

  * “He marshals many facts frequently overlooked by writers on
  twentieth century Japan, but essential to a proper appreciation of the
  problems—social, religious, economic, and political—now confronting
  the country.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 270w.

  “Untrustworthy in theories, perhaps no other single volume gives so
  wide and correct a view of the main facts in the several phases of
  Japanese national life.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 337. Ap. 27, ‘05. 2710w.

  “A treatise of so comprehensive and illuminating a character as to
  warrant its inclusion in the front rank of works aiming to present in
  compact form an authoritative account of the evolution and present
  stage of development of the Island empire. It is in the author’s
  discussion of Japanese problems that the highest value of his work
  lies. Mr. Dyer gives a far better idea than do the majority of writers
  of the part played by foreigners in the growth of Japan. It is heavy
  with repetitions not only of idea but of phrase; its diction is at
  times strangely awkward and at times imbued with the flavor of the
  ‘blue book’; while inexactitudes of statement are occasionally to be
  detected.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 497. F. 25, ‘05. 1720w.


=Dyer, Louis.= Machiavelli and the modern state. *$1. Ginn.

  “The volume is made up of three chapters, originally delivered as
  lectures in England in 1899, under the titles ‘The prince and Cæsar
  Borgia,’ ‘Machiavelli’s use of history,’ ‘Machiavelli’s idea of
  morals.’ The author was formerly an assistant professor at
  Harvard.”—Ann. Am. Acad.

  “What we have is a series of remarks, some of them on Machiavelli and
  none on the modern state.... The ‘brilliant allusiveness’ of the
  style, the great number of irrelevancies, and the florid
  overtranslations....” Edward S. Corwin.

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 685. Ap. ‘05. 240w.

  “A valuable little volume.”

         =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 381. Ap. ‘05. 310w.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 129. Ja. ‘05. 40w.

  “Mr. Dyer, however, without any of Mr. Morley’s charm or Macaulay’s
  zest, does contrive to say a good deal that is valuable in the course
  of these most interesting lectures.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 462. Ap. 15, 510w.




                                   E


=Earle, Maria Theresa (Mrs. Charles W. Earle).= Garden colour; with
fifty full-page il. by Margaret Waterfield. *$6. Dutton.

  “An English collaborated production ... fifty-one colored plates ...
  which are from water colors by Miss Margaret Waterfield. Miss
  Waterfield herself writes the garden notes for the various months,
  giving advice in regard to cultivation only incidentally, but chiefly
  in regard to artistic arrangement—those methods of planting whereby
  each plant or shrub shows its own beauties to best advantage, while at
  the same time enhancing those of its neighbors.... It is the
  principles rather than the actual facts that the various writers wish
  in this case to enforce. Miss Waterfield’s collaborators include Mrs.
  C. W. Earle, Miss Rose Kingsley, and other well-known English garden
  lovers and writers.”—Dial.

         =Country Calendar.= 1: 109L. Je. ‘05. 90w.

  “One who has considered the subject only casually will certainly get
  some inspiring suggestions from both pictures and text.” Edith
  Granger.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 380. Je. 1, ‘05. 480w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1257. Je. 1, ‘05. 130w.

  “The contributed text is not so uniformly good as the plates.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 445. Je. 1, ‘05. 420w.

  “This book is notable both from the standpoint of nature lover and
  bibliophile.” Mabel Osgood Wright.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 369. Je. 10, ‘05. 480w.


=Eastman, Charles A.= Red hunters and the animal people. **$1.25.
Harper.

  “In the red man’s philosophy, as interpreted by the author, himself a
  full blooded Sioux, the beasts of the fields and the birds of the air
  are the brothers of their human fellow creatures. The four-footed and
  feathered tribes also, in the same philosophy, regard the red man as a
  brother. They are the animal people, and these stories are stories of
  them as such—stories which differ not as widely as might be wished
  from the white man’s animal tales now so numerous.”—N. Y. Times.

  “One of the most original and delightful books about animal life that
  have appeared for a long time, full of interest and information not to
  be found in text-books. The book is simply and pleasantly written,
  with no affectation or mannerism.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 105. F. 4, ‘05. 210w.

  “With no literary art whatever at his command, he has mistakenly
  chosen to cast his material in the form of short stories, and has
  failed with them.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 478. My. ‘05. 120w.

  “Is likely at first to be a little disappointing, it is so plain, so
  lacking in art or artifice. After Mr. Long and Mr. Thompson-Seton, it
  is like bread-and-butter after dessert. But it nearly, if not quite,
  justifies the simile, for if the reader sustains his interest long
  enough his taste will approve the rather homely fare.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 158. Mr. 1, ‘05. 230w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 47. Ja. 21, ‘05. 430w.

  “The book is entertaining as fiction, valuable because of the light it
  throws on Indian life, and largely interesting as one of the few
  contributions to our literature made by an Indian.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 118. Je. ‘05. 230w.

  “This is a very pleasing book.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 683. My. 6, ‘05. 180w.


=Eastman, Helen.= New England ferns and their common allies; an easy
method of determining the species. *$1.25. Houghton.

  “It is a merit of this book that it includes ... the lycopodiums and
  equisetums, club-mosses and horse-tails. Each plant is provided with a
  picture, from the press ... and even the unusual varieties and hybrids
  are included.... The descriptions are good and brief.”—Ind.

  “We wish the author had not given us so many fancy English names that
  have no authority. But it is a good book, and we are particularly glad
  for the horse-tails and club-mosses.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 268. F. 2, ‘05. 320w.


=Eccles, Robert Gibson.= Food preservatives, their advantages and proper
use; the practical versus the theoretical side of the pure food problem;
with an introd. by E. W. Duckwall. $1; pa. 50c. Van Nostrand.

  A volume which sets forth the pure food problem as it is found in
  practice and theory. “A valuable part of the book is that devoted to
  showing how little evidence there is for the assumption, commonly made
  even by chemists, that the process of fermentation is so similar to
  that of digestion that whatever prevents the one must impair the
  other.” (Ind.)

  “It contains much special pleading, but this is justified by the
  excessive amount of special pleading that has been done, both in and
  out of court, against the use of preservatives.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 960. Ap. 27, ‘05. 430w.


* =Eckel, Edwin C.= Cements, limes and plasters: their materials,
manufacture, and properties. *$6. Wiley.

  The composition and character of the raw materials, the methods of
  manufacture, and the properties of the various cementing materials are
  treated in this volume, which is designed for the use of the working
  engineer. Complete reference lists are given for the benefit of those
  who wish to make a further study of the subject treated.

  * “This is an exceedingly valuable and well-nigh exhaustive work. It
  is by far the most valuable work on the several subjects that it
  treats that we have met, and in our judgment may be rightly considered
  a masterpiece of compilation.”

   + + + =Science,= n.s. 22: 522. O. 27, ‘05. 450w.


=Eckenrode, Hamilton James.= Political history of Virginia during the
reconstruction. 50c. Hopkins.

  The author “concerns himself almost altogether with the political
  parties of the reconstruction era. He relates the history of the

  Alexandria government, ... and discusses quite fully President
  Johnson’s attitude toward the Southern states at the close of the
  Civil war.... He shows that the Republican party in Virginia was for
  the most part opposed to unlimited negro suffrage, until the
  Philadelphia convention of 1866, when ‘manhood’ suffrage became a
  party measure.”—R. of Rs.

  “The method of the author is truly critical, the use of the sources
  satisfactory, ... and the conclusions arrived at are unquestionably
  justifiable and as accurate as the nature of the subject will permit.”
  William E. Dodd.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 700. Ap. ‘05. 450w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 756. D. ‘04. 140w.


=Eckman, George P.= Young man with a program, and other sermons to young
men. *50c. Meth. bk.

  The purpose of these sermons is to offer practical reasons to young
  men for yielding themselves to the sovereignty of Jesus Christ. They
  treat of the young man and his capital, the young man in his house, at
  his work, the young man with ambition, the young man and his
  meditation, and his opportunities, and finally the young man and the
  supreme passion.


=Edgington, T. B.= Monroe doctrine. $3. Little.

  The author, an attorney of over forty years’ practice at the bar of
  Memphis, Tenn., has brought to his task a long professional
  experience and an extended study of original sources of information.
  Altho new material abounds in this presentation of the Monroe
  doctrine,—including the treaty establishing the Hague tribunal, the
  Venezuelan boundary case, the settlement of the European claims
  against Venezuela, and the Panama canal treaty and concession, “its
  origin, its history, and its application to various exigencies are
  in this book described with no little narrative skill, with
  clearness, and with judicial spirit.” (Outlook).

  “The book contains errors of fact as well as of judgment. The most
  serious imperfections are due to a lack of experience in handling
  sources, especially a lack of acquaintance with public documents.
  Notwithstanding grave defects the book is interestingly written and
  suggestive.” John H. Latané.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 601. My. ‘05. 370w.

  Reviewed by Winthrop More Daniels.

         =Atlan.= 95: 553. Ap. ‘05. 360w.

  “Mr. Edgington preserves a calm and historical spirit in all his
  comments on the interesting subjects of which he treats, and the
  argumentation in which he not infrequently indulges is that of a
  candid jurisconsult rather than that of a partisan.” James Oscar
  Pierce.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 122. F. 16, ‘05. 1190w.


=Edmunds, Albert Joseph.= Buddhist and Christian gospels: being Gospel
parallels from Pali texts. *$1.50. Open ct.

  The third edition, complete, and edited with notes by Prof. Anesaki of
  the imperial University of Tokio. The editor “holds to the
  independence of the fundamental documents of the Buddhist and the
  Christian scriptures. He only raises the question whether the Gospel
  of Luke, ‘in certain traits extraneous to the synoptical narrative,’
  is indebted to a Buddhist source. This question he submits to the
  reader who compares the parallel texts here presented. Much more than
  merely such parallels are presented; pretty nearly every book of the
  New Testament supplies matter for a comparison with the Buddhist
  scriptures, which even the amateur in such studies will find
  interesting. The New Testament suffers nothing in the comparison.”
  (Outlook.)

  “As a contribution to the study of comparative religion from a
  Japanese scholar, this volume has a peculiar interest as well as a
  positive value for the student.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 331. O. 7, ‘05. 160w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 512. O. ‘05. 90w.


=Edwards, Amelia Blandford.= Untrodden peaks and unfrequented valleys: a
midsummer ramble in the Dolomites. $2.50. Dutton.

  In this third edition the text is the same as that of the first
  edition of 1873, but the footnotes and other explanatory matter that
  appeared in the second edition of the book have been included in the
  present volume. The district here described is in that part of the
  Southeastern Tyrol lying between Botzen, Brunecken, Innichen and
  Belluno; within this space are the limestone Dolomite mountains. There
  are numerous illustrations in half-tone.

  “Now as twenty-five years ago, the indispensable work is Miss Edwards’
  ‘Untrodden peaks.’”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 529. Je. 29, ‘05. 480w.

  “A pleasant volume of travel and guidebook information.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 478. Jl. 22, ‘05. 340w.

  “A new and welcome edition of a thoroughly readable book of travels.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 143. My. 13, ‘05. 80w.


=Edwards, Matilda Barbara Betham-.= Home life in France. *$2.50.
McClurg.

  Miss Betham-Edwards’ first hand knowledge of French family and school
  life has been the outgrowth of years of service as an officer of
  public instruction. This insight tempers her treatment with sympathy
  and enthusiasm. She describes every phase of life from the
  home-keeping which is “the glorification of simplicity,” to the city
  keeping which is presided over by “indefatigable workers to whom
  fireside joys and intellectual pleasure are especially dear, and to
  whom self-abnegation ... becomes a second nature.”

  “It is brightly written, and full of entertaining little personal
  reminiscences of the kind which do more to explain France to the
  average English mind than pages of psychological studies appealing
  only to the cultivated few.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 561. My. 27, ‘05. 1360w.

  * “Writes with knowledge on a subject she may be said to have made her
  own, and what is more, she writes sympathetically.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 656. My. 27. 310w.

  * “The point of view is impartial, but friendly, and both knowledge of
  the subject and charm of style characterize the book.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘05. 180w.

  * “Miss Betham-Edwards discourses with intelligent vivacity and good
  humor, lightening our darkness, gently removing the prejudice born of
  ignorance, and steadily building up the respect that rests on
  knowledge.” Josiah Renick Smith.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 300. N. 16, ‘05. 1180w.

  “The value of a book which is in the main not less valuable than
  interesting is somewhat impaired by this persistent ignoring of the
  seamy side of life.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 175. Je. 9, ‘05. 570w.

  * “She has succeeded on the whole, in writing a very entertaining book
  full of detailed information, with statistics that here and there need
  slight correction.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 491. D. 14, ‘05. 1010w.

  “An extremely interesting, and in many ways valuable, book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 727. O. 28, ‘05. 1000w.

  “The book is an excellent one for the intending sojourner in France,
  and it will, of course, interest those who have sojourned in that
  country.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 526. O. 28, ‘05. 120w.

  * “A description of French domestic life and conditions which is
  written with sympathy and enthusiasm.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 636. N. ‘05. 50w.

  “Miss Betham-Edwards selects matter which on the whole may be intended
  more for women than for men, but the latter will not enjoy it the less
  on that account.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 676. My. 20, ‘05. 230w.

  * “There are also here and there signs of hurry and awkwardness in the
  style. All this could easily be put right in another edition, which
  the book, if only for the valuable amount of detail it contains,
  certainly ought to reach.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 259. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1570w.


=Edwards, William Seymour.= Into the Yukon. **$1.50. Clarke, R.

  In a series of papers which were originally home letters, the author
  tells of the travels of himself and wife thru the Canadian northwest,
  the gulfs and fjords of the North Pacific, the valley of the upper
  Yukon, the golden Klondike, and some parts of California and the
  Middle west. The book gives an apparently unbiased view of conditions
  on the Canadian Yukon in the summer of 1903. It is profusely
  illustrated with snap shot photographs.

  “If it says nothing new, at least says it brightly and interestingly.”
  Wallace Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 91. F. 1, ‘05. 100w.

  “Mr. Edwards seems to be a clear-sighted observer, and his narration
  is straightforward and unpretentious. He appears to possess the knack
  of gathering and summarizing popular opinion without the exaggeration
  or superficiality usually characteristic of hasty news-gatherers. The
  most interesting portion of the book is naturally that relating to the
  Klondike region.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 141. F. 16, ‘05. 920w.

  “A readable narrative.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 759. Mr. 25, ‘05. 50w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 255. F. ‘05. 70w.


=Eggleston, George Gary.= Daughter of the South. †$1.50. Lothrop.

  A war’s-end romance which follows the adventurous career of the
  Commodore of a cotton-buying fleet. While braving great danger for the
  sake of great profit he encounters the heroine in distress and carries
  her northward on one of his boats to love and to safety.

  “His art must be described as crude. Nevertheless, he tells a story of
  some interest, and keeps fairly in touch with reality.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 208. O. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  “‘Decent under difficulties’ should be the title of this last story.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 987. O. 26, ‘05. 60w.

  “Exactly like all the rest of his novels.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 557. Ag. 26, ‘05. 290w.

  “Altogether, while not by any means a great book, this story is
  agreeable reading.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 44. S. 2, ‘05. 130w.


=Eggleston, George Gary.= Our first century. **$1.20. Barnes.

  “The design of this book ... is ... to present in a connected and
  picturesque narrative those facts of American history during the
  seventeenth century which were characteristic as to life and manners
  and customs. The book has the story element in a marked degree. It is
  liberally illustrated.”—Outlook.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 91. Ag. 16, ‘05. 390w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1390. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

  “After reading this lively little narrative one can without hesitation
  commend it to those who find the ordinary one-volume histories dry and
  meagre, and who have not the time or inclination to consult the larger
  works.” Robert Livingston Schuyler.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 480. Jl. 22, ‘05. 280w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 446. Je. 17, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 797. D. 16, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 123. Jl. ‘05. 140w.


=Eggleston, George Gary.= Rebel’s recollections. *$1. Putnam.

  A fourth edition of a book first published in 1874, with an additional
  article upon “The old regime in the Old Dominion.” It contains much
  that is interesting, and gives a good idea of the Confederate soldier,
  and the Confederate commissary, also civil administration.

       + =Ind.= 58: 1312. Je. 8, ‘05. 100w.

  “The book contains in a very readable form a deal of information about
  the Confederacy, which Mr. Eggleston had first hand. Mr. Eggleston
  overemphasizes certain features, but there is a certain advantage in
  that, for they are just the features which other writers have been apt
  to ignore.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 275. Ap. 29, ‘05. 390w.

  “The book still outranks in interest almost all other reminiscences of
  the Civil war.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 60w.


=Eldridge, George Dyre.= Milibank case. †$1.50. Holt.

  A detective story whose scene is laid in Maine near the Canadian
  border. The plot centers about the murder of a young lawyer,
  supposedly without enemies, and involves prominent state politicians.
  The tangle undertaken by two detectives contains at its close a
  surprise for detective and reader alike.

  “The story is fluently told, and is not ungenial as murders go.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 123. Ag. 10, ‘05. 200w.

  “Is only a fair example of the art.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 432. Jl. 1, ‘05. 260w.


=Eliot, Sir Charles Norton Edgecumbe.= East African protectorate. $5.
Longmans.

  “Up to the time of his recent resignation, the author had been
  commissioner for the British government in the protectorate. He
  describes the country, its peoples, gives its history, and discusses
  its prospects as a field for European colonization; he also describes
  the present system of administration in the protectorate, and writes
  about the Uganda railway, trade, slavery, missions, a trip down the
  Nile, animals, etc. The volume is illustrated, and contains several
  maps.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The book gives a great deal of minute and not always interesting
  geographic information, but it was written by neither a geographer nor
  an economist, and often produces a sense of vagueness by omitting
  factors essential to an understanding of the country in its relation
  to human welfare. Other parts of the book are interesting, and the
  sociologist might find some useful information in the accounts of the
  native races.”

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 589. S. ‘05. 170w.

  “Sir Charles Eliot has here provided a much more compact and, within
  its limits, comprehensive handbook on the subject than was previously
  available.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 363. Mr. 25. 1260w.

  “... Throughout makes the book a most readable one, even to those who
  have no intention of being lured to it by the glowing pictures he
  paints.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 278. Ap. 29, ‘05. 1790w.

  “Nothing could exceed the interest, the deep research and the
  knowledge shown in the present work.”

   + + + =Sat.= R. 99: 808. Je. 17, ‘05. 1600w.

  “One of the best of recent travel books on a subject which is growing
  daily in interest and importance. The book is an encyclopedia of
  information, but the reader is never bewildered among the details, and
  the main problems of the future are lucidly and undogmatically
  discussed. The style is simple and colloquial, but it is never
  slipshod.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 552. Ap. 15, ‘05. 2030w.


=Eliot, Charles William.= Happy life. 75c. Crowell.

  A new edition of this forceful, kindly book by the President of
  Harvard university. Under the headings: The moral purpose of the
  universe; Lower and higher pleasures; Family love; Pleasure in bodily
  exertion; The pleasure of reading; Mutual service and co-operation;
  The selection of beliefs; and The conflict with evil, he shows how to
  “cultivate the physical mental, and moral faculties through which the
  natural joys are won.”

  * “The material is abundantly worth preserving in its new form.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “The points are concrete and practical, and the style is very
  simple, with a ring of nobility and sincerity about it that is worth
  more than many epigrams.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 386. D. 1, ‘05. 150w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 20w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 37: 732. D. 2, ‘05. 80w.


=Eliot, George.= Adam Bede. $1.25. Crowell.

  This volume of “Adam Bede” is uniform with the “Thin paper classics.”
  It takes up little space on the library shelf, and its flexible cover
  and thin paper make it specially desirable for a pocket edition.


=Eliot, George.= Romola. $1.25. Crowell.

  “Romola” in this edition is uniform with the “Thin paper classics.”


=Eliot, John.= Logick primer. *$6. Burrows.

  “A reprint of John Eliot’s ‘Logic primer’ of 1672. The ‘Primer’ is an
  interlinear translation of the Indian text and the reprint is made
  from a photographic reproduction of the entire book (40 leaves) made
  in 1889 at the expense of the late James C. Pilling.”—Am. Hist. R.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 716. Ap. ‘05. 50w.


=Elkin, William Baird.= Hume: the relation of the Treatise of human
nature, bk. I, to the Inquiry concerning human understanding. *$1.50.
Macmillan.

  “As a stepping-stone in philosophy from the old to the new, Hume still
  furnishes staple material to the student. Dr. Elkin here undertakes to
  make clear the exact ground held by him in his principal philosophical
  works, the ‘Treatise on human nature’ and the ‘Inquiry concerning the
  principles of morals.’”—Outlook.

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 53. Jl. 20, ‘05. 410w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 120w.

  “Taken all together, the book is a scholarly, clear-headed, thorough
  piece of work, straightforward in expression and substantially
  convincing in the large.” A. K. Rogers.

   + + + =Philos. R.= 14: 615. S. ‘05. 1260w.


=Elliott, Mrs. Maude Howe (Mrs. John Elliott.)= Two in Italy. *$2.
Little.

  Italian studies and sketches, so chatty in form as to be largely in
  dialog, which give glimpses of Italian life and character under the
  chapter headings: Anacrap; The inn of Paradise; Buona Fortuna; The
  Castello; Savonarola Finnerty; In old Poland; and, The hermit of
  Pietro Anzieri. There are six full page illustrations from drawings by
  John Elliott.

  * “Mrs. Elliott knows Italy better than most Americans, and she knows
  how to write.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “Readers of ‘Roma beata’ will enjoy this second volume, which,
  though of slightly different type, is equally permeated by Mrs.
  Elliott’s individual and entertaining point of view.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 386. D. 1, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 826. D. 23, ‘05. 100w.


=Ellis, Edward Sylvester.= Deerfoot in the forest. †$1. Winston.

  This is the first of a new series of Indian stories which continues
  the adventures of the author’s famous character Deerfoot, the
  Shewanoe. The time and incidents depicted are those of the Lewis and
  Clark expeditions. The plot of “Deerfoot in the forest” centers about
  the rescue of two boys by Deerfoot, and the thrilling adventures
  attending their return to safe territory.

  “All Mr. Ellis’ tales, like those of Castlemon, Oliver Optic and other
  writers of this class, are replete with interest, action and
  excitement, and the present volume ... is fully up to the standard set
  by Mr. Ellis in his popular series of tales that have preceded the
  present books.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 557. N. ‘05. 570w.


* =Ellis, Edward Sylvester.= Deerfoot in the mountains. †$1. Winston.

  This third and last volume of the “New Deerfoot series,” takes the
  Indian guide and his two boy companions in a whirl of adventure from
  the Pacific ocean to their home in Ohio. The recapture of Deerfoot’s
  wonderful stallion, Whirlwind, a single handed encounter with five
  ferocious braves, and a hair breadth escape in a raging mountain
  torrent, are among the incidents which will recommend this story to
  all boy readers.


* =Ellis, Edward Sylvester.= Deerfoot on the prairies †$1. Winston.

  In this second volume of the “New Deerfoot series,” the popular Indian
  hunter accompanied by his two boy friends and his Blackfoot guide
  makes the dangerous journey from the Ohio to the mouth of the Columbia
  river successfully, altho the hostile Indians, wild horses, grizzly
  bears, and other dangers of one hundred years ago beset their path and
  create many strange adventures for them.


=Elton, Charles Isaac.= William Shakespeare, his family and friends; ed.
by A. H. Thompson. *$4. Dutton.

  A series of papers, disconnected and sometimes unfinished, which would
  doubtless have been expanded into an exhaustive work had the author
  lived, have been collected by and published by Mr. Thompson, with a
  memoir written of the author by Mr. Andrew Lang. There are chapters on
  Shakespeare’s early life, on Stratford and London in Shakespeare’s
  time; on his family and descendants; on the history of Blackfriars’
  theatre, and many other subjects of both interest and value. There is
  a complete and accurate index, which renders this work, with its
  wealth of facts, of great value to the student.

  “Indeed, so much material is furnished, and the learned antiquary
  ranges so very far afield, that the drift of his argument is not
  seldom obscured. The book abounds in the best kind of biographical
  material. It is a work of the very greatest value to the student of
  Shakespeare.” Charles H. A. Wager.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 194. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1600w.

  “This work is a large and scholarly one, with perhaps more of detail
  about the great poet’s life and surroundings than would be essential
  to such an idea of the man himself as is given by Mr. Mabie in his
  picture. Mr. Elton’s volume, however, will be welcomed by scholars.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 30: 758. D. ‘04. 80w.


=Ely, Helena Rutherford.= Another hardy garden book. $1.75. Macmillan.

  A book which is not intended to be a treatise upon any of the subjects
  referred to, or to take the place of other books upon gardening. It
  is, the author states in the preface, “a brief statement of simple
  methods of conducting gardening operations, particularly in the small
  home garden,” and it contains the result of the author’s own
  experiences in raising vegetables, fruits and flowers. There are
  chapters on the vegetable garden, fruits, trees—deciduous and
  evergreen, perennials and other flowers, a garden of lilies and iris,
  autumn work in the flower garden, and the flower garden in spring.
  There are many half-tone illustrations from photographs of flowers,
  trees and gardens, taken at various seasons of the year.

  “The new book is wider in its scope than its predecessor.”

       + =Country Calendar.= 1: 9g. My. ‘05. 100w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 565. Je. ‘05. 120w.

  “Her books are far from being sentimental, but are infused with a very
  vigorous personality, and with occasional touches of humor that prove
  she is not taking herself too seriously.” Edith Granger.

       + =Dial.= 38: 381. Je. 1, ‘05. 370w.

  “The charm of the book rests in the reader’s companionship with an
  intelligent, agreeable woman, who loves her garden.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1254. Je. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “The author of this work places before us her quiet statements in an
  unobtrusive and instructive manner, and, here and there, gives touches
  to her sketch which makes the book more than usually readable.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 338. Ap. 27, ‘05. 620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 137. Mr. 4, ‘05. 160w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “It seems a quite practical book for the amateur gardener.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 704. Mr. 18, ‘05. 50w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 867. Je. 3, ‘05. 90w.


=Ely, Richard T.,= ed. See =Adams. T. S.= and =Sumner, Helen L.= Labor
problems.


=Ely, Richard Theodore.= Labor movement in America. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  A new and enlarged edition of a standard authority first issued nearly
  twenty years ago.

  * “At present we have no book that could be a satisfactory substitute
  for Professor Ely’s volume.” A. W. S.

     + + =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 431. N. ‘05. 50w.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 589. S. ‘05. 50w.

         =Dial.= 39: 20. Jl. 1, ‘05. 30w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 386. Je. 17, ‘05. 520w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 542. Je. 24, ‘05. 50w.

         =Yale R.= 14: 230. Ag. ‘05. 120w.


=Emch, Arnold.= Introduction to projective geometry and its
applications: an analytic and synthetic treatment. $2.50. Wiley.

  “The first chapter derives the usual theorems of projective ranges and
  pencils, perspective and involution by means of the anharmonic
  ratio.... The second chapter deals with collineation.” There is “a
  chapter on the theory of conics.... The next chapter discusses the
  conics which pass through four fixed points; ... the cubic curve,
  defined by a pencil of conics and a projective pencil of lines, is
  treated at some length.... The fifth chapter, of over forty pages, is
  devoted to applications to mechanics.”—Engin. N.

  “A knowledge of trigonometry and plane analytical geometry is all that
  is required to understand the book, which is clearly and carefully
  written.” Virgil Snyder.

         =Engin. N.= 53: 183. F. 16, ‘05. 370w.

  “The author is a very clever draughtsman, and his skill as a writer is
  equally pronounced.”

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 77. My. 25, ‘05. 210w.

  “The exposition of the interesting connection between collineations
  and the surprisingly beautiful doctrine of linkages deserves special
  mention, as do also the clearness, directness and swiftness of style
  in which the book is written.” Cassius J. Keyser.

   + + + =Science.= n.s. 22: 114. Jl. 26, ‘05. 290w.


=Emerson, Ralph Waldo.= Works. 12 vol. ea. $1.75. Houghton.

  Edward Waldo Emerson has carefully edited this twelve volume centenary
  edition of his father’s works, culling some valuable new material from
  the author’s note books, “his savings-bank,” he called them. The three
  volumes recently added to complete the twelve are, “Lectures and
  biographical sketches,” “Miscellanies,” and “Natural history of
  intellect and other papers.” “The last of them is provided with an
  elaborate general index to the entire edition. No less than five
  papers in this closing volume are now printed for the first time. The
  editing of these volumes, done by the pious hands of Mr. Edward Waldo
  Emerson, offers a shining example of what such editorial work should
  be, and makes the present form of the writings far more desirable than
  any of the earlier ones.” (Dial).

  “The present edition, in its Notes by Dr. Emerson, contains the first
  complete commentary on the author’s writings.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 283. Mr. ‘05. 220w.

         =Dial.= 38: 22. Ja. 1, ‘05. 120w.

  “Is manifestly the definitive edition, since it is the most
  comprehensive and perfect in matter and form.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 40. Ja. 5, ‘05. 780w.


=Emerson, Ralph Waldo.= Emerson calendar; ed. by Huntington Smith.
**50c. Crowell.

  Suggestions for each day of the year taken from Emerson’s works. By
  giving cullings which show clear perception of life and its
  obligations, the editor hopes to render an aid along the line of
  simpler living.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 387. D. 1, ‘05. 100w.


English essays, selected and edited by Walter Cochrane Bronson. *$1.25.
Holt.

  The chief purpose of this book is to cultivate a liking for good
  English prose in the college student who is taking introductory work
  in literature. The material chosen is therefore interesting in thought
  and style and the selections are complete in themselves even when
  entire chapters or essays are not given. Essays by Bacon, Milton,
  Swift, Addison, Johnson, Goldsmith, Lamb, De Quincey, Carlyle,
  Macaulay, Ruskin, Newman, Stevenson and others are included, and the
  volume is fully annotated for class use.

       + =N. Y. Times= 10: 730. O. 28, ‘05. 100w.
 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 60w.


=Erasmus, Desiderius (surnamed Roterdamus).= Epistles of Erasmus,
arranged in order of time: English translations from the early
correspondence, with a commentary confirming the chronological
arrangement and supplying further biographical matter, by Francis Morgan
Nichols. 2v. ea. *$6. Longmans.

  “The first volume published in 1901, contained a selection of the
  letters of Erasmus up to the date of his receipt in Rome of the news
  of the death of King Henry VII of England (April 21, 1509).... The
  second volume carries the extant correspondence of Erasmus to the year
  1517, when he took up his residence at Louvain. Many of the later
  letters are not those of Erasmus himself but were written by his
  correspondents.”—N. Y. Times.

  “On the whole this volume fairly maintains the interest roused by the
  first and must be regarded as a highly important contribution to the
  whole subject of the new learning.” E. E.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 686. Ap. ‘05. 240w. (Survey of contents of
         vol. II.)

  “These minor writings of the great humanist are chiefly valuable for
  the light which they shed upon his intensely interesting career. They
  are strongly marked with the well-known Erasmian characteristics, an
  easy elegance, a classical spirit, a strong tendency to flattery, a
  decided turn for quiet irony, and an impulse to break out once in a
  while into sarcastic flings at religious orders and the Roman Curia.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 684. P. ‘05. 290w.

  “The same qualities of careful rendering and intelligent conjecture
  mark the work of this as of the first volume, and the same little
  formalities and tricks of usage occur here as there. It offers an
  indispensable starting-point for every future study of the great
  humanist.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 39. Ja. 12, ‘05. 570w. (Review of Vol. II.)

  “The appendices contain many hitherto inaccessible documents of value
  to the student of the Reformation epoch.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 40. Ja. 21, ‘05. 160w.


=Erskine, Mrs. Steuart.= London as an art city. *$1. Scribner.

  In her little monograph Mrs. Erskine “shows why London is a field for
  her artistic study on account of its wonderful architecture and
  wonderful art collections; a literary center with a past as the home
  of such writers as Dickens, Thackeray ... Goldsmith ... and others,
  and the home of present workers in art—George Frampton, T. Brock, A.
  Gilbert, and other sculptors; while among the painters are Sir Edward
  Poynter, Luke Fildes, John S. Sargent, and a number of others. The
  volume is fully illustrated with half-tone pictures of buildings,
  reproductions of well-known paintings, &c.” (N. Y. Times).

         =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 76. Ja. ‘05. 90w.

         =Nation.= 80: 33. Ja. 12, ‘05. 310w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 14. Ja. 7, ‘05. 340w.


=Esty, William.= Alternating current machinery. $6. American school of
correspondence at Armour institute of technology, Chicago.

  “The author of the present volume declares that it has been prepared
  with the special object of giving the beginner, and the so-called
  practical electrician, a working knowledge of alternating current
  apparatus, so that he may know how to install and operate it
  intelligently.... The book is divided into nine different headings,
  and treats of the alternator, commercial types of alternators,
  synchronous motor, switchboard and station appliances, special
  switchboard apparatus, and lightning arresters.”—Engin. N.

  Reviewed by David B. Rushmore.

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 637. Je. 15, ‘05. 590w.


=Evans, Henry Ridgely.= Napoleon myth. bds. *75c. Open ct.

  The Napoleonic myths in both literature and art the author measures
  according to historical fact. The book also contains an introduction
  by Dr. Paul Carus and a reprint of “The grand erratum” by Jean
  Baptiste Peres. “The whole is a summary of the results of ‘higher
  criticism’ as applied to the Napoleon of the popular imagination.” (R.
  of Rs.)

  * “The author does little or nothing to emphasize the difference
  between fact and legend, or point out the means of distinguishing
  between the two spheres.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 526. Ap. 29, 200w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 160. Mr. 11, ‘05. 360w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 512. Ap. ‘05. 60w.


=Everett, William.= Italian poets since Dante. $1.50. Scribner.

  The author has converted his lectures, delivered in the famous Lowell
  course in Boston, into book form with slight revision. His aim is “to
  show that Italy from the ‘trecento’ down to the end of the eighteenth
  century gave forth a literature which is great without the
  contributions of Dante, but which is often neglected and thought of
  lightly owing to the transcendent genius of that one man. Petrarca,
  Pulci, Boiardo, Berni, Ariosto, Vittoria Colonna, Michelangelo, Tasso,
  Marino, and the dramatists Goldoni and Alfieri are among the writers
  concerning whom Dr. Everett discourses with fine academic appreciation
  and a charming disregard of modern criticism.” (N. Y. Times).

  “His attitude towards his subjects is sympathetic, his appreciation is
  sincere, his criticisms are just and moderate. It is therefore all the
  more regrettable that he should have allowed his work to stand
  disfigured by so many slip-shod, loosely constructed and even
  absolutely ungrammatical sentences.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 646. Je. 17, ‘05. 300w.

   + + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 379. Ap. ‘05. 260w.

  “Dr. Everett’s survey, indeed, embraces only about a dozen names, and
  treats those for the most part rather sketchily.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 719. Je. 10. 660w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 380. Ap. ‘05. 60w.

  “The work is luminous and vivid in style, and a delight to the
  instinct of every lover of literature. Eloquent panegyric upon Milton,
  and many another purple patch revealed in these pages. From the point
  of view of the scholar, little exception is to be taken to this work.
  To say that the book is readable is to do it much less than justice.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 49. Ja. 16, ‘05. 700w.

  “A carelessness in the use of language which is often slovenly and
  sometimes ungrammatical. The most vexatious quality of the book,
  however, is due to Dr. Everett’s scorn of all methods and opinions
  save his own. We admit that his views are sometimes refreshingly
  independent. But his egoism, which is piquant when it wanders away
  from his subject, is disastrous when he attempts a serious comparison
  of the Italian poets. Dr. Everett’s short biographies of the poets are
  generally interesting and clever. His criticisms are erratic, but the
  copious extracts from Italian poetry with which he illustrates them
  are very valuable to the general reader.”

   + — — =Ind.= 58: 210. Ja. 26, ‘05. 450w.

  “His textual illustrations show him to be not only a translator in the
  finest sense, but also a poet of broad and subtle imagination and of a
  most delicate harmonic sensibility. The torch of classical effulgence
  dropped from the hand of Ticknor, of Longfellow, and of Lowell, he has
  caught up and illuminates anew what once passed for history. On one
  point, however, we think the doctor might have made a concession to
  the moderns as a gentle hint for his own permanency. He might have
  furnished an index. He is also cruel to kill off the poet Carducci,
  who at this writing is very much alive.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 38. Ja. 21, ‘05. 430w.

  “Mr. Everett’s sketches of their lives and works seem adequate and the
  translations, some of which are original, are vigorous. The author
  would have improved his work if he had pruned the rhetoric, more
  suitable for lectures than essays.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 99: 746. Je. 3, ‘05. 310w.

  “He is generally just. We do not much like the fun that he makes of
  the romances. It is somewhat cheap.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 718. My. 13, ‘05. 240w.


* =Eytinge, Rose.= Memories of Rose Eytinge. **80c; **$1.20. Stokes.

  Into her own autobiography Rose Eytinge has introduced a wealth of
  sidelight information on the American drama of the past fifty years.
  She was an associate and personal friend of Edwin Booth, J. W. and
  Lester Wallack, E. L. Davenport and Augustin Daly, and her
  observations are all from the vantage point of first hand knowledge.




                                   F


=Fairless, Michael, pseud.= Grey Brethren, and other fragments in prose
and verse. $1.25. Dutton.

  Four fairy tales, five papers and five poems make up this posthumous
  volume. “‘The grey brethren,’ which gives its title to the volume, is
  a tenderly and reticently touched reminiscence of two maidenly
  ladies.... A German Christmas eve is a descriptive sketch of
  characteristic domestic charm. A Christmas idyll is an imaginative
  fantasy full of fine feeling and thoughtful religion.... Luvly
  Miss ... is the simple record of a poor child, dying from an accident,
  and her devout worship of an altogether ridiculous doll.” (Acad.)

  “Though slender and unambitious, they are written in a refined style.
  The poems, as a whole, are the least successful work in the volume.”

       + =Acad.= 62: 520. My. 13, ‘05. 600w.

  “This little volume will be welcome to all lovers of ‘The road
  mender.’ It has, not, indeed, the finished perfection of that book,
  but some of the stories and poems display the same fine artistic
  sense, and the same sacramental reverence for natural glory, the same
  deep tenderness and sympathy.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 560. My. 6. 300w.

  “Is marked by an exquisite simplicity of diction and a delicacy of
  spiritual insight that are far out of the common.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 71. Ag. 1, ‘05. 110w.


=Fairlie, John Archibald.= National administration of the United States
of America. **$2.50. Macmillan.

  Written chiefly from official records such as the Constitution of the
  United States, statutes of Congress, administrative reports and
  judicial decisions, this volume gives an account of the administrative
  system, treating the legislative and judicial branches only in their
  direct relations to the executive administration. There are chapters
  on the powers of the president, the senate, congress, the cabinet, and
  the various departments and bureaus. A complete bibliography is
  provided.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 948. Jl. ‘05. 30w.

  “Dr. Fairlie’s treatise on this subject is marked by all the scholarly
  treatment, painstaking accuracy and thoroughness which characterized
  his work on municipal administration.”

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 589. S. ‘05. 160w.

  “The book is written in a readable style. For the most part it is
  easily understood.” David Y. Thomas.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 12. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1380w.

  “A book that is at the same time full, readable and authoritative.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 332. Ag. 10, ‘05. 330w.

  “The author has done his work carefully, and his book may be accepted
  as a generally trustworthy guide.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 466. Je. 8, ‘05. 1040w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 374. Je. 10, ‘05. 570w.

  “In style the work is direct and incisive, in treatment accurate and
  objective, in presentation logical.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 194. My. 20, ‘05. 240w.

  “Is perhaps the first comprehensive work on this subject that has ever
  been published.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 110w.


* =Fairweather, Rev. William.= Pre-exilic prophets. *35c. Lippincott.

  In this volume in the “Temple series of Bible handbooks” “Mr.
  Fairweather treats of the prophets from Amos down to Jeremiah—Amos,
  Hosea, Isaiah, Micah, Zephaniah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Jeremiah. The
  general character of the eighth century before Christ is discussed in
  the opening chapter, which is followed by a consideration of the value
  of written prophecy in relation to the Israelitish history of the
  period, the significance of prophecy for Divine revelation, ‘The older
  and the new prophecy,’ ‘The golden age of Hebrew prophecy,’ ‘The
  religious ideal of the prophets,’ ‘The century before the exile.’”—N.
  Y. Times.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 568. Ag. 26, ‘05. 140w.

  * “In the brevity prescribed for it could not be easily improved
  upon.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 345. Je. 3, ‘05. 40w.


=Falkiner, C. Litton.= Illustrations of Irish history and topography.
$7. Longmans.

  The period covered by this book is mainly that of the 17th century.
  The author treats of the history and development of Dublin, and
  “follows the history of the counties of Ireland giving their origin,
  constitution, and gradual elimination. What to us is of the greater
  interest are the accounts of the Irish people by contemporaneous
  authors. Fynes Moryson describes Ireland as he saw it at the close of
  the reign of Elizabeth.... The convivial habits of the Elizabethan
  Irish are dwelt on.... Luke Vernon’s “Discourse of Ireland” it is
  believed was written about 1619.... The last two chapters give the
  impressions of Sir William Brereton and a rather dandy Frenchman, M.
  Jorevin de Rocheford. The latter giving this account of his impression
  of Ireland, 1666.” (N. Y. Times).

  “The notes to these papers are numerous and characterized by scholarly
  care. In general Mr. Falkiner must be credited with a volume which
  will be permanently serviceable to students of Irish history.” Edward
  Porritt.

     + + =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 920. Jl. ‘05. 520w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 273. Ap. 16, ‘05. 390w.

  “For the rest Mr. Falkiner writes with such exceeding care that he has
  left little for a critic to find fault with. Here and there, we think,
  he might with advantage have developed his subject more fully.” R.
  Dunlop.

   + + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 796. O. ‘05. 1750w.

  “Mr. Falkiner has been successful in his choice of descriptions
  determined by their rarity, representative character, and difficulty
  of procurement by the ordinary reader.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 254. Mr. 30, ‘05. 1230w. (Survey of contents.)

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 115. F. 25, ‘05. 1480w.


Famous battles of the nineteenth century, 1875-1900, ed. by Chas. Welsh.
**$1. Wessels.

  This fourth and last volume of “Famous battles of the nineteenth
  century,” contains an account of the famous battles fought from 1875
  to 1900. It includes descriptions of The storming of Kars by Major
  Arthur Griffiths, The Boer war of 1881, by Archibald Forbes; The
  bombardment of Alexandria, by Max Pemberton; Port Arthur, 1894; The
  battle of Manila; and With Roosevelt on San Juan hill, by A. Hilliard
  Atteridge and other descriptions by these and other authors.

  * “The book is designed for boys, who will undoubtedly find it quite
  to their taste.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “It is not possible to name the collection one of absorbing interest
  or to praise always either the fairness or the dramatic quality of the
  battle-pieces, but the book has considerable interest and some value.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 785. N. 18, ‘05. 810w.


=Fandel, Peter.= Judgment of Paris. $1. Badger, R. G.

  The story of the judgment of Paris cast in dramatic form. The awarding
  of the apple, the chariot race which brings Paris to the notice of his
  father, Priam, the indignation of princes and people, and the flight
  of Paris are dealt with in four short acts.


=Fanshawe, Anne Harrison (Lady Richard Fanshawe).= Memoirs of Lady
Fanshawe, wife of Sir Richard Fanshawe, bt., embassador from Charles II
to the courts of Portugal and Madrid, written by herself; containing
extracts from the correspondence of Sir Richard Fanshawe; ed. with
introd. by Beatrice Marshall, and a note on the illustrations by Allan
Fea. *$1.50. Lane.

  “The memoirs were first published in 1830, and were well worth a place
  in ‘The crown library’ series.... Both Sir Richard and his wife were
  representative of the highest type of Royalist—cultured, refined and
  humane. Sir Richard, who died in 1666, devoted his leisure years under
  the Commonwealth to literary labours of love.... The memoirs yield
  much information as to the events and social practices of a most
  interesting period in history.”—Ath.

  “Attractive memoirs, which we have read with very great pleasure in
  the delightful form in which they now appear.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 730. Jl. 15, ‘05. 990w.

  “Certainly the memoirs have a charm which is by no means dependent on
  the time of which they treat.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 142. Jl. 29. 320w.

  * “Holds a high place in the biographical literature of the Stuart
  era.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 447. N. 30, ‘05. 470w.

  “Her memoirs are bright and full of good stories of the doings of two
  and a half centuries ago.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 745. N. 4, ‘05. 760w.

  “The editing might have been done with greater skill and energy than
  Miss Marshall has brought to her task.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 189. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1380w.


=Farmer, James Eugene.= Versailles and the court under Louis XIV.
*$3.50. Century.

  A beautiful book profusely illustrated. The sketch is a four-fold one
  including The palace, The park, The king and The court, each of which
  divisions presents the subject inductively and so prepares the way for
  the next. Beginning with the plans for the palace and the laying out
  of the grounds the author leads up to the finished work. With this for
  a back-ground, the king is presented and viewed from the standpoint of
  his daily life, methods of work, personal appearance and character,
  and the intricacies of court etiquette. Then the stage throngs with
  the gay and the wicked courtiers who were as perfect in manners as
  corrupt in morals.

  * “Our author has given us a volume of real value as an admirable
  pen-picture of the court.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 659. D. ‘05. 600w.

  * “An interesting subject is interestingly handled.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 130w.

 *   + + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 34. D. ‘05. 180w.

  * “He does, indeed, depend upon the memoir writers very largely, but
  he uses them with intelligence, and makes his book a study in the
  physiology of court life.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 426. N. 23, ‘05. 420w.

  * “Mr. Farmer has joined his threads skillfully; there is no
  suggestion of patchwork about his book, which is entertaining to its
  last page.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 811. N. 25, ‘05. 770w.

  * “The reader feels that he has been in excellent company when he lays
  the volume down with a regret that it is not longer, or one of a
  series.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 706. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.


=Farmer, John S., and Henley, William Ernest.= Dictionary of slang and
colloquial English. *$2.50. Dutton.

  This is an abridgment of the seven-volume work by the same authors
  entitled “Slang and its analogues.” It contains slang expressions and
  their analogues in English and American usage. A list of more than
  fifty books to which reference and acknowledgment is made in this
  volume, is given. The first of these is dated 1440.

 *     + =Nation.= 81:75. Jl. 27, ‘05. 110w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10:276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 220w.

  “For ordinary use the present book is ample.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79:1013. Ap. 22, ‘05. 130w.


=Farquhar, Edward.= Poems. $1.50. Badger, R: G.

  Under three divisions, History, Man and nature, and Devotion, are
  included poems as varied in length and verse as in subject. They range
  from long poems such as “King Herod,” and “Christianity in the
  apostles,” which are cast in poem-drama form, to little verses such as
  “Microcosm,” and “Clouds and dawn.”

  “In his volume of collected poems Mr. Farquhar takes a deeper plunge
  into the psychological mysteries of youthful hearts, and now and then
  succeeds in striking a truly poetic note.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10:585. S. 9, ‘05. 90w.


=Fenn, Frederick, and Wyllie, B.= Old English furniture. *$2.50.
Scribner.

  Mr. Fenn has written the chapters on oak furniture, the walnut period,
  and the introduction of the making of furniture, while those upon
  chairs, sofas, painted furniture, and inlaid mahogany and satinwood,
  are by B. Wyllie. There are ninety-four illustrations of articles
  either owned by the authors or in collections to which they have
  access. The volume belongs to the “Newnes library of applied arts.”

  “Is ... trustworthy, but it leaves us with a somewhat unpleasant
  feeling of having been ‘taken in hand.’” Edith A. Browne.

     + — =Acad.= 68:79. Ja. 28, ‘05. 320w.

  “The accompanying text is full of valuable information and pregnant
  hints to the inexperienced amateur.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 25:82. Mr. ‘05. 120w.

  “What we like especially about the text is its reserve, and quiet
  tone, and plain statement of the impossibility of fixing dates very
  closely.”

     + + =Nation.= 80:319. Ap. 20, ‘05. 790w.

  “Its style is intimate rather than didactic, impressionistic rather
  than scientific.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10:179. Mr. 25, ‘05. 260w.

     + — =Sat. R.= 99:846. Je. 24, ‘05. 660w.


=Fernández Guardia, Ricardo.= Cuentos ticos. $2. Burrows bros. co.

  These ten short stories of Costa Rica, have been translated into
  English by Gray Casement. The author, who is a writer of reputation
  among Central Americans has strikingly set forth the social, political
  and religious ideas of Costa Rica in these brief narratives, which
  combine both pathos and humor. There is a good introduction by the
  translator; there are also many illustrations of street and country
  scenes.

  “Although here and there reminiscent of Castillian story tellers, the
  tales and the style in which they are related make one wish to know
  more of Señor Ricardo and his works.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10:3. Ja. 7, ‘05. 400w.


=Ferree, Barr.= American estates and gardens. $10. Munn.

  The title of this book misleads one, as the author writes of the
  country houses, or rather palaces, of our American millionaires. These
  houses are monuments, not of the taste and personality of the owners,
  but of the skill and training of the architects and decorators, and
  there is much grandeur and little domesticity. What is lacking in
  “Estates,” however, the author amply makes up to us in “Gardens,” and
  gives most delightful illustrations, many of which are drawn from the
  well-known Falkner and Bellefontaine farms.

  “Whether we regard his book as a record of contemporary and domestic
  architecture of a certain sort, or as a contribution to sociology, it
  will be of scarcely less interest a hundred years hence than it is
  to-day.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 160. F. 23. ‘05. 470w.


=Fetter, Frank Albert.= Principles of economics; with applications to
practical problems. *$2. Century.

  A book which will be particularly valuable to students and teachers,
  as it represents the course of instruction which Dr. Fetter has given
  in his classes. “The theory is illuminated by constant references to
  practical life, and to such sides of life as college students are
  likely to come into contact with, and it is also used to shed light on
  the larger problems of our current social life.” (J. Pol. Econ.)

  “In the wealth of material treated, in the judicious employment of all
  methods of economic study, in the sanity and lucidity of discussion,
  the book has hardly an equal. Moreover, it is the most readable book
  on economics that the reviewer has had the good fortune to peruse.” A.
  S. Johnson.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 144. Ja. ‘05. 1840w.

  “Professor Fetter’s book may challenge comparison, on the ground of
  its intrinsic excellence, with any systematic treatise on economics
  that has appeared since the days of John Stuart Mill.” Winthrop More
  Daniels.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 563. Ap. ‘05. 850w.

  “Tho having acquaintance with the new, his philosophy is essentially
  of the old and reveals but few modifications due to an understanding
  of modern thought and modern conditions.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 333. Ag. 10. ‘05. 240w.

  “Among the numerous text-books of economics which have appeared in
  England and America in the last year or two, Professor Fetter’s book
  is likely to take high rank. For those who share his views on
  fundamental economic doctrines, his work may well serve as a
  first-class text-book. The present writer, while admiring the
  structure of Dr. Fetter’s course, and appreciating the fact that
  students following such a course are likely to have a keen interest in
  economics developed, finds himself in the position of a critic
  compelled to assail the very foundations of Dr. Fetter’s economic
  system.” A. W. Flux.

     — + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 109. D. ‘04. 2020w.

  * “As an economic synthesis bottomed on the accepted modern theory of
  value and extended to all phases of economic analysis, it stands
  unsurpassed.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81 :367. N. 2, ‘05. 1000w.


=Fiebeger, Gustave Joseph.= Civil engineering. *$5. Wiley.

  A book intended to give military cadets who have to master many
  sciences and languages as well as military science and tactics an
  elementary knowledge of civil engineering.

  Reviewed by H. N. Ogden.

   + + — =Science,= n.s. 22: 397. S. 29, ‘05. 690w.


=Field, Edward Salisbury. (Childe Harold, pseud.).= Child’s book of
abridged wisdom. **75c. Elder.

  A little book of rhymed advice amply illustrated with humorously
  grotesque drawings. The binding is artistic and the wisdom will amuse
  the parent rather than edify the child. It is upon this order,

                   “At dinner use your fork and spoon;
                     It may prolong your life,
                   My grandfather once cut himself
                     While eating with his knife.”

  * “A series of irresistibly comic verses containing good advice for
  the young.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  * “The decorations are clever, and so is the verse it contains.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1384. D. 14, ‘05. 25w.


=Fielding, Henry.= Selected essays, ed. by Gordon Hall Gerould. *60c.
Ginn.

  A book designed to introduce Fielding as an essay writer to both
  college students and general readers. It contains selected essays from
  his novels, and some of the best work from the “Miscellanies” of 1743
  and the periodicals. The text is in most cases based on the first and
  second editions. A biographical sketch, an introduction, full notes,
  and an index are provided.

  “To the present volume there is prefixed an introduction ... by which
  we can see that the praise is lavish rather than discriminating.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 870. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1230w.


=Finerty, John Frederick.= Ireland: the people’s history of Ireland.
*$2.50. Dodd.

  The first history of the Irish people “pro-Irish rather than
  pro-English in spirit and view” since McGee’s “History of Ireland,”
  three-quarters of a century ago. Mr. Finerty, the president of the
  United Irish league of America, aims to throw “more light in a simple
  and comprehensive manner on the history of that beautiful island, the
  blood of whose exiled children flows in the veins of not less than
  twenty millions of the American people.” The history, two volumes, is
  a very rapid survey of Ireland from the earliest period down to the
  career and ascendency of the fearless avenger of Irish liberty,
  Parnell.

  * “Writes from that patriotic point of view, but with no obvious bias
  that would prevent him from being fair and trustworthy in regard to
  opposing views.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 80w.

  * “It will not do to say that his style is everywhere excellent. If
  Mr. Finerty had studied the history of his native land in the light of
  European events, the policies of England would have become
  intelligible to him, and the ‘People’s history of Ireland’ would have
  been a far more trustworthy work.” Laurence M. Larson.

   — — + =Dial.= 38: 412. Je. 16, ‘05. 1230w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 162. Mr. 18, ‘05. 630w.

  “The work before us, despite its prefatory promise of breadth and
  fair-mindedness, is itself a striking example of the way in which
  Irish history should not be written. In so far as the ‘political
  misfortunes’ of Ireland are concerned, bias prevails—the bias of a
  narrative constructed along pronounced pro-Catholic lines by an
  uncompromising sympathizer with the Irish cause. Strictly speaking,
  moreover, the work is not a history, but merely a chronicle in which
  the familiar superlatives, epithets, and errors of overstatement and
  understatement are painfully in evidence. There is also room for
  criticism from the standpoint of proportion.”

     — — =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 340w.


=Firth, Charles Harding.= Plea for the historical teaching of history:
an inaugural lecture delivered on November 9, 1904. *35c. Oxford.

  In this lecture Prof. Firth finds fault with the present school of
  history. He also declares history to be neither a science nor an art,
  “but it partakes of the nature of both. A twofold task lies before the
  historian. One-half of his business is the discovery of the truth, and
  the other half its representation.”

  “A very plain-spoken expression of opinion, and, as it is always well
  to have ideals set before us, likely to be useful.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 23. Ja. 7, ‘05. 370w.


=Firth, John Benjamin.= Constantine, the first Christian emperor.
**$1.35; **$1.60. Putnam.

  “There is ample room for a brief biography of the Emperor Constantine
  along the lines on which Mr. Firth has constructed his present book.
  Going directly to contemporary sources, and examining them with an eye
  keen to the detection of bias, Mr. Firth gives in small compass a
  careful exposition not only of the career and personality of the first
  imperial champion of Christianity, but of the period to which he
  belonged and of the nature and extent of the influence exerted by him
  on his generation and on posterity. In other words, an analysis is
  made of the elements essential to a correct evaluation of the validity
  of Constantine’s claim to greatness.”—Outlook.

  “We may, however, fairly criticize the author for having taken no
  account of some recent investigations which ought not to be ignored.”

   — + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 649. My. 27. 1470w.

  “Of this period and of its central figure the author has written
  sensibly and satisfyingly.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 324. My. 1, ‘05. 570w.

  “Mr. Firth makes a slip at the beginning of the book in speaking of
  the conquerors of Valerion as the Parthians.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 170. My. 26, ‘05. 710w.

  “Though written as a volume for a popular series, this book should not
  escape the attention of scholars, since it is based on a first-hand
  study of the authorities, and is the fruit of independent reflection.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 128. Ag. 10, ‘05. 1250w.

  “It is on the whole, a well balanced piece of work. The book opens
  with an absurdly bad genealogical table, and continues to practically
  a dateless limit.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 125. F. 25, ‘05. 780w.

  “Indeed we cannot but feel that, if only through an excess of
  impartiality, he paints the shadows at times all too deeply. And, for
  a similar reason, we gain the impression that here and there the pagan
  receives more and the Christian less than his due. We could wish, too,
  less disquisition regarding the untrustworthiness of the annalists of
  the period, less detailed picking of flaws—a habit so pronounced as to
  become tedious. These blemishes, however, are not vital defects. The
  work is well arranged, well written, and, with the exceptions noted,
  well balanced.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 501. F. 25, ‘05. 290w.

  * “We have little but praise of the writer’s treatment of the
  ecclesiastical and theological side.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 528. O. 21, ‘05. 810w.

  “Mr. Firth’s account of him is an excellent performance.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 360. S. 9, ‘05. 460w.

  “Is an interesting biography and an excellent study of an important
  phase in the earlier history of Europe.”

   + + + =Yale R.= 14: 230. Ag. ‘05. 90w.


=Firth, John Benjamin.= Highways and byways in Derbyshire. $2.
Macmillan.

  “Mr. Firth remarks that his book is of ‘narration rather than
  description.’ He tells the reader where he may profitably go, and what
  he may expect to see ... [and] takes occasion to mention the literary
  and historical associations of the places which he visits.”—Spec.

  “Mr. Firth’s ‘Derbyshire’ is to the full as thorough and as
  companionable as any of its predecessors.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 609. Je. 10, ‘05. 1040w.

  “Mr. Firth, has, beyond doubt, produced some five hundred pages of
  attractive and interesting reading.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 551. My. 6, 2160w.

  “Above all, there is a style that stamps the book as more than a
  guide, yet takes nothing away from its usefulness.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1111. N. 9, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Mr. Firth has a talent for description.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 1220w.

  “There are a few other references to people and scenes of especial
  interest to the scientific world, but the book will not be valued by
  these so much as for its bright narrative of literary and historical
  centers of Derbyshire, and its fine illustrations.”

       + =Nature.= 72: 100. Je. 1, ‘05. 320w.

  “The drawings ... are singularly charming—are, in fact, when all is
  said, the best part of a very good book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 356. Je. 3, ‘05. 710w.

  “The book is rich in literary associations and personal anecdotes, and
  is decidedly readable.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 192. My. 20, ‘05. 60w.

  “If a little slapdash at times and opinionated, Mr. Firth writes with
  real spirit.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 748. Je. 3, ‘05. 270w.

  “Full of interesting matter.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 718. My. 13, ‘05. 270w.


=Fischer, George Alexander.= Beethoven: a character study; with Wagner’s
Indebtedness to Beethoven. **$1.40. Dodd.

  In this study of the great composer’s life and character is given not
  only the influences under which he developed but the effect which his
  work had upon the music of to-day and upon the work of Wagner.

  “Is perhaps the most rational, convincing, shrewd, and sympathetic
  estimate yet made.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 70. Ag. 1, ‘05. 350w.

  “His method is straightforward enough, but his style is an
  exasperating journalese, without distinction of any kind. It is not of
  any special value or significance.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 695. S. 21, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is a character study rather than a biography and criticism. The
  chapter on humor is one of the best in the book.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 380. My. 11, ‘05. 190w.

  “It is presented in a straightforward style, though without much
  distinction; and what the author has added in the way of critical
  estimate is unimportant. Nor has he thrown any new light upon the
  character and artistic nature of Beethoven.” Richard Aldrich.

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 290w.

  “A simple, straightforward, and readable biography. An excellent and
  useful book for the young amateur of music.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 50w.


=Fisguill, Richard, pseud. (Richard H. Wilson).= Venus of Cadiz. †$1.50.
Holt.

  An American novel with a decided French twang. The scene is laid in
  Kentucky with an unsophisticated country girl for a heroine and a
  mushroom grower for her Adonis. Impossible situations follow one
  another in rollicking succession which involve cases of mistaken
  identity, mishaps, and weird meetings of moonshiners in caves. It is
  rightly called an extravaganza.

  “The plot is nought, and the manner everything. A racy and rollicking
  book it is, warranted to dispel the most chronic case of blues.” Wm.
  M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 116. S. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  “It is a rollicking and impossible tale, in which the author gets
  rather beyond his depth, while the reader is just sufficiently amused
  to flounder after him in astonishment.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 123. Ag. 10, ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Fisguill’s story is one which might well have remained in
  manuscript.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 29: 221. Ag. 12, ‘05. 60w.


=Fish, Carl Russell.= Civil service and the patronage. *$2. Longmans.

  “This volume deals with a subject which primarily concerns the
  citizens of the United States ... the history of the ‘Spoils
  system.’”—Spec.

  “The most valuable part of the book is the second section, dealing
  with the genesis of the spoils system. This is a genuine contribution
  to the history of the subject.” L. M. S.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 172. O. ‘05. 1260w.

  “This book is distinctly a history of the patronage, and as such
  deserves recognition as a valuable contribution in this particular
  field.” Ward W. Pierson.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 606. S. ‘05. 380w.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 169. S. 16, ‘05. 420w.

  “His book is brief but thorough.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 318. S. 2, ‘05. 130w.

         =Spec.= 94: 559. Ap. 15, ‘05. 170w.


* =Fisher, Ruth B.= On the borders of Pigmy land, **$1.25. Revell.

  “A record of missionary experiences in Central Africa, with
  interesting descriptions of the country and its people.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 942. D. 16, ‘05. 15w.

  * “Very interesting is the story she tells in this volume—tells with
  an admirable combination of the humorous and the serious.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 294. Ag. 26, ‘05. 450w.


=Fitch, William Edwards.= Some neglected history of North Carolina,
including the battle of Alamance, the first battle of the American
revolution. $2. Neale.

  “North Carolina’s claim to be the first battleground of the Revolution
  is zealously advocated in this monograph, which is, briefly, a study
  of the ‘viper’ episode of 1765.... In it also is incorporated some
  interesting documentary matter in the way of legislative acts,
  Regulator’s ‘Advertisements,’ and contemporary letters and
  addresses.”—Outlook.

  “The work is flimsy, incoherent, prejudiced.”

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 951. Jl. ‘05. 270w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 179. Mr. 25, ‘05. 960w. (Abstract of
         contents.)

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 709. Mr. 18, ‘05. 260w.


* =FitzGerald, Edward.= Euphranor: a dialogue on youth. *75c. Lane.

  This fifteenth volume of the “New pocket library” contains Euphranor
  “very fitly presented after the text of the first edition of 1851. Mr.
  Frederick Chapman, who supplies a preface, dwells upon the value of
  the little work ... not only as a classic specimen of English prose,
  but as reflective of Cambridge and its contemporary life, and the
  author as a part of them.” (Nation.)

  * “To possess ‘Euphranor’ in the present convenient form will give
  pleasure to many lovers of the famous letters and the more famous
  quatrains.” H. W. Boynton.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 850. D. ‘05. 390w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 339. O. 26, ‘05. 90w.

  * “A pleasing preface. There are some sixty Greek words and more than
  twenty mistakes.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 397. S. 16, ‘05. 160w.


=Fitzgerald, Edward and Pamela.= Edward and Pamela Fitzgerald; being an
account of their lives; compiled by Gerald Campbell. $3.50. Longmans.

  “A volume compiled by Gerald Campbell [their great grandchild] from
  the letters of those who knew them, in which is told the ‘life story’
  of the Irish rebel leader and his wife. Unlike other memoirs of Lord
  FitzGerald, this is not founded on Thomas Moore’s ‘Life and death of
  Lord Edward FitzGerald,’ which appeared in 1831. The letters cover in
  all a period of sixty years—from 1770 to 1831. The object of the first
  part of the volume is to give a picture of the home life of Lord
  Edward’s family, and incidentally portraits of the writer of the
  epistles. No attempt has been made to give a connected account of the
  story of his life. The letters have been left to show how he was
  regarded by those who knew and loved him best.”—N. Y. Times.

  “On the whole the work of the editor has been well done.” G. H. O.

     + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 613. Jl. ‘05. 590w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 10. Ja. 7, ‘05. 400w. (Outlines contents).


=Fitzgerald, Percy.= Lady Jean, the romance of the great Douglas cause.
*$3.60. Wessels.

  A revival of the famous Douglas case, the story of Lady Jean Douglas,
  who at the age of 50 married a broken down gambler in order to provide
  heirs for her brother’s estates. The author takes the side of the
  Hamiltons and contends that Lady Jane’s twin boys were hers not by
  birth but by purchase.

  “Mr. Fitzgerald has, in fact, given us a somewhat repellant chapter of
  gossip, narrated in a style so slipshod as to suggest doubts as to its
  accuracy in other points.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 147. F. 18, ‘05. 650w.

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 779. Je. 24. 490w.


* =Fitzgerald, Sybil.= In the track of the Moors. *$6. Dutton.

  “These essays contain no personal reminiscences; they are
  interpretative rather than descriptive, and they often run far afield
  into legend, history, politics, race characteristics and development,
  the inter-play of one race upon another, and other problems remote
  from the point of view of the guide-book.... It is as a luxurious and
  leisurely commentary upon travels past or to come, as a collection of
  delightful essays and beautiful pictures, that ‘In the track of the
  Moors’ should be judged and enjoyed. The book is the result of
  collaboration by Sybil and Augustine Fitzgerald, the former furnishing
  the essays and the latter the pictures. There are sixty-three
  full-page illustrations excellently printed in color.”—Dial.

  * “If the author displays here no great erudition, she certainly shows
  a real and sympathetic acquaintance with the lands in question,
  considerable powers of observation, and a pretty taste in the
  literature of travel.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 729. N. 25, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The essayist is equipped for her task by a thorough knowledge of
  the subject, a gift for analysis, and the ability to put the results
  of analysis into trenchant and finished form.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 382. D. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  * “The feature of ‘In the track of the Moors’ lies essentially in its
  illustrations.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1381. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “The pictures, much the more satisfactory element, are often
  charming, although also at times very trivial in subject.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 463. D. 7, ‘05. 240w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 765. N. 11, ‘05. 310w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 60w.


=Fitzmaurice, Edmond George Petty.= Life of Granville. 2v. $10.
Longmans.

  The materials used for Lord Fitzmaurice’s biography are mainly
  extracts from Lord Granville’s diaries and correspondence, from
  letters from his mother, from Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, and
  from a large group of his political colleagues. “The most striking
  letters which it contains are those which explain the relations of
  Queen Victoria to her ministers in respect of the conduct of foreign
  affairs.... The pleasantest portion of the first volume consists of
  the diary jottings of Lord Granville contained in his letters to the
  Governor-General of India.... The most important matter treated in the
  second volume is Home rule, and here again we find new facts which are
  material.... There are many interesting passages scattered throughout
  the portions of the book which deal with modern politics.”

  “Impartiality is a virtue of which he never loses sight, and though
  his book does not give us a clear portrait of Lord Granville, it holds
  within its covers a mass of facts and documents, with which the
  historian of the nineteenth century will never be able to dispense.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1121. O. 28, ‘05. 1650w.

  “Lord Edmond Fitzmaurice’s book is both interesting and important.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 497. O. 14. 2800w.

  “Lord Edmond has put together a vast amount of interesting and
  entertaining information about many people besides Lord Granville.
  Lord Granville’s own personal charm was perhaps too evanescent a
  quality to be reproduced on paper.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 338. O. 13, ‘05. 3880w.

  “Lord Edmond Fitzmaurice has done a very good piece of work in his
  life of Lord Granville.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 746. N. 4, ‘05. 1270w.

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 558. O. 28, ‘05. 2320w.

  “Even Mr. John Morley has not drawn so full a picture of the
  unfortunate Cabinet of 1880 as Lord Edmond has been able to supply,
  and it is certain that no future writer will be able to address
  himself to this period unless he has thoroughly studied Lord Edmond’s
  volumes.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 609. O. 21, ‘05. 1760w.


=Flandrau, Rebecca Blair=, tr. See =Kielland, Alexander.= Professor
Lovdahl.


=Fletcher, A. E.= Thomas Gainsborough. *$1.25. Scribner.

  A volume in the “Makers of British art” series. “If, in the present
  volume, we are not taught much as to Gainsborough’s technique we gain
  a good picture of Gainsborough’s age and its degradation in taste; of
  Gainsborough’s family; of the famous Bath period (the turning point in
  the painter’s career of Gainsborough’s landscape work) and its
  relation to Constable’s; of the London life, the king’s favor, the
  Academy, and, finally, the noble passing. Of the great triumvirate of
  English portrait painters—Reynolds, Gainsborough, and Romney—working
  at the same time, Gainsborough was not only the most brilliant artist
  in, but also the founder of the English landscape school.” (Outlook).

  “Excellent thought and carefully gauged appreciation is conveyed in a
  too dramatic, one might almost say, journalistic, tone.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 16. Mr. ‘05, 190w.

  “Mr. Fletcher has nothing new or important to tell us of
  Gainsborough’s art, but he has succeeded, in spite of the handicap of
  a wordy and inefficient style, in writing a fairly entertaining
  biography.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 194. Mr. 9, ‘05. 140w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 92. F. 11, ‘05. 550w.

  “Mr. Fletcher’s is the latest of the rapidly increasing number of
  Gainsborough biographies. His is a good biography, but not a
  remarkable book of criticism. For that one will seek Sir Walter
  Armstrong’s book; not that entire satisfaction is to be had from it
  either.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 96. Ja. 7, ‘05. 150w.


=Fletcher, Banister, and Fletcher, Banister Flight.= History of
architecture. *$6. imp. Scribner.

  A fifth edition, revised and enlarged. The volume is intended for
  students, craftsmen, and the general reader. It contains over 2000
  illustrations including photographs of buildings, exteriors and
  interiors, maps, plans, and diagrams, and includes a bibliography, a
  glossary, and a full index.

  “The present edition is certainly an improvement on the former ones in
  clarity and fulness of information.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 440. Ap. 8. 300w.

  “Is a veritable encyclopedia of its subject, and presents in compact
  form an immense amount of information.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 277. Ap. 16, ‘05. 70w.

  “The peculiar excellence and convenience of this work....”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 229. Mr. 23, ‘05. 100w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 169. Mr. 18, ‘05. 290w.


=Fletcher, Charles Robert Leslie.= Introductory history of England, from
the earliest times to the close of the middle ages. *$2. Dutton.

  “Mr. Fletcher’s book is ‘introductory’ in a double sense. Besides
  being intended for boys, it stops at the beginning of the Tudor
  period. In style, it is explanatory, and the author is enabled, by
  excising a large number of subjects, to treat those that remain with
  tolerable fulness of detail.”—Nation.

  “He gives a fresh and really interesting connected narrative of
  England’s emergence from barbarism and the beginnings of her national
  and institutional life. There are surely very many older readers who
  will find the book more fascinating than most novels.”

       + =Ind.= 58:671. Mr. 23, ‘05. 490w.

  “Mr. Fletcher’s avowed object is to avoid intolerable dulness, even
  when discoursing of the Norman conquest; and without further delay we
  may as well state that he has succeeded. The dry-as-dust critic might
  pick holes in some of his statements. But Mr. Fletcher has a grasp of
  essentials, and some lapses may well be condoned in the case of one
  whose light touch really does lend interest to the mediaeval history
  of England.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80:235. Mr. 23, ‘05. 560w.

  “The book he has now given us is eminently characteristic, full of his
  own energetic, practical activity, his love of health, fresh air, and
  good exercise. Mr. Fletcher’s story is, in the main, highly
  intelligible and adequately consecutive. He has certainly given us
  here a sketch of living men by a living man. Peculiarly interesting is
  the picture attempted of an imaginary village in pre-Norman, Norman,
  and post-Norman times. A word must also be said in praise of the
  capital little chapter of geological history.”

     + + =Nature.= 71:385. F. 23, ‘05. 470w.


=Fletcher, Margaret.= Light for new times: a book for Catholic girls.
60c. Benziger.

  Four essays which aim to help Catholic girls to enter upon the life
  which succeeds school days with some practical warning as to what the
  realities of life will be. They are entitled, Without the way there is
  no going; Liberty; Responsibility; and Professional life.

  * “Miss Fletcher really meets a serious want. Her work is of a high
  order; her aim is in the right direction.”

       + =Cath. World.= 82:262. N. ‘05. 540w.


=Flint, Austin.= Handbook of physiology. *$5. Macmillan.

  The author states that this book is the outgrowth of “a desire to
  present to students a work that may serve to connect pure physiology
  with the physiology especially useful to physicians.... I have
  endeavored to adapt it to the curricula of medical schools where the
  subject is taught in the English language.... The subject has been
  treated from a medical standpoint, not unduly neglecting, it is hoped,
  pure physiology and biology.”

  “We cannot leave it without a word of recognition for the
  extraordinarily lucid style which this veteran professor ... has
  achieved. It might well be the envy if not the despair of professional
  writers.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10:649. O. 7, ‘05. 680w.


=Flint, George Elliot.= Power and health through progressive exercise.
*$1.50. Baker.

  In a plea for heavy work in the gymnasium, the author lays aside light
  weight systems, and outlines a course in heroic strength-development.
  He maintains that “it is not much work requiring many slight efforts,
  but much less work requiring great efforts that make the best quality
  of brain and brawn.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 422. Je. 16, ‘05. 300w.


* =Flood, William H. Grattan.= Story of the harp. *$1.25. Scribner.

  The history of the harp is given in this volume, from its earliest
  form in Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, and Persia, also its use in the
  Jewish temples and Christian churches, its appearance in Ireland, with
  a full description of Irish harps and harpists, and a discussion of
  the increasing use of the harp in the orchestra. There are appendices
  upon the Æolian harp, and Epochs in the history of harp-making. The
  volume is illustrated.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 467. D. 7, ‘05. 190w.

  * “A more definite plan, a more skillful presentation, a more detailed
  and critical discussion and description would have made a book more
  valuable to the student and not less agreeable to the general reader.”
  Richard Aldrich.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 604. S. 16, ‘05. 360w.


=Flower, Elliott.= Best policy. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  Dave Murray, special insurance agent, is the central figure about whom
  center the incidents which fill these twelve stories. All phases of
  the life insurance plea are presented, including comedy, tragedy,
  speculation, failure, error, sacrifice and grievance.

  “Considered as fiction the book is one of the brightest and best
  volumes of short stories of the season.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 551. N. ‘05. 180w.

  * “The insurance companies of the country should pay Mr. Flower a
  royalty on this book.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 966. D. 23, ‘05. 360w.

  “This is a timely book, unique and interesting.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 771. N. 11, ‘05. 200w.

  “It would make an excellent guide for young insurance agents in the
  art of soliciting business.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 40w.

  “The fact that his stories are good ones, or would be if it were not
  for the trail of the serpent of bitter knowledge that lies over them,
  only adds to the seriousness of his offense.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 180w.


=Flower, Elliott.= Slaves of success. †$1.50. Page.

  These eight short stories form a study in state politics. The grafter,
  the boss, the spoilsman, the reformer, the honest country member of
  the legislature, all are true to their parts and serve to bring out
  the various phases of American business and political methods as
  viewed from the inside.

  “The eight chapters of ‘Slaves of success’ are rather as many
  narratives than stories.” Churchill Williams.

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 173. O. ‘05. 1030w.

  “Is rather a series of sketches than a novel, and the chapters have
  very unequal merit.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 452. Ag. 24, ‘05. 70w.

  “One of the many merits of his book is that it is not one of unalloyed
  pessimism. ‘Slaves of success’ is not only of absorbing interest, but,
  if as widely read as it deserves, cannot fail of being a power for
  good.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 326. My. 20, ‘05. 480w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1016. Ap. 22, ‘05. 40w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 676. Ap. 29, ‘05. 320w.


=Flux, A. W.= Economic principles: an introductory study. *$2. Dutton.

  Prof. Flux has written an introductory text book and has rendered it
  unsatisfactory for advanced work by giving no references, save in a
  general way. His object is to avoid introducing controversies which
  would interest only students more advanced than those for whom he
  wrote, and to give himself more freedom of expression than would be
  possible if he gave credit for each point of doctrine to those who
  first defined it. The work is, on the whole, of the classical point of
  view, as found in Marshall, but whatever the economic prejudices of
  the reader, he will find the work accurate and thoro, as well as
  modern.

 *   + — =Ind.= 59: 931. O. 19, ‘05. 230w.

  “It is not too much to say that the book is pretty nearly everything
  else than a textbook could be fairly expected to be; but it is not
  that. It is accurate, thoughtful, forceful, thorough, critical,
  logical, learned, temperate, clear; but it is difficult, abstract, and
  over-condensed; even for the practised economist it is hard reading.
  This is not to imply that it is not surpassingly well worth while, a
  positive contribution to the literature and thought of the science—it
  is all of this; but that only very advanced classes will find the book
  possible of handing; and for these it covers too wide a field, and can
  be of great service only for reference purposes or for collateral
  reading. On the whole, a work of great merit and significance. So much
  the more could better treatment from the publisher, especially in
  point of binding, have fairly been expected.” H. J. Davenport.

   + + — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 114. D. ‘04. 660w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 53. Ja. 28, ‘05. 370w. (Outlines scope of
         book).

  “It is in some important respects one of the most satisfactory
  systematic treatises on economics to appear within recent years.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 92. My. 6, ‘05. 330w.


=Forbes, J. T.= Socrates. $1.25. Scribner.

  The latest in the “World’s epoch makers” series. The political
  conditions of Socrates’ time, the civic ideal, and the religion of the
  Greeks are discussed in the introduction. With the environment of the
  philosopher’s activity established, the author shows how he developed
  his great system which looks upon the individual as the moral unit.

  “Mr. Forbes has done a real service to the educated public by issuing
  a bright, sound estimate, biographical and critical, of the charm and
  limitations attaching to the Greek primal path.” James Moffatt.

     + + =Hibbert J.= 4: 227. O. ‘05. 760w.

  “While his work is conscientious and sufficiently thorough, it is not
  always interesting, nor do the discussions leave a clean and clear
  impression.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 247. S. 21, ‘05. 630w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 444. Jl. 1, ‘05. 260w.

  “It is an exacting as well as a fascinating subject, and its demands
  for a comprehensive view and critical insight are well met in the
  present volume.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 160w.


* =Ford, Paul Leicester.= His version of it. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “The pretty little fiction of the horses’ interest in the love affairs
  of Miss Fairley—who was ‘a beauty, but not what her mother was at her
  age’—and the noble Major, while the odious Mr. Lewis played the
  despicable role of villain, is told with great vivacity by the prime
  movers, the horses.... The book is attractively illustrated by Mr.
  Henry Hutt, and should be a pretty addition to any Ford
  collection.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Charming story.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 387. D. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  * “One of the cleverest of this author’s short stories.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1378. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 526. O. 28, ‘05. 20w.


=Forman, Justus Miles.= Island of enchantment. †$1.75. Harper.

  A romance of Italy in the fourteenth century. The hero is a young
  captain sent by the Doge of Venice to rescue the island of Arbe from
  the forces of the Ban of Bosnia. “The story is full of passionate
  doings and conflicts of love and honor.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Told with gentle and straightforward English that must surely charm.
  The very simplicity and directness of the plot and prose give the
  volume its chief character.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 60w.

  * “Mr. Forman knows how to mingle love, war and intrigue in a way to
  compel his reader’s interest, and he has never succeeded better than
  in this novelette.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 90w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 382. O. 14. ‘05. 50w.


=Forman, Justus Miles.= Tommy Carteret. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  “The story, which has its beginning in a New York ballroom, goes far.
  It takes Tommy from his first lovemaking, and assigns him to the
  nobler role of volunteer scapegoat for the amatory sins of a handsome
  and heedless father. It exiles the young man ... to ... the back
  country. It exposes him to weird temptations, comes within an ace of
  marrying him to a dark-eyed, black-haired hill beauty, threatens him
  with tar and feathers, puts a bullet into his head, and when hospitals
  and the doctors....”—N. Y. Times.

  “‘Tommy Carteret’ is poor stuff. It is a réchauffé.”

     — — =Acad.= 68: 984. S. 23, ‘05. 280w.

  “This story is fundamentally unsound, superficially clever, and for
  the most part entertaining.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 298. S. 2. 280w.

  “The story is one of unusual cleverness, and full of surprises to the
  end.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 517. Jl. ‘05. 520w.

  “‘Tommy Carteret’ is quite readable, even entertaining, though it is
  the kind of book some superior persons sneer at and consign to the
  limbo of nothingness.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 166. Mr. 18, ‘05. 390w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “The book is full of sentimental absurdities and affectation, and in
  the end degenerates into a most unpleasant pseudo-pathological study.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 761. Mr. 25, ‘05. 90w.

  “A book that unites so much power and charm, so much insight and
  kindliness and truth.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 758. Je. ‘05. 260w.

  “In spite of its faults, therefore, it is impossible to condemn the
  novel entirely, though it is difficult to read it without feelings of
  sorrow that so vigorous a pen should be employed in so vulgar a
  manner.”

     — + =Spec.= 95: 532. O. 7, ‘05. 180w.


=Forman, Samuel Eagle.= Advanced civics: the spirit, the form, and the
function of the American government. *$1.25. Century.

  Dr. Forman says, “I have constantly kept in mind the truth that
  instruction in Civics should have for its aim the indoctrination of
  the learner in sound notions of political morality.... In Part I. the
  underlying principles of our government are presented. The essentials
  are placed first in order.... In Part II. is an account of the
  governmental machine. In Part III. the every-day work of government is
  considered and the practical problems connected with the work are
  discussed.”

  “A thoughtful, compact, direct, and comprehensive account of the
  machinery, operation, and problems of the governmental system.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 628. N. 11, ‘05. 110w.


=Fortier, S.= Progress report of co-operative irrigation investigations
in California.

  “One of the most interesting lines of work here described is an
  investigation of pumping water for irrigation, by Prof. J. N. Le
  Conte, of the University of California, and others. Thus far
  descriptions of 750 pumping plants have been secured. Both field and
  laboratory tests of pumping plants have been made. These are here
  summarized briefly, but will be reported on more fully at a later
  date. Studies of evaporation and methods of applying water to land are
  also described in the pamphlet.”—Engin. N.

         =Engin. N.= 53: 185. F. 16, ‘05. 100w.


=Foster, John Watson.= Arbitration and the Hague court. **$1. Houghton.

  “A brief review of events dealing with arbitration up to the
  convention of The Hague peace conference. It gives the circumstances
  under which that conference was called, the reasons why The Hague was
  appropriate for such an assemblage, and the eminent men employed and
  spirit of the conference.”—Bookm.

  “The exposition is clear, the conclusions logical.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 383. Ap. ‘05. 100w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 275. Ap. 16, ‘05. 190w.

  “This is a valuable hand book. His book, however, has the peculiar
  value of being historical and impersonal.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 269. F. 2, ‘05. 350w.

  “His publication, important in more than one respect, is, so far as we
  know, the first to give, in a small compass and an interesting way,
  the present status of arbitration and its practice under the Hague
  convention.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 19. Ja. 5, ‘05. 1390w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 247. F. ‘05. 80w.


=Fox, Frances Margaret.= Rainbow bridge. †$1.25. Wilde.

  From the “little pilgrims’ home” Marian Lee traverses her rainbow
  bridge to the ideal home of her dreams where love and privileges
  abound.

  * “Another interesting, natural story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 911. D. 23, ‘05. 40w.


=Fox, John, jr.= Following the sun-flag: a vain pursuit through
Manchuria. **$1.25. Scribner.

  One of our war correspondents who never reached the front gives his
  impressions of Japan and her people. The account of his experiences in
  Tokio and in Manchuria, which he traversed in the trail of the
  Japanese army, is amusing and interesting.

  “A book very pleasing in its literary finish. Mr. Fox is very guarded,
  and is as self-controlled as a Japanese in his intimations.” William
  Elliot Griffis.

       + =Critic.= 47: 265. S. ‘05. 170w.

  “He has made the work interesting by the sketchy, breezy manner in
  which it is written, although it is imbued with ... race prejudice
  against men of darker skin.” Wallace Rice.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 416. Je. 16, ‘05. 550w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 42. Jl. 13, ‘05. 540w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 265. Ap. 22, ‘05. 280w.

  “Mr. Fox has made some very pretty copy out of his four months’ stay
  in Tokio.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 300. My. 6, ‘05. 600w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

     — + =Outlook.= 80: 245. My. 27, ‘05. 130w.

  “There are some bits of very fine description in this volume.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 125. Jl. ‘05. 140w.

  “The book is written in an amusing high-coloured style, and as a
  record of nothing at all is, in its way, an achievement.”

       — =Spec.= 95:51. Ag. 8, ‘05. 130w.


=Fox, Middleton.= Child of the shore; a romance of Cornwall. (†)$1.50.
Lane.

  Eery incantations on the Cornish shore bring to a farmer’s wife one of
  the “merry-maids” of the sea as her longed-for child. The girl’s
  strange beauty and her sympathy with the sea’s moods cause the
  villagers to regard her with suspicion, and when she is gone they
  believe the story that she and her sea-sisters have avenged her life’s
  tragedy by pulling down to the depths of the sea her aristocratic
  betrayer. Smugglers, wreckers and fisher-folk enter into the story.

  “Mr. Fox’s novel is atmospheric, with the result that in spite of
  occasional passages of some beauty in the actual writing, and an
  attractive way of introducing his story ... it is tedious.”

       — =Acad.= 68:785. Jl. 29, ‘05. 320w.

  “The book, however, is pleasingly written.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1:651. My. 27. 210w.

  * “It is, perhaps, unfortunate, that material of such unusual
  possibilities should have been squandered in a ‘first book,’ for as
  yet the writer’s equipment is lacking in dramatic force.”

     + — =Critic.= 47:477. N. ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Fox tells his story well, in a way to touch both the heart and
  the imagination, but in addition to the story there is the interest of
  the vivid picture of a quaint, old village and a mode of life long
  past.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10:584. S. 2, ‘05. 550w.


=Francis of Assisi, St. (Giovanni Francisco Bernadone Assisi).= Words of
St. Francis; sel. and tr. by Anne MacDonell. *60c. Dutton.

  “Friends of St. Francis have left records of what in other men might
  be called ‘Table talk.’ Others of his sayings have come down to us at
  one further remove, from friends of the Saint’s friends. Some of these
  things Miss MacDonell has put together in this volume, trying, as she
  tells us, ‘to reflect his spirit, his temperament, and his attitude to
  life rather than his doctrine.’”—Spec.

  “An admirable little book.”

       + =Spec.= 94:23. Ja. 7, ‘05. 160w.


=Francis, M. E., pseud.= See =Blundell, Mary. E. (Sweetman).=


=Frankau, Julia (Frank Danby, pseud.).= Eighteenth century artists and
engravers. 2v. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  “In the regal portfolio of forty engravings, which forms part of her
  work, [Mrs. Frankau] gives most of her plates to William Ward, who
  reproduced paintings like Hoppner’s famous Miranda in noble fashion,
  when he was not designing and stippling dainty circular or oval
  portraits of feminine types. But in the octavo which contains her
  text, she fills much of her space with a biographical sketch of James
  Ward, who valued his gifts as a painter.... The thirty photogravures
  from his works, which she scatters through her text, are important to
  the student.”—Atlan.

  Reviewed by Royal Cortissoz.

     + + =Atlan.= 95:274. F. ‘05. 530w.


=Franklin, Benjamin.= Selections from the writings of Benjamin Franklin;
ed. by U. Waldo Cutler. 35c. Crowell.

  One of the thirteen new titles lately added to the “Handy volume
  classics.” There is an introduction, which sketches the life of
  Franklin, and notes by the editor.

  “The selections in the book are well chosen.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10:730. O. 28, ‘05. 120w.


=Franklin, Benjamin.= Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin; printed from
the full and authentic text, ed. by William MacDonald. *$1.25. Dutton.

  The editor has made this book a complete biography by providing a
  biographical preface and an account of Franklin’s later life and his
  relation to the history of his time.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 947. Jl. ‘05. 30w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “The editor seeks to describe Franklin as the complete citizen—of his
  city, his country, and the world. The task is superficially done, and
  is marred by the strong prejudices of the writer.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 142. Ag. 17, ‘05. 80w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 372. Je. 10, ‘05. 180w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 90w.

         =Sat. R.= 99: 849. Je. 24, ‘05. 140w.


=Fraser, Edward.= Famous fighters of the fleet. $1.75. Macmillan.

  These “Glimpses through the cannon smoke in the days of the old navy,”
  set forth the gallant fights fought by the insignificant little
  English crafts which used to rule the sea. The past and present is
  strikingly contrasted in the opening chapter, and then follow accounts
  of the capture of the French ship Foudroyant by a little Monmouth
  whose namesake today makes her seem a mere toy, the famous ships that
  bore the name Formidable, the Zebra, whose fighting captain, Faulkner,
  carried, by storm, a French fort in the West Indies, and others. The
  requiem of the Téméraire. the subject of Turner’s picture and Ruskin’s
  oration, is fittingly sounded and the book closes with an account of
  how Lord Charles Beresford successfully took the little Condor into
  action during the bombardment of Alexandria in 1882.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 414. My. 25, ‘05. 350w.


=Fraser, Mary Crawford (Mrs. Hugh Fraser).= Maid of Japan. †$1.25. Holt.

  The tale of a Japanese girl with the music of the sea and the glory of
  the cliffs in her nature. Sixteen years before, her mother had walked
  into the sea because the Englishman who had wed her sailed away and
  left her. The young girl’s simple life as shell gatherer is disturbed
  one day by the coming of a young Englishman who sings love songs to
  her over the water, clears up the mystery of her parentage, and takes
  her back to his England.

  “She has a wonderful vocabulary, mastery of language, fine literary
  finish, and a keen sense of the dramatic. There is no false step or
  slip of the pen in her word drawing and shadings of Japanese life.”
  William Elliot Griffis.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 265. S. ‘05. 140w.

  “The volume is quite unworthy of the author of the ‘Letters from
  Japan.’” Adachi Kinnosuké.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 389. Ag. 17, ‘05. 130w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 101. Ag. 3, ‘05. 310w.

  “The plot is slight, but the story is told with surpassing grace, and
  possesses to a rare degree both atmosphere and temperament.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 446. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1400w.

  “The moral tone is high, the literary finish good, the general effect
  idyllic, and the typographical presentation unique and agreeable.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 592. Jl. 1, ‘05. 80w.

  “Whatever this author does is done well, and when she touches Japan
  she is securely at home. There is nothing sensational or thrilling in
  the book, but it is bathed deep in Japanese atmosphere.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 160. Jl. 29, ‘05. 200w.


=Fraser, William Alexander.= Sa’-Zada tales. †$2. Scribner.

  “Stories supposed to be told by the animals in a ‘Zoo’ in India. The
  keeper, Sa’ (or Sahib) Zada, in the warm summer nights lets the
  animals out of their cages, and brings them together to tell
  stories.... Each of the animals in turn tells of his life in the
  jungle and how he came to be captured.... They indulge in repartee and
  sometimes in bad temper, but they are on the whole a happy family,
  united by their love for their keeper. The book is strikingly
  illustrated by Arthur Heming.”—Outlook.

 *   + — =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “Will be a treasure-trove to children who love animals and who love
  to hear them talk.” May Estelle Cook.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 374. D. 1, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Though not a brilliant story-teller, is interesting, and apparently
  knows a great deal about the creatures that he presents to us.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 511. D. 21, ‘05. 140w.

  * “The author’s knowledge of natural history, his skill in story
  telling, and his humorous sympathy, enable him to thrill the lover of
  forest creatures and even to thrall jaded readers who may scorn all
  popular nature books.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 707. O. 21, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 718. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.


=Free, Richard.= Seven years’ hard. *$1.50. Dutton.

  A record of the Rev. Richard Free’s seven years of pioneer missionary
  work in that section of the London slums known as the Isle of Dogs, or
  Millwall. The author himself calls it “a city of desolation,” and he
  and his wife fight a long and gallant fight against rowdyism and
  intemperance. Tho the Thames flows through that section, “its waters
  have become loathsome by human selfishness and folly,” and young and
  old toil from dawn till dark for a mere pittance; factories fill the
  district, and dirt and foul odors are everywhere. The erection of the
  mission building, the establishment of guilds, and the problems to be
  met with, are well described in this volume.

  “It is not a story and it is not a system of sociology, but a series
  of snap-shots of the life of people ground to earth by employers,
  debased by drink and ignorance, and indifferent to art, science,
  history, morals, and religion.” Charles Richmond Henderson.

       + =Dial.= 38: 156. Mr. 1, ‘05. 160w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 84. F. 11, ‘05. 1330w. (Review of contents).

  “For a picture or series of pictures of an unknown people living in
  the midst of a Christian civilization, we have seen nothing so graphic
  as this book of Mr. Free’s since Jacob A. Riis’s ‘How the other half
  lives.’”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 902. Ap. 8, ‘05. 180w.


=Freeman, Edward Augustus.= Western Europe in the eighth century and
onward. *$3.25. Macmillan.

  The late Professor Freeman left the manuscript of this work in the
  rough, some chapters being merely fragmentary and the editors who are
  first publishing the book, twelve years after the author’s death, can
  give it only in an unfinished form; but it is a welcome addition to a
  period upon which there is little historical light. The period covered
  opens with the rise and fall of the British Constantine and closes
  with Theodoric and Chlodowig. It is put before us with the great
  historian’s usual breadth of view, and accuracy of detail; it is
  learned and even heavy, but it contains many beautiful and vivid
  passages, and is the result of the faithful researches of one who was
  thoroly steeped in the subject and in the times.

  “The volume is plainly meant for the specialist, who will find profit
  in the discussions of the patriciate and donation and in the detailed
  account of Pippin’s campaigns, in spite of the amount of more or less
  relevant comparison and allusion with which the author was in the
  habit of overloading his writings.”

   + + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 913. Jl. ‘05. 450w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 43. Ja. 14. 540w.

  “Excellent as is Freeman’s work, even without his own revision, it is
  unfortunately impossible to say the same of the editing.” E. W.
  Brooks.

     + — =Eng. Hist.= R. 20: 548. Jl. ‘05. 1330w.

  “This book is thoroughly readable, even if all critics may not find it
  thoroughly convincing from beginning to end.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 222. F. 11, ‘05. 420w.

  “The task of editing the MS. has been performed with scrupulous care.
  Its difficulty could hardly be exaggerated, for Mr. Freeman had at
  times only indicated the sources of the references. Our knowledge of
  this period is so meagre that we are grateful for the light thrown on
  it by the researches, unfortunately incomplete, of one who had made
  the subject peculiarly his own.”

     + + =The Westminster Review.= 163: 231. F. ‘05. 180w.


* =Freeman, Mrs. Mary Eleanor (Wilkins).= Debtor. †$1.50. Harper.

  “The ‘Debtor’ preys upon his fellow-men because he has himself been
  ruined in business by a scoundrel, and has not the skill and strength
  to make an honest fight. His amiable, unreasoning wife, who thinks all
  creditors mean and vulgar persons; his worn and disillusioned sister,
  who knows all his faults, but fights for him to save the family; his
  queer little son with impish instincts and inherited traits ... and,
  above all, his innocent and faithful daughter, who really saves her
  father by the intensity and unselfishness of her love—all these are
  real people. So, too, are the creditors.”—Outlook.

  * “As it is the novel seems to lack unity, and in spite of much
  subtlety and fine workmanship the effect is that of a succession of
  disconnected studies of character rather than of a single
  well-proportioned whole.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 396. N. 17, ‘05. 400w.

  * “The first interest of the book lies in its fidelity to the small
  things that make up manners and customs.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 488. D. 14, ‘05. 490w.

  * “One misses the crispness of style that marked ‘Pembroke’ and
  ‘Jerome’; one sometimes finds involved sentences and careless
  phrasing; but the reality, intensity, and force of the novel are
  remarkable.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 709. N. 25. ‘05. 270w.


=Freer, A. Goodrich-.= Inner Jerusalem. *$3. Dutton.

  In telling “what Jerusalem is like” Miss A. Goodrich Freer commands a
  view from the Holy City itself, with her vantage ground right under
  the shadow of the Russian tower. Among other noteworthy facts brought
  out as to life in modern Jerusalem is one which the author presents in
  these words: “While we sing ‘They call us to deliver their land from
  error’s chain,’ let us realize that here we may send out our youngest
  maid, with no further caution than not to get her pocket picked; we
  may take a cab, certain that our driver, unless he be a Christian,
  will not get drunk.” (R. of Rs.) There are many full-page
  illustrations, chiefly from photographs.

  “Has contrived to answer a great many interesting questions regarding
  life in the Holy City, so that the reader rises from the work with a
  sense of having at last learned just what Jerusalem means to its
  widely assorted inhabitants, especially to those who comprise the
  European colonies there. The knowledge displayed in the book is such
  as could have been acquired only by long residence, and is used with
  discrimination and a sympathetic outlook upon the curious
  ramifications of temporal and spiritual power.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 91. F. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  * “She has withal, a very pretty wit, racy descriptive power and a
  clever knack of relating her subject to its graver scientific issues,
  with the sure result that we are both informed and entertained.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 992. O. 26, ‘05. 430w.

  “The style, however, is the same throughout—amusing and light, without
  being irreverent. The book gives a pleasant and entertaining and, in
  spite of its limitations, probably the best available picture of
  actual living conditions in Jerusalem at the present day.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 340. Ap. 27, ‘05. 1380w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 123. Ja. ‘05. 120w.


=French, Anne Warner (Mrs. Charles Ellis French).= Rejuvenation of Aunt
Mary. †$1.50. Little.

  Aunt Mary, “dreadfully deaf and fearfully arbitrary,” is also seventy
  years old, immensely wealthy, and unreasonably devoted to her nephew
  Jack. After getting him out of various scrapes, she becomes
  discouraged and disinherits him. The body of the book is taken up with
  an account of the good time which Jack and his college chums give the
  old lady when she comes to New York on a visit. Knocking about town,
  indulging in late suppers, motorcar spins and other joys prove so
  alluring that she forgives Jack, who promptly marries a beautiful
  young widow, who has played an important part in the story, and Aunt
  Mary goes to New York to live with them and continue to enjoy the
  giddy whirl offered by the metropolis.

  “Considered as a bright and humorous story, this tale is incomparably
  superior to the author’s previous work, ‘Susan Clegg and her friend
  Mrs. Lathrop.’ The general moral atmosphere, especially of the earlier
  part of the story, leaves much to be desired.”

   + + — =Arena.= 35: 556. N. ‘05. 780w.

  * “There is plenty of dialogue in this story, and the plot is lively
  enough to hold the most frivolous spirit.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 800. N. 25, ‘05. 250w.

  * “Clever little comedy.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  “She has only succeeded in producing a broad farce.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 579. N. 4, ‘05. 70w.


=Frenssen, Gustav.= Jorn Uhl; tr. by F. S. Delmer. †$1.50. Estes.

  Jörn Uhl was the youngest son of a drunken brute. His mother died
  neglected, his brothers followed his father’s mode of living and Jörn
  worked the great farm while the others caroused. His career is
  followed in detail as his character unfolds and he dully plods toward
  the light, until at last he comes to be a man of mark.

  “Really is a fine novel and deserves to be taken seriously. The
  present translation is good, but fails, we think, to reach the highest
  excellence.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 588. My. 13. 450w.

  “It is a rich, homely book, seemingly artless in its simple sincerity,
  intensely human in its appeal, touched with poetic feeling that can
  glorify the humblest material, and genuine in the best sense of the
  word.” Wm. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 40. Jl. 16, ‘05. 650w.

  “The translation shows remarkable poetic insight and is faithful
  rather than literal.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1311. Je. 8, ‘05. 280w.

  “Freely offered advice to the reader of Jorn Uhl is to skip the story
  and read the reflections and sermons.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 123. Ag. 10, ‘05. 430w.

  “On the whole not ill translated.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 326. My. 20, ‘05. 430w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “Unusual story. For many chapters the reader is absorbed in quiet but
  intensely vivid pictures full of real poetry and throbbing with
  convincing truth.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 192. My. 20, ‘05. 220w.

  “Is powerful rather than original, deliberately thoughtful and
  carefully wrought rather than striking; ... it is the culmination, not
  the creation, of a genre.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 764. Je. ‘05. 320w.

  “There are tedious passages. There is a want of proportion; there are
  abrupt transitions from tragedy to a somewhat childlike jollity. But
  it is for all its artlessness, an attractive story.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 779. Je. 10, ‘05. 340w.

  “While Mr. Delmer’s translation is in the main workmanlike and
  straightforward, his method of occasionally representing the Low
  German dialect by using Scotch forms is most disconcerting.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 788. My. 27, ‘05. 1150w.


=Friedenwald, Herbert.= Declaration of independence. **$2. Macmillan.

  “Dr. Herbert Friedenwald has written an interpretation and analysis of
  ‘The Declaration of independence.’ As preliminary to his chapters on
  adopting and signing of the declaration its purpose and philosophy,
  Dr. Friedenwald points out the close interrelation between the
  development of the authority and jurisdiction of the Continental
  congress and the evolution of the sentiment for independence. He shows
  that as the authority and jurisdiction of congress were extended it
  adopted various means to further the desire for independence; that the
  highest point of power was reached by the congress on July 4, 1776,
  and that it was never again so powerful as on the day it declared
  independence of England.”—R. of Rs.

  “The independence campaign has never been so carefully studied as in
  this valuable monograph. The book as a whole represents an amount of
  study that gives great credit to the author’s conscientious
  scholarship.” C. H. Van Tyne.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 148. Ja. ‘05. 910w.

  “Very suggestive study.” Winthrop More Daniels.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 550. Ap. ‘05. 700w.

  “An elaborate and careful monograph.” H. E. E.

   + + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 612. Jl. ‘05. 250w.

  “This is the most scholarly study of the Independence campaign that
  has been made. The book is a credit to the author’s conscientious
  scholarship. Written in a rather heavy style.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1423. Je. 22, ‘05. 320w.

  * “A careful and deep study of the evolution of the spirit that
  produced that famous document.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “It is the first attempt to give the general reading public an
  adequate treatment of the period concerned, and within its compass it
  does what has been pressingly needed. Here we have knowledge kept
  within bounds, original authorities sifted and their pith extracted.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 287. O. 5, ‘05. 460w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 30: 761. D. ‘04. 110w.


=Friedlander, M.=, tr. See =Maimonides, Moses.= The guide for the
perplexed.


From servitude to service: the history and * work of Southern
institutions for the education of the negro. *$1.10. Am. Unitar.

  A book for students of Southern educational institutions and their
  problems. There is an outline of the history and work of six of the
  leading Southern institutions engaged in negro education: Howard
  university, Berea college, Tuskegee institute, Hampton institute,
  Atlanta university, and Fisk university.

  * “A book of great interest.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 911. D. 23, ‘05. 760w.


* =Frost, Arthur Burdett.= Book of drawings; with introd. by Joel
Chandler Harris, and verse by Wallace Irwin. $3. Collier-Fox.

  “A new edition of the happy combination of the humor of these men
  already firm in the hearts of their public.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 20w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1376. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.


=Frost, Thomas Gold.= Incorporation and organization of corporations
created under the “Business corporation acts” of all the states and
territories of the United States. *$3.50. Little.

  “A treatise describing and comparing the incorporation laws of the
  various states and territories of the Union. Every step in obtaining a
  charter, incorporating, issuing stock, and going into bankruptcy is
  fully described for every class of corporation and with reference to
  the statutes of every commonwealth. The legislative, judicial, and
  executive powers of the various branches of the federal and state
  governments over corporations are given clearly and succinctly, and
  185 pages are devoted to a synopsis-digest of the incorporation acts
  of the several states and territories.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It teaches the whole important art of incorporation in a very
  satisfactory way, and without an excess of citations.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 443. Je. 1, ‘05. 610w.

  “This digest is remarkable for its careful condensation of the very
  wordy acts into a form available for quick and reliable reference.
  Nothing essential is omitted, and nothing unnecessary is included. As
  a book for the reference of the lawyer and the information of the
  prospective incorporator, we do not know of any work comparable to
  this.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 285. Ap. 29, ‘05. 350w.


=Fuchs, Carl Johannes.= Trade policy of Great Britain and her colonies
since 1860, tr. by Constance H. M. Archibald. *$2.50. Macmillan.

  “An admirable translation by Miss Constance Archibald of the
  well-known work of Prof. Fuchs on the fiscal question.... The drawback
  to the book is that the original was published in 1893, and that the
  figures are out of date.”—Ath.

  “With the exception of a few blemishes, the book is one which it was
  right to translate. The work of translation and editing has been
  admirably performed.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905. 1: 748. Je. 17. 1310w.

  “It is a drawback that the book is not brought up to date; Dr. Fuchs
  has changed his mind at least as to one point since he wrote.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 166. My. 26, ‘05. 670w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 377. Je. 10, ‘05. 320w.

  “We unreservedly welcome this translation of a Freiburg professor’s
  work.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 312. S. 2, ‘05. 1050w.


=Fuller, Anna.= Bookful of girls. †$1.50. Putnam.

  “A half-dozen sketches of as many different types of winsome young
  womanhood—Blythe, enthusiastic and lovable; Madge, the artistic;
  Olivia, the young philanthropist; Polly, capable and devoted sister;
  Di, the dear peacemaker; but best of all, Nannie, who floured her face
  and did Lady Macbeth in a nightgown to an admiring audience of
  one—Miss Becky Crawlin, seamstress, whom she afterward took to a real
  theatre, with many amusing results.”—Outlook.

  “The book is adapted for young girls’ reading and has a wholesome and
  stimulating tone. It should be popular.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 30w.

  “A very rare and pleasing collection of girls are these.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 338. My. 27, ‘05. 430w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 70w.


=Fuller, Robert Higginson.= Golden hope: a story of the time of King
Alexander the Great. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  An accurate picture of the life of the time, with the wars and
  conquests of Alexander as a background. The story follows the
  adventures of Clearthus, a rich young Athenian, in his search for his
  betrothed, Artemesia, who had been taken from him on the eve of their
  wedding, thru the influence of a relative who covets the young Greek’s
  fortune. A Theban and a Spartan accompany him and they become involved
  in Alexander’s campaigns.

  “The characters are conventional, the plot is laboured, and an air of
  unreality hangs about the whole.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 746. Je. 17. 320w.

  “The book ends peacefully, and is one to absorb the attention.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 959. Ap. 27, ‘05. 230w.

  “It is as good as many other historical novels of the day.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 180. Mr. 25, ‘05. 320w.

  “To readers with a predilection for historical fiction this romance of
  Alexander’s wars of conquest will more especially commend itself.
  Others may find it over long and rather too heavily freighted with
  descriptive detail.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 759. Mr. 25, ‘05. 30w.

  “Not without signs of ability and interest.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 20w.


=Fullerton, Edith Loring.= How to make a vegetable garden: a practical
and suggestive manual for the home garden. **$2. Doubleday.

  “The illustrations!—truly, they illustrate—everything from seedlings
  and tools to the aspect of the garden in winter.” (Dial.) “Besides
  being a good picture book, it contains practical and detailed
  directions for making the best use of a small garden from the
  preparation of the soil to the cooking of the vegetables.”—Ind.

  “Mrs. Fullerton’s book is a pleasing record of experience.”

       + =Country Calendar.= 1: 109L. Je. ‘05. 140w.

  “The writer has managed to avoid everything dull and prosy, without
  omitting anything essential.” Edith Granger.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 382. Je. 1, ‘05. 300w.

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1255. Je. 1, ‘05. 120w.

  “A very worthy contribution to the world’s sanity.” Mabel Osgood
  Wright.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 370. Je. 10, ‘05. 600w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 838. Jl. 29, ‘05. 60w.


=Furness, Horace Howard=, ed. See =Shakespeare, Wm.= New variorum
edition of Love’s labour’s lost.


=Fyvie, John.= Women of wit and beauty of the time of George IV. **$3.
Pott.

  The lives of eight famous women are dealt with in this volume: Mrs.
  Fitzherbert; Lady Hamilton; Mrs. Montagu; Lady Blessington; Mrs.
  Lennox; Mrs. Grote; Mrs. Norton; and Lady Eastlake. Excellent
  portraits add much to the interest of this collection of biographies.

  “We must be grateful, however, for Mr. Fyvie’s addition to our
  materials, although we still await the wizard who shall transform them
  into flesh and blood.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 871. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1130w.

  * “As a whole, Mr. Fyvie’s sketches are agreeably and discreetly
  written, but they contain little evidence of original research.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 205. Ag. 12. 350w.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 40w.

  “The biographies are told con amore, the women placed before us with
  firm strokes and careful shading; and the result is wholly pleasing.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 672. O. 14, ‘05. 230w.

  * “In all, Mr. Fyvie, who is indefatigable in research and clever in
  arranging his ‘finds,’ makes the best of his theme.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 229. Ag. 12, ‘05. 420w.




                                   G


=Gallatin, A. E.= Whistler’s art dicta and other essays. $3.50.
Goodspeed.

  A collection of five essays which originally appeared in the
  International studio, the Lamp, the Critic, the Weekly critical review
  of Paris, and the Literary collector. The title essay deals with
  Whistler’s “Gentle art of making enemies,” “Aubrey Beardsley: man of
  letters,” contains a review of his last writings as found in “Under
  the hill, and other essays in prose and verse,” (John Lane). “Notes on
  three hitherto unpublished drawings by Beardsley,” describes three
  unfinished sketches here reproduced, a border design for Mallory’s “Le
  morte d’Arthur.” The closing papers are “Whistler’s realism” and
  “Whistler’s memorial exhibition,” in Boston, February and March, 1904.

  “The volume has little interest but for those already much interested
  in Whistler and his work.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 380. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

         =Dial.= 38: 327. My. 1, ‘05. 50w.

       + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 100. F. ‘05. 300w. (Reviews each
         essay.)

  “The title of this little volume is somewhat misleading, and its price
  out of proportion to its value.”

       — =Int. Studio.= 25: 366. Je. ‘05. 120w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 16. Ja. 7, ‘05. 290w.

  “This exquisite volume will be a valuable keepsake to those who admire
  Whistler. It is remarkable, first, because of its superb print,
  secondly, because of some remarkable facsimiles, and, thirdly, because
  of a criticism which may well be a vade mecum to those who would
  better understand Whistler—to those who have thought him an
  impressionist, for instance.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 400. F. 11, ‘05. 110w.


=Gallizier, Nathan.= Castel del Monte; a romance of the fall of the
Hohenstaufen dynasty in Italy. †$1.50. Page.

  A novel with a most involved and exciting plot which concerns a wicked
  duke and ex-monk, his lovely kinswoman, Lady Helena, and the beautiful
  Francesca whom he has taken from a nunnery. There are witches and
  sorcerers, plots and counterplots, murders and battles. A young
  nobleman, who loves Lady Helena, is again and again entangled by the
  wicked duke and dies in her arms at the tragic close of the story.

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 180. Mr. 25, ‘05. 230w.


* =Ganz, Henry F. W.= Practical hints on painting, composition,
landscape, and etching. *$1. Lippincott.

  This volume “supplies the advice and suggestion, hung on the frame
  work of graded lessons in drawing and painting, that are ordinarily to
  be had only in class.... In twelve preliminary lessons the author sets
  the beginner various tasks in drawing and in painting, with
  representative illustrations.”—Int. Studio.

  * “While perhaps a trifle categorical to the reader, this book should
  prove a convenient walking stick to many who start along the road of
  painting alone.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 28: sup. 22. N. ‘05. 120w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 571. S. 2, ‘05. 250w.


=Ganz, Hugo.= The land of riddles. $2. Harper.

  This book is translated from the German and edited by Herman
  Rosenthal. The author, a German journalist of Vienna, sent his work
  originally to the Austrian newspapers in the form of letters. It gives
  in detail his visit to Russia, the land of riddles, early in 1904, and
  his conversations with men of all classes of social and official life.
  He treats of the war; the political situation; the universities, which
  are “only political camps awaiting the call to arms, and nothing
  more”; the Jewish question, which there seems no hope of solving, and
  the unsteady financial standing of Russia, whose foreign credit is a
  mere bubble. There is a chapter on Ryepin, the great Russian painter,
  the sale of whose paintings is forbidden abroad, and an account of a
  visit to Tolstoy. The book as a whole gives a vivid and unpleasing
  picture of corruption and riddles to which there is at present no
  answer.

  “After reading the introduction, one is apt to get the impression that
  Mr. Ganz went to Russia with a mind receptive, to say the least, to
  ‘horrors,’ and that quite naturally he was horrified. The volume has
  the defects usually inherent to a collection of letters written for
  popular consumption—prolixity. The writer assumes that his readers are
  ignorant of everything east of the Vistula.”

     + — =Boston Evening Transcript.= F. 8, ‘05. 1130w.

  “Toward solving the ‘riddles,’ the author’s guesses imply only average
  insight or acumen, but the book is readable, and the style is
  pleasing.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 170w.

  “There is little in the book that adds to the recent knowledge poured
  forth so profusely concerning that unhappy land. The translation, by
  Mr. Herman Rosenthal, is into excellent English.” Wallace Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 89. F. 1, ‘05. 220w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1073. My. 11, ‘05. 420w.

       + =Nation.= 80: 180. Mr. 2, ‘05. 530w.

  “In its present English dress the book contains, however, much
  additional matter, and some of it valuable. He states throughout the
  truth boldly, as he sees it, and in most cases gives his authority, or
  authorities, for his facts and conclusions.” Wolf von Schierbrand.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 36. Ja. 21, ‘05. 1800w.

  “Mr. Rosenthal’s translation is excellently well done. The style is
  smooth and interesting.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 757. D. ‘04. 310w.


=Gardenhire, Samuel M.= Silence of Mrs. Harrold. $1.50. Harper.

  The author is a New York lawyer and has chosen his home town as the
  setting for his novel. The plot hinges upon a marriage in which both a
  man and a woman promise to ask no questions relative to their
  respective pasts. The compact is kept, but the husband’s jealousy is
  aroused, and finally it develops that “Mrs. Harrold” in her youth had
  eloped with a member of a circus troupe. Her father, following them to
  the man’s home in Austria, kills her husband, whose own father suffers
  imprisonment for the crime, the real murderer being shielded by his
  daughter. There are many complications but the book ends with the
  complete vindication of the silent wife.

  “Had it been half as long, ‘The silence of Mrs. Harrold’ might have
  been twice as good.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 746. Je. 17, 260w.

  “A novel of strong and complex interest.” W. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 391. Je. 1. ‘05. 280w.

  “I am firmly inclined to believe that the new novel of intricate plot
  which Mr. Gardenhire has given us in ‘The silence of Mrs. Harold’ will
  be warmly welcomed and meet with as wide an appreciation as its merit
  deserves. Mr. Gardenhire possesses remarkable constructive ability. He
  knows how to tell a story. The author has handled this question with a
  dignity and justice and fine feeling that will make the book appeal
  strongly to women.” James MacArthur.

     + + =Harpers Weekly.= 49: 131. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1340w.

  “He knows much that is behind the scenes to the general, and yet his
  novel lacks atmosphere. One looks on at a carefully constructed Coney
  Islandish reproduction of New York; one does not feel the throb of
  ‘the mighty heart’ of the living city. The chief defect of the book is
  the one most surely fatal to fiction—it is tedious. The author is
  fluent, ingenious, inventive; but the long and stilted conversations
  ‘get on to our nerves.’ Now and again we applaud, but before the last
  page is reached we are exceedingly weary. In short, the novel is not
  the work of an artist, and so fails to take the reader with it.”

   — — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 92. F. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  “It has rarely been our fate to read more prolix, tiresome, and
  unnatural dialogue than that in this book, while in substance and plot
  the story is valueless.”

     — — =Outlook.= 79: 605. Mr. 4, ‘05. 40w.

  “The book is carefully and easily written.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 215. F. 11, ‘05. 290w.

  “The discovery of relationships, the linking together of scattered and
  seemingly unrelated facts, the many ramifications, show constructive
  skill of a high order. As a study—thorough, logical and strong—of some
  complex, sophisticated aspects of New York life the book will rank
  high.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 620. Ap. ‘05. 520w.


=Gardiner, Ruth Kimball.= Heart of a girl. †$1.50. Barnes.

  A book about a child, but one whose contemplative phase belongs to
  grown-ups. The story traces the workings of a silent, lonely, albeit
  resourceful girl’s heart from childhood thru her High School days. “We
  follow Margery to Margaret, and know we are always with a real girl,
  independent, faulty, sensitive, and generous, imperious among her
  fellows, yet a favorite and a born leader.” (Outlook.)

  “Mrs. Gardiner’s story represents a phase in the psychology of
  childhood to the study of which such writers as Kenneth Grahame,
  George Madden Martin, and Marion Hill have contributed.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 492. Jl. 22, ‘05. 270w.

  “The book is well written, with much sympathy for the little joys and
  sorrows that loom so large in childhood, and for the intense loves,
  ambitions, disappointments, triumphs of the older schoolgirl.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 620. S. 23, ‘05. 650w.

  “The strength of this little story lies in the frequent responses it
  calls up in the mind of the reader, if that reader knows girls.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 279. S. 30, ‘05. 190w.


=Gardner, Percy.= Grammar of Greek art. **$1.75. Macmillan.

  This volume “presents an attempt to set forth the underlying
  conventions of Greek art, and the changes which ... they gradually
  underwent. The mental fashions of the Greek mind in building and
  sculpture and in painting, are presented with a discussion of the
  relation between epic, lyric and dramatic poetry to painting and vase
  decoration. An informing chapter is devoted to the subject of dress
  and drapery.... Such sculptural problems as the decoration of
  pediments are carefully analyzed. Interesting light is thrown upon the
  formation of sculptural types and the Greek tendency to
  impressionalism.... Illustrations in outline and half tone are
  sufficiently plentiful to point in every case the discussion and
  argument.”—Int. Studio.

  “Dr. Gardner’s book, though brief, covers a wide range, and is rich in
  illustration; but we could wish that the beauty of the originals had
  been better rendered, even at a sacrifice of number.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 660. Je. 24, ‘05. 540w.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10:938. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “In all his treatment is suggestive, not exhaustive. Information he
  supplies, but his aim is rather to teach how to understand. The
  English style leaves something to be desired.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 184. Ag. 5. 1080w.

  “A valuable volume whose only fault is that it fails as an attempt to
  provide an elementary study of the subject, and presupposes
  considerable classical training on the part of the reader.”

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 92. Ag. 16, ‘05. 330w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1424. Je. 22, ‘05. 320w.

  “Dr. Gardner’s book is one which should be helpful and attractive to
  all who are familiar with its general subject, and who go to it for
  illumination and suggestion, with the proper equipment of familiarity
  with forms not to be had in a mere perusal or study of books.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 88. Je. ‘05. 260w.

  * “A handbook that will probably be found very useful by teachers in
  schools.”

       + =Int. Studio=, 27: 184. D. ‘05. 180w.

  “Simplicity is one of the most marked characteristics of the style of
  the whole book. The principle underlying the treatment is sound.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 416. My. 25, ‘05. 1710w.

  “It offers an intelligent and practically unerring method for the
  judgment of the art of Hellas.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 431. Jl. 1, ‘05. 230w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 324. S. 2, ‘05. 330w.


* =Gardner, William.= Life of Stephen A. Douglas. $1.50. Eastern pub.

  A brief biography compiled mainly from original sources and intended
  by the author as a dispassionate study. It is a history of the career
  of Douglas rather than an intimate life story. A detailed account of
  his work presents him as lawyer, judge, and politician, but while what
  the man has done is faithfully given there is little of the man
  himself. The author announces in his preface that he has “not
  attempted to pronounce judgment on Douglas and his contemporaries but
  to submit the evidence,” this and this only has he done. The volume
  has no index.

  * “Mr. Gardner has done something toward solving the Douglas riddle.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 891. D. 16, ‘05. 460w.


=Garis, Howard R.= Isle of black fire. $1.50. Lippincott.

  This is a boy’s book of adventure. A New York merchant sends out an
  expedition to an uncharted island where a great lump of radium
  supposedly worth fifty-five million dollars, is guarded by priests in
  asbestos robes, who worship it and offer up passing strangers in
  sacrifice to the “black fire.” There are stirring scenes in which two
  thousand savages are mowed down by the ship’s guns, and barbaric games
  and combats, which celebrate the coming of an office boy, George the
  Fat, as king of the savage kingdom. A comic Irishman relieves the
  tense situations.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 69. F. 4, ‘05. 310w. (Gives plot.)


=Garland, Hamlin.= Tyranny of the dark. †$1.50. Harper.

  A western girl, beautiful and endowed with uncanny psychic powers,
  struggles between love and hypnotism; the first, represented by a
  young chemist and biologist, the second, by a clergyman. The story
  passes thru death and excitement to a happy ending.

  “Pleasing and interesting as is the romance considered merely as a
  novel, its supreme excellence lies in its detailed presentation of
  certain psychical phenomena.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 206. Ag. ‘05. 8100w.

  “It is a good and interesting tale.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 685. Je. 3. 330w.

  “It is very delicate and exacting material that Mr. Garland has chosen
  for his latest novel, and very crudely has he handled it.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 70w.

  “With all his exposition, Mr. Garland does not make clear his own view
  of spiritualism, and, by closing the story where he does, he evades
  the most difficult of the problems which he raises.” Herbert W.
  Horwill.

     + — =Forum.= 37: 113. Jl. ‘05. 310w.

       — =Ind.= 59: 575. S. 7, ‘05. 200w.

  “The scientific portions of the book are the finest and the most
  absorbing.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 122. Ag. 10, ‘05. 470w.

  “Regarded as fiction simply ‘The tyranny of the dark’ is too much
  encumbered with laborious arguments and citations. Has told his story
  well.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 343. My. 27, ‘05. 530w.

  “Four characters outlined with vigor. A book of more than ordinary
  power to hold the reader.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 248. My. 27, ‘05. 60w.

  “The story is an interesting one; in places it grips you. But,
  compared to some of Mr. Garland’s earlier writings, it must be said
  regretfully that the book is a disappointing piece of work.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 330w.

         =Reader.= 6: 105. Je. ‘05. 280w.

  “It is based on a theme of absorbing interest and it is exceedingly
  well written.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 357. Ag. ‘05. 290w.

  “That the story ... lacks genuine literary attractiveness or
  convincingness on its supernatural side, it would be absurd to deny.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 763. Je. ‘05. 130w.


=Garnett, Richard.= William Shakespeare, pedagogue and poacher: a drama.
$1.25. Lane.

  This play, written apparently for study and not dramatic presentation,
  deals with Shakespeare’s traditional roles of school teacher and
  poacher. It is necessarily unsatisfactory to Shakespeare lovers and
  students, who find that his character as here portrayed falls short of
  the man as shown to us in his works, and the words which Mr. Garnett
  puts into his mouth, while perhaps Shakespearean, are obviously not
  Shakespeare.

       — =Critic.= 46: 192. F. ‘05. 310w.

  “Among the most ingenious and successful experiments upon this
  baffling theme [attempt to portray Shakespeare as he lived and moved
  among his fellows] must surely be reckoned the little two-act drama of
  Dr. Garnett.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 46. Ja. 16, ‘05. 880w.

  “While Dr. Garnett’s play is equally open to the charge of being a
  subject dressed in poetry, rather than poetry incarnate in a fit
  subject, it is a remarkably readable and pleasant little book.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 73. Ja. 26, ‘05. 380w.

  “Dr. Garnett’s respect for the great Elizabethan is not to be doubted,
  but his drama lends to it no emphasis. It contains agreeable lines,
  but it is not interesting in development, nor is there any reality in
  the general effect. Moreover, the figure of Shakespeare is trivial and
  his speech frequently is elaborate and dull. In no respect is he
  realized with the distinction and art demanded by a subject so far
  from the ordinary.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 83. F. 11, ‘05. 480w.

  “It is all work at a high level, and the way in which the characters
  are made to speak in lines which are echoes of the later Shakespeare
  is extremely skilful. There is a humour, too, in many of the scenes,
  and much accomplished verse. But it is rather a chapter of Mr. Sidney
  Lee’s Life turned into dialogue than a substantive drama.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 114. Ja. 28, ‘05. 60w.


=Garrison, William Lloyd.= Words of Garrison. **$1.25. Houghton.

  The hundredth anniversary of the birth of William Lloyd Garrison
  occurs in December, and to commemorate it there appears a small volume
  of characteristic sentiments from his writings dedicated “to all who
  hate cruelty, oppression, and war, and believe in the equal rights and
  perfectibility of mankind.”

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 797. D. 9. 560w.

  * “Interesting and really valuable little volume.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 391. D. 1, ‘05. 70w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 240. S. 21, ‘05. 200w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 756. D. ‘05. 50w.


=Gaspe, Philippe Aubert de.= Cameron of Lochiel; tr. by Charles G. D.
Roberts. †$1.50. Page.

  What Gaspé did in his Canadian narrative of the early sixties was “to
  gather up,” says Mr. Roberts, “and preserve in lasting form the songs
  and legends, the characteristic customs, the phases of thought and
  feeling, the very local and personal aroma of the rapidly changing
  civilization.” The story turns to the days of the last struggle of the
  English and the French, and tells the life history of two young men, a
  Scot and a Frenchman, both of whom were educated at the Jesuits’
  college in Quebec, and later fought against each other on the plains
  of Abraham.

  “He makes on the whole a very satisfactory translator.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 482. Jl. 22, ‘05. 590w.


=Gasquet, Rt. Rev. Francis A.= Henry the third and the church. *$4.
Macmillan.

  “A careful study of the relations between England and Rome, from the
  submission of John to the Papal see on Ascension day, 1213, to the
  close of his son’s reign. It is written with no desire to defend the
  Papacy from the charges which were made even by the faithful at the
  time, and it may fairly claim to represent an unbiased survey of the
  evidence. The author’s principle has been to let the original
  documents speak for themselves.” Lond. Times.

  “A trustworthy contribution to the story of this long reign on the
  very points upon which most historians are either silent or
  provokingly brief.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 102. Jl. 22. 2590w.

  “It is somewhat dull and colorless. His conclusions, as it seems to
  us, are sound, if not novel. His book will be indispensable to the
  student of the reign of Henry III.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 243. Jl. 28, ‘05. 640w.

  * “The high literary merit and abundant learning of this investigation
  into the relationship between Rome and England in the thirteenth
  century are all that we might expect.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: sup. 787. N. 18, ‘05. 2020w.


=Gass, Patrick.= Gass’s journal of the Lewis and Clark expedition, ed.
by Jas. K. Hosmer. *$3.50. McClurg.

  Dr. Hosmer, who contributed to the centennial interest in the Lewis
  and Clark expedition thru his “Story of the Louisiana purchase,” has
  added further to the commemoration in the present work. The original
  jottings of Patrick Gass being no longer extant, nothing of them could
  be included in Thwaites’ recent “Original journals of the Lewis and
  Clark expedition,” but the chronicles trimmed and shaped by David
  McKeehan, under the supervision of Gass, are of so great importance
  that the re-issue after sixty years is well warranted. A full
  introduction leads up to the records, and a time-saving analytical key
  follows the text. The volume is uniform in style with other volumes of
  McClurg’s “Americana,” with reproductions of the original
  illustrations.

  “Dr. Hosmer has confined his editorial work to supplying an
  introduction. The volume contains no new contribution, nor does it
  make the journal of Gass much more valuable as a source. The
  introduction, in an easy though sometimes rather personal style,
  always with a view to the picturesque, is a convenient summary of the
  results of recent research.”

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 450. Ja. ‘05. 510w.

  “This excellent reprint.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 131. Ja. ‘05. 90w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 191. F. ‘05. 80w.


* =Gates, Errett.= Disciples of Christ, **$1. Baker.

  As one of “The story of the churches” series, this volume takes up the
  origin, development, and history of the denomination called The
  disciples of Christ, beginning with the withdrawal of Thomas Campbell
  from the Seceder Presbyterian church in Western Pennsylvania 1809,
  thru the time of union with the Baptists, the later separation of the
  Reformers from the Baptists, the union of the Reformers as Disciples
  of Christ, their growth and organization down to the present time.
  There are chapters upon Evangelism, journalism, education and church
  growth, and Recent tendencies and problems; there is also a
  bibliography and an index.


* =Gates, Josephine Scribner.= Story of the three dolls. $1.25. Bobbs.

  A group of stories for little people including the story of the gold
  beads which were lost and found on the dog’s neck, the story of the
  candy heart, which was devoured “lick by lick” by two little girls,
  and various anecdotes of dogs, birds, horses and fish, “which are
  absolutely true,” says the author.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 450. D. 16, ‘05. 50w.


=Gautier, Theophile.= Russia, by Theophile Gautier, and by other
distinguished French travelers and writers of note; tr. from the French,
with an additional chapter upon the struggle for supremacy in the Far
East, by Florence MacIntyre Tyson. 2v. **$5. Winston.

  The entire first volume and one-fourth of the second, treating of the
  empire of the czars from the beginning to the most recent times, are
  by Gautier, while separate papers by other well known French writers
  complete the work. These include: The mir, by Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu;
  The press and censorship, by Gustave Lejeal; The Russian army and
  navy, by Désiré Lacroix; Religion and sects, by Gustave Lejeal;
  Literature, by L. Lejar; Russian art, by Marius Vachon; Siberia, by
  Jules Legras; and others. Fifty photogravures illustrate the volumes.

  * “As literature, and as a mine of information, these volumes call for
  special notice.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 659. D. ‘05. 360w.

  * “There is much interesting information and picturesque writing in
  these volumes.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 20w.

  * “The translation ... is mechanical, but on the whole fairly
  satisfactory.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 447. D. 16, ‘05. 170w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1380. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.


=Gavit, Helen E.= Etiquette of correspondence. *50c. Wessels.

  A thoroly modern compendium, being, as the sub-title states,
  illustrations and suggestions as to the proper forms in present usage
  of social, club, diplomatic, military, and business letters, with
  information on heraldic devices, monograms, and engraved addresses.

  “Is the best of its kind.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 157. Mr. 11, ‘05. 960w.

  “An excellent compendium, covering everything that pertains to the
  subject.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 652. Mr. 11, ‘05. 30w.


=Gaye, R. K.= Platonic conception of immortality and its connection with
the theory of ideas. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  “Mr. Gaye’s object in this book is to investigate the connection
  between the theory of ideas and the theory of the immortality of the
  soul as held by Plato, and in this way to make clear the nature of
  Plato’s conception of immortality and to determine in what sense he
  believed in the continued existence of the individual soul: this
  subject has involved the consideration of the Platonic conception of
  the soul and of the relation of soul and body.”—Int. J. Ethics.

  “Yet, whatever we may think of his assumptions, Mr. Gaye’s essay shows
  decided ability, and is written in a good, clear style.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 429. Ap. 8. 600w.

         =Bookm.= 21: 519. Jl. ‘05. 580w.

  “The main criticism of the book, however, is that though it makes its
  points clearly and is for that reason of considerable value for all
  students of Plato, it has failed to establish satisfactorily that the
  interpretation of Plato which it adopts is the only possible
  interpretation or that Plato was really influenced by the difficulties
  and arguments by which Mr. Gaye assumes him to have been influenced.”
  A. R. Ainsworth.

     + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 381. Ap. ‘05. 1500w.

  “It is lucidly written and scholarly, but not remarkable for novelty
  and originality.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 106. Ag. 3, ‘05. 310w.

  Reviewed by Paul Shorey.

     + — =Philos. R.= 14: 590. S. ‘05. 1950w.

  “Deals in a clear and diligent manner with points in Plato’s doctrine
  of immortality, and reflects ... with somewhat over-exclusiveness the
  views of the great gods of Trinity.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 742. Je. 3, ‘05. 40w.


=Gayley, Charles Mills, and Young, Clement C.= Principles and progress
of English poetry. $1.10. Macmillan.

  “Profs. Charles Mills Gayley and Clement C. Young, in their volume on
  ‘The principles and progress of English poetry, with representative
  masterpieces and notes,’ have attempted to show through extracts and
  by a scientific study of rhythm, melody and movement as well as by
  historical analysis, how English poetry has developed, and how it has
  been touched by external and internal influences since the days of
  Chaucer down to those of Tennyson. Each chapter has a separate
  introduction descriptive of the school to which the poems included in
  it are supposed to belong.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Merits the attention both of the studious reader of poetry, and of
  the mechanician in verse—particularly of the youthful apprentice in
  the art of poesy.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 187. Ag. ‘05. 150w.

  “With Professor Gayley’s artistic theory we cannot always agree. It
  has the great advantage of putting a large amount of poetic phenomena
  into shape for the student’s use.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 260. Ag. 3, ‘05. 200w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 41. Ja. 21, ‘05. 310w. (Outlines scope.)

  “There is a preface ... devoted to the principles of poetry—a valuable
  book in itself.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 274*. Mr. ‘05. 140w.


=Geddie, John.= Romantic Edinburgh. $2.50. Dutton.

  A reissue, without revisions, of a suggestive guide to the study of
  the landmarks of Old Edinburgh.

         =Nation.= 81: 198. S. 7, ‘05. 60w.

  “A map is needed—a map or plan, such as Baedeker prints in his guide
  books. That, and either no photographs or better ones, would make Mr.
  Geddie’s a well-nigh perfect hand book to Auld Reekie.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 576. S. 2, ‘05. 1120w.


=Geere, H. Valentine.= By Nile and Euphrates. $3.50. Scribner.

  A book of both discovery and adventure. The author, at Professor
  Flinders Petrie’s request, was given an appointment on the staff of
  the expedition which was sent out to Mesapotamia by the University of
  Pennsylvania in 1895 to continue the excavation of the ruins of
  Nippur. He writes of “unsettled, poverty-stricken and neglected
  Mesapotamia, and well-ordered, flourishing Egypt,” and gives detailed
  accounts of the work of investigation carried on at Behnesch, Nippur
  and Babylon.

  “So far as we know, there is no other book which paints so vividly the
  camp of the excavator, or sketches the scenery and life of the Nile
  and Euphrates valleys, as the one before us.” George L. Robinson.

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 235. S. ‘05. 950w.

  Reviewed by Wallace Rice.

         =Dial.= 38: 90. F. 1, ‘05. 310w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 38. Ja. 21, ‘05. 450w.

  “Mr. Geere writes in a pleasant, lucid style, which rises almost into
  eloquence when he describes the evening at Mohammerah when the charms
  of the East first stole upon him.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 119. Ja. 28. ‘05. 430w.


=Geffroy, Gustave.= National gallery (London); with an introd. by Sir
Walter Armstrong. ¼ vel. *$10. Warne.

  “The author has treated his subject by subdivision into schools
  corresponding to the arrangement of the pictures on the walls (an
  arrangement quite unsurpassed in excellence in any public gallery).
  The English, Italian, Flemish, Dutch, German, Spanish, and French
  schools are all covered both in the charmingly written text, and the
  profuse illustrations.”—Int. Studio.

  * “One of the most elaborate, as well as one of the most
  authoritative, art books of the season. His style is often brilliant,
  and always clear and definite.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 442. D. 16, ‘05. 420w.

  “M. Gustave Geffroy’s essays are one and all marked by the keen
  insight into peculiarities of the style that distinguish him; and they
  have about them a freshness and originality that is, alas, daily
  becoming more rare.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 25: 81. Mr. ‘05. 120w.

  “The work is a magnificent one—one which makes us feel grateful to
  author and publisher.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 14. Mr. ‘05. 450w.

  * “Great pains have been taken with the mechanical perfection of the
  reproductions, and the work ranks well.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “Unfortunately, many of the photogravures are but mediocre, and most
  of the process cuts are wretched, so that what should have been a
  feast of art is little more than an aid to memory.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 150w.

  * “The text is discriminating as well as informative.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 130w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 115. Ja. 28, ‘05. 200w.


=Geikie, Sir Archibald.= Landscape in history, and other essays. *$2.75.
Macmillan.

  “Ten essays and addresses.... Half of them deal with scenery in its
  geological relations and in its influence on human progress.... They
  are entitled ‘Landscape in history,’ ‘Landscape and the imagination,’
  ‘Landscape and literature,’ ‘The origin of the scenery of the British
  islands,’ and ‘The centenary of Hutton’s Theory of the earth.’ The
  others discuss the problem of the age of the earth, ‘Geological time’;
  two are biographical, ‘The life and letters of Charles Darwin’ and
  ‘Hugh Miller: his work and influence’; one deals with the place of
  science in modern education, and the book closes with a paper on the
  Roman campagna.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Sir Archibald Geikie in those thoughtful essays has done something
  toward elucidating the dependence of man’s intellectual achievement on
  his physical environment.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 193. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1450w.

  “A charming contribution to the literature of his favorite science.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 504. Ap. 15. 980w.

  “These essays are very charming, written with great clearness and
  distinction.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 989. O. 26, ‘05. 270w.

  * “The essays are popular, rather than technical; and there is very
  little in them beyond the reach of the average educated man.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 167. Ag. 24, ‘05. 3030w.

  “A most readable book, the several parts of which hang well together.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 577. Ap. 20, ‘05. 1560w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 164. Mr. 18, ‘05. 160w. (Outline of
         contents).

  “Charming style in which this volume of varied essays is written.
  Altogether this volume is stimulating and enlightening, a distinct
  contribution to the literature of science.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 857. Ap. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  “It is the interweaving of history, mythology, and imagination with
  the dry light of scientific fact that constitutes the particular
  fascination of this book.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 312. S. 2, ‘05. 1010w.

  “This is a very entertaining and useful field of research, in which we
  could desire no better guide than Sir Archibald Geikie.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 677. My. 6, ‘05. 650w.


=Geikie, James.= Structural and field geology for students of pure and
applied science. *$4. Van Nostrand.

  Addressed primarily to beginners in field geology, this handbook is
  intended also for students preparing to be mining or civil engineers,
  architects, agriculturists, or public health officers, to whom some
  knowledge of structural geology is important. It covers the course
  gone over in the summer course of geology in the University of
  Edinburgh, a course instituted to give students a further knowledge of
  practical geology than could be presented in the winter courses. There
  are numerous illustrations and full-page plates.

  “Written with the knowledge and authority of a professor of wide
  experience, the work is likely to be of much use far beyond the range
  of University classes. Perhaps the most valuable part of Prof.
  Geikie’s work is that devoted to geological surveying.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 183. Ag. 5. 430w.

  * “The work is excellent in plan, in presentation. It will be very
  helpful, not only to beginners, but to those who have been well
  trained in the science of geology.” N. S. Shaler.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 54: 529. N. 16, ‘05. 1250w.

  “A very useful handbook, admirable in the freshness and terseness of
  its descriptions, and the clearness and abundance of its
  illustrations.”

     + + =Nature.= 72: 223. Jl. 6, ‘05. 1620w.

  * “A full and well-considered hand-book for use in the sober work of
  geological surveying or economic investigation, in a country like
  Scotland, where there are no active volcanoes, earthquakes or
  glaciers.” B. K. Emerson.

   + + — =Science=, n.s. 22: 628. N. 17, ‘05. 970w.


Genealogical records, $1. W. G. DeWitt, 201 E. 12th St., N. Y.

  A book of blanks for those who wish to record their family history in
  systematic form. The spaces for names, notes, dates, and index are
  indicated, and when filled out will constitute a neat and handy volume
  for genealogical reference.


=Genung, John Franklin.= Ecclesiastes. **$1.25. Houghton.

  A philosophical rather than a critical study. “The author, together
  with most modern students of the book, rightly discards the word
  ‘Ecclesiastes,’ the Greek translation of ‘Koheleth,’ in the first
  place because it is almost certainly an incorrect translation, and, in
  the second place, as the author appropriately observes, because it
  ‘entitles what is of all Scripture books the least ecclesiastical.’”
  (Bib. World.) “He dwells but slightly on the historical background,
  and then introduces us to the theory that Koheleth was a reaction
  against the immortality doctrine, recently adopted from the Greeks and
  pushed into prominence by the Pharisees. The preacher contends against
  living for a vague futurity, and insists upon living this present life
  to its utmost.” (Cath. World).

  “Genung’s thesis is admirably set forth and strongly buttressed by
  references to modern literature. But the impression remains that he
  has rather read into Koheleth a view which one would like to discover
  there, than revealed the actual nature of the book itself.”

     + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 168. Ja. ‘05. 530w.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 703. My. ‘05. 480w.

  “To a full two hundred pages of discussion the author has added a new
  translation and a running commentary. Both are excellent, but the
  latter especially ripples along in clear, crisp sentences that show
  how much a deft literary touch may do even for a commentary. In fact,
  the book as a whole exhibits in language and treatment the author’s
  nice literary taste. In the opinion of the present writer, Professor
  Genung is not at his best when he discusses, or rather makes fun of,
  Siegfried’s analysis of Koheleth. Satire is not convincing. The
  reviewer also feels impelled to enter a non liquet against Professor
  Genung’s contention that Koheleth represents a reaction against
  contemporary views of immortality. The solid merit of the serious and
  painstaking work that has gone into the book will win for it an
  honored place on many shelves.” William Frederic Badé.

   + + — =Bib. World.= 25: 311. Ap. ‘05. 940w.

  “Mr. Genung would have done far better to have examined the book
  without a philosophical theory as to its nature, but with a critical
  openness of mind for straightforward evidence. Still, in the
  introductory portion of the volume, and in the exegetical notes
  accompanying the translation, there are useful suggestions.”

     + — =Cath. World.= 80: 546. Ja. ‘05. 390w.

  “His discussion reveals a well-balanced sense of the literary and
  spiritual values that are to be found in Koheleth.” Ira M. Price.

     + + =Dial= 38: 45. Ja. 16, ‘05. 230w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1368. Je. 15, ‘05. 120w.

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 190. Ja. 21, ‘05. 710w.


=George, Hereford B.=, ed. See =Thiers, Adolphe.=


=Gerard, Dorothea (Mme. Longard de Longarde).= Sawdust: a Polish romance
of the Carpathian timberlands. $1. Winston.

  Self made, a lover of work for work’s sake, Josef Mayer, has at last
  achieved success and erected a saw-mill in the Polish Carpathians,
  having beggared Count Rutkowski and secured his timber lands in a
  shrewd business deal. Then comes a pretty romance between the count’s
  daughter and Meyer’s son, which is opposed more strenuously by the
  peasant than by the nobleman, but which ends satisfactorily in the
  loss of the Meyer fortune. Royalty, the village folk and the
  disaffected Jews figure in the story.

  “There is also a certain delicacy in the treatment of the love scenes
  and fidelity to truth in the descriptions of natural scenery that give
  the story a charm not present in most present-day novels.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 552. N. ‘05. 160w.

  “There is, moreover, much skill displayed in the delineation of
  character and situations alike, and the writer is thoroughly familiar
  with her material.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 207. O. 1, ‘05. 320w.

  “The story is told naturally and carefully.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 101. Ag. 3, ‘05. 370w.

  “It is full of freshness and originality.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 455. Jl. 8, ‘05. 480w.

  “A charming combination of capital and labor, with an absorbing
  love-plot, is ‘Sawdust’.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 383. S. 16, ‘05. 190w.


=Gerson, Virginia.= More adventures of the happy Heart family. $1. Fox.

  Another book for the very young in which little mother Heart, papa
  Goodheart, and the little Hearties all appear, also the Jolly-jumpers
  and the Valentines, who were “a very elegant family because their
  grandfather was a saint, so Mrs. Fancy Valentine always wore white
  lace.” Quaint drawings illustrate the volume.

  * “Another one of those delightful children’s books which the
  grown-ups like as much as the little people.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 795. N. 25, ‘05. 290w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 767. D. ‘05. 60w.


=Gettemy, Charles Ferris.= True story of Paul Revere. **$1.50. Little.

  A short biography of the American patriot whom Longfellow’s poem saved
  from historical oblivion. His midnight ride is told in his own words,
  and he appears as a patriotic engraver and dentist as well as public
  messenger, soldier, and juror. Both Revere and the historical events
  in which he played a part lose in romance but gain much in reality by
  this accurate account. Original documents are quoted and Revere’s
  copper-plate engravings are fully described.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 90w.

  “The book shows scholarly work, and is of value historically apart
  from its narrative of Paul Revere.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 580. N. 4, ‘05. 70w.

  * “The real value of the book lies in the light which it throws on
  local Revolutionary history, and especially on the alliance with
  France and the adoption of the Constitution.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 756. D. ‘05. 80w.


=Ghent, W. J.= Mass and class. $1.25. Macmillan.

  “Mr. W. J. Ghent, author of ‘Our benevolent feudalism,’ has written
  ‘Mass and class: a survey of social divisions.’ In his present work,
  Mr. Ghent seeks to analyze the social mass into its component classes;
  to describe these classes, not as they may be imagined in some
  projected benevolent feudalism, but as they are to be found here and
  now in the industrial life of the nation; and to indicate the current
  of social progress which, in spite of the blindness of the workers,
  the rapacity of the masters, and the subservience of the retainers,
  makes ever for an ultimate of social justice.”—R. of Rs.

  “Brilliant arraignment of modern society.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 129. Ja. ‘05. 120w.

  Reviewed by Owen R. Lovejoy.

         =Current Literature.= 38: 309. Ap. ‘05. 2180w. (Abstract of
         book.)

  Reviewed by Charles Richmond Henderson.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 155. Mr. 1, ‘05. 140w.

  “The one criticism offered concerns a fundamental point—Mr. Ghent’s
  failure to grasp the full meaning of the doctrine of economic
  interpretation on which he professes to base his whole discussion.”
  Wesley C. Mitchell.

   — + + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 281. Mr. ‘05. 2290w.

  * “Probably most psychologists would attach more importance to the
  part played by ideals than the author does, but in tracing back our
  present conditions of war between labor and capital to a play of
  motives that were the direct result of the rapid economic development
  of our country, he is fundamentally correct. The book is to be
  criticised in this respect as being too schematic, as not going
  sufficiently into detail to be at all satisfactory to one’s historical
  sense.” Amy E. Tanner.

     + — =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 413. D. 15, ‘05. 790w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 760. D. ‘04. 100w.

     + + =Yale R.= 14: 106. My. ‘05. 270w.


=Ghosh, Sarath Kumar.= Verdict of the gods. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “With prologue, epilogue, and interludes between the great king, sick
  unto death, and his faithful chronicler beguiling the painful hours,
  this Oriental romance details the ordeals—a horrid half-dozen,
  including burial alive, exposure to wild beasts, and the poison cup—to
  which Navayan Lal was put for daring to love the Princess Devala.
  Great bravery and a canny knowledge of hypnotism and other mysteries
  occult carry him through in safety.”—Outlook.

  “Its lucid English style and its fascinating plot. For all these
  trifling cavils, ‘The verdict of the gods’ must rank as a novel of
  unusual interest.” Louis H. Gray.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 310. My. ‘05. 1530w.

         =Ind.= 59: 575. S. 7, ‘05. 110w.

  “Can be recommended as an antidote for ennui in several of its forms.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 570. S. 2, ‘05. 740w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 910. Ap. 8. ‘05. 110w.

  “Here are more ‘Arabian nights,’ murmurous, beguiling, enchanting in
  their beauty and strangeness.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 595. O. ‘05. 220w.


=Gibbons, Alfred St. Hill.= Africa from south to north through
Marotseland. **$7.50. Lane.

  The account of a thoro exploration of Marotseland, made in 1898 by an
  experienced African traveler. The objects of the expedition were to
  fix a British boundary line; to determine the Congo-Zambesi watershed;
  to discover the real source of the Zambesi; and to make such surveys
  and general investigations as should determine the best place for the
  Rhodesian railway company to push its line across the river. The
  account is interesting and valuable, the more so because the Cape to
  Cairo railway, soon to be completed, will make it possible for the
  tourist to cover this same ground. Native life and conditions, present
  government and economic possibilities are treated in detail.

  “Is written in a charming style, simple, direct and convincing. Quite
  apart from its interest and special worth to the Englishman, is its
  value on account of the new and interesting geographical information
  it contains. Is one of the most important works of travel of recent
  years.”

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 561. My. ‘05. 790w.

  “There are at least half a dozen reasons why it should be welcome and
  why it will take a permanent place among the standard books on African
  exploration. The best authority in print today concerning the country.
  There is much detail in the book. Still it is all very readable.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 499. Mr. 2, ‘05. 670w.


=Gibbons, Hughes Oliphant.= History of old Pine street; being the record
of an hundred and forty years in the life of a colonial church. Winston.

  “Pine Street church in Philadelphia, the third Presbyterian church
  founded in that city, is the only one dating from colonial times still
  on its original site. In the churchyard some three thousand lie
  interred, including many Revolutionary officers and soldiers. It has
  been served by a succession of remarkably able ministers....
  Originally in a fashionable center, now in a slum neighborhood ... it
  remains there, consecrated by its history and pledged by its endowment
  to a perpetuity of service in its changed environment. This handsome
  and finely illustrated volume is a worthy memorial of seven
  generations to many more to come.”—Outlook.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 587. S. 9, ‘05. 520w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 135. S. 16, ‘05. 170w.


=Gibbs, Philip.= Facts and ideas. $1.25. Longmans.

  Short studies of life and literature, which have appeared in various
  weekly newspapers. There is a brief treatment of a great many
  subjects, including the French revolution, and the Transvaal war.

  “The book aspires to be a sort of elementary substitute for liberal
  education—a university extension course on things one should know.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 333. My. 20, ‘05. 270w.

  “We think that occasionally, in his desire to point a moral, Mr. Gibbs
  exaggerates. The writer does not go to the heart of his subject.”

       — =Spec.= 94: 293. F. 25, ‘05. 340w.


* =Gibson, Charles.= Among French inns: the story of a pilgrimage to
characteristic spots of rural France. **$1.60. Page.

  “Most daintily attired, all gray and silvery and splendidly pictured,
  comes ‘Among French inns’ ... with ... an automobile, an indulgent
  American papa, a managing American mamma, a double love match, and an
  enviable collection of French, English, and Italian types. Moreover,
  there is real information about the inns, their table d’hotes, their
  relative expensiveness and inexpensiveness, and a plenty of historical
  data.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “He defaces almost every page of his book by his badly chosen
  vocabulary, or his disregard for the rules of English syntax.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 444. D. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  * “This new book may well deserve that quaintly descriptive old word
  ‘fetching.’”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 460. D. 2, ‘05. 500w.


* =Gibson, Charles Dana.= Our neighbors. **$4.20. Scribner.

  The present collection, which it is announced, contains Mr. Gibson’s
  last work in black and white, “is uniform in size, shape, and binding
  with the nine volumes which have preceded it. It is entitled ‘Our
  neighbors,’ a phrase generally interpreted to mean all sorts and
  conditions of men and women. The Gibson Girl is charmingly portrayed,
  as well as the Gibson Man, the Gibson Dowager, and the Gibson Old
  Gentleman. There are also the street types ... and cartoons.” (Dial.)

  * “Perhaps Mr. Gibson has done his best in black-and-white; at least
  he will have to do something very good indeed to surpass the general
  level of ‘Our neighbors.’”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 382. D. 1, ‘05. 260w.

  * “Whatever else may be said of Gibson and his work, certain it is
  that he makes you see what he sets out to show you, and he does it
  pleasantly and with a deal of humor.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1379. D. 14, ‘05. 170w.

  * “He leaves us quite at his best, and his humor has never been keener
  or his technical ability more astonishing than in the present
  collection.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 150w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 50w.

  * “The artist is as fresh and interesting as ever.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: sup. 793. N. 18, ‘05. 110w.


=Gibson, William Hamilton.= Our native orchids. **$1.35. Doubleday.

  Mr. Gibson had only begun to record his observations on orchids of the
  Northwestern United States at the time of his death. Mrs. Jelliffe has
  supplemented his portfolio of sketches and scattering notes with her
  own results of study, and has produced an orchid handbook of
  particular value to the amateur botanist, which practically includes
  all the sixty species of our native orchids, giving keys,
  descriptions, illustrations and notes.

  “This is a book which supplies a want long felt by the amateur
  botanist, and we give it a cordial welcome.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 46. Jl. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “A volume, unassuming though it is, of substantial value and
  interest.” Edith Granger.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 109. S. 1, ‘05. 440w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 271. Ag. 3, ‘05. 50w.

  “Satisfactory and intelligible volume.” Mabel Osgood Wright.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 477. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1680w.


=Gide, Charles.= Principles of political economy; second American ed.;
tr. by C. Wm. A. Veditz. $2. Heath.

  The eight editions through which the original French “Principes
  d’economie politique” has gone, mark a succession of changes in
  certain sections of the book, but leave the fundamental purpose the
  same,—that of giving to the reader “a plain statement of the accepted
  principles of economics, a summary of the unsettled problems of the
  science, and a clear, brief, and impartial outline of the various
  solutions that have been proposed. The author is almost as felicitous
  in presenting a subject that in the hands of most scholars is
  extremely dull as was Henry George. This work has been brought down to
  the latest date and evidently no pains have been spared, within
  certain limits, to present the subject in a broad, up-to-date and
  comprehensive manner. A third excellence is found in its concrete
  presentation of the subject.” (Arena).

  “Perhaps much of the popularity of the book is due to its catholicity.
  The arrangement of the material is open to criticism as unnatural and
  liable to interrupt and confuse the thought. This is not true as
  regards the general plan of the book, but only as regards topics under
  the chief heads. Professor Veditz must be given credit and
  congratulation for the vitality and the up-to-dateness of this book.”
  Walter E. Kruesi.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 347. Mr. ‘05. 380w.

  “It is written in a charmingly lucid manner. By the author’s method of
  presentation the interest in the subject and its intelligibility have
  gained rather than lost by the concise and direct treatment. The
  division and arrangement of the work are also admirable and with the
  fairly good index enable the reader to find anything he desires with
  little loss of time. This work, though far less open to criticism than
  many conventional political economies, falls, in our judgment, far
  short of meeting the demands of an up-to-date political economy that
  claims to present impartially the various present-day theories of
  government. The claim of the publishers, that the book is impartial,
  is not borne out by the facts.”

     + — =Arena.= 33: 107. Ja. ‘05. 820w.


=Gilder, Jeannette Leonard.= Tom-boy at work. †$1.25. Doubleday.

  In this sequel to her “Autobiography of a tom-boy,” Miss Gilder tells
  of her heroine’s varied career as a bread-winner. At sixteen she was
  employed as a copyist by a historian, later she worked in the
  Philadelphia mint, then became in turn a tinter of photographs, an
  auditor’s clerk, a proofreader, and, finally, a successful newspaper
  woman. She gives her impressions of New York thirty years ago; and
  many distinguished literary men, singers and actors of that day enter
  into her story.

  “She has interpreted the whole situation with that shrewd, honest,
  impersonal intelligence which is founded upon humor and common sense
  rather than upon the usual sentimental pose of such a writer to her
  theme.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 786. Ap. 6, ‘05. 370w.

  “Miss Gilder writes in a breezy and unconventional style, suitable to
  the pace at which her tomboy lived and changed professions. Nothing
  could be more American than the atmosphere and point of view of this
  book.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 100. F. 2, ‘05. 750w.


=Gilder, Richard Watson.= In the heights. *$1. Century.

  A little volume of verses containing elegiac poems, poems suggested by
  music, songs of experience, impromptus, etc. The book closes with The
  white tsar’s people, reprinted, with additional stanzas suggested by
  recent events.

  “Into almost all of his verse the poet has woven high, fine thoughts
  that will appeal to the artistic, the intellectual or the conscience
  sides of life. This is one of the few volumes of verse that we can
  heartily recommend to our readers.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 550. N. ‘05. 650w.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 30w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 507. D. 21, ‘05. 270w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 748. N. 4, ‘05. 450w.

  * “Mr. Gilder’s limpidity and chastity of style are a constant
  delight, and the turn of his fancy is pleasing.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.


=Gilfillan, Joseph Alexander.= Ojibway; a novel of Indian life of the
period of the early advance of civilization in the great Northwest.
$1.50. Neale.

  The Ojibway in relation to his own kindred and tribe is pictured in
  this narrative so humane that were it not for his wilderness
  surroundings, his crude equipments, his superstitious fear, one might
  count him the owner of some developed instincts. But the recital of
  the horrible and bloodthirsty relations with the Sioux tribe reveals
  such abject savagery that the reader fairly recoils from it. The book
  is made up of these two phases, with many incidental allusions to
  traits and customs.

  “To call the book a novel was a misnomer. It is rather a series of
  moving pictures in which we see real people doing real things. In
  spite of careless proofreading, conspicuous faults of diction and
  unfortunate lack of experienced editing, the story is told with ...
  simplicity and vividness.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 960. Ap. 27, ‘05. 260w.


* =Gillette, Halbert Powers.= Handbook of cost data for contractors and
engineers: a reference book giving methods of construction and actual
costs of materials and labor on numerous engineering works. *$4. Clark,
M. C.

  “The reviewer believes this to be the first handbook on the cost of
  engineering work that has been published.... The book is divided into
  fourteen sections, under heads that facilitate quick reference ...
  preparing estimates, cost keeping, and its corollary, the organization
  of forces ... earth and rock excavation ... cost of roads, pavements
  and walks ... stone masonry ... the cost of concrete construction of
  all kinds ... the cost of water-works, sewers, vitrified conduits and
  tile drains ... structures in which timber dominates ... steam and
  electric railways ... the erection and painting of steel bridges ...
  the cost of railway and topographic surveys ... and the cost of many
  miscellaneous structures.... The book is illustrated with cuts
  wherever they add to the text.”—Engin. N.

  * “The subject is presented in an attractive manner. Although much
  information is given, yet the users of the book will desire more. Its
  usefulness will only be limited by its sale.”

   + + + =Engin. N.= 54: 527. N. 16, ‘05. 1550w.


=Gilman, Lawrence.= Phases of modern music. **$1.25. Harper.

  “A study of the more important phases of music to-day, grouped about
  appreciative chapters on Richard Strauss, Edward McDowell, Grieg,
  Wagner, Verdi, Edward Elgar, and Charles Martin Loeffler, with
  vigorous essays on ‘Parsifal and its significance’ and ‘Women and
  modern music.’ Mr. Gilman has been the musical critic of Harper’s
  Weekly since 1901.”—R. of Rs.

  “Mr. Gilman writes with penetration and a more than common sympathy,
  and has a distinctive and charming mode of expression. His work is
  unusual in appealing both to the technical and the lay reader, and its
  judgments and illuminations will be valued by students.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 287. Mr. ‘05. 150w.

  “The author is endowed with grace of style, and he knows how to bring
  into relief the interesting features of unattractive subjects.” Ingram
  A. Pyle.

       + =Dial.= 38: 238. Ap. 1, ‘05. 240w.

  “It is not often possible to follow him in all his ways; for they are
  sometimes oversubtle and elusive. He has not yet the weight of reason
  and the authority of judgment that will no doubt come to one who
  reflects and thinks seriously as he does.” Richard Aldrich.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 330w.

  “He writes with vividness and sympathy.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 761. D. ‘04. 80w.


=Gilman, N. P.= Methods of industrial peace. **$1.60. Houghton.

  This book will be gladly received by the student of social movements,
  as there is increasing demand for new works upon the “labor question,”
  due to the rapid growth of knowledge thru investigation, and the
  steady change in facts and phases of the question itself. “The book
  takes an Anglo-Saxon point of view, since it draws almost as much upon
  English as upon American experience, besides making considerable
  reference to Australian and New Zealand developments. It undertakes a
  good deal more than a discussion of the special machinery designed to
  further industrial peace, giving a brief but concise statement of the
  chief facts incidental to the history and present position of trade
  unionism. [Then the author shows the necessity for the efficient
  organization of both employers and employed, discusses the “sliding
  scale,” raises the question of the legal constitution and liability of
  trade unions.] ... The ensuing chapters deal at some length with the
  aims and methods of unions, their conduct of strikes and boycotts, and
  the place borne by the public in relation to their actions. The
  remainder of the book is given to a general account of trade boards of
  conciliation, state boards of arbitration, and the methods of legal
  regulation in force in New Zealand.” (Int. J. Ethics).

  “The treatment is characterized by insight, sobriety, and accurate
  learning.” C. R. Henderson.

     + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 557. Ja. ‘05. 280w.

  “If a general criticism might be ventured on the whole book, it would
  be that too much ground has been covered and that in consequence too
  little intensity of treatment is shown. On the other hand, the author
  exhibits an admirable breadth of view and impartiality which must
  appeal to all readers.” James T. Young.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 602. My. ‘05. 550w.

  “The chief value of the book will be the statement, dispassionate, and
  in clear form, of the main facts of the case and of the principles in
  accordance with which industrial organization would appear to be
  moving. Mr. Gilman has traveled over so much ground that he has at
  times become a little sketchy in his treatment. Description rather
  than economic analysis is the strong point of the book. In a subject
  so far reaching, however, it is perhaps unfair to expect more than a
  broad presentation of the material which will enable others to
  formulate particular problems and to attempt independent judgments.
  This Mr. Gilman has done in a manner so interesting as to command the
  gratitude of all interested in current labor problems.” C. J.
  Hamilton.

   + + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 237. Ja. ‘05. 1400w.

  “Upon the whole, however, the book is of value. In spite of its
  inaccuracies and occasional unfairness, it contains much information
  presented in a readable way, with many references to secondary and
  some to primary sources. It must also be said that he has generalized
  too broadly on insufficient evidence, and has been influenced too much
  by his prepossession for state regulation to give an unbiased
  interpretation of the strivings of the leaders of employers and of
  employes towards satisfactory methods of industrial peace.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 178. Mr. 2, ‘05. 1420w.

  “He writes with skill and precision. The data on which his conclusions
  are based are abundant and have been carefully sifted.” Frederick
  Stanley Root.

   + + + =Yale R.= 14: 84. My. ‘05. 1110w.


=Gissing, Algernon.= Broadway, village of middle England, *50c. Dutton.

  A topographical description of one of the villages of the Cotswolds,
  which dates from the time of Shakespeare, and is the home of some of
  the distinguished folk of to-day. The little volume is illustrated by
  Mr. Edmund New.

         =Nation.= 80: 247. Mr. 30, ‘05. 280w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 137. Mr. 4, ‘05. 270w.

  “The present volume should appeal to the lover of England by its clear
  description of topography and by its apt references to history. In
  some pages it also reflects the peculiar atmosphere and poetic charm
  of a typical English village.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 398. F. 11, ‘05. 60w.


=Gissing, George Robert.= By the Ionian sea; notes of a ramble in
Southern Italy. *$1.75 Scribner.

  “It was a short journey the writer took, from Naples to Reggio,
  miserably punctuated by an illness in the most depressing inn on the
  route. The author, deeply moved by such traces of ancient life as he
  could find, refreshed his mind by study and memoirs of the great men
  of classic time who dwelt in or wrote of Calabrian hills and
  streams.”—Outlook.

  “His narrative is the expression of a highly cultivated intelligence,
  but it does not enchant; and its lighter touches are particularly
  unsuccessful.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 80w.

  Reviewed by Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 385. Je. 1, ‘05. 320w.

  “The book is worth reading from beginning to end.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 464. Je. 8, ‘05. 1720w.

  “Full of the marked personal touch. A veil of slight melancholy hangs
  over the whole picture, which in a way adds to its charm.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 137. My. 13, ‘05. 110w.


=Gissing. George.= Veranilda. †$1.50. Dutton.

  As the posthumous historical novel of one who was essentially a modern
  realist, this unfinished work has called forth much comment and
  speculation upon the author’s change of style. It is a romance of Rome
  in the sixth century, and deals with the historical persons and events
  of the time of Justinian and Belisarius. Mr. Frederic Harrison, who
  writes the introduction, considers it the author’s most important
  work, showing, “his poetical gift for local color, his subtle insight
  into spiritual mysticism, and ... his really fine scholarship and
  classical learning.”

  “Throughout the style is stilted, the conversations absurd, the action
  tiresomely slow, and the story destitute of a single throb of real
  humanity.”

     — — =Critic.= 46: 478. My. ‘05. 180w.

  “Besides being cold and formal, ‘Veranilda’ is a rather incoherent
  tale.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 441. Je. 1, ‘05. 470w.

  “A more complete or less welcome metamorphosis in style, subject
  matter, purpose—everything for which the name of George Gissing has
  always stood in the minds of those who counted him among the strongest
  of the latter day novelists—than is to be found in his posthumous
  historical novel, ‘Veranilda,’ it would be as hard to imagine. What is
  published is in no sense a fragment or preliminary sketch, but is
  finished and polished in Mr. Gissing’s best manner.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 118. F. 25, ‘05. 1260w.

  “In manner the narrative is dignified and careful. The human and story
  interests are strong and well maintained. The book is easily one of
  the best of modern attempts at classical romance.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 606. Mr. 4, ‘05. 220w.

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Gissing, George.= Will Warburton: a romance of real life. †$1.50.
Dutton.

  In this story of self sacrifice in every-day life Will Warburton, when
  his extensive sugar business fails because of the extravagances of his
  incompetent partner, supports his mother and sister by secretly
  becoming a shopkeeper. When his friends at last discover that he has
  degenerated into a mere grocer, a girl whom he thought he loved, an
  artist whom he had befriended, and others turn against him, but he
  finds, when they are gone, that his true friends and his true love
  still remain.

  “‘Will Warburton’ is a monument of ‘art for art’s sake.’ Its
  arrangement is not quite flawless; we would not quarrel with some of
  the sequences of chapters: but on the whole, it is a thing of noble
  shape.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 710. Jl. 8, ‘05. 860w.

  “A gain in power, in grasp, and in sympathy. But apart from this
  important development there is no change observable in the style.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 41. Jl. 8. 500w.

  “Where he fails, it is for lack of the supreme touch of art, not of
  the high and ardent intention.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 450w.

  “It is characteristic Gissing, but not good Gissing. His familiar
  effects are reproduced in a fainter form than of old, and there are no
  new effects indicating how, with further experiences of life, his
  talents would have developed.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 209. Je. 30, ‘05. 660w.

  “Each character, however lightly touched, is true, true to a hair,
  stepping forth from the page a rounded, breathing figure. It is
  excellent in workmanship and large of vision.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 487. Jl. 22, ‘05. 590w.

  “Certainly it leaves one with a warmer personal feeling toward the
  author than did some of his earlier and abler books.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 644. Jl. 8, ‘05. 110w.

  “Although not by any means the best of his books, shows no failure in
  power.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 251. Ag. 19, ‘05. 600w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 19. Jl. 1, ‘05. 750w.


=Given, Charles Stewart.= Fleece of gold. *35c. Meth. bk.

  Five lessons derived from Jason’s quest of the Golden fleece are the
  contents of this work added to the “Modern messages” series. They are
  The ruling element, The golden quality, The messenger of fate, The
  active hand, and Ethics of activity.


* =Gladden, Rev. Washington.= Christianity and socialism. *$1. Meth. bk.

  “The subjects of these lectures, which were delivered before the
  students of the Drew theological seminary, are as follows: The Sermon
  on the Mount as a basis of social reconstruction, labor wars, the
  programme of socialism, and lights and shadows of municipal reform.
  Dr. Gladden’s attitude on most of these topics has been made known in
  earlier works. It has been his endeavor ... to bring Christianity and
  socialism into ‘more intelligible and more friendly relations.’”—R. of
  Rs.

  * “His volume may be characterized in a word as one of wise counsels.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 680. N. 18, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 752. D. ‘05. 120w.


=Gladden, Washington.= Where does the sky begin? **$1.25. Houghton.

  Twenty sermons by the present moderator of the national council of
  Congregational churches. “They are concerned with the difficulties and
  needs of the religious life of the individual, rather than with the
  social problems to which Dr. Gladden hitherto has been more inclined.”
  (Ind.)

  “Those who are fortunate enough to read ‘Where does the sky begin?’
  will be convinced that he is a preacher of marked spirituality.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 600. Jl. ‘05. 120w.

         =Atlan.= 95: 706. My. ‘05. 180w.

  “He treats large and serious themes in a large and serious way, with a
  simple, direct and grave diction.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 154. Ag. ‘05. 100w.

  “They are good sermons from the points of view of easy style and
  sincere moral enthusiasm; but very saddening sermons from their feeble
  content of doctrine.”

       + =Cath. World.= 80: 547. Ja. ‘05. 200w.

  “The twenty sermons here published are earnest, original and
  thoughtful, with forceful religious appeal and in excellent literary
  style.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 500. Mr. 2, ‘05. 80w.


=Gladys, Evelyn, pseud.= Thoughts of a fool. $1.50. Rosenthal.

  Twenty-six chapters “of virile iconoclasm ... of challenge to all the
  schools, with unfailing good humor to temper its plain speaking.” “A
  message to the inner life of man. In keen words the book endeavors to
  lay bare the heart and mind of the world. Satire, irony, and derision
  in all their forms are used to expose human nature to its own gaze.”
  (Bookm.)

  “A new writer of vigor and point.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 384. Mr. ‘05. 100w.


=Glasfurd, A. I. R.= Rifle and romance in the Indian jungle: being the
record of thirteen years of Indian jungle life. *$5. Lane.

  The author has aimed “to present an old, though still engrossing
  subject in what is perhaps a novel manner: to carry the reader into
  more direct contact with the surroundings of the Indian sportsman and
  naturalist, and, while avoiding as much as possible the recital of
  personal experience with its stereotyped accompaniments, to lead him
  into the jungle, with all its fascinating variety of scene and season,
  hill and plain, where in spirit he may make acquaintance or renew an
  intimacy with its shy denizens and their habits.” The illustrations
  are taken from photographs or from sketches by the author.

  “Has succeeded in preparing a most cunning and admirable blend of
  fact, romance, weird mystery and sound advice. Search where one will
  through this entertaining book, one happens always upon sound
  literature, fine descriptions, good natural history and lively
  adventure.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 632. Je. 17, ‘05. 890w.

  “As sound and readable a book of its class as we have seen for many a
  day. The book generally, though occasionally a little slack in its
  phrasing, may be commended to young sportsmen as a guide, and to old
  as recalling pleasant reminiscences.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 45. Jl. 8. 530w.

  Reviewed by H. E. Coblentz.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 377. D. 1. ‘05. 290w.

  “That out of such materials Capt. Glasfurd has succeeded in composing
  so excellent a book is greatly to his credit.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 206. S. 7, ‘05. 840w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 399. Je. 17, ‘05. 260w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 527. Ag. 12, ‘05. 960w.

  “He is an observer and a naturalist, as well as a sportsman, and he
  imports at times into his narrative an air of mystery and of romance
  which adds greatly to the charm of his work.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 99: 848. Je. 24, ‘05. 260w.


=Glover, T. R.= Studies in Virgil. $3. Longmans.

  “It falls naturally into four parts. The first is a chapter on the age
  and the man, and in it we are shown how Virgil, himself the child of a
  darker period, had a vision of a brighter day to come, and taught his
  countrymen to look forward hopefully to the age which was opening
  before them. The next consists of three chapters of literary studies:
  the first treats of the literary influences to which Virgil was
  subject, the second of his contemporaries, and the third about the
  growth of the myths about Aeneas. The third portion of the book deals,
  in three chapters, with the land and the nation, the three topics
  being Italy, Rome, and Augustus. The last part of the book is on
  Virgil’s interpretation of life, and here we have chapters on Dido,
  Aeneas, Hades, and Olympus, and a final summary.”—Nation.

  “In the long list of writings on Virgil and his poetry, Mr. Glover’s
  new book deserves a high place. The chapter about Dido is perhaps the
  best in the book, and certainly it is one of the most interesting and
  sensible essays on that famous episode of the Aeneid which we have
  ever read. The chapter on Aeneas is unconvincing, and almost a
  failure. Neither do we care much for the last chapter. But as a whole
  the book ought to be of great assistance to all who wish to get a true
  conception of the powers and the weaknesses of the greatest of the
  Roman poets.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 160. F. 23, ‘05. 760w.

         =Spec.= 94: 367. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1220w.


=Glyn, Elinor.= Vicissitudes of Evangeline. †$1.50. Harper.

  The autobiography of a distracting and unconventional red-haired girl.
  She is the granddaughter of an earl, but her grand parents “forgot to
  marry,” and she is brought up by a rich old lady who leaves her to the
  bachelor heir as a part of his estate. Then come the vicissitudes.
  There are many characters, a handsome guardsman, a Scotch family, a
  lovely selfish married woman, and many others. The story is cleverly
  told and ends happily.

       + =Acad.= 68: 241. Mr. 11, ‘05. 360w.

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 395. Ap. 1. 420w.

  “It has the whipped-cream consistency of its predecessors. It is
  mildly amusing.” William Morton Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 389. Je. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  “This Evangeline, though not without the serene egotism of lovely
  youth, is mighty good company. The men are not half bad, and the book
  is full of cleverness.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 156. Mr. 11, ‘05. 690w.

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 762. Mr. 25, ‘05. 40w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 943. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “The intention of the book seems to be to present a ‘naughty’ heroine.
  Evangeline is ‘not nice’.”

       — =Reader.= 6: 476. S. ‘05. 220w.

  “The story is witty, fluent, and amusing.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 758. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Gocher, W. H.= Wadsworth; or, The charter oak. $2. W: H: Gocher,
Hartford, Conn.

  “It purports to give all that is ascertainable relating to the hiding
  of the colonial charter, in 1687, in the famous oak tree at
  Hartford,—an incident of which Captain Joseph Wadsworth, according to
  doubtful tradition, was the hero. Wadsworth himself, is made to tell
  the story of the charter and its hiding, in language that is
  undisguisedly hodiernal, and with many interpolations of matter
  remotely or not at all connected with the main theme. The chapters on
  the Royal oak, on Cromwell, and on the regicides, are of this
  irrelevant nature. The wording, and still more the spelling, of Joseph
  Wadsworth’s will, which is printed in full, are so strikingly in
  contrast with the modernity of his supposed narrative, that not the
  faintest touch of illusion can cling to the latter. Mr. Gocher’s work
  is lavishly illustrated from old prints, old portraits, and modern
  photographs, and is provided with numerous footnotes bearing evidence
  of painstaking research.”—Dial.

  “A mingling of fiction and somewhat delusive fact gives the text ... a
  doubtful historic value.”

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 720. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

  “Mr. Gocher has shown commendable antiquarian zeal in prosecuting his
  researches; yet his readers will probably wish he had not chosen to
  weave fact and fiction into the same web in a book that professes to
  be history rather than a novel.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 130. F. 16, ‘05. 410w.

  “A book showing long and careful historical research, this volume will
  add much to the lore of the Connecticut colony, for the author treats
  of the story of the regicides, of the New Haven and other colonies,
  and includes interesting memoirs of Roger Ludlow, John Hooker, John
  Winthrop, and others who worked so effectively for the establishment
  of the first pure democracy in the New World.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 32. Ja. 14, ‘05. 1690w.


=Goddard, Pliny Earle.= Morphology of the Hupa language. $3.50. Univ. of
Cal. press.

  Volume III. of the “American archæology and ethnology” series issued
  by the University of California. An extended examination of the Hupa
  language in which the various words and forms have been studied,
  analyzed and assembled into classes “that an adequate conception of
  the language as a whole might be obtained.”


=Goff, Clarissa (Mrs. Robert Goff).= Florence and some Tuscan cities.
*$6. Macmillan.

  “‘The purpose of Colonel and Mrs. Goff in this handsome volume is to
  describe the most characteristic monuments of Tuscany and to introduce
  into the account, legends and stories which are not always within
  reach of the traveler.... On a basis of historical narrative ... Mrs.
  Goff has given her readers a vivid picture of a city with a passion
  for politics, a passion for war, and a passion for art. Large
  attention is given to the churches of Florence.... The volume is
  richly illustrated in colors by Colonel Goff and issued with a
  decorative cover.”—Outlook.

  “To this charming series of pictures Mrs. Goff has provided an
  agreeable and easily-written commentary. Too easily written, we fear,
  to be quite exact in all its information. Mrs. Goff is at her best
  when she leaves the town for the country, and when she turns from
  history to describing the life of the Tuscan people of to-day, their
  festivals, quaint observances and ancient superstitions. The last
  chapter of the book is devoted entirely to such subjects, and it is
  one of the most enjoyable.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 235. Mr. 11, ‘05. 430w.

  “Mrs. Goff is an excellent guide round Florence, and supplies just the
  right sort of gossipy commentary for a book of this sort.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 312. S. 2. 120w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1069. My. 11, ‘05. 130w.

  “Altogether the book is a charming one, likely to be of real value to
  the traveller, as well as a pleasing memento of some of the fairest
  scenes in Italy.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: 273. My. ‘05. 520w.

  “The book seems the most satisfactory of the series.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 381. My. 11, ‘05. 410w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 166. Mr. 18, ‘05. 960w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 856. Ap. 1, ‘05. 140w.

  “Mrs. Goff’s text is the pleasantest reading. Her touch is light, her
  knowledge wide, her style entirely natural, her sympathy and insight
  vivid and kindly. Slips in the book are more numerous than they should
  be.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 99: 777. Je. 10, ‘05. 1030w.

  “The letterpress is written by Mrs. Goff, and contains much
  disconnected information. It is not quite safe to assume that it is
  all accurate.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 261. Ag. 19, ‘05. 120w.


=Goldenberg, Samuel L.= Lace; its origin and history. *$1.50.
Brentano’s.

  The different kinds of lace are arranged alphabetically, with
  particulars as to their characteristics, their various subdivisions,
  and the manner in which they are made. The illustrations are
  especially clear and useful for purposes of lace study. The book
  contains much valuable information on machine-made laces, with
  diagrams and explanations of the lace and embroidery machines now in
  use. It tells also of the nets made for the foundations of certain
  kinds of lace. The opening article treats of the origin and history of
  lace.

  “The book is well adapted for its purpose, the enlightenment of ‘the
  busy man of affairs,’ but it is evident our author is hampered by
  having to express his meaning in English, and sometimes fails to
  convey what he intends.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 158. F. 23, ‘05. 330w.


=Goldring, W.= Book of the lily. *$1. Lane.

  “The author gives a clear general statement in regard to the
  cultivable species, hybrids, and varieties, and illustrates the handy
  treatise by exquisite pictures of a few of the best kinds and their
  most artistic setting.”—Nation.

  “It is written for those who delight in flowers and who love their
  gardens rather than for the connoisseur.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 85. Jl. 15. 500w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 290. Ap. 13, ‘05. 160w.

  “The introductory chapter on the geography and history of the lily is
  particularly interesting, as well as the treatise upon diseases and
  insect pests—that closes the book.” Mabel Osgood Wright.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 369. Je. 10. ‘05. 290w.

  “The great value of the book, however, is that it enables one without
  much trouble to get a conspectus of the whole lily-group. A much too
  ambitious title.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 156. Jl. 29, ‘05. 150w.


=Gomperz, Theodor.= Greek thinkers: a history of ancient philosophy. v.
2 and 3. ea. *$4. Scribner.

  Volume I covered the period of Greek philosophy previous to Socrates,
  volumes II. and III. contain a discussion of Socrates, his life, his
  followers, and the great philosophical movement which he fathered;
  also an account of Plato and his philosophy. 13 chapters are given
  wholly to a critical analysis of the course and structure of Plato’s
  works.

  “It will admirably serve the purpose of the general reader who is
  interested in philosophy as an element in the history of human
  culture. And for the technical student who has mastered some of the
  more rigorous treatises, it will be useful in completing and vivifying
  his picture of the great thinkers of Greece.” Walter G. Everett.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 123. O. ‘05. 560 w. (Review of v. 2 and 3.)

  “It may be said with confidence that Prof. Gomperz has succeeded
  admirably in accomplishing his design of composing ‘a comprehensive
  picture’ of the development of Greek thought, in which the historical
  setting of the narrative, the background of the picture, is ‘not
  unduly contracted.’ It is written in a vigorous, lively style.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 520. Ap. 29. 2690w. (Review of v. 1-3.)

  “It offers not merely a cold technical enumeration of the tenets of
  the Greek philosophers, but a broad and rational discussion of the
  permanent significance of each great thought as it presents itself in
  historical sequence.” Paul Shorey.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 31. Jl. 16, ‘05. 3110w.

  “Mr. Berry, like Mr. Magnus, has managed to give his translation the
  air of real English, and his version is on the whole a great
  improvement on the curiously abrupt and disjointed style of the
  original German. It is his moderation, his avoidance of extreme views,
  that makes Professor Gomperz so satisfactory a critic. The
  proof-reading of the English translation is far from perfect.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 442. Je. 1, ‘05. 1550w. (Review of v. 2 and 3.)

  “The arguments are concisely stated. A rich subject, it is richly
  treated by this veteran scholar.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 759. Mr. 25, ‘05. (Review of Vols. II. and III.)

  “In his last two volumes Professor Gomperz proves himself to be a
  thinker and a writer of distinction.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 596. My. 6, ‘05. 1940w.


=Goodhart, Simon P.= See =Sidis, Boris=, jt. auth.


=Goodhue, Isabel.= Good things and graces. **50c. Elder.

  The following recipe shows the character of the group: Hygienic bread,
  Mix together the flour of love, made from the whole kernel (giving the
  all-inclusive flavor and quality); the leaven of spirit; the salt of
  common sense; the water of life appreciated. Let this rise in the
  encouraging atmosphere of patience. Knead and mold in the silence.
  Butter with cheerfulness, and serve to the entire family.

  * “In both form and spirit it is a thorough-going holiday booklet.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The book is better than its outward appearance suggests, and is not
  one to be thrown aside after a single reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The idea is cleverly carried out, and the directions for breakfast
  food, game pie, deviled tongue, and so on, are often witty as well as
  admonitory.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 110w.


=Goodloe, Carter.= At the foot of the Rockies. †$1.50. Scribner.

  “Capital short stories of Canadian military and social life in the
  Northwest, with Indian customs and superstitions as the
  background.”—Outlook.

  “While lacking in individuality, are yet pleasantly readable.”

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 87. S. ‘05. 330w.

  “In her treatment, as well as in her situations, Miss Goodloe is
  rather too markedly Kiplingesque.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 365. Je. 3, ‘05. 220w.

  “The tales have originality and force, with the added element of quiet
  humor.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 40w.


=Goodnow, Frank Johnson.= City government in the United States. *$1.25.
Century.

  Professor Goodnow of Columbia university contributes this volume to
  “The American state series.” He is known for his authoritative works
  on “Municipal home rule,” and “Municipal problems.” “In the present
  work, the author confines himself almost exclusively to a study of
  American conditions, and at the same time broadens the scope of the
  inquiry so as to embrace the entire field of city government, so far
  as that is regarded from the viewpoint of organization and structure.”
  (R. of Rs.)

  “Professor Goodnow’s book will be found eminently readable and useful
  as a text.” James T. Young.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 348. Mr. ‘05. 670w.

  Reviewed by Winthrop More Daniels.

         =Atlan.= 95: 554. Ap. ‘05. 420w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 128. Ja. ‘05. 100w.


* =Goodnow, Frank Johnson.= Principles of administrative law of the
United States. *$3. Putnam.

  “In his ‘Comparative administrative law,’ published twelve years ago,
  Professor Goodnow gave an analysis of the administrative system,
  national and local, of the United States, England, France, and
  Germany. The rapid growth of the public interest in our system was
  thought by Professor Goodnow a sufficient justification for a new book
  giving a fuller account of American conditions, with special emphasis
  upon the legal side.”—Dial.

  * “The volume is a notable contribution to the literature of public
  law, and will prove of great use, not only to students, but also to
  officials in the actual work of administration. But to the writer
  there appears to be a few omissions of importance, some of which would
  probably indicate a defect in our constitutional law.” David Y.
  Thomas.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 304. N. 16, ‘05. 1410w.

  * “By his masterly grasp of the subject and his power of lucid
  exposition Prof. Goodnow has rendered great service to students and
  administrative officers. He has also made a distinct contribution to
  political science.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 776. N. 18, ‘05. 330w.


=Goodwin, Maud Wilder.= Claims and counterclaims. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  A young physician, the hero of Mrs. Goodwin’s story, has been rescued
  from death by a young man for whom he conceives a strong dislike. The
  situation becomes complicated by the fact that both men love the same
  girl, and Dr. Dilke is called upon by the father of the girl to
  endorse the character of a dishonest rival. “How to adjust the heroic
  savior of one’s life with the counterclaim of truth and of loyalty to
  a woman beloved is the problem Mrs. Goodwin’s hero has to solve.” (N.
  Y. Times.).

  “One can hardly help feeling that in ‘Claims and counterclaims’ Mrs.
  Maud Wilder Goodwin has not done justice to a motif and scheme which
  were very good. Mrs. Goodwin botches her climaxes by improbability or
  cumbrous narration.”

     — + =Lit. D.= 31: 666. N. 4, ‘05. 620w.

  “Its unique plot, its life-like characters, its brilliant execution in
  both dialogue and movement, are all crowned by a novel’s raison
  d’etre—its absorbing interest.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 542. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1260w.


=Gordon, Armistead C.= Gift of the morning star. $1.50. Funk.

  “He that overcometh ... I will give him the morning star.” The blood
  of a French mother flowing warm in the veins of her Dunker son sends
  him out in the world at the age of forty to seek his fortune, his
  whole being crying out against the repressed life of silent labor on
  the farm with which his older brother and sister are content. He wins
  his fortune as a boomer, he loses it in a single night, and in the end
  comes home again self conquered and content with his Dunker life and
  his Dunker sweetheart.

  “Mr. Gordon has made his book of somewhat incongruous material.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 450. Jl. 8, ‘05. 550w.

  “A truly original story of Dunkard character. His pictures have all
  the vividness of reality.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 192. My. 20, ‘05. 100w.

  “A forcible and an original tale.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 150w.


=Gordon, John Brown.= Reminiscences of the civil war. $1.50. Scribner.

  “A new and moderate-priced edition of one of the very best of
  Southern books of reminiscences, written by a famous Southern
  soldier.”—Outlook.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 717. O. 21, ‘05. 140w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 282. S. 30, ‘05. 20w.


=Goss, Charles Frederick.= Husband, wife and home. **$1. Vir.

  A collection of forty-six sketches from life. “Such titles as True
  wife or married mistress, Curing your partner’s faults, Observing
  conventionalities, A good word for the ‘bad boy,’ Ability of parents
  to see a joke, Humanizing the beast, Nerve strain, indicate the extent
  of the field, and it is well dotted with pithy anecdotes and amusing
  stories. The whole is pervaded by strong and pure moral feeling.”
  (Pub. Opin.)

  “A book of good advice to husbands and wives, easy to read, not so
  easy to follow, but worth reading and worthy to be followed.”

       + =Bib. World.= 26: 400. N. ‘05. 20w.

  “Wide experience and keen observation of real life yield material
  which is treated with plain common sense, good wit, and no lack of
  humor.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 790. Jl. 22, ‘05. 180w.


=Gosse, Edmund William.= Coventry Patmore. **$1. Scribner.

  This fourth volume of the “Literary lives series,” contains a sketch
  of the poet’s life by one who knew him well in his later years. There
  is an account of his childhood, his life in London, and his later
  years, with a description of his personality, his work, and an
  estimate of his place in the world of letters.

         =Acad.= 68: 265. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1190w.

  “His volume is not without its limitations. But it is, on the whole,
  able, at times brilliant. Among Mr. Gosse’s faults dulness has no
  place. His book shows discriminating taste.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 389. Ap. 1. 3560w.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

         =Atlan.= 96: 278. Ag. ‘05. 420w.

  “Mr. Gosse’s biography is highly interesting; explaining much that is
  mysterious in Patmore’s poetry through the strange personality of the
  poet, the biographer adds something of distinct value to the critical
  estimate. But his conclusions are at least open to debate.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 272. Ap. 16, ‘05. 360w.

  “Though he says too little about Patmore’s prose essays, which have
  singular merits of style, his attractive little volume, with its
  excellent illustrations, can be recommended to all to whom the more
  exhaustive Life by Mr. Champneys is not accessible.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 399. My. 18, ‘05. 2210w.

  “A delightful little book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 134. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1780w.

  “A well-balanced and interesting biography. There is a careful,
  sympathetic, but entirely clear-sighted estimate of Patmore’s poetic
  gifts and of the value of his work.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 652. Mr. 11, ‘05. 220w.

  “Having the helpfulness neither of hostility nor of enthusiasm, and
  being needlessly apologetic both for Patmore’s domesticity and his
  mysticism.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 597. My. 6, ‘05. 1050w.


=Gosse, Edmund William.= French profiles. *$1.60. Dodd.

  Sketches of French writers nearly all of whom are still living or only
  lately dead. They are given “in profile” not “from the front” or “from
  a direct and complete point of view,” and are chiefly “snap-shots, as
  it were, at authors in the course of their progress.”

  “Biography and criticism are deftly blended into an intermediate
  something and the last thing that the reader need apprehend is to be
  bored.” Richard Garnett.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 78. Ja. 28, ‘05. 700w.

  * “Mr. Gosse owed it to his readers to rewrite and revise more
  diligently. But his book is an agreeable and profitable one.” Edward
  Fuller.

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 568. D. ‘05. 530w.

  “It is far from being an indispensable book, but it is decidedly a
  useful one.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 624. S. 23, ‘05. 700w.

  “A successful book, very agreeable to read, and more likely than any
  we have lately seen on the subject to attract that difficult creature,
  the general reader. If not infallible the book is full of interest.
  Any one who cares at all for French literature, and does not mind a
  little intellectual irritation, will read it both with pleasure and
  advantage.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 676. My. 6, ‘05. 1480w.


* =Gosse, Edmund William.= Sir Thomas Browne. **75c. Macmillan.

  This volume in the “English men of letters” series, a monograph on Sir
  Thomas Browne, “bears every sign of care and of minute and skillful
  investigation. Browne himself is set before us with fullness of
  detail, his work is analysed with scholarly patience.... Browne was
  that rare favorite of the gods, a happy man of genius. His serene and
  serious mind was ever preoccupied with high, impersonal, ‘un-mating
  things.’ His daily life was that of a fond husband and father; a
  perfect friend; an alert citizen; a busy and successful doctor.
  But ... no man of letters ever tasted more deeply the lonely and
  exquisite gratifications known to the vividly inquiring,
  experimentalizing mind.” (Lond. Times.)

  * “Mr. Gosse has made a careful study of the materials at his disposal
  and in a comparatively short space embodies all that is known of the
  famous writer and physician. The faults of the book lie on the surface
  and may be briefly dismissed.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 1070. O. 14, ‘05. 1500w.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

 *     + =Atlan.= 96: 842. D. ‘05. 310w.

  * “To put it crudely, what we miss in Mr. Gosse’s estimate of Browne
  is a feeling of pleasure. This is a very skilful biography; very
  intelligent criticism; but it is not the fine, the suggestive, the
  liberal, and illuminating criticism which we expected from a writer of
  Mr. Edmund Gosse’s accomplishments.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 333. O. 13, ‘05. 3250w.

 *   + — =Nation.= 81: 486. D. 14, ‘05. 3140w.

 *     + =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 4. N. 18, ‘05. 890w.


=Gould, George Milbry.= Biographic clinics. v. 3. Essays concerning the
influence of visual function pathologic and physiologic upon the health
of patients. *$1. Blakiston.

  These essays fully cover the ground indicated by the subject, and in
  them numerous common ailments are unhesitatingly traced to defective
  eyesight, and much good advice is given for school children and men
  engaged in literary or clerical work, all of which is borne out by
  illustrations from life. The technical terms used in the table of
  contents need not alarm the casual reader, who will find the text
  clear and easily understood.


=Gower, Edward Frederick Leveson.= Bygone years. *$3.50. Dutton.

  Memoirs written by the Honorable F. Leveson-Gower in his 86th year. As
  he never kept a diary, he chats merrily from memory of well-known
  people and things he has met with in the course of his long life.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 706. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1030w.

  “The author’s style is pleasant, though singularly familiar.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 710. Je. 10. 1110w.

  Reviewed by Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 346. O. ‘05. 1180w.

  “Good humor, good sense, good birth and breeding, an entire absence of
  airs and pretensions, these are among the qualities that commend him
  to the reader.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 211. O. 1, ‘05. 390w.

  “The volume is worth the attention of those who delight in the
  pleasant gossip of a genial and generous-hearted man of vast
  experience and wide information.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 988. O. 26, ‘05. 240w.

  “His book is like him, and it will therefore attract and give pleasure
  to a large number of readers.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 192. Je. 16, ‘05. 1130w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 220. S. 14, ‘05. 620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 481. Jl. 22, ‘05. 660w.

  “It is never dull: it is never absorbing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 568. Ag. 26, ‘05. 470w.

  “The book is characterized by good sense and wit and an agreeable
  conversational style.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 43. S. 2, ‘05. 260w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 18. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1070w.


=Grafton, Rt. Rev. Charles Chapman.= Christian and Catholic. *$1.50.
Longmans.

  “The aim of the good bishop ... is ‘not controversial’ but to help
  souls who are in honest doubt to come into closer union with
  Christ ... The mass of Christians ... he designates as ‘the sects’ in
  distinction from ‘the church’ ... To secede from the Anglican church
  to the Roman is pronounced to be ‘the most terrible sin we believe a
  Christian man can commit.’”—Outlook.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 330. Ag. 10, ‘05. 70w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 855. Ap. 1, ‘05. 150w.


=Grant, Mrs. Colquhoun.= Mother of czars. *$3.50. (*12s.) Dutton.

  “This ‘Mother of czars’ was the princess Dorothea of Würtemberg who
  married the Czarevitch Paul, son of Catherine II.... The czar’s two
  sons were Alexander I. and Nicholas I.... Mrs. Grant’s book consists
  largely of details of a tour made by the Grand Duke Paul and his wife
  during the years 1780-81. The most enjoyable time was spent in
  France.”—Spec.

  “A very innocuous sketch of the wife of Paul I. of Russia.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “Neither as a study of personality nor as an historical monograph can
  this volume be praised with much heartiness.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 166. Ag. 24, ‘05. 480w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 329. My. 20, ‘05. 270w.

  “Here related in an agreeable, sympathetic, unpretentious way.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 393. Je. 10, ‘05. 110w.

  “With merits as an entertainment this book is marred as an
  authoritative portrayal of local colour by certain inaccuracies.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 309. S. 2, ‘05. 1130w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 719. My. 13. ‘05. 250w.


=Grant, Robert.= Orchid. †$1.25. Scribner.

  The orchid is a society belle in a set where money counts for
  everything. She marries a wealthy man whom she does not love, then
  comes to care for a poor man, secures a divorce and the custody of her
  child, which she later relinquishes to the father in return for two
  million dollars, and is thereby established once more upon a secure
  social foundation.

  “Clever as it is in its scenes, its dialogues, its enjoyable diversity
  of types, the real merit of the little volume lies not so much in what
  it actually gives as in what it suggests. ‘The orchid’ is an
  interesting example of a psychological problem, worked out along lines
  almost purely realistic.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 365. Je. ‘05. 480w.

  “The novel is as empty of psychological content as a headline. In this
  novel his style seems to be even more hard and colorless than
  formerly, his phrasing even more stereotyped and inaccurate.” O. H. D.

     — — =Critic.= 47: 90. Jl. ‘05. 750w.

  “Judge Grant’s characters are like chessmen: they are well defined and
  they move in a straightforward and logical manner. This simile does
  not imply that his characters are wooden, or that the situation lacks
  complexity.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1008. My. 4, ‘05. 220w.

  “Told ... in this accomplished writer’s crispest and most interesting
  style.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 356. Je. 3, ‘05. 800w.

  “It is a story which not only makes one think, but holds the interest
  as well.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “A more thoroughgoing study of feminine selfishness and lawlessness is
  not to be found in American fiction.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 772. Ap. 1, ‘05. 90w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 796. My. 20, ‘05. 170w.

  “Judge Grant’s sure touch and craftmanship are here, but ‘The orchid’
  is hardly a worthy successor to ‘The undercurrent.’”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 758. Je. ‘05. 120w.


=Grant, Robert.= Undercurrent. $1.50. Scribner.

  “His theme is the very modern problem of the divorce evil, and he
  shows us how the undercurrent of emotion eventually triumphs over
  reason, and sweeps away the intellectual objections which stand in the
  path of a woman’s happiness. The situation is subtly handled, and one
  of the oldest of stories thereby acquires new distinction. It is the
  familiar story of marriage without much thought, the husband’s rapid
  development into a vulgar brute, and his final desertion of wife and
  children. Then the right man appears upon the scene, and the deserted
  wife is torn by the conflict between desire and duty. The plea of duty
  is voiced by the representatives of church and society, and their
  argument convinces her intellect, yet it takes only a slight mishap to
  the man whom she loves to bring about her surrender.”—Dial.

  Reviewed by W. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 15. Ja. 1, ‘05. 440w. (Statement of theme.)

  “The opposing claims of church and state to the regulation of marriage
  have never been more interestingly presented than in the debate
  between the rector and the lawyer in this book.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1008. My. 4, ‘05. 190w.

  “As a carefully considered, well-rounded, unimpassioned treatment,
  this book deserves attentive reading and deep pondering. The legal
  clearness with which Judge Grant has analyzed the question, and the
  thoroughness and skill with which he has embodied all its aspects in
  the individual characters and the action of the story, make ‘The
  undercurrent’ a constructive master-piece. Its interest is timely,
  therefore, rather than literary, and its value practical and ethical,
  not artistic. Neither of these facts, nevertheless, derogates from its
  literary importance. A notable literary expression of conviction among
  the books of its day.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 254. Ja. ‘05. 550w.

  “Deals with two insistent problems of American society—the problem of
  enormous wealth and the problem of divorce. Judge Grant treats both
  with calmness and sanity. The characters and the story by means of
  which Judge Grant illustrates his views are thoroughly attractive from
  the point of view of literature. ‘The undercurrent’ is first of all a
  novel, and an excellent one, and only secondarily a book of purpose.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 118. Ja. ‘05. 210w.

  “A sane and two-sided view of this problem. The author is master of
  many of the secret traits of woman’s nature, he rises with dramatic
  force to a crisis, and his method is always wholesome. But one must
  regret his excessive use of monologue, as though he could not let his
  characters interpret themselves.” J. R. Ormond.

   + + — =South Atlantic Quarterly.= 4: 96. Ja. ‘05. 140w.


=Granville, W. A.= Elements of differential and integral calculus.
$2.50. Ginn.

  To meet the need of a modern text-book on calculus which is at once
  rigorous and elementary, is the rather difficult task of the author.
  “On the one hand it is necessary to avoid the worthless and even
  vicious forms of reasoning which mar so many elementary treatises and
  which are simply intolerable to one educated according to modern
  standards of rigor. On the other hand, the author must not introduce
  subtleties of reasoning and logical refinements beyond the needs and
  comprehension of those who are to use the book. The volume under
  review is an attempt to solve this problem.” (Science).

  “Its first quality is clearness; its second, judicious accentuation.
  The ground notions are admirably handled, and throughout, the nature
  and limitations of important theorems are conscientiously indicated.”
  C. J. Keyser.

   + + + =Educ. R.= 29: 208. F. ‘05. 250w.

  “This is a book the main object of which seems to be to enable the
  student to acquire a knowledge of the subject with little or no
  assistance from a teacher; and, after a very careful study of it, we
  are enabled to say that the work is admirably constructed for the
  purpose.” George M. Minchin.

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 26. My. 11, ‘05. 670w.

  “In perusing Dr. Granville’s book one feels throughout that the author
  has in mind the requirements of modern rigor. We believe the present
  volume is eminently a safe book to put in the hands of the beginner.
  He will get no false notions which afterwards will have to be
  eradicated, with much difficulty; he will, on the other hand, acquire
  a considerable acquaintance with the principles of the calculus and a
  good working knowledge of its methods. The relatively few blemishes in
  this work, the reviewer is glad to state, will be removed in the next
  edition.” James Pierpont.

   + + — =Science=, n.s. 21: 64. Ja. 13, ‘05. 1180w.

  “As well in its scope as in its spirit, the work is distinctly more
  than its author modestly styles it ‘essentially a drill book.’”
  Cassius J. Keyser.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 22: 115. Jl. 28, ‘05. 150w.


=Gratacap, Lewis Pope.= World as intention: a contribution to teleology,
*$1.25. Eaton.

  “Under this title the author exhibits the movement which the world
  shows towards a purposed end. His aim is to help perplexed thinkers
  out of a state of mind which can neither get on without religion, nor
  get on with much that is claimed in the name of religion.”—Outlook.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 336. My. 20, ‘05. 360w.

  “Mr. Gratacap is certainly an independent and vigorous thinker; though
  his reading has evidently been more thorough in scientific lines than
  in philosophical. For lack of proportionate equipment in the latter
  his contribution to the problems of modern thought is hardly equal to
  the need.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 762. Mr. 25, ‘05. 400w.


=Graves, Algernon=, comp. Royal academy of arts. v. I. *$11. Macmillan.

  This “complete dictionary of contributors and their work from its
  foundation in 1769 to 1904,” is compiled with the sanction of the
  president and council of the Royal academy. The artists’ names are
  arranged alphabetically and their works are listed under their names.
  Volume I. now issued, covers Abbayne to Carrington.

         =Acad.= 68: 623. Je. 10, ‘05. 110w. (Review of v. 1.)

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 87. Jl. 15. 2560w. (Review of v. 1.)

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 38. Jl. 13, ‘05. 770w. (Review of v. 1.)

   + + + =Sat. R.= 99: 671. My. 20, ‘05. 470w. (Review of v. 1.)


=Gray, Charles H.= Lodowick Carliell. *$1.50. Univ. of Chicago press.

  Lodowick Carliell was a courtier dramatist of the reigns of Charles I
  and II. The name of Carliell is a conspicuous one in English
  literature, having as a later representative Thomas Carlyle. The
  present work includes a sketch of Carliell’s life, a discussion of his
  plays, and “The deserving favorite.”

  “He has shown a German thoroughness of work.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 574. S. 2, ‘05. 540w.

  “This is an interesting contribution to the history of the English
  drama.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 983. Ag. 19, ‘05. 90w.


=Green, Anna Katharine.= Amethyst box. †75c. Bobbs.

  The spiriting away of an amethyst box in which was hidden a tiny vial
  containing a drop of deadly poison is followed by a sudden death. This
  furnishes the plot for one of Mrs. Green’s characteristic mystery
  stories into which is woven a double romance. The volume is uniform
  with the “Pocket book” series.

  * “This American writer ... builds better puzzles and controls her
  surprises more skilfully than any living sensation writer we can call
  to mind.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1155. N. 4, ‘05. 350w.

  “It is an absorbing story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 324. My. 20, ‘05. 220w.

  * “They are utterly improbable, and full of extravagances and
  absurdities.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 600. N. 4, ‘05. 70w.


=Green, Anna Katharine.= House in the mist. †75c. Bobbs.

  The first of these stories, “The house in the mist,” is the tale of
  vengeance which a wealthy testator wreaks upon his debauched heirs.
  According to the will they assemble, are apportioned their shares, and
  then trapped to their death. The harrowing succession of events is
  relieved only by the escape of the one worthy heir. The other story,
  “The ruby and the caldron,” shows the steps taken along the wrong
  scent in recovering a lost ruby.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 386. Je. 17, ‘05. 210w.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 140. My. 13, ‘05. 70w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 61. Jl. 8, ‘05. 30w.


=Green, Anna Katharine (Mrs. Charles Rohlfs).= Millionaire baby. $1.50.
Bobbs.

  The spiriting away of a baby, the heiress to three fortunes, furnishes
  a plot for a unique detective story. The detective himself, in the
  race with others for the fifty thousand dollar reward, narrates the
  steps that lead up to the mystery-solving stroke,—this latter
  involving a surprise even for the wily disciple of Sherlock Holmes.
  The book is illustrated by Arthur I. Keller.

     + — =Acad.= 68: 568. My. 27, ‘05. 340w.

  “She is, we think, the best American author of detective tales of the
  present, and in ‘The millionaire baby’ we have one of her very best
  books. It is clever in conception and treatment, it holds the
  interest.”

     + + =Arena.= 33: 340. Mr. ‘05. 260w.

  “Granted its fundamental improbability, the plot is skilfully
  constructed, and the interest of the story is successfully
  maintained.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 714. Je. 10. 150w.

  “As a detective story, ‘The millionaire baby,’ is as clever as
  anything Anna Katharine Green has written. You will not lay it aside
  until you know the whole story.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 40. Ja. 21, ‘05. 550w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “As a detective story it is ingenious; as fiction in any other sense
  it is worthless.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 246. Ja. 28, ‘05. 40w.

  “A good story of compelling and sustained interest. Is quite the equal
  of any of the long line of stories which she has created.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 95. Ja. 15, ‘05. 450w.

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Green, Evelyn Everett-.= Secret of Wold Hall. †$1. McClurg.

  The marriage between Marcus Drummond and Lady Marcia Defresne was for
  the one the fulfillment of a ten-years’ dream—dating back to a moment
  when a bronzed traveler boy of sixteen rescued a child from her fall
  over a precipice—for the other, a release for herself and family from
  pecuniary predicaments. The man loves his wife, and the course of
  events which awakens her love for him is strongly associated with a
  mystery. The story has a strong dramatic interest.


=Greene, Frances N., and Kirk, Dolly Williams.= With spurs of gold.
†$1.50. Little.

  The boy and girl whose galaxy of heroes for special worship includes
  many knights of chivalry will find some absorbing details given here.
  The work is authentic, based on histories, chronicles and legends, and
  sets forth such characters as Roland and Oliver, Richard
  Coeur-de-Lion, the Chevalier Bayard, and Sir Philip Sidney.

  “A number of famous poems accompany the excellent prose in which these
  tales are set.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 580. N. 4, ‘05. 60w.


=Greenidge, Abel Henry Jones.= History of Rome during the later republic
and early principate. 6 vols. v. I, *$3.50. Dutton.

  “The first volume of the six volumes in which Dr. Greenidge plans to
  compress his history covers some twenty-nine years, from the time of
  Tiberius Gracchus to the consulship of Marius, B. C. 133 to 104.... In
  that short period occurred the two agrarian movements, led by Tiberius
  Gracchus, and, ten years later, by Caius Gracchus, and the Jugurthine
  war.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It will appeal strongly to the general reader ... but it is addressed
  also to the scholar, as based on the original sources and presenting
  the results in accordance with the most advanced ideals of history
  writing.” Joseph H. Drake.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 849. Jl. ‘05. 1310w.

  “Both the specialist, who looks for laborious research and painstaking
  erudition, and the ordinary reader, who sets the main value on
  perspicuity and brilliancy of narrative, will alike be gratified.” W.
  A. Goligher.

   + + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 545. Jl. ‘05. 860w.

  “The present volume sustains his reputation for accuracy and
  penetration, while proving him to possess gifts of a different order.
  It discloses a large grasp of facts and a weighty style.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 14. Jl. 6, ‘05. 3200w.

  “It may be said at once that Dr. Greenidge revivifies Rome, which had
  been reduced to the deadness of classicality. He creates the Eternal
  city in the sixth century of its existence, and with exactness and
  grace shows us its life, its politics, the causes of its troubles, how
  it met them, and what the final issue was.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 319. My. 13, ‘05. 1330w.


* =Greenslet, Ferris.= James Russell Lowell, his life and work. **$1.50.
Houghton.

  “A concise view of the life of Lowell, which the author frankly admits
  to be mainly based on printed sources, chief among which has naturally
  been the collection of his letters edited by Charles Eliot Norton; but
  the work was nevertheless worth doing and is very well done.... The
  book is illustrated with portraits, local views, etc.”—Critic.

  * “The author has made judicious use of his abundant and rich
  material, his personal additions to which have been considerable and
  valuable.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 573. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “A little difference of emphasis here and there may suggest itself
  as possible; but in substance the narrative is exactly what it should
  be. He writes from a firm critical theory, and knows how to back his
  own opinions. Yet his speech lacks something of firmness and
  consistency.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 773. N. 18, ‘05. 1670w.

  * “Conspicuously free from provincialism of standards and of feeling,
  conspicuously competent, dispassionate, and, therefore,
  authoritative.” Hamilton W. Mabie.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 827. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Beyond any other biography recently written among us, this book
  gives, by its execution, the impression of a distinct addition to the
  literary resources of our younger authors.” Thomas Wentworth
  Higginson.

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 625. N. 11, ‘05. 1520w.


=Gregg, David; Goodrich, William W., and Carney, Sidney Howard, jr.=
Makers of the American republic: a series of patriotic lectures. $2.
Treat.

  Sixteen historical lectures on the early colonists; The Virginians,
  Pilgrims, Puritans, Hollanders, Scotch, Huguenots, Quakers, and the
  old-time doctors, lawyers, and ministers. Columbus, Washington, our
  patriotic dead, and the black forefathers are also treated.

  “Characterized for the most part by a degree of intellectual
  hospitality and breadth of thought rarely found in similar discussions
  by trinitarian clergymen.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 220. Ag. ‘05. 370w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 190. Jl. ‘05. 30w.


=Gregory, J. C.= Short introduction to the theory of electrolytic
dissociation, *50c. Longmans.

  “This is a useful little book for those students who, after taking a
  course of systematic chemistry, wish to know something of the
  behaviour of electrolytic solutions.” (Nature.) Its four chapters are
  entitled The condition of dissolved substances; Ions and
  precipitation; Hydrogen and hydroxyl ions; Electrolytic and general
  considerations.

  “The language and mode of presentation are simple, and although one
  might take exception to many points of detail, the book, on the whole,
  should prove a trustworthy guide.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 606. Ap. 27, ‘05. 100w.


=Grenfell, Bernard Pyne; Drexel, Lucy Wharton; and Hunt, Arthur
Surridge,= eds. New sayings of Jesus, and fragments of a lost gospel,
from Oxyrhynchus, Part IV. *40c. Oxford.

  “The present volume contains for the most part papyri found in the
  second excavations at Oxyrhynchus in 1903. It will not be as amusing
  to the general reader as certain of the previous volumes, since it
  includes but few of the non-legal and non-literary, but excessively
  human, documents that gave in them such a sparkle of life to the pages
  of a very dead subject.... The volume contains a goodly number of
  interesting legal documents, which increase our knowledge of details
  of Egyptian administration and Graeco-Egyptian law. The number of
  personal letters is, as we have indicated, very few.”—Nation.

         =Nation.= 80: 139. F. 16, ‘05. 990w.


=Grenfell, Wilfred Thomason.= Harvest of the sea: a tale of both sides
of the Atlantic. **$1. Revell.

  Dr. Grenfell, who for twenty years has worked among the deep sea
  fishermen on both sides of the Atlantic, gives a picture of these men,
  their lives, and the revolution, social and religious, wrought by the
  coming of the mission ship among the fishing fleets.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 651. Ag. ‘05, 210w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 471. My. ‘05. 350w.

  “Dr. Grenfell’s narrative of the North Sea fishers
  especially—considered quite without reference to its value as a record
  of evangelization—is stirring, full of the life and tragedy of the
  sea. The account of the Labrador men is briefer and less picturesque.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 243. Ap. 15, ‘05. 320w.

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 170w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 508. Ap. 1, ‘05. 360w.

     + + =Reader.= 6: 473. S. ‘05. 300w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 508. Ap. ‘05. 70w.


=Griffith, J. Quintin.= Helps and hints in nursing. *$1.50. Winston.

  A text-book for nurses, and a guide for the family which gives the
  ordinary details of nursing which the doctor wishes carried out in
  everyday maladies, tells what to do in cases of emergency, gives
  directions for caring for infants and children, and for preserving the
  health.

  “A practical and sensible book which may be commended to use in
  families and by all who have to do with illness.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 334. Ag. 7, ‘05. 20w.


=Griffiths, Arthur George Frederick.= Fifty years of public service.
*$5. Cassell.

  Born in India and entering the English army at the time of the Crimean
  war, as a mere youth, the author saw military service in Crimea, Nova
  Scotia, Montreal, Gibraltar, and Abyssinia, and civil service in
  charge of prisons at Gibraltar, Chatham, and Milbank. This account of
  his career suggests that the material for his novels and detective
  stories was taken from life.

         =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 120w.

  “The author’s style has the unstudied fluency of one who is used to
  writing with the din of the printing-press in his ears and the boy at
  his side waiting for copy. The book is a worthy addition to the
  major’s long list of works, grave and gay.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 325. My. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “You would say Major Griffiths had enjoyed his ‘Fifty years of
  service’ in the living at least as much as you enjoy it in reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 333. My. 20, ‘05. 1410w.


=Griggs, Edward Howard.= Moral education. *$2. Huebsch.

  Professor Griggs points out the aim and scope of his work in the
  following: “a study, as exhaustive as I could make it, of the whole
  problem of moral culture: its purpose in relation to our society, and
  all the means through which that purpose can be attained. My aim has
  been sanity and not novelty, ... to see ‘steadily and whole’ both
  human life and the process of moral culture that leads to it and make
  possible the happiest and most helpful living.”

  “This volume should be carefully read by every parent and teacher in
  the land. It is a work at once eminently practical and yet nobly
  idealistic. He has considered his subject deeply and treats it as only
  a man of rare insight, a true philosopher and a practical teacher
  could present a theme.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 330. S. ‘05. 290w.

  “He writes with beauty and almost invariably with marked clearness; he
  develops very instructively and applies to the work of ethical
  formation the leading results of modern educational investigation.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 81: 126. Ap. ‘05. 580w.

  “This book by Mr. Griggs is one of the significant indications of the
  trend of education in the present time, while in itself it is a
  decided contribution to the philosophy and method of education. Unlike
  much of current educational discussion, the parent is not here made
  subservient to the teacher or entirely ignored.” Leslie Willis
  Sprague.

     + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 379. Ap. ‘05. 940w.

  “The present volume seems to have reached the root of the difficulty
  which confronts modern educators, for it points out wherein they err
  by casting aside the old systems and giving entire precedent to new
  and untried methods. The book is written in a masterly style.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 499. Mr. ‘05. 400w.

  “The book addresses itself especially to the teacher, but will be
  found interesting and helpful to all who are concerned in any way with
  the rearing of children.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 254. F. ‘05. 120w.


=Gronau, Georg.= Titian. $2. Scribner.

  The monograph of the great painter not only tells a graphic story of
  the artist’s life, but describes the picturesque conditions under
  which he worked, the emperors, dukes and bishops who gave him
  commissions, forming a romantic background. The book gives the results
  of the most recent investigations of the authorship of disputed
  masterpieces, is copiously illustrated with fifty odd half-tones, has
  a fine bibliography, and a complete index.

  “Is not so specialized a piece of work as is the standard biography by
  Crowe and Cavalcaselle. It is tersely and vividly written, precisely
  the book for the general reader.” Royal Cortissoz.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 276. F. ‘05. 320w.

  “It is quite up-to-date in its attributions. The side on which their
  usefulness does not seem to increase or greatly enlighten is that of a
  new word concerning the technical performances of great colourists,
  draughtsmen and virile painters. But this lapse Gronau has in common
  with others who write of artists and their work. Such books as these
  become, in a sense, a kind of superior guidebook to galleries, palaces
  and churches, but they are not quite what a student or a connoisseur
  would desire when wishing to be enlightened on the methods, ways, and
  practices of a master painter. Present book is excellent of its kind.”
  Frank Fowler.

       + =Bookm.= 20: 556. F. ‘05. 870w.

  “Dr. Gronau’s volume, marked by cautious accuracy and disinterested
  love of truth, is a model for works of its class. It is a thing of
  high art in itself, and is certainly the best life of Titian that has
  appeared.” George Breed Zug.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 320. My. 1, ‘05. 1000w.


=Grout, Abel Joel.= Mosses with hand-lens and microscope. 26. ed. $1.75
A. J. Grout, 306 Lenox Road, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  This second edition “which follows the same general plan as the first
  edition, is expanded to include 169 of the ‘more common and more
  easily recognized mosses of the northeastern United States,’ as well
  as fifty-four of the hepaticæ of the same region.... The text contains
  something like 118 figures and 39 full-page plates.”—Science.

  “In the matter of typography and illustrations, the work is so much of
  an improvement over its predecessor that it deserves special
  commendation.”

     + + =Science=, n.s. 21: 816. My. 26, ‘05. 230w.


=Grove, Sir George=, ed. Dictionary of music and musicians; new and
thoroughly rev. ed.; ed. by J. A. Fuller Maitland. **$5. Macmillan.

  In undertaking the revision of Sir George Grove’s dictionary which
  appeared twenty-five years ago, the editor aims mainly to bring the
  work down to date. Mr. Maitland, “a man of erudition, good taste and
  sound judgment, has critical acumen, and while he is inclined to a
  thoroughly safe conservatism, such critical remarks as have been
  admitted are for the most part such as are likely to give the reader a
  general idea of the special characteristics of the musicians dealt
  with.” (Ind.)

  * “If the succeeding volumes contain as many valuable additions and
  amplifications as the first, the work will suffice for many years to
  come, and will remain for all time a monument to the learning,
  patience, and judgment of the editor.” W. J. Henderson.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 851. D. ‘05. 1100w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “At last we have an English musical dictionary not only worthy to be
  compared with the French and German dictionaries, but surpassing them
  all in the lateness of its information and in its comprehensive scope.
  Some of the portraits are unworthy of the general high standard.”
  George P. Upton.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 310. My. 1, ‘05. 2770w. (Review of v. 1.)

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 671. Mr. 23, ‘05. 600w. (Review of vol. I.)

  * “Ably and judiciously edited, and it promises to be an indispensable
  compendium for those who are genuinely interested in music or in
  music-makers.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1161. N. 16, ‘05. 70w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “The editing has on the whole been admirably done, and ... Mr. Fuller
  Maitland has amply proved, not only his great ability in dealing with
  a difficult task, but the foresight of those responsible for his
  selections.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 226. Jl. 14, ‘05. 2020w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “Unquestionably the most valuable work of the kind in English, and at
  present superior to any other in any language, considering its
  encyclopaedic character and the substantial quality of its most
  important articles.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 296. My. 6, ‘05. 1710w. (Review of v. 1.)


=Guiney, Louise Imogen.= Hurrell Froude: memoranda and comments. *$3.
Dutton.

  This volume is in two parts, the first, a sketch of Hurrell Froude and
  his life, consisting mainly of letters and journals, the second, a
  collection of comments upon him and his connection with the Oxford
  movement. Outside of those interested in English religious movements,
  Hurrell Froude, brother of the historian, and John Henry Newman’s most
  intimate friend, is perhaps little known, and this book gives in
  detail the man’s influence upon his associates and the religious
  movements of his time, as well as his personality and character.

  “The author’s style is not always unintelligible and precious, and by
  dint of a great deal of quotation we are brought fairly near to that
  strange inspirer of Newman.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 656. My. 27. 230w.

  “It is a work of unusually distinguished merit. In the first place,
  Miss Guiney allows Hurrell Froude to tell his own story. And a second
  feature of this book which calls for praise is that in the pages which
  the biographer has written herself, the style is splendid.”

   + + + =Cath World.= 80: 826. Mr. ‘05. 580w.

  “As a whole the book lacks literary unity, but it is initiative and
  gives an intimate glimpse into a circle of singularly real and fervent
  men. Valuable it is as being illustrative of a phase of the nineteenth
  century.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 381. O. ‘05. 380w.

  “She has brought to her task abundant sympathy and much careful
  preparation. If her judgment is at fault, she has furnished us the
  means of correcting it in no halting fashion. Her collection of
  comments is no mere device for confirming her own views.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 214. Mr. 16, ‘05. 2090w.

  “Miss Guiney’s book, which she does not call a biography, though in
  effect it is one, is a sympathetic account of his life, his character,
  and his work.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 602. S. 16, ‘05. 380w.

  “The editing has been done sympathetically, and, in spite of the
  opportunity offered for the exercise of a rich and rather over-refined
  literary style, with restraint.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 400. F. 11, ‘05. 390w.

         =Spec.= 94: 180. F. 4, ‘05. 320w.


=Gulick, Sidney Lewis.= Evolution of the Japanese. **$2. Revell.

  A fourth edition, revised and enlarged. “It contains a new preface and
  numerous changes in the text, which have been turned into notes and
  placed at the end of the chapters to which they belong.” (N. Y.
  Times.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 370w.


=Gulick, Sidney Lewis.= White peril in the Far East. **$1. Revell.

  The author, an American missionary who has lived long in Eastern Asia,
  discusses the significance of the Russo-Japanese war, which he
  considers a turning point in the world’s history. He holds that there
  is no cause to fear the yellow peril, that Japan is western in spirit
  and civilization, but that the white peril menaces the Orient to-day.

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 559. My. 6. 260w.

  “While in no way profound, it is rich in novel and suggestive points
  of view. It contains one of the best statements of the real causes of
  the war with Russia yet published, and gives an interpretation of the
  Japanese attitude toward the conflict that is agreeably clear,
  concise, and illuminating.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 356. My. 16, ‘05. 580w.

  “A concise, clear and comprehensive presentation of the national and
  international interests involved in present movements and tendencies,
  viewed as growing from the past.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 910. Ap. 8, ‘05. 120w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 755. My. 13, ‘05. 280w.

  “Is a model of compactness and illumination.”

   + + + =Reader.= 6: 591. O. ‘05. 280w.


=Gunsaulus, Frank W.= Paths to power; Central church sermons. *$1.25.
Revell.

  The first group of Dr. Gunsaulus’ sermons to be published. They
  emphasize his right to be classed with such men as Beecher, Brooks and
  Spurgeon. “But to feel their power one must surrender for the time to
  the speaker’s wand and not dissolve the spell by a critical mood.”
  (Outlook.)

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 150w.


=Gwynn, Stephen.= Thomas Moore. **75c. Macmillan.

  The author, who is already known as a novelist and a critic of
  English-Irish literature, is also an Irishman and consequently found
  an unusually happy subject in Thomas Moore. The romantic rise of Moore
  from the Dublin grocery store to London’s rank and fashion is
  detailed. The critical estimate of his work is fully given, and his
  part in the last century’s remarkable advance in poetical technique is
  enlarged upon.

  “His life is excellently set forth in this volume, the author having
  evidently put before him as the object of his task the painting of a
  faithful portrait. Mr. Gwynn has added considerably to his already
  very considerable repute by this capital little book, in which he does
  justice to his subject and to himself.” W. Teignmouth Shore.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 79. Ja. 28, ‘05. 710w.

  “Mr. Gwynn had accomplished no easy task with tact and literary skill,
  if not with accuracy.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 327. Mr. 18. 2340w.

  “A sympathetic treatment of the man and his works.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 20w.

  “Mr. Gwynn’s book is compact with information and well-balanced
  criticism.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 70. Ag. 1, ‘05. 450w.

  “Delightful little volume.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1128. My. 18, ‘05. 330w.

       + =Nation.= 80: 253. Mr. 30, ‘05. 610w.

  “Considered as a portrayal of Moore’s character, this book of Mr.
  Gwynn’s is adequate and satisfactory. It is not, however, eminently
  successful in evoking for the imagination the world in which the poet
  lived. As a literary estimate, while it neither observes its subject
  from a new angle, nor throws new light upon it, it is upon the whole a
  thoroughly competent and workmanlike performance—an orderly,
  trustworthy, and comprehensive statement of the established critical
  opinions regarding Moore’s poetry and prose. Mr. Gwynn has shown
  himself a safe, if neither a brilliant nor remarkably painstaking
  critic.” Horatio S. Krans.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 97. F. 18. ‘05. 2580w.

  “Mr. Gwynn has given us an eminently readable book.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 251. F. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  “Mr. Gwynn’s estimate of Moore is the most noteworthy thing in the
  volume.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 214. F. 11, ‘05. 370w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 381. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

  “We feel that Mr. Gwynn is making quite a nice and workmanlike book to
  fill a supposed cap in a respectable series; we admire his visible yet
  sober efforts to impart a tinge of enthusiasm.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 740. Je. 3, ‘05. 2180w.

  “Mr. Gwynne, who has done his work with much skill and sympathy, has
  never allowed his judgment to be influenced.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 555. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1890w.


=Gwynne, Paul.= Bandolero, †$1.50. Dodd.

  A book which gives a vivid picture of Spanish peasant life. The story
  concerns the only son of the Marquis de Bazan who is kidnapped by his
  father’s enemy, a “bandolero,” and brought up on an Andalusian farm.
  The boy falls in love with his playmate, the bandit’s daughter, and
  altho her father violently opposes their marriage, he at last not only
  gives his consent but sacrifices his life for the son of his enemy.
  Altho the plot is melodramatic, the scenes of country life are homely
  and humorous.

  “The romance is thoroughly interesting, and has a considerable degree
  of literary charm.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 208. O. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  “A good melodramatic novel. The author must know his Spain far better
  than most men.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 191. Mr. 25. ‘05. 300w.

  “As has been said by some one, Mr. Gwynne knows the Spanish peasant as
  well as Miss Wilkins knows the New England farmer. It is this part of
  this book, as it was with his former story, which attracts us in Mr.
  Gwynne’s work. The plot of the story ... seems to us on the
  melodramatic order and less worthy of praise.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 704. Mr. 18, ‘05. 180w.

  “A logical, well-atmosphered story whose interest is steadily
  sustained and whose denouement is satisfactory.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 473. S. ‘05. 180w.

  “Mr. Gwynne has painted for us the large sun-lit landscape of the
  Andalusian plains and the slow comedy of village life with a certainty
  of touch and a depth of colour which are entirely admirable. But apart
  from merits of atmosphere and scenery, he has a very stirring story to
  tell and much excellent character-drawing. Mr. Gwynne, though he deals
  with the favourite constituents of melodrama, is always a serious
  novelist, and his characters are as carefully studied as his plot. Mr.
  Gwynne has found a field in which he need fear no rival, and we
  welcome a book so full of freshness and vitality.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 90. Ja. 21, ‘05. 400w.




                                   H


=Haeckel, Ernest Heinrich Philipp August.= Evolution of man: a popular
scientific study; tr. by Joseph McCabe. *$10. Putnam.

  The present translation has been made from “the fifth (enlarged)
  edition of the German work. The abstruse and puzzling phenomena of
  embryology occupy the whole first volume.... The second volume is
  devoted to the vexed problem of our ancestry—beginning with the lowest
  forms of life and working upwards thru ‘Our worm-like ancestors,’ ‘Our
  fish-like ancestors,’ ‘Our five-toed ancestors,’ and ‘Our ape-like
  ancestors.’ But besides these we have some luminous chapters on the
  evolution of the nervous system, sense organs, vascular system, and so
  on. A summary on the ‘results of anthropogeny’ closes the book.”
  (Acad.)

  Reviewed by W. P. Pycraft.

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 489. My. 6, ‘05. 1680w.

  * “As always, he is prodigious of learning, fertile alike in
  illuminating suggestion and extraordinary new words; and as always,
  totally at sea as to what may reasonably be said in a popular book.”
  E. T. Brewster.

   + + — =Atlan.= 96: 682. N. ‘05. 410w.

  * “A translation which is, on the whole, excellent.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 512. D. 21, ‘05. 360w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 224. Ap. 8, ‘05. 330w.

  “The broad fact of development and the main details of the process are
  undeniably given by Prof. Haeckel with a wealth of illustration and a
  positiveness of statement which aids both understanding and memory,
  even if it somewhat obscures the complexity of the problem and the
  insecurity of the conclusions to which one is lead.” Joseph Jacobs.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 569. S. 2, ‘05. 1660w.

  “It is unfortunate that more care has not been taken with the
  translation and proof-reading, in the latter especially with regard to
  proper names. On the whole, however, the translation is readable and
  set forth in idiomatic English.” J. P. McM.

   + + — =Science=, n.s. 22: 137. Ag. 4, ‘05. 1550w.


=Haeckel, Ernest Heinrich.= Wonders of life. *$2. Harper.

  This volume is supplementary to the author’s “Riddle of the universe,”
  and is an answer to the thousands of letters and the many published
  attacks the first work called forth. It contains a quantity of
  biological information and is probably too technical to be popular.
  “His whole method of argument is based on the continuity of life, the
  unity of nature, and his metaphysics grows out of his biology. The
  book is divided into four parts, in which he treats respectively of
  the knowledge, the nature, the functions and the history of life.
  Altho he is now in his seventy-second year he has not lost the skill
  in classification and terminology which has given him his special
  reputation, and he uses effectively the tabular form and parallel
  columns to elucidate his theories and to contrast them with those of
  his opponents.” (Ind.)

  “The chapters on ‘Forms of life,’ ‘Monera,’ and ‘Nutrition’ are
  written by a master in these fields and tend to compensate for the
  enormous mass of paralogisms and unproved assertions that constitute
  perhaps the greater part of the remaining chapters.” C. W. Saleeby.

     + — =Acad.= 68: 82. Ja. 28, ‘05. 700w.

  “Yet the book must be respected for its learning, and is absorbing
  even when not convincing.”

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 383. Ap. ‘05. 130w.

  “The book is translated into good English, but there are various slips
  or misprints in names and technical terms.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 232. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1000w.

         =Ind.= 58: 206. Ja. 26, ‘05. 1130w.

  “It [the translation] is on the whole clear and vigorous, but it
  betrays inexpertness. The translator has not the vaguest idea of what
  he is translating. Defective proofreading.... This book expresses the
  sincere convictions of a veteran who has done much for biology.”

     + — =Nature.= 71: 313. F. 2, ‘05. 1550w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 270w.

  “Notwithstanding this obscurity in parts, the whole book is fairly
  clear as to its tendency.” Joseph Jacobs.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 570. S. 2, ‘05. 1210w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 505. F. 25, ‘05. 390w.

  “After one wades through this terrible terminology of the scientific
  philosopher he is gratified, however, to find that he has been led
  always to a clear conclusion. Such is the nature of the question that
  much depends on the original bias of the reader.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 214. F. 11, ‘05. 860w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 383. Mr. ‘05. 100w.

  “Has been well translated by Mr. Joseph McCabe.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 788. My. 27, ‘05. 200w.

  “On the whole we find it disappointing. In the present book we got a
  mass of biological information, often of the most obscure kind, set
  forth with all the ability of an acknowledged master in this branch of
  science: but in conjunction with this we get a considerable quantity
  of loose thinking of a kind which passes for philosophical often
  presented in a very superficial manner.”

     + — =The Westminster R.= 163: 103. Ja. ‘05 530w.


=Haenssgen, Oswald H.= Suction gas. $1. Gas engine pub.

  “Written, according to the author, to supply the lack, in this
  country, of information on the subject of suction gas producers, and
  more briefly of their first cost, cost of running and possible utility
  and development.”—Engin. N.

  Reviewed by Alfred B. Forstall.

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 184. F. 16, ‘05. 220w.


=Hafiz, Mohammed Shems-ed-Din.= Odes from the Divan of. Freely rendered
from literal translations by Richard Le Gallienne. *$1.50. Page.

  “Hafiz has the epicureanism of Omar Khayyam without his philosophy. He
  sings of nothing but wine and love.... Mr. Le Gallienne has not merely
  translated, he has transmuted the odes into true English poetry, and
  any one but an antiquarian will prefer to read them in this form
  rather than in the literal versions.”—Ind.

  “In short, while Mr. Le Gallienne has not found much more to tell us
  in this than in his last Persian study, he has not shown any greater
  poetical merit; but, on the contrary, by his more ambitious metrical
  scheme and greater dependence upon himself, he has been led into worse
  technical blunders.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 1123. O. 28, ‘05. 980w.

  “The only fault we have to find with Mr. Le Gallienne is that he is
  inclined to make his task easy by diluting his poetry until it flows
  freely. With more pains he might have kept more of the terseness and
  spirit of the original.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 687. S. 14, ‘05. 540w.

  “His work is frankly not a translation by a scholar, but a poet’s
  version of another poet. Jarring notes like these are the more
  discordant when one thinks of the beauty of so much of his version,
  and remembers the undoubted ability of Mr. Le Gallienne.”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 665. N. 4, ‘05. 710w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 330w.

  “Many of these odes have the lyrical quality, and that while they may
  not be in all points acceptable to Oriental scholars, they give to the
  reader sufficiently well the effect of Persian imagery and the essence
  of the poet’s feeling.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 44. S. 2, ‘05. 220w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 120w.


=Haggard, Andrew Charles Parker.= Silver Bells, †$1.50. Page.

  Stories of hunting and fishing abound in this tale of a man who leaves
  home and friends for the care free life of the Canadian Indians.
  Silver Bells, an Indian girl, is the heroine.

  “Col. Haggard has gone back to Fenimore Cooper for his model in this
  story. The story may amuse boys, perhaps.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 347. My. 27, ‘05. 370w.


=Haggard, (Henry) Rider.= Ayesha: the return of “She.” †$1.50.
Doubleday.

  In this sequel to “She.” the book which thrilled and fascinated twenty
  years ago, “Holly and Leo search full sixteen years for Ayesha and
  find her at last, the priestess of a strange religion, half
  Isis-worship, half fire-worship, on a lonely mountain in no man’s land
  at the back of beyond, there are hair-breadth escapes from avalanches
  and from mad Khans who hunt people to death with bloodhounds,
  mysterious doings in great temples and on the roof of the world,
  fierce battles, in which nature fights for Ayesha against her old foe
  Amenartas.... And Leo Vincey having won, after many an ordeal, his
  bride, dies on the eve of bliss and Ayesha herself, now half goddess,
  half weak and wilful woman, passes away from the earth forever.”
  (Lond. Times.)

  “Not all the wishes that we could form of submitting our imagination
  to that of the author result in a moment of illusion.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1026. O. 7, ‘05. 260w.

  “‘Ayesha’ fails to exercise the fascination of ‘She’; and the reason
  must, perhaps, be sought, not in Mr. Haggard, but in ourselves.
  ‘Ayesha’ deserves indeed a vogue only second to that of her previous
  incarnation.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905. 2: 538. O. 21. 230w.

  “Has our taste changed and our discrimination grown keener through the
  intervening years, or has the pen of Mr. Haggard lost its magic?”
  Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 22:236. N. ‘05. 510w.

  “If the reader will lay aside doubt and scepticism for the old ready
  belief, he cannot fail to feel again the old pleasure, the old
  interests, and the old thrills.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 140w.

  “‘Ayesha’ is not ‘She,’ and the lovers of ‘She’ are a little stiffer
  in the mental joints.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 329. O. 6, ‘05. 460w.

  “No doubt, allowing for the disillusionment of years, this sequel is
  as well-wrought as its original. Probably it is even superior
  geographically, ethnologically, theologically, and pyro-technically.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 649. O. 7, ‘05. 310w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39:572. O. 28, ‘05. 120w.

  * “‘Ayesha,’ continuing ‘She,’ betokens no weariness and no decay.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 762. D. ‘05. 70w.

  “The novel shows fine imagination, but it is surely an artistic
  mistake to throw doubt on the reincarnation story which readers of
  ‘She’ were bound to accept.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 595. N. 4, ‘05. 880w.

  “As in all Mr. Haggard’s stories, there are some admirable adventures,
  and the tale is told with much skill.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 657. O. 28, ‘05. 370w.


=Haggard, (Henry) Rider.= Gardener’s year. *$4. Longmans.

  There are two gardens described in this book, one on the eastern shore
  of Suffolk, where the author, by planting a certain beach-grass, has
  successfully checked the inroads of the sea, and the other at
  Ditchingham, where he has three acres under cultivation. He has six
  glass houses and two ponds in which he grows aquatic plants. With the
  assistance of two gardeners he raises fruit, vegetables and flowers,
  making a specialty of orchids. There are 25 illustrations from
  photographs.

  “In the volume under notice he details his joys and sorrows as a
  gardener in a manner which is well nigh certain to prove very
  acceptable to the vast army of garden lovers.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 60. Ja. 21, ‘05. 630w.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 503. Ap. 15. 350w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 296. Ap. 13, ‘05. 920w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 553. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1840w.


=Haggard, (Henry) Rider.= Poor and the land; being a report of the
Salvation army colonies in the United States and at Hadleigh, England;
with a scheme of national land settlement, and an introduction by H.
Rider Haggard. 75c. Longmans.

  By permission of the British government, Mr. Haggard’s report to
  parliament of the results of his investigation of the Salvation army
  colonies is re-printed in book form. It contains full descriptions of
  these colonies with reports of conversations with the colonists,
  letters, etc., and is illustrated from photographs.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 528. O. 28, ‘05. 440w.

  “Any one who believes in state-aided emigration as a cure for some of
  our graver social evils will be grateful to Mr. Haggard for his
  thorough investigation of the question and his thoughtful proposals
  towards a solution.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 354. S. 9, ‘05. 1580w.


=Haile, Martin.= Mary of Modena, her life and letters. *$4. Dutton.

  “The biography of the ‘fascinating’ princess—the only Italian queen
  who ever shared the English throne—as it appears in her own letters
  and the dispatches and letters of her contemporaries.... The volume is
  illustrated with photogravures.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “A valuable addition to the history of her time.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1197. N. 18, ‘05. 130w.

  “But it is heaped together rather than written, and the author has no
  gift of historical portraiture. Here and there interesting facts
  emerge; there is, alas, no life in the whole.”

     — + =Lond. Times.= 4: 361. O. 27, ‘05. 720w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 361. Je. 3, ‘05. 340w.

  “An interesting book on the life of a young woman of little
  importance.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 759. N. 11, ‘05. 840w.

  * “Is a sympathetic survey of Mary’s life. The interest is both
  historic and sentimental.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  “The one source of regret is that Mr. Haile, manifestly tireless in
  research and an adept in converting the results of research into
  narrative has not preserved a judicial attitude.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 250w.


=Haines, Alice Calhoun.= See =Knipe, Emilie Benson.=


=Haines, Alice Calhoun.= See =Mar, Alice.=


* =Haines, Henry Stevens.= Restrictive railway legislation. **$1.25.
Macmillan.

  This volume is made up of twelve lectures given by the author in April
  and May, 1905, at the Boston university school of law, “the purpose
  being to present the manner in which legislation and judicial
  decisions have affected the operations of railway corporations in
  their relations to the public.”

  * “Perhaps the most interesting portion of Col. Haines’s book, and a
  unique and valuable record to the student, is the historical matter
  which it contains.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 54: 533. N. 16, ‘05. 930w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  * “The author discusses in an academic spirit, and without heat,
  questions which are the subject of very heated discussion by the press
  and by public men. The volume will be valuable to all students of this
  subject whether they deal with it from the point of view of the
  publicist or of the railroad manager.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 430. O. 21, ‘05. 190w.

  * “Conservative discussions of the whole question, conducted in a
  judicial temper.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 938. D. 16, ‘05. 120w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 637. N. ‘05. 80w.


=Haines, Jennie Day=, comp. Sovereign woman versus mere man: a medley of
quotation. **$1. Elder.

  In these well chosen quotations from writers of both sexes and many
  ages the compiler has compared and contrasted man and woman in various
  phases and stages of their being. The left hand page applies to
  sovereign woman, the one facing it to mere man, and they are presented
  as heroines and heroes, spinsters and bachelors, wives and husbands,
  and as related to love, matrimony, fads, fame, ways, work, religion
  and many other things. The marginal decorations and general get up
  make the volume an attractive gift-book.

  * “The quotations, which are of very miscellaneous authorship, possess
  more than a superficial aptness, and there is a refreshing absence of
  that attempt at epigrammatic smartness which spoils most books of this
  type.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 384. D. 1, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1384. D. 14, ‘05. 120w.


=Hains, Thornton Jenkins.= Black barque. †$1.50. Page.

  The adventures of a sailor aboard the slave-ship, Gentle Hand, on her
  last cruise in the year 1815, form the subject of this new romance of
  the sea.

  Reviewed by Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 519. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

  “In spite of its exaggerations, it is probable that one does not get
  from this story a very erroneous idea of slave ships, as they were in
  1815.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 315. My. 13, ‘05. 610w.

  “Language somewhat surprising for the rough character he makes himself
  out to be.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 60w.

  “Mr. Hains’s story—one of pure adventure—is vivid and exciting.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 473. S. ‘05. 90w.

 *     + =Sat. R.= 100: 600. N. 4, ‘05. 180w.


=Haldane, J. W. C.= Life as an engineer; its lights, shades and
prospects. *$2. Spon.

  “This volume would make an excellent present for a lad with a taste
  for mechanics, or for a young man thinking of an engineer’s
  occupation.... The reader learns something not only of the marvels of
  machinery ... but of the likelihood of earning a living in this
  particular line.... The author has given an autobiographical form to
  his book, relating his experiences at various great centres of
  industry, as at Glasgow and at Birkenhead.”—Spec.

         =Spec.= 94: 147. Ja. 28, ‘05. 300w.


=Hale, Edward Everett.= Man without a country. *25c. Little.

  A new edition of a story “written in the darkest period of the Civil
  war to show what love of country is.” A young army officer,
  court-martialed for treason charges, curses the United States and
  wishes that he may never hear its name again. As punishment his wish
  is granted, and for fifty years he is “a man without a country.” He is
  carried on one long cruise after another by government vessels and
  barred from hearing or seeing a word from home.


=Hale, Edward Everett=, jr. Dramatists of to-day. *$1.50. Holt.

  Rostand, Hauptmann, Sudermann, Pinero, Shaw, Phillips, Maeterlinck:
  being an informal discussion of their significant work. This book is
  exactly what it declares itself to be in the fore-going sub-title, but
  in its informal discussion is matter of much interest, for the
  dramatists and their dramas are discussed from the viewpoint of both
  literature and the stage. They and their works are chatted about and
  compared in a fireside fashion that makes the reader feel as tho he
  had entertained a pleasing and instructive guest, one who can vividly
  revive memories of “Cyrano de Bergerac,” “L’Aiglon,” “Die versunkene
  glocke,” “Magda,” “Sweet lavender,” “The second Mrs. Tanqueray,”
  “Candida,” “Paolo and Francesca,” and “Ulysses.”

  “These papers are what is called readable: chatty, urbane, a little
  ostentatiously inconsequent, perhaps, and familiar not always in the
  best sense.” H. W. Boynton.

       + =Atlan.= 95: 842. Je. ‘05. 580w.

  “Strangely immature judgments and ... oddly egotistic digressions from
  which the author forgets to return. He has an amazing capacity for
  misunderstanding the things he writes about.” Olivia Howard Dunbar.

     — — =Critic.= 47: 90. Jl. ‘05. 160w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 357. My. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  “An amiable and quite unacademic vagueness is ... the chief
  characteristic. His English style leaves much to be improved.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 14. Jl. 6, ‘05. 420w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 249. Ap. 15, ‘05. 290w.

  “His little book, modest in style and also in spirit, is a fresh and
  entertaining piece of writing.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 138. My. 13, ‘05. 240w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 50w.


=Hale, Harris Grafton.= Who then is this? a study of the personality of
Jesus. *$1.25. Pilgrim press.

  “The personality of Jesus is exhibited as in a normally human
  development, attaining thru communion with God a transcendence beyond
  all measure of comparison. The work avoids technical theology, but its
  Christological view is clearly of the Ritschlian type. Mr. Hale is a
  Congregational minister.”—Outlook.

  “Not without attractiveness from a literary point of view.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 151. Jl. 20, ‘05. 160w.

  “This is, on the whole, a strong book. The method of the work is
  inductive, and its style is clear and vigorous.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 196. My. 20, ‘05. 140w.


=Hale, William.= Dauntless viking. $1.50. Badger.

  The foreword states that “this story of the Gloucester fisheries is a
  conscientious study of the local life and color as it actually
  exists.” It follows the fortunes of a young viking who comes to
  America and casts his lot among the fishermen of Cape Ann, and is told
  in the broken English of the sons of Norway. It describes a hard life
  and does not close upon a happy ending, but lets the hero win success
  and happiness, and then ends grimly.


=Hall, Charles Cuthbert.= Christian belief interpreted by Christian
experience. *$1.50. Univ. of Chicago press.

  These lectures were delivered in India, Ceylon and Japan on the
  Barrows foundation, 1902-1903, and are now submitted to Western
  readers in book form that they may see “the manner and style of the
  work done in India for Indians.” Written in that spirit of broad
  sympathy which is essential if the Christian would successfully
  approach the non-Christian mind, they appeal to all creeds, to all
  ages, to all seekers after God.

  “The foremost merit of President Hall’s ‘Barrows lectures’ is their
  supreme tact, their gracious Christian courtesy.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 752. S. 28, ‘05. 490w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 558. Ag. 26, ‘05. 140w.

  “The tone of the book is ironic and characterized by the true
  Christian spirit of a broad catholicity.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 413. S. 23, ‘05. 530w.


=Hall, Edward.= Henry VIII.; with an introd. by C: Whibley. 2v. *$12.
Grafton press.

  This text is reprinted from the folio edition of 1550. In its quaint
  English it gives an account of the social rather than the political
  phases of the reign of the “high and prudent prince, King Henry the
  Eighth, the indubitate flower, and very heire” of Lancaster and York.
  It gives a brilliant and interesting picture of the early 16th
  century, it narrates faithfully, but lets many great heads go to the
  block without comment. It was safer so in those times.

  “Admirable alike in print, paper, format, style, and introduction.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 9. Ja. 7, 1030w.

  “This present book disarms critics, so far as concerns Hall’s gift of
  seeing things, and of using a dignified old English which now and
  then ... rises to something like splendour.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 291. F. 25, ‘05. 1620w.


* =Hall, Jennie.= Men of old Greece. †$1.50. Little.

  Four chapters graphically sketching history and biography are
  “Leonidas,” “Themistocles,” in which this hero is set in the midst of
  the events that led up to the victories of Marathon and Salamis,
  “Phidias and the Parthenon,” and “Socrates.” The illustrations include
  eight full-page plates and a number of drawings suggestive of types,
  customs and dress.

  * “Makes good reading for the boys of to-day.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 911. D. 23, ‘05. 220w.


=Hall, R. N., and Neal, W. G.= Great Zimbabwe, Mashonaland, Rhodesia.
*$6. Dutton.

  “This is a detailed account of two years’ (1902-1904) examination work
  on behalf of the government of Rhodesia.... Mr. Hall writes briefly on
  the area of the ruins, burial places of the old colonists, absence of
  inscriptions, two periods of gold manufacture, the Elliptical temple,
  the Acropolis ruins.... Chapters are given to the Acropolis, the
  people, their customs, manners, religions and habits, the ruins,
  ancient architecture, relics and finds, the Elliptical temple, etc....
  The volume is profusely illustrated from drawings and photographs.”—N.
  Y. Times.

  “However fascinating these researches into hoary antiquity may be, the
  great value of Mr. Hall’s work consists in its ample and careful
  description of the ruins as they are, and in the plans and photographs
  which illustrate it.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 501. Ap. 15. 1250w.
       + =Nation.= 80: 507. Je. 22, ‘05. 610w.
         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 185. Mr. 25, ‘05. 390w.

  “In the main his account is intended for the archæologist rather than
  for the general reader.”

       + =Outlook.= 80:139. My. 13, ‘05. 330w.


=Halsey, R. T. H.= Boston port bill as pictured by a contemporary London
cartoonist. Grolier club.

  “Through the associations of the remarkable series of cartoons
  described and beautifully reproduced the author is led to tell
  directly or incidentally almost everything that is known about the
  Port bill ... [He] traces, through little-known letters, newspaper
  accounts, and pamphlets, public and private opinion about the Port
  bill both in England and America.... Five of the mezzotint
  cartoons ... were the work of one man, Philip Dawe, a pupil of
  Hogarth.... Other humorous mezzotints ... were put forth by anonymous
  cartoonists, and the subject is further fitly illustrated by portraits
  from contemporary prints and pictures of statues and famous historical
  buildings.”—Outlook.

     + + =Outlook.= 79:907. Ap. 8, ‘05. 580w.


=Halstead, George Bruce.= Rational geometry. $1.75. Wiley.

  Altho Euclid still holds its place as the one authoritative text book
  on geometry, modern criticism tends to make pure reason the only court
  of appeal, and doubts the reliability of the intuition of our senses.
  This “Rational geometry” upholds this view, using points, lines and
  planes as the names of things, the physical conception of which is not
  necessary. “The object is to deduce the conclusions which follow from
  certain assumed relations between these things, so that if the
  relations hold, the conclusions follow, whatever these things may be.
  Space is the totality of these things; its properties are solely
  logical, and varied in character according to the assumed fundamental
  relations. These assumed relations which develop space concepts that
  are apparently in accord with vision constitute the modern foundations
  of Euclidean space.” (Science). At a hasty glance the book does not
  appear to differ from ordinary text-books, diagrams are given, but not
  as essential to the argument. Altho the method of development is new,
  all the school propositions of both plane and solid geometry are
  eventually developed.

  * Reviewed by E. T. Brewster.

         =Atlan.= 96: 682. N. ‘05. 180w.

  “The aim of modern rational geometry is to pass from premise to
  conclusion solely by the force of reason. Mr. Halstead is the first to
  write an elementary text-book, which adopts a modern view, and in this
  respect his ‘Rational geometry’ is epoch-making. It seems as if the
  present text-book ought not to be above the heads of the average
  elementary students, and that it should serve to develop logical power
  as well as practical geometrical ideas.” Arthur S. Hathaway.

     + + =Science,= n. s. 21: 183. F. 3, ‘05. 1090w.


=Hamilton, Sylla W.= Forsaking all others: a story of Sherman’s march
through Georgia. $1.50. Neale.

  A Union soldier, by persistent kindness to a fiery daughter of the
  South wins her, and makes her see that though her home lies devastated
  in the wake of Sherman’s army, and her childhood’s lover lies dead
  upon the battle field, a great right has grown out of these many
  wrongs. The book gives a vivid picture of Georgia’s sufferings during
  the war, and of the brutality of Sherman’s men.


=Hammond, Captain Harold.= Pinkey Perkins: just a boy. †$1.50. Century.

  Wholesome fun pervades this story of Pinkey, the boy, his pranks, his
  love affairs, and his troubles. The reader’s sympathy is wholly with
  him in his contests with an over-zealous teacher, in his celebration
  of April fool’s day, and July fourth, and in his encounters with old
  Hostetters, for Pinkey is always quick-witted, and never malicious.

  “Is a little different from most boys’ books. He is never monotonous,
  however.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 722. O. 28, ‘05. 150w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14, ‘05. 80w.


=Hammond, Mrs. L. H.= Master-word, †$1.50 Macmillan.

  A story of Tennessee, which treats of the race question. Viry, whose
  mother is three parts white and whose father is a Southern gentleman,
  feels the call of the white race but is doomed to be relegated to the
  black. Loathing any affiliation with them, she is one of them, and the
  slight arguments used by her dead father’s wife, who forgives her
  husband and nobly tries to do her duty by his alien child, neither
  help her nor solve the problem. There are other characters and an
  account of the development of the phosphate region.

  “It is the first compassionate, intelligent interpretation ever
  written by any white person, North or South, of that pathetic class of
  men and women who suffer the loneliness and humiliation of a peculiar
  condition. The sympathetic attitude of the book merits all praise, and
  it is a story full of incident and interest.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 902. Ap. 20, ‘05. 470w.

  “The author has written with sincerity and with a high purpose; and,
  although there are things regrettable in her book, and she has fallen
  short of her aim, she has done some admirable work, and has achieved a
  striking story, quite out of the ordinary.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 130. Mr. 4, ‘05. 790w.

  “The story is unusual in its nobility of spirit and its sanity.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 773. Ap. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “It is admirably constructed and well carried out save for a somewhat
  forced and over-pathetic conclusion.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 713. My. 6, ‘05. 100w.

  “‘The master-word’ is a book that stands far above the average of
  contemporary fiction.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 245w.


=Hampson, W. J.= Radium explained. **50c. Dodd.

  “This little book ... will ... serve a useful purpose in giving an
  elementary acquaintance with the subject of radio-activity, so far as
  that is accessible to those with little scientific knowledge....
  Probably one of the most valuable chapters in the book is that on the
  medical aspects of radium.”—Nature.

  “The language is simple and clear and should be comprehensible to any
  one with the ordinary knowledge of chemistry and physics.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1366. Je. 15, ‘05. 140w.

     — — =Nation.= 81: 33. Jl. 13, ‘05. 160w.

  “The explanations given of the experimental properties of radium are,
  so far as we have observed, clear and accurate.” R. J. S.

   + + — =Nature.= 71: 530. Ap. 6, ‘05. 610w.

  “As a preparation for the further study of the new element, or for
  those who wish merely to keep well abreast of the world to-day, his
  little volume has an important place.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 442. Jl. 1, ‘05. 310w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 447. Je. 17, ‘05. 30w.

  “Dr. Hampson has a fine sense of value and proportion, both in subject
  matter and style.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 470w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 294. F. 25, ‘05. 180w.


=Hanauer, J. E.= Tales told in Palestine; ed. by H. G. Mitchell, *$1.25.
Jennings.

  A collection of folk-lore stories of ancient and modern Palestine,
  gathered by a long-time resident of that land, and a contributor to
  the publication of the Palestine exploration fund. The folk-tales fall
  into five groups: “Anecdotes more or less historical,” “Legends of
  saints and heroes,” “Stories of modern miracles,” “Tales embodying
  popular superstitions,” and “Specimens of oriental wit and wisdom.”
  There are a few helpful notes and numerous illustrations.

  “As entertaining as any book of travel could be. Its combinations of
  shrewdness and superstition, naiveté and astuteness, its worldly wit
  and wisdom so other-worldly than our own, furnish an agreeable and
  wholesome mental recreation for a leisure hour.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 145. Ja. 14, ‘05. 80w.

  “Charming weird folk-lore tales.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 250. F. ‘05. 60w.


=Hanchett, Henry Granger.= Art of the musician: a guide to the
intelligent appreciation of music, **$1.50 Macmillan.

  The purpose of this book is “to supply the demand of those mature
  lovers of music who wish to understand the aims and purposes of a
  composer, some of the methods of his work, and to get some ground for
  fairly judging his attainments and results. It aims to supply such
  information as should make concert-going more satisfactory, listening
  to music more intelligent, and that may assist in elevating the
  standards of church, theatrical and popular music.”

  “Undoubtedly there is need of books of this kind, but it is to be
  feared that this one will not accomplish its excellent object, because
  of the author’s diffuseness and lack of lucidity.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 480. My. ‘05. 90w.

  “A unique and useful book, and one which goes far to demonstrate his
  theory that music can be thoroughly and usefully taught without
  teaching the art of performance.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 419. Je. 16, ‘05. 420w.

  “In short, it is a treatise on how to listen to music that he gives
  us, and it is a very good one.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 693. S. 21, ‘05. 640w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 380. My. 11, ‘05. 410w.

  “And while Mr. Hanchett may not have got to the bottom of all that he
  discusses, much of what he says is useful and much will be
  illuminating to the intelligent student who follows him through his
  discourse and scrutinizes the examples he gives.” Richard Aldrich.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 410w.

  “Useful, however, as this book is sure to be, it is not free from
  certain evident defects.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 343. Je. 3, ‘05. 400w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 835. My. 27, ‘05. 250w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 510. Ap. ‘05. 70w.


=Hancock, Harrie Irving, and Higashi, Katsukuma.= Complete Kano
jiu-jitsu, *$4.50. Putnam.

  The Kano system of jiu-jitsu, the official jiu-jitsu of the Japanese
  government is dealt with in this volume. It also contains chapters on
  the serious and fatal blows and on kuatsu, the Japanese science of the
  restoration of life.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 100w.

  “Beyond doubt, it is the most comprehensive work on the subject in
  England.” Adachi Kinnosuké.

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 389. Ag. 17, ‘05. 140w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 118. Ag. 10, ‘05. 230w.

  “The volume is the most helpful and comprehensive treatise on
  jiu-jitsu that has yet been published.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 571. S. 2, ‘05. 1130w.

  “A manual of the most approved form of the Japanese art of combat.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 836. Jl. 29, ‘05. 60w.

  “So far as we have examined, every trick is sufficiently pictured and
  explained.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 415. S. 23, ‘05. 550w.

         =Spec.= 95: 263. Ag. 19, ‘05. 30w.


=Hancock, Harrie Irving.= Physical culture life: a guide for all who
seek the simple laws of abounding health, **$1.25. Putnam.

  The purpose of this book is “to represent in a clear and succinct way,
  the real aims and methods of the physical culture movement that is
  marching onward in England and the United States.” The reader is urged
  to follow “the plain and easily learned laws of physical culture.” and
  is told how to exercise the individual muscles of his body, and how
  much depends upon water and fresh air. The volume is well illustrated.

  Reviewed by Eustace Miles.

     — + =Acad.= 68: 491. My. 6, ‘05. 760w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 422. Je. 16, ‘05. 80w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 271. Ag. 3, ‘05. 40w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 89. F. 11, ‘05. 340w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 215. Ap. 8, ‘05. 260w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 634. Ap. 22, ‘05. 140w.


=Hand, James Edward=, ed. Ideals of science and faith: essays by various
authors. **$1.60. Longmans.

  A series of ten essays, each from a different hand, and divided into
  two groups. The first six are included under the general title,
  “Approaches through science and education,” and deal “with the
  possible contemporary relations between science and religion
  (relations of an ironical nature) from the standpoint of the lay
  expert.” (Science). They are as follows: Physics, Sir O. Lodge;
  Biology, J. A. Thompson; Psychology, J. H. Muirhead; Sociology, V. V.
  Branford; Ethics, B. Russell; General and technical education, P.
  Geddes. The second group, entitled “Approaches through faith,”
  presents the clerical standpoint in its various phases as follows: The
  Presbyterian approach, J. Kelman; A Church of England approach, R.
  Payne; The church as seen from the outside, P. N. Waggett; The Church
  of Rome, W. Ward.

         =Atlan.= 95: 702, My. ‘05. 640w.

  “Is conceived after an admirable plan. The minority of essays, which
  are good, are so thoroughly good, that they lift the work up to a high
  rank as a sadly-needed eirenicon.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 80: 675. F. ‘05. 1150w.

  “A rather prosy introduction. The essays are of various degrees of
  merit.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 87. F. 1, ‘05. 640w.

  “It deserves to be commended. A very remarkable series.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 41. Ja. 5, ‘05. 970w. (Summary of book.)

  Reviewed by Charles M. Bakewell.

 *     + =Int. J. Ethics.= 16: 105. O. ‘05. 3530w.

  “The plan of the work is novel, even daring, and conjures up piquant
  expectancy. No doubt the work is tentative, not conclusive. The
  collection remains notable and has everything to recommend it to
  reflective men, no matter on which side of the fence their main
  pre-suppositions happen to lie.” R. M. Wenley.

   + + — =Science,= n.s. 21: 26. Ja. 26, ‘05. 760w.


* =Handel, George Frederick.= Songs and airs; ed. by Ebenezer Prout. pa.
$1.50; cl. $2.50. Ditson.

  The two volumes of Handel’s songs, one for high voice, the other for
  low, are recent additions to “The musicians library.” The songs in
  each are prefaced by a sketch of Handel’s life and a brief note on his
  different compositions.


* =Hanotaux, Gabriel.= Contemporary France, tr. from the French. 4v. ea.
*$3.75. Putnam.

  This “record of the inner diplomacy of the great powers of Europe
  during the last thirty years” is issued in four volumes, each complete
  in itself. The political figures of each period are brilliantly
  described. Volume I. France in 1870-1873, treats of the
  Franco-Prussian war and the close of the second empire; Volume II.,
  France in 1874-1878, gives the history of the Broglie cabinets
  together with the attempt to restore the monarchy. Volume III., covers
  1879-1889 and Volume IV., 1890-Dec. 31, 1900.

  * “The part of the volume which deals with art and letters strikes us
  as poor.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 541. O. 21. 260w. (Review of v. 2.)

  * “The most interesting chapters are perhaps those which attempt to
  survey the soul of France, as it expressed itself in literature and
  the arts in the years succeeding the war.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 385. N. 10, ‘05. 630w. (Review v. 2.)

  * “The second volume of M. Hanotaux’s monumental work emphasizes the
  good qualities of its predecessor. First of all, the narration bears
  the marks of intimate experience. The volume is thus a distinct and
  notable contribution to history.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 240w. (Review v. 2.)


* =Harben, William Nathaniel.= Pole Baker; a novel. †$1.50. Harper.

  Another story of northern Georgia of which Pole Baker, who has already
  appeared as a humorous character in “Abner Daniel,” is the central
  figure. He is here made not only humorous but forceful and even
  dramatic and he tells many good yarns and plays an important part in
  the love affair of an unsteady young merchant and a girl named
  Cynthia.

  * “A somewhat crude if spirited story. There is no part of the
  narrative that impresses one either with its reality or its charm. As
  a novel, it cannot be considered a success.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “The translations given of the sadness and splendor of married love,
  the whimsical veracity of the whole conception, shows this to be the
  author’s best work in fiction so far.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1228. N. 23, ‘05. 210w.

  * “If they are occasionally innocently coarse they are yet very truly
  and forcibly moral in intention.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 528. O. 28, ‘05. 100w.


=Harbottle, Thomas Benfield.= Dictionary of battles from the earliest
date to the present time. *$2. Dutton.

  This book is a companion volume to “Dictionary of historical
  allusions.” The author, who has compiled several excellent
  dictionaries of quotations, died while this work was going to press,
  so the proof-reading and indexing was done by Colonel P. H. Dalbiac,
  who had collaborated with him in earlier works. The book is brought
  close to date—there are five entries under the heading Russo-Japanese
  war.

  “The more modern battles are more efficiently dealt with than the
  ancient, and we look in vain for any mention of the wars of the
  ancient Egyptians, Assyrians, and Israelites. With this exception the
  book is adequate.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 35. Ja. 14, ‘05. 140w.

  “It is a handy compendium, but must be used with caution. Too many
  details are given to insure freedom from error.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 481. Je. 15, ‘05. 140w.

  “A little more pains on his part, however, would have improved his
  book exceedingly. The location of the various battlefields is
  invariably omitted.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 322. My. 20, ‘05. 310w.

  “Such a book has an evident if rather limited scope of usefulness.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 391. Je. 10, ‘05. 90w.

  “We have fairly tested the Dictionary of battles and have not found it
  wanting.”

     + + =The Westminister Review.= 163: 233. F. ‘05. 160w.


* =Hardy, Rev. Edward John.= John Chinaman at home, **$2.50. Scribner.

  The author “for over three years was chaplain to His Majesty’s forces
  at Hong Kong.... His volume is a very medley of things
  Chinese,—Chinese cities with their local peculiarities; Chinese food,
  medicine, clothes, houses and gardens, servants and laborers; customs
  of marriage, burial, and mourning; Chinese boys, women, and girls,
  their manners, education, punishments; religions, superstitions,
  spirits, monks and priests, foreign missionaries, New Year devotions
  and rites, government,—and much more.”—Dial.

  * “A simple-minded, chatty and amusing work.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1111. O. 21, ‘05. 120w.

  * “For one who contemplates a hurried journey through the lands of the
  ‘Son of Heaven,’ Mr. Hardy’s book will be a most acceptable eye-opener
  to Chinese characteristics.” H. E. Coblentz.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 379. D. 1, ‘05. 320w.

  * “To write so readable a book on China, in a vein both sympathetic
  and critical, is in itself no mean feat.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 505. D. 21, ‘05. 430w.

  * “The author’s style is extremely readable and vivacious. His book
  contains a great deal of real information.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 577. N. 4, ‘05. 150w.

  * “If the author is not always judicial in his conclusions nor
  strictly accurate in his statements, he is very readable and gives a
  fair all-round view of the Chinaman that is slowly being transformed
  by the very agencies he is here shown to despise.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 598. N. 4, ‘05. 940w.


* =Hare, Christopher.= Dante the wayfarer. *$2.50. Scribner.

  “As the author remarks in his preface, Dante’s great poem is ‘a
  marvellous record of travel,’ and the book follows his journeys from
  first to last, recording, as the poet does, all the varied incidents
  of his wayfaring, his observations of man and beast and bird, the
  vicissitudes of climate and weather, and whatever else, however
  trifling, could enter into the itinerary.”—Critic.

  * “In this book ‘he’ has many times miswritten, mismetred, and
  misinterpreted his author. Sometimes it appears that he is merely
  careless or genuinely ignorant; at others that he is wilful. Indeed
  the inception of the book seems due to wilfulness.”

     — + =Acad.= 68: 1075. O. 14, ‘05. 1030w.

  * “How much this record must illustrate the poem one would hardly
  imagine before reading the book.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “Tourists intending to visit the places he describes cannot do
  better than secure his book. As an authority on Dante—that is another
  matter.” Walter Littlefield.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 848. D. 2, ‘05. 940w.

  * “It has a delicate biographical flavor, is not without critical
  value, and may be commended alike to students of the master and to
  those who have yet to penetrate the depths with him, and with him
  ascend the heights.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 716. N. 25, ‘05. 210w.

  * “If the author’s first idea is not new, he has carried it out
  entirely on his own lines, and in an attractive manner.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: sup. 789. N. 18, ‘05. 1410w.


* =Harland, Marion, pseud. (Mary Virginia Hawes Terhune), and Van de
Water, Virginia.= Everyday etiquette. **$1. Bobbs.

  A practical manual of social usages which sets forth the “Gospel of
  Conventionality” for the especial benefit of those who thru changed
  fortune find themselves in a new social environment. There are
  chapters upon such subjects as; invitations, calls, letter-writing,
  weddings, the debutante, the chaperon, gifts, mourning, the table,
  etiquette at home and in public, the church, and mistress and maid.
  The book does not cover a brilliant social season, but it is a helpful
  volume for the home and concerns itself with daily conduct and modest
  entertainment.


=Harnack, (Carl Gustav) Adolf.= Expansion of Christianity in the first
three centuries; tr. and ed. by James Moffatt. 2v. *$3. Putnam.

  “Dr. Moffatt ... is a competent translator of Prof. Harnack’s notable
  work. Since its publication in Germany in 1902 the book has commanded
  attention; and as it is the first exhaustive history of the Christian
  mission, it is well that it should be in the hands of those English
  readers whose ignorance of German does not interfere with their
  interest in the beginnings of Christianity and the advance of the
  early church.... One of the most valuable parts of Prof. Harnack’s
  book is that which deals with the extension of Christianity down to
  325 A. D.”—Ath.

  * “It is the best account that we have yet had of the way in which
  Christianity spread over the civilized world. Where the book is
  disappointing is in its attempted explanation of the remarkable way in
  which Christianity spread, and in its inadequate treatment of external
  influences.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 1258. D. 2, ‘05. 670w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “It hardly requires to be said of any work by Prof. Harnack that it is
  marked by richness of historical detail; and it may be confidently
  asserted that this one will maintain his high reputation as an
  ecclesiastical historian.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905. 2: 463. O. 1730w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

  * “It is an indispensable work of reference as to Christian activities
  in that period.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1159. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “It has many of the characteristic defects of the author, but it has
  also, in a very marked degree, his particular merits; it is vigorous,
  original, full of life, and, above all, draws its material straight
  from the original sources.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 298. S. 22, ‘05. 1330w. (Review of v. 1 and
         2.)

  “Much of this is now ‘common form,’ after the researches of Schürer,
  not to speak of the now antiquated work of Dollinger, but Harnack puts
  his points with less pedantry than the former, and with better
  equipped scholarship than the latter. Yet much will be new even to the
  expert student.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 364. Je. 3, ‘05. 580w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “The subject of course is interesting; the treatment is not, except to
  those who dig deeply into theology.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 676. O. 14, ‘05. 220w. (Review of v. 2.)

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 333. O. 7, ‘05. 370w. (Review of v. 1.)

     + + =Spec.= 95: 656. O. 28, ‘05. 1590w.


=Harold, Childe=, pseud. See =Field, Edward Salisbury.=


=Harper, Vincent.= Mortgage on the brain. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  “The strange woman who is the central personage of this queer story
  has three distinct personalities.... [She] is Lady Torbeth, the
  cultivated, self-centered, high-minded wife of a British peer.... She
  is also a Miss Errington, neurotic and erotic, and a Miss Leighton,
  sentimental and innocent.... The problem is to expel the two
  superfluous personalities from the brain of Lady Torbeth. This is
  accomplished by ... the employment of radio-activity, electricity,
  hypnotism, and mumbo-jumbo jargon.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The story is almost plausible. It is deeply interesting, even
  thrilling.” Albert Warren Ferris.

       + =Bookm.= 22: 67. S. ‘05. 1200w.

       — =Critic.= 47: 285. S. ‘05. 80w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 576. S. 7, ‘05. 200w.

  “As a story Mr. Harper’s novel is ill-constructed and unsatisfactory.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 248. Ap. 15, ‘05. 600w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 142. My. 13, ‘05. 60w.

  “Mr. Harper weaves a strange and fascinating web of incidents,
  somewhat bewildering in its shifting, glimmering improbability, but
  none the less suggestive and taking.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 763. Je. ‘05. 80w.


=Harper, William Rainey.= Critical and exegetical commentary on Amos and
Hosea. **$3. Scribner.

  “Dr. Harper is in thorough sympathy with the modern analytical method
  of the study of the Bible. He correctly says that the reconstruction
  of the text is the first duty of a commentator in the study of such
  writers as Amos and Hosea.... He also recognizes the profound moral
  and spiritual significance of the Old Testament history.”—Outlook.

  “It is painstaking, accurate and thorough in scholarship, fair and
  sound in judgment, full and impartial in the statement of contrary
  opinion, and mindful of its text. In general, President Harper
  represents the view of the modern critical scholarship. His views on
  many particular passages will be questioned.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1131. My. 18, ‘05. 580w.

  * “President Harper’s ‘Amos and Hosea’ fully sustains the reputation
  of American Old Testament scholarship, and are the best and fullest
  exposition of those most important prophets.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “But taken as a whole his book combines thorough technical scholarship
  with large measure of ethical and spiritual insight, and we think his
  ‘Commentary on Amos and Hosea’ will take its place among the best in
  this very excellent series.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 758. Mr. 25, ‘05. 340w.

  * “Professor W. R. Harper’s commentary on these two prophets is the
  fullest that has appeared in English. Our chief complaint is that it
  is too full; the original scripture lies almost buried under the mass
  of authorities and opinions.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 1300w.


=Harper, William Rainey.= Priestly element in the Old Testament: an aid
to historical study for use in advanced Bible classes. *$1. Univ. of
Chicago press.

  A revised and enlarged edition of Dr. Harper’s work in which there are
  new chapters upon the Literature of worship, legal, historical,
  hymnal, and on the Permanent value of the priestly element.

  “It is a valuable aid to the historical study of the worship, ritual
  and laws of the Old Testament and is especially full in its references
  to authorities.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1131. My. 18, ‘05. 50w.

  “As a standard type of excellence among manuals for Biblical study
  this volume, available for various methods of teaching, is
  unsurpassed.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 900. Ap. 8, ‘05. 110w.


=Harper, William Rainey.= Prophetic element in the Old Testament, $1.
Univ. of Chicago press.

  These studies are intended primarily for students in colleges or
  theological seminaries, but the author has endeavored to make them
  suitable also for advanced classes in Sunday schools. Part 1, covers
  The general scope of the prophetic element in the Old Testament; Part
  2, The history of prophecy through Hosea. The studies are concise and
  scientific in treatment. Appendices include A table of important
  dates, A chronological table of the religious life of Israel, The
  prophetic vocabulary, and An analysis of the Hexateuch.

  “It is a complete guide to this period of prophetic work. Its method
  is inductive and constructive.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 398. N. ‘05. 70w.

  “This is the needed complement to Dr. Harper’s work on ‘The priestly
  element.’”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 578. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.


=Harper, William Rainey.= Religion and the higher life: talks to
students. *$1. Univ. of Chicago press.

  Religion as presented by President Harper in these talks to students
  is an attractive but very serious thing, to be gotten and kept only by
  the bravest struggle. He summons his hearers to meet the peculiar and
  tremendous responsibilities which rest upon them as college men, and
  tells them with an almost fatherly sympathy and undertone of pleading
  how religion will help them in a most practical way to meet the
  sufferings and temptations which await them. Noteworthy are the
  chapter on Our intellectual difficulties, in which he shows that
  doubts are not inconsistent with the Christian life, but are in fact
  inevitable, and the chapter entitled Bible study and religious life,
  in which he argues that the supreme spiritual value of the Bible is
  independent of the literary and historical criticism to which it is
  properly subjected.

  “The sympathy with young life is unmistakable. The altruistic spirit
  breathes through every address. The treatment of religious
  difficulties is robust and sensible.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 603. Jl. ‘05. 440w.

         =Atlan.= 95: 706. My. ‘05. 200w.

  “His moral counsels, admonitions, and warnings are simple and
  straightforward, his tone is natural, his language without pretence.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 81: 125. Ap. ‘05. 350w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 253. F. ‘05. 100w. (States doctrine of essays.)


=Harper, William Rainey.= Trend in higher education. *$1.50. Univ. of
Chicago press.

  Dr. Harper presents a series of observations which have been made
  along the way towards the yet unreached goal of a formulated
  philosophy of the trend in higher education. He shows that the
  conspicuous elements which characterize the movement—among them
  college self-government, freedom from ecclesiastical control, and
  right of free utterance—all point towards the “growing democratization
  of higher educational work.” Some of the chapters are, “The university
  and democracy,” “Some present tendencies of popular education,” “The
  university and religious education,” “Waste in higher education,”
  “Dependence of the West upon the East,” “The business side of the
  university,” “Are school teachers underpaid?” “Why are there fewer
  students for the ministry?” “University training for a business
  career,” “Coeducation,” etc.

  “The articles, with the exception of some brief occasional addresses,
  are vital and frank almost to the point of bluntness. The treatment is
  fair, and no attempt is made to criticize a particular institution by
  insinuation. Dr. Harper takes a vigorous and business-like attitude,
  modern but not radical.” Henry Davidson Sheldon.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 271. Ap. 16, ‘05. 2210w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 273. Ag. 3, ‘05. 60w.

  “He makes no attempt to deal with the subject in a systematic way; the
  papers are somewhat desultory and disconnected.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 259. Ag. 11, ‘05. 880w.

  “On the whole the book is that of a man of learning of no very
  pronounced views, who may be called an educational opportunist.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 259. S. 28, ‘05. 360w.

  “The value of the book and the chief interest of it consists in the
  total effect of the assembled material.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 164. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1130w.

  “What gives most vital value to the volume is its discussion of what
  the university and the church have to do with the problems of
  democracy and religion, as well as with those of education. Such
  criticisms from such a source cannot be waived aside; they may be
  thought too sweeping; exceptions exist; but Dr. Harper’s ‘record of
  observations here and there’ is a needed reveille.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 761. Mr. 25, ‘05. 220w.


=Harriman, Karl Edwin.= Girl and the deal. †$1.25. Jacobs.

  On his journey across the continent from Boston to San Francisco, a
  young Harvard man wins the girl he loves and learns thru her to
  understand the spirit of the West. With the girl he wins her “Uncle
  Jack” the capitalist whose support for one of his father’s business
  ventures he has come so far to seek. There is a detailed account of
  the trip over the Santa Fé and a description of the Grand canyon.

  “The note of personality in the author’s pictures of things Western is
  the best feature of the story, which for the rest, lacks something of
  high-bred delicacy in its portrayal of young love and is of the
  slightest texture.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 478. Jl. 22, ‘05. 190w.


=Harris, Charles.= Pro fide: a defence of natural and revealed religion.
*$3. Dutton.

  “The author, an accomplished theologian of the Anglican church, has
  written for intelligent laymen, as well as for the clergy and students
  preparing for the ministry. He is well versed in the literature of his
  subject, whether hostile or friendly to his purpose of vindicating the
  rationality of Christian theology. His standpoint is indicated by his
  belief that the sayings of Jesus to his disciples ‘undoubtedly confer
  a supernatural authority of some kind’ upon the Church.”—Outlook.

  “While his work in a number of points fails of meeting the full demand
  of a strictly scientific apologetic, its spirit is admirable. Its full
  repertory of the evidences and arguments advanced by parties in the
  great debate presents materials for independent judgment as well as
  for views for which he contends.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 694. Jl. 15, ‘05. 220w.

  “Mr. Harris’ text-book on Christian apologetics like Mr. Pullan’s on
  early Church history, will be extremely useful to those who are
  already on his side and are in need of a short, clear, able statement
  of their case; but we doubt whether it would convince an opponent.”

     + — =Sat R.= 100: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 240w.


=Harris, J. Henry.= Fishers. $1.50. Lane.

  A poor fishing-village in Cornwall forms the setting of this novel,
  and the narrow views of the simple, superstitious fisher-folk are
  strongly contrasted with the broad-minded outlook of Uncle Zack, who
  is a progressive power, and a wholly charming character. The romance
  of the story is furnished by Robert Pendean the son of a successful
  Wall street speculator. Robert, while at Harvard develops a taste for
  Utopian social ideals and his father gives him five million dollars
  and sends him to Europe in the hope that he will acquire a taste for
  “high finance.” He drifts into Cornwall, falls in love with Mary
  Vaughan, and these two, to the joy of Uncle Zack, develop a
  co-operative enterprise among the fishermen and build a model fishing
  village near the dilapidated old town.

  “A thoughtful and well-written novel, a romance in which the common
  life of a poor fishing village is invested with rare charm, while with
  a few exceptions the ethical ideals evinced are wholesome. It is to us
  a matter of much surprise to find a writer who while not evincing the
  bravery of thought or grasp of fundamental principles that mark the
  writings of advanced economists and practical idealists among modern
  social philosophers, is nevertheless far in advance of many
  conventional religious, ethical and social teachers, striving to
  justify the gaining of wealth through speculation in Wall street.”

     + — =Arena.= 33: 108. Ja. ‘05. 920w. (Story of plot.)


=Harris, Joel Chandler (Uncle Remus, pseud.).= Told by Uncle Remus, †$2.
McClure.

  The inimitable Brer Rabbit and Brer Fox are just as entertaining as
  ever in this new series of escapades in spite of the fact that Uncle
  Remus says “I done got so ol’ dat my min’ flutters like a bird in de
  bush.” The book is characteristically illustrated by A. B. Frost,
  Frank Verbeck and J. M. Condé.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 25w.

  * “Permeated by the same sly humor that has given Uncle Remus his
  unique position among lovers of good stories.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 444. D. 16, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1385. D. 14, ‘05. 70w.

  * “Shows the familiar vein unexhausted.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  * “Joel Chandler Harris’s new Remus stories are as full of the humor
  and charm of negro lore as ever.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 864. D. 2, ‘05. 610w.

  * “It is the same old Uncle Remus, and the same old marvelous tales of
  animal lore, full of gentle humor and kindly negro wisdom.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 753. D. ‘05. 60w.


=Harrison, Edith Ogden (Mrs. Carter Henry).= Moon princess. **$1.25.
McClurg.

  The youngest and most beautiful of the princesses of the moon asks as
  a boon of her moon-queen mother that she and her brother, the sun
  prince Dorian, may spend their honeymoon upon the earth. They and
  their retinue pass down a silver ladder made for them by the moon
  sprites, and visit all parts of the earth and the caves of the ocean.
  They are told about the little dwellers of the marsh, and the rainbow
  sisters, and hear stories of the jewelled beach, the lost ocean, the
  princess Sunset and many others. The book is full of fanciful conceits
  and is charmingly illustrated in color by Lucy Fitch Perkins.

  * “A nice new fairy story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 780. N. 18, ‘05. 190w.

  * “A simply told and prettily fanciful tale.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 20w.


=Harrison, Frederic.= Chatham, **$1.25. Macmillan.

  “Fundamentally out of sympathy with the work which is Chatham’s chief
  glory—the creation of the British empire” (Spec.), Mr. Harrison
  follows Pitt’s career “through the long years in opposition, through
  the days of savage attacks upon Walpole, upon ‘the brilliant Carteret,
  the vacillating Pulteney, the tricky Newcastle,’ the king’s
  ‘Hanoverian policy,’ the rivalries in the Commons with Henry Fox and
  Murray, who was later Lord Mansfield; the tenure of the Pay office and
  the marvel of Pitt’s perfect honesty, the support of the Pelham
  ministry (and certain inconsistencies thereto appertaining), till at
  last, in 1756, ‘the terrible cornet of horse,’ the bugbear of
  governments, became ‘First minister,’ though under the nominal
  leadership of the Duke of Devonshire.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “A life of William Pitt, the elder, without sympathy and without
  conviction.”

     — — =Acad.= 68: 267. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1830w.

  “Mr. Harrison brings much freshness of treatment to bear upon
  Chatham’s career, particularly during its earlier periods. A
  singularly dignified portrait of a figure of lonely majesty.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 394. Ap. 1. 1480w.

  “With all its brevity, Mr. Harrison’s study of the elder Pitt is as
  would be expected, of the most finished character.” H. W. Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 277. Ag. ‘05. 310w.

  “Mr. Harrison is no indiscriminate eulogist.”

       + =Bookm.= 21: 527. Jl. ‘05. 200w.

  “A compact but comprehensive biography of the great statesman.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Frederic Harrison’s monograph, however, is for the present the
  best study there is of Chatham.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 96. Jl. 13, ‘05. 600w.

  “No one who has dealt of late with the career of the Great Commoner
  has shown a deeper admiration of his nobler and more positive
  qualities.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 266. S. 28, ‘05. 1400w.

  “Mr. Harrison begins dryly enough, but in the end he has managed to
  convey to his reader something—a vital something—of his own feeling
  for the bigness, the nobility, the splendor of the man and his ideas.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 196. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1420w.

  “Mr. Harrison has painted Pitt in language which, without bringing the
  great commoner from the pedestal whereon posterity has placed him,
  enables us to measure him in due proportion both as man and as
  statesman.” H. Addington Bruce.

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 384. Je 10, ‘05. 2620w.

  “Mr. Harrison has pierced the veil of mystery that shrouded the great
  Chatham and shown him as he must have been.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “Mr. Harrison had a magnificent opportunity, but English readers when
  they wish a short satisfactory account of Chatham in their own tongue
  must still rely on Macaulay’s two superb essays supplemented by Mr.
  Walford Green’s recent admirable and sober biography.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 632. My. 13, ‘05. 810w.

  “Mr. Harrison has produced an interesting and spirited book, but it is
  disfigured by this fatal lack of sympathy and in consequence by a tone
  of petty and irrelevant criticism.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 512. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1330w.


=Hart, Albert Bushnell=, ed. American nation: a history from original
sources by associated scholars. v. 1-5. *$9; v. 6-10. *$9. Harper.

  This series, of which the present volumes form the first section, is
  to contain twenty-six volumes with one volume of index and one of
  maps. Section one is in five volumes. Vol. I., The European background
  of American history, by E. P. Cheney: vol. II., Basis of American
  history, by Livingston Farrand; vol. III., Spain in America, by E. G.
  Bourne; vol. IV., England in America, by Lyon G. Tyler; vol. V.,
  Colonial self-government, by Charles M. Andrews; vol. VI., Provincial
  America, by Evarts B. Green: vol. VII., France in America, by Reuben
  G. Thwaites. With frontispieces and maps.

  “Not without shortcomings ... (the faults of omission), this work is
  charmingly simple, direct, and comprehensive. The work must therefore
  prove a boon to schools and to the general public, which have too long
  been at the mercy of the hobby-rider and the sensation-monger. It is
  conservative and refreshingly healthy in tone throughout.” W. H.
  Holmes.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 638. Ap. ‘05. 1060w. (Review of vol. II.)

  “In many respects no better introduction to American history could be
  desired. It seems, moreover accurate in a degree very unusual in
  general statements covering so wide a field. It is on the side of
  omissions that the book can be most seriously criticized.” Victor
  Coffin.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 858. Jl. ‘05. 1680w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “Dr. Tyler is particularly happy in tracing beginnings. The great
  fault of the book is Dr. Tyler’s bias against the Puritan and for the
  cavalier. On the whole Dr. Tyler’s treatment leaves an impression of
  slightness. Dr. Andrews keeps to the historical point of view ... and
  his vision is sane and comprehensive. Dr. Andrews has accomplished a
  great task worthily. It means something not merely to scholarship but
  even to the comity of nations that at last we have a popular history
  of our colonial era, untainted by provincialism. Dr. Andrews is always
  clear and most always forceful; but I venture to call attention to a
  few errors and weaknesses.” Willis Mason West.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 869. Jl. ‘05. 3440w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  * “Judging by the first series, the history will be, when complete, a
  monumental work fitted to stand comparison with similar productions of
  the English and German students.” Carl Kelsey.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 753. N. ‘05. 600w. (Review of v. 1-5.)

  “A series of well-written monographs of undoubted value. Professor
  Cheney [in vol I] presents such a basis for the study of beginnings of
  American history that the general reader is under large debt for the
  information thus put in readable and compact form. Within the scope of
  his treatment [vol II], however, he has given us a satisfactory piece
  of work. [Vol. III.] Like the rest of the works, rather written down
  to what the author considers the standard of public intelligence.
  Nevertheless it views its subject with a breadth and force that make
  the treatment commendable. [Vol. V.] Accurate and interesting. The
  style of the monographs is in general rather dry, and yet it is
  readable and interesting to those who use the volumes for study.”

   + + + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 1120w.

  “The author of this volume [vol. I] has had a difficult task, and has
  done it admirably. The story is told delightfully and with care; but
  the necessity for compression causes occasionally a lack of clearness.
  The author [of vol. II] himself informs us that his task has been one
  of condensation, and the results are especially evident in the first
  third of the volume, which is somewhat below the general average of
  interest. The chief service of this portion of the book will be its
  suggestiveness and the references in Professor Farrand’s excellent
  bibliography. The many striking summaries of events and
  characterizations of individuals which one finds throughout the book
  [in vol III]. [In vol. IV] President Tyler has given us a scrupulously
  fair and a very interesting work. The author gives us no detailed
  study of institutional growth, but a general narrative. Here one
  inevitably compares President Tyler’s work with that of the late Mr.
  Fiske, with results not at all to the disadvantage of President Tyler.
  [Vol. V]. This is very certainly the best general account of this
  period that has yet appeared. One feels that the author not only has
  intimate acquaintance with the old sources, but also has been
  fortunate enough to reach considerable new material. Professor Andrews
  is especially to be congratulated upon the catholic view of colonial
  history that he presents to us. As successful as his descriptions of
  institutions is the author’s delineation of personality. We must not
  omit commendation of the bibliographical matter appended to each
  volume. Volumes like that of Professor Bourne will take their place as
  standard works. For the general reader, ... the work will prove a mine
  of information interestingly told, well arranged, and attractively
  published.” St. George L. Sioussat.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 190. Mr. 16, ‘05. 3050w.

  * “The editor of the coöperative history of which these volumes form a
  part deserves congratulation upon the success with which the process
  of ‘linking,’ which here is so very necessary, has been carried out.”
  St. George Sioussat.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 236. O. 16, ‘05. 2100w. (Review of v. 6 and 7.)

  * “However, from the standpoint of critical scholarship, the authors
  leave American history very much as they found it. The cooperative
  plan has precluded a consistent and systematic treatment of the
  development of British colonial policy and American commercial
  interests, and the economic analysis is not keen or original.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 872. O. 12, ‘05. 770w. (Review of v. 6-10.)

  * “Tho the series cannot escape some of the limitations of the
  monographic method, yet it has already taken the place which it will
  hold for many years of the most important reference history of our
  country.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1155. N. 16, ‘05. 150w. (Review of v. 1-10.)

  “Never fail to be direct and lucid. The value of the series as a whole
  can hardly be overestimated.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 304. S. 22, ‘05. 3340w. (Review of v. 1-5.)

  “Taking the five volumes as a whole, the general verdict must be one
  of cordial approval. All the writers have succeeded in attaining
  brevity and compactness without falling into an elementary style,
  while the volumes of Professor Bourne and Professor Andrews must be
  given high rank as substantive contributions in their respective
  fields. The literary form, though in no case striking, is meritorious
  and of fairly even quality.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 96. F. 2, ‘05. 2440w. (Review of v. 1-5.)

  * “As a condensed account of a peculiarly difficult period, written in
  the light of modern historical scholarship, the volume is a
  commendable piece of work, and a worthy addition to the series in
  which it appears.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 306. O. 12, ‘05. 1200w. (Review of v. 6.)

  “He has made a careful and discriminating use of his material, and
  apart from a useful text has given us a valuable critical essay on the
  authorities.” Robert Livingston Schuyler.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 480. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1110w. (Review of v. 6.)

  “Prof. Thwaites, while hardly possessed of a fascinating style, is
  always readable. His work is brief, clear, and always to the point.”
  R. L. S.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 573. S. 2, ‘05. 860w. (Review of v. 7.)

  “Prof. Howard’s work compares favorably with the best volumes of the
  ‘American nation’ series that have yet appeared.” R. L. S.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 621. S. 23, ‘05. 980w. (Review of v. 8.)

  * “Prof. Van Tyne has succeeded in turning out a fresh, original, and,
  considering the limitations of space imposed, an adequate history of
  the Revolution.” R. L. S.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 680. O. 14, ‘05. 760w. (Review of v. 9 and
         10.)

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 837. Jl. 29, ‘05. 230w. (Review of v. 7.)

  “A survey at once broad and specific, and of high value to the student
  desirous of obtaining the latest word of modern research. It is as a
  helpful work of reference rather than as a ‘popular’ history, in the
  usual acceptation of the term, ... it will deservedly win a place on
  the library shelves.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 38. S. 2, ‘05. 1790w. (Review of v. 1-6).

  “Like Professor Van Tyne—and, for that matter, like almost all the
  writers who have as yet contributed to the series—[Mr. McLaughlin]
  shows a firm grasp of detail and perspective, and his exposition is
  such as to leave all that is salient impressed on the scholar’s mind.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 331. O. 7, ‘05. 400w. (Review of v. 9 and 10.)

  Reviewed by H. Addington Bruce.

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 588. O. ‘05. 560w. (Review of v. 1-5.)

  * “The scheme of the history is on the whole good, though we are bound
  to say that some of the writing is uninspired, and not in the same
  rank of literary production as much of the work by American writers in
  the volume of the ‘Cambridge modern history’ dealing with the United
  States.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 694. N. 4, ‘05. 700w. (Review of v. 1-5.)


=Hart, Albert Bushnell.= Essentials in American history (from the
discovery to the present day). *$1.50. Am. bk.

  This is one of a series of text books which includes a volume each on
  ancient, medieval, modern, and English history. “The volumes are
  intended for use in secondary schools, and contain lists of references
  and topical questions, but apart from this pedagogic machinery they
  have little in common with the ordinary schoolbook. The authors have
  addressed themselves avowedly only to those things which have been
  vital and significant to the development of the civilizations treated
  respectively in the several works.” (Outlook.)

  “The somewhat original grouping of topics in the Colonial period is
  the book’s most distinguishing feature. Upon the whole this work of
  Professor Hart deserves commendation and should meet with a cordial
  welcome among a wide circle of teachers.” Frank Greene Bates.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 166. O. ‘05. 1240w.

  “While the historic narrative is necessarily compact and free from all
  attempts at rhetorical writing or dramatic presentation, the books are
  essentially selective in that they purposely omit confusing details.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 442. Je. 17. ‘05. 70w.


* =Hart, Jerome.= Levantine log book. **$2. Longmans.

  All the reverence with which one likes to approach the Holy Land is
  shattered by the genially sarcastic observations which the author
  makes upon all his observant eyes saw in the Levant. His Levant
  includes Stamboul, Smyrna, Jaffa, Jerusalem, Cairo, Luxor, Thebes,
  Alexandria and other places naturally included in this itinerary, and
  his log book is a record of cheerful disillusionment, but the pictures
  he draws are amusing enough to compensate for the shock his
  revelations bring. The volume is illustrated with photographs, many of
  which were taken by the author.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “A gossipy, vivacious account of travel.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 941. D. 16, ‘05. 30w.


* =Harte, Francis Bret.= Her letter, His answer, and Her last letter.
$2. Houghton.

  “For the present reprint, these old favorites have been literally, as
  the title-page has it, ‘pictured’ by Mr. Arthur I. Keller.... The
  illustrations, a few more in number than the stanzas, are in color or
  in tint, some from wash-drawings and others from pen-and-ink sketches.
  They catch both the humor and the sentiment of the verses, and the
  artist has not forgotten that the life of Poverty Flat is now a full
  generation behind us.”—Dial.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “‘Her letter’ is certainly one of the artistic triumphs of the
  season’s output.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1379. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 381. N. 9, ‘05. 90w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 712. O. 21, ‘05. 220w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 90w.


=Hartley, Charles Gasquoine.= Pictures in the Tate gallery. *$3.50.
Dutton.

  A study, with twenty reproductions, of the famous gallery presented to
  the British nation by Sir Henry Tate. There is a general summary of
  modern English art; the treatment is by epochs represented in the
  gallery.

  “The brief essays ... are well written and instructive ... and the
  illustrations are thoroughly representative.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 25: 273. My. ‘05. 160w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 252. F. ‘05. 90w.

  “A general summary of modern English art written in a popular manner,
  and as such may prove a useful book, for there is discrimination in
  the criticism.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 115. Ja. 28, ‘05. 40w.


* =Harwood, Edith.= Notable pictures in Florence. *$1.50. Dutton.

  The author “aims to help the uninitiated in art matters.... Miss
  Harwood arranges her artists alphabetically, giving us some account of
  their lives and their most important works, and telling where these
  are to be found, with small illustrations, good only for assistance in
  remembering the compositions. She includes the principal artists
  represented in the Belle Arti, the Uffizi, and the Pitti, along with
  frescoes in the churches.”—Nation.

  * “The book is good to read, full of interesting historical detail,
  and ample in quotations from writers ancient and modern in prose and
  verse.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 402. N. 16, ‘05. 270w.

  * “The pleasure it has given the writer to set down her impressions
  may do something toward removing the suggestion that the book lacks a
  good reason for existence.” Chas. de Kay.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 741. N. 4, ‘05. 220w.

  * “A book distinctly better than the customary ‘center-table’ variety,
  the text is better than the pictures, but that is not saying that the
  text is either original or adequate enough.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 50w.


=Harwood, W. S.= New creations in plant life: an authoritative account
of the life and work of Luther Burbank. **$1.75. Macmillan.

  “Following the brief account of Mr. Burbank’s career down to the
  present time. Mr. Harwood has a chapter on his methods of work in
  general. He then passes on to a discussion of the individual creations
  of the breeder, describing the trees created by him, the amaryllis and
  the poppy, the potato and pomato, lilies, plums, and prunes, the
  ‘Shasta’ daisy, cacti, breeding plants for perfumes, etc. There are
  also chapters on breeding and grafting and the commercial aspect of
  the work; a description of a day with Mr. Burbank, and his
  personality. The volume is profusely illustrated from photographs.”—N.
  Y. Times.

  * “Given reasonably clear English and logical presentation, the actual
  information in this book could be condensed into a magazine article.”
  C. R. B.

     + — =Bot. G.= 40: 459. D. ‘05. 600w.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘05. 80w.

  “Here and there the style is a little difficult to follow. We can
  recommend this volume as a readable and truthful description of a
  remarkable career.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 388. N. 9, ‘05. 510w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 709. O. 21, ‘05. 290w.

  * “Contains the most complete and comprehensive account of Mr.
  Burbank’s great achievements, his methods of work, and his
  personality. His book is eminently readable.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 1039. D. 23, ‘05. 250w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 754. D. ‘05. 130w.


=Hatch, Ernest Frederick George.= Far Eastern impressions. *$1.40.
McClurg.

  Impressions of Japan, Korea and China, being the author’s
  recollections of a tour of those countries made some three years ago.
  His memory is fortified by facts and opinions collected at the time in
  his note books and the whole is cast in narrative form. While the
  industrial and political aspects receive first attention, the
  historical and social phases are fully and fairly presented and the
  book will undoubtedly fulfill its object of further stimulating public
  interest in the great Far Eastern problem. There are three maps and
  eighty-eight illustrations from photographs.

  * “Mr. Hatch’s impressions are not mere chance gatherings and
  ill-digested glimpses; they are acute and weighty observations upon
  the things that appeal to a business man interested in politics. The
  volume is well indexed, well illustrated, and written in a clear and
  forcible style.” H. E. Coblentz.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 378. D. 1, ‘05. 390w.

  * “A capital book for the investor and fortune seeker.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1479. D. 21, ‘05. 90w.

  * “The illustrations seem about as valuable as the text, for little of
  purely original matter of any great importance enters into the book,
  which is rather too rich in quotations.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 445. N. 30, ‘05. 290w.

  * “The book is an interesting one to read in connection with Lord
  Curzon’s and Mr. Norman’s much larger and exhaustive volumes on the
  same subjects.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 80w.


=Hatch, F. H., and Corstorphine, George Stewart.= Geology of South
Africa. *$7. Macmillan.

  “The book is divided into five parts. Part I deals with the pre-Karroo
  rocks.... The Karroo rocks are adequately dealt with in part II....
  The coastal system, including the Uitenhage and Umtavuna Cretaceous
  rocks, profusely illustrated with typical fossils, occupies part
  III.... Part IV briefly discusses the igneous rocks of doubtful
  position.... Part V discusses the correlation of the South African
  strata.”—Nature.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 278. Ag. 26. 1460w.

  “The volume might be more truthfully entitled ‘A geognostic account of
  British South Africa.’ Thus regarded the work is good and should prove
  of much practical value.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 266. Ag. 25, ‘05. 1510w.

  “The authors have certainly succeeded in their self-imposed task ‘to
  correlate and systematise the valuable results of both official and
  private work.’” W. G.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 346. Ag. 10, ‘05. 980w.

  “Admirable summary provided by these two most competent geologists.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 374. S. 16, ‘05. 1620w.

         =Spec.= 95: 198. Ag. 5, ‘05. 180w.


=Hatch, Louis Clinton.= Administration of the American revolutionary
army. **$1.50. Longmans.

  A monograph, “Harvard historical series X,” which first treats of the
  evolution of the Continental army and discusses the relation between
  Congress and the commander-in-chief. There are also chapters on
  “Appointment and promotion” of officers, setting forth the states’
  jealousies; “Foreign officers;” “Pay and half-pay,” the real
  contrasted with the apparent pay of the soldiers; “Supplying the
  army,” its mismanagement and the suffering at Valley Forge; “Newburg
  addresses;” and “Mutiny of 1786, and disbandment of the army.”

  “A valuable chapter on the subject of the ‘Appointment and promotion’
  of officers, showing the jealousy of the members of Congress for the
  rights of their states. The chapter on ‘Foreign officers’ is the least
  valuable in the volume, adding little to the account in Tower’s
  ‘Lafayette’ and that in Wharton’s ‘Diplomatic correspondence.’ The
  following chapter, on ‘Pay and half-pay,’ is, on the other hand, a
  real contribution. ‘Supplying the army,’ the mismanagement in the
  feeding and clothing of the army, and the consequent suffering at
  Valley Forge is, on the whole, the most accurate account we have, and
  is stated with moderation and without sentimentality. The ‘Newburg
  addresses’ in the following chapter are, however, treated in a fuller
  and more conclusive manner. The book is well organized and well
  written. It is a source study of high merit. There is a valuable
  bibliography and a good index.” C. H. Van Tyne.

     + + =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 401. Ja. ‘05. 730w.


* =Hatzfeldt, Paul.= Hatzfeldt letters: letters of Count Paul Hatzfeldt
to his wife; written from the headquarters of the King of Prussia,
1870-71; tr. from the French by J. L. Bashford. *$4. Dutton.

  “The Countess ... says in her introduction that the letters ‘throw so
  much light on the great events of 1870-1’ as well as on the character
  of the writer, that she thinks they will be ‘interesting to many
  people who only know hitherto of Count Hatzfeldt’s public
  services.’ ... Candor, however, compels one to deny the accuracy of
  the first statement.... Count Paul was not behind the scenes in those
  great events ... his letters ... were merely family letters.... As to
  throwing light on the diplomat’s character, they may do that; but
  merely that he loved his family, wanted to be with them.... The
  letters were written almost daily—sometimes more than one a day—from
  Aug. 2, 1870, to March 6, 1871, those from and after Oct. 7, being
  dated from Versailles.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “While, however, a little more care in editing might have avoided
  some blemishes, we welcome the volume as throwing light on many
  historical characters and events. The index is unfortunately poor,
  though fairly accurate as far as it goes. There are a few errors in
  the text.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 499. O. 14. 1490w.

  * “In fact, so far as the public is concerned, the translation is far
  better than the letters themselves.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 764. N. 11, ‘05. 660w.

 *     + =Sat. R.= 100: 754. D. 9, ‘05. 1090w.


=Havell, E. B.= Handbook to Agra and the Taj, Sikandra, Fatehpur-Sikri,
and the neighborhood. *$1.50. Longmans.

  The object of this volume is “to assist those who visit, or have
  visited, Agra to an intelligent understanding of one of the greatest
  epochs of Indian art.” The author, who is the principal of the
  government school of art at Calcutta, gives a brief historical
  introduction followed by a detailed treatment of the buildings and
  tombs at and about Agra. There are 14 illustrations in half-tone from
  photographs, four plans, an index and footnotes.

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 269. Ap. 6. ‘05. 110w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 479. Jl. 22, ‘05. 320w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 9. Ja. 7, ‘05. 240w.

  “The book appears to be at least as good as most books of its kind and
  better than many.”


=Hawkins, Anthony Hope (Anthony Hope, pseud.).= Servant of the public.
†$1.50. Stokes.

  A story not of the stage, but of an actress: a character study of Ora
  Pinsent, a creature of whim and folly, and ever behind the failure she
  makes of living and the cloud her attractive, clinging, and uncertain
  personality casts over those who cross her path, is the glory of her
  triumph behind the footlights. There is slight reference to her public
  career, but its success seems measured by the detailed failure of her
  private life.

  “We cannot regard ‘A servant of the public’ as other than a failure.
  It is sufficiently interesting to wile away an hour or two, but not so
  interesting as to fulfil the promise to which the early career of its
  author gave rise.”

     — + =Acad.= 68: 1025. O. 7, ‘05. 820w.

  “Marks an improvement in some ways on ‘Double harness.’ The canvas is
  less crowded, and the attempt to unravel cross-purposes and
  conflicting motives is less strenuous yet more successful.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 396. S. 23. 590w.

  “One of the few heroines of this season’s fiction that will not easily
  be forgotten.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

   + + + =Bookm.= 22: 234. N. ‘05. 350w.

  * “The ostensibly piquant history of Miss Ora Pinsent is, after all,
  dull reading.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 140w.

  * “The story is written in a vein of grave comedy, pleasing but not
  stirring in effect. Its half-dozen chief characters are delicately
  defined, while its diction is an acceptable compound of natural
  dialogue, engaging description, and agreeable social philosophy.” Wm.
  M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 310. N. 16, ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1151. N. 16, ‘05. 180w.

  * “Altho the plot is a little tenuous, yet Mr. Hope treats it with
  much solidity.”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 886. D. 9, ‘05. 570w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 287. S. 8, ‘05. 910w.

  “There is a sound as well as subtle philosophy to be read between the
  lines of this unusual book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 602. S. 16, ‘05. 880w.

  “As a clever study of a character often met with in real life, but not
  so often attempted in fiction, this story offers unusual attractions.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 430. O. 21, ‘05. 220w.

  * “As an analysis of a temperament and an artistic presentment of
  individual problems the novel is wrought out with skill and ability.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 710. N. 25, ‘05. 140w.

  “Mr. Hope’s fine comedy manner has no better example than ‘A servant
  of the public.’ Lacking the dramatic vitality of ‘Double harness,’
  this story is almost as interesting, for it deals, keenly,
  good-humoredly, with that fascinating subject, the dramatic instincts
  of a woman.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 633. N. 11, ‘05. 320w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 50w.

  “The finish of the story illustrated an art of which Anthony Hope is
  attaining real control. He gives by a very delicate succession of
  blunting touches, an admirable imitation of the dulling effect of
  time.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 376. S. 16, ‘05. 630w.

  “Subject to the limitations of his theme, in the choice of which we
  are ready to admit that opportunity as well as temperament may have
  been a governing factor, we have little but praise for the skill, the
  tact, and the subtlety with which Mr. Anthony Hope has handled it.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 395. S. 16, ‘05. 1160w.


=Hawks, Wells.= Red wagon stories; or, Tales told under the tent. 50c;
pa. 25c. Ottenheimer.

  In “these realistic sketches, reminiscent of traveling circus
  days, ... the men who make the great show go, the bill poster, the
  press agent, the boss canvasman, the bandmaster, and the ticket
  seller, give us, in their rough and ready manner, a cheery view of
  their good-humored personalities in the breezy stories they relate
  when seated around the ring bark between performances.... In all there
  are eleven stories.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 277. Ap. 29, ‘05. 140w.


=Hawthorne, Hildegarde.= Poems. $1. Badger, R. G.

  A little volume of delicate poems by the granddaughter of Nathaniel
  Hawthorne.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 566. Je. ‘05. 160w.

  Reviewed by William Morton Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 201. Mr. 16, ‘05. 140w.

  “A graceful lyric gift, a vein of pretty fancy, and a habitual mood of
  ideality are very little inconvenienced by disturbing mental
  processes.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 150w.

  “In Miss Hawthorne’s work a certain respect for the purity of the
  poetic impulse is invariably felt. She neither trifles nor bungles
  with her art, but approaches it sincerely and with intelligence. Her
  verse, therefore, even when it is of the slightest, has a delicate,
  veracious property that charms.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 133. Mr. 4, ‘05. 250w.


=Hawthorne, Nathaniel.= Marble faun. $1.25. Crowell.

  A volume of the “Thin paper classics,” with an introduction by
  Katharine Lee Bates, and a frontispiece showing the Grand Salon, in
  the Capitoline Museum.


=Hay, Helen.= See =Whitney, Mrs. Helen Hay.=


=Hayden, Arthur.= Chats on old furniture: a practical guide for
collectors. **$2. Stokes.

  The author “begins with a bibliography, and follows this with a
  glossary.... He then proceeds to deal separately with various periods
  of style. The first chapter is given to the French renaissance, the
  second to the English, the Jacobean and Queen Anne styles, and the
  styles of the successive Louises, with that of the empire. Finally we
  have an account of the famous English makers. Each chapter has an
  appendix of recent sale-prices.”—Spec.

  “Is an admirable compendium of all that has been written on the
  subject.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 272. Mr. 18, ‘05. 900w.

         =Ath.= 1905, 1: 377. Mr. 25. 490w.

   + + — =Sat. R.= 99: 846. Je. 24, ‘05. 200w.

  “A useful and instructive volume.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 333. Mr. 4, ‘05. 110w.


=Hayes, Helen.= Her memory book. $2. Harper.

  An elaborately decorated volume of blank pages in which a young girl
  may keep a record of her social life, her “coming-out” party, dinners,
  teas, balls, card parties, and out of door sports, there is even space
  for samples of her favorite gowns and newspaper notices; the final
  page is headed by a wee winged figure with veil, and orange wreath.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 387. D. 1, ‘05. 180w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 701. O. 14, ‘05. 280w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 279. S. 30, ‘05. 30w.


=Hazlitt, William Carew,= ed. Faiths and folklore. *$6. Scribner.

  “This is really a new edition of Brand and Ellis’s ‘Popular
  antiquities of Great Britain,’ but it is now for the first time
  alphabetically arranged—an immense improvement—and has also been
  enlarged and improved. The title, as given above, sufficiently
  indicates the classes of topics treated.”—Outlook.

  “The author has collected a good deal of folklore, which it is useful
  to possess in alphabetical order, but many of the entries would have
  been improved by revision.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 39. Jl. 8. 1710w.

  “Mr. Hazlitt has added some material to the old book, but neither in
  quantity nor in quality is it worth while. Most of it is newspaper
  clippings culled at random, and both in arrangement and in subject
  shows no sense of proportion or definite plan.”

       — =Dial.= 39: 119. S. 1, ‘05. 320w.

  “The work is a rarely quaint storehouse of legend, allusion,
  antiquarian information, and bygone usages.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 95. Ja. 7. ‘05. 60w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 924. Je. 24, ‘05. 420w.


=Healy, Patrick Joseph.= Valerian persecution: a study of the relations
between church and state in the third century, A. D. **$1.50. Houghton.

  An historical monograph, which is not a sectarian work, but which sets
  forth in the light of recent investigation, the true history of this
  period in which the early Christians suffered much at the hands of the
  Roman state.

  * “The character of Dr. Healy’s work may be briefly indicated by
  saying that, while it satisfies the exacting standards to which the
  modern writer of history must conform, it will not fail to fascinate
  the intelligent reader who takes up a book of history, not for severe
  study, but partly for instruction, partly for entertainment. Clear
  alike by its methodic arrangement and its simple style, lively and
  vivid without falling into the rhetorical, the narrative flows
  smoothly on, and, though abounding in detail, never becomes tedious or
  monotonous.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 82: 403. D. ‘05. 1070w.

  * “Painstaking as he has been in piecing together his material, he
  does not always seem to have understood the sphere to which the
  statements he copied down applied. This will not prevent his book’s
  being useful to a large circle of readers to whom the sources from
  which he draws are not accessible.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 374. N. 3, ‘05. 540w.

  “Dr. Healy’s work is not everywhere selfconsistent.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 346. O. 26, ‘05. 1100w.

  “A carefully written monograph.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 385. O. 14, ‘05. 140w.


=Hearn, Lafcadio.= Exotics and retrospectives. Shadowings. A. Japanese
miscellany. In ghostly Japan, ea. $1.25. Little.

  The general title, “Stories and sketches of Japan,” includes in
  popular form four volumes of the short papers written during the last
  few years of the author’s life. The volume entitled “A Japanese
  miscellany,” “would have fitted,” says the N. Y. Times, “the whole
  series excellently well for it is altogether Japanese.... Bits of
  antiquarian and ethnological investigation; little papers of research
  in all kinds of interesting matters relating to the people whom the
  author loved so well; Japanese stories retold from curious old
  Japanese books, with Mr. Hearn’s own version of traits and occurrences
  that have come under his observation; a few of the exquisitely
  artistic and suggestive tales, impressions, descriptions, which no one
  but a Hearn could write—these fill the four volumes with such a wealth
  of entertaining as well as valuable material that, in reading them,
  one constantly marvels how any one man found time or patience to
  gather and assimilate it all into one such orderly shape.”

  “He does not so much attempt to define, as to convey by means of his
  charmingly expressed and equally charmingly conceived ideas, some
  notion of the other half of the world, and the ideals as well as the
  daily life of the East.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 40. Ap. ‘05. 230w.

  “Together they offer an extraordinary variety of apercus of Japanese
  character and customs and beliefs, subtly apprehended, and expressed
  in a style infused with sympathy, phantasy, and color.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 68. Ja. 26, ‘05. 330w.

  “It is here that we gain some idea of the painstaking study, for
  infinite capacity for details, the special sympathy and appreciation
  that formed the solid basis of that wonderful power of vivid portrayal
  and poetic fancy that have made all of Mr. Hearn’s work unique and
  delightful. Certainly no one can afford to miss the insight into the
  very spirit of Japan, which is to be gained from these books. He, more
  than any other English writer, was fitted to be their prophet, and he
  nobly began his task, even if he did not have opportunity to complete
  it.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 68. F. 4, ‘05. 1010w.


=Hearn, Lafcadio.= Japan. **$2. Macmillan.

  The author, an American journalist, son of a Greek mother and an Irish
  father, took a Japanese name and a Japanese wife and lived the life of
  a native teacher, in order to interpret sympathetically the Japanese
  mind and its products to the Western world. Altho frankly devoted to
  the country, he surpasses her enemies in admiringly laying bare the
  realities. “One cannot quote, one must read this work. It shows the
  Japanese under his armor, modern science. The Japanese, outwardly, are
  ruled by treaties, diplomacy, governments, codes, imperial diet,
  armies, and battleships—all modern and external. Inwardly they—that
  is, forty-nine millions of them—are governed by ghosts. The graveyard
  is the true dictator. It is ever their ‘illustrious ancestors’ who
  achieve victories.” (Critic).

  “Probably three greater errors were never compressed into a single
  sentence than this from p. 27: ‘The real religion of Japan, the
  religion still professed in one form or another by the entire nation,
  is that cult which has been the foundation of all civilized religion
  and of all civilized society—ancestor-worship.’ The close and frequent
  points of influence which religion exercised upon politics and
  morality in Japan can nowhere else be so well studied as here.” E.
  Buckley.

   + + — =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 545. Ja. ‘05. 2460w.

  “Is a classic in science, a wonder of interpretation. It is the
  product of long years of thought, of keenest perception, of marvellous
  comprehension. Hearn outdoes the missionaries in dogmatism, exceeds
  even the hostile propagandist in telling the naked truth. His book is
  a re-reading of all Japanese history, a sociological appraisement of
  the value of Japanese civilization, and a warning against intolerant
  propaganda of any sort whatever.” W. E. Griffis.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 185. F. ‘05. 710w.

  “Both the prose and the poetry of Japanese life are infused into Mr.
  Hearn’s charming pages. Nobody, so far as we know, has given a better
  description of the fascination which Japanese life has at first for
  such as enter into its true spirit, and of its gradual disappearance.
  The swan-song of a very striking writer.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 54. Ja. 14, ‘05. 530w.


=Hearn, Lafcadio.= Letters from the raven. *$5. Mintie press.

  In this volume of letters and poems, Hearn tells of his life in the
  South, gives his views on the negro question, and his impressions of
  Memphis, New Orleans, and New York. The verses are both light and
  serious, and there are translations from negro and Creole love songs.


=Hearn, Lafcadio.= Romance of the Milky Way, and other studies and
stories. **$1.25. Houghton.

  “This small posthumous volume ... presents half a dozen ... graceful
  trifles, all but two Japanese in theme, preceded by a short
  biographical and appreciative notice ... by Mr. Ferris Greenslet.
  ‘With the exception of a body of familiar letters now in process of
  collection,’ says this editor, ‘the present volume contains all of
  Hearn’s writing that he left uncollected in the magazines or in
  manuscripts of a sufficient ripeness for publication.’”—Dial.

  * “The last work of Lafcadio Hearn lacks nothing of that delicacy of
  expression, of that beauty and depth of thought which caused his
  earlier books to be sought after and cherished by the ‘many who are
  yet the few.’”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1257. D. 2, ‘05. 850w.

  “The exquisite art of Hearn’s pen stamps the little book as a notable
  one.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 276. N. 1, ‘05. 580w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1478. D. 21, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 510. D. 21, ‘05. 400w.


=Heath, Dudley.= Miniatures. *$6.75 Putnam.

  “The chief object of the book is to present a historical account of
  the art which shall be suggestive and stimulating to further study and
  appreciation rather than to attempt an exhaustive catalog or an
  authoritative guide for the specialist.”—Ind.

  “Mr. Heath has done his work with exceptional thoroughness and skill.
  The closing pages are given up to ‘Foreign portrait miniaturists’ and
  we read of Italy, Germany, and France, but not a word of America or
  the United States.” Charles Henry Hart.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 202. O. 1, ‘05. 1960w.

  “Mr. Heath has taken up the consideration of his subject with
  enthusiastic zeal as well as with discrimination.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 394. Ag. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “The present volume has been designed on too ambitious a pattern.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 276. S. 1, ‘05. 940w.


=Heath, William.= Heath’s memoirs of the American war: ed. by Rufus
Rockwell Wilson, **$2.50. Wessels.

  “This is the third and decidedly the most important of the ‘Source
  books of American history’ thus far issued under the direction of
  Rufus Rockwell Wilson. General Heath’s memoirs, which were
  originally published in 1798, and, so far as we are aware, have
  hitherto been reprinted only in a limited edition, are of direct
  value to the student of the war of the Revolution, constituting a
  first-hand account of many of the operations connected therewith,
  and assisting to an appreciation of the men and conditions of the
  period. The author served as a major-general in the American army
  throughout the long conflict, his military activity dating from the
  battle of Concord, where he took part in the harrying of the
  retreating British.”—Outlook.

  “The editor’s introduction, notes, and appendixes are excellent in
  their way.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 285. Mr. ‘05. 80w.

  “The book is of value also for its accounts of the disposition of
  Burgoyne after his surrender, of Arnold’s treason, and of the
  surrender of Cornwallis.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 204. Mr. 16, ‘05. 170w.

  “His diary is, as stated, gossipy, redolent of army life and its
  trifling incidents. Well worth rescuing from the dusty obscurity of
  library shelves.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 220. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1740w.

  “In its present form it should command a wide audience, its value to
  the modern student being increased by the intelligent annotations of
  its present editor.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 95. Ja. 7, ‘05. 340w.

  “In this new dress ... these memoirs form a valuable addition to our
  source books of American history.”

   + + + =Reader.= 5: 626. Ap. ‘05. 330w.


=Heigh, John.= House of cards. †$150. Macmillan.

  The pen-name John Heigh has aroused genuine curiosity among the lovers
  of a “morsel of mystery.” “The corrupt league between business and
  politics is the leading note, but the strength and grace of the story
  lie in the narrative of the life and portrayal of the character of
  Kriemhild West, of the friendship of Eliot and Cards, of the bluff,
  hearty and honest personality of John Heigh.” (Ind.)

  “The style is epigrammatic without being laboured, the dramatic
  situations are handled with artistic restraint, and a vein of quiet
  humor runs all through the book.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 236. Ag. 19. 220w.

  “Written in an exasperating style. There is very little story about
  the book but instead a great deal of shrewd comment and incisive
  characterization.” Wm. M. Payne.

     — + =Dial.= 39: 209. O. 1, ‘05. 400w.

  “An exceptionally bright and striking story. He has the art of telling
  a story, of putting each incident, rightly proportioned, in its proper
  place, of making his characters speak for themselves and justify their
  existence.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 452. Ag. 24, ‘05. 150w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is not often that a lesson of serious import is conveyed in
  fiction with such delicacy of style, charm of humour, and literary
  effectiveness as here.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 692. Jl. 15, ‘05. 140w.

  “Bricks of humor, satire, pathos, a couple of tragedy keystones, and
  all these joined with the mortar of realism into a magnificent
  edifice, built upon the rocks of cleverness.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 140w.


=Heilprin, Angelo.= Tower of Pelee. **$3. Lippincott.

  Professor Heilprin, of the Yale scientific school, and author of “Mont
  Pelée and the tragedy of Martinique,” was in Martinique at the time of
  the great eruption in the summer of 1902 and has visited the islands
  twice since that time, ascending Pelee many times. This volume is an
  illustrated study of the great West Indian volcano, and the strange
  tower of lava which rose so mysteriously from the crater’s mouth, and
  crumbled away in constantly falling fragments. He also gives the
  after-history of the tower and explanations of the phenomena.

  “An important contribution to our knowledge of the ways of volcanoes.
  The book is written with more care than preceding volumes from the
  same hand.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 203. Mr. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  “It is in the wide and sympathetic interest stirred by the tragic fate
  of St. Pierre that Professor Heilprin’s volume finds its
  justification. Author is a man of versatile scientific attainment, a
  general naturalist and geographer rather than a geologist or
  volcanologist, and with the journalist’s eye for the effective (albeit
  not always essential or accurate) details. A tendency to introduce
  irrelevant matter. In giving the results of Prof. Moissan’s analysis
  of fumerole gases from St. Pierre, the author curiously omits nitrogen
  which formed 55 per cent of the whole.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 137. F. 16, ‘05. 1730w. (Abstract of contents.)

  Reviewed by J. S. F.

       + =Nature.= 72: 101. Je. 1, ‘05. 170w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 531. Ag. 12, ‘05. 490w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 145. Ja. 14, ‘05. 100w.

  “His study is both scientific and popular.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 251. F. ‘05. 100w.

  “The illustrations, indeed, can hardly be matched, so effective is
  their representation of the volcanic phenomena.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 223. F. 11, ‘05. 170w.


* =Helm, W. H.= Aspects of Balzac. **$1. Pott.

  “The greater part of the book is reprinted from the ‘Empire
  review.’ ... Two articles run through the women and men of Balzac, and
  another deals with Balzac’s idea of the English and his admiration for
  various English authors. In ‘Balzac and Dickens’ essential differences
  between the French realist and the ‘respectable English author’ are
  well indicated.... In ‘Literary references in Balzac’ ... the
  influence of Sterne and Richardson is rightly pointed out.”—Ath.

  * “He gossips freely and with abundance of humour (which seems
  occasionally introduced for the purpose of mollifying the general
  reader) concerning the characters in Balzac’s immense world, and sets
  down the main conclusions about the novelist which most expert readers
  have reached.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 493. Ap. 15. 260w.

  * “It contains entertaining information about the novelist and his
  novels, presented in a clear, direct, offhand manner, which agreeably
  does not exact too much patience from the reader.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 838. D. 2. ‘05. 530w.


=Henderson, Charles Hanford.= Children of good fortune: an essay in
morals. **$1.30. Houghton.

  The philosophy that preaches salvation thru good fortune is set forth
  under the headings: The problem; Human conduct; Right and wrong;
  Efficiency; Worth; The moral person; Individual morality; The cardinal
  virtues; The doctrine of automatic goodness; Social welfare; The
  morality of the four institutions; Occupations; Immediacy; The moral
  outlook.

  * “The work is written in a charming style, and possesses keen
  penetration and moral insight.” W. C. Keirstead.

     + + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 781. O. ‘05. 880w.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 798. D. 9. 390w.

  “Mr. Henderson’s books, moreover, are not written from strange heights
  which none but the moral philosopher can scale. They are clear and
  simple, showing a rare firsthand knowledge of the larger life. They
  combine to an unusual extent the attitudes of the observer and the
  experimentalist; they are at once dispassionate and enthusiastic.”
  Edith J. R. Isaacs.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 354. My. 16, 05. 1840w.

  “At all events the book is good reading, fit to stimulate thought and
  apt even to produce effects upon conduct itself.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 460. Jl. 8, ‘05. 640w.

  “Such a book is a moral tonic.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 343. Je. 3, ‘05. 450w.

  “Dr. Henderson’s book is stimulating, and represents an interesting
  attempt to provide a working basis for moral conduct.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 100w.


=Henderson, Charles Richmond, and others.= Modern methods of charity.
**$3.50. Macmillan.

  An account of the public and private systems of relief in the
  principal countries of Europe, the British empire, and the United
  States; also a special treatment of Jewish charities. It is a book for
  active workers in any field of philanthropy, as well as for students.

         =Acad.= 68: 151. F. 18, ‘05. 350w.

  * “It is not philosophy, it is not theory; but it is a foundation upon
  which theory and philosophy may be erected. It is the product of the
  hardest and most tedious delving, searching, translating, comparing
  and verifying.” Ernest P. Bicknell.

   + + — =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 426. N. ‘05. 790w.

  “Encyclopaedic compend.” Winthrop More Daniels.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 556. Ap. ‘05. 710w.

  “The book is almost encyclopaedic in character, and hence more likely
  to be referred to on special topics than to be read through as a
  treatise. The volume has too many details which are not digested and
  which are not of valuable significance, and altogether too many
  statements which do not convey clear and helpful ideas; while some
  information that should be found in it is unhappily lacking.... The
  misleading generalizations which the editor has allowed to appear at
  frequent intervals throughout the volume.” B.

     + — =Charities.= 14: 639. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1870w.

  Reviewed by Max West.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 269. Ap. 16, ‘05. 560w.

  “We regret to say, the editor seems to have a very inadequate
  conception of the comparative method of study and of scientific
  methods in general.”

     — — =Nation.= 80: 422. My. 25, ‘05. 960w.

  “It is a scientific study in what we may call the methodology of
  public relief for public poverty.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 902. Ap. 8, ‘05. 340w.

  “A useful compendium.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 127. Ja. ‘05. 130w.


=Henderson, George Francis Robert.= Science of war; ed. by Neil Malcolm.
*$4. Longmans.

  The author of “Stonewall Jackson” called the Herbert Spencer of
  military tactics was a master of the theory and practice of the art of
  war. This collection of essays and lectures which separately have been
  regarded as authoritative along their respective lines of thought,
  treat such subjects as “War,” “Strategy,” “The tactical employment of
  cavalry,” “Tactics of the three arms combined,” “Training of the
  infantry for the attack,” “Military criticism and modern tactics,”
  etc. The fourteen essays are preceded by a memoir by Col. Henderson’s
  staunch admirer and patron, Lord Roberts.

  “Henderson is at his best in driving home with quiet persistence, and
  with the help of countless apt examples, the lessons of pure military
  warfare.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 728. Jl. 15, ‘05. 810w.

  “In the present volume there are many contradictions. So, too as
  regards style itself.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 687. Je. 3, 670w.

  “Reading them we get the real measure of the man; we realize the
  extraordinary compass of his knowledge, the wise way in which he
  looked on professional things, his power to put before his hearers or
  his readers matter for deep thought, and repaying any amount of
  thought bestowed on them.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 200. Je. 23, ‘05. 2270w.

  “It is rare for the reviewer to open the pages of a book in which
  there is so little to criticise, so much to admire.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 346. O. 26, 05. 730w.

  “Those in the volume before us are minor only in the matter of
  quantity, not at all in that of quality.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 660. O. 7, ‘05. 1020w.

  “An admirable contribution to the serious study of the art of war.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 153. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1580w.


=Henderson, Henry F.= Religious controversies of Scotland. *$1.75. imp.
Scribner.

  “The story of the dozen storms that differences of opinion have
  generated in the Scottish church during the last two centuries....
  Some of the chapters in this volume relate to recent contentions about
  the higher criticism; others to conflicts equally serious in their
  time, but now forgotten.”—Outlook.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 761. Mr. 25, ‘05. 120w.

  “Generally. Mr. Henderson has treated a very difficult subject in a
  satisfactory way.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 755. My. 20, ‘05. 300w.


=Henderson, Howard.= Ethics and etiquette of the pulpit, pew, parish,
press and platform. $1. H. A. Schroetter, Covington, Ky.

  A second revised edition of this manual of manners for ministers and
  members, which may prove helpful to those who have had no home
  training and who know nothing of common social usages.


=Henderson, John.= West Indies; painted by A. L. Forrest; described by
John Henderson. *$6. Macmillan.

  The text deals almost wholly with Jamaica and its people, chiefly its
  negroes. Much information upon the flora, the commerce, and various
  matters of interest to the tourist are given. The illustrations are
  done in color.

  “Mr. Forrest has done better in this volume than he did in its
  predecessor, ‘Morocco.’ Mr. Henderson’s text falls considerably short
  of the artistic level of its illustrations.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 217. Ag. 12. 260w.

  “Their joint work is a very attractive book. Its illustrations are
  charming. Mr. Henderson’s descriptive chapters are not to be taken too
  seriously; they are light, bright, and rapid, not to say slap-dash
  here and there, and they display, as is only to be expected, not a few
  of the defects of those attractive qualities.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 199. Je. 23, ‘05. 580w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 361. Je. 3, ‘05. 200w.

  “The book is very interesting, and within the limits which we think we
  have found, is valuable as a study of some of the phases of
  subtropical America.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 451. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1410w.

  “The pictures of negro types are full of character and individuality.
  The reproductions are unusually good. The text of the book consists of
  the observations of a traveler, chatty and genial, but not penetrating
  to any great depth.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 696. Jl. 15, ‘05. 60w.


* =Henderson, R. S.= Earthwork tables. 2 pts. $1.50. Eng. news.

  This useful book of tables is divided into two parts: Part I.
  Preliminary earthwork tables, giving cubic yards per 100 feet for
  level sections, to which is added a graphical method of estimating
  quantities from a profile. Part II. Earthwork tables, giving the
  volume in cubic yards of prismoids 100 feet long by the average end
  area method.

  * “The reviewer knows of no other similar table that equals it for
  range.” Halbert P. Gillette.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 54: 650. D. 14, ‘05. 640w.


=Henderson, William James.= Pipes and timbrels. $1.25. Badger, R: G.

  “A new volume of poems.... Pictures, music, dreams, and reminiscences
  of the classic world are the flowers that grow in Mr. Henderson’s
  garden, and from these he makes a most acceptable bouquet of the
  pretty old-time ‘mixed’ variety.”—N. Y. Times.

  “There are poems in blank verse, sonnets, songs, and in all the meter
  is good, in some excellent. There is thought in all the poems, and it
  is poetic thought.” Eltweed Pomeroy.

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 219. Ag. ‘05. 280w.

  “A certain compliance with the rules of prosody, a flavor of the
  sentiment of poetry, an inspiration toward the best, characterize
  these verses.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 566. Je. ‘05. 60w.

  Review by W: M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 67. Ag. ‘05. 240w.

  “Contains many lovely lines and a few successful technical
  experiments.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 265. Ap. 22, ‘05. 300w.


* =Henry, Arthur.= Lodgings in town. †$1.50. Barnes.

  “To interest yourself in others, to go with the tide of the great city
  and observe closely every possible condition, is Mr. Henry’s recipe
  for happiness. Add to this an especial care for one person in
  particular—like Nancy—and the picture is complete. The faith that kept
  firm hold of the youth who began his New York life possessed of one
  clean collar and a poem must be the kind that moves mountains.
  Particularly good are the descriptions of the office where Nancy
  worked and the Baxter street lodgings where she and her poet
  lived.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 527. O. 28, ‘05. 120w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 663. N. 18, ‘05. 350w.


=Henry, Arthur.= Unwritten law. †$1.50. Barnes.

  The purpose of this book is to show how, in our modern social system,
  ignorance of the laws themselves and of the crime done in breaking
  them often leads to tragedy. A German engraver, who loses his savings
  thru the speculations of his banker, sets innocently to work to
  support his family by engraving bank notes for himself, the result is
  Sing Sing. One daughter, simple and unlearned, comes to grief, while
  her sophisticated and selfish sister marries well. The book treats of
  both the upper and the lower classes, and of the many problems of
  modern life. The setting is New York.

  “Handful of tragedies in the guise of a novel.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 759. Jl. 22, ‘05. 420w.

  “The book is animated by a fine seriousness, a single-minded
  sincerity, which pertain to the best and highest in American art and
  thought. It exhibits a certain crudeness, a certain toughness of
  fiber, which may militate against its right appreciation by the
  fastidious.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 778. Je. 24. 750w.

  * “Is an encouraging example of that best sort of realism. The style
  is simple, at times almost to the point of baldness. It will
  inevitably provoke discussion; it will arouse some antagonism; but it
  cannot fail to make people think.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 267. My. ‘05. 980w.

  “There is no kind of excuse for the excessively plain speaking in
  which this book indulges. It impresses one as the work of a reporter
  rather than that of a constructive novelist.” Wm. M. Payne.

     — — =Dial.= 39: 115. S. 1, ‘05. 200w.

  “The book has, perhaps, no merely literary merit, it is crude in plot
  and exhibits much bad taste in incident, but it has a certain
  sincerity in strength, and a vividness, too, in places.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 220. Ap. 8, ‘05. 710w.


=Henry, O., pseud. (Sydney Porter).= Cabbages and kings. $1.50. McClure.

  The author, who has lived many years among the people of the South
  American republics, draws upon his fund of experience in this breezy
  story which recounts the adventures of an energetic American in the
  land of popular revolutions. “The characters range from the native
  brown-skinned maiden to the daughter of an American banker, and from a
  peon to an absconding president. The game proceeds much like a
  rattling good comic opera—and the characters have many opportunities
  to spin yarns of the kind that have already made famous the name of
  ‘O. Henry.’” (Pub. note.).

  “A book of very unusual interest and cleverness. The general
  popularity will necessarily be limited by the fact that it is
  essentially a man’s book. A number of the chapters might be taken
  bodily from the book and held up as admirable examples of short-story
  telling.” Stanhope Searles.

       + =Bookm.= 20: 561. F. ‘05. 530w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 189. F. ‘05. 90w.

  “The inimitably breezy style of story telling is retained in the main
  episodes. Has weakened the structure of the whole. The characters, so
  delightful in the original stories become less real, less convincing
  on their new stage.”

     — + =Ind.= 58: 328. F. 9, ‘05. 210w.

  “Pure burlesque, but lively, ingenious, and slangily humorous, South
  American intrigue, Yankee resource, the colossal impudence of the
  American fakir, and the romance of unusual love complications, are all
  worked together into a semi-connected story, parts of which have been
  already used as magazine tales.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 94. Ja. 7, ‘05. 50w.


=Herbert, George.= English works, newly arranged and annotated and
considered in relation to his life, by G. Herbert Palmer. 3v. *$6.
Houghton.

  “Herbert, though a minor poet, is established in English literature as
  are few minor poets of the seventeenth century. His poems have been
  constantly reprinted for general readers.... The form of this edition
  is altogether admirable. The print is clear and restful to the eye,
  the margins are wide ... and the volumes comfortable to hold. The
  notes to the poems are printed opposite to the poems, so that one has
  the poem on the right-hand page, the corresponding notes on the
  left-hand. The illustrations are interesting and apt. The portrait of
  Herbert published here, for the first time as the frontispiece to
  volume I., is a notable addition to literary portraiture.”—Nation.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “Of the more specific work of the editor one may say that it is at
  once scholarly and literary, minute in its exegesis yet mindful always
  that a poet and not a ‘corpus vile’ is under discussion.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1230. N. 23, ‘05. 870w.

  “The annotations are very thorough. The study of the matter and style
  is exhaustive.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 384. N. 9, ‘05. 1880w.

  “It will ever hold its place, as one of the triumphs of American
  scholarship in editing English classics, alongside such works as those
  of Furness and Child. These latter are bigger and on bigger subjects,
  but they are not better done.” Cameron Mann.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 757. N. 11, ‘05. 2470w.

  “Has done his work as biographer and editor con amore.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 577. N. 4, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Every help to the reader’s eye and mind for the appreciation of
  Herbert will be found in these volumes, so great is the labor of love
  which Professor Palmer, with his own fine intelligence and training,
  has wrought for the most lovable and the most human of our religious
  poets.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 827. D. 2, ‘05. 1480w.


* =Herford, Brooke.= Eutychus and his relations. *70c. Am. Unitar.

  Under this profound title appear the witty old-time pulpit and pew
  papers written from a layman’s point of view, which were first
  published anonymously during the early years of their author’s
  ministry, 1860-1861. They include quaintly humorous disquisitions
  upon: A ‘lay’ view of sleeping in church; Some people who always come
  late; Praising God by proxy; Pews; A country tea party; Over-much
  discourse; Unsocial worship; Parsonic acid, and other kindred
  subjects.


=Herford, Charles Harold.= Robert Browning. **$1. Dodd.

  “The biographical element is sufficient, but is subordinate to the
  exposition of the poet’s work in the order of its production. The true
  biography of Browning can be written in no other way.... A clear
  perception of this fact, and a definite though not a rigid application
  of this fact to his material, give Professor Herford’s study a true
  biographic as well as an interpretative quality.”—Outlook.

  “Prof. Herford’s study of Browning is in many respects complementary
  to that of Mr. Chesterton’s published last year. The style is, for the
  most part sober and balanced though there are occasional flashes of
  rather loose rhetoric, and the author has an odd habit of falling at
  intervals into comments which are banal or tasteless.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 14. Jl. 1, 1580w.

  “In scale it stands midway between Mr. Chesterton’s and Prof.
  Dowden’s; in quality it is to be compared rather with the latter.” H.
  W. Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 279. Ag. ‘05. 760w.

  “There could hardly be a better brief estimate of Browning’s genius
  than Professor Herford has given us.” Edward Fuller.

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 247. S. ‘05. 390w.

  “The commentator knows his Browning well, has availed himself of the
  best and latest authorities, and manifests a considerable degree of
  sympathetic appreciation; but he is hampered in his presentation by a
  clumsiness of expression. Numerous misquotations from the poems ... do
  not strengthen our confidence in Professor Herford or his book.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 44. Jl. 16, ‘05. 400w.

  “The necessity to be poetic, to live up to his matter, has been too
  much for him.”

     — + =Ind.= 59: 457. Ag. 24, ‘05. 220w.

  “This is likely to stand as one of the best of the numerous short
  critical lives of its provocative poet.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 531. Je. 29, ‘05. 350w.

  “His treatment of Browning the poet and man shows considerable insight
  and unusual sanity.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 304. My. 6, ‘05. 280w.

  “His study of Browning is intelligent, sympathetic, and well
  balanced.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 1015. Ap. 22, ‘05. 280w.

  “He has a gift of selection and juxtaposed selection which remarkably
  increases the pleasure of reading this sort of criticism. But the
  scheme of the book runs parallel with how many others.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 849. Je. 24, ‘05. 110w.

  “We are not wholly in agreement with his estimate of the poet. Our
  chief difference is in regard to Browning’s literary form. The
  criticism generally, we greatly admire.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 558. Ap. 15, ‘05. 580w.


* =Herrick, Christine Terhune=, ed. Lewis Carroll birthday book. 75c.
Wessels.

  A little birthday book that will delight “Alice in wonderland”
  admirers.

  * “As a birthday book, it is hardly a success, and the selections do
  more credit to the compiler’s familiarity with her author than to her
  sense of appropriateness.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 490. D. 14, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Mrs. Christine Terhune Herrick has made the selections for the
  volume and nobody could have done it with more sympathy and
  understanding.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 895. D. 16, ‘05. 230w.


=Herrick, Francis Hobart.= Home life of wild birds: a new method of the
study and photography of birds. **$2. Putnam.

  The “new method” consists in carrying away the nest with its eggs or
  young birds and also its immediate surroundings and setting it up
  before a green tent where it may be watched and photographed at
  leisure. 150 photographs of thirty species of our common birds attest
  the value of this method. The author also gives the results of his
  close observation of the nests.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 396. Je. 1, ‘05. 80w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1152. Je. 1, ‘05. 180w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 263. S. 28, ‘05. 320w.

  Reviewed by Mabel Osgood Wright.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 402. Je. 17, ‘05. 530w.

  “The volume is a valuable contribution to the scientific knowledge of
  bird habits.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 392. Je. 10, ‘05. 150w.


=Herrick, Robert.= Common lot. $1.50. Macmillan.

  The story is of a young architect who has grown up in the belief that
  he is heir to his uncle’s millions. When the fortune is left to
  charity, he takes up the common lot of toil unwillingly and is weakly
  led away from his young ideals by the desire for money. When his
  personal and professional honor are compromised, he is held to his
  expiation by his young wife whose unflinching faith in him forces him
  to be the man she thinks he is. It is a vivid representation of
  business life in Chicago, and the philosophy of the book is summed up
  in the closing sentence—“Fortunately there are few things that do make
  any great difference to real men and women,—and one of the least is
  the casual judgment of their fellow-men.”

  “‘The common lot’ is worthy of wide circulation. It cannot fail to do
  good.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 450. Ap. ‘05. 460w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 11. Ja. 7. 280w.

  “An interesting and impressive story.”

       + =Engin. N.= 53: 181. F. 16, ‘05. 230w.

     + + =Reader.= 5: 258. Ja. ‘05. 570w.

  “There is a good deal of character drawing in the book that is at once
  delicate and strong, and the story of how Francis Hart did not inherit
  the millions he hoped for, took up the common lot of toil, and what
  came of it, is among the best in recent fiction.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 118. Ja. ‘05. 110w.


=Herrick, Robert.= Memoirs of an American citizen. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  A country boy, tired of his lot runs away to Chicago to make his
  fortune. His autobiography follows with an unusually strong personal
  note even for a self-told tale of the career which starts with service
  as a grocery wagon driver and reaches the ranks of the Chicago
  capitalist. The way is made by “turning Texas steers into dressed beef
  and Iowa hogs into leaf lard and sausage,” which would seem honorable
  enough did not analysis of his methods of operation reveal a dulled
  sense of moral obligation to people at large, the city, and any
  competing organization.

  “No more absolute unswerving merger of the author in the character of
  his hero, of his self-effacement in the interest of good art, could
  ever be conceived of.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

   + + + =Bookm.= 22: 132. O. ‘05. 970w.

  “Professor Herrick does not appear to have a powerful imagination, and
  his literalness, and even his unusual power of penetration, do not in
  themselves suffice to carry a story otherwise deficient.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 170w.

  “The story seems to be rooted in bitter cynicism and to embody the
  very philosophy of despair.” Wm. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 114. S. 1, ‘05. 510w.

  “Is not in so happy a vein. The author sees things too big, and he has
  not enough confidence in the virtue of the American people, which will
  outlast transient vices.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 1154. N. 16, ‘05. 70w.

  “This is not a book that we should care to see in the hands of youth.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 205. S. 7, ‘05. 730w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

  “Mr. Herrick’s book is a book among many and it comes nearer
  reflecting a certain kind of recognizable, contemporaneous American
  spirit than anybody has yet done.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 482. Jl. 22, ‘05. 620w.

  “The story is worked out with extraordinary virility, realism, and
  truth. Deserves reading, not only because of its subject and its moral
  force, but because of the thorough, faithful, and even artistic way in
  which the material is handled.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 935. Ag. 12, ‘05. 290w.

  * “It is penetrated by genuine intensity of spirit, and shows the hand
  of a high-minded and accomplished workman.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 707. N. 25, ‘05. 160w.

  “One of the most refreshing qualities of the story is its sanity.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 220. Ag. 12, ‘05. 330w.

  * “But one thing Prof. Herrick has achieved in spite of himself; he
  has somehow put,—no, hammered,—together a rough image of the American
  self-made man.”

     — + =R. of Rs.= 32: 757. D. ‘05. 150w.


=Hess, Isabella R.= St. Cecilia of the court. †$1.25. Revell.

  “In Flanery Court, where Cecilia (otherwise Angelina Sweeney) lives,
  poverty rules.... Miss Hess ... has told a pathetically pretty story
  of the life of a poor little red-haired saint—her struggles against
  the hardships of life, her drunken mother, her little brother
  Puddin’.... There is Jim Bellway, who taught the make-believe saint,
  quite unconsciously, how to become a real one; and there is Mr.
  Daniels, who Cecilia, quite unconsciously, brought back to the
  straight and narrow path—and so on; and though the story wades through
  tears, it nevertheless ends in a burst of sunshine.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 648. S. 30, ‘05. 200w.

  “Touches portraying the generosity, loyalty, and cheerfully borne
  privations of the poor are the best feature of this story of New York
  tenement life.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 136. S. 16, ‘05. 70w.


=Hewett, Rev. G. M. A.= The rat. *$2. Macmillan.

  Having arrived at the old age of three years, this hoary rat sits down
  to write his memoirs, recounting his many adventures in English mills
  and cornfields. He discourses on his wives and gives his conclusions
  upon boys, men, ferrets, and women. He also gives an exhaustive
  treatment of traps. There is much delineation of rat-character, and
  the experiences of a traveled friend who had lived in the sewers of
  London and Paris are given. The book is illustrated with colored
  pictures.

  “A work which we commend to young and old alike.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 404. Ap. 1. 160w.

  “It is a very English story of a very English rat intended primarily
  for English children and supposed to be told by the rat himself.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 43. Ja. 21, ‘05. 520w.


* =Hewlett, Maurice.= Works. Ed. de luxe. IIV. ea. *$3. Macmillan.

  The five hundred numbered sets of this edition de luxe are sold by
  subscription only. The volumes are appearing one a month in the
  following order: The forest lovers; Richard Yea-and-Nay; Little novels
  of Italy; New Canterbury tales; The queen’s quair; The fool errant;
  The road in Tuscany in two volumes; Earthwork out of Tuscany; Pan and
  the young shepherd and songs and meditations in one volume; Fond
  adventures.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 426. N. 23, ‘05. 280w. (Review of v. 1-3.)

  Reviewed by Christian Gauss.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 844. D. 2, ‘05. 2450w. (Review of v. 1-3.)

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 525. O. 28, ‘05. 80w. (Review of v. 1.)


=Hewlett, Maurice Henry.= Fond adventures: tales of the youth of the
world. †$1.50. Harper.

  Four short stories of mediaeval romance, The heart’s key, Brazenhead
  the Great, Buondelmonte’s saga, and The love chase.

  “Knowing well the possibilities of Mr. Hewlett’s fine ability, we lay
  down this latest volume with great disappointment.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 419. Ap. 15, ‘05. 520w.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 716. Je. 10. 220w.

  “One feels that in these few crowded, tumultuous pages there is more
  of the real essence of Florentine life than in the whole length and
  breadth of George Eliot’s ‘Romola.’” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 515. Jl. ‘05. 600w.

  “Mr. Hewlett is at his best in these short stories.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 93. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “Taken as a whole, the impression remains that the book is made up of
  work done early in Mr. Hewlett’s literary career, and denied
  publication until now.”

       — =Dial.= 38: 393. Je. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “Not one of these stories is lacking in intrinsic interest, yet one’s
  dominant impression in closing the book is not of any of the
  characters or events, but of the cleverness of Mr. Hewlett.” Herbert
  W. Horwill.

   + + — =Forum.= 37: 111. Jl. ‘05. 230w.

  “But it is ‘The love chase,’ the last story of the series, in which
  Mr. Hewlett probably surpasses anything he has ever written.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1309. Je. 8, ‘05. 820w.

  “A volume of stories, splendid stories, full of action and passion,
  with an undercurrent of laughter, all carried off with great spirit
  and style. They are told in wonderful words, so apt and abundant.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 440. Je. 1, ‘05. 1130w.

  “These four stories of Mr. Hewlett’s are as rich in imagery and as
  glowing in color as any that he has ever written.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 342. My. 27, ‘05. 810w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “These stories are remarkable rather for atmospheric quality than for
  construction or force of characterization.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 139. My. 13, ‘05. 200w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 871. Je. 3, ‘05. 190w.

  “The tales are medieval; rich in quality, decorative in effect and
  fascinating always.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 92. Je. ‘05. 180w.

  “The quaint and pleasing title of Mr. Hewlett’s new book serves as a
  preface for tales more deserving of the first adjective than the last,
  except in so far as artistic work is, in a sense, always deserving of
  the term ‘pleasing.’”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 360. Ag. ‘05. 340w.

  “His style, his vision, his passion—these are always there.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 756. Je. ‘05. 250w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 680. My. 6, ‘05. 830w.


=Hewlett, Maurice.= Fool errant. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  The “fool” of Mr. Hewlett’s new story is an English youth with a very
  ardent temperament who goes abroad to complete his studies. He is
  guilty of many hot-headed indiscretions, chief among which is his
  boyish passion for the wife of his stern tutor. A pilgrimage of
  expiation follows his declaration of love for her. Much of the
  interest of the tale centers in the phases of Italian life of high and
  low degree which he encounters. “He has in his journeyings a
  quick-witted companion, who rescues him alike from rash promptings of
  his ‘daemon’ and from foes from without.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Mr. Maurice Hewlett, it may be said at once, has achieved a notable
  success in the latest of his books.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 750. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1440w.

  “‘The fool errant’ will not make so wide an appeal to the general
  public as several earlier volumes of Mr. Hewlett’s. It lacks the
  tumultuous passion of ‘Richard yea-and-nay’, the epic bigness of the
  ‘Queen’s quair.’”

       + =Bookm.= 22: 36. S. ‘05. 800w.

  “The novel shows, on the whole, an advance over its predecessors. Has
  proved, by the charm and animation of his tale, that imagination and a
  sense of style need not, under favourable circumstances, seriously
  interfere with the writing of a good novel.” Edith Wharton.

   + + — =Bookm.= 22: 64. S. ‘05. 1660w.

  “It is possible, though the statement is not to be made dogmatically,
  that Mr. Maurice Hewlett, in all his succession of legitimately showy
  triumphs, has done nothing better than this history of a ‘fool.’”
  Olivia Howard Dunbar.

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 451. N. ‘05. 370w.

  “We feel that he is simply saturated with the life of the time and the
  color of the environment and that he has reproduced these things with
  marvelous fidelity. This is the chief title of the book to praise, and
  a high title it is.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 113. S. 1, ‘05. 510w.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “Told with sureness of touch and undeniable brilliance.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 225. Jl. 14, ‘05. 430w.

  “A story of intense interest and a literary achievement of a very high
  order.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 511. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1180w.

  “As a faithfully wrought and vigorous piece of fiction-writing the
  book is unusual.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 883. Ag. 5, ‘05. 240w.

  * “May be counted among the notable books of the second half of the
  year.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 708. N. 25, ‘05. 190w.

  “Mr. Hewlett draws a brilliant picture of a decadent period.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 283. Ag. 26, ‘05. 260w.

  “A book very subtly conceived and very admirably written.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 218. Ag. 12, ‘05. 580w.

  “This brilliant study in the picaresque seems to us one of the most
  successful of Mr. Hewlett’s works.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 359. S. 9, ‘05. 310w.


=Hewlett, Maurice Henry.= Road in Tuscany. **$6. Macmillan.

  Mr. Hewlett’s own words are perhaps best descriptive of the freshness
  of his view of life and art in Tuscany. He calls it “a companion of
  travel and leisurely, sententious commentary of the country,” and he
  strikes its key-note in his opening remarks. “His plan for the book
  has the freshness which marks its rendering of details. ‘Let the
  history, fine arts, monuments and institutions of a country be as fine
  as you please, its best product will always be the people of it, who
  themselves produced those other pleasant spectacles. I have always
  preferred a road to a church, always a man to a masterpiece, a singer
  to his song; and I have never opened a book when I could read what I
  wanted on the hillside or by the river bank.’” (Reader). He
  consistently subordinates art galleries to peasants, but gives
  legends, history, and piquant references to the art and literature of
  the country, with a lavish hand.

  “Is one of those rare books having charm, and one which gives no less
  insight into Mr. Hewlett than into the hearts of all the dead and
  living Tuscans of whom he writes. Mr. Hewlett’s one fault, regarded as
  a cicerone, is that he gives us life in superabundance; he gives it to
  us often at the cost of other things which we are loth to sacrifice.
  Now guidebooks the very best of them, while they make excellent
  servants, are bad masters, Mr. Hewlett’s not excepted. Flippant he is,
  at times, perverse, even arrogant: but he understands the Tuscans, and
  he loves them. Whoever goes to Florence without ‘The road in Tuscany’
  goes but half equipped.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

   + + — =Bookm.= 20: 557. F. ‘05. 1860w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 479. My. ‘05. 150w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 179. Mr. 2, ‘05. 920w.

     + + =Reader.= 5: 500. Mr. ‘05. 830w.

  “One of those genial, leisurely, charming books, with a touch of
  infinite knowledge, that we find in the combination of the artist and
  traveler. It reveals the real Italy, with its color and fragrance,
  which is known only to those who get away from the towns and cities.
  Typographically, the work is elegant, and the pictures really
  illustrate.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 123. Ja. ‘05. 130w.

  “His artistic suggestiveness never fails; his ideas and conclusions
  especially with regard to such unfamiliar places as Volterra, Cortona,
  Arezzo, and many more, seem almost invariably right.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 88. Ja. 21, ‘05. 1870w.


=Heywood, William.= Palio and Ponte. Methuen, London.

  This “account of the sports of central Italy from the age of Dante to
  the XXth century” dwells upon a phase of Italian history almost
  unknown to literature. The Italian idea of sports was closely allied
  to the Greek idea of games, and they often grew out of rivalry in
  neighboring communities or celebrated some historic or civic event.
  Mr. Heywood shows their importance in the life of the mediæval Italian
  city, and pictures Lorenzo de’Medici, Sodoma, the painter, and Caesar
  Borgia racing their horses at Sienese pali.

  “The style throughout is clear and simple,—in general not of marked
  quality, but occasionally showing such vigor and even beauty that one
  is tempted to wish for more such pages even at the sacrifice of some
  of the by-paths of erudition.” Ellen Giles.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 107. S. 1, ‘05. 1490w.

  “Mr. Heywood has undertaken his study of these sports in the spirit of
  a true historian, and his researches have revealed a new side of Italy
  to English readers. But our author is more than a student of archives.
  He has bursts of eloquence in his style. He has interwoven a vast
  amount of local history, especially Sienese, since no Anglican, save
  perhaps Mr. Langton Douglas, knows his Siena better. Mr. Heywood
  tastes what he describes. He has gone to sources not merely in his
  facts, but in his inspiration. He has not compiled a book, but has
  written one for which all lovers of Italy can only be grateful.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 119. F. 9, ‘05. 940w.

  “Without a real love of Italy, and an unusually deep understanding of
  Italian character, this book could not have been written.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 19. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1970w.


=Hibben, John Grier.= Logic, deductive and inductive. $1.40. Scribner.

  “Logic, so far as merely formal, is proverbially dry. In its
  application to living interests it becomes a succulent source of
  intellectual pleasure. Professor Hibben has aimed to invest it with
  this attractiveness, especially in his illustrations of inductive
  knowledge.”—Outlook.

  “These are not only modern, but fresh in a degree as welcome to the
  student as it is unusual, and they are drawn from a wide range of
  science.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 605. Mr. 4, ‘05. 100w.

  “It is comprehensive and accurate in statement, systematic and free
  from trifling and irrelevant subtleties. On the other hand, the
  discussions of the early chapters seem to me somewhat too difficult
  and technical to afford the beginner the guidance he needs.” J. E. C.

   + + — =Philos.= R. 16: 725. N. ‘05. 1120w.


=Hibbert, Walter.= Life and energy; an attempt at a new definition of
life; with applications to morals and religion. $1. Longmans.

  “The thesis of these four addresses—originally delivered at the
  Polytechnic institute, London—is that life is not matter, is not
  energy, but an unceasing nonfactorial directive control of energy and
  its transformations.”—Nature.

  “Mr. Hibbert puts most of his points clearly, and much of what he says
  has considerable force. But it is doubtful if the range of ideas
  within which the book moves is adequate to the problem. The main
  position is not unassailable, and the deductions from it in regard to
  morals and religion are occasionally fanciful.”

     + — =Nature.= 71: 271. Ja. 19, ‘05. 340w.

  “Neither the method of treatment nor the style of the book seems to us
  particularly happy.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 400. F. 11, ‘05. 170w.


* =Hichens, Robert Smythe.= Black spaniel and other stories. (†)$1.50.
Stokes.

  The story of the black spaniel is an uncanny tale of a man who lost a
  dog-friend at the hands of a vivisectionist, of a doctor who met his
  death thru the bite of another spaniel on which he was cruelly
  experimenting, and of the awful revenge which the dog lover took upon
  this dead doctor reincarnated in a third black spaniel. The creepy
  atmosphere is well sustained thruout. The volume also contains eleven
  shorter stories, most of which have the Arabian desert for a
  background, and all of which are most original in theme.

  * “Mr. Hichens, thorough decadent as he is, can make his decadence
  big; and it is wrong of him to make it as petty as this.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1079. O. 14, ‘05. 640w.

  * “To our thinking, ‘Mr. Greyne’ is the pick of the book.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 608. N. 4. 220w.

  * “‘The black spaniel’ occupies only the first third of the book, but
  nothing that follows has the least power to blur the effect of the
  spaniel’s whine. The following eight stories ... are slight things,
  episodes rather artfully and artistically told. They will be read with
  pleasure and forgotten without difficulty, while ‘The black spaniel’
  will be read with terror and forgotten never!”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 340. O. 13, ‘05. 550w.

  * “Not worthy of the genius of the author of ‘The garden of Allah.’”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 90w.

  * “The title-story is of the gruesome kind most tediously spun out,
  the second ‘The mission of Mr. Eustace Greyne’ is funny and satirical
  and the best in the book.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 600. N. 4, ‘05. 130w.

  * “Few modern story tellers are more expert in their art, and this
  book would be well worth reading for the workmanship alone, had it not
  also something of the charm of unfamiliar and unhackneyed material.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 658. O. 28. ‘05. 270w.


=Hichens, Robert.= Garden of Allah. $1.50. Stokes.

  A woman, longing for peace, and a renegade monk seeking refuge from
  himself and filled with remorse at his desertion of his high calling,
  meet and seek rest and happiness in the “Garden of Allah,” the African
  desert. The story is one of passion, struggle, and renunciation, the
  woman finally leading the monk, who has become her husband, back to
  his monastery.

  “In brilliancy falls short of ‘The woman with the fan,’ on the other
  hand, the intensity with which he reproduces an atmosphere of beauty
  creates an almost physical sense of well-being. In addition to a very
  genuine gift of imagination, he has learned how to tell his story.”

     — + =Atlan.= 95: 697. My. ‘05. 190w.

  “The book, from the point of view of writing, is decidedly heavy. The
  immorality of the book is, to our minds ... gross. Is not a worthy nor
  an artistic creation; it is a reeking monstrosity.”

   — — — =Cath. World.= 81: 545. Jl. ‘05. 830w.

  “In this striking novel Mr. Hickens immeasurably surpasses all his
  previous work.... Is a wonderfully handled tragedy, advancing with
  masterly logic from premise to conclusion.... Very rarely in an
  English book is there to be found such an exhibition of descriptive
  skill.” Olivia Howard Dunbar.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 474. My. ‘05. 400w.

  “In all the three essentials of invention, style and thought, this
  performance is highly commendable, and entitles Mr. Hichens to more
  serious consideration than ever before.” W: M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 388. Je. 1, ‘05. 420w.

  “Mr. Hichens has written his masterpiece.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 787. Ap. 6, ‘05. 230w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “The critics have seemed to agree that in this novel Mr. Robert
  Hichens has done something big, strong and lasting.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “A singular but powerful story, in many respects the best work of this
  author. An absence of the morbidity that is too common with him. There
  are, however, a plain speaking ... that sometimes, it will seem to
  many readers, overstep the limits of taste. In manner the romance is
  in an intense style, sometimes a little exalté, but never, or rarely,
  falling into mere high-flown ‘fine writing,’ although single passages,
  taken out of their connection might give that impression. Brilliant
  with color and bathed in African atmosphere.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 502. F. 25, ‘05. 130w.

  “Mr. Hichens has taken a great stride forward in this unusual story.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 772. Ap. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is useless to attempt to describe Mr. Hichens’s word-pictures of
  the beauties of the deserts and the emotional paroxysms of Domini and
  Boris. They must be read to be appreciated.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 214. F. 11, ‘05. 430w. (Outlines plot.)

  * “Beauty and power,—these are nobly conspicuous in Mr. Hichens’ tale,
  so loftily free from the small or paltry, so fervently reciting a
  grievous fault, a great love, a grand renunciation.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 80w.


=Higginson, Thomas Wentworth=, ed. Hawthorne centenary celebration at
the Wayside, Concord, Massachusetts, July 4-7, 1904. **$1.25. Houghton.

  The addresses and letters delivered and read at the centenary
  celebration, including a speech by Charles T. Copeland. Papers by Mrs.
  Julia Ward Howe, Charles Francis Adams, Mrs. Maud Howe Elliot, Julian
  Hawthorne, and Moncure D. Conway, and contributions from John S.
  Keyes, Frank Preston Stearns, F. B. Sanborn, Mrs. Rose Hawthorne
  Lothrop, Dr. Richard Garnett, Edmund Clarence Stedman, Miss Beatrix
  Hawthorne, John D. Long, Henry Cabot Lodge, Mrs. Harriet Prescott
  Spofford, Robert S. Rantoul, Judge Robert Grant, Mrs. Elizabeth Stuart
  Phelps Ward, Dr. Edward Everett Hale, John Hay, and Mrs. James T.
  Fields.

       + =Critic.= 47: 96. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “The book is a worthy memorial of an important event in our literary
  annals.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 240. Ap. 1, ‘05. 290w.

         =N. Y. Times= 10: 105. F. 18, ‘05. 370w. (Outline of contents).

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 207. Ap. 1, ‘05. 520w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 520. Ap. 8, ‘05. 210w.


* =Higginson, Thomas Wentworth.= Part of a man’s life. **$2.50.
Houghton.

  “Very enjoyable chapters of reminiscence, observation and reflection,
  that have of late been enlivening the pages of the ‘Atlantic.’ Two
  chapters have been added ... as also many portraits and facsimile
  copies of letters.” (Dial.) The volume contains: The sunny side of the
  transcendental period; The child and his dreams; English and American
  cousins; American audiences; The aristocracy of the dollar; “Intensely
  human”; Letters of mark; Books unread; Butterflies in poetry;
  Wordsworthshire; The close of the Victorian epoch; Una Hawthorne;
  History in easy lessons; The cowardice of culture.

  * “These ripe and scholarly chapters—ripe with the varied experience
  of eighty years and more, and scholarly with the scholarship of a
  lover not only of books, but of men—have an interest and value far
  exceeding anything that another pen might contrive to say about them.”
  Percy F. Bicknell.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 266. N. 1, ‘05. 2160w.

  * “We congratulate the author on carrying to his eighty-second year an
  intellect the eye of which is not dimmed, nor its natural vigor
  abated.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 428. N. 23, ‘05. 1260w.

  * “He has seen much and thought much and done much, and he has the way
  of making all that he writes seem interesting. Yet it must be
  confessed that a good deal of his reminiscence and anecdote is here
  spread out pretty thin.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 783. N. 18, ‘05. 700w.

  * “A very interesting if somewhat random collection of experiences,
  recollections, and opinions of Col. Higginson.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “It should not be inferred, however, that the work is obviously
  didactic, for the very contrary is the case, so pleasantly have the
  lessons read been interwoven with anecdote and reminiscence. And from
  the autobiographical standpoint, or rather from the standpoint of
  unconscious autobiography, its value is high.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 713. N. 25, ‘05. 390w.

  * “There is great scope to a work which stretches all the way from
  child-dreaming to problems of philosophy and higher mathematics.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 665. N. 18, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Col. Higginson has written several volumes of reminiscences and
  autobiography, none of which is more entertaining than his last book.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 755. D. ‘05. 140w.


=Higginson, Thomas Wentworth, and MacDonald, William.= History of the
United States from 986 to 1905. $2. Harper.

  This “turns out to be Colonel Higginson’s ‘History of the United
  States of America,’ with some revisions of the original text, and
  continued from Jackson’s administration down to the present date. It
  has a new set of illustrations and maps.”—Dial.

  “The whole constitutes a readable and attractive one-volume history,
  which ought to supply the demand—if there be one—for a short and
  comprehensive narrative.”

     + + =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 946. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 50w.

  “Is one of the most readable histories of this country ever written.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 360. My. 16, ‘05. 70w.

  “On the whole the work is one of the most valuable single volumes
  covering the entire period of American history that we have.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 394. Ag. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “Six new chapters have been added, bringing the story down to the
  present. Externally these chapters conform to the earlier ones, but
  the treatment is less partial and they reflect present scholarship
  much better.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 373. My. 11, ‘05. 110w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 240w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 180w.


=Hill, David Jayne.= History of diplomacy in the international
development of Europe, v. I. **$5. Longmans.

  An exhaustive study of the history of diplomacy complete in six
  volumes. Volume I is entitled The struggle for universal empire, and
  the following volumes include The establishment of territorial
  sovereignty, The diplomacy of the age of absolutism, The revolutionary
  era, The constitutional movement, and Commercial imperialism.

  “It is refreshing to find one of our public men willing to devote his
  energies to scholarly occupations, and able to produce a work of such
  high excellence as, judging from the first installment, Mr. Hill’s
  ‘History of European diplomacy’ promises to be.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 82: 263. N. ‘05. 1150w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “What Mr. Hill has written is accurate and readable enough for the
  most part, but it will not compare with the books by Bryce and Fisher,
  to say nothing of the erudite works of French and German scholars.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 817. O. 5, ‘05. 400w. (Review of v. 1.)

  * “A carefully written summary of European international history.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1155. N. 16, ‘05. 15w.

  “In his first volume, coming down to the year 1250, he merely
  restates, and not with the hand of a practised mediaevalist, a great
  deal that was in no need of such a repetition.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 280. O. 5, ‘05. 300w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “It was carefully thought out in the first instance, and then executed
  in the most satisfactory manner.” William E. Dodd.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 553. Ag. 26, ‘05. 2800w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “The results of investigation are handled with a narrative skill that
  invests the driest facts with the interest of freshness; the tone
  throughout is scrupulously impartial, and the requirements of
  perspective are unfailingly observed.”

   + + + =Outlook= 81: 329. O. 7, ‘05. 1530w. (Review of v. 1.)

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 253. Ag. ‘05. 200w. (Review of v. 1.)


=Hill, Frederick Trevor.= Accomplice. †$1.50. Harper.

  “A murder mystery treated from a new angle—that occupied by the
  foreman of the jury. After this foreman (a scholarly, retiring man)
  has been sworn in, he comes into possession of special knowledge of
  the case, tries to resign, but is forced to continue, and plays a far
  more important part in the drama than might be expected.”—Outlook.

  “Sensational the book certainly is; yet there is undeniably some good
  realism in it.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 518. Jl. ‘05. 180w.

  “This book is above the average of its class, and will provide an hour
  of entertainment for the most jaded of readers.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 114. S. 1, ‘05. 90w.

  “Is worth mentioning because of the unusual way the mystery is
  unraveled.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 640. S. 14, ‘05, 60w.

  “There is a marked absence of the gruesome in this cheerful little
  novel of murder and courtship. Furthermore, the solution of the
  mystery is not without originality.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 122. Ag. 10, ‘05. 240w.

  “The chief faults of the book are matters of artistic finish.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 338. My. 27, ‘05. 210w.

  “In plot and management the story is quite unusual and really
  exciting. The love story is by no means so good.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 100w.

  “Little more than a fairly good amateur detective story with a dash of
  sentiment.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 869. Je. 3, ‘05. 210w.


* =Hill, George Francis.= Pisanello. *$2. Scribner.

  A book which offers for the first time to the English reader
  information about Pisanello heretofore acquired only from the Italian,
  French or German. The sketch of this “greatest of medallists and one
  of the most fascinating of Italian artists ... gives us, what we
  really want, the fullest and clearest account of Pisanello’s career
  that is available from the extant material, and a detailed
  characterization of his works.” (Lond. Times.)

  * “In treating of his work in painting Mr. Hill’s scholarly monograph
  shows an admirable admixture of enthusiasm and restraint. Of his work
  as medalist ... Mr. Hill’s erudition almost forbids discussion.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 729. N. 25. 1490w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1483. D. 21, ‘05. 320w.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 32. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “Is written with competence and understanding.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 305. S. 22, ‘05. 750w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 509. D. 21, ‘05. 240w.

  * “Mr. Hill has written a scholarly essay, which, on the whole,
  reveals very thorough research along what is almost a bypath of art.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 769. N. 25, ‘05. 290w.

  * “The volume is one of the most interesting of an interesting
  series.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 630. N. 11, ‘05. 190w.


* =Hills, Lucius Perry.= Memory of song. $1. Franklin ptg.

  In 1894, when Patti sang at Atlanta, Georgia, the author, inspired by
  her voice, wrote a few verses on the back of his program, telling how—

         “All the while sweet harmonies crept down into my heart,
         And nestled in a home from which they never can depart.”

  They were afterward published in a souvenir booklet. This volume
  contains these verses, revised, and illustrated from photographs and
  paintings from life by V. A. Richardson.


=Hinkson, Katharine Tynan (Mrs. H. A.).= Daughter of kings. $1.25.
Benziger.

  A proud Irish girl who traces her family back to Adam, comes, at the
  suggestion of her friend, the duchess, who knows of her poverty, to
  take charge of the household of John Corbett, a wealthy English
  widower who has made his money in trade, and here she learns that
  there are gentlemen who are not gently born. There are many love
  stories involved and there is a touch of socialism and a description
  of Irish peasantry and an epidemic of fever among them.

  “The Irish portions of the book especially abound in traits of shrewd
  observation and humour which show how different a picture the author,
  if only she chose, might have given us.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 587. My. 13, ‘05. 140w.


=Hinkson, Mrs. Katharine Tynan (Mrs. H. A.).= Julia. $1.50. McClurg.

  An Irish story, with the simple modern setting of a country estate,
  but which has the old-time theme of the fairy tale; for the young lord
  sees and loves Julia, the ugly duckling of the family of one of his
  tenants, and makes her Lady O’Kavanagh. The crude selfishness of
  Julia’s sisters is contrasted with the selfishness found in finer clay
  among the gentry, and there are some great characters whose loving
  service is in stronger contrast still.

  “Under the cunning hand of Mrs. Hinkson the story develops so easily
  and plausibly that these seeming improbabilities never tax the
  credulity of the reader. All the characters, too, are drawn with
  strong individuality.”

       + =Cath. World.= 82: 122. O. ‘05. 260w.

  “The book has its charm.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1072. My. 11, ‘05. 140w.

  “A pleasant story of Irish country life, charmingly told.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 375. Je. 10. ‘05. 450w.

  “Her story is a pretty little romance, the charming Irish flavor of
  which is more than a matter of nomenclature and appropriate
  description.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 90w.

  “This is a most delightful little story. The love-story is prettily
  given, but the real charm of the book lies in its portraiture and its
  Irish atmosphere.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 372. Mr. 11, ‘05. 90w.


=Hiroi, Isami.= Statically-indeterminate stresses in frames commonly
used for bridges. **$2. Van Nostrand.

  This work is the outgrowth of a series of lectures given by the author
  to his students in Civil Engineering in the Tokyo Imperial university.
  It aims to save time and labor by furnishing solutions of those
  problems most commonly met with in the practice of a bridge engineer,
  and contains chapters upon: Trussed beams; Viaduct bents; Continuous
  girders; Arches with two hinges; Arches without hinges; Suspension
  bridges; and, Secondary stresses due to rigidity of joints.

  * “This book forms an important contribution to the literature of
  bridge engineering. It is the first attempt to present in the English
  language in a single volume the principal cases of statically
  indeterminate stresses occurring in the practice of the bridge
  engineer, the solution of which is based exclusively on the method of
  least work. The book deserves a place in the library of every bridge
  engineer.” Henry S. Jacobi.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 54: 530. N. 16, ‘05. 1730w.


=Hirst, Francis Wrigley.= Adam Smith, **75c. Macmillan.

  Mr. Hirst first treats of Adam Smith, the man, the absent-minded, but
  keenly observant, Scotchman, and then takes up Adam Smith, the
  philosopher, and examines his lectures, his “Theory of moral
  sentiments,” and his “Wealth of nations.”

  “Indeed it is a distinct service of this little book, which will
  doubtless be more generally read than any other life of Smith, that no
  reader can leave it with the false impression of Smith as a closet
  philosopher interested only in questions of ethical or economic
  theory.”

     + + =Am. Hist.= R. 11: 195. O. ‘05. 320w.

  “Excellent monograph. A lucid and attractively-written exposition of
  Smith’s economic theories.”

     + + =Contemporary R.= 87: 303. F. ‘05. 380w.

  “More complete and satisfactory than Roe’s exhaustive ‘Life,’ on
  account of new and important material discovered more recently.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 30w.

  “The task the author set for himself he has accomplished with
  thoroughness and even with interest: for there is about this biography
  no suggestion of dullness.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 170. S. 16, ‘05. 300w.

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1128 My. 18, ‘05. 550w.

  “He adds little that is new either of information or criticism. Still
  the volume should find a welcome. It is well written, graceful and
  entertaining, and with an intelligent appreciation of Adam Smith’s
  traits of character as well as of the traits of style, method, scope
  and insight that have made the ‘Wealth of Nations’ a masterpiece of
  the science and of English literature. The most attractive portions of
  the book are those that turn about Adam Smith’s intimate life and his
  contact with men and affairs.”

       + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 136. D. ‘04. 110w.

  “Mr. Hirst’s monograph, although not deficient in originality, is
  necessarily largely a digest of these the best of its predecessors.
  Patient culling of fugitive sources of information is also apparent,
  however, and as a conscientious and luminous account of the famous
  Scotchman it should be welcomed by all desirous of obtaining an
  intelligent idea of the factors shaping his view of life and the
  world.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 187. Ja. 21, ‘05. 2250w.


Historians’ history of the world; ed by H: Smith Williams. $72. Outlook.

  “A comprehensive narrative of the rise and development of nations as
  recorded by over two thousand of the great writers of all ages.” These
  twenty-five volumes are composed of long and short extracts taken from
  the most eminent authors and most authentic sources for each country
  and period. They form not only a world history but also an anthology
  of historians.

  “In general it seems to me that the series appears at its best in the
  volumes on the ancient Orient, Greece, the Roman empire, and perhaps
  Russia. Taken all in all, the series has the unevenness of quality of
  every historical library.” Edward G. Bourne.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 610. Ap. ‘05. 990w.

  “By a curious fatality the portions of an historian’s work upon which
  he was least fitted to write are chosen as bits of mosaic suited for
  those particular parts of the history. One part of the work of the
  editor he has done with remarkable skill and that is the fitting of
  the parts so closely and skilfully that the reader rarely feels that
  there is any break. Also he has very fairly judged the amount of space
  properly assigned to each country and age. Taken as a whole, it is a
  magnificent undertaking and serves a great and useful purpose.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 555. Mr. 9, ‘05. 810w.

  * “Tho the choice of materials shows a greater sense for literary than
  historical merit, yet, for popular use, that is more essential.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1155. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 100. P. 18. ‘05. 880w. (Survey of contents
         of vols. XIX-XXIII.)

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 750. Mr. 25, ‘05. 2980w.


=Hobart, George Vere.= Silly cyclopedia; containing copious etymological
derivations and other useless things, by Noah Lott (an ex-relative of
Noah Webster); embellished with numerous and distracting cuts and
diagrams by L: F. Grants. 75c. Dillingham.

  This little volume declares itself to be “a terrible thing in the form
  of a literary torpedo which is launched for hilarious purposes only”
  and is “inaccurate in every particular.” It is a collection of jocose
  epigrams cast in dictionary form, and if taken in small doses may
  prove amusing.

  “It is full of the sort of stuff indolent, good-humored folks like to
  retail on the piazzas of country hotels. It is all harmless.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 462. Jl. 15, ‘05. 530w.


=Hobart, George Vere (Hugh McHugh; Dinkelspiel, pseuds.).= You can
search me. †75c. Dillingham.

  John Henry here figures thru a series of theatrical ventures in
  company with his side partner, Bunch Jefferson. “One Signor
  Petrikinski, prestidigitator, is the star of the venture, and his
  clever handling of not only John Henry and Bunch, but of Uncle Peter
  Grant and Mr. William Grey, is amazing reading.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Written in the picturesque and highly descriptive style of the rest
  of this series.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 213. Ap. 9, ‘05. 120w.

  “Slangy, rather vulgar, funny for those who like the cheaply comic.”

     — + =Outlook.= 79: 655. Mr. 11, ‘05. 10w.


=Hobhouse, L. T.= Democracy and reaction. $1.50. Putnam.

  “A pessimistic view of modern English society by a ‘Little Englander,’
  a disciple of Cobden, a strenuous believer in Jeremy Bentham and in
  the Manchester school, who regards all departure from individualism,
  whether in industry or politics, as a reaction towards despotism, and
  who yet draws back from the conclusions toward which his own reasoning
  leads him, and endeavors skilfully, but in our judgment not
  successfully, to reconcile the individualistic theories of our own
  time.”—Outlook.

  “While well written, the book is full of expressions, which lead one
  to believe it the work of a disappointed politician, rather than that
  of a fair critic.” Ward W. Pierson.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 603. My. ‘05. 400w.

  * “No summary, however, can do justice to the wealth of thought that
  this little book contains, to the freshness and power with which
  familiar themes are handled, and to the width of outlook which every
  page reveals.” G. P. Gooch.

   + + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 499. Jl. ‘05. 1890w.

  “All the first part of the book, giving an account of the Reaction and
  its causes, is excellent. We do not remember to have seen anywhere, in
  so small a compass, a better analysis of the extraordinary changes in
  sentiment and opinion produced in the last thirty years. As to the
  great body of Liberal doctrine, the author is on firm ground.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 254. Mr. 30, ‘05. 1070w.

  “To one who believes, as we do, that the present conditions in England
  and America, both industrial and political, are those of a higher
  stage of intellectual and moral progress than those of the first half
  of the nineteenth century, the volume is chiefly valuable as an
  exposition of perils which attend this progress, and of which society
  needs to be warned, and against which it needs to guard itself.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 502. F. 25, ‘05. 160w.

  “He writes moderately, and does not mar his argument by any of those
  personalities which are too freely indulged in by writers of his way
  of thinking. His book is, indeed, in its way, scientific.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 119. Ja. 28, ‘05. 340w.

  “This is a book which furnishes abundant material both for the active
  politician and the student.”

     + + =The Westminster Review.= 163: 106. Ja.


=Hocking, Joseph.= Coming of the king. †$1.50. Little.

  The search for a black box in which lay a marriage contract between
  Charles Stuart and a Welsh girl, Lucy Walters, whose son, if the
  contract were found, would be heir to the English throne, provides the
  series of adventures which make up this story. The time is that of the
  restoration, the scenes are of court and country. The dashing young
  hero fails to find the paper, but finds instead beautiful Constance
  Leslie with a price upon her head and marries her.

  “A tedious novel of the swashbuckling type.”

     — — =Outlook.= 80: 642. Jl. 8, ‘05. 70w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 158. Jl. 29, ‘05. 120w.


=Hodgson, John Evan, and Eaton, Frederick A.= Royal academy and its
members, 1768-1830. *$5. Scribner.

  A somewhat pompous history of the Royal academy from the time of its
  founding by King George III. in 1768. Its growth, management and
  prestige are given and the volume is fully illustrated.

  “It is not a glorious record, this of Messrs. Hodgson and Eaton, but
  as though to atone for its meagre episodes it is composed in a proud
  and vaunting style.”

     — + =Acad.= 68: 511. My. 13, ‘05. 1120w.

  “Of the work as a whole it may be said that it has a full measure of
  that serenity in face of criticism which is eminently characteristic
  of official histories.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 696. Je. 3. 2840w.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 474. N. ‘05. 250w.

  “Although rich in historical material, illustrations, and appendices,
  and containing valuable biographical sketches, fails to give that view
  of art development which the reader would naturally be led to expect.”

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 68. Ag. 1, ‘05. 550w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 503. Je. 22, ‘05. 350w.

  “This record has much that is valuable and interesting.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 355. Je. 3, ‘05. 1170w.

  “A comprehensive and interestingly written history.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 394. Je. 10. ‘05. 60w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 510. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “It tells us very little that is not to be found elsewhere, arranges
  it badly, and carries the story no further than 1830.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 671. My. 20, ‘05. 700w.


=Hoffmann, Franz.= Little dauphin; tr. from the German by George P.
Upton, *60c. McClurg.

  The pathetic figure of Louis Charles, second son of Louis XVI. and
  Marie Antoinette, figures thruout this story according to the
  ordinarily accepted theory that he was confined in the Temple and
  after the execution of the King and Queen was at the mercy of the
  cruel keeper. The volume belongs to “Life stories for young people.”


=Hoffmann, Julius.= Amateur gardener’s rose book, tr. from the German by
John Weathers, *$2.50. Longmans.

  The book is written not so much for professional gardeners and
  nurserymen, as for garden lovers who devote special attention to the
  cultivation of the rose; the object being to enlarge their knowledge
  on the subject, and to reproduce a book that will serve as a practical
  and concise adviser.

  “The point that makes this volume a necessity to the amateur beginning
  his collection of roses is the twenty beautifully colored plates.”
  Mabel Osgood Wright.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 538. Ag. 19, ‘05. 340w.

  “Does not approach in usefulness Mr. Foster-Melliar’s ‘Book of the
  rose,’ and far less in delightful reading Dean Hole’s ‘Book about
  roses.’ However, the book is probably worth adding to a rosarian’s
  shelf.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 314. S. 2, ‘05. 1440w.

 *   + + =Spec.= 95: 472. S. 30, ‘05. 60w.


=Hogg, Ethel.= Quintin Hogg. $3. Dutton.

  In this biography of her father, the author gives a complete and
  intimate account of his life and work in the London slums. A famous
  Eton foot-ball player, he often made his influence felt by sheer
  physical force, and this was perhaps the secret of his remarkable
  success. He founded the Ragged school, and the famous Polytechnic, and
  his life is a story of the most practical kind of philanthropic work.
  There is an introduction by the Duke of Argyll.

  “The book is needlessly long, and is disfigured by numerous
  exclamation points.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 93. F. 2, ‘05. 180w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 53. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1350w. (Condensed
         biography.)

       + =Outlook.= 79: 247. Ja. 28, ‘05. 180w. (Survey of Hogg’s life.)


=Holdich, Thomas Hungerford.= India. $2.50. Appleton.

  The author’s knowledge of the geographical conditions of India is
  reliable as he was at one time superintendent of the survey of India.
  After giving an historical sketch of the country, “he proceeds to a
  study of the geography of the frontiers bordering Baluchistan and
  Afghanistan; he describes Kashmir, the Himalayas, and the Peninsula,
  then Assam, Burma, and Ceylon. He tells us about the people, the
  political geography, the agriculture, revenues, railways, minerals,
  and climate and he puts India before us as we will not find it
  elsewhere. The work is amply indexed, and is provided with a wealth of
  maps and diagrams.” (Outlook).

  “The book and its maps are creditable to all concerned, and will
  unquestionably prove of great value to seekers for information about
  the region of British India and its dependencies.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 402. Ap. 1. 2080w.

  “The results of all former investigations are well digested and
  epitomized.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 381. Ap. ‘05. 100w.

  “With few exceptions his work will rank high with the other volumes of
  the series.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 201. Mr. 16, ‘05. 440w.

  “Altogether, as a representative volume on India for the library, this
  book is about the best to be had.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 97. Jl. 13, ‘05. 780w.

  “This excellent and useful book supplies a real want, and gives to the
  reader a broad geographical description of the real continent of
  India.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 160. My. 19, ‘05. 1060w.

  “Avoiding ‘statistics and details,’ the author has here compressed
  into one volume an immense amount of geographical and ethnological
  information regarding the peninsula itself and the frontier,
  Baluchistan, Afghanistan, Kashmir, Assam, and Burma. The most valuable
  part of ‘India’ is, of course, the geographical description, where the
  author is on his own ground. The literary-historical side is mortar to
  the bricks of the altar.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 117. F. 9, ‘05. 230w.

  “He has produced a topographical description of the Indian empire
  which, in spite of minor errors.... is not only interesting to read,
  but accurate and well proportioned on the whole.”

   + + — =Nature.= 71: 268. Ja. 19, ‘05. 1210w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 2. Ja. 7, ‘05. 570w. (Summary of facts in
         book.)

  “His volume has the ring of authority on every page. It is equally
  valuable for steady reading or as a work of reference.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 95. Ja. 7, ‘05. 150w.

  “The product of years of study in the country of which he writes.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 251. F. ‘05. 200w.


=Holdsworth, Annie E. (Mrs. Eugene J. Lee-Hamilton).= New Paolo and
Francesca. †$1.50. Lane.

  A modern variation of the old story. The heroine has promised her
  dying father that she will wed the elder of her twin cousins, who will
  inherit her father’s title and estates. She fulfils her pledge in
  spite of the fact that she loves the younger brother, and the result
  is tragedy. The story is further complicated by the discovery that her
  lover is the true heir, and her husband in reality is the younger
  brother, the two having been changed in infancy.

     + — =Acad.= 68: 150. F. 18, ‘05. 460w.

  “Nothing but praise, however, is to be said for the art of the author.
  In description, in delineation of character and in that subtle and
  compelling power by which the imagination of the reader is held
  enthralled, the work is noteworthy. It is to be regretted that a story
  so charming in its style, so fascinating in its atmosphere and so
  powerful in the handling of the theme should be so depressing in its
  influence on the mind.” A. C. Rich.

     + — =Arena.= 33: 453. Ap. ‘05. 250w.

  “It is well told, and the author has enough coloring matter in her
  vocabulary to paint the national history of a whole continent.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 218. Jl. 27, ‘05. 110w.

     — + =Sat. R.= 99: 779. Je. 10, ‘05. 170w.


=Holland, Clive.= Japanese romance. $1.50. Stokes.

  A young English artist sailing eastward to paint the wonders of Japan,
  meets a beautiful English girl on the steamer and admires her
  apparently merely in an artistic way. Arriving at Nagasaki he falls in
  with two former fellow-students at Paris, one a Japanese, the other a
  Scot who has taken a Japanese wife. Thru these he becomes involved in
  many social complications and finally marries Mio-Lan, a lovely
  Japanese maid. Later he begins to long for the English girl he had met
  on the steamer and the story becomes a tragedy for Mio-Lan.

  “The merit of the story lies not in the sentiment and flower women,
  but in the characters of the modern Japanese, Mr. Yumoto, and the
  Scottish expatriate.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 54. Ja. 28, ‘05. 370w. (Outlines plot.)


=Holland, Robert Afton.= Commonwealth of man. **$1.25. Putnam.

  “The Slocum lectures of 1904, delivered at the University of
  Michigan ... revised by the author in the light of the discussion that
  followed the publication of Mr. Edwin Markham’s poem, ‘The man with
  the hoe,’ which, in the opinion of Mr. Holland, consisted chiefly of a
  series of socialistic fallacies set to stormful music.’”—R. of Rs.

  “There are eleven lectures, all pretty vigorous writing and not bad
  reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05. 420w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 795. My. 20, ‘05. 310w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 510. Ap. ‘05. 80w.


=Holley, Marietta (Josiah Allen’s wife, pseud.).= Around the world with
Josiah Allen’s wife. †$150. Dillingham.

  The inveterate traveller, Samantha, accompanied by Josiah Allen and a
  sick grandson, for whose health the trip is undertaken, starts on a
  journey around the world with a party which includes a Dorothy, who
  enlivens the trip by marrying in spite of her chaperone. Samantha’s
  characteristic descriptions and comments include much of interest on
  Hawaii, the Philippines, India, Egypt, the Holy Land, and many
  European states, while she frequently attempts to set right whatever
  she thinks may be wrong, even instructing the Empress Si Ann on her
  duty.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 60w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 774. N. 18, ‘05. 200w.


=Holley, Marietta (Josiah Allen’s wife, pseud.).= Samantha at the St.
Louis exposition. $1.50. Dillingham.

  Samantha, as unique and widely known as any book character ever
  created, is at her best in these “episodin’” bits of wit, pathos, and
  clear visioned common sense. In the story, Josiah Allen discovers that
  his farm had come into the possession of the Allen family the year of
  the Louisiana purchase, that his ancestors had paid fifteen dollars
  for it, the same sum, he said, “with the orts left off,” that was
  given for Louisiana. The Allens celebrate this discovery by taking a
  trip to the Exposition. A group of interesting companions serve only
  to enhance the characteristic observations of Samantha, which are
  better than ever.

  “Feminine frailty and masculine arrogance and the sexual inequalities
  of social customs and the laws continue to furnish material for her
  satire and weakly witty garrulity.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 212. Ja. 26, ‘05. 110w.


=Hollis, A. C.= Masai, their language and folk-lore. *$4.75. Oxford.

  A study of the language, myths, traditions, enigmas, proverbs, and
  customs of this fast vanishing East African race by the chief
  secretary of the East African Protectorate, assisted by native
  authorities.

  “Mr. Hollis’s is the fullest study yet made. It is impossible to do
  justice in the course of an ordinary notice to this exceedingly
  interesting book, which is, moreover, absolutely free from padding of
  the ordinary kind.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 742. Je. 17. 2420w.

  “In describing the mythology, folklore, and customs of the Masai he
  has hit upon a method as scientific as it is original.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 143. My. 5, ‘05. 460w.

  “For the first time the civilized world has been presented with an
  authoritative work on the Masai language, customs, and folklore, by
  Mr. A. C. Hollis. It is the authoritative study of the Masai people;
  and it is satisfactory to record that the author confines himself
  mainly to facts and not to theories.” H. H. Johnston.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 83. My. 25, ‘05. 1200w.

  “Mr. Hollis’ grammatical treatise is a study in itself. The book is
  worthy of the greatest attention.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 309. S. 2, ‘05. 1330w.


=Holmes, Gordon.= Mysterious disappearance. $1.50. Clode.

  The usual crime, shrouded in the usual mystery, the rapid succession
  of events, the story action that palls not for a moment are all here.
  But the book surpasses others of its kind in the clever comparison of
  two distinctive types of detectives. There is Claude Bruce, barrister,
  “subtle, analytic, introspective,” and there is his foil, the Scotland
  yard inspector, a part of the machine, “direct, pertinacious,
  self-confident ... a slave to system,” one whose method, as the
  barrister comments, “works admirably for the detection of common place
  crimes, but as soon as the region of higher romance is entered, it is
  as much out of place as a steam roller in a lady’s boudoir.”


=Holmes, Mary Jane Hawes.= Abandoned farm. †$1. Dillingham.

  The romance of a young girl who becomes a waitress at a summer house
  party on an estate once owned by her grandfather. She is known as
  waitress no. 1, and her ladylike mien, even in white cap and apron,
  charms the rich young master of the house who loves her even before he
  discovers that the estate is really hers. The volume also contains a
  story called Connie’s secret, which hinges upon a sham marriage by
  which the girl believes herself to be legally bound to the man who has
  deserted her.


* =Holmes, Oliver Wendell.= One-hoss shay, with its companion poems.
$1.50. Houghton.

  A delightful Christmas edition of Holmes’ humorous poems, “The
  one-hoss shay,” “How the old horse won the bet,” and “The broomstick
  train,” illustrated by Mr. Howard Pyle in colors and black and white.

 *   + + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 388. D. 1, ‘05. 170w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 424. N. 23, ‘05. 70w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 120w.


=Holt, Martin.= Out of bondage. $1.25. Benziger.

  Renie, a pretty Catholic girl, kept in the country with no knowledge
  of life or of her own parentage, serves the cruel Mrs. Sherwood well
  until her death and then flies forth into the world to enjoy her
  freedom. She encounters many tragic things, but her courage enables
  her to straighten out a serious tangle and save the man she loves from
  a murderer’s death.


=Holyoake, George Jacob.= Bygones worth remembering. 2 vols. *$5.
Dutton.

  The author, who has for many years taken an active part in all
  movements toward the bettering of the conditions of the working
  classes gives interesting details concerning the progress of the
  English nation during the last few decades and reminiscences of
  Harriet Martineau, Mazzini, Kossuth, John Stuart Mill, Lord
  Shaftesbury, Garibaldi, and Gladstone. There are many illustrations.

  “In this later book the gold is beaten rather thin; and, in fact, the
  reminiscences—which are none of them to be described as wildly
  exciting—are eked out with extracts from newspapers.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 145. F. 18, ‘05. 1230w.

  “As a contribution to the history of the political and social progress
  of the nation these ‘Bygones’ are of great value.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 232. F. 25, 1490w.

  Reviewed by H. Addington Bruce.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 605. Ag. ‘05. 1780w.

  Reviewed by Jeanette L. Gilder.

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 156. Ag. ‘05. 1430w.

  “Frank egotism is evidenced on every page. Mr. Holyoake has a strong
  sense of humor, but his manner of writing is such that it is not
  always easy to discover when he is jesting and when he is in earnest.”
  Edith J. R. Isaacs.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 106. S. 1, ‘05. 1180w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 988. O. 26, ‘05. 230w.

  “He states many facts, he corrects many fallacies, that should claim
  the consideration of historians of British politics during the
  nineteenth century. Seldom have we read a book breathing a more
  tender, tolerant, and judicial spirit.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 127. Ag. 10, ‘05. 1380w.

  “These pages and people are all interesting.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 372. Je. 10, ‘05. 1590w.

  “A further characteristic of the author’s opinions and reminiscences
  is a whole-souled optimism which, pervading his book, manifests itself
  perhaps most impressively in the final chapter.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 85. S. 9, ‘05. 2280w.

  “We are not sure that all the ‘Bygones’ which Mr. Holyoake recalls are
  ‘worth remembering.’”

       — =Spec.= 94: 924. Je. 24, ‘05. 340w.


* =Home, Andrew.= Boys of Badminster. †$1.50. Lippincott.

  A tale of English schoolboy adventure whose hero is Jack Coverdale,
  broad shouldered enough to bear the burden of his own scrapes and
  those of less honorable companions. “There is an attempt at
  kidnapping, with exciting cricket games and boys’ pranks, all of which
  must be read to be appreciated. There is another good story, ‘A row in
  the sixth,’ at the end of the book, which is a big one.” (N. Y.
  Times.)

  * “Good characterization and plenty of humor should make this a
  success.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 576. O. 28. 30w.

 *   + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 761. N. 11, ‘05. 320w.

  * “Mr. Home has the happy knack of rousing an expectancy which he
  never disappoints.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 7. D. 9, ‘05. 100w.

  * “Mr. Home does his best, not wholly without success, to make it seem
  possible, and constructs a good story out of it, as school stories
  go.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 693. N. 4, ‘05. 100w.


=Home, Gordon Cochrane.= Evolution of an English town. *$3.50. Dutton.

  The old town and castle of Pickering in Yorkshire, and the country of
  Pickering vale are dealt with here from pre-glacial times down to the
  beginnings of 1905. “It is really surprising to find how much may be
  learned relating to ethnology, archæology, and ancient customs from
  this curious piece of local antiquarian study.” (Outlook.)

  * “The quality and number of the illustrations greatly enhance the
  value of the book. We have only noticed one misprint.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 922. S. 9, ‘05. 750w.

  “The book furnishes a pleasing type of local history to which other
  essays in that field will do well to conform.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 211. O. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “The book commends itself to special readers more than to the general
  traveler.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1111. N. 9, ‘05. 110w.

  “Makes altogether a charming book for lovers of things old,
  picturesque and curious.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 497. Jl. 29, ‘05. 810w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 691. Jl. 15, ‘05. 110w.


* =Home, Gordon.= Normandy: The scenery and romance of its ancient
towns. *$3.50. Dutton.

  The author has profusely illustrated this volume with colored plates
  and pen-and-ink sketches. “Mr. Home says his book is not a guide, but
  simply ‘an attempt to convey by pictures and description a clear
  impression of the Normandy which awaits the visitor.’ But it will
  serve as a guide if need be, for the author, with that curious naiveté
  of the Englishman, names inns and hotels without fear of being accused
  of advertising; and as he says, ‘any one using the book as a guide
  would find in his path some of the richest architecture and scenery
  that the province possesses.’” (N. Y. Times.)

  * “Is chiefly of interest for its beautiful colored plates, which give
  clearer impressions of Normandy’s varied and wonderful scenery ...
  than any words, however perfectly chosen, could hope to do. Mr. Home
  is sufficiently an artist to write, as well as paint, like one. He
  wins the reader’s approbation by his first sentence.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 445. D. 16, ‘05. 170w.

  * “A very successful attempt has been made to convey, by means of
  pictures and description, a clear impression of the Normandy which
  awaits the visitor.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1378. D. 14, ‘05. 110w.

  * “The book will certainly give us a better notion of Normandy than
  Mr. Menpes’s much more multitudinous blots can convey to us of
  Brittany or any other place.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 503. D. 21, ‘05. 180w.

  * “A charming book on Normandy. The book is one to read and keep, and
  to take with one on his trip to the old duchy it describes.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 851. D. 2, ‘05. 510w.

  * “Its text is illuminative, graphic, and sympathetic. Mr. Home has
  produced a work on Normandy to appeal to every one who has ever
  visited that interesting region.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 890. D. 9, ‘05. 40w.

  * “Mr. Home knows something of architecture and describes with feeling
  and taste.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 14, D. 2, ‘05. 240w.


=Hooker, Katharine.= Wayfarers in Italy. **$2. Scribner.

  A fourth edition of a book about the out-of-the-way places of Italy,
  by one who has left the beaten and over-described paths to hunt for
  old books and lost Madonnas, and study the life, habits, and
  temperament of the village and country folk.

  “Is well deserving of the many editions it has passed through.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 172. Mr. 18, ‘05. 410w.

  “A fresh, informing, and thoroughly charming book in one of the oldest
  fields in the world.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 858. Ap. 1, ‘05. 140w.


=Hope, Anthony=, pseud. See =Hawkins, Anthony Hope.=


=Hopekirk, Helen=, ed. Seventy Scottish songs. $2.50. Ditson.

  These seventy songs include the folk-music student’s favorites. They
  have been gathered from the Lowlands and the Highlands, from the
  remote mountainous regions and from the western isles. The volume is
  uniform with the “Musicians library.”

  * “A very interesting and valuable work.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 391. D. 1, ‘05. 70w.

  * “Those who care only for popular tunes with any serviceable
  accompaniment will find this selection acceptable; whereas the epicure
  who likes his folk-music pure and unadulterated will be likely to
  object to many passages in which the arranger has exercised her
  faculty of harmonizing with too little regard for the racial essence
  of the tunes.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 467. D. 7, ‘05. 110w.


=Hoppenstedt, J.= Problems in manoeuvre tactics; with solutions for
officers of all arms, tr. by J. H. V. Crowe, *$1.60. Macmillan.

  In this volume the original German organizations have been adapted to
  those of the British army in order to assist its officers in studying
  for examinations, and furthering their knowledge of the art of war.
  Four maps have been provided.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 345. My. 27, ‘05. 240w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 492. Jl. 22, ‘05. 70w.

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 671. My. 20, ‘05. 920w.


=Hornaday, William Temple.= American natural history; a foundation of
useful knowledge of the higher animals of North America. **$3.50.
Scribner.

  “The author has had many years’ experience as a field naturalist in
  America and the far East, and as director of the New York zoölogical
  park, gives much information in an interesting style, illustrating his
  text with maps, charts, and drawings. “The object of this book is to
  make nature available to laymen; it is also particularly addressed to
  teachers and parents.” It is intended to be plain, practical and
  direct, as well as systematic and scientific.... The field covered
  includes all the principal types of vertebrates found in North
  America.” (Science.)

  “We find here much practical and economic zoölogy, invaluable matter
  on the extinction of American species, and the setting right of many
  ancient and silly myths. Clear exposition is exhibited in many
  sections of the book. The drawings, while of uneven merit, are full of
  life and action and have good teaching value. The author aims to amuse
  as well as to instruct.” W. K. Gregory.

   + + — =Science=, n. s. 21: 346. Mr. 3, ‘05. 1510w.


* =Home, C. Silvester.= Common sense Christianity. *35c. Meth. bk.

  “This book aims at being a popular contribution to the art of
  Christian defence.” The author believes that a policy of vigorous
  attack is necessary to oppose the work of many who maintain that for
  the twentieth century a new religion is needed.


=Horner, Joseph.= Engineers’ turning. *$3.50. Van Nostrand.

  A well-illustrated text which considers the principles and practice in
  the different branches of turning. A feature of the book is the
  important section devoted to modern turret practice; boring is another
  subject treated fully; a chapter on tool holders illustrates a large
  number of representative types; screw-cutting is treated at length;
  and the last chapter contains a good deal of information relating to
  the high-speed steels and their work.


=Horner, Joseph.= Tools for engineers and woodworkers. *$3.50. Van
Nostrand.

  A comprehensive work whose object is “to give an account of such tools
  as are commonly used by engineers and woodworkers, written chiefly
  from the standpoint of the men who have used them, and who desire to
  understand the principles which underlie the forms in which those
  tools are found. Practical instruction for their employment, as
  suggested by the writer’s own experience, have been added.”

  “Although there is necessarily a good deal of the descriptive
  catalogue in a work of this kind, yet this one is so well put
  together, its brief descriptions are so clear, and above all the
  endless varieties of tools enumerated are brought to one’s notice in
  so logical an order, their classification is so essentially
  scientific, that it may be regarded as in a sense a finished monograph
  of one phase of evolution.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 280. Ag. 26. 420w.

  * “The author has written a clear and comprehensive description of
  various groups of tools.”

       + =Engin. N.= 54:529. N. 16, ‘05. 120w.


=Hornung, Ernest William.= Stingaree. †$1.50. Scribner.

  Stingaree, a one-time London clubman, now a robber in Australia,
  “sticks up” (Australian for hold up) mail coaches and banks in a
  manner both theatrical and gentlemanly. On one occasion he operates
  among a company of amateurs, forcing them to give a concert, and makes
  use of the occasion to introduce a girl with a beautiful voice to a
  prominent composer. He is afterward released from jail just in time to
  don evening clothes and hear this girl as a prima donna.

  “Of no importance from the literary standpoint, the present volume yet
  contains ten very readable and ingeniously worked out stories.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 716. Je. 10, 180w.

  “The stories are all fluent, ingenious, and diverting, and will be
  found readable enough.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 285. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “Series of ingenious tales.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 292. My. 6, ‘05. 250w.

  “On the whole, his adventures being as hazardous and exciting as those
  of his predecessor he should be equally well beloved.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “The tales ... are dashing, daring, entertaining, and show
  considerable inventiveness without disclosing any special literary
  power.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 143. My. 13, ‘05. 160w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 869. Je. 3, ‘05. 210w.

  “He is a real creation.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 593. O. 05. 220w.

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 90w.

  “Mr. Hornung who has much aptitude for sensational fiction has
  exhibited little ingenuity or originality in these tales.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 140w.


* =Hornung, Ernest William.= Thief in the night: further adventures of
A. J. Raffles, cricketer and cracksman. †$1.50. Scribner.

  The third series of the adventures of Raffles goes back to the
  earliest days of the cracksman and Bunny, his foil. One of the nine
  tales portrays the disloyalty of the thief in losing for Bunny his
  sweetheart, another, and quite the most ingenious of the group, is
  that of a little “job” at Lord Thornaby’s town house where Raffles
  diverted from himself the suspicions of the “Criminologists’ club.”
  All thru Raffles is still the same terrible expert burglar.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1177. N. 11, ‘05. 310w.

  * “Unfortunately the reader’s taste has been whetted for better
  things, and he looks in vain for the quick turns and the conquering of
  difficult situations of the earlier yarns.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “The newer stories, while they seem somehow to lack the snap and go
  of the earlier ones, are nevertheless not very different in quality,
  and if you are not tired of the old Raffles they may be trusted to
  furnish entertainment for an idle hour.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 727. O. 28, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Those unacquainted with the cracksman will find admirably written
  stories retailing the exploits of a gentleman burglar of the most
  marvelous skill and finesse, and an unusually winning personality.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 530. O. 28, ‘05. 70w.

  * “His mind works with all its old rapidity and originality, but he is
  less convincing and beguiling.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 712. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.

  * “It is not so mischievous as its predecessors, because it is not
  nearly so well done.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 871. N. 25, ‘05. 90w.


=Horsley, Walter C.=, tr. =See La Colonie, Jean Martin de.=


=Hort, Fenton John Anthony.= Village sermons. * $1.75. Macmillan.

  Dr. Hort, a noted scholar and Christian gentleman, writes with
  simplicity for the country folk with whom he had to deal as the parson
  of a Hertfordshire village. The sermons “are generally founded on some
  incident of the day’s service, some sentences in a psalm, or more
  often some petition in a collect.” (Lond. Times.)

 *   + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 287. S. 8, ‘05. 470w.

 *   + — =Outlook.= 81: 283. S. 30, ‘05. 70w.

  * “We must confess that the sermons strike us as being highly
  conscientious but a trifle dull. Yet here and there, genius shows
  itself in the easy power of expressing a great deal in a few words.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 190. Ag. 5, ‘05. 140w.


=Horton, George.= Monk’s treasure. $1.50. Bobbs.

  Ta Castra, an island of the Cyclades, in the Ægean sea, is the scene
  of a series of adventures in which a young American, buying up Greek
  argols for his uncle’s firm, and his interpreter, a sturdy Scotchman,
  figure conspicuously. The American straightway becomes involved in
  breaking up an alliance between a beautiful Greek bond-girl and her
  belligerent betrothed, Spiro. Thru treasure, hidden in a monastery, he
  proves the girl to be a duchess, and outwitting the monks and Spiro
  alike, escapes with Polyxene and her bags of gold.

  “Those who love a story for the story’s sake will be sure to enjoy Mr.
  Horton’s latest romance.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 565. My. ‘05. 120w.

  “The recovery of the wealth against the cunning machinations of the
  monks supplies a number of exciting and tragic events to sustain
  interest in a story which otherwise is rather lightly worked out.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 293. My. 6, ‘05. 280w.

  “Crude romance.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 760. Mr. 25, ‘05. 80w.

  “A good story.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 70w.


=Hosking, Arthur Nicholas=, comp. and ed. Artist’s year book. $3. Art
league pub. assn., Chicago.

  A handy reference book wherein may be found interesting data
  pertaining to artists, and their studio, home and summer addresses for
  1905-1906. Recognized merit has been made the standard of selection
  for this list.


* =Hough, Emerson.= Heart’s Desire. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  Heart’s Desire is a little settlement hidden away in a corner of the
  West “where men have gone to live at peace—without law and without
  women.” “The inhabitants dozed in the sunshine, smoked, drank, gambled
  a little, toiled fitfully, fought occasionally, and dreamed a good
  deal. Then the railroad came and the dreams were gone. Along with the
  railroad came Constance and the old vexations that troubled Eden and
  have troubled every assemblage of men ever since.” (Pub. Opin.) It is
  a picture of rough Western life with clever character delineation.

  * “A singularly pleasing story of the west o’ dreams.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  * “A more vivacious tale of far western life one does not often get.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 576. N. 4, ‘05. 100w.

  * “In vigor and spontaneousness it seems to us Mr. Hough’s best work
  in fiction.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 710. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.

  * “It is idyllic, impossible, and extremely entertaining.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 220w.


=Houston, Edwin James.= Electricity in every-day life. 3v. $4.50.
Collier.

  “These volumes aim to give to the general reader a comprehensive
  knowledge of the history of electricity, the principles and laws that
  govern its action, and its practical applications in every-day life.”
  (Outlook.) There are eight hundred illustrations which present
  electricity as applied to modern industry and as used in laboratories,
  and in the home.

  “Without trace of romance and yet in an eminently attractive style,
  the author has made comparatively clear the vagaries of electricity.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 384. Ap. ‘05. 90w.

  “The style is clear and pleasant. Abstruse technicalities are
  carefully avoided, and no part of the book will be difficult of
  comprehension for the average well-informed man who has made no
  specialty of electrical subjects.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 330w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 502. F. 25, ‘05. 30w.

  “He succeeds well in popularizing technical subjects. The present work
  is voluminous, but never wearisome.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 251. F. ‘05. 90w.


=Howard, George Elliott.= History of matrimonial institutions chiefly in
England and the United States. *$10. Univ. of Chicago press.

  “In the three volume work ... Prof. George E. Howard deals chiefly
  with the matrimonial institutions of the English race, prefacing his
  treatment of the subject with an analysis of the literature and the
  theories of primitive matrimonial institutions. Professor Howard’s
  treatise covers practically every phase of the subject that calls for
  treatment, and gives elaborate biographical data relating, not only to
  the institution of marriage itself, but to almost every conceivable
  phase of the sex problem that has been treated in our literature.”—R.
  of Rs.

  “To students of sociology this work is one of importance.” Simeon E.
  Baldwin.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 607. Ap. ‘05. 1070w. (Abstract of book).

  Reviewed by E. T. B.

         =Atlan.= 95: 137. Ja. ‘05. 650w.

  “Professor Howard’s volumes are admirable studies and a much needed
  supplement to the famous works of Starcke and Westermarck.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 784. Ap. 6, ‘05. 720w.

  * “A scholarly and profound inquiry.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “For even the general public Professor Howard’s volumes cannot fail to
  be both interesting and instructive, for they deal attractively with
  the most human of all institutions, and contain a mass of facts
  nowhere else obtainable.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 55. Ja. 19, ‘05. 2270w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 756. D. ‘05. 120w.

  “An immense bibliographical index at the end of the third volume
  completes the usefulness of the work as a book of reference, and it is
  as a book of reference that it will be chiefly used and valued.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 617. Ap. 29, ‘05. 830w.


=Howard, John R.=, comp. See =One= hundred best American poems.


=Howe, Frederick Clemson.= City: the hope * of democracy. **$1.50.
Scribner.

  “A novel interpretation of municipal affairs.... Mr. Howe ascribes
  most of the ills to which the American city is heir to economic and
  industrial, rather than to political or ethical causes.... Mr. Howe’s
  remedy for the present evil conditions consists in offering
  opportunity to labor, in taxing monopoly, and in the abolition of
  privilege.”—R. of Rs.

  * “Mr. Howe’s main arguments in favor of municipal ownership are
  strong, and much of his abstract reasoning in favor of the single tax
  is well put, although less convincing to most people; but the author
  is too sweeping in his advocacy of the adoption of these measures and
  in his claims for resulting benefits.”

     + — =Engin. N.= 54: 648. D. 14, ‘05. 610w.

  * “Dr. Howe, in a spirited and striking description of the American
  city, interprets its myriad phases from the economic standpoint.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

  * “Is a good deal of a theorist, but, happily also, he is very much of
  a student. Mr. Howe’s book, we fear, will not advance that result as
  much as it might have done had it been more soberly written.” E. C.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 773. N. 18, ‘05. 970w.

  * “His book is a frank discussion of municipal problems as they are
  actually encountered in the more typical of our American cities. The
  prevailing note is one of optimism.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 637. N. ‘05. 230w.


=Howe, Maude.= See =Elliott, Mrs. Maude Howe.=


=Howells, William Dean.= London films. * **$2.25. Harper.

  The volume is made up of Mr. Howells’ characteristic talks about
  London weather, London streets, London noises, churches, parks, buses,
  slums, children, and bobbies—often with humorous comparison with the
  corresponding phenomena in New York. He tells, too, about society out
  of doors in Rotten Row and Piccadilly. Some of the matter has already
  appeared in some of the magazines. The book is provided with sixteen
  full-page illustrations and is bound to match the author’s “Literary
  friends and acquaintances.”

  * “These films do not amount to so comprehensive or extensive a survey
  as Emerson achieved. But they are very fascinating, and are written
  with the clarity and richness of style which constitute Mr. Howells
  one of our foremost writers of English to-day.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 717. N. 25. 1740w.

  * “Its ‘films’ are far more interesting and significant than some that
  Mr. Howells has shown; they are indeed in his happiest analytic vein.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 381. D. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  * “The book is in no whit inferior to those masterly studies in
  Italian life.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1227. N. 23, ‘05. 880w.

  * “A series of delicate and charming impressions of London in many of
  its aspects, social, civic, and meteorological.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 490. D. 14, ‘05. 820w.

  * “Easily takes its place among the few most noteworthy books of the
  season.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 712. O. 21, ‘05. 130w.

  * “He is still master of the gentle irony, the subtle, mischievous
  suggestion, the humorous backward glance, that have fascinated his
  readers for years.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 682. N. 18, ‘05. 270w.


=Howells, William Dean.= Miss Bellard’s inspiration. †$1.50. Harper.

  “It was nothing short of inspiration which made Miss Lillias Bellard
  decide to visit her aunt and uncle, the Crombies, in order to consider
  quietly the question of marrying a certain eager young Englishman. Mr.
  and Mrs. Crombie had ... taken a cottage in the New Hampshire hills.
  Miss Bellard’s intention was to watch the domestic conditions of the
  Crombie household before rushing recklessly into matrimony. But
  coincident with her visit came that of the Mevisons, a couple
  trembling upon the verge of separation. Thus Miss Bellard was treated
  to a variety of domestic relations which produced varying effects upon
  her.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Charming and idyllic comedy which at once tickles and instructs. Mr.
  Howells has written no more delightful story for years.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 41. Jl. 8, 310w.

  * “The book is undeniably a delicate and diverting piece of satire and
  full of those illuminating sidelights upon human foibles and frailties
  that make Mr. Howells inimitable.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 610. Ag. ‘05. 1500w.

  * “The charm of Mr. Howells’s style is the only inducement offered the
  ‘gentle reader’ in this book.” Charlotte Harwood.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 452. N. ‘05. 240w.

  “Has a charm altogether out of proportion to its pretensions.” Wm. M.
  Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 115. S. 1, ‘05. 280w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1152. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “The whole thing is dainty and amusing, and the irony so suavely
  expended that some readers may fail to detect it, and hence be a
  little puzzled as to the degree of the author’s facetiousness.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 187. Ag. 5, ‘05. 790w.

  “It is as if Mr. Howells’s vision were being contracted instead of
  enlarged as the years go on. He stops short now at the surface; and
  delicately and gracefully as he plays about on it, we regret his
  arrested development.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 209. Je. 30, ‘05. 520w.

  “Is a light comedy with enough social satire to remind us that Mr.
  Howells is not just fooling for our summer holiday.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 101. Ag. 3, ‘05. 320w.

  “Mr. Howells has not lost any of his cunning in portraying the
  delightfully illogical phases of the feminine mental processes.
  Altogether it is a decidedly entertaining book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “Has all the lightness, the charming comedy touch, of his earlier
  work, and yet is not lacking in serious purpose. The studies of
  temperament are both skillful and convincing. It is quite certain that
  Mr. Howells has written nothing in a happier style; the vein of humor
  which runs through the book is as fresh as in his earlier work, and
  parallel with it runs a vein of quiet, kindly irony equally
  effective.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 643. Jl. 8, ‘05. 190w.

  “Beyond a doubt the story is amusing, but to Mr. Howells’ real
  devotees it must be rather hard sledding.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 283. Ag. 26, ‘05. 650w.

  * “Though but a slight love tale, embodies a maturity of conception, a
  surety of view, a subtle phraseology, an exquisite use of irony, and,
  withal, a sedate, appeasing dignity.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 757. D. ‘05. 70w.

  “The book is mainly a study—and a very clever and shrewd study—of one
  type of American girl. But all the subordinate characters are
  carefully drawn.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 124. Jl. 22, ‘05. 830w.


=Howells, William Dean.= Son of Royal Langbrith. $2. Harper.

  The story is the tragic one of the weakness of a good mother who lacks
  the courage to tell her son of the iniquities of his dead father. He
  grows up in the belief that his father is a noble and heroic
  character, and when the truth is revealed to him, through the
  courtship of his mother by the country doctor, he suffers greatly in
  the loss of his ideal. An opium eater and his loyal daughter enter
  into the story. The setting is a small New England manufacturing town.

  “Is in many respects the best bit of work Mr. Howells has done of late
  years. One is inclined to read it slowly, lingering in enjoyment of
  the charming style, and appreciating to the full the perfect picture
  of New England life in the minute details that Mr. Howells so loves to
  dwell on. It is a pity, however, that in his love of realistic detail,
  Mr. Howells should be led into writing passages which, to say the
  least, mar the artistic effect of his work. He has set such a dainty
  dish before us that we cannot bear even one drop of grease to spoil
  the taste.” C. Harwood.

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 184. F. ‘05. 560w.

  “The one objection which the average reader has been known to make
  against the work of Mr. William Dean Howells,—namely, that that
  distinguished novelist is too fond of the insignificant,—cannot be
  brought against ‘The son of Royal Langbrith.’ That the working out of
  this theme is masterly it is superfluous to add.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 116. Ja. ‘05. 80w.

  “What lends peculiar charm to Mr. Howells’s best work is the fact that
  it could only have been written by an American. It is in the delicacy
  and tact with which it is hand sovereign merit of the story resides.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 22. Ja. 7, ‘05. 960w.


=Hubbard, Arthur John, and Hubbard, George.= Neolithic dew-ponds and
cattle-ways. *$1.25. Longmans.

  “The author endeavors to solve the question of the water-supply of the
  Neolithic dwellers in hill-encampments on the downs in the south of
  England. There were apparently no wells, and they had to depend on the
  ‘unfed’ artificial dew-pond.... Closely connected with the dew-ponds
  are the cattle-ways down which primitive man drove his herds from the
  entrenched settlement to water.... There are numerous and very clear
  photographs.”—Nation.

  “Altogether the book is one to be read with interest and profit by
  everyone at all interested in the evidences relating to our ancestors
  of the stone age.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 589. My. ‘05. 220w.

  “Contains much suggestive and interesting matter, and is very good
  reading, but not wholly convincing.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 151. Jl. 29, 1080w.

  “The whole study is well worth reading even by those who have no
  immediate interest in antiquarian topography.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 360. My. 4, ‘05. 830w.

  “The construction of dew-ponds by the early inhabitants of Britain has
  often been glibly asserted, but few, if any, have furnished such clear
  and circumstantial evidence as the authors of this short treatise.”

   + + + =Nature.= 71: 611 Ap. 27, ‘05. 610w.


=Hubbard, Gardiner Greene.= Collection of engravings. See =United
States=, Library of Congress.


=Hubbard, Sarah A.=, comp. See =Catch= words of cheer.


=Huckel, Oliver.=, tr. Lohengrin, **75c. Crowell.

  A companion volume to Mr. Huckel’s “Parsifal” which appeared in
  similar form two years ago. “It is a version for the general reader.
  It is not a libretto for the music. It gives a cumulative impression,
  the composite effect of words, scenery, action, and it is hoped, the
  spirit of the musical interpretation ... the spirit of the original
  text in a free version rather than in a strictly literal one.”

  * “The poem is preceded by an admirable introductory chapter relating
  to the work, the whole forming a little volume which will be highly
  prized by lovers of this noble music-drama.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 557. N. ‘05. 140w.

  “It gives the reader a much better impression of the drama than the
  ordinary literally translated libretto can furnish.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 40w.

  * “The verse is smooth and dignified.”

       + =R of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 30w.


=Huckel, Oliver.= Melody of God’s love; a new unfolding of the
twenty-third psalm, *75c. Crowell.

  An interpretation of the twenty-third psalm which divides it into
  three melodies: In green pastures, a song of the sweet and pleasant
  experiences of life; Through the valley of the shadow, a song of the
  harder and deeper and more sorrowful experiences of life; and, In the
  house of the Lord forever, a song of the exultant and triumphant and
  heavenly experiences of life here and hereafter.

  “A series of meditative essays in poetic vein, but without great
  distinction of style.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 20w.


=Huffcut, Ernest Wilson.= Elements of business law; with illustrative
examples and problems. *$1. Ginn.

  This volume is intended as a text-book for students in commercial
  courses in high schools and colleges and it sets forth the fundamental
  principles of business law, giving simple concrete examples which show
  them in their actual application to business transactions. Problems
  taken from decided cases are given at the end of each chapter. The
  book is based upon the common law and a glossary of legal terms is
  provided.


=Hughes, Hugh Price.= Life of Hugh Price Hughes, by his daughter. 3d ed.
*$3. Armstrong.

  “Mr. Price Hughes broke in early life with the traditional
  conservatism of the Methodist body, and allied himself with the
  Liberation society.... The greater part of the volume is taken up with
  the spiritual activities with which” he “occupied his strenuous life.
  These were very various in kind. Not the least interesting among them
  is the part which he took in the reunion conferences at
  Grindelwald.”—Spec.

  “She tries to set down all her father ever did or said, with little
  order of time and not too much of logic; yet large abstractions
  obscure practical details.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 354. My. 4, ‘05. 630w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 196. Ap. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  “This story of his life will be read in all branches of the Church. It
  deserves to be. It needs to be.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 143. Ja. 14, ‘05. 270w.

  “We must frankly say that there is a certain magniloquence of diction
  and general exuberance about Miss Hughes’s description of her father’s
  life and work which we could wish away; but these do not hinder us
  from recognizing a really striking personality. There are, indeed,
  more serious faults in Miss Hughes’s book than those of diction and
  manner. It would not have cost much trouble to ascertain the facts.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 181. F. 4, ‘05. 520w.


* =Hughes, Rupert.= Zal: an international romance. †$1.50. Century.

  The tale of a young Polish pianist’s battle for recognition in New
  York. There is the artist and dreamer’s “deathless enthusiasm” which
  dominates Ladislav Moniusko and Rose Hargrave, a wealthy New York
  girl, whose father had set her apart for an English duke.

  * “The book is of value, not only because of its musical quality, but
  because it enlarges information and intensifies sympathy for what may
  truly be called the land of genius.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 856. D. 2, ‘05. 630w.

  * “The contrast between the Polish and American natures is excellently
  indicated.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


=Hugo, Victor.= Notre Dame de Paris. $1.25. Crowell.

  A volume in the “Thin paper classics” series, translated from the
  French by Isabel F. Hapgood.


=Hugo, Victor.= Toilers of the sea. $1.25. Crowell.

  A translation from the French by Isabel F. Hapgood, uniform with the
  other attractive volumes of the “Thin paper classics” series.


=Hulbert, Archer Butler, and others.= Future of road making in America.
(Historic highways in America.) *$2.50. Clark, A. H.

  Volume XV closes the series of monographs on the history of America as
  portrayed in the evolution of its highways of war, commerce, and
  social expansion, in the “Historic highways of America” series.
  Besides the first essay, which gives the title to this volume, Mr.
  Hulbert’s symposium includes “Government co-operation in object-lesson
  road work,” by Martin Dodge; Maurice O. Eldridge’s “Good roads for
  farmers,” Prof. Logan Waller Page’s “The selection of materials for
  macadam roads,” and E. G. Harrison’s “Stone roads in New Jersey.”
  There will be a final volume devoted to an index.

     + — =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 928. Jl. ‘05. 110w.

  “The later volumes of the series present both the merits and defects
  of the earlier ones. They are entertaining and often suggestive, but
  always incomplete. The material is ill arranged, and a surprising
  amount of it is reprinted from other books.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 322. My. 1, ‘05. 290w. (Review of v. 15 and 16.)

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 183. F. 16, ‘05. 300w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 132. Mr. 4, ‘05. 390w.

  “A model of what an index should be.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 514. Ag. 5, ‘05. 140w. (Review of v. 16.)

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 449. F. 18, ‘05. 120w.

  “[The index] is model work of its kind.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 838. My. 27, ‘05. 120w. (Review of v. 15 and
         16.)


=Hume, Fergus.= Mandarin’s fan. †$1.25. Dillingham.

  A jade fan causes a deal of trouble in Mr. Hume’s new story. It is at
  the bottom of a plot which involves the good name of a Chinese
  official, the fortunes of a worthy young Englishman, the satisfaction
  of a Chinese god, Kwang-Ho, and the happiness of a young English girl.
  Never has the author presented so motley an array of men and women
  from which to select the real criminal.

  “His ‘heathen’ are of the conventional and traditional sort, but the
  dialogue is spicy, the plot intricate, and the personages are set in
  lively contrast to each other.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 189. Ag. ‘05. 70w.

  “Clever as the plot is, there are several woefully weak links, though
  a rapid reader is pretty sure to overlook these while engrossed in the
  really thrilling story. Contrary to his usual custom, Fergus Hume has
  given us better character drawing than plot in this tale of a fan.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 262. Ap. 22, ‘05. 230w.

  “The author appears frequently quite as much in the dark in trying to
  fix on one of his puppets the crime involved as is the patient and
  mystified reader. There is here no real flesh and blood.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 706. Mr. 18, ‘05. 70w.


=Hume, Fergus W.= Secret passage. †$1.25. Dillingham.

  The secret passage contains all the strange things which are the
  natural accompaniments of secret passages. An eccentric old lady is
  found stabbed to death in her room and there is no clue to the
  murderer. A clever young detective takes up the case and a number of
  people become involved in it; several love stories past and present
  serve to make matters more complicated, and in the end it is
  discovered that the murdered old lady was really somebody else in
  disguise, and that the only person not suspected of the crime is the
  guilty one.

  “Another of his hide-and-seek, jack-o’-lantern murder mysteries.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 589. S. 9, ‘05. 230w.


=Hume, Martin Andrew S.= Spanish influence of English literature. $2.
Lippincott.

  Ten public lectures re-written fill this portly volume. Its aim is “to
  provide for English readers a comparative study of Spanish literature
  in special relation to its points of contact with the literature of
  our own country.”

  “Major Hume does not succeed in persuading us that he has attained to
  any clear conception of what is meant by literary influence.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 99. F. 4, ‘05. 840w.

  “But these faults of arrangement, selection, and taste are minor
  defects in comparison with the want of knowledge and the inaccuracy
  which the book shows. Instances of reckless assertion are numerous in
  every chapter.”

   — — — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 365. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1200w.

  “The book, moreover, seems to be pervaded by an exaggerated sense of
  the importance of its thesis.”

       — =Dial.= 39: 93. Ag. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  “A cursory reading of this volume will reveal that it commits two
  unpardonable sins: first, that on points of scanty information, it
  jumps at brilliant conclusions without an effort to gather adequate
  facts; and second, that in matters of minute and detailed learning it
  generally takes its knowledge bodily from a source nowhere mentioned.”

     — — =Nation.= 81: 78. Jl. 27, ‘05. 2810w.

  “These phenomena of European literary history, Mr. Hume presents
  clearly and intelligently enough, but without that attention to
  detailed evidence which would have made his principal chapters
  somewhat more convincing.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 589. S. 9, ‘05. 890w.

  “We are obliged to him for a most interesting book, which brings
  together facts unknown to ninety-nine in every hundred of the great
  reading crowd.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 407. S. 23, ‘05. 2020w.

  “Though we cannot praise unreservedly either Mr. Hume’s style or his
  arrangement, yet both are greatly superior to Mr. Underhill’s; and it
  is just in those chapters in which he comes into competition with Mr.
  Underhill that Mr. Hume is at his best.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 514. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1180w.


* =Hume, Martin Andrew Sharp.= Wives of Henry VIII. **$4.50. McClure.

  Major Hume portrays King Henry as “a weak, vain and boastful creature,
  the plaything of his passions, and the tool of those great minds about
  him who worked solely to further their own religious and political
  aims.” Catherine of Aragon claims the longest consideration, in which
  the “pathetic and noble” picture is offset by the less agreeable light
  thrown on her period of widowhood. The author “gives a pitiless
  picture of Anne Boleyn—of her utter lack of generosity, her meanness
  of spirit, her frivolity, and her vanity.” Katherine Howard furnishes
  the best subject of study from a “psychological and romantic point of
  view,” while Katherine Lady Latimer is presented as “amiable, tactful
  and clever and evidently ‘managed’ her fickle husband with great
  intelligence.” (Acad.)

  * “The latest and by far the clearest account of these six queens.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1196. N. 18, ‘05. 1500w.

  * “Major Hume in this, his latest book, and certainly one of the most
  deeply interesting he has written, is just sufficiently partial to
  make us feel that he is human.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 603. N. 4. 1420w.

  * “Altogether the book is one which supplies the reader with plenty of
  ideas and impressions, though there are times when one gets lost in
  the mazes of the game Mr. Hume is exposing, and wonders if the game is
  all really there.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 896. D. 16, ‘05. 1410w.


=Humieres, Robert d’ vicomte.= Through isle and empire; tr. by Alexander
Teixeira de Mattos. **$1.40. Doubleday.

  “The psychology of the Englishman is a curious subject for a French
  writer, but it is one very entertainingly treated by Vicomte
  d’Humières. He divides his book into four parts, following his quarry
  out of England into Egypt, India, and through Deccan, but always in
  amiable pursuit; witness Mr. Kipling’s indorsement in a prefatory
  letter.”—Outlook.

  Reviewed by Robert C. Brooks.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 380. Je. ‘05. 2200w.

  “Admirably translated into English.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 360. My. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  “He uses as sharp a wit as Max O’Rell in describing British customs,
  manners, sports and institutions; but his criticism is much more just
  and much less bitter.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 782. Ap. 6, ‘05. 480w.

  “Readers may differ in opinion of the author’s estimate of British
  character, but all will agree as to the charming quality of the
  recorded impressions and sketches of travel.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 961. Ap. 15, ‘05. 90w.

  “His description of English manners is not without humour and
  incisiveness, and his view of India, native and British alike, is
  marked by sympathy and insight.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 637. My. 13, ‘05. 220w.

  “Brilliant and lightsome pages.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 592. Ap. 22, ‘05. 2210w.


=Humphrey, Seth K.= Indian dispossessed. **$1.50. Little.

  A plain statement of the wrongs which the Indians have suffered at the
  hands of the government of the United States, backed by extracts from
  official records. There is little rhetoric but there are many facts.
  The crowding out process as it affected various tribes and
  reservations is given in detail and the final chapters: Dividing the
  spoils, and Uncle Sam, trustee, make the most ardent patriot stop and
  ponder. There are sixteen full page illustrations from photographs of
  Indian chiefs.

  * “By taking only those instances wherein the Government or its
  representatives have been conspicuously unfair in dealing with the
  Indian, Mr. Humphrey succeeds in making out a pretty strong case
  against the white man. He has used his material well and has made the
  most of it.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 1231. N. 23, ‘05. 410w.

  “We ascribe to this author the best intentions, but we do not think
  his book will render any real service to the Indian cause. All that he
  says may be true, but he does not tell all the truth.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 526. O. 28, ‘05. 210w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 668. N. 18, ‘05. 260w.


=Humphreys, Alexander Crombie.= Lecture notes on some of the business
features of engineering practice. $1. Dept. of business engineering,
Stevens institute of technology, Hoboken, N. J.

  “This book is, we believe, the first of its kind—namely, a book of
  lectures on business methods for students of engineering.” (Engin.
  N.). It contains lectures upon Notes on contracts, Estimates and
  specifications, three lectures on Accounting, three on Accounting as
  applied to repairs and depreciation, Systems of classification—taxes,
  Analysis of a balance sheet and Analysis of data.

  “So well does he handle the subject that interest is awakened from the
  start, and it not allowed to lag.”

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 635. Je. 15, ‘05. 860w.


=Huneker, James Gibbons.= Iconoclasts: a book of dramatists. **$1.50.
Scribner.

  Studies of modern continental dramatists. A review of Henrik Ibsen’s
  work is followed by impressions and criticisms of the dramas of August
  Strindberg, Henry Becque, Gerhart Hauptmann, Paul Hervieu, “The
  quintessence” of Shaw, Maxim Gorky’s “Nachtasyl,” Hermann Sudermann,
  Princess Mathilde’s play, Duse and D’Annunzio, Villiers del Isle Adam,
  and Maurice Maeterlinck.

  “If Mr. Huneker would abandon his strain after originality and
  epigram, and would be content to be natural and reposeful, his chances
  of enduring success would be better.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 284. Ag. 26, ‘05. 690w.

  “What one misses in his work is the repose, the finish, the, it may
  be, studied avoidance of mere epigram, mere cleverness, which gives so
  stable a charm to such criticism as that of Mr. Symons.” H. W.
  Boynton.

   + + — =Atlan.= 95: 841. Je. ‘05. 1100w.

  “Mr. Huneker’s brilliant book holds substantial refreshment and work
  of more than transient value. Is saturated with his subject, yet has
  preserved an invaluable sensitiveness to impressions.” Olivia Howard
  Dunbar.

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 89. Jl. ‘05. 380w.

  “Mr. Huneker’s manner of writing is pointed and almost brilliant, but
  the journalistic origin of his essays is too apparent.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 357. My. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  “His style is not exactly engaging, and we hold some of his
  admirations to be misplaced; but, when all is said, ‘Iconoclasts’ is a
  capital book, lively, informing, suggestive.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 218. Jl. 7, ‘05. 1040w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 88. F. 11, ‘05. 130w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 184. Mr. 25, ‘05. 450w.

  “Mr. Huneker’s style is brilliant, audacious, often paradoxical, and
  full of sweeping generalizations. He knows his subject thoroughly.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 140. My. 13, ‘05. 370w.


=Hunt, Agnes.= Provincial committees of safety of the American
revolution. $1. Western reserve university, Cleveland, O.

  “The present work comprises five chapters. In the first three the
  committees or councils of safety in the New England, the middle, and
  the southern colonies respectively are dealt with; the fourth presents
  a general view of the character and work of these bodies; while the
  fifth and last seeks their origin in preceding English and colonial
  experience. The investigation rests almost wholly upon the sources;
  and the result is thoroughly enlightening for many important questions
  connected with the struggle for independence.” (Am. Hist. R.) “Every
  special student of the American revolution will find this work very
  useful for its collection of facts, its table of the powers of the
  committees in the several states, and its convenient bibliography of
  works relating to the subject.” (Ann. Am. Acad.)

  Reviewed by George Elliott Howard.

     + + =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 689. Ap. ‘05. 390w.

  “Is a real contribution to the study of the American revolution.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 340. Mr. ‘05. 110w.


* =Hunt, Violet.= Cat. *$2. Macmillan.

  “The cat’s story of the women folk with whom she lived, and whose
  sentimental attitude toward herself she inwardly despised while she
  endured it for the sake of the loaves and fishes. Of course it is a
  story for girls.... It deals with a cat and her family of kittens and
  with Auntie May, who is still young, and a love affair of Auntie’s....
  Miss Hunt ... arranges it so that the young man who loves Auntie May
  shall hate cats—hate them so that the very presence of one in the room
  makes him frantic. And Auntie May, when it come to the test, prefers
  her man to her cats.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 40w.

 *   + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 404. N. 24, ‘05. 490w.

  * “Good reading and wholesome.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 890. D. 6, ‘05. 230w.

 *       =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 12. D. 9, ‘05. 90w.

 *       =Spec.= 95: sup. 909. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.


* =Hunt, Rev. William, and Poole, Reginald Lane.= Political history of
England. 12v. ea. *$2.60. Longmans.

  This twelve volume work on English political history is announced
  under the following authorship: Volume I. 1066, Thomas Hodgkin; II.
  1066-1216, Professor George B. Adams; III. 1216-1377, T. F. Tout; IV.
  1377-1485, C. Oman; V. 1485-1547, H. A. L. Fisher; VI. 1547-1603, A.
  F. Pollard; VII. 1603-1660, F. C. Montague; VIII. 1660-1702, R. Lodge;
  IX. 1702-1760, I. S. Leadam; X. 1760-1801, Rev. W. Hunt; XI.
  1801-1837, Hon. G. C. Broderick and J. K. Fotherham; XII. 1837-1901,
  Sidney J. Low.

  * “The professed student will revel in this book, in its accurate
  scholarship, in its clearness of style and arrangement, in its maps
  and indexes, and, above all, in the invaluable appendix which Dr.
  Hunt’s unique knowledge of the original authorities of the period has
  enabled him to draw up.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1097. O. 21, ‘05. 510w. (Review of v. 10.)

 *   + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 569. O. 28. 1050w. (Review of v. 10.)

  * “There is not much that is new or startling either in Mr. Hunt’s
  narrative or in his opinions; it is on his sober and wholesome common
  sense that the reputation of this book will depend, and this is not
  the least important recommendation of such a series as the present.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 346. O. 20, ‘05. 1380w. (Review of v. 10.)

  * “A very useful book, in which the sense of proportion, the volume of
  information, and the continuity of narrative are good.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 429. N. 23, ‘05. 870w. (Review of v. 10.)

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 716. O. 21, ‘05. 210w. (Review of v. 10.)


=Hunter, (Wiles) Robert.= Poverty, **$1.50. Macmillan.

  The author has been actively engaged for ten years in
  university-settlement work in New York, Chicago, and London, and his
  book aims to awaken the unthinking and unseeing to a realization of
  the grim and terrible conditions existing among our poor. He describes
  evils, points out remedies, and sets forth the pitiful struggles of
  the underpaid and underfed wage-earners. The book is divided into
  seven chapters: Poverty, The pauper, The vagrant, The sick, The child,
  The immigrant, and Conclusions.

         =Acad.= 68: 51. Ja. 14, ‘05. 100w.

  “In his volume, entitled ‘Poverty,’ Robert Hunter has rendered for the
  United States the same service that Frederick Engels rendered to
  England sixty years ago by the publication of his volume on ‘The
  condition of the working class.’ No student of philanthropy, or of
  sociology, can afford to ignore this book. But when all deductions on
  the ground of inclusiveness have been made, the arsenal of facts here
  brought to the attention of the critic must command the respect of the
  candid.” Florence Kelley.

     + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 555. Ja. ‘05. 370w.

  “The conscience literature of social progress receives an important
  contribution in ‘Poverty.’ This work, within certain limits, is
  strong, fine and deserving of great praise. Mr. Hunter’s remedial
  measures are for the most part sane, reasonable, just and necessary,
  and they will appeal to tens of thousands who would be frightened if
  one proposed more fundamental measures. Books like this are of immense
  value at the present period in our conflict against the sordid
  materialism that is ranging itself with reaction and subtly, when not
  aggressively, opposing the ideal of democracy and social progress.”

     + + =Arena.= 33: 219. F. ‘05. 1480w.

  “There is a certain literary quality to Mr. Hunter’s book which will
  insure it a wide vogue. Mr. Hunter’s book is not one that commands our
  confidence.” Winthrop More Daniels.

     + — =Atlan.= 95: 555. Ap. ‘05. 320w.

  “While it will meet with objections and while there is room for
  differing with many statements of the author, the work is a distinct
  contribution to the literature of sociology.”

     + + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. ‘05. 590w.

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 399. Je. ‘05. 580w.

  “The author shows a wide and intimate knowledge of his subject, and he
  has recorded his observations and conclusions in a scholarly, frank,
  and sympathetic spirit. When he speaks of the cure of the difficulty,
  his position is necessarily less strong and less satisfactory.”
  Constant Huntington.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 90. Ja. ‘05. 660w.

  Reviewed by Charles Richmond Henderson.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 155. Mr. 1, ‘05. 340w.

  “Mr. Hunter has head as well as heart, and his book both convinces and
  inspires. The best chapter is that on ‘The child.’ The poorest chapter
  is that on ‘Immigrants.’ ‘Poverty’ is fairly well written and will
  undoubtedly be a standard book on the subject for the next few years.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 97. Ja. 12, ‘05. 970w.

  * “Impressions are quite elaborately reinforced throughout by
  statistics and authorities, and, to this extent, they are calculated
  to mislead the unwary.” Mary E. Richmond.

     + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 506. Jl. ‘05. 490w.

  “The author has faced a grave problem resolutely. He has stated it in
  clear terms. He has gathered together the best and most intelligent
  thought upon the subject. Mr. Hunter’s book is a landmark in the
  American literature upon the subject.” S. G. Lindholm.

   + + — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 277. Mr. ‘05. 1160w.

  “Such a book as this stands in deplorable contrast with Mr. Rowntree’s
  study of poverty in York.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 70. Ja. 26, ‘05. 380w.

  “The book as a whole, has one aim—namely, to show the grievous need of
  certain social measures calculated to prevent the ruin and degradation
  of those working people who are on the verge of poverty. Mr. Hunter’s
  book on ‘Poverty’ is the most impressive and important book of the
  year. Every page is crowded with vital matter. There is no high
  coloring; only a plain, quiet statement of the frightful facts. The
  book should attract national attention. It should have a million
  readers.” E. Markham.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 1. Ja. 7, ‘05. 2090w.

  “His volume is sympathetic rather than scientific—the work of one who
  is first a philanthropist, and second a student. It is human—intensely
  so. It has the defects of its qualities. Looking at the problem of
  poverty from the view point of the poor, it is somewhat too somber in
  its interpretation of existing conditions.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 902. Ap. 8, ‘05. 540w.

  “The most telling facts that he presents are facts drawn, not from
  official reports, but from actual experience and observation. As a
  record of such data his book is an extremely valuable contribution to
  sociology.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 127. Ja. ‘05. 220w. (States scope of book).

  “It is to be regretted that Mr. Hunter did not make a more judicious
  and careful use of his statistical material. There is much else that
  is of interest and value in the books.” J. E. Cutler.

   + + — =Yale R.= 14: 86. My. ‘05. 1290w.


* =Hurll, Estelle May.= Bible beautiful: a history of Biblical art.
**$2. Page.

  “The book aims to trace the development of Bible illustration from the
  crude pictures of the catacombs to the splendid art of the mediaeval
  mosaics, cathedral façades, stained glass windows, and mural frescoes,
  and finally to the modern work, mostly English, of the last two
  centuries. Three special indices are provided; one of artists, for the
  art student; one of places, for the tourist; and one of Bible subjects
  for Bible students.” The volume is uniform with the “Art lover’s
  series” and about fifty half-tones of various types of sacred art.
  (Dial.)

  * “An interesting and comprehensive, though distinctly popular, study
  of Biblical art.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 387. D. 1, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “She well describes the pictures which themselves describe the
  Bible.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Husband, T. F., and Husband, M. F. A.= Punctuation: its principles and
practice. **75c. Dutton.

  The first part of this book is historical and, beginning with the
  earliest inscriptions which had no separation of words or punctuation,
  it traces the development of punctuation and shows why it is needed.
  How it should be used is the subject of the second part which gives a
  full discussion of the uses of each stop.

  “Messrs. Husband appear to be too sensitive to the look of stops, to
  the suggestion of a skeleton, and their own sparing use of them is the
  one fault in a good book.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 978. S. 23, ‘05. 1150w.

  “A practical little volume, which is also strong on the theoretical
  side, and may be commended as a guide to a neglected subject.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 469. O. 7. 260w.

  “The book seems to us both widely useful and entertaining.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 618. S. 23, ‘05. 520w.

  “The book does good service in showing the growth of our system of
  punctuation, and most of the authors’ positions are well taken and
  carefully reasoned out.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14, ‘05. 100w.


=Hussey, Eyre.= Miss Badsworth, M. F. H. †$1.50. Longmans.

  Hugo Badsworth, master of Cranston Hounds has an old-maid sister and a
  niece, both of the same name, Lavinia. Upon his death, a will, made in
  jest, is discovered stipulating that unless Miss Lavinia Badsworth
  follows the hounds upon certain occasions his money is to go to a
  reprobate nephew. The niece fulfills the terms of this will for her
  aunt and all is well.

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 243. Ap. 15, ‘05. 340w.

  “Although somewhat diffuse it is pleasantly told.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 709. My. 27, ‘05. 330w.

  “The book ... can best be described by the adjective ‘breezy.’”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 681. My. 6, ‘05. 200w.


* =Hutchinson, Horace Gordon,= ed. Big game shooting. 2v. *$7.50.
Scribner.

  “The ‘Country life’ volumes on Big game shooting under the competent
  editorship of Mr. Horace Hutchinson, contain an exhaustive account of
  all the larger game animals of the world, from the Scottish red-deer
  to the African elephant. The first volume deals with Europe and
  America.”—Spec.

  * “The style is graceful, easy, and animated, and the interest never
  flags, because the author is unaffectedly interested in the subject.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 775. N. 18, ‘05. 580w.

 *     + =Spec.= 95: 869. N. 25, ‘05. 410w.


=Hutchinson, Horace G.= Two moods of a man. †$1.50. Putnam.

  The two moods which war for the ascendancy in young Hood are one which
  compels allegiance to the gypsy wife whom he had married after the
  Romany rite, and another which bids him desert the gypsy and marry a
  high minded Philadelphian. His philosophy which claims the divine
  right of the Greek “daemon” to guide him is a cloak for his
  selfishness. Intense enthusiasm and reactionary suffering show him to
  be absolutely without poise.

  “This is an extremely interesting, yet deceptive story, in which the
  cleverness of the telling often dazzles and obscures the true
  significance of incidents and motives.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 759. Jl. 22, ‘05. 390w.

  “It is with exemplary and judicial dispassionateness that Mr.
  Hutchinson analyzes and depicts his man with two moods. But apart from
  this non-committal tone of the narrative, the novel deserves nothing
  but praise.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 73. Jl. 15, 330w.

  * “The book is written with a simple distinction, and is filled with
  suggestive and quotable passages. An unusual character study.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 80w.

  “A book of almost startling originality and of very unusual interest.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 463. Jl. 15, ‘05. 790w.

  * “Is hardly a successful novel, though it has merit as a succession
  of scenes.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 282. Ag. 26, ‘05. 320w.

  “The beginning of the book, with the pictures of life in the gipsy
  van, though not worked out in detail, furnishes pleasant reading; but
  Hood’s philosophic utterances are not impressive.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 293. Ag. 26, ‘05. 150w.


=Hutten, Baroness von.= He and Hecuba. †$1.50. Appleton.

  A poor English rector who is atoning for the passionate past by
  faithful service to his flock at the expense of himself, his invalid
  wife, and his neglected children, meets a beautiful southern woman who
  awakens in him his buried youth, and he takes up his pen and writes an
  anonymous book of his young days and of his downfall. The book sells,
  but he is obliged to denounce it from the pulpit because of his
  bishop’s crusade against it. Unhappy complications follow and other
  characters bring into the story all the elements of tragedy.

  * “There are excellent bits of portraiture in this story,—bits which
  make one regret that the book as a whole should be stamped as frankly
  and crudely melodramatic.”

     — + =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 120w.

  * “This novel is uneven, with some good touches, but, as whole,
  painfully harrowing, cheaply melodramatic, and decidedly unwholesome
  in its treatment of love. In an obvious attempt to achieve strength,
  the author has only compassed a cheap and florid rankness.”

       — =Lit. D.= 31: 965. D. 23, ‘05. 580w.

  “She mars, too, by faults of taste, which belong to the current school
  of fashionable fiction, a story which in its elements is true and
  strongly human and developed with no little skill and cleverness.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 637. S. 30, ‘05. 460w.

  “There is doubt, however, as to her soundness in dealing with moral
  questions and the wholesomeness of her manner of making her characters
  play about the edges of social sin. Those who found it difficult for
  this reason to like ‘Pam,’ with all its cleverness, will feel the same
  objection here.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 526. O. 28, ‘05. 90w.


=Hutten, Baroness von.= Pam. †$1.50. Dodd.

  The story of Pamela Yeoland whose mother, Lord Yeoland’s daughter,
  outrages her family by eloping with a popular tenor who deserted his
  wife and family for her. They live happily, however, in Bohemia, among
  disreputable and brilliant associates. Little Pam, at the age of ten,
  is taken from these surroundings by an apparently respectable
  grandfather, and her observations of her new and conventional life
  lead her to the conclusion that marriage is both undesirable and
  unhappy. This belief colors her own love affairs. The book closes when
  she is still young and her future is undetermined.

  “A novel of considerable psychological insight. The book, though
  written with a light touch, deals subtly with some deep questions.”
  Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 22: 233. N. ‘05. 580w.

  “The novel is artistic to the last degree, and absorbing as a play by
  Shaw.” Carolyn Shipman.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 474. My. ‘05. 590w.

         =Ind.= 58: 615. Mr. 16, ‘05. 290w.

  “Is quite as interesting from its logical working out of a problem in
  social ethics as it is for its strong character sketching and literary
  style.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1008. My. 4, ‘05. 190w.

         =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “It is interesting, even sinfully interesting. To the thoughtful
  reader ‘Pam’ holds both an immoral and a moral.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 206. Ap. 1, ‘05. 580w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “The figure of the quaint little girl and her talk are decidedly
  pleasing and out of the ordinary. We care much less for her when she
  is a young woman.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 708. Mr. 18, ‘05. 90w.

  “It is the most daring story that has appeared in many months. It is
  an interesting book of artistic purpose, and therefore a book to be
  read by the liberal-minded.”

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 119. Je. ‘05. 410w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 757. Je. ‘05. 240w.

  “‘Pam’ belongs in the main to the category of the ‘emancipation
  novel.’ To describe it as dangerous or immoral in tendency would be
  unfair and unjust, for, while it is emphatically not suitable for the
  consumption of the young person, no grown man or woman could take harm
  from its perusal. Yet the lesson ... of the story of Pamela Yeoland is
  so sound and obvious that, beyond the reserves already made, we are
  not disposed to insist on the freedom with which it is handled.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 144. Ja. 28, ‘05. 900w.


=Hutton, Edward.= Cities of Umbria. *$2. Dutton.

  Mr. Hutton “tells of the cities of Umbria, Perugia, Assisi, Spoleto,
  Orvieto, Urbino, and others less known; of the art of Umbria, with its
  great names, Perugino, Pintoricchio, and of Umbria Mystica, the Umbria
  of Assisi, St. Francis and Brother Elias, of Sta. Clara and Joachim di
  Flore.... His book is illustrated in color after drawings by Mr. A.
  Pisa, and a number of photographs of pictures to illustrate the
  section on Umbrian art.”—Acad.

  “There is so much solid backbone of historical and artistic knowledge
  to support his raptures that they are not merely rapturous.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 935. S. 9, ‘05. 300w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1376. D. 14, ‘05. 70w.

  “He has ruined his natural power of description by a disastrous
  attempt to combine the styles of Ruskin, Swinburne, d’Annunzio and Mr.
  Berenson.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 269. Ag. 25, ‘05. 630w.

  “His book is destined to prove an invaluable companion for the tourist
  he so heartily scorns. We shall probably wait many a long day for a
  better book on Umbrian painters and Umbrian saints.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 246. S. 21, ‘05. 1190w.

  “The book has much that is useful and valuable as a contribution
  toward the understanding of the Italian life and spirit in their
  manifold manifestations, much that is suggestive much that is concrete
  and firmly to be taken hold of.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 671. O. 14, ‘05. 590w.

  “The text is well written, readable, trustworthy, clearly put, and
  often has atmosphere, but, despite not a few clever touches, it seems
  to us in the main unoriginal.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 277. S. 30, ‘05. 180w.


=Hutton, Laurence.= Talks in a library with Laurence Hutton. Recorded by
Isabel Moore. **$2.50. Putnam.

  Informal chats in which Hutton tells of his life, his friends, and his
  fads. The volume is full of interesting anecdotes for he numbered
  among his friends the greatest actors, artists and men of letters in
  England and America, and he had a collector’s mania for death masks,
  play-bills, inscribed books and portraits.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 783. Je. 24. 220w.

  “One of the most interesting books of its class that has been written
  in a long time is ‘Talks in a library with Laurence Hutton.’”
  Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 510. Je. ‘05. 770w.

  “On the whole, for its wealth of literary, dramatic, and miscellaneous
  reminiscences the book is one of the best of its kind. The editor
  deserves a warm word of praise for her part in the work.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 17. Jl. 1, ‘05. 490w.

  “Are likely, no doubt, to be found entertaining by those who care for
  the more gossipy, intimate sort of confidences about public
  characters.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 639. S. 14, ‘05. 120w.

  “It is a miscellaneous collection of literary and personal gossip, a
  good deal of which is new and most of it decidedly interesting.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 443. Je. 1, ‘05. 610w.

  “As the last word, and the very characteristic word, of a cultivated,
  genial observer with a genius for friendship, it will give much
  pleasure.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 325. My. 20, ‘05. 970w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “This is a very informal book, and gains by its unpretentious intimacy
  of style.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 643. Jl. 8, ‘05. 270w.

  “One of the most readable books of the year.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 942. Je. 17, ‘05. 460w.

  “The book is rich in stories, and if he sometimes points a moral we
  suspect he can often adorn a tale.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 343. S. 9, ‘05. 900w.

  “An eminently readable book. He is always interesting, always natural,
  always kindly.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 293. Ag. 26, ‘05. 300w.


=Hyde, William DeWitt.= From Epicurus to Christ: a study in the
principles of personality. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  “A lucid exposition of the fundamental principles of the Epicurean,
  Stoic, Platonic, Aristotelean, and Christian philosophies.... The book
  is made up of extracts from the founders of each system, together with
  quotations from modern writers on the subject, as well as scholarly
  comments on both by President Hyde.”—R. of Rs.

         =Atlan.= 95: 704. My. ‘05. 410w.

  “An extremely interesting presentation of old principles in a new
  setting, together with keen suggestions of their modern exponents,
  tend to convince the reader that Mr. Hyde himself is far from lacking
  in certain principles of personality.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 202. Mr. 16, ‘05. 220w.

  “Here discourses on ethics and philosophy in a familiar and breezy
  sort of way.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1075. My. 11, ‘05. 180w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1161. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “The book is hortatory and not historical. The only serious criticism
  to be made on the book is the order of the chapters.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 212. Mr. 16, ‘05. 460w.

  “The book fulfills its purpose admirably. The author has a firm grasp
  on the fundamental principles of the systems which he discusses and,
  in addition, a remarkable insight into the practical merits of the
  different theories. He writes forcibly and with an abundance of
  illustration. For general reading the book is interesting, suggestive,
  and helpful.” H. W. Wright.

     + + =Philos. R.= 14: 373. My. ‘05. 530w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 254. F. ‘05. 70w.

  “Professor Hyde has produced a very readable book on Greek and
  Christian ethics; it is clear and popular.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 640. My. 13, ‘05. 290w.

  “Is one of those extremely clever and almost painfully ‘up-to-date’
  metaphysico-theological books which America produces in such
  abundance.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 119. Ja. 28, ‘05. 420w.


=Hyslop, James Hervey.= Ethics of Greek philosophers, Socrates, Plato,
and Aristotle. $2. Higgins.

  An essay first given as a lecture before the Brooklyn ethical
  association (1896-7). It treats of the teachings and influence of
  Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle and is illustrated with their
  portraits. Copious editorial notes by Mr. Higgins and extracts from
  the works of the philosophers show their close relation to modern
  thought. The volume concludes with a brief life of Socrates.

  “It would be difficult to find a better brief presentation of the
  matter.” Gerald B. Smith.

   + + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 396. Ap. ‘05. 170w.

  “The conspicuous absence of historic insight, of breadth and
  impartiality of view, of even an approach to scholarly discrimination,
  forms strange qualifications for the editing of a volume bearing the
  ambitious title, ‘The evolution of ethics.’”

     — — =Ind.= 58: 384. F. 16, ‘05. 290w.


=Hyslop, James Hervey.= Science and a future life. **$1.50. Turner, H.
B.

  “An attempt to popularize and condense the evidence buried in the
  Society for psychical research’s voluminous reports on Mrs. Piper’s
  trances, for one of the bulkiest and most detailed of which Dr. Hyslop
  was himself responsible.”—Nation.

  “Is the most important critical book relating to psychical research
  that has appeared during the present year.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 325. S. ‘05. 3250w.

  “It belongs therefore with a group of books, numerable on the fingers
  of one hand, which, treating of matters occult, articulate with a body
  of fact and doctrine in aspect at least scientific.” E. T. Brewster.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 689. N. ‘05. 680w.

  “To those who cherish as something precious the reputation of science
  and the worth and ideals of the votaries thereof, equally with those
  who draw from religious faith a sensitiveness and a healthy-mindedness
  that make for intellectual refinement and stability, the volume is
  nothing less than offensive.”

       — =Dial.= 39: 242. O. 16, ‘05. 480w.

 *     + =Lit. D.= 31: 179. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1580w.

  “He has added to his extracts some sensible comments and a careful
  comparison of the telepathic and the spiritistic explanation, the
  latter of which he prefers.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 53. Jl. 20, ‘05. 300w.

  “Altogether, Prof. Hyslop’s book is the broadest and most
  understandable work in accord with an intelligent ambition for what
  this new science can and will do that we have read up to date.”
  Pendennis.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 430. Jl. 1, ‘05. 690w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 1068. Ag. 26, ‘05. 860w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 256. Ag. ‘05. 110w.




                                   I


=Ihlseng, Magnus C., and Wilson. Eugene Benjamin.= Manual of mining.
*$5. Wiley.

  “Based on the course of lectures delivered at the school of mines of
  Colorado, Prof. Ihlseng’s book, which is regarded in America as the
  best text-book on the subject, has been enlarged under the joint
  authorship of Mr. Wilson to include coal mining.... The book is
  divided into two parts, mining engineering and practical mining. The
  former deals with prospecting, preparatory work, methods of mining,
  power generation, hoisting machinery, electric generation and water
  power ... underground haulage systems, ... pumping, mine gases,
  ventilation, ... and accidents in mines. The second part deals with
  shafts, ... tunnels and gangways, drilling and boring machines for
  explorations, miner’s tools, channelers, drills and coal-cutters, and
  blasting.”—Nature.

  “The book has no American competitor, and it is superior to any other
  book in the English language covering the same broad field.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 293. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1060w.

  “The book contains much useful information, but the lack of method in
  the arrangement cannot fail to militate against its use as a
  textbook.”

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 53. My. 18, ‘05. 360w.


Indian stories retold from St. Nicholas. 65c. Century.

  The best of the stories of Indian life and legend contributed to St.
  Nicholas by well-known travelers and writers have been collected here
  for “out of hours” reading for young children. The book is the first
  of a series of historical stories, now in preparation, which in order
  will include “Colonial stories,” “Revolutionary stories,” “Civil war
  stories,” and “Our national holidays.”

  “Capital tales of Indian legend and adventure.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 884. Ag. 5, ‘05. 7w.


=Inge, William Ralph.= Faith and knowledge. *$1.50. Scribner.

  “Mr. Inge’s sermons are chiefly doctrinal.... The subject most
  frequently recurring is the dependence of faith upon knowledge, the
  author opposing the Ritschlian view that faith is independent and
  master in her own sphere.”—Ind.

  “A series of well-written sermons of rather more than ordinary power.”

     + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 400. Ap. ‘05. 70w.

  “They disappoint the reader by an absence of intellectual virility and
  ‘grip,’ and a certain passionate enthusiasm which sweeps the interest
  of the reader into its current.” F. E. Dewhurst.

     + — =Bib. World.= 26: 74. Jl. ‘05. 490w.

         =Ind.= 58: 500. Mr. 2, ‘05. 70w.

  “These sermons are thoughtful, scholarly, finely spiritual. I should
  not think of calling them great or powerful. But they are good—at
  times quite suggestive, though in places tolerably commonplace. The
  author is not merely preacher and rhetorician but, one is pleased to
  find, a capable spiritual thinker. The style is always clear and
  good.” James Lindsay.

   + + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 385. Ap. ‘05. 1220w.


=Ingersoll, Ernest.= Island in the air. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  Fifty years ago some plucky resourceful young people were cut off from
  their elders, as they all travelled westward to found a new home, by a
  landslide which held them fast upon a bit of table land, an island in
  a sea of air. The story tells of their adventures with Indians and
  wild animals and their final escape. There is also much information
  upon archaeology, geology, and the use of drugs.

  “Exactly the sort of narrative to please adventurous boys and girls.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 577. N. 4, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 768. D. ‘05. 60w.


* =Innes, Arthur Donald.= England under the Tudors. *$3. Putnam.

  “‘England under the Tudors’ ... is the fourth (the second in order of
  publication) of Professor Oman’s ‘History of England’ in six volumes,
  and is, therefore, a companion volume to Mr. Trevelyan’s ‘England
  under the Stuarts.’ ... Mr. Innes ... has produced a competent book on
  this troubled epoch.”—Lond. Times.

  * “Mr. Innes has carefully interpreted each reign in the light of
  these views and they give to his narrative a consistency and unity
  which will make his book especially valuable to the younger student
  and to the general reader, to whom it is more particularly intended to
  appeal.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 419. D. 1, ‘05. 660w.

  * “Mr. Innes’s work has not the brilliance of Mr. Trevelyan’s
  installment, but it is thoroughly adequate for its purpose, and shows
  even greater signs of sound judgment. If it is not so readable, it is
  perhaps more trustworthy. It is this sane judgment which characterizes
  Mr. Innes’s treatment of difficult and disputed questions, and makes
  his book so valuable an introduction to the study of the whole period.
  If the other volumes of the series are executed as well as the two
  already at hand, the reading public will at last have an adequate
  history of England.” Joseph Jacobs.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 869 D. 9, ‘05. 1550w.


International catalogue of scientific literature: First annual issue.
N-Zoology. pt. 1, Author catalog: pt. 2, Subject catalog, ea. *$8.40.
imp. Blakiston.

  “The work is planned to include the zoölogical literature for the year
  1901, altho one is compelled to analyze the preface in order to
  determine the period covered since no record of its extent appears on
  title page of either part.... Part I. contains the general
  explanations, with the scheme of classification and an index thereto
  in English; and this matter is repeated in French, German and Italian.
  Following these, the author catalog fills 260 pages and lists 5,918
  titles. Part II., which is about three times as voluminous, contains
  at the close a list of journals with abbreviated titles and the
  topographical classification. More than 1100 pages are filled with the
  subject references proper. The addition to each phylum of a list of
  names of new genera and species will commend itself to all as a most
  desirable feature.”—Science.

  “With respect to promptness, completeness and accuracy the results are
  distinctly inferior to those already achieved for zoölogy by several
  bibliographic agencies.” Henry B. Ward.

     + — =Science=, n. s. 21: 147. Ja. 27, ‘05. 1380w.


=Ireland, Alleyne.= Far Eastern tropics: studies in the administration
of tropical dependencies. **$2. Houghton.

  The author spent many months in the Far East in the service of the
  University of Chicago, and the present volume contains carefully
  collected data and studies of the governments and commercial
  conditions of the tropical dependencies of Great Britain, Holland,
  France, and the United States, also a new map of southeastern Asia
  prepared by Mr. Ireland, himself, and an appendix containing
  statistics.

  “We should like to recommend it as a very able study in comparative
  colonization in the tropics.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 719. Jl. 8, ‘05. 170w.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 937. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  * “It is for the most part clearly written in an interesting style, it
  gives just the facts which an American might wish to know, and its
  conclusions are given with an impartiality, honesty and forcefulness
  which must carry the greatest weight in the minds of the
  unprejudiced.” James T. Young.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 755. N. ‘05. 860w.

  “He is courageous in his outspoken comment upon all that he finds
  wrong.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 718. Je. 10. 740w.

  “Mr. Ireland has wit and vision, and in his style are clearness and
  force. He has made a difficult subject interesting.” Wm. Elliot
  Griffis.

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 265. S. ‘05. 220w.

  “There is every evidence of careful and painstaking study; and the
  book has the unusual merit of being on the whole, definite and precise
  in its statements.” H. Parker Willis.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 36. Jl. 16, ‘05. 1660w.

     + — =Ind=, 58: 1363. Je. 15, ‘05. 770w.

  “It stands out from a copious literature as a valuable contribution to
  the study of comparative colonization.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 230. Jl. 21, ‘05. 1300w.

  “Mr. Ireland is an effective writer, clear, vigorous, and direct,
  putting his points in a broad way. Mr. Ireland strikes us as being
  rather too sweeping in his views, and rather too confidently positive
  in his expression of them.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 145. Ag. 17, ‘05. 2950w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 221. Ap. 8, ‘05. 200w.

  “Altogether, it is the most satisfactory work on tropical dependencies
  that has yet been published, and is indispensable both because of its
  first-hand information and its acute suggestions.” Stanhope Sams.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 512. Ag. 5, ‘05. 2020w.

  “It is safe to say that nowhere else can be found so many facts, or
  facts so clearly stated, about the particular places and problems
  concerned as are gathered in this book.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 1013. Ap. 22, ‘05. 500w.

  “On the whole it is a well-considered work.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 755. My. 13, ‘05. 510w.

  “Sound knowledge and deep care disclosed.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 407. S. 23, ‘05. 890w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 945. Je. 24, ‘05. 1650w.


=Irving, Edward.= How to know the starry heavens: an invitation to the
study of suns and worlds. **$2. Stokes.

  “An introduction to the study of astronomy, written, not as a
  text-book, but with the intention of arousing the reader’s interest in
  this great subject, and stimulating him to the study of
  text-books.”—Outlook.

  “On the whole, the book may be characterized as a fresh, up-to-date,
  and stimulating series of short essays on the worlds that people
  space.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 274. Ap. 16, ‘05. 320w.

  “The diction, moreover, is simple and direct. In all respects it is a
  book admirably adapted for the average reader.”

     + + =Ind.= 38: 1421. Je. 22, ‘05. 150w.

  “The wonders of the universe are described in a fascinating way.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 143. Ja. 14, ‘05. 50w.


=Irving, Washington.= Selected works. $2.50. Crowell.

  Five tiny volumes each measuring about two inches by an inch and a
  half include selections from “Tales of a traveller,” “Christmas
  sketches,” “The Alhambra,” “The sketch book,” and “Bracebridge hall”
  respectively. The books are perfect little models in thin paper, clear
  type and limp leather binding.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 100w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1380. D. 14, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 730. O. 28, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 752. D. ‘05. 60w.


=Irving, Washington.= Rip Van Winkle. **$5. Doubleday.

  Mr. Arthur Rackman has made fifty paintings to illustrate this new
  edition of Rip Van Winkle, and they are all reproduced in full color.
  “Each of them is a marvel of his Dureresque detail, his grotesque
  elaborateness, and of the strange bizarre life which beats on every
  inch of his paper.... Half of the charm of the book lies in the
  quaintness and originality of the pictures of Rip’s life among
  ordinary mortals before and after his long sleep in the mountains—in
  the humour of the old burghers, the beautiful delicately-figured
  landscapes, the village scenes with their happy mixture of grace and
  humour.... The winning and tender beauty of his women and children
  would alone make this book an artistic treasure.” (Lond. Times.)

 *   + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 730. N. 25. 250w.

  “Among the Christmas books which will pour from the press during the
  next three months it will be hard to rival this delightful volume.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 305. S. 22, ‘05. 340w.

  “The humor and the poetry of Irving are all in the pictures, without a
  hint of the theatrical quality.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 640. S. 30, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 100w.

  * “It is difficult to understand for whose pleasure this latest
  edition of ‘Rip Van Winkle’ is designed. It cannot be taken seriously
  as an ‘art book,’ the drawings are not sufficiently good, while at the
  same time it is too sumptuous a production to put into the hands of an
  ordinary child.”

     — + =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 9. D. 9, ‘05. 170w.


=Irwin, Wallace Admah.= At the sign of the dollar. $1. Fox.

  In this cleverly slangy book of verses

                  “Statesman, lawyer, business man
                  Rob-as-rob-will or catch-as-catch-can,
                  At the jolly old sign of the Dollar.”

  The topics are strictly American and up to date, and the verses in
  their own satirical way point a few morals. Niagara be damned,
  Frenzied finance, To the pure all food is pure, To an Indian skull,
  and Fall styles in faces, are fair samples.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “It is humorous, fresh and glib.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 700. N. 25, ‘05. 50w.


* =Isham, Samuel.= History of American painting. *$5. Macmillan.

  In this volume the development of art in this country is traced from
  its beginning and the conditions which influence it, the social
  aspects of art, and the personality of the artists are discussed. Much
  space is given to the lives of some of the earlier painters, the rise
  and development of the National academy of design is described, also
  early institutions now dead and forgotten. There are twelve full-page
  photogravures and 100 text illustrations.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1375. D. 14, ‘05. 230w.

  * “The book is interesting to read now, and should prove of great
  value in the future.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 508. D. 21, ‘05. 530w.

  * “The truth is that Mr. Isham has written a book about New York
  painters with passive sympathy for tradition and convention and with
  some reference to the development of art in the whole country.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 874. D. 9, ‘05. 760w.




                                   J


=Jabez, Brother, pseud.= See =Koons, U. S.=


=Jackson, Charles Ross.= Tucker Dan. †$1.25. Dillingham.

  Tucker Dan and his chum, Mickey, indulge in a series of pranks and
  practical jokes thru-out these pages. Good old Uncle Binny is the
  usual victim altho the village doctor and a rival for the affections
  of the pretty Martin twins also suffer.

  “The style is simple, with here and there little bits of homely humor
  and philosophy, though the latter is well-nigh lost and soon
  forgotten.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 496. Jl. 29, ‘05. 160w,

  “It is one continual laugh from beginning to end.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 869. Je. 3, ‘05. 100w.


* =Jackson, Charles Tenney.= Loser’s luck. †$1.50. Holt.

  A Central American princess, the last of the line of Montezuma, leads
  what would have been a farce comedy revolution had not the brave lads
  who believed in her and her dream, died fighting for her. A young
  American millionaire, his yacht, and a college professor who chances
  to be his guest are all stolen by this daring young woman, whose
  personal charm wins these prisoners to champion her forlorn cause. The
  story is pathetically humorous, but it is also most unreal.

  * “On the whole, a readable and briskly moving, if far from natural
  story.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 100w.

  * “An unusually readable tale.” H. I. Brock.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 776. N. 18, ‘05. 900w.

  * “A lively romance of whim and adventure.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.


* =Jackson, E. L.= St. Helena, the historic island from its discovery to
the present time. *$3. Whittaker.

  “We naturally expect that Napoleon’s sojourn at St. Helena would be
  made much of; instead, we have an orderly description of the island
  and a chronological account of the events which have happened there.”
  (Outlook.) “The photographic illustrations have a curious worth. Some
  of these were taken shortly after the Boer war, and show the Boers yet
  interned in the island.” (Nation.)

  * “For a book of reference, in spite of its lack of an index, it has
  its utility.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 445. N. 30, ‘05. 70w.

  * “This volume is strangely matter-of-fact, but on that very account
  has a certain restful charm.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 90w.


* =Jackson, Edward Oscar.= Love sonnets to Ermingarde. $1. Badger, R: G.

  These love sonnets “are exactly one hundred in number, and their
  recipient has reason to be proud of the imagery and emotion which she
  evokes in the soul of her poet. It is the Shakespearean model that Mr.
  Jackson follows, both as to form and to diction.”—Dial.

  Reviewed by Wm. M. Payne.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 67. Ag. 1, ‘05. 200w.

  * “They are refined in form, rich in feeling, and swarm with
  suggestions that appeal to the bookish mind.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 133. Mr. 4, ‘05. 170w.


=Jackson, Mrs. Gabrielle Emilie Snow.= Mother and daughter. **$1.25.
Harper.

  Twenty short chapters for mothers upon the management and training of
  their daughters.

  “The style of the essay is simple and straightforward, and the matter
  itself bears favorable comparison with any other book of its kind.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 214. Ap. 8, ‘05. 120w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 60w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 634. Ap. 22, ‘05. 80w.


=Jackson, Mrs. Gabrielle Emilie Snow.= Tommy Postoffice: the true story
of a cat. *75c. McClurg.

  The adventures of Tommy Postoffice were many and all cat-lovers will
  read with interest how Tommy came to the Hartford postoffice in a mail
  sack, how he aided Cupid, what he did at the cat and poultry show, and
  what an important place he filled in the postoffice where all the
  gray-coated men were his fast friends and defenders.

  * “It is brightly told, and will interest children, and their elders
  who like cats.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 80w.


* =Jackson, Mrs. Gabrielle Emilie Snow.= Wee Winkles and Wideawake,
†$1.25. Harper.

  “One of the nicest stories possible about a nice little girl and her
  brother, whose real names are not Winkles and Wideawake at all. They
  are six and eight years at the time of the story, which tells about
  the nice times they have together playing house, playing that papa is
  a whale in the water and taking a swim on his back; having birthday
  parties, and doing other interesting things. Mary Theresa Hart has
  made the pictures.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 90w.

  * “To the little folks of six to nine, the stories being plainly told,
  will appeal more directly.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 766. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Jackson, Helen Hunt.= Ramona. $2. Little.

  A new edition of this picturesque story of American life, with an
  introduction by Susan Coolidge and illustrations by Henry Sandham.

  * “A popular but not in any sense a cheap edition.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 387. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

     + + =N.Y. Times.= 10: 658. O. 7, ‘05. 280w.

  * “A very satisfactory edition.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 100w.


=Jackson, Mrs. Margaret Doyle.= When love is king. †$1.50. Dillingham.

  Todhunter Payson, who as a child philosophizes over his homely face
  thus:—“I was born that way.... You know nothing makes the way you’re
  born. It just happens an’ then you have to stay that way all your
  life,” and Luke Lyttle “gentleman to his small finger tips” are chums
  in boyhood, rivals in love, friends all the way. The development of
  the sturdy Tod from a homeless waif into a man who sways his world is
  not overdrawn but is true to the principles of a self-made career.

  “The book is well worth reading. The people are natural and
  consistent, the story is well told and interesting.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 215. Ap. 8, ‘05. 200w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “A well-written, excellently constructed novel.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 910. Ap. 8, ‘05. 110w.

  “It is real, vivid, and compelling.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 120w.


=Jackson, Wilfrid Scarborough.= Helen of Troy, N. Y. $1.50. Lane.

  “The story concerns two young men of London, who have been engaged in
  a duel with a German, arising from a quarrel caused by their mutual
  love for a young American heiress. The plot turns on the efforts which
  the Englishmen and the hero of the tale, a chance passerby, who has
  been induced to be a second, make to flee from the consequences of a
  supposedly serious wound sustained by the German. The disordered state
  of affairs existing during the recovery of the wounded man furnish
  amusement to the story.”—Bookm.

  “It is a rollicking farce. He has style, observation and a pretty gift
  of dialogue, so that his characters talk with a naturalness which
  immensely heightens for the moment the plausibility of his widely
  impossible plot. Mr. Jackson appears to have entrusted the reading of
  his proofs to unskilled hands.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 150. F. 18, ‘05. 260w.

  “It is a pity that Mr. Jackson, whose style is otherwise good and
  virile, should help to mar the English language by certain small
  mannerisms.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 237. F. 25, ‘05. 310w.

  “Mr. Jackson has deft wit and an unforced originality.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 478. My. ‘05 80w.

  “This very lively and entertaining book. The thing has a sort of tang
  of ‘The new Arabian nights’ of Mr. Stevenson, a prankish irresponsible
  air, combined with a style decidedly precious and deliberate.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 23. Ja. 14, ‘05. 490w. (Outline of plot).

     + — =Spec.= 94: 557. Ap. 15, ‘05. 260w.


=Jacob, Violet (Mrs. Arthur Jacob).= Golden heart and other fairy
stories, **$1.25. Doubleday.

  All who love good old-fashioned fairy tales will enjoy these eight new
  stories, and will be eager to know how, in Golden heart, the ugly
  prince rescued a bewitched princess from a rock in the sea; how
  Grimaçon, the dwarf, helped the Princess Moonflower, and how Ella
  wished for the peacock’s tail and got it. Other stories are: The
  sorcerer’s sons and the two princesses of Japan; The dovecote; The
  pelican; The cherry trees; and, Jack Frost—a story for very little
  children. The volume is illustrated with drawings by May Sandheim.

  * “The tales by no means conform to the modern insipid and bloodless
  standard for juvenile fairy stories and ought to make a direct and
  lively appeal to the eager imagination of any healthy child.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1386. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 780. N. 18, ‘05. 160w.


=Jacob, Violet (Mrs. Arthur Jacob).= Interloper. $1.50. Doubleday.

  Mrs. Arthur Jacob, who made a sudden reputation in her former novel,
  “The sheep stealers,” now writes a story of country life in Scotland.
  The interloper is a young man who returns to his mother’s old home
  from a sojourn in Spain with the man who has always passed as his
  father,—all unconscious of the blot on his birth, the suspicions of
  the neighbors, and the presence of his real father in the vicinity.
  The situation is well handled and the social tragedy skilfully
  averted. There are many well-drawn characters in the book, the loyal
  heroine, the grand dame, the villainous family lawyer and many
  interesting villagers.

  “When you lay down ‘The interloper’ you feel that you know intimately
  a half-dozen interesting people whom you did not know before. Mrs.
  Jacob is rich in the supreme gift of the novelist—character depiction.
  A melodramatic ending, trite in conception, and ill-fitting. Mrs.
  Jacob did not set out to tell an emotional story. She set out to
  reflect life in a small, old-fashioned Scotch town and its environs,
  and she has succeeded in masterly fashion. She has given us a
  delightful comedy of manners written in a style remarkable for power,
  simplicity and grasp. Out of the ruck of cheap fiction this book rises
  to real, permanent value. It is not only worth reading, it is worth a
  place on the book-shelf.”

   + + — =Reader.= 5: 383. F. ‘05. 370w.


=Jacobi, Charles Thomas.= Printing: a practical treatise on the art of
typography as applied more particularly to the printing of books,
*$2.50. Macmillan.

  “A third revised and enlarged edition.... The completeness of the book
  will be apparent from a brief list of its chapters, which number
  thirty-five. They are in seven divisions, and deal with typefounding,
  composition (thirteen chapters), proofreading, hand-press work (six
  chapters), illustrated and color work, motive power, machine printing
  (six chapters), and warehouse work (four chapters).”—N. Y. Times.

       + =Nation.= 81: 203. S. 7, ‘05. 260w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 316. My. 13, ‘05. 410w.


* =Jacobs, William Wymark.= Captains all. †$1.50. Scribner.

  This new collection contains “half a score of the tales this author
  has taught laughter-loving English readers to expect from his pen.
  This brand is well-known and well-liked.” (Ath.) They include amusing
  stories of sailormen, longshoremen, and the people of a little English
  village.

  * “The book is thoroughly enjoyable.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 608. N. 4. 170w.

  * “Adds notably to the world’s stock of humorous enjoyment.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 50w.

  * “The stories are not all as good as the earlier ones, the humor
  often growing out of situations that are forced, and the characters
  lack their old delightful naïveté.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 829. D. 23, ‘05. 160w.

  * “The book is merely a collection of magazine stories, and their
  cumulative effect is a little disappointing.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 725. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Mr. Jacobs is an artist with a literary conscience as well as a
  most engaging humourist, and, to borrow the familiar saying, though
  his genre is not great, he is great in his genre.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 613. O. 21, ‘05. 740w.


=Jacobus, Melancthon Williams=, ed. Roman Catholic and Protestant Bibles
compared; the Gould prize essays. 50c. Bible teachers’ training school,
N. Y.

  “In 1903 Miss Helen Gould offered three prizes for popular, brief
  essays on ‘The origin and history of the Bible approved by the Roman
  Catholic church’ and ‘of the American revised version.’ Two hundred
  and sixty-five essays were presented. The prizes were won by Rev.
  William Whitely, L.L.M., LL.D., Rev. Gerald Hamilton Beard, B.D.,
  Ph.D., and Charles B. Dalton, Esq. These three essays are published in
  this volume. Of course, they cover much the same ground. The limits of
  space imposed were such that the authors could give only a somewhat
  bare and crowded statement of facts.”—Am. J. Theol.

  “The first two essays are very full, accurate, and well proportioned.
  The third leaves something to be desired in accuracy, especially
  regarding the exactness of the present biblical text (p. 140). The
  chief value of the third essay lies in certain quotations from
  contemporary Catholic sources.” Irving F. Wood.

   + + — =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 743. O. ‘05. 300w.

  “These three constitute what must now be regarded as the standard work
  on a theme of controversy that greatly needed enlightenment.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 90w.


=James, Bartlett Burleigh.= History of North America, Vol. V. $6.
Barrie.

  The fifth volume of the series edited by Professor Guy Carleton Lee,
  treats of the colonization of New England and was written by Professor
  James of Western Maryland university. The chronological table begins
  with the sailing of the Mayflower and is brought down to the passage
  of the Stamp act. There is a careful examination of the motives of the
  Puritans in coming to New England, and the founding of the settlements
  of Connecticut and Rhode Island is given in detail. The closing
  chapter is devoted to the causes which led to the Revolution. There
  are many excellent illustrations.

  “The work is of the most comprehensive character. The treatment of an
  extended topic is carefully and philosophically worked out.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 101. F. 18, ‘05. 970w.


* =James, George Wharton.= In and out of the old missions of California:
an historical and pictorial account of the Franciscan missions. *$3.
Little.

  This interesting volume covers a broad field successfully. It begins
  with the founding of the California missions, then gives a chapter
  upon Junipero Serra and his coadjutors, followed by a discussion of
  the Indians at the coming of the padres and at the present time. An
  especially noteworthy chapter deals with the secularization of the
  missions, and in twenty-one chapters is given an account of as many
  individual missions, followed by a chapter upon nine mission chapels
  or Aristencias. Perhaps the most distinctive feature of the volume is
  its treatment of mission architecture and interior decoration. A
  careful survey of the mural decorations of the missions is followed by
  a pictorial account of the furniture, pulpits, doors, and other
  woodwork, crosses, candlesticks, and other silver and brass ware, and
  of the various figures of the saints found at the missions. The
  illustrations are reproduced from photographs made expressly for this
  book.

  * “An interesting and adequate treatment of a fascinating theme.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 444. D. 16, ‘05. 340w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 1040. D. 23, ‘05. 130w.


* =James, Henry.= English hours. *$5. Houghton.

  “This reprint of some of Mr. James’ essays descriptive of England is
  happily illustrated by the drawings of Mr. Joseph Pennell. The essays
  include London; Browning in Westminster abbey; Chester; Lichfield and
  Warwick; North Devon; Wells and Salisbury; An English Easter; London
  at midsummer; Two excursions; In Warwickshire; Abbeys and castles;
  English vignettes; An English New Year; An English watering-place;
  Winchelsea, Rye and ‘Denis Duval;’ Old Suffolk.”

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1225. N. 25, ‘05. 800w.

  * “Mr. James is like his simple original self in this charming book.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “These interpretations of English life carry the reader with them by
  their quality of tonic freshness, which takes the place of the
  bewildering curiosity about everything and nothing characteristic of
  the late novels.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 381. D. 1, ‘05. 260w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 836. D. 8, ‘05. 220w.

  * “But these lapses though apparent are rare—more apparent, indeed, on
  account of their rarity—and it is impossible to resist the engaging
  enthusiasm, the fine freshness of mind which he brings to bear on the
  variety of topics and places about which he chatters in the fugitive
  papers bound up in this volume.”

   + + — =Sat.= R. 100: sup. 5. D. 9, ‘05. 730w.


=James, Henry.= Golden bowl. $2.50. Scribner.

  “Four principals and two particularly diverting subordinates make up
  the role of characters” in this story whose action centers about the
  marriage of an American girl to an impoverished foreigner. “The four
  are Adam Verver, widower, and his daughter, Maggie, Americans,—the
  husband of Maggie, an Italian prince, and Charlotte Stant, a young
  woman of exquisite intelligence, and paramount charm, American by
  birth, cosmopolitan by nature.” The elements of tragedy are fostered
  thru the prince’s yielding to his former love for Charlotte Stant, the
  princess’ friend, and now Adam Verver’s wife. The strength of the
  story is embodied in the princess’ determination to win back the love
  of her husband, “which she vows must be as complete and perfect as the
  original crystal of the broken bowl, that picturesque property of the
  story that takes so unique a part in the development of the plot.”
  (Reader).

  “The intellectuality overpowers the sensuous and objective traits
  proper to a novel, until one has the impression of reading an abstruse
  treatise of psychology rather than a tale. Despite exasperations of
  detail, the novel in the main is masterly. The three leading women are
  differentiated with the nicest skill: each is living and persuasive.
  But it fairly ranks as a master-work—if a master-work flawed by some
  of his obscurest later mannerisms.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 128. F. 11, ‘05. 1020w.

  “The book is clear to those who think Mr. James worth a little
  trouble. The method, in spite of its inwardness, is detached, cold,
  and, if the word is possible, a little cruel. But its mental agility,
  its likeliness, its atmosphere, are perfect.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 332. Mr. 18. 530w.

         =Atlan.= 95: 696. My. ‘05. 190w.

  “Another two volumes of abstruseness, another long discussion of a
  situation that only scandal mongers are supposed to discuss; again the
  same old heavy respectability where nothing is bad because it is not
  named; again the heroic sweetness of two characters, that is always
  his saving grace, that makes us read him.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 153. Ja. 19, ‘05. 700w.

  “In the end you have your reward—a story, a situation, which, as you
  think about it, pierces the obscurities and strikes you in the eyes,
  like the low red autumn sun pushing out of a mass of black clouds.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 74. Ja. 26, ‘05. 1380w.

  “A book of mixed ugly and charming aspects. Never has the art of
  description been brought nearer to that of painting.”

   + + — =Reader.= 5: 380. F. ‘05. 1290w.

  “A book so pregnant with fundamental brainwork, so rich in
  suggestiveness, and so accomplished in execution. The book is clearer,
  and, for that very reason, more vital, than the works of what one may
  call his middle period.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 116. Ja. ‘05. 80w.


* =James, Henry.= Question of our speech: The lesson of Balzac; two
lectures, **$1. Houghton.

  “In the first essay, delivered as a commencement address at Bryn Mawr,
  Mr. James has well emphasized the overlooked needs in America of ‘a
  virtual consensus of educated people to impart to our speech a
  coherent culture.’ ... The second essay in the volume, ‘The lesson of
  Balzac,’ is a notable piece of literary criticism in its concentrated
  vigor, its elucidation of the novelist’s art, and its nicety of
  phrase. Recognizing in Balzac the master-artist of modern
  fiction.”—Dial.

  * “These essays will raise a divergence of opinion, as does all of Mr.
  James’s literary work; but however widely readers may differ from his
  point of view, all will recognize the stimulating intellectual
  quality.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 311. N. 16, ‘05. 620w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 764. D. 9, ‘05. 200w.


=James, Montague Rhodes.= Ghost stories of an antiquary. $1.50.
Longmans.

  Eight old fashioned ghost stories with all the gruesome and
  hair-raising qualities which a story of their kind could possess. The
  eight are Canon Alberic’s scrap-book, Lost hearts, The mezzotint, The
  ash tree, Number 13, Count Magnus, “Oh, whistle, and I’ll come to you,
  my lad,” and The treasure of Abbot Thomas.

  “Mr. James manages at times to give you a pretty well-defined creepy
  feeling—but his ghost stories are not quite the real thing in spite of
  the pains he takes to pile up detail in the setting and leave the
  horror itself as undefined, shapeless, and elusive as may be.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 483. Jl. 22, ‘05. 580w.

  “There can be no question about the literary merit of these eight
  stories, and of the ingenuity which Dr. James has shown in their
  construction.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 925. Je. 24, ‘05. 170w.


=Jamison, Cecilia Viets (Mrs. Samuel Jamison).= Penhallow family; a
story. †$1.50. Wilde.

  A little wanderer, back from India to her father’s old home, is
  dropped into an uncle’s family where three self-centered, noisy
  youngsters ruled by a hard task-mistress, “Aunt Gordon,” make life
  miserable for the new-comer. Her brave helpfulness in bringing
  happiness out of the confused and warring forces of the household
  frames a lesson for every young reader to profit by.


=Jane, L. Cecil.= Coming of Parliament, 1350-1660. (Story of the
nations, no. 73.) **$1.35. Putnam.

  “The general scheme of this volume is indicated by its title. It deals
  more especially with the development of the Constitution within the
  three centuries with which it is concerned, and it is an attempt to
  trace the steps by which Parliament attained to a permanently
  important share in the government of England. While stress is laid
  upon this theme, other sides of the national life have not been
  ignored.” (N. Y. Times.) There are many illustrations, a map of
  England, and a chronology.

  “What Mr. Jane has really written is an English history of a period.
  But, while its accuracy it notable, it has other merits which are
  astonishing. The events of the period, particularly towards the close,
  were many and complex and stirring; yet, although this book is almost
  as compact as an encyclopaedia, it is so fluent and fascinating that
  one reads it with the delight which is given by great romance. Mr.
  Jane, it is true, is not without predilections. His imagination is
  attracted by the navy. In all other respects, though invariably he
  arrests attention, he is coldly judicial. Besides being exceptionally
  well-informed, our historian brought to his task a fresh, independent
  and penetrating intellect.” W. Earl Hodgson.

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 78. Ja. 28, ‘05. 840w.

  “As a book professedly concerned with ‘the coming of parliament’ and
  the place of parliament in national life, it cannot be said to have
  any particular merit or value, or to render of less service any of the
  accepted histories of English constitutional development.” Edward
  Porritt.

   — — + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 917. Jl. ‘05. 230w.

  “We have failed to find in the latest issue of this well-known series
  any general connexion with the subject of parliamentary government or
  the least pretension to originality of thought or vigour of
  delineation; whilst research is wanting.”

     — — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 76. Jl. 15. 200w.

  Reviewed by Edward Fuller.

   + — — =Bookm.= 21: 525. Jl. ‘05. 1260w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “It is obvious from the text that Mr. Jane has broken no new ground in
  the research for the Parliamentary side of his book.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 212. Jl. 27, ‘05. 420w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 185. Mr. 25, ‘05. 350w.

  “Mr. Jane’s book is interesting reading, even if he sometimes tangles
  the thread of his story of Parliament.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 293. My. 6, ‘05. 1190w.

  “Adds little or nothing to the history of Parliament which cannot be
  found in any of the accepted works on the English constitution. There
  is nothing, moreover, that is attractive about Mr. Jane’s literary
  style.”

     — — =Outlook.= 79: 1057. Ap. 29. ‘05. 710w.

  “Mr. Jane’s book is not always ‘easy reading,’ but is reliable, a
  quality which will conceal many literary sins.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 318. S. 2, ‘05. 200w.

  “The volume will have its uses, but we should have preferred something
  more to the purpose.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 324. S. 2, ‘05. 200w.


=Janssen, Johannes.= History of the German people at the close of the
middle ages; tr. from the Germ, by A. M. Christie. v. 7-8. *$6.25.
Herder.

  “These two volumes cover the period between the years 1550-1580....
  Within those thirty years fell such events as: The religious
  conference at Worms in 1557, the Diet of Augsburg in 1559, the
  Grumbach-Gotha conspiracy for a Lutheran empire, the effects in
  Germany of the religious wars in France and the Netherlands, the war
  against the Turks, the establishment and progress of the Jesuits in
  Germany, and the concluding sessions and general effect of the Council
  of Trent. These great events and many others of similar moment are
  treated with Janssen’s well-known fulness of detail, abundance of
  scholarship, and sturdy Catholic spirit.”—Cath. World.

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 117. Ap. ‘05. 610w. (Review of vols. VII.
         and VIII.)


=Japp, Alexander H.= Robert Louis Stevenson; a record, an estimate, and
a memorial. *$1.50. Scribner.

  The author who, thru a common interest in Thoreau, came to know
  Stevenson well in his early Edinburgh days, gives a critical
  discussion of his life and works, with some new facts and some newly
  published letters.

  “It contains a good deal of valuable matter presented in the most
  scrappy and disjointed way; as well as some matter which is not
  valuable at all.” H. W. Boynton.

     + — =Atlan.= 96: 280. Ag. ‘05. 200w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 358. My. 16, ‘05. 480w.

  “The criticism on Stevenson’s various styles in his varied work is
  often acute and just. Altogether the book in parts has a strong
  interest for the Stevenson enthusiast, but will hardly attract the
  general reading public.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 708. Mr. 18, ‘05. 120w.

  “This is a very informing book, a contribution of distinct value to
  our knowledge of R. L. Stevenson.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 146. Ja. 28, ‘05. 330w.


=Javal, Emile.= On becoming blind: advice for the use of persons losing
their sight; tr. by Carroll E. Edson. **$1.25. Macmillan.

  Dr. Javal, who lost his sight at the age of 62, writes to the families
  of those who are blind or in danger of becoming so. He gives advice as
  to their treatment, suggestions on amusement, and there are chapters
  upon memory, marriage, the psychology of the blind and the sixth
  sense.

  “The style of the book is simple, direct and scholarly.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1483. Je. 29, ‘05. 220w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 137. Mr. 4, ‘05. 260w.

  “The book is a pleasure to read even on the part of those whose
  interest is not immediately claimed by the subject.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 225. My. 20, ‘05. 710w.


=Jeans, James Hopwood.= Dynamical theory of gases, *$4.50. Macmillan.

  “Mr. Jeans ... in the first seven chapters, follows fairly closely on
  conventional lines, and deduces the Boltzmann-Maxwell law of
  distribution, the minimum theorem, the law of partition of energy, and
  the isothermal equations according to the Boyle-Mariotte and van der
  Waals’s laws. In chapter VIII the author throws over the principle of
  conservation of energy and assumes that his gas is a dissipative
  system in which loss of energy occurs by radiation.... In chapters IX
  and X, Mr. Jeans considers application of the theory of a
  non-conservative gas, particularly in connection with rates of
  dissipation of energy and ratios of specific heats. We thus have a
  definite attempt to break away from traditional methods and boldly
  introduce the notion of dissipation into the kinetic theory.... In the
  remaining chapters Mr. Jeans deals with ‘free path phenomena’ such as
  diffusion, conduction of heat, viscosity, and the escape of gases from
  planetary atmospheres. In this work he is more on the ordinary
  lines.”—Nature.

  “Misprints and minor errors are delightfully few. The book is a piece
  of conscientious work by one who has already made valuable
  contributions to this subject. It belongs rather with the classical
  work of Burbury and of Boltzmann than with any of the attempts at a
  simple or more popular presentation.” W. P. Boynton.

   + + + =Astrophys. J.= 22: 224. O. ‘05. 780w.

  Reviewed by G. H. Bryan.

         =Nature.= 71: 601. Ap. 27, ‘05. 870w.


=Jebb, Richard.= Studies in colonial nationalism. *$3.50. Longmans.

  “An attempt ... to present a modern view of imperial evolution, ...
  the result of three years’ travel and study among the self-governing
  states of the empire ... which should be studied by all who wish to
  understand the trend of colonial aspirations, whether they agree with
  them or not.”—Acad.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 469. Ap. 29, ‘05. 570w.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 942. Jl. ‘05. 170w.

  “His observations on America, though justly calling attention to many
  undoubted and serious faults indicate on the whole an exaggerated and
  distorted view of our public life.” Willard E. Hotchkiss.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 607. S. ‘05. 640w.

         =Ath.= 1905. 1: 494. Ap. 15. 730w.

  “Mr. Jebb’s book has no small originality. His book contains not a few
  inconsistencies. Almost every page of it is instructive.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 166. My. 26, ‘05. 940w.

  “Everything he says is stated with a confidence that dreams not of the
  possibility of contradiction. This makes the book attractive.” Charles
  W. Thompson.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 432. Jl. 1, ‘05. 2880w.

  “It is essentially a work that will be welcomed, not derided in Canada
  and Australasia. And that is to say no small thing of its merits, and
  of the success with which its author has achieved his object.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 897. Je. 17, ‘05. 1720w.


=Jefferies, (John) Richard.= Bevis; the story of a boy. $1.50. Button.

  A new edition of a book for boys written many years ago and founded
  upon Mr. Jefferies’ own boy-hood idealized. Mr. E. V. Lucas states in
  his introduction that it is “a long and eloquent, and, I think,
  successful argument in favor of the wisdom of leaving boys to
  themselves, and allowing independence and self-reliance to oust for
  the time being school books and tutors.”

  “‘Bevis’ is a wholesome and delightful book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 376. Je. 10, ‘05. 530w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 220w.

  “Full of his intimate knowledge of nature, and full also of sympathy
  with and knowledge of the interests and characteristics of boys.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 642. Jl. 8, ‘05. 40w.


=Jefferson, Charles Edward.= Faith and life. **30c. Crowell.

  Under the text “Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, a
  conviction of things not seen” (Heb. xi. 1), Dr. Jefferson discusses
  the relation which faith bears to life. The booklet is attractively
  bound in white, with gold lettering and a holly design in green and
  belongs to the “What is worth while series.”


=Jefferson, Charles Edward.= Minister as prophet, **90c. Crowell.

  Originally given as a series of lectures before the Bangor theological
  seminary, these talks are “clear, luminous, pithy, cogent, full of
  practical suggestions” for ministers, students and the general public.
  The following chapters show the minister’s present position in general
  affairs; The dimension of the work, The three men involved (the
  physical man, the mental man, the spiritual man). The growing of
  sermons, Form and manner, The place of dogma in preaching.

  “There are many books on the Christian ministry, and few are smaller
  than this and few more valuable.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 331. Ag. 10, ‘05. 90w.

  “The general tone and spirit of these lectures is uplifting,
  clarifying, and stimulating to high endeavor.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1014. Ap. 22, ‘05. 300w.


=Jelliffe, Smith Ely.= Introduction to pharmacognosy. *$2.50. Saunders.

  This is the first adequate English treatment of pharmacognosy, and
  will be welcomed by the special student. “The work falls into three
  divisions, animal drugs, vegetable drugs without organic structure,
  and vegetable drugs with organic structure. The first division is
  appropriately small, and the last constitutes the major portion of the
  work. A goodly treatise on each drug is found, embracing references to
  its origin; discussions of its gross structure, microscopic structure
  and features recognizable in its powder; and mention of constituent
  substances present.... Excellent original illustrations accompany a
  large number of the descriptions.” (Science.)

  “The discussions are in the main botanically correct and the style is
  fairly clear. Imperfections aside, however, it is well within the
  truth to say that this volume is the nearest approach which has yet
  appeared towards filling the need of the day in this country.” Charles
  H. Shaw.

   + + — =Science=, n. s. 21: 625. Ap. 21, ‘05. 290w.


=Jenks, Tudor.= Captain Myles Standish. *$1.20. Century.

  A biography of Myles Standish, the Pilgrim’s captain, which tells the
  story of the people of the Mayflower and of their captain’s service to
  them as leader, lawgiver, trader, and physician. The account is
  accurate to the sacrifice of many romantic traditions.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 60w.

  “It is intended, perhaps, more for youthful than for mature readers,
  although we imagine it will interest these as well. Is practically a
  history of the Plymouth settlement.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 649. O. 7, ‘05. 490w.

  “Mr. Jenks’s account gives an impression of accuracy and care, but it
  lacks picturesqueness and any romantic quality.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 756. D. ‘05. 210w.


=Jenks, Tudor.= In the days of Milton, **$1. Barnes.

  Uniform with “The lives of great writers” series this volume contains
  a popular description of the conditions in England during the reigns
  of Elizabeth, James, and Charles, of Puritan and Cavalier, and of the
  life of the blind poet himself and his relation to these surroundings.
  There is a frontispiece portrait of Milton, a bibliography and a
  chronological table.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 80w.

  “The author is luminous rather than critical, gives a touch of
  imagination to the accuracy of facts, and inspires with fresh human
  interest a national movement commonly thought of as only bitter and
  austere.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 313. N. 16, ‘05. 230w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1389. D. 14, ‘05. 70w.

  “The book is both instructive and readable.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 715. O. 21, ‘05. 270w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.

  * “It will be found extremely helpful to an understanding of the
  Puritan period in English history.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 140w.


=Jenks, Tudor.= In the days of Shakespeare; with introd. by Hamilton W.
Mabie. **$1. Barnes.

  “One of the series of ‘Lives of great writers.’ ... This little volume
  consists of a personal picture of the Stratford boy, and the London
  actor and man of affairs. There is also a helpful explanation of some
  of the principal plays, with suggestive comments.”—R. of Rs.

  “For the purpose for which it is intended—that is, as a literary
  substitute for the textual and verbal approach to the subject which
  has hitherto prevailed—it is to be commended.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 840. Ap. 13, ‘05. 50w.

  “The book is readable and will likely give the ordinary reader a much
  better idea of what the playwriting business was in Elizabeth’s reign,
  what the work Shakespeare actually did was, than many much more
  pretentious volumes can do.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 134. Mr. 4, ‘05. 460w.

  “Proceeds, as an open-minded student, to unroll a fascinating
  panorama.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 349. F. 4, ‘05. 260w.

  “Mr. Jenks has handled his material well.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 58. Ja. 12, ‘05. 670w.

  “A new and ‘worth while’ Shakespeare book.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 381. Mr. ‘05. 70w.


=Jephson, Lady.= Letters to a debutante. *$1.25. Lippincott.

  These letters are addressed to Violet, who is gently told how to be
  sweet and happy in chapters upon The art of happiness, The need for
  controlling the tongue, The ethics of dress, On country house
  visiting, The choice of literature, Are elopements justifiable?
  Concerning wit, The advisability of friendships with men, and other
  subjects of interest to the young girl who longs to be a social
  success.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 20w.

  “On the whole, however, the lady gives wholesome enough advice—albeit
  most of it has been given to other debutantes many times before.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 620. S. 23, ‘05. 450w.

  “While Lady Jephson’s form is throughout aphoristic, she lacks the
  gift of saying the inwardly true thing in memorable words, and that is
  the particular gift one looks for in a book of this sort.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 502. O. 7, ‘05. 740w.


=Jepson, Edgar.= Lady Noggs, peeress. †$1.50. McClure.

  “Lady Noggs, properly called Lady Felicia Grandison, is the small
  niece and ward of a prime minister, whose peace of mind is continually
  disturbed by pranks and escapades of the most extraordinary nature....
  A background romance between the governess and the secretary is
  engaging and real by way of contrast.”—Outlook.

  “The object of these few remarks is to cordially commend Felicia,
  within her suitable literary bounds, as a pleasant holiday companion.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 328. My. 20, ‘05. 560w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 246. My. 27, ‘05. 130w.


=Jernigan, Thomas R.= China in law and commerce. *$2. Macmillan.

  From these pages “one may glean not merely knowledge of the political
  and commercial life of the country, but a better understanding of the
  Oriental mind. The physical features, the resources, the people of
  China; the state, provincial, district, town, and family organization,
  the anomalies between legal theory and business customs, the native
  banking system, the weights, measures, and currency employed, the
  Empire’s transportation facilities” (Outlook) are all fully treated.

  “Mr. Jernigan is not an inspiring writer. But there is a great deal
  that is valuable in his book, and his statements are accurate and
  apposite.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 398. S. 23. 820w.

  “A volume which will be indispensable to every student of the
  civilization of the Far East.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 694. S. 21, ‘05. 550w.

  “The thing essential in compiling a book of this kind is sympathetic
  perception, and Mr. Jernigan has evidently cultivated this faculty,
  during his residence in China, with no little success.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 262. Ag. 18, ‘05. 800w.

  “Here in one handy book is choice and exact information, carefully
  sifted, tested, and arranged concisely and in an orderly manner. There
  is a good index to this noteworthy book.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 84. Jl. 27, ‘05. 780w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 377. Je. 10, ‘05. 280w.

  “The subjects ... find exhaustive discussion, and ... are treated
  carefully and intelligently.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 590. Jl. 1, ‘05. 190w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 382. S. 16, ‘05. 220w.

  “A scholarly volume.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 100w.

  * “An unpretentious book, containing a large amount of well-selected
  and well arranged information.”

       + =Spec.= 95: sup. 795. N. 18, ‘05. 270w.


=Jernigan, Thomas R.= China’s business methods and policy, *$3.60.
Wessels.

  The author, ex-consul general of the United States at Shanghai,
  prefaces his book with the statement that he has sought to find “some
  of the elementary principles which base and influence business and
  social China and to present them without unnecessary detail.” His
  papers give a clear and accurate treatment of China’s administrative
  system, land tenure, sources of revenue, law courts, finances, social
  regulations, commercial trend, educational and consular systems, and
  foreign relations.

  “There is a want of cohesion about this work; it seems more a
  collection of papers than a treatise. The work will be found useful
  when any important event takes place in China in connection either
  with its foreign or with its internal policy, as a sort of
  reference-book.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 121. Ja. 28, ‘05. 220w.


=Jervey, Theodore D.= Elder brother. $1.50. Neale.

  “A novel in which are presented the vital questions confronting the
  South growing out of the Reconstruction, and in which the author
  defines the true relations now existing between the races in the
  South.” Specifically, it presents the political, social, and economic
  history of a southern city during this period. There are many
  characters of all classes but interest centers about two brothers who
  become social and political leaders.

  “The book, if it is not a novel to carry the reader along—it is not
  that—is an exceedingly valuable, truthful, and interesting study.
  There is certainly no other picture of the period which approaches it
  in these vital points.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 528. Ag. 12, ‘05. 730w.

  “It is a good picture of conditions—and perhaps, after all, its
  solution of the problems confronting the South is the only practical
  one.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 911. Je. 10, ‘05. 240w.


=Jessel, Frederick.= comp. Bibliography of works in English on playing
cards and gaming. *$4.40. Longmans.

  “Gaming in this sense includes dominoes, conjuring, card-tricks and so
  forth. Mr. Jessel has described the title of every work he has found,
  however slight, on cards or gaming; and he has included all books
  which contain allusions of sufficient importance to be recorded, even
  works of fiction which depend on gaming for their plots or contain
  scenes which illustrate the mode of playing some particular game.
  Periodicals have not been forgotten.... The bibliography is in
  alphabetical order of the names of authors, but the index at the end
  enables subjects to be searched for without difficulty.”—Acad.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 646. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

  * “We can recommend it not only to libraries, but also to clubs for
  card-room reference, and to all who wish for a ready means of finding
  out what has been written in our language about cards and gaming.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 683. N. 18. 630w.

         =Dial.= 39: 212. O. 1, ‘05. 40w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 313. My. 13, ‘05. 240w.

  * “Probably as complete as any other in English.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 786. N. 18, ‘05. 290w.


=Jevons, William Stanley.= Principles of economics: a fragment of a
treatise on the industrial mechanism of society and other papers.
*$3.25. Macmillan.

  “The fragment in a mere outline, but it comes from a master hand and
  is doubly welcome at a time when the need for restatement of
  definitions is particularly evident.”—Acad.

  “The volume is one that we cordially welcome, and it is bound to meet
  with the high appreciation of a discriminating public.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 609. Je. 10, ‘05. 1290w.

  “Probably much that is already printed would have been greatly revised
  before it appeared, and yet, imperfect as it is, the careful student
  of economics will lose a great deal if he does not master this
  volume.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 362. S. 16. 1470w.

  “The book may be said to be well justified, even though it be equally
  clear that the form and title and bulk of it fall somewhere between
  the questionable and the indefensible.” H. J. Davenport.

     + — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 600. S. ‘05. 1180w.

  “A word of gratitude is due to the editor, who has spared no pains to
  elucidate what the author left unfinished and obscure.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 243. Jl. 28, ‘05. 780w.

  “It cannot be said that the fragments now published offer anything of
  great value. Mr. Higgs has performed his editorial labors in an
  admirable manner.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 245. S. 21, ‘05. 1330w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 377. Je. 10, ‘05. 350w.


* =Jewett, John Howard (Hannah Warner, pseud.).= Con the wizard, †50c.
Stokes.

  This little volume in the Christmas stocking series, tells how the
  wizard-bird, Con, changed Teddy Mann and the pets of Mistress May into
  the form of the man or beast they envied most, and how they were glad,
  after a time, to be changed back and become themselves again. There
  are eight illustrations in color by Edward R. Little, and numerous
  illustrations in black and white by Oliver Herford.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.


Jewish encyclopaedia; ed. by Isidore Singer. 12v. per v. $6. Funk.

  Everything which in any way concerns the ancient or modern life of the
  Jewish people and which has either historical or literary value can be
  found in this “Descriptive record of the history, religion, literature
  and customs of the Jewish people from the earliest time to the present
  day.” Prepared by more than four hundred scholars and specialists
  under the direction of Cyrus Adler, I. K. Funk, F. H. Vizeletly and
  others. There are twelve massive volumes and two thousand
  illustrations.

  “In spite of some minor defects, should prove a valuable work of
  reference to all interested in Jewish history.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 170. F. 25, ‘05. 880w. (Outlines scope of Vol.
         VIII.).

  “Has much the same merits and defects as its predecessor.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 473. Ap. 29, ‘05. 370w. (Review of Vol. IX.)

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 791. Jl. 29, ‘05. 280w. (Review of v. 10.)

  “The enterprise has now gone far enough to leave no doubt that the
  high standard of excellence set up by the editors will be reached.”

   + + + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 523. Jl. ‘05, 580w. (Review of v. 1-10.)

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 140. Jl. 29. 610w. (Review of v. 9.)

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 239. Ag. 19. 310w. (Review of v. 10.)

       + =Bib. World.= 26: 159. Ag. ‘05. 70w. (Review of v. 10.)

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 577. S. 7, ‘05. 620w. (Review of v. 9 and 10.)

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 30w. (Review of v. 9-11.)

  * “This encyclopaedia will be essential in any well equipped library.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1484. D. 21, ‘05. 100w. (Review of v. 11.)

  “The standard cannot be said to be rising. Still, if only for its
  wealth of biography, especially English and American, the book is
  indispensable for reference.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 290. Ap. 13, ‘05. 110w. (Review of Vol. IX.)

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 382. N. 9, ‘05. 290w. (Review of v. 10.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 180. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1730w. (Survey of contents
         of Vol. IX.)

  “The tenth volume is as valuable as any of its predecessors.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 463. Jl. 15, ‘05. 480w. (Review of v. 10.)

  “As a work of world-wide comprehensiveness this is one to enrich any
  library.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 605. Mr. 4, ‘05. 190w. (Outlines scope of volume
         IX).

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 693. Jl. 15, ‘05. 290w. (Review of v. 10.)

  * “This great work, the joint product of Jewish and Christian writers,
  fully sustains its early promise as it nears its completion.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 890. D. 9, ‘05. 230w. (Review of v. 11.)

  “Nearly all subjects mentioned [in volume IX] are treated at great
  length, in good spirit, with thorough scholarship.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 389. Mr. 11, ‘05. 550w.

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 260w. (Review of v. 10.)

  * “Volume XI. is exceptionally rich in politico-economic material.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 730. D. 2, ‘05. 320w. (Review of v. 11.)

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 256. F. ‘05. 270w. (Outlines scope of volumes
         VII and VIII).

  * “It can be affirmed without hesitation that, taken as a whole, the
  work is a contribution to general knowledge which, for the future,
  will be nothing less than indispensable.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: sup. 790. N. 18, ‘05. 1240w. (Review of v. 8-10.)


=Job, Herbert Keightley.= Wild wings: adventures of a camera-hunter
among the larger wild birds of America on land and sea. **$3. Houghton.

  A simple story of the author’s conflicts and conquests as he hunted
  with his camera “the wild hardy birds of the sea, whose strong wings
  make them masters of the elements.” His search took him from the
  Magdalen islands to the Florida keys and he gives pictures of
  pelicans, kittiwakes and gannets, of laughing gulls, cormorants and
  auks, of plovers brooding their young, and of the great horned owl
  mothering her owlet. There are 160 of these photographs.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “No such collection of ‘portraits’ can be found anywhere else.” May
  Estelle Cook.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 387. Je. 1, ‘05. 440w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1251. Je. 11, ‘05. 340w.

  “His book should appeal to a large circle of readers, especially the
  ornithologist, the sportsman, and the nature-lover, as well as the
  omnipresent camera fiend.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 171. Ag. 24, ‘05. 620w.

  * “Despite its somewhat pedantic title, this book is much above the
  average of works of the same general nature.”

     + + =Nature.= 73: 123. D. 7, ‘05. 500w.

  “‘Wild wings’ should not only appeal to nature and bird lovers, but
  there is much in its pages to interest sportsmen as well.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “Without doubt this book is a contribution to the world’s sanity,
  while at the same time its science is duly respected.” Mabel Osgood
  Wright.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 402. Je. 17, ‘05. 410w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 395. Je. 10, ‘05. 60w.

  “Quite as entertaining as most hunters’ stories.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 768. Je. ‘05. 180w.


John Van Buren, politician, †$1.50. Harper.

  “‘John Van Buren, politician,’ is a young up-state lawyer, who comes
  to New York, joins Tammany hall, wins the favor of Boss ‘Coulter,’ and
  is sent to the state legislature, where he is speedily made acquainted
  with the darker aspects of legislative life. The story of his
  adventure in politics and of his lovemaking ... is told in a volume
  that is a curious combination of novel and guide to the sights of New
  York.”—Outlook.

  “The book has no style, and but slight interest considered as a story.
  Its implied ethics, moreover, are of a highly dubious character.” Wm.
  M. Payne.

       — =Dial.= 39: 114. S. 1, ‘05. 120w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 166. Mr. 18, ‘05. 360w.

  “Were it not for its intimate portrayal of the methods whereby Tammany
  achieves political success, it would be of little value or interest.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 653. Mr. 11. ‘05. 140w.

  “The picture of the sessions of the general assembly at Albany is
  graphic and possibly true to the life, although the coloring is
  probably too strong and the lines too heavy.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 549. Ap. 8, ‘05. 150w.

  “The book does not preach anything, clean politics or foul; it simply
  reflects conditions as a keen observer would find them.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 594. O. ‘05. 180w.


* =Johnson, Burges.= Pleasant tragedies of childhood. †$1.50. Harper.

  “Experiences more or less tragical to babies and children, but
  pleasantly told in Mr. Johnson’s verses and humorously depicted in
  Miss Cory’s sketches. Fathers and mothers will be amused by them, and
  the juvenile victims—some of them at least—will enjoy the
  pictures.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 384. D. 1, ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1389. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 50w.

  * “This is an exceedingly attractive picture book.”

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 723. O. 28, ‘05. 90w.

  * “One of the really delightful books about children of the present
  season.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 90w.

  * “Some of the verses are very witty.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 767. D. ‘05. 90w.


=Johnson, Burges.= Rhymes of little boys. **$1. Crowell.

  A truly charming book of little boy verses, which little girls and
  grown-ups will enjoy also Goin’ barefoot, Bein’ sick; Gettin’ well;
  Cookin’ things; Makin’ things; Gettin’ washed; and two score others
  set forth little boy philosophy in little boy language, and following
  these are some verses to or about little boys, among them an exquisite
  tribute to Frank R. Stockton. The volume is bound in plaid gingham,
  with decorative title and end leaves by Mrs. John Carpenter.

  * “The naïveté of small-boy egotisms, generosities, rivalries, has
  never been, and, it would seem to us, could never be, better done than
  in Mr. Johnson’s clever and sympathetic verses.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 150w.

  * “This volume is sure to win for its author a wider appreciation of
  his really unique work.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1389. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  “The introductory poems strike a note of tenderness and reverence of
  unusual purity and beauty.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 529. O. 28, ‘05. 120w.

  * “We like his verse for its insight, literal though it often is.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 60w.


* =Johnson, Clifton=, ed. Oak-tree fairy book; il. by Willard Bonte.
$1.75. Little.

  Here are the old favorites reproduced in wholesome form with the
  savagery, harrowing details and abnormal pathos eliminated, and with
  the charm retained.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1385. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 481. Jl. 22, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.


=Johnson, Owen.= In the name of liberty. $1.50. Century.

  A story of the French revolution in which the personal struggles of
  the actors are silhouetted against the greater struggle of the nation
  in the background. Barabant, a young enthusiast, allies himself with
  the Girondins and falls with them, to be saved from the guillotine
  only by the sacrifice of Nicole, a flower-girl, whom he has made his
  wife in prison, and who gives up her life for his. The course of the
  story runs subjectively close to the people; their whims, their morbid
  curiosity, their unrestrained impulse and anger, and their hatred for
  the aristocrats distort their vision thru the bloody days of the
  terror which is followed in grewsome detail.

  “Mr. Johnson has devised a fresh and unhackneyed story, with a heroine
  quite apart from the usual types.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 381. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  “Owen Johnson has written a good story, with several unusual points
  about it that entitle it to notice.” Priscilla Leonard.

     + + =Current Literature.= 38: 371. Ap. ‘05. 1440w.

  “A fresh and interesting view of a subject that would seem to have
  been exhausted of all novelty. One can but admire the cleverness with
  which he has made reality and fiction supplement and sustain each
  other while keeping the reader’s attention wholly engrossed by the
  very simple and pathetic love story of Nicole and Barabant. A vivid
  and vigorous handling of a subject that has been used to the point of
  threadbareness.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 133. Mr. 4, ‘05. 610w.

  “A rather unusually spirited tale. Mr. Johnson has created two or
  three flesh-and-blood characters, has put them into trying crises, and
  has made them work out their own moral salvation or ruin as they
  respond or fail to respond to the test. The book has life and energy.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 246. Ja. 28, ‘05. 90w.

  “The sure touch of the confident master is lacking. There is
  over-emphasis, a too great insistence on the individual when the mass
  should have been brought into the foreground. Viewed as a whole the
  book is an effective piece of word painting.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 135. Ja. 26, ‘05. 710w.

  “Mr. Johnson’s story has merits of its own unborrowed from Dickens or
  any one else. One of them is a saving sanity of expression.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 618. Ap. ‘05. 370w.

  “Well and swiftly told, and probably of breathless interest to the
  unsophisticated mind.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 30w.


=Johnson, Sidona Viola.= Short history of Oregon, **$1. McClurg.

  This book covers the early discoveries, the Lewis and Clark
  explorations, settlement, government, Indian wars, and progress. In
  concise form it gives a full account of that interesting region. It is
  illustrated with numerous halftones.

  “A short but comprehensive account of the state.”

       + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 131. Ja. ‘05. 60w.


=Johnson, William Henry.= French pathfinders in North America. $1.50.
Little.

  The author has made his narrative suitable in every respect to young
  readers. He tells of the discoveries and adventures of such men as
  Cartier, Jean Ribaut, Rene de Laudonnière, Champlain, Nicollet,
  Joliet, La Salle, and Father Hennepin, in an interesting fashion,
  basing his story, upon standard authorities; he has provided notes
  upon Indian tribal connections and customs, and introductory chapters
  which deal with the origin and distribution of the Indian race and
  give a view of Indian society.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 20w.

  * “Mr. Johnson’s descriptions of the great French explorers are
  calculated to serve the purposes he had in view and to stimulate
  curiosity.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 781. N. 18, ‘05. 450w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 130w.


=Johnson, William Henry.= Sir Galahad of New France, †$1.50. Turner, H.
B.

  This romantic story of a young Frenchman, who, lost and alone in the
  new world, is befriended by an Indian girl who leads him back to his
  people and in whom he awakens such intellect and religious fervor,
  that he comes to love her and takes her back to France and makes her
  his wife, is based upon the attempts of the French Huguenots to settle
  America in the sixteenth century. The historical element, however, is
  subordinated to the forest love story.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 10w.

 *   + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 300w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 130w.


=Johnson, Wolcott.= An old man’s idyl. *$1. McClurg.

  A homey story, an autobiography in scattered diary form, in which a
  husband and father tells of his late love, his happy marriage, his
  honeymoon in Europe, and the birth of his two little girls who grow
  up, are educated, and finally marry, leaving him to look back over a
  long life which they and their mother rounded out into a perfect idyl,
  and a prayer.

  “This old man’s little ‘idyl’ has a peculiarly reminiscent,
  speculative flavor which now and then recalls Ik Marvel and George
  William Curtis and others of that school of amiable and dearly beloved
  dreamers.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 372. Je. 10. ‘05. 220w.

  “The story is not an intellectual one. It is not an intense one.
  Tenderness and sanity, good will and unaffected English make the
  progress of the recital agreeable and almost imperceptible. Mr.
  Johnson is to be congratulated upon the sincerity and simplicity of
  this unpretentious little volume.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 106. Je. ‘05. 230w.


=Johnston, Charles, and Spencer, Carita.= Ireland’s story; a short
history of Ireland for schools, reading circles, and general readers.
**$1.40; school ed. *$1.10. Houghton.

  Beginning with the legendary past, this volume follows the history of
  Ireland down to modern times. In the discussions the authors touch
  upon the Irish church, home rule, land purchase, the Irish in America,
  on the continent, and in the British empire. The Irish literary
  revival is fully treated and there is a closing section on the
  derivation of Irish names. The book is illustrated with views,
  portraits and maps.

  “Written in a quiet, almost gentle style, the narrative moves calmly
  forward and is easily followed. The treatment is sufficiently fair and
  charitable to satisfy any reader in whom the virtue of tolerance is
  properly developed.” Laurence M. Larson.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 411. Je. 16, ‘05. 590w.

  “The writers of the present work have managed to condense a vast
  amount of information into their sketch of some 400 pages.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 96. Ag. 3, ‘05. 250w.

  “The first five chapters ... absolutely worthless for any purpose
  whatever. The rest of the volume, however, appears to be of some
  value.”

     + — =N. Y.= Times. 10: 354. Je. 3, ‘05. 590w.

  “A well-arranged outline history of Ireland. The authors, while
  frankly revealing both their political and their religious sympathies,
  write with moderation and fair-mindedness.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 90w.

  “All in all, this volume gives an excellent epitome of Irish history.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 253. Ag. ‘05. 150w.

  “A book which ought to have a place in the libraries of our high
  schools.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 440. My. ‘05. 70w.


=Johnston, Rev. John Octavius.= Life and letters of Henry Parry Liddon,
canon of St. Paul’s cathedral and sometime Ireland professor of exegesis
in the University of Oxford. $5. Longmans.

  A detailed and sympathetic account of the life and character of the
  late Dean Liddon, strict ritualist and devoted Puseyite who was almost
  constantly involved in controversy. It is a faithful record of
  unfaltering devotion to duty and his steady advancement to well-earned
  success; his friendly relations with Gladstone and Salisbury and his
  refusal to accept a bishopric from either; his success as a pulpit
  orator; his famous sermons; his pleasing personality, high scholarship
  and untiring energy.

  “A worthy addition to the literature of biography.” Percy F. Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 234. Ap. 1, ‘05. 2020w.

         =Spec.= 94: 180. F. 4, ‘05. 400w.


=Jones, Amanda Theodosia.= Rubáiyát of Solomon, and other poems. $1.25.
Alden bros.

  One-third of this new volume of poems “is given up to versification,
  in the familiar rubáiyát form, of certain of the sayings of Solomon
  and Koheleth.... It is elsewhere in Miss Jones’s volume that we must
  look for her most meritorious verse. We find it, for example, in the
  group of ‘Kansas bird songs,’ in the lyrics of childhood, the tender
  personal tributes, and the pieces that touch on contemporary history.”
  (Dial.)

  “It can truly be said that she has looked upon the sun and has been
  undismayed; for, at intervals ... the clear voice of this fearless and
  fiery-hearted Deborah has been heard and heeded by those who may be
  reckoned as the jealous custodians of the gates of song.” Edith M.
  Thomas.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 412. N. ‘05. 1650w.

  “There is in the book always a first-hand view of nature,—often a
  touch of mysticism. Some of the experiments are not fortunate, but now
  and again there is a narrative poem, or a lyric that clings to the
  memory.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 414. N. ‘05. 290w.

  “After a long silence, Miss Jones has put forth a new volume of poems,
  which may perhaps secure for her work something of the appreciation
  which has long been its due.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 275. N. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  * “The variety of achievement in this modest volume is in pleasing
  contrast to that offered in most collections of its size.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 802. N. 25, ‘05. 360w.


* =Jones, E. Griffith-.= Economics of Jesus; or, Work and wages in the
kingdom of God. *35c. Meth. bk.

  A study of the money parables,—“a series of problems arising out of
  the deep-seated and manifold inequalities of life.” The little volume
  belongs to the “Freedom of faith” series.


=Jones, Henry Arthur.= Manoeuvres of Jane: an original comedy in four
acts. **75c. Macmillan.

  “Mr. Nangle, a wealthy widower, places his wilful daughter in charge
  of Mrs. Beechinor, retired matron of a young ladies’ boarding-school,
  in the hope that she will transfer her affections from a man who is in
  moderate circumstances to Lord Bapchild, a nephew of Mrs. Beechinor’s,
  Jane arranges matters to suit herself and marries the man whom she
  loves.”—Bookm.

  “The situations are the work of an undoubted expert, and the dialog is
  skilfully written. Now that Oscar Wilde is dead, Mr. Jones has only
  one equal in England, the Ibsenized Pinero.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 783. Ap. 6, ‘05. 140w.

  “It reads well, although the literary form emphasizes the fact that it
  is really more of a farce than a comedy.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 451. F. 18, ‘05. 30w.


=Jones, Henry Arthur.= Mrs. Dane’s defence. **75c. Macmillan.

  This four-act play was given in New York in the years 1901-1902. It
  concerns a woman with a past and a skilful lawyer who forces the truth
  from Mrs. Dane.

  “Undeniably clever.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1060. Ap. 29, ‘05. 20w.


=Jones, Rev. J. D.= Elims of life, and other sermons. *$1. Revell.

  “These are discourses by a prominent Congregational pastor in
  England.... The spiritual and ethical element predominates, the form
  is plain and lucid, the aim is practical.”—Outlook.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 100w.


=Jones, Jenkin Lloyd.= Dying message of Paracelsus. pa. 50c. Unity pub.

  “Appropriate as an Easter gift, and dedicated as such by the [author]
  to his Browning classes, is this elegantly printed pamphlet,
  illustrated by Albrecht Dürer’s picture of ‘Melancholia.’ ... A few
  paragraphs of Mr. Jones’s lecture on Paracelsus accompany Browning’s
  text as introduction and commentary.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 856. Ap. 1, ‘05. 70w.


=Jones, Paul.= Commercial power of Congress. $5. priv. ptd. C. S.
Nathan, N. Y.

  The object of this book “is to trace the history and show the present
  authoritative interpretation of that pregnant declaration of the
  constitution of the United States: ‘Congress shall have power ... to
  regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states,
  and with the Indian tribes.’” (N. Y. Times.) Present interest centers
  about the application of this provision to trusts and railway rates.

  “It is carefully done, but lacks a table of cases.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 258. S. 28, ‘05. 80w.

  “It bears evidence of a lot of painstaking work, is written in a style
  excellent for its purpose, and offers very few of those slips of the
  pen or the proofreader that are apt to invade in force the pages of
  the amateur.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 312. My. 13, ‘05. 900w.


=Jones, Rufus Matthew.= Social law in the spiritual world, **$1.25.
Winston.

  “While the title at once suggests the famous work of the late Henry
  Drummond, and the book is in a way an attempt to deal with the same
  problems as those discussed in his Natural law in the spiritual
  world,’ Professor Jones is concerned rather with the psychological
  aspects of the subject than with the biological. In his view, there is
  a greater stress to-day in the psychological than in the so-called
  natural sciences.”—R. of Rs.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 134. Mr. 4, ‘05. 120w. (Outlines scope).

  “Professor Jones very tersely sums up the present-day meaning of
  personality and social relationship. His discussion of the modern
  religious problem is from a somewhat novel point of view.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 253. F. ‘05. 180w.


=Jones, Samuel Milton.= Letters of labor and love. **$1. Bobbs.

  Thirty-eight letters originally dictated by Mayor Jones, Golden Rule
  Jones, to his stenographer and delivered to his women with their
  wages. Each letter begins, Dear Friends, and closes, Very faithfully
  yours, and in each the master and man meet on common ground as
  brothers. Equality, coöperation, harmony, fellowship, patriotism and
  even picnics and vacations are advocated in these letters, and many
  other subjects of general interest are discussed.


=Jonson, Ben.= Plays and poems, *$1.25. imp. Scribner.

  “This latest addition to the irresistible ‘Caxton’ series is the
  representative work of Jonson as a dramatist and as a poet.... The
  frontispieces and the title-pages in this series ... are often as in
  the case of this volume, admirable pieces of typographical and
  illustrative work.”—Outlook.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 858. Ap. 1, ‘05. 70w.


=Jonson, Ben.= Devil is an ass; ed. with introduction, notes and
glossary by William Savage Johnson. $2. Holt.

  A contribution to the “Yale studies in English.”


=Jonson, Ben.= Poetaster; a thesis presented to the faculty of the
graduate school of Yale univ. in candidacy for the degree of Dr. of
philosophy; ed. by Herbert S. Mallory. $2.50; pa. $2. Holt.

  This 27th volume in the “Yale studies of English” series, contains the
  text of the play, a long critical introduction, notes, glossary,
  bibliography, and index.


=Jonson, Ben.= Staple of news: a thesis presented to the faculty of the
Graduate school of Yale univ. in candidacy for the degree of Doctor of
philosophy; ed. by Dr. De Winter. $2.50; pa. $2. Holt.

  This twenty-eighth volume in the “Yale studies of English” series
  contains the critical text of Jonson’s play, with elaborate notes, a
  glossary, and an introduction.

         =Dial.= 38: 276. Ap. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “The least satisfactory part of the work is that devoted to
  bibliography, which contains, as usual, a number of inaccuracies.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 922. Je. 24, ‘05. 300w.


=Jonson, G. C. Ashton.= Handbook to Chopin’s works, **$1.50. Doubleday.

  “A sort of a ‘musical Baedeker.’ ... It has been the author’s aim to
  make his book equally useful and helpful to concert-goers, for whom it
  forms a permanent analytical programme, to pianists, and to those
  amateurs of music who can now, owing to the pianola, pursue for the
  first time a systematic and co-ordinated study of Chopin’s works.... A
  brief account is given of each composition.... The volume opens with a
  brief sketch of Chopin’s life, which is followed by short preliminary
  chapters on various aspects of his work.”—Dial.

  Reviewed by Ingram A. Pyle.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 238. Ap. 1, ‘05. 350w.

  “An exceptionally valuable book, which every devotee of pianoforte
  music should have at hand for daily reference.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 380. My. 11, ‘05. 290w.

  “It is likely to be a useful compilation for hurried reference.”
  Richard Aldrich.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 309. My. 13, ‘05. 110w.


=Jordan, David Starr.= Guide to the study of fishes. 2v. **$12. Holt.

  Dr. Jordan’s work is encyclopedic in its scope, and “treats of the
  fish from all the varied points of view of the different branches of
  ichthyology. In general, all the traits of the fish are discussed,
  those which the fish shares with other animals most briefly, those
  which relate to the evolution of the group, and the divergence of its
  various classes and orders most fully. The extinct forms are restored
  to their place in the series and discussed along with those still
  extant.” (Dial.)

  “The most comprehensive treatise on American ichthyology.” Charles
  Atwood Kofoid.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 84. Ag. 16, ‘05. 1680w.

  “There is no thorough classification or system. The table of contents
  of the chapters make matters only worse. A single page with an outline
  of the arrangement would be a boon.” H. C.

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 625. O. 26, ‘05. 1600w.


=Jordan, Kate (Mrs. F. M. Vermilye).= Time the comedian. †$1.50.
Appleton.

  A man who was about to elope with a woman who is to desert for him her
  husband and child is shocked on the eve of their departure by the
  suicide of the husband with one of his wife’s guilty letters in his
  hand. He will not marry her now, but gives her a liberal allowance,
  and years later when he has come to love her daughter, his old letters
  to her mother keep them forever apart.

  * “The characters are well drawn and the plot worked out logically ...
  and the story is written with a sureness of touch and a briskness that
  keeps the interest unflagging throughout.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 90w.

  “A bright, entertaining society novel, not without a moral for light,
  frivolous, and selfish people of both sexes.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 579. N. 4, ‘05. 60w.


Jubilee gems of the Visitation order. Sisters of the visitation of Holy
Mary. *$1. Christian press.

  “The present publication aims successfully at giving, in clear and
  simple language, an authentic account of the foundation of the order,
  and a picture of the ideals which have obtained in the community and
  borne fruit in the saintly lives of its members.... It will help to
  fill the lamentable lack of books suitable for Catholic school
  premiums.”—Cath. World.

  “The volume is well gotten up and attractively written.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 406. Je. ‘05. 350w.


=Judd, Sylvester.= History of Hadley, including the early history of
Hatfield, South Hadley, Amherst and Granby, Mass. *$6. H. R. Huntting &
co., Springfield, Mass.

  This work was originally published in 1863. It is now reprinted with
  an introduction by Geo. Sheldon and family genealogies by Lucius M.
  Boltwood.

  “Introduction is, by the way, decidedly more interesting than Mr.
  Judd’s ‘History.’”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 399. S. 23. 320w.

  “His compilation is replete with authentic information as to manners
  and customs, and is highly browsable.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 198. S. 7, ‘05. 330w.

  “The new edition will find a wider field than the first met, and
  should create and fill a demand for itself.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 541. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1010w.


Judith: an old English epic fragment, ed. by Albert S. Cook. 40c. Heath.

  This volume is section I of the “Belles-lettres” series contains the
  text of Judith, passages from the Vulgate Judith, an introduction,
  bibliography, and glossary.


* =Judson, Frederick Newton.= Law of interstate commerce and its federal
regulation. *$5. Flood, T. H.

  “The volume is divided into two parts, the first part, comprising
  about one-fourth of the book, deals briefly with the power of the
  federal government over interstate commerce and with the statutes that
  have been enacted in the exercise of that power. Part two discusses in
  more detail the interstate commerce act of 1887, the anti-trust law of
  1890, the safety appliance legislation of 1893 and 1896, and various
  other minor acts of legislation regarding interstate commerce. The
  latter part of the book is devoted to the presentation of information
  regarding ‘procedure before the Interstate commerce commission.’”
  (Ann. Am. Acad.)

  * “The volume is systematically arranged, it is well proportioned and
  carefully written. It is both a good treatise and a valuable book of
  reference. Neither the lawyer nor the economist interested in
  transportation can afford to neglect part two of Mr. Judson’s book.”
  Emory R. Johnson.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 756. N. ‘05. 310w.

  * “Mr. Judson has a good power of statement, and his volume is a
  valuable addition to the literature of the subject.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 247. S. 21, ‘05. 230w.


Juliana, ed. by William Strunk. 40c. Heath.

  A volume in section I of the “Belles-lettres” series, English
  literature from its beginning to the year 1100. The original text of
  the Exeter manuscript is given, all deviations being indicated in the
  variants. An introduction discusses the text, the author, and the
  legend, and complete notes, bibliography, and glossary are provided.

  “The notes have been most carefully edited, the type is clear, and the
  notes and glossary are adequate.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 529. Ap. 29. 340w.


=Jungman, Beatrice.= Norway: text by Beatrice Jungman; with 75 il. in
col. by Nico Jungman. *$6. Macmillan.

  “Mrs. Jungman does not concern herself ... with the past history of
  Norway, except with a few of its legends; nor does she allude to the
  present unsettled state of its politics. But the fact of Norwegian
  unrest ... makes ... an interesting background to her brilliant series
  of passing impressions.... Mr. Jungman is a charming artist, ... and
  he has done nothing more attractive than these portraits of Norwegian
  girls and children.... His sketches of Norwegian landscape are also
  most characteristic.”—Spec.

  “She is always readable,—partly, no doubt, because she is so
  absolutely unpretentious; and the book is a welcome addition to an
  interesting and valuable series.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 645. Je. 17, ‘05. 430w.

  “The limited scope of his work suffers considerably by comparison with
  the comprehensive title of the book.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 791. Je. 24. 660w.

  “The ‘text’ is friendly gossip about a trip in Norway, quite natural,
  with no straining after effect. The colour of the pictures is gay; it
  is too vivid for our liking.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 748. Je. 3, ‘05. 110w.

  “Mrs. Jungman’s ‘text’ is quite as interesting, in its way as her
  husband’s pictures.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 922. Je. 24, ‘05. 270w.




                                   K


=Kasson, John A.= Evolution of the constitution of the United States of
America and history of the Monroe doctrine. **$1.50. Houghton.

  An edition in a form convenient for the general reader of a work
  published in memorial volumes, at a high price, in 1887 for the
  Constitutional centennial commission. “Mr. Kasson gives a clear but
  condensed recital of the conditions preliminary to the original
  ‘Confederacy:’ a statement of the infirmities and ineffectiveness of
  the Articles of confederation; the recognition of the failure of those
  articles by the patriots of the revolution; the successive steps by
  which they sought the consent of the states to a general convention to
  provide a substitute government; and finally the manner in which they
  accomplished the organization of a nation.” (R. of Rs.)

  Reviewed by C. L. Raper.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 340. Mr. ‘05. 150w.

  “This ought to be a good handbook for beginners, but is not a lawbook,
  and does not cover the field occupied by such a book as Cooley’s
  well-known treatise.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 188. Ag. 31, ‘05. 900w.

  Reviewed by R. L. S.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 67. F. 4, ‘05. 530w.(States scope of book).

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 247. F. ‘05. 150w. (States scope of book).


=Katherine, pseud.= See =Stephens, Louise G.=


=Kaye, Percy Lewis.= English colonial administration under Lord
Clarendon, 1660-1667. 50c. Hopkins.

  In his monograph, Dr. Kaye presents colonial administration under the
  following heads: The official colonial system, The Royal charters of
  Connecticut and Rhode Island, The founding of Carolina and the
  conquest of New Netherland, The Royal commissioners in New England and
  Results.


=Keats, John.= Poems; ed. with an introd. and notes by E. de Selincourt.
$2.25. Dodd.

  “Mr. de Selincourt has wisely left the significant irregularities of
  orthography as Keats left them; and he has grouped the poems in a
  logical and significant order, relegating to an appendix certain
  nonsense rhymes and doggerel ditties that have stood hitherto side by
  side with ‘La Belle sans merci’ and the ‘Ode to Malta.’ The text
  stands midway of an introduction and a body of notes that preserve an
  even-handed balance between ideal and textual criticism.”—Nation.

  * “The prefatory study is the result of much original and painstaking
  research and the notes leave no clue to the sources of the poet’s
  ideas untouched.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 326. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1420w.

  “In the mean time we commend most heartily to the public his
  introduction and notes to this edition.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 534. O. 21. 3260w.

  * “It is safe to say that no one who has this new edition will feel
  the need of any other: to that extent at least it is definitive.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 150w.

  “Is likely to stand as the best edition of the poet for the critical
  student of poetry as a fine art.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 383. N. 9, ‘05. 310w.

  “His industry is commonly attended with judgment. And so his
  effort ... has yet been a real success. It is complete if he has
  succeeded in producing the ‘definitive’ edition of Keats. And it seems
  that it has really done that.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 705. O. 21, ‘05. 1140w.

  “The notes are so full as to class this volume with texts for the
  expert rather than for the ordinary reader.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 120w.


=Keen, William Williams.= Addresses and other papers. *$3.75. Saunders.

  The truth about modern surgery told by a master surgeon is of value
  both to the members of the medical profession and the general reader.
  Dr. Keen treats the historical and antiquarian aspects of practical
  anatomy, covers the ground of modern surgery, shows the position of
  the medical college to-day, its mission and needs, and closes with an
  address on “The surgical reminiscences of the Civil war.”

  “The subjects are discussed in excellent English, and with exactness,
  though without the technical language.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 484. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1280w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 511. Ag. 5, ‘05. 220w.

  “These papers are of interest chiefly to physicians and surgeons; but
  some of them are of value to readers outside of the medical
  profession.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 590. Jl. 1, ‘05. 120w.


=Keith, Marian.= Duncan Polite, the watchman of Glenoro. †$1.50. Revell.

  Pathos and humor are skilfully blended in this story of a small
  Canadian town where English, Irish, High and Lowland Scotch are found.
  Duncan McDonald, called the polite to distinguish him from all the
  other McDonalds, is the hero of the tale which concerns the discord
  which a young and modern minister engenders in an old kirk, where he
  wins a youthful following in spite of the elders’ aversion to all new
  things.

  “It is a fresh, clean story, likely to interest young people in spite
  of the prayerful tension in the atmosphere of the tale.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 986. O. 26, ‘05. 60w.

  “Anyhow, it wad hae made a bonnie, wee short story.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 450. Jl. 8, ‘05. 470w.


=Kellogg, Vernon.= American insects. **$5. Holt.

  “This volume aims to provide a general, systematic account of the
  principal insect families as they exist in America, written with the
  greatest regard for scientific accuracy and thoroughness, but in such
  a way as to interest the average intelligent reader. A chapter on
  ‘Insects and disease,’ giving an account of the researches which have
  determined beyond any question the part played by mosquitoes in the
  spread of malaria and yellow fever, is of special timeliness just
  now.”—Outlook.

  “We have in this simple volume a whole library of insect lore, brought
  into convenient compass, abundantly illustrated and clearly printed.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 110w.

  “Readable and profusely illustrated, it gives a great amount of
  information about the insects of this country, in such a manner that
  it is available to any intelligent person. With all its merits, Prof.
  Kellogg’s book is a little too much of a compilation to be ideally
  satisfactory.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 164. S. 16, ‘05. 690w.

  “It seems that nothing needed to make this a complete guide to the
  study of our American insects has been omitted. The style of the book
  is in general popular and adapted to the average intelligent reader.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1112. N. 9, ‘05. 340w.

  “In general, entomologists will agree with the schemes of
  classification.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 207. S. 7, ‘05. 690w.

  “Not only is an excellent reference book, but ... contains much
  interesting reading for any nature-lover.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 43. S. 2, ‘05. 100w.

  “The minor defects noted detract little from its real value, and
  Professor Kellogg’s volume will be welcomed as one of the best general
  text-books on the subject covered.” C. L. Marlatt

   + + — =Science=, n.s. 22: 563. N. 3, ‘05. 1160w.


=Kellor, Frances A.= Out of work. **$1.25. Putnam.

  “Miss Kellor’s previous studies of convict women and correctional
  institutions gave her an admirable preparation for the investigation
  of employment bureaus.” (Am. J. Soc.) Her researches have been carried
  on in New York, Boston, Philadelphia and Chicago, with the result that
  her material is first hand. She discusses the employment agencies,
  their treatment of the unemployed, and their influence upon homes and
  business. The last chapter is devoted to state and municipal laws.

  “No previous study has accumulated such a wealth of information on
  this vital problem. The author has very properly aimed to give a clear
  and adequate statement of the entire situation and has dealt out
  advice sparingly. Yet she has probably suggested about all the
  measures for betterment which give any promise of immediate
  usefulness.” C. R. Henderson.

   + + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 558. Ja. ‘05. 110w.

  “The work is well done. This volume should command the attention of
  housekeepers and employers generally, as well as students, for it
  indicates that the reign of graft is not confined to political
  positions, and the corrupting influences of many agencies are clearly
  set forth.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 131. Ja. ‘05. 220w.

  “It is an admirable piece of work. The work thorough and well-planned;
  and the facts stated in an impartial and interesting manner; simple
  and entertaining as well as scientifically valuable.” Charlotte
  Perkins Gilman.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 279. Mr. ‘05. 580w.

  Reviewed by Charles Richmond Henderson.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 156. Mr. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  “The volume is worthy of high praise and it should be widely read.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 99. Jl. 13, ‘05. 290w.

  Reviewed by S. P. B.

     + + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 295. Mr. ‘05. 530w.

  “An interesting study of employment agencies. The value of Miss
  Kellor’s book lies largely in the undoubted authenticity of the
  information on which it is based. The book should be read by all who
  are interested in reforming the abuses of employment agencies in
  American cities.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 760. D. ‘04. 190w.


=Kelly, Myra.= Little citizens. †$1.50. McClure.

  Miss Kelly’s narrative had to do with a “polyglot brood of future
  Americans,” children of the New York east side Jewish colony. She
  “shows us these little citizens at work and play in a New York school.
  Their parents are pedlars, seamstresses, and costermongers.... They
  are timid, ignorant, unwashed. But the children they send shrewdly and
  faithfully to school ... are enchanting. Of course they are naughty.
  Miss Kelly is at once too honest and too artistic to write stories
  about little saints.... But they are clever, affectionate, and
  teachable.... They speak an odd dialect that we take to be a graft of
  the Yiddish on American; and at school their ways are most humorous
  and entertaining.” (Acad.)

  “Miss Myra Kelly’s ‘Little citizens’ are as strange to us as the
  countries of their birth, and their charm is partly the charm of
  novelty. She has presented them with originality and freshness and
  with a convincing sympathy.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 336. Mr. 25, ‘05. 480w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 189. F. ‘05. 90w.

  “For real insight into the child mind with its misconceptions and
  limitations, so hard for an adult to understand, these stories are
  only equalled by those of ‘Emmy Lou.’”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 502. Mr. 2, ‘05. 210w.

  “They pile up material for the future, and are in the present
  prodigiously amusing.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  “In the representation of their terrible manners, their extraordinary
  dialect and their oriental warmth of heart, the author shows keen
  observation, delightful humor, and no mean order of creative talent.
  Miss Kelly’s book is amusing, and it is unconsciously,
  unintentionally, and therefore delightfully, instructive. The dialect
  is picturesquely and easily handled.”

   + + + =Reader.= 5: 623. Ap. ‘05. 380w.

  “The volume may be highly recommended as containing sketches of an
  original and attractive kind.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 754. My. 20, ‘05. 150w.


=Kendrick, A. F.= English embroidery. *$2.50. Scribner.

  “A well-illustrated guide for students and collectors to the history
  of art embroidery in England from the middle ages down to the
  eighteenth century, with descriptions of the important examples of
  this work that have been preserved.”—Outlook.

  “He writes, moreover, from a liberal and genuinely artistic
  standpoint, and is not carried away by a love of mere curiosity.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 760. Je. 17. 500w.

  “It is seldom that a book on a special subject is so interesting and
  readable throughout.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 60. Jl. 20, ‘05. 1350w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 313. My. 13, ‘05. 300w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 139. My. 13, ‘05. 40w.


=Kennedy, John Pendleton=, ed. Journals of the house of burgesses of
Virginia, 1773-1776. *$10. Putnam.

  The publication of these documents by the Library board of Richmond
  will be welcomed by all students of this most interesting period in
  Virginia’s history. The editor has provided a valuable introduction
  containing numerous extracts from contemporary newspapers and
  unpublished “Broadsides.” The letters and minutes of the Colonial
  Committee of Correspondence are appended to the Journal of each year.

  “The work of editing the volume has been ably done.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 44. Jl. 16, ‘05. 440w.

  “A very satisfactory introduction.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 585. O. 21, ‘05. 340w.

  “The editor, John Pendleton Kennedy, State Librarian, has performed
  his task with judgment, and the result is highly creditable to the
  state.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 144. Ag. 17, ‘05. 770w.


=Kennedy, Sidney Robinson.= Lodestar. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  In their rambles thru the Connecticut hills, two friends, a novelist
  and a painter, meet a refined and well educated country girl, with
  whom they both fall in love. A great-hearted millionaire enters the
  story, and there are many amusing complications.

  “One of the pleasantest of summer books.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 395. Ag. 17, ‘05. 60w.

  “Something of a disappointment.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380. Je. 10, ‘05. 680w.

  “Clever and readable novel.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 100w.


=Kent, Arminie Thomas.= Otia; ed. by Harold Hodge. **$1.25. Lane.

  Some thirty essays, and critical reviews reprinted from various
  magazines, and about twenty poems, serious, sentimental and satiric,
  which were written between 1881 and the author’s death in 1903.

  “The book intrinsically strikes us as a failure.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 80. Ja. 28, ‘05. 690w.

  “In treating a writer who pays such attention to the small points of
  style, and who incidentally sneers at ‘the shallower sort of American
  scholars,’ an American reviewer feels justified in pointing out minute
  defects.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 45. Jl. 16, ‘05. 540w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 215. Ap. 8, ‘05. 260w.

  “Among the essays, the best, we think, are those which deal with the
  technique of literature. Of the poems, we should place first the
  sonnet to the memory of Lord Beaconsfield, where the form leaves very
  little to be desired.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 93. Ja. 21, ‘05. 70w.


=Kent, Charles Foster=, ed. Israel’s historical and biographical
narratives, from the establishment of the Hebrew kingdom to the end of
the Maccabean struggle. **$2.75. Scribner.

  “Professor Kent has undertaken the bold task of rearranging the
  writings of the Old Testament in their logical and chronological
  order. The aim is not merely to arrange the books, but to break them
  up into their component parts, and to indicate the sources from which
  they were originally drawn, presenting in a practical and intelligible
  form, the results of modern critical research. ‘The student’s Old
  Testament’ is to be divided into six volumes:—(1) ‘Narratives of the
  beginning of Hebrew history’; (2) ‘Historical and biographical
  narratives’; (3) ‘Prophetic sermons, epistles, and apocalypses’; (4)
  ‘Laws and traditional precedents,’ (5) ‘Songs, psalms, and prayers;’
  (6) ‘Proverbs and didactic poems.’ The work is intended for general
  readers, not for specialists only.”—Lond. Times.

  “Results of very various degrees of certainty are embodied in his
  volume. But his work will be invaluable to the student who uses it
  with discrimination.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 270. Ag. 25, ‘05. 1060w.

  “It is a credit to the university served by Professor Kent.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 692. Jl. 15, ‘05. 500w.


=Kent, Charles Foster.= Narratives of the beginnings of Hebrew history,
from the creation to the establishment of the Hebrew kingdom. **$2.75.
Scribner.

  Impelled by the demands for a constructive presentation of the facts
  regarding the literature of the Old Testament, Professor Kent has
  undertaken a series of six volumes presenting successively the
  narrative of the beginnings of Hebrew history, historical and
  biographical narratives, prophetic sermons, epistles and apocalypses,
  laws and traditional precedents, songs, psalms, prayers, proverbs, and
  didactic poems; thus covering the entire Old Testament. This first
  volume, “The student’s Old Testament,” is a modern and scholarly
  translation, with a systematic, logical classification of the early
  narratives found in the books from Genesis to Ruth. Various versions
  of the ancient stories are presented side by side, so that they can be
  read like the gospels of the New Testament, in their original form.

  “Its information is full and eminently trustworthy. In the notes the
  editor is careful not to be over-dogmatic.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 140. Jl. 29. 530w.

  “Its scholarly character, its conservative and constructive spirit,
  its admirable rendering of the text, its ample helps for proper
  interpretation, and its large promise of good things to come in the
  subsequent volumes, assures the reader that a most serviceable work
  has been added to the apparatus for biblical study.” H. L. W.

     + + =Bib. World.= 25: 309. Ap. ‘05. 1020w.


=Ker, William Paton.= Dark ages, **$1.50. Scribner.

  “Professor Ker, of University college, London, presents, under special
  title of ‘The dark ages,’ the first volume of a series of ‘Periods of
  European literature,’ to be edited by Professor Saintsbury.... He
  begins with an attempt to define this much-abused term....
  Chronologically he limits his period by the decline of Roman culture
  on the one hand and the year 1100 on the other.... In the second
  chapter, ‘The elements,’ we are given a general survey of the whole
  period.... The main body of the volume is then divided into two parts,
  treating respectively the ‘Latin authors,’ and ‘The Teutonic
  languages’; and a short final chapter on the literature of Ireland and
  Wales completes what is at best but a hasty survey of a vast
  field.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “There are enough learned references here to challenge the literary
  expert at every turn. Indeed, we can hardly see how any one can
  understand this book to whom the things it deals with are not already
  perfectly familiar. To such a one it offers a somewhat confused résumé
  of matters he should know already. For the young student it is far too
  abstruse, and for the general reader it lacks the unity and
  concentration which alone can command his attention. Mr. Ker’s bane is
  fine writing; he has a certain sense of humor that now and then is
  useful, but it leads him into long ways around where directness and
  compactness are prime necessities.” E. E.

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 628. Ap. ‘05. 410w.

  “By wise selection of his materials, lucid exposition, and occasional
  happy characterization, he maintains the interest even of those who
  are prepared to find the Dark ages pretty dull and unprofitable. Of
  actual error we think the work will be found to contain very little.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 382. My. 11, ‘05. 940w.


=Kerr, Robert Pollok.= Blue flag: or, The Covenanters who contended for
Christ’s crown and covenant. 75c. Presbyterian com.

  The origin and history of the Covenanters is accurately and stirringly
  presented in this little book which is intended for class study in
  Sunday schools and young people’s societies. To this end a series of
  questions is given at the close of the volume.


* =Kerst, Friedrich,= comp. Beethoven: the man and the artist, as
revealed in his own words: tr. and ed. by H: E: Krehbiel. *$1. Huebsch.

  Much of the material used for compiling this Beethoven handbook has
  been drawn from letters, reports of conversations, and diaries
  heretofore unavailable. The author has classified his cullings under
  appropriate chapter headings, and they serve to enlighten Beethoven
  lovers upon the great composer’s spiritual, philosophical and human
  observations.


* =Kerst, Friedrich,= comp. Mozart: the man and the artist, as revealed
in his own words; tr. and ed. by H: E: Krehbiel. *$1. Huebsch.

  From material gleaned here and there, the author has pieced together
  “an autobiography of Mozart written without conscious purpose, and for
  that reason peculiarly winning, illuminating and convincing. The
  outward things in Mozart’s life are all but ignored in it, but there
  is a frank and full disclosure of the great musician’s artistic,
  intellectual and moral character, made in his own words.”


* =Kester, Vaughan.= Fortunes of the Landrays. †$1.50. McClure.

  This story “begins and ends in an Ohio town, and is essentially a
  picture of life in that community; but the adventures of certain of
  its characters take us at times to the far West with the
  forty-niners—to Salt Lake City in the early days of Brigham Young,
  to the closing scenes of the Civil war, and to the prairies of
  Kansas. The story is one of three generations, not only of the
  Landrays, but of the other families with whose fortunes theirs are
  associated.”—Dial.

  * “On the whole, a solid and capable story, with flashes of
  brilliancy.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “A novel whose interest, although complicated, is remarkably well
  sustained. Its faults of incoherency do not prevent it from being a
  fairly readable production.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 309. N. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  * “The chief merit of the story lies in its character drawing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.

  * “This story is unsatisfactory. There is good work in it; but the
  general scheme is weak. Characterization is one of Mr. Kester’s
  strongest qualities.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 633. N. 11, ‘05. 220w.


=Ketcham, Heber D.= Certainty of the kingdom and other sermons. The
Methodist pulpit. Second series, *50c. Meth. bk.

  In the hope that the ways of God may be made more plain to his
  readers, the author offers these eight sermons entitled, The certainty
  of the kingdom, Our sonship, The will, the pivot of destiny. The
  unveiled vision, Paul, the preacher, and Life’s procession of the
  seasons.


=Key, A. Cooper-.= Primer of explosives, for the use of local inspectors
and dealers. *35c. Macmillan.

  “The author gives a short description of the manufacture of the chief
  explosives, but its great value will be found in the sections devoted
  to special risks with each class, the methods of storing and packing,
  and a particularly useful chapter on the general construction and
  management of a store, the destruction of explosives, etc. It is
  certain that a careful study of the book by local inspectors will lead
  to a better understanding of the whole question of explosives.... For
  those traders and users who have the handling of these goods after
  they have left the manufactory the book should be equally
  valuable.”—Nature.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 962. S. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  “Is what such a handbook should be.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 369. S. 16. 250w.

  “This little book should prove to be of great value to those for whose
  benefit it has been mainly written.” J. S. S. B.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 507. S. 21, ‘05. 220w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 638. S. 30, ‘05. 220w.


=Khan,—(Hadji), and Sparroy, Wilfrid.= With the pilgrims to Mecca,
*$3.50. Lane.

  An account of Mr. Khan’s journey to Mecca in 1902 as a special
  correspondent of the Morning Post. The author is a Mohammedan and
  speaks Arabic fluently. He tells of the various rites and ceremonies
  which must be performed by the pilgrims, and of their strange
  religious feasts and festivals. There are also chapters upon bazaars
  and social life in the holy city, the whole being enlivened by the
  original humor of the author’s guide. There is a closing chapter upon
  the slave market by Mr. Sparroy.

  “A book which gives perhaps the most vivid and picturesque account of
  the great pilgrimage which has ever been written in English, compared
  with which the well known narratives of Burckhardt and Burton are dry,
  jejune and colourless. For vigour of style and picturesque treatment
  of Hadji Khan may be compared with the famous traveller, Palgrave,
  with the latter’s tendency to embroider the narrative at the expense
  of accuracy.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 329. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1240w.

  “A welcome book for our libraries.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 565. Je. ‘05. 220w.

  “No portion of the book lacks interest for the curiously inclined, and
  it is admirably and graphically written.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 383. Je. 1, ‘05. 580w.

  “It is unfortunate that little reliance can be put on our author’s
  accuracy. With the pictures of society and trade in Mecca it is
  different; these are most lively in color and give every appearance of
  truth.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 319. Ap. 20, ‘05. 560w.

  “For an insight into the mind of the Oriental, and more particularly
  of the followers of the prophet, with the ceremonies of his faith, we
  know of nothing equal to the work under notice.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 165. Mr. 18, ‘05. 820w.

  “Every detail of the ‘pilgrim’s progress’ from his arrival at Jeddah
  is minutely set forth, and that with a force and local colour that
  increases one’s interest.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 315. S. 2, ‘05. 300w.


=Kielland, Alexander L.= Professor Lovedahl; tr. from the Norwegian, by
Rebecca Blair Flandrau. *$1.25. Turner, H. B.

  “A romance from the Northland. The love of money and power lead to the
  downfall of a society man and to the gradual ruin of a whole
  community. The author aims to put corruption and cant in their proper
  places.”—Bookm.

  “A story pre-eminently Scandinavian in its matter, inspiration, and
  outcome. Nobody in it is happy; few people in it are good. It is all
  horribly futile and Scandinavian.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 36. Ja. 21, ‘05. 250w. (Outline of plot).


=Kildare, Owen.= My Mamie Rose: the story of my regeneration. $1. Baker.

  A popular edition of this autobiography of a child of the Bowery, a
  newsboy, a “beer slinger” in a notorious dive, a pugilist, one who
  could not read or write until he was thirty, who now at thirty-eight
  earns his living by his pen, and upholds the cause of right. It is the
  story of how this development of the real man in him came about thru
  the influence of his Mamie Rose, the little school teacher who died on
  the eve of their marriage, and also, tho perhaps he would not admit
  it, thru the influence of his pal, the bull pup Bill.

  “‘My Mamie Rose’ is a true love story, a human document and a
  photograph of slum life as it is to-day. Its effect will be to
  demolish theories of environment and to inspire the settlement worker
  with greater hope.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 975. S. ‘05. 280w.


=Kinealy, John Henry.= Centrifugal fans: a theoretical and practical
treatise on fans for moving air in large quantities at comparatively low
pressures. *$5. Spon.

  “This compact little treatise is devoted mainly to the theory of
  centrifugal fans. There is included in it, however, a brief outline
  showing the evolution of the present usual commercial type of
  centrifugal fan and some practical information concerning the less
  common types, such as the cone type, running without a casing, and
  disk or propeller fans. The work is primarily devoted, however, to the
  ordinary commercial fan for use in heating and ventilating work or for
  mechanical draught.”—Engin. N.

  “It is difficult to see how this work can be of material value to the
  practicing engineer.” D. W. Taylor.

       — =Engin. N.= 53: 644. Je. 15, ‘05. 2060w.


=King, Charles.= Medal of honor: a story of peace and war. *$1.25.
Hobart.

  This is not one of General King’s garrison stories, altho it is of
  course a story of the army. Its hero, Ronald Fane, who wins the medal
  of honor and the girl he loves, is first an instructor at West Point,
  and after active service against the Apaches becomes instructor in
  military tactics at a western university. There are many complications
  and the plot is skilfully tangled and skilfully straightened out
  again.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 409. Je. 17, ‘05. 380w.


* =King, Charles Francis.= Soldier’s trial. $1.50. Hobart.

  A sub-title declares that this novel is, “an episode in the canteen
  crusade,” and it does set forth the army sentiment against the well
  meaning outsiders who defeated the ends of temperance by abolishing
  the canteen; but the book is largely concerned with a garrison scandal
  caused by a beautiful Spanish girl with two husbands and many lovers.
  There are several unsavory episodes and the book draws, perhaps, a
  less pleasing picture of army life than any of General King’s army
  stories.


=King, Henry Churchill.= Personal and ideal elements in education.
**$1.50. Macmillan.

  “President King writes for the scholar a conservative interpretation
  of the results gained by men like Coe, Starbuck, and Leuba in their
  researches concerning psychology of conversion and allied themes....
  The chapters were first delivered as papers before religious
  conventions.... The volume contains President King’s inaugural
  address, another plea for the retention of the old-time college
  course.”—Dial.

  Reviewed by Henry D. Sheldon.

         =Dial.= 38: 272. Ap. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  * “His plea for less of the mechanical and more of the personal in
  education is worth the attention of teachers and of all interested in
  the methods which are at this moment forming the future citizen.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 818. O. 5, ‘05. 180w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 511. Ap. ‘05. 90w.


=King, Henry Churchill.= Rational living: some practical inferences from
modern psychology, **$1.25. Macmillan.

  “President King ... has brought together the ‘four great emphases’ of
  psychological study in popular form, and pointed out their direct
  practical bearing on the conduct of life. For the satisfaction of
  those who have not at hand the works of the masters in psychology, he
  quotes these freely, so that the reader may judge of the adequacy of
  the grounds on which are based the practical counsels which they
  suggest for rational living in respect to growth, character,
  happiness, and influence. In conclusion it is shown that ‘just these
  ideal conditions to which psychology leads us Christ declares to be
  actual.’”—Outlook.

  * “A serious and amazingly comprehensive study.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 100w.

  “The peculiar merit of President King’s work is that he has presented
  the fundamental facts of psychology, together with the practical
  counsels which they impose for a life in rational accord with our
  nature, more comprehensively and completely than any preceding
  writer.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 529. O. 28, ‘05. 200w.


Kingdom of Siam. See =Carter, A. Cecil=, ed.


=Kingsbury, Sara.= Atonement, $1. Eastern pub.

  The sweat shop, the college settlement, and the college itself, each
  points its own moral in this story of Marion, the niece of a
  millionaire, who turns from a life of luxury to work among the poor.
  Her self sacrifice, however, is not rewarded by personal happiness
  for, in the renunciation of Roger, her betrothed, she suffers equally
  with him as he works out his expiation for the betrayal of a daughter
  of the sweat-shop, who was employed in his great department store.


=Kingsley, Charles.= Hypatia. $1.25. Crowell.

  A new volume in that pleasing pocket edition: the “Thin paper
  classics.”


=Kingsley, Mrs. Florence (Morse).= Resurrection of Miss Cynthia. †$1.50.
Dodd.

  Miss Cynthia, a spinster of thirty-three, who has lived a narrow,
  cramped little life is told by her doctor that, owing to an affection
  of the lungs, she has only one more year to live. Instead of repining
  she decides to make her last days happy ones so she throws off all the
  traditions of her house, discards black for bright colors, and goes
  out to enjoy light and sunshine. As a result she finds both health and
  an old lover.

  * “Clever and pleasant tale.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 758. D. 2. 240w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 651. O. 7. ‘05. 290w.


=Kinzbrunner, Charles.= Testing the continuous current machine in
laboratories and test-rooms: a practical work for students and
engineers. $2. Wiley.

  “This work is a laboratory manual giving detailed instruction for
  carrying out numerous experiments upon direct current machines. The
  author has had constantly in mind the necessity of planning the
  exercises with a view to their practical application and has
  endeavored to make the book useful to engineers as well as to
  students.”—Engin. N.

  “It is a pleasure to commend Mr. Kinzbrunner’s manual to American
  readers and to state that it deserves to be classed with the somewhat
  similar works of Nichols, Swenson, and Frankenfield, and other
  well-known writers of electrical laboratory manuals.” Henry H. Norris.

   + + + =Engin.= N. 53: 638. Je. 15. ‘05. 820w.


=Kipling, Rudyard.= Seven seas. * *$2. Appleton.

  “In a green and gold cover, with an old-fashioned ship on it riding
  high before the wind, reappears this famous volume of verse by the
  unofficial laureate of Great Britain. The pages are adorned with
  decorative borders in green.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.


=Kirk, William Frederick.= Norsk nightingale: being the lyrics of a
“Lumberyack.” **75c. Small.

  “Faithful Norsk-English dialect, Western slang, cleverness in rhyme
  and structure, and odd incongruity of familiar stories put in a queer
  form—all help to make the poems amusing in a new fashion.”—Outlook.

  “Novelty and freshness, and no little ingenuity as a parodist, salute
  us in this volume of dialect verse.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 384. O. ‘05. 140w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 585. S. 9, ‘05. 190w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 246. My. 27, ‘05. 60w.


=Kiser, S. E.= Charles the chauffeur. $1. Stokes.

  “The story of the social and financial aspirations of a well-meaning
  and very able young chauffeur, who never killed anyone unless he had
  to in order to make a certain run, and who would handle a machine as
  few chauffeurs can.... The story, told by Charles himself and
  frequently spelled phonetically, abounds in descriptions of a highly
  diverting nature.”—N. Y. Times.

  “For those who enjoy humor of a broad up-to-date kind this will be
  just the kind of story they will like.”

       + =Sat. R.= 10: 342. Je. 10, ‘05. 270w.


=Kitton, Frederic George.= Dickens country. $2. Macmillan.

  A volume in the “Pilgrimage” series. A brief biography of the novelist
  which, in following his life, gives with the places, persons and
  incidents mentioned the part each played in his stories. There are
  fifty full-page illustrations in half-tone, including pictures of
  Dickens himself and of the places connected with him.

  “In ‘The Dickens country’ we have a work worthy of the subject and of
  the writer. Wherever he [Dickens pilgrim] may list to go, he should
  carry this book with him—a sure and faithful guide, and a pleasant
  travelling-companion.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 126. F. 11, ‘05. 1140w.

  “The work has been done so faithfully and so fully that it need never
  be attempted again.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 169. S. 16, ‘05. 430w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 156. Mr. 11. ‘05. 280w.

  “The book is coherent and accurate.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 168. Mr. 18, ‘05. 870w.

  “He had thoroughly mastered the subject, and wrote out of a
  well-filled mind.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 923. Je. 24, ‘05. 220w.


=Kittredge, George Lyman.= Old farmer and his almanack. *$2.50. Ware.

  Some observations on life and manners in New England a hundred years
  ago, suggested by reading the earlier numbers of Mr. Robert B.
  Thomas’s “Farmer’s Almanack”; together with extracts, curious,
  instructive, and entertaining, as well as a variety of miscellaneous
  matter.

  “There are, indeed, not a few purple patches sewed into this
  crazy-quilt, but they are hid from our eyes unless we find clues in
  the capacious index.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 507. Je. 22, ‘05. 1080w.

  “An interesting volume.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 217. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1160w.

  “A highly interesting book.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 436. S. 28, ‘05. 240w.


=Klein, Felix.= In the land of the strenuous life. **$2. McClurg.

  Kindly impressions of the United States, its institutions and its
  people by one whose object was to see and describe the things of our
  land which might serve as profitable examples to his “poor beloved
  France.” The Abbe visited New York, Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, Peoria,
  St. Louis and the World’s fair, Pittsburg, Baltimore, Washington and
  Philadelphia, and also saw something of Canada. His volume is
  dedicated to President Roosevelt and is an author’s translation of his
  successful French work.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 580. D. ‘05. 110w.

  “The good literary style of the English version, made by the Abbé
  himself, and the highly entertaining character of the narrative, will
  no doubt make it a favorite in this country also.” Percy F. Bicknell.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 162. S. 16, ‘05. 2210w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 719. O. 21, ‘05. 210w.

  “The wit and brilliancy that shine upon every page, and illuminate the
  acute judgments made by Abbé Klein, give a unique charm to the record,
  and will attract many readers.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 270w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 754. D. ‘05. 190w.


=Knapp, Oswald G.=, ed. Artist’s love story. *$3.50. Longmans.

  The letters of Sir Thomas Lawrence, Mrs. Siddons, and Maria and Sally
  Siddons help to tell the story of the love affairs of the artist and
  the two daughters of the great actress. Both girls died early of
  consumption and Lawrence died a bachelor, but lived to break other
  hearts. The book is illustrated with lithographs and facsimiles taken
  from drawings and portraits done by Lawrence.

       + =Dial.= 38: 130. F. 16, ‘05. 270w.

  “Its peculiar value consists in the light it casts upon an age when
  people cultivated and enjoyed their emotions more than they did wisdom
  or intelligence.”

     + + =Ind.= 68: 612. Mr. 16, ‘05. 860w.


=Knight, William A.= Retrospects. Vol. I. *$2.25. Scribner.

  “Any book from the pen of Dr. William Knight, the Wordsworth scholar
  and St. Andrews professor, is sure to be richly worth the reading....
  After noting, in his preface, the indisputable benefit to be derived
  from communion, whether personal or thru books, with ‘characters that
  are strong, original, exalted and benign, that are many sided,
  fertile-minded and ideal,’ he says a word condemnatory of that
  distorted presentation of a man’s life which is not seldom found in
  the so-called critical biography.” (Dial). “Professor Knight ... adds
  to fuller and more formal accounts of his literary contemporaries odds
  and ends of which he has had personal knowledge.” (N. Y. Times). Among
  the most interestingly discussed are Carlyle, Browning, Frederick D.
  Maurice, and Matthew Arnold. A second volume is promised.

  “Is a treat. Without conscious idealization, therefore, or any
  embroidery or amplification of plain facts and spoken words, Professor
  Knight has produced some chapters of fragmentary biography that are as
  fascinating as they are convincing, their very charm indeed largely
  lying in their evident truthfulness and their admirable restraint.”
  Percy F. Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 117. F. 16, ‘05. 2760w. (Survey of contents).

  “‘Retrospects’ is, on the whole too much involved in the academic and
  professionally literary point of view to inspire such interest as a
  more human account of the same people must needs call forth.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 29. Ja. 14, ‘05. 840w. (Survey of contents).


* =Knipe, Emilie Benson=, il. Girls and boys: with new stories and
verses by Alice Calhoun Haines. †$1.50. Stokes.

  Pictures and verses of present day American children at home and at
  play. There are eight full-page illustrations in colors.


=Knowles, Frederick Lawrence.= Love triumphant. **$1. Estes.

  A volume containing ninety poems, grouped into five sections and
  singing of human love, divine love, love triumphant over guilt, and
  love of country.

  “In Mr. Knowles’ poems we find the imaginative genius of the true
  poet, the grace of the accomplished versifier and the prophet’s high
  and noble appeal to the reason and sense of right in man, all in so
  eminent a degree that his work holds for us a special charm.”

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 557. My. ‘05. 3050w.

  “Graceful workmanship.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 199. Mr. 16, ‘05. 240w.

  “Mr. Knowles’s volume contains some very good verses. But there are
  also some very bad ones.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1016. My. 4, ‘05. 150w.

 *   + — =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “The illustrations are all very well reproduced, and beneath each one
  a full description, with sizes, etc., is given, a most useful feature,
  making reference and identification easy.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: 82. Mr. ‘05. 150w.

         =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 64. My. ‘05. 180w.

  “Mr. Knowles, while not disdaining the graces of rhythm and rime, and
  while taking the most sweet and serious things of life as subject
  matter, yet contrives to give a strain of real music that comes
  refreshingly, and to voice the themes that carry swift appeal to the
  heart.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 730w.

  “As one reads on through the book and rereads, the rhetorical
  virtuosity becomes more obvious and the poetry less.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 280w.

  “He gives us flashing poetic thoughts, but he cannot show them in such
  beauty as to move the soul. He is at his best in expression when,
  abandoning the labored incentive of the magazine demand, he tells
  simply some little story with feeling in it.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 135. Ja. 26, ‘05. 640w.


=Knowles, Robert Edward.= St. Cuthbert’s: a novel. †$1.50. Revell.

  “The pastor of a large Presbyterian church in Canada gives here in
  semi-romantic form the story of his parish. Most of his characters
  speak Scotch dialect.” (Outlook.) A love story of which the
  clergyman’s daughter, Margaret, is the heroine, runs thru the book.

  * “He has given us the best study of mingled pathos and humor that we
  have read for several years.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1264. D. 2, ‘05. 320w.

  “The book is not without passages rich in humor and pathos, but it is
  too didactic, and in some particulars lacks the restraint which many
  readers would naturally expect of a clerical pen.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 579. N. 4, ‘05. 60w.

  “The interest and value of the book lie in its revelation of Scottish
  traits, in its author’s appreciation of a noble bedrock of granite
  character underlying the soil infertile of the flowers of speech.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 220w.


=Knowles, W. Pitcairn.= Dutch pottery and porcelain. *$2.50. Scribner.

  A guide to the collector and student in attributing specimens to the
  correct maker and factory and period. The author is himself a
  connoisseur and famous collector, and “tells us the alphabet from
  which pottery and the different makes of porcelain are constructed.
  Then, by the aid of a few historical facts, he creates a Dutch
  atmosphere. When we are sufficiently acclimatised he traces the
  development of the industry from the time when the potter-baker
  accepted the assistance of the seller of clay and went into
  partnership with the potter-turner, till he finally collaborated with
  the potter-painter, and the porcelain factory came into existence.”
  (Acad.) The volume belongs to the “Newnes library series.”

  “Our author is a reliable, as well as an entertaining guide.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 79. Ja. 28, ‘05. 460w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 466. Je. 8, ‘05. 840w.

  “His knowledge of the literature and history of the Dutch art is put
  at the disposal of his readers in a simple and engaging way, aided by
  beautiful colored plates of many museum pieces.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 190w.


=Knox, George William.= Japanese life in town and country. **$1.20.
Putnam.

  “After an introductory chapter on ‘The point of view,’ notable for its
  liberal-minded common sense, Dr. Knox reviews briefly, but clearly and
  interestingly, the history of Japan from the traditionary period down
  to the present time. Chapters VI and VII are taken up with Buddhism
  and Confucianism; Chapter VIII ... gives an account of the efforts
  made in the eighteenth century to spread Confucianism by popular
  preaching and quotes at length from one of the curious Confucian
  sermons. So important in Dr. Knox’s mind is the influence of the
  samurai and his philosophy upon the Japanese of to-day that he devotes
  three chapters to this subject. The quotations from the autobiography
  of Arai Hakuseki in Chapter X are as informing as anything that has
  lately come to us about feudal Japan.”—Ind.

  “In this readable volume Dr. Knox has succeeded in compressing into
  small space a great deal of interesting matter about Japan.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 211. Ja. 26, ‘05. 340w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 758. D. ‘04. 50w.


=Kobbé, Gustav.= Famous actors and their homes. $1.50. Little.

  Little chats about the home side of John Drew, William Gillette,
  Richard Mansfield, E. H. Sothern, and Francis Wilson with closing
  chapters on the Lamb’s club and the Players. There are many
  illustrations taken from photographs of the actors at home.

  * “These sketches are deservedly popular, for they combine dignity
  with interest, in a field where such a combination is rarely
  achieved.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 445. D. 16, ‘05. 110w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 619. S. 23, ‘05. 250w.


=Kobbé, Gustav.= Famous actresses and their homes. $1.50. Little.

  Word pictures and photographs of Maude Adams, Ethel Barrymore, Julia
  Marlowe, Annie Russell, and Mrs. Fiske, when off stage, also chapters
  upon, The actress’s home behind the scenes; The actress’s Christmas;
  and Some actresses in summer.


=Kobbé, Gustav.= Loves of great composers. *$2.50. Crowell.

  In an easy conversational manner the real romance in the lives of
  Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Chopin, Liszt, and Wagner is
  set forth. Several of the stories are based upon untranslated
  material, and many popular errors are corrected. The volume is
  illustrated from photographs, and includes portraits of the composers
  themselves and of Constance, wife of Mozart; Countess Therese von
  Brunswick, the “immortal beloved” of Beethoven; Mendelssohn’s wife and
  sister; Clara Schumann; and a reproduction of the famous pastel of
  Countess Potocka.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “The accounts are entertaining, and the reader is grateful for their
  complete avoidance of sentimental rhapsodizing.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 445. D. 16, ‘05. 110w.

 *   + + =Nation.= 81: 467. D. 7, ‘05. 130w.

  * “Mr. Kobbe’s book is curiously entertaining. It is not a rehash of
  old and stale matter in a new binding, but is the result of personal
  investigation and study.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  * “Two charmingly written volumes.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 60w.


=Kobbe, Gustav.= Opera singers; a pictorial souvenir. $1.50. Ditson.

  “A profusely illustrated pictorial souvenir of the most famous living
  opera singers, with their biographies.... This handsome work is
  interesting as giving intimate glimpses of opera folk.... The artists
  considered in this attractive book are Nordica, Calvé, Eames, Melba,
  Sembrich, Ternina, and Schumann-Heink, and Caruso and Jean and Edouard
  De Reszke. There is also a chapter on ‘Opera-singers off duty.’”—R. of
  Rs.

  “Besides being full of anecdotes, the compilation is of great value as
  giving biographic sketches of the singers taken down from their own
  lips, sometimes with the aid of stenography.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 380. My. 11, ‘05. 70w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 707. Mr. 18, ‘05. 30w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 10: 510. Ap. ‘05. 90w.


* =Kobbé, Gustav.= Wagner and his Isolde. **$1. Dodd.

  “The correspondence and journals of Wagner and Mathilde Wesendonck,
  which have lately appeared, are the basis of this volume, which gives
  the whole story of that fascinating period of Wagner’s life. The
  author obtained from a friend of Mme. Wesendonck some personal
  impressions of her, and some photographs that are reproduced
  herein.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 467. D. 7, ‘05. 80w.

  * “To the student of Wagner’s music these letters afford some
  interesting commentary from the composer.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 432. O. 21, ‘05. 230w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 50w.


* =Kolle, Frederick Strange.= Fifty and one tales of modern fairyland,
†$1.50. Grafton press.

  “The tales are really new, and entertaining as well. They teach good
  lessons without obtruding the moral aim, and many of them are based on
  modern scientific discoveries and processes. Even the balloon and the
  automobile—a ‘conscientious’ one, not the ordinary unprincipled
  sort—figure in the stories. The illustrations by Flora Sheffield are
  in keeping.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1387. D. 14, ‘05. 15w.

  * “And one finds them exactly what one might expect sterilized fairy
  tales to be—made of quite tasteless and sawdusty particles.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 861. D. 2. ‘05. 370w.


* =Konody, Paul G.= Filippino Lippi. $1.25. Warne.

  This volume in the “Newnes art library” contains a brief life of
  Filippino Lippi and sixty-four full-page reproductions of his works.

 *   + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 442. S. 30. 190w.

  * “Is a more serious performance than most of the contributors to this
  series have offered us.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 130w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 888. D. 9, ‘05. 130w.


=Koons, Ulysses Sidney (Brother Jabez, pseud.).= Tale of the kloster: a
romance of the German mystics of the Cocalico. †$1.50. Am. Bapt.

  A description of life in the curious celibate community of Ephrata,
  where German mystics, refugees to Pennsylvania from the persecutions
  which followed the Hundred years war, endured the hardships of the
  pioneer. There is also a love story interwoven with danger and
  suffering and the rigid life of the brotherhood.

  “As a representation of the manners and feelings of the time and the
  strange community the story has its own value. It is written with
  simplicity and grace.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 350. F. 4, ‘05. 140w.

  “Rather violently injected a love story. Every contribution to
  American history which recognizes the proportionate importance of the
  different ingredients which have gone to the composition of our
  national stock and so helps to a broader and fuller understanding of
  our national development deserves recognition and encouragement.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 94. Ja. 19, ‘05. 340w.


=Kropotkin, Petr Alexieevich, kniaz’.= Russian literature. **$2.
McClure.

  A very complete account of Russian literature from its beginning in
  mythology and folklore to the present day, with much personal
  information about its great figures and copious extracts from its
  masterpieces.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 656. Je. 24, ‘09. 610w.

  “The work of Prince Kropotkin is very comprehensive in view of its
  scope. The English of Prince Kropotkin’s book is fairly good, although
  occasionally stiff and unidiomatic.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 70. Jl. 15, 2060w.

  “The greater part of the book, devoted wholly to the
  nineteenth-century writings, treated from the author’s novel point of
  view and full of the charm of his attractive personality, make this
  volume, in spite of some glaring misprints, a very desirable addition
  to Russian literary history.” Henry James Forman.

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 185. Ag. ‘05. 1520w.

  “Prince Kropotkin has given us a work of absorbing interest, colored,
  no doubt, by his own political philosophy, but discriminating and
  profound in its judgment of aesthetic values. Of the English language,
  as his readers well know, he is an absolute master.”

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 19. Jl. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  “But he has done us an especial service by making accessible
  information concerning the younger Russian writers whom we want to
  know something about.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 638. S. 14, ‘05. 610w.

  “Prince Kropotkin’s book is admirable, and, so far, at any rate, as
  the later Russian literature is concerned, should supercede all other
  works of the kind in our language.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 150. My. 12, ‘05. 1550w.

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 526. Je. 29, ‘05. 1780w.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 449. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1890w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 247. My. 27, ‘05. 320w.

  “In our opinion the most satisfactory treatise which has yet appeared
  in English on the literature of Russia.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 99: 774. Je. 10, ‘05. 2260w.




                                   L


=La Colonie, Jean Martin de.= Chronicles of an old campaigner, M. De La
Colonie, 1692-1717; from the French of Walter C. Horsley. *$4. Dutton.

  “These memoirs of the war of the Spanish succession have been unknown
  to English readers, and in this adequate translation have real
  historic value. Curious sidelights on military customs and methods of
  war two hundred years ago are included. The ‘old campaigner’ had a
  bluff, rugged, and not uninteresting personality. There are portraits
  and other illustrations.”—Outlook.

  “The book is preëminently for military men, being devoted to the
  details of battles and sieges, of marches and counter-marches. Other
  readers will find it tiresomely prolix. Both translator and printer
  appear to have done their work well. Portraits, plans of battles and a
  copious index are duly provided.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 158. Mr. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  “It cannot be said that the book is a substantial addition to
  historical knowledge, but it is pleasant reading and is beautifully
  illustrated with portraits and plans.” I. S. Leadam.

       + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 808. O. ‘05. 1610w.

  “This book contains little information regarding politics or society,
  but certainly deserves to be known by all who care to study warfare as
  an art.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 461. Je. 8. ‘05. 410w.

  “The translation of the memoirs by Mr. Horsley has its special merit,
  as it gives an excellent idea of the methods of warfare at the close
  of the seventeenth and the beginning of the eighteenth centuries. The
  translation is remarkably well done, and the notes at the foot of the
  pages of great value.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 70. P. 4, ‘05. 1300w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 348. F. 4, ‘05. 60w.


* =La Fontaine, Rachel Adelaide.= Days and hours of Raphael, with a key
to the hours. **$1. Grafton press.

  “A little manual of art study, substantially bound, copiously
  illustrated, and intended for the tyro in matters aesthetic. The full
  page plates in half-tone, including, besides the seven ‘Days’ and the
  twelve ‘Hours,’ two portraits of Raphael, are of excellent quality.
  The accompanying notes of explanation are very elementary,
  presupposing little knowledge of art or mythology on the part of the
  reader.”—Dial.

  * “It is a pity, seeing her effort for simplicity, that the author
  does not couch her ideas in less obscure and tortuously constructed
  sentences.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  * “The explanations of the illustrations the book contains are
  comprehensive and interesting. The book will have a place in any
  collection of Raphaeliana.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1376. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 874. D. 9, ‘05. 110w.


=Lahontan, Armand Louis de Delondarce, baron de.= New voyages to North
America; reprinted from the English ed. of 1703, with a facsimile of
original title pages, and 24 maps and il., and the addition of introd.,
notes, and analytical index, by Reuben Gold Thwaites; (with bibliography
by Victor Hugo Paltists). 2v. *$7.50. McClurg.

  Two books of adventurous travel in the heart of North America. The
  author came to New France at the age of seventeen in 1683 with a
  detachment of French marines, and he writes of experiences which cover
  many years, giving “an account of the customs, commerce, religion and
  strange opinions of the savages,” with geographical information and
  personal comment. “There is also a dialogue between the author and a
  general of the savages,” and “an account of the author’s retreat to
  Portugal and Denmark and his remarks on their courts.” His book was
  very popular when first published but the truth of the whole was later
  doubted because of one chapter, which gave in detail an apparently
  fictitious story of the discovery of the River Long.

  “These volumes display enthusiasm as well as erudition, and render
  accessible a great quantity of curious information. The labour that
  has been bestowed both on the letters themselves and on the
  bibliography is worthy of the highest praise.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 386. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1050w.

  “The foot-notes are admirably done, and a long introduction describes
  entertainingly the character of the writer and his narrative. Mr.
  Paltsits in this, as in preceding volumes of the series, contributes a
  scholarly and satisfying bibliography.”

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 946. Jl. ‘05. 100w.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 590. My. ‘05. 130w.

  Reviewed by John J. Halsey.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 14. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1060w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 211. Jl. 27, ‘05. 360w.

  “Dr. Thwaites’s editorial notes are similar in quality to those which
  have accompanied his ‘Jesuit relations’ and other works of Western
  travel. The Introduction, however, contains one or two slips.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 13. Jl. 6, ‘05. 540w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 95. F. 11, ‘05. 190w.

  “Mr. Reuben Gold Thwaites’s notes add much to the value of the text.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 180. Mr. 25. ‘05. 460w.


* =Laking, Guy Francis.= Furniture of Windsor castle, by Guy Francis
Laking, Keeper of the king’s armory; published by command of His Majesty
King Edward VII. *35c. Dutton.

  * “A sumptuous book, appearing as an imperial quarto, bound in half
  leather, with the British royal monogram in color on one side. The
  collection at Windsor castle is well-known for its fine specimens of
  Louis XIV., XV., and XVI. periods, as well as the best examples of the
  most famous craftsmen of the past two centuries—Jacob Chippendale,
  Riesener, André Bouille, Gaspar Teune, and many others. The
  introduction to the book treats of the starting of the collection and
  its growth, from the beginning of the seventeenth century down to the
  present day.... The illustrations, presenting pictures of the finest
  specimens in the collection, are in photogravure.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: 185. D. ‘05. 120w.

  * “It is evidently the work of one who has a good knowledge of
  technical history and an eye that can discriminate between original
  work and restorations.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 428. D. 8, ‘05. 360w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.


=Lamb, Charles and Mary.= Works and letters, v. 6 and 7. *$2.25. Putnam.

  “Here certainly is the largest, richest edition of the ‘Letters’ which
  has been published, clearly superior to some in size, to others in the
  quality and scope of the notes, and to all as a book that is easy and
  pleasant to read. In short, Mr. Lucas seems to come near to an
  inaccessible perfection, as well as to have produced the best edition
  of the ‘Letters’.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 605. Je. 10, ‘05. 1890w. (Review of v. 6. and 7.)

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 680. Je. 3. 4290w.

  “Mr. Lucas’s copious and most interesting notes are the fruit of years
  of loving study and research. To him Lamb is indeed ‘Saint Charles’;
  yet his chief editorial merit lies, perhaps, in giving us Saint
  Charles un-canonized.” William Archer.

     + + =Critic.= 47:50. Jl. ‘05. 1260w.

         =Dial.= 38: 360. My. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “The editor has used extraordinary pains to make clear the innumerable
  allusions to persons and things well known to correspondents, but
  unknown to us.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 374. My. 11, ‘05. 300w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 108. F. 18, ‘05. 390w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 244. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1520w.

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 640. Ap. 29, ‘05. 1780w.


* =Lamb, Charles, and Lamb, Mary Anne.= Tales from Shakespeare. *$2.50.
Scribner.

  “A small quarto, liberal and very clear in print, and adorned for each
  play by a full-page colored design from the pencil of Norman M. Price.
  These designs are, in point of merit and attractiveness in perfect
  keeping with the rest of the elegant volume, and will impress and
  educate the taste of any child who reads the classic by himself....
  The portraits of the authors after those in the National portrait
  gallery face the bordered title-page.”—Nation.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 120w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1388. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

  * “We recall no edition of Charles and Mary Lamb’s ‘Tales from
  Shakespeare’ comparable at all points with that just issued by Jack in
  London.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 299. O. 12, ‘05. 120w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 712. O. 21, ‘05. 360w.

  * “This is a handsome book, worthy in form of its contents.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 692. N. 4. ‘05. 110w.


* =Lamb, Osborn Rennie.= Essay on the drama. $1. Ames & R.

  This essay which discusses the drama in its various phases is
  developed under the divisions Criticism is not analysis; The aesthetic
  essential in drama; The play of the people; Sympathy as a dramatic
  force; The dramatic power of terror; Humor in drama; Reflective
  thought in drama; and Scenery and music in drama as an aid to the
  creation of atmosphere. The essay may prove suggestive to dramatic
  critics, and it will certainly help the average reader to form his own
  opinions and to challenge the “misstatement and false argument” so
  often found in newspaper criticism.


=Lamb, Osborn Rennie, and Dixon, H. Claiborn.= Iberian: Anglo-Greek
play. $1.50. Ames & Rollinson press.

  Following the ancient dramas in unities of time, place and theme, “The
  Iberian” combines in a one-act play “the beauties of the ancient Greek
  drama with those of the modern romantic play, so as to adapt the same
  to the stage and scenario of to-day.” Athens is the scene of the play,
  435 B. C., the time.


=Lamia, pseud.= See =Austin, Alfred.=


=Lamprecht, Karl Gotthard.= What is history? Five lectures on the modern
science of history; tr. from the Germ. by E. A. Andrews, **$1.25.
Macmillan.

  One of these lectures was first given at the Congress of arts and
  sciences in St. Louis, and the other four at the sesquicentennial of
  Columbia university. The subjects treated are Historical development
  and present character of the science of history; The general course of
  German history from a psychological point of view; The translation to
  the psychic character of the German present; Universal mechanism of
  psychic periods of transition; Psychology of the periods of culture in
  general; and Problems of universal history.

  “‘What is history?’ is throughout suggestive and provocative, though
  the work of translation has not been skilfully performed; indeed, the
  English version is in one or two passages unintelligible.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 801. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1480w.

  “The translation inevitably suffers from such conditions. In spite of
  them it gives us a rendering which is clear, readable, and reliable
  for sense, and which is a useful contribution toward an English
  terminology of the subject. Many inexcusable inaccuracies in detail
  occur, however.” Asa Currier Tilton.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 119. O. ‘05. 1360w.

  “Unfortunately the book abounds in abstruse terminology borrowed from
  psychology and kindred sciences.”

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 590. My. ‘05. 380w.

  “Mr. Andrews has done his work well, and made a good rendering.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 529. Ap. 29. 60w.

       + =Critic.= 47: 187. Ag. ‘05. 60w.

  “Throughout, indeed, the translation scarcely helps to clear up the
  obscurities of the original.” A. G.

     + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 604. Jl. ‘05. 390w.

  “Professor Lamprecht has a clumsy method of presentation ... and he
  adds to the difficulty by much elusiveness of demonstration and by an
  awkward terminology. Professor Lamprecht’s method may be good
  psychology, it certainly is not history.”

   + — — =Nation.= 81: 123. Ag. 10, ‘05. 2270w.

  “If well translated, they would constitute a very stimulating volume.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 439. Jl. 1, ‘05. 530w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1062. Ap. 29, ‘05. 150w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 190w.

  “There is a meaning, we doubt not, in his words, but it is very hard
  to get at.”

       — =Spec.= 94: 719. My. 13, ‘05. 190w.

  “Their appeal is to the student of the science of society rather than
  to the historian proper.”

       + =Yale R.= 14: 107. My. ‘05. 100w.


=Lancaster, G. B.= Sons o’ men. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  A collection of short stories which “deal with the men who herd and
  shear the sheep in South New Zealand and save them from storm and snow
  at the cost of hardships scarce endurable. At times, too, the native
  plays a part.” (R. of Rs.)

  “Through such books hope grows less forlorn.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 210w.

  * “Lively reading—and informative as well.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 758. D. ‘05. 170w.

  “Mr. Lancaster reaches a high level of excellence in ‘The story of
  Wi.’”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 23. Ja. 7, ‘05. 100w.


=Lancaster, R. V.= Creed of Christ: a study of the Gospels. 60c.
Presbyterian com.

  The author states in his preface, “I have caught a glimpse of Jesus
  from what, to me, is a fresh viewpoint,” and this he voices in his
  book, which is divided into two sections: The introduction, and The
  creed. Under the latter head he discusses, The scriptures; God; Satan;
  Sin; Redeemed men; The kingdom; The second coming; The final glory,
  and Kindred subjects.

  “His volume is careful, painstaking, conscientious, but without
  insight or imagination, and so without literary quality.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 569. N. 4, ‘05. 360w.


=Landon, Percival.= The opening of Tibet. $3.80. Doubleday.

  “Mr. Landon gives in ‘The opening of Tibet,’ an account of Lhasa, the
  history of Tibet, the folk-lore and manners of the Tibetans, and the
  present relations with the rest of the world, with which he became
  acquainted as the representative of the London Times with the mission
  sent by the British government to Lhasa. The book is profusely
  illustrated with reproductions of photographs and sketches and maps.”
  (N. Y. Times). An introduction is provided by Col. Younghusband, who
  headed the mission to the Forbidden land.

  “The book is ponderous in size, wide in its scope and interesting
  reading. Including the numerous appendices, the range of information
  extends from the frogs and fishes of the country to the folklore, art,
  religion and amazing priest-craft of the people.”

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 591. S. ‘05. 170w.

  “Regrettable that some errors of fact and date should have crept into
  the earlier and historical pages of the work.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 231. F. 25. 2440w.

  “Fine descriptive writing, indeed, is characteristic of Mr. Landon’s
  work throughout.”

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 305. My. ‘05. 1100w.

  “His style is a model for the writer of travel books.” W. E. Griffis.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 560. Je. ‘05. 790w.

  “Is a virile and picturesque narrative of great general interest. All
  in all, it is a welcome addition to the annals of travel and
  exploration.” H. Addington Bruce.

     + + =Current Literature.= 38: 345. Ap. ‘05. 3400w.

  “Mr. Landon has the genius of the true reporter for weaving a large
  amount of detail in an interesting ‘story,’ but he gives no map or
  index.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1186. My. 25, ‘05. 370w.

  “The work is conceived on broader lines, historically and
  philosophically, than the rival volume of Mr. Candler.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 273. Ap. 6, ‘05. 1710w.

  “A characteristically British presentation of a most interesting and
  somewhat delicate subject. The vast amount of information which Mr.
  Landon has collected ... This is not a solemn book altogether.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 116. F. 25, ‘05. 2590w.

  “The Tibetan expedition was fortunate to have with it a writer so
  competent to do justice to its romance, so sympathetic towards Tibetan
  life, so eagerly inquisitive and retentive of impressions, and above
  all, the possessor of a style so dexterous and graceful.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 365. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1620w.


=Landor, Arnold Henry Savage.= Tibet and Nepal. *$5. Macmillan.

  “In his book, Mr. Landor tells about a second journey to Tibet. He
  describes the natives, their costumes, and religion, and the country
  through which he passes, besides recounting adventures on the way. He
  has provided numerous colored and black-and-white pictures, being
  reproductions of sketches made on the spot. These illustrations are
  portraits of the native men, women, and children, scenery, churches,
  animals, &c. In the opening chapter the author writes of his
  preparations for this visit.”—N. Y. Times.

  “This odd, unsatisfactory and fascinating essay. The present writer
  can only say that for his part, he believes his author to be sincere
  and correct, and one of the pluckiest, truest-hearted and most
  enterprising men in the world to boot.... One of the cleverest, too,
  for the drawings in colour and black and white display a very acute
  artistic sense and an exquisite perception of the beauty and grandeur
  of mountain scenery.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 101. F. 4, ‘05. 570w.

  “It is difficult to take Mr. Landor seriously, and we find it
  impossible to follow his tour geographically.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 334. Mr. 18. 530w.

  “The illustrations with which Mr. Landor has liberally besprinkled the
  story of his achievements are even more astonishing than the text.” H.
  Addington Bruce.

       — =Bookm.= 21: 307. My. ‘05. 520w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 105. F. 18, ‘05. 230w.

  “Apart from some apparent faults, the book is decidedly agreeable and
  even exciting reading, and presents in many ways an intimate picture
  of the life of the Tibetans and their innumerable curious customs. The
  colored pictures are striking and effective.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 606. Mr. 4, ‘05. 130w.

  “It is a weird and fascinating story, told in the author’s best vein.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 508. Ap. ‘05. 90w.

  “He traveled only on the outskirts of the country, and he makes some
  obvious mistakes; but he writes with an assumption of the highest
  expert knowledge. This swashbuckling air does not reassure the reader;
  but when it comes to climbing snow mountains our imagination falters
  far behind him.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 179. F. 4, ‘05. 280w.


=Lang, Andrew.= Adventures among books. *$1.60. Longmans.

  Seventeen essays are collected in this volume. Adventures among books,
  Recollections of Robert Louis Stevenson, Rab’s friend, Oliver Wendell
  Holmes, Mr. Morris’s poems, Mrs. Radcliff’s novels, A Scottish
  romanticist of 1830, The confessions of St. Augustine, Smollet,
  Nathaniel Hawthorne, The paradise of poets, Paris and Helen, Enchanted
  cigarettes, Stories and story telling, The supernatural in fiction, An
  old Scottish psychical researcher, The boy.

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 324. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1970w.

  “It holds the sound criticism which proceeds from good taste and wide
  knowledge, though it is so lightly presented as to seem mere butterfly
  work.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 368. Mr. 25. 470w.

  “But one forgives Mr. Lang his little affectations for the sake of his
  delightful humor, his literary touch, and his real bookishness.”
  Jeannette L. Gilder.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 409. My. ‘05. 1770w.

  “Those who have a taste for books about books will hunt long before
  they will find one more tickling to the palate than Mr. Lang’s
  ‘Adventures among books.’” Percy F. Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 409. Je. 16, ‘05. 2240w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 264. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1170w.

  “They are very high class work of the moment rather than work of a
  permanent quality.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 220w.

  “Mr. Lang’s account of his own ‘adventures among books’ is full of
  teaching and attractiveness. So indeed are all the papers that make up
  this volume.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 924. Je. 24, ‘05. 250w.


=Lang, Andrew.= History of Scotland from the Roman occupation. V. 3,
*$3.50. Dodd.

  The period covered in the third volume of Mr. Lang’s history begins
  with the accession of Charles I., and continues to the end of Argyll’s
  rising, 1625-1688. “With always interesting details, he carefully
  considers successively the Protestant disruption, the riot in St.
  Giles’s church and its consequences, the bishops’ war, the Scotch
  invasion of England, the relations of the commonwealth to Scotland,
  finally the restoration.... It is true that the period was one of
  theological, political, and physical conflict, measured by the battles
  of Aberdeen, Auldearn, Alford, Kilsyth, Carbinsdale, Dunbar.... But
  out of the general swaying, struggling mass of men rise certain
  commanding figures who receive characteristic treatment from Mr.
  Lang—Hamilton, Montrose, Charles the First, Sharp, Argyll, Cromwell.”
  (Outlook).

  “If the present volume maintains the standard of excellence set by its
  predecessors it does not escape the shortcomings that characterized
  them. The proportion is occasionally obscured and the connection of
  events lost sight of, by the inclusion of details which although
  interesting are unrelated. The disposition of the material and the
  general structure of the volume are, on the other hand, excellent; and
  some of the characterizations—notably those of the two Argylls,
  Montrose and Archbishop Sharp—are altogether vital and admirable.”
  Gaillard Thomas Lapsley.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 150. O. ‘05. 1400w.

  “The impression received from this work is that the author is not
  attempting to write a formal history of Scotland, but is rather using
  the materials he has collected and studied to test the accuracy of
  earlier works by well-known authors. The result is that while those
  who are intimately familiar with the details of Scottish history will
  find Mr. Lang intensely interesting as a critic and as a shrewd
  investigator, uncovering new sources of information, the ordinary
  reader must frequently be puzzled to understand the connection and
  relation of events. But in respect to exact statement of doubtful
  events at least, Mr. Lang’s work is a fine example of modern
  scholarship, being based on a careful analysis of the documents and
  other sources available for the study of Scottish history.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 19. Ja. 1, ‘05. 470w.

  “He is, as usual, at his best in appreciations of character, and, as
  usual, he sees important points which have generally been ignored. His
  work suffers somewhat from its great accuracy in points of detail. Mr.
  Lang has gone to the original sources, and ... he has thrown fresh
  light on many obscure topics, and he has brought a sane and
  enlightened judgment to bear on the numerous controverted issues in
  his story.”

     + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 799. O. ‘05. 710w.

  “He takes little or no thought about style, but simply jots down the
  facts in a succession of short sentences. The modern passion for
  scrutinizing all the sources and presenting their results in the most
  plain and summary fashion has seized and carried away this
  accomplished man of letters. The chief blemish of the book is the
  spirit in which it is written. We might have expected Mr. Lang, in
  dealing with men and events that lie two centuries and a half behind
  him, to show that calmness and detachment which befit the philosophic
  historian. The best parts of his book, and certainly the most
  readable, are those which describe the campaigns of that brilliant
  leader [Montrose].”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 13. Ja. 5, ‘05. 2240w.

         =R. of Rs.= 30: 756. D. ‘04. 70w.

  “It is less frequently relieved by what Stevenson termed its author’s
  ‘incommunicable humour.’ There is, further, in this volume a good deal
  more than we have noticed before of Mr. Lang’s ‘perversity.’”

   — + + =Spec.= 94: 716. My. 13, ‘05. 2850w.


=Lang, Andrew.= John Knox and the reformation. *$3.50. Longmans.

  In his account of the life of John Knox, Mr. Lang has endeavored to
  get behind enveloping traditions and reveal the real man. He
  criticises Knox’s history carefully and disagrees with it. He gives
  much Scottish history and an interesting account of Knox’s struggle
  with Mary Stuart and his onslaught upon Mary of Guise in which is much
  gentle irony.

  “Even in exposing the enormities of John Knox he keeps his literary
  temper, and instead of breaking the reformer’s head with a bludgeon,
  gently pricks him with the pin-point of his scorn.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 585. Je. 3, ‘05. 1580w.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 942. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “The book is exceedingly lively in tone and style, but is, we think,
  rather spoilt throughout by the apparent desire to make points.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 230. Ag. 19. 2020w.

  “But because the work is as true and impartial as it is, it is the
  best life of Knox we have.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 693. Ag. ‘05. 470w.

  “Mr. Lang writes as a man of letters, without much respect for popular
  traditions or what the elders consider orthodoxy. He goes not only to
  the sources, but back of tradition, even to the intensely human John
  Knox. Lang makes Knox not less great, but more human.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 381. O. ‘05. 310w.

  “From the beginning to the end of his book, Mr. Lang employs all the
  resources of his literary art, irony, denunciation, special pleading,
  to discredit the great Reformer.” Charles H. Cooper.

       — =Dial.= 39: 206. O. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “But what separates Mr. Lang from his colleagues in this literature is
  a marked lack of sympathy with the public life of his subject. That he
  writes a charming book is a matter of course.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 190. Je. 16, ‘05. 460w.

  “Mr. Lang has studied his subject as few of the more solemn of his
  biographers have, and exhibits in his entertaining book a very human,
  powerful, and not unlikable Knox.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 432. Jl. 1, ‘05. 990w.

  “It would command universal admiration (out of Scotland general
  assent) if it were not for a satirical style, which hardly befits
  history.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 440. S. 30, ‘05. 580w.


* =Lang, Andrew.= Oxford. *$1.50. Lippincott.

  “This edition has fifty illustrations reproduced from drawings or
  etchings by J. H. Lorimer, Alfred Dawson, Toussaint, Brunet-Debaines,
  Ernest Stamp, Lancelot Speed, T. H. Crawford, R. K. Thomas, and Joseph
  Pennell, and there are one or two rather charming drawings to which no
  artist’s name is given. The book itself is too well known to need
  discussion now.”—Acad.

  * “The present edition makes a very pleasant gift-book.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1111. O. 21, ‘05. 90w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 444. N. 30, ‘05. 110w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 825. D. 2, ‘05. 1380w.


* =Lang, Andrew,= ed. Red book of romance. **$1.60. Longmans.

  “‘All the stories were done by Mrs. Lang out of the old romances,’
  says the editor, who proffers excellent advice as to what should be
  read, being the sworn foe of the youthful prig. Mr. H. J. Ford has
  provided alluring illustrations, some of which are full of bright
  color. The stories come largely from the North, which produces,
  perhaps, the best romances in the world; but we have also ‘The tale of
  the Cid,’ ‘Don Quixote’s homecoming,’ ‘Cupid and Psyche,’ ‘Guy of
  Warwick,’ and others.”—Ath.

  * “It is full of the kind of entertainment always provided by its
  compiler.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 90w.

 *   + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 576. O. 28. 110w.

  * “No better reading for the young will be found among this year’s
  Christmas books.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 50w.

  * “The book is rich in appearance and varied in contents.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1387. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The stories are all told by Mrs. Lang and are in a graceful easy
  style, except for a trick of generalization in a would-be humorous
  fashion, and occasional unpleasant affectations.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 503. D. 21. ‘05. 150w.

  * “A fine book for a holiday gift either for a youngster, or an old
  person with a young heart.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 764. N. 11, ‘05. 190w.

  * “Mrs. Lang has written the stories out of the old romances and has
  done it admirably.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18, ‘05. 130w.

 *       =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 9. D. 9, ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =Spec.= 95: 692. N. 4, ‘05. 310w.


=Lankester, Edwin Ray.= Extinct animals. *$1.75. Holt.

  “A peep at the strange and wonderful history of extinct animals” thru
  which the author hopes to awaken in young people an interest in its
  further study. The volume embodies a corrected shorthand report of a
  course of lectures adapted to a juvenile audience given by the author
  during the Christmas holidays, 1903-4 at the Royal institution,
  London. The lantern slides used in the lectures have been converted
  into process blocks to illustrate the volume, there are over two
  hundred illustrations and drawings, many of which are from photographs
  of specimens in the Natural history museum.

  * “It may safely be said that since the days of that ‘most delightful
  collector and explorer of the earth’s crust, Dr. Gideon Mantell,’
  there has been published no book on this subject combining so
  successfully the virtues of accuracy and attractiveness.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 357. O. 27, ‘05. 1010w.

  “We give the book a hearty welcome, feeling sure that its perusal will
  draw many young recruits to the army of naturalists and many readers
  to its pages.”

   + + + =Nature.= 73: 6. N. 2, ‘05. 1140w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 657. O. 7, ‘05. 320w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 100w.

  “It is well adapted to arouse the interest of adult as well as
  youthful minds in a fascinating branch of study.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 180w.

  “Appealing chiefly to young people ... the author adopts an easy,
  somewhat conversational style, as free as possible from unnecessary
  technicalities. But simple and elementary though the book is, it is by
  no means confined to matter already well known even to scientific
  readers.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 597. N. 4, ‘05. 1680w.


=Larned, Josephus Nelson.= Seventy centuries of the life of mankind. 2v.
$4.50. C. A. Nichols Co., Springfield, Mass.

  “These volumes are evidently intended for the general reader who
  wishes an intelligent grasp of the broad outlines of general
  history.... The biographical prefaces to each period are unique and
  useful, the index is good, the illustrations are chosen with
  discrimination.”—Ind.

  “The arrangement of the work is not striking and the impressions
  conveyed are not clear cut. He has made remarkably discriminating use
  of excellent and recent materials available in English.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 576. S. 7, ‘05. 810w.

  * “Makes the serious error of a chronological arrangement regardless
  of the logical sequence of events, and he divides time into periods
  measured by the lives of great men—a method destructive of real
  historical unity.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1155. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “Unlike most abridgments, it is extremely readable, and is well
  calculated to stimulate the beginner to further inquiry. When all is
  said, however, the excellencies of the work outweigh its defects.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 984. Ag. 19, ‘05. 470w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 509. O. ‘05. 130w.


=Larson, Laurence Marcellus.= King’s household in England before the
Norman conquest. 50c. Univ. of Wis.

  A monograph submitted for the degree of doctor of philosophy at the
  University of Wisconsin. First comes a discussion of the relations of
  the king and his nobles, the eorls, gesiths, and thegns; then the
  various officers of the royal household, the king’s reeve, seneschal,
  butler, chamberlain, staller, and house-carls are considered and the
  development of their offices is traced.

  “Exhibits much more originality and power of research than the average
  doctoral thesis, it also displays a linguistic equipment and a lucid
  style. He has carefully exploited charters, laws, chronicles, sagas,
  lives of saints, and poetic monuments in quest of evidence bearing on
  his subject; and the result is a substantial contribution to our
  knowledge of Anglo-Saxon institutions.” C: Gross.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 631. Ap. ‘05. 690w.

  “Is an admirable study of a subject beset with great difficulties. Dr.
  Larson deserves warm praise for the skill which he has shown.”

   + + + =Yale R.= 14: 229. Ag. ‘05. 140w.


=Latham, Charles.= Gardens of Italy: a series of over 300 illustrations
from photographs of the most famous examples of Italian gardens, with
descriptive text by E. March Phillipps. 2v. $18. Scribner.

  “A pair of very sumptuous folio volumes containing the collected
  series of photographs of Italian gardens by Mr. Charles Latham....
  These fine photographs have more than an artistic charm; one dwells on
  them all with delicious memories.” (Lond. Times.) “As a photographer
  of architecture, and especially of gardens, Latham stands among the
  ablest.... Some descriptive text by E. March Phillipps accompanies the
  pictures. It is of a gossiping, semi-historical sort.” (Nation.)

  * “He who has never seen them will find the present treatment at once
  comprehensive and suggestive.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 381. D. 1, ‘05. 330w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 215. Jl. 7, ‘05. 100w.

  “The value of such a splendid collection of photographs as Mr.
  Latham’s is so evident, and the expense of securing them so great,
  that it is much to be regretted, that they should not be accompanied
  by plans.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 341. O. 26, ‘05. 380w.

  “Miss Phillipps brings to her descriptive text those elements of
  knowledge which are most conducive toward a pleasant and worthy
  realization of her work.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 758. N. 11, ‘05. 760w.

  * “The text leaves somewhat to be desired; there is in it much too
  little of the noble art of landscape gardening.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 160w.


=Laurvik, John Nilsen=, tr. See =Michaelis, Karin.=


=Laut, Agnes Christina.= Pathfinders of the West. **$2. Macmillan.

  This volume “tells the story of the men who discovered and explored
  the great Northwest. First among the explorers of the land west of the
  Mississippi the author places Pierre Radisson, claiming precedence for
  him over Marquette, Joliet, and La Salle.... The discovery of an
  account of Radisson’s voyages, written by himself, the authenticity of
  which has been generally admitted by scholars, has induced the author
  to popularize the story of his life in the West and rescue his name
  from oblivion.” (Cath. World.) There are many illustrations, an
  historical appendix and an index.

  “But whatever we may decide as to Miss Laut’s theory as to the
  Mississippi and Lake Superior discoveries, two facts remain: first,
  Radisson and Groseillers were pathfinders—in the real sense—to Hudson
  Bay; and, secondly, the author has made a readable translation of much
  of Radisson’s narrative.”

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 199. O. ‘05. 420w.

  “More absorbing than the most thrilling romance of imaginary heroes.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 128. Ap. ‘05. 230w.

  “Her work is not merely authentic, and founded, as history must always
  be founded, on the original documents, but it is vivified by the touch
  of an artist.” Lawrence J. Burpee.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 353. My. 16, ‘05. 1260w.

         =Nation.= 80: 318. Ap. 20, ‘05. 1120w.

  “Asks us to readjust our notions of the early history of the western
  United States. Miss Laut is doing a work which deserves well of
  historians in following up to their sources the stories and traditions
  of the Western history of our country and retelling the stories in her
  characteristically clear style.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 248. F. ‘05. 160w.


=Lawson, Publius Virgilius.= Bravest of the brave. Captain Charles de
Langlade. $1.50. Log cabin inn, Menasha, Wis.

  Altho the hero of this sketch fought upon the other side in the French
  and Indian war and the Revolutionary war, he compels the interest of
  Americans as a great French-Canadian pioneer. The account of some of
  the “ninety-nine battles, skirmishes and border affrays” in which he
  took part is stirring.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 135. Ja. 26, ‘05. 410w.

  “From materials in the possession of the Wisconsin historical society,
  and from other sources, Mr. Lawson has constructed a most interesting
  sketch of this ardent pioneer and fighter.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 110w.


=Lawson, Publius Virgilius.= Prince or creole: the mystery of Louis
Seventeenth. $1.50. G. Banta pub. co.

  An attempt to prove that the late Rev. Eleazer Williams, who devoted
  his life to missionary work among the Indians, was really the boy
  king, son of Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI, and that instead of dying
  in the Temple prison, Paris, he was sent to America where he grew up
  as the son of a half-breed.

  “He has not marshaled his evidences; his brief is a hodge podge; his
  statements, made with much éclat, are unsubstantiated by references.
  He has not even the grace of style to make his book interesting.”

     — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 363. Je. 3, ‘05. 430w.

  “If he does not succeed in winning his readers to his way of thinking,
  Mr. Lawson may at least take to himself the credit of having
  recounted, in an entertaining way, a narrative of high interest
  altogether apart from that naturally attached to historical
  mysteries.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 446. Je. 17, ‘05. 240w.


=Leach, Albert Ernest.= Food inspection and analysis, for the use of
public analysis, health officers, sanitary chemists, and food
economists. $7.50. Wiley.

  “The foregoing title very well describes this book written by one of
  America’s analysts of longest experience in this field of
  chemistry.... Food inspection, its principles and the precautions
  necessary in its conduct are ably, though briefly discussed.... The
  mass of information gathered in American laboratories together with
  the more recent developments in European food inspection, ... the
  author has ably systematized and condensed.... Nearly two hundred
  carefully compiled tables of composition are given, and upward of
  fifty tables showing the physical characters, chemical constants,
  etc., of food constituents, are introduced.... The worker in the field
  of food chemistry will find of great value the list of bibliographic
  references with which each chapter closes.”—Science.

  “Few American contributions of importance seem to have escaped his
  notice. No important class of foods has failed to receive careful
  consideration. As a guide to special analytical methods the work is no
  less valuable. In literary style, the book is clear and concise. There
  are a few striking omissions. All considered, however, this book is
  the best manual on its special subject in the English language,
  possibly in any language.” William Frear.

   + + + =Science=, n. s. 21: 465. Mr. 24, ‘05. 1610w.


* =Learned, Arthur G.= Eve’s daughters: epigrams about women from
world-wide sources. Compiled by a mere man and portrayed by A. G.
Learned. $1.75. Estes.

  “These epigrams, made by men concerning women and compiled by ‘a mere
  man,’ include wise and witty sayings from the works of such men as
  Goethe, Hugo, Cervantes, Tolstoy, Emerson, Shakespeare, Euripides,
  Thackeray, Ruskin, Byron, Bourget, Maupassant, and many others ...
  about the widow, the coquette, the flirt, the debutante, the prude,
  the summer girl, and the best and highest type of womanhood as well.
  The work is designed as a gift-book, and is beautifully illustrated by
  Mr. A. G. Learned with delicate marginal line drawings, and more
  elaborate full-page designs.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The epigrams contained herein are famous; the numerous
  illustrations are not.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 10w.

  * “The volume belongs to the large class of pretty and amusing
  gift-books which are intended not for systematic reading, but for
  pleasant companionship in an idle hour.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.

  * “The epigrams have been chosen with considerable judgment.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1384. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 29. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “The selection of the quotations has been carefully made.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.


=Ledoux, Louis Vernon.= Songs from the silent land. **$2. Brentano’s.

  An attractive little volume which contains about forty poems on such
  subjects as life, love, nature, and thought.

  “All may be said to be ‘sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,’
  rather than to evince any novel or original thought on the author’s
  part. Yet the verse itself is at least of average merit.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 566. Je. ‘05. 80w.

  “These two examples show Mr. Ledoux to have refined sensibilities and
  something of the poetic vision; and they are fairly representative of
  a body of work that is finished in execution and uniformly pleasing.”
  Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 66. Ag. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “Mr. Ledoux’s poems strike a pure and high note.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 447. Je. 17, ‘05. 270w.


=Lee, E. Markham.= Tchaikovsky. $1. Brentano’s.

  The second volume in the “Music of the masters” series. Mr. Lee’s
  exposition at no time loses sight of the object of the series which is
  helpfulness to the “plain man,” and in so doing he analyses,
  summarizes and holds up to broad day the vitalizing facts of
  Tchaikovsky’s musical genius. The symphonies, chamber music,
  orchestral works, piano-forte music and songs are discussed in turn
  with illustrations of the principal themes.

  “His criticism is searching and candid as well as sympathetic, and his
  descriptions are picturesque.” Richard Aldrich.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 170w.


=Lee, Rev. Frank T.= Bible study popularized. *$1.25. Winona pub.

  “The first chapter in this book is devoted to general information
  about manuscripts and translations, and closes with commendation of
  the American revision. A chapter on personal Bible study follows. The
  rest of the book is taken up with illustrations of different methods
  of Bible study—by books, by historic periods, by characters and
  incidents—and a concluding chapter on expository preaching.”—Bib.
  World.

  “The style is simple and clear, although the range of subjects
  required too much condensation. The critical standpoint is quite
  conservative. The historical sketches are compiled from ordinary
  sources.” Charles Richmond Henderson.

   + + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 390. Ap. ‘05. 120w.

  Reviewed by Irving F. Wood.

     + — =Bib. World.= 25: 315. Ap. ‘05. 450w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 253. F. ‘05. 60w.


=Lee, Robert Edward, Capt.= Recollections and letters of General Robert
E. Lee, by his son. **$2.50. Doubleday.

  “The author allows Gen. Lee’s letters, written to his most intimate
  ones, to form the body of the book. As these letters were written
  without any idea of their being made public, this book turns the light
  on the man as he really was.” (Ind.) “The hero of the Confederacy,
  seen through the eyes of his youngest son, stands forth a living
  personage, a kindly husband and father no less than an ideal
  commander, not unduly elated by victory, nor unduly cast down by
  defeat.” Some of the chapters are devoted to “Services in the United
  States army,” “The confederate general,” “The army of northern
  Virginia,” “Fronting the army of the Potomac,” “The surrender,” “A
  private citizen,” “President of Washington college,” “The idol of the
  South,” “Lee’s opinion of the late war,” “An ideal father,” and “The
  reconstruction period.”

  “Such comments as Captain Lee has added are delightfully told and in
  perfect good taste. The style is simple, but betrays a practiced
  hand.” John R. Ficklen.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 674. Ap. ‘05. 710w.

  Reviewed by M. A. DeWolfe Howe.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 133. Ja. ‘05. 630w.

  “A true representation of himself. The book does not attempt to exalt
  Lee.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 155. Ja. 19, ‘05. 350w.

  * “A charming work, which should be read by every Northern man who
  finds himself intolerant of southern heroes.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1157. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “The story is gentle and soothing, and it will not disappoint those
  who may wish to forget the horrors of war and the screech-owls of
  peace.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 54. Ja. 19, ‘05. 190w.

  “One cannot read this book without being convinced of the man’s
  disinterested motives and nobility of character, nor can we wonder
  that he developed qualities of leadership.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 30: 754. D. ‘04. 160w.

  “If we must look elsewhere for a proper appreciation of the soldier,
  we cannot read these Recollections without gaining a clearer knowledge
  of the dignity and kindliness which distinguished the private
  citizen.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 220. F. 11, ‘05. 2420w.


=Lee, Sidney Lazarus.= Great Englishmen of the sixteenth century.
**$1.75. Scribner.

  The contents of this volume are based on a series of eight lectures
  delivered at Lowell Institute, Boston, in the spring of 1903. After an
  opening chapter on the Renaissance in England, “he has vivified the
  personalities of these half-dozen men,—More, Sidney, Raleigh, Spenser,
  Bacon and Shakespeare,—and has made them show forth almost the entire
  activity of the age.” (Dial).

  “It contains no original discoveries, no profound generalizations, no
  subtleties of criticism. But it gives the results of sound scholarship
  and sound common sense in a dry but pleasant way. Perhaps the best
  essays in the book are those on More and Bacon.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 73. Ja. 21. 2090w.

  “With commendable fairness and conscientious criticism Mr. Lee has
  handled the virtues and the weaknesses of his subjects. This volume of
  essays is a valuable addition to literature on the subject.”

   + + + =Cath. World=, 81: 549. Jl. ‘05. 540w.

  “The versatility of the intellect and the imagination of their age was
  never better shown than in this charming account of these five men.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 187. F. ‘05. 80w.

  “The book is no mere rehashing of the commonplace. Mr. Lee endeavors
  to place these men before us in the light of their personal
  environment as well as in the greater light of their relation to their
  time.” J. W. Tupper.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 123. F. 16, ‘05. 930w.

  “Delightfully written biographies ... prefaced by the best sketch of
  the intellectual spirit peculiar to the sixteenth century which we
  remember anywhere to have read.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1074. My. 11, ‘05. 170w.

  “One great merit of the book is the catholic sympathy it displays with
  minds of very different types.... The admirable marshalling of the
  facts.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 116. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1220w.


=Lee, Vernon, pseud. (Violet Paget).= Enchanted woods, and other essays
on the genius of places. *$1.50. Lane.

  A “rag-bag of impressions” the author calls her “pilgrimage through
  the open and hidden ways where, without any noisy calling, the Genius
  loci meets her. In Italy ... at every time of year; at Pisa, Ravenna,
  Venice; among Tuscan churches in summer ... in the last fir-woods of
  the Apennines ... she sees what Keats might have seen.” (Spec.)

  “There is also in the book, besides its charm, a sympathetic insight
  into the past, born of wide and intimate knowledge, a sanity, a
  clearness of vision and perspective, all of which make the author a
  delightful companion.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 478. N. ‘05. 240w.

  “The habitual grace of Vernon Lee’s style is present in these pages,
  and her unfailing vivacity makes her the most delightful of couriers
  and engaging of companions.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 120. S. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “This is made up of just what the guide book leaves out, the personal
  equation, the temperamental interpretation.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1070. My. 11, ‘05. 170w.

  “What gives the book a permanent value is her thorough knowledge of
  the literature, the art, and the architecture of these countries in
  whose remote corners she has from time to time made her home.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 33. Jl. 13, ‘05. 310w.

  “They are not very deep, many of them are quite superficial, but they
  are charming, and if not full of thought themselves, may easily cause
  thought in those who read them.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 780w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 358. Ag. ‘05. 280w.

  “The many little essays are very like ‘Vernon Lee’s’ other work, which
  is always pretty and delicate, and shows a capacity for arriving at
  the genius of places.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 637. My. 13, ‘05. 170w.

  “Her remarks contain much more than empty fancy and personal
  enjoyment; she sees, but she also thinks, and so the book is worth
  reading for its wisdom as well as its beauty.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 330. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1550w.


=Leech, John.= Pictures of life and character. $1.50. Putnam.

  A collection of the cartoons of John Leech, taken mainly from Punch.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1390. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

  “They have historic value, no doubt, for manners and customs, for
  dress, etc. In some the humor of the drawing suffices; in many the
  legend is necessary for the smile.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 278. O. 5, ‘05. 180w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 723. O. 28, ‘05. 200w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 180w.

  “It is pleasant to have in this book so full and satisfactory a
  collection of John Leech’s pictures.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 835. O. 7, ‘05. 50w.


=Lefevre, Edwin.= Golden flood. †$1. McClure.

  The story of a young chemist who outwitted both the president of New
  York’s largest bank and the richest man in the world by depositing
  assay office checks to the amount of several millions a week until the
  great financiers believed that he manufactured his gold in his
  laboratory is cleverly told. Wall street and the reader are excited
  until the young man has made his fortune and explained his methods.

  “Mr. Lefevre’s delightful sense of humor would sufficiently commend
  his book, were it not also remarkable for its technical adroitness and
  its excellent character touches.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “This is an exceedingly interesting story.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 359. Je. 3, ‘05. 300w.

  “Mr. Edwin Lefevre has constructed an interesting story with a most
  ingeniously worked out dénouement. It is a dénouement in the very
  simplicity of which lies its strength.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 220w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “That story, however, has more than its element of uniqueness to
  recommend it. The studies in the characters of great financiers,
  Gentile and Jew, are of unusual vividness and verisimilitude.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 120w.


=Le Gallienne, Richard.= Painted shadows. †$1.50. Little.

  These are not stories, nor essays, nor a part of prosaic today; they
  are verily painted shadows, as clear, as fanciful, and as elusive.
  There is much charming verse and much poetic prose, and many truthful
  things which strike home to a troubled soul. “The youth of lady
  Contantia,” “The shadow of a rose,” “What of love? What of fame?”—they
  were real only so long as they ran before us, shining shapes of
  promise. They were real only so long as they were shadows. “Old
  silver,” with its exquisite song, “The woman of dreams,” “Household
  gods,” “Dear dead woman,” “The two ghosts”; they and the others form a
  book which will be dear to all who love what is good and beautiful in
  literature.

  “Devotees of the realistic school in literature will never enjoy Mr.
  Le Gallienne’s work, but for those who value a story more for its fine
  literary quality than for its fidelity to the real conditions of life,
  his beauty of phrasing and delicacy of imagination hold a charm which
  never grows old.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 221. F. ‘05. 160w.

  “... In ‘Painted shadows,’ where pretty phrasing usurps the place of
  beautiful thought, where the mental amiability of the author’s
  attitude is unsupported by any vigor or nobility of utterance.”

     — + =Reader.= 5: 784. My. ‘05. 570w.

  “Le Gallienne’s style, when at its best, is one of the finest things
  in contemporary literature. It is distinctly at its best in ‘Painted
  shadows.’ Should add materially to Mr. Le Gallienne’s reputation.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 116. Ja. ‘05. 110w.

  “He touches life with a delicate brush. His plots are not strong, or
  very purposeful; but they have the true aroma of my lady’s boudoir. He
  does not hesitate to use the impossible fancies of mediaeval romance
  to bring his stories to a desired consummation.” J. R. Ormond.

       + =The South Atlantic Quarterly.= 4: 98. Ja. ‘05. 180w.


=Le Gallienne, Richard.= Romances of old France. **$1.50. Baker.

  Daintily bound, with marginal drawings the floral designs of which, in
  pale green ink, wander across its pages, this small volume contains
  the old stories of King Florus and the fair Jehane; Amis and Amile;
  The tale of King Coustans the emperor; Blonde of Oxford and Jehan of
  Dammartin; Aucassin and Nicolete; and The history of over sea, all
  retold in the author’s own delicate fashion with little digressions
  and comments.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘05. 50w.

  * “Mr. Le Gallienne’s style is graceful, piquant, and spirited,
  without being archaic; and he tells as much of the stories as most
  readers will care to hear.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 446. D. 16, ‘05. 180w.

 *       =Nation.= 81: 484. D. 14, ‘05. 120w.

  * “He is near enough to his readers in lack of deep learning and near
  enough to his subjects in romantic feeling to give his work an
  undoubted interpretative value.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 830. D. 2, ‘05. 500w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18, ‘05. 100w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 753. D. ‘05. 20w.


=Le Gallienne, Richard,= tr. See =Hafiz.= Odes from the Divan of.


=Legg, Leopold George Wickham=, ed. Select documents illustrative of the
history of the French revolution and the constituent assembly. 2v. *$4.
Oxford.

  The editor’s aim is “to tell the story of the Revolution ‘almost in
  the words of the Frenchmen of the time.’ For this purpose he has made
  his selections chiefly from ... such journals as the political part of
  the Mercure de France, edited by Mallet du Pan, Mirabeau’s Courrier de
  Provence, and Brissot’s Patriote français.... Occasionally the texts
  of laws vital to the comprehension of the period are inserted in the
  body of the work, while others fill about one hundred pages of the
  appendix.” (Dial.)

  “Along with numerous capital features there are some grave defects.
  The finding apparatus is not what it should be. The dogmatic manner
  and the partisan spirit which mark these comments are particularly out
  of place in a work which will probably find its chief use among
  university students.” Frank Maloy Anderson.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 196. O. ‘05. 500w.

  “Mr. Legg’s selections are made with excellent judgment, and are all
  interesting.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 117. S. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  “Two volumes of extracts that are well worth the editorial care he has
  lavished upon them.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 14. Jl. 6, ‘05. 580w.

  “Mr. Legg’s book is admirably edited, it supplies not only a charming
  refreshment but a valuable and even an indispensable assistance to the
  serious student of the French revolution.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 279. Ag. 26, ‘05. 850w.


=Legge, Arthur E. J.= Ford, The. †$1.50. Lane.

  “The ford in question connects the lands of an old-fashioned peer with
  those of a new soap-boiler, and its use gives cause for a feud between
  the houses. On this basis it is clear that a love affair between the
  millionaire’s son and the peer’s daughter is, as the doctors say,
  indicated. But the peer’s middle-aged cousin and heir, Paul Gleddayne,
  unwittingly introduces complication. He had loved the soap-boiler’s
  wife, and Mr. Legge very frankly tells us that Ralph Harrold, the
  jeune premier, might have been Paul Gleddayne’s son, though he happens
  not to be. Paul at any rate is very fond of him for his dead mother’s
  sake, and is distressed to find himself in the young man’s way alike
  in politics and love.”—Sat. R.

  “The cynical indifference with which he depicts the lax morality of
  his men and women detracts much from an otherwise admirable piece of
  work.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 947. S. 16, ‘05. 370w.

  “It displays close observation and an unusual knowledge of life, and
  tells its story in excellent style, terse and graceful. The characters
  are drawn with vigor, and altogether the book is quite out of the
  ordinary in both its plot and its workmanship. While it is
  interesting, however, it fails to compel interest.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 707. O. 21, ‘05. 300w.

  “There is a pervasive air of marital infidelity about the book which
  should make it popular. Mr. Legge labours his points unnecessarily,
  and might with advantage refrain from working up to very obvious
  epigrams.”

     — + =Sat. R.= 100: 345. S. 9, ‘05. 300w.

  “His novel is only incidentally melodramatic, and primarily appeals to
  the reader as a study in character, not as a sensational romance. A
  book which is characterized more by charm than by strength.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 323. S. 2, ‘05. 730w.


=Lent, Edward Burcham.= Being done good. *$1.25. Brooklyn Daily Eagle.

  A sufferer from rheumatism gives his experience with physicians of
  various schools in their attempts to cure him. “Blisters and red-hot
  cautery” is followed by disquisitions upon Turkish and electric baths,
  patent medicines, liver cures, hot-water treatment, and osteopathy.
  The humor is so genial it will not offend even those who are
  ridiculed.

  “Here we have a satire, a humorous, but none the less biting satire,
  upon the medical science of today and those who apply its principles.”

       + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 120w.

  “In genuine humorous style.”

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 384. Mr. ‘05. 60w.


=Leonard, Mary Finley.= Story of the big front door. 75c. Crowell.

  This volume of the “Twentieth century juveniles” tells of the doings
  of the Hazeltine children who lived behind the big front door, of Ikey
  Ford, and other boys and girls, of their aunts, uncles, and neighbors,
  their plays and their clubs. The children are good children who openly
  repent of their pranks, and the gentle strain of moralizing which runs
  thru the book fits it for Sunday school use.


* =Leonard, William Samuel.= Machine-shop tools and methods. $4. Wiley.

  A third revised and enlarged edition of a book which represents Mr.
  Leonard’s “lectures on shop practice and machine design, given to the
  students in the Michigan agricultural college. The text is concise,
  comprehensive, and clear.... The description of the machines and tools
  is good and covers the principal details without useless words. The
  names of the machine parts, tools and fixtures are those used in
  general shop practice.”—Engin. N.

  * “The book as a whole is undoubtedly the best one on machine shop
  practice that has yet appeared.” William W. Bird.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 54: 529. N. 16, ‘05. 220w.


=Le Poer, John Patrick.= Modern legionary. $1.50. Dutton.

  A story uniform with Roger Patrick’s “Frontiersman.” “The tale is told
  by the hero, an Irish boy of sixteen, who joins the French foreign
  legion and is sent to Algeria. He describes the life of the
  ‘legionary’ among Chinese, Berbers, and other semi-savage tribes; and
  recounts several adventures.” (N. Y. Times).

  “The chief characters are drawn boldly and effectively, and the scenes
  are described with a certain raciness which makes the story worth
  reading.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 782. Je. 24. 430w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 502. Jl. 29, ‘05. 450w.

  “It is not easy to dismiss the idea that a vast deal of fancy is
  intermingled with the fact, so extraordinary are the adventures
  accredited to the narrator. Book leaves an unpleasant taste. But with
  all its cynicism and unquestionable offenses against the canons of
  good taste, it is not without value as a protest against the evils of
  militarism and war, a forcefully worded indictment reciting the evils
  attendant upon armed strife.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 451. F. 18, ‘05. 180w.


* =Le Queux, William.= Czar’s spy; the mystery of a silent love. 50c.
Smart set.

  A young Englishman, the hero of this story, becomes involved in a
  series of strange happenings which occur in Italy, England, Scotland,
  Finland, and Russia, and include ghastly murders, robberies and plots.
  The maneuvers of a mysterious yacht owned by a band of international
  criminals, the dark deeds of the strangler, governor of Finland, and
  the sufferings of the beautiful young heroine whose enemies have
  rendered her deaf and dumb because she knows their guilty secret, form
  but a part of the thrilling and complicated plot.

  * “It is a story that sets out to harrow your feelings and keep them
  harrowed till the end, which is as happy as possible.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.


* =Le Roy, James A.= Philippine life in town and country. **$1.20.
Putnam.

  “Mr. Le Roy’s aim has been rather to set forth the social constituents
  of the population than to describe in minute detail the customs and
  manners of the people. He regards all Filipinos ... as the crude
  recipients of the blessings or curses of the American system. In this
  light he studies their religion, their tribal life, their family
  organization, and their social status. On questions which are still
  undetermined and uncertain he refrains from pronouncing
  judgment.”—Pub. Opin.

  * “Mr. Le Roy’s writing is always fair-minded and non-partisan in
  attitude. Is both instructive and readable.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 350w.

  * “Everything considered, it is one of the best studies of the
  essential character of the Filipinos which has yet appeared.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 725. D. 2, ‘05. 370w.


=Le Strange, Guy.= Lands of the Eastern Caliphate, Mesopotamia, Persia
and Central Asia, from the Moslem conquest to the time of Timur. *$4.
Macmillan.

  “Mr. Le Strange’s book is nominally a geography, but it is more than
  that—it is a fairly close description of Western Central Asia during
  the time of its greatest prosperity, with especial reference, of
  course to the geography of the country.”—N. Y. Times.

  “We cannot express our gratitude to him better than by hoping that he
  will resume his laborious task and publish another volume as well
  indexed and as admirably provided with maps as that which he has
  already given us.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 268. Ag. 25, ‘05. 2140w.

  “Of course such a book cannot be very readable, but its value for the
  students of mediaeval Hither Asia cannot be exaggerated, and even for
  the student of civilization in the broad it will be full of
  suggestion.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 360. N. 2, ‘05. 380w.

  “The book is extremely suggestive and provocative of thought; it tells
  such tales as it has to tell in an interesting way, and throws a
  strong side light on the civilization of the Arab ‘misbelievers’ at
  the time when Christian Europe was groveling in outer darkness.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 664. O. 7, ‘05. 860w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 280. S. 30, ‘05. 120w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 60w.

  “Mr. Le Strange has earned the gratitude of students for the valuable
  work which he has done in the field, comparatively unexplored, of
  Arabian geography.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 505. O. 7, ‘05. 350w.


=Lethaby, William Richard.= Mediaeval art from the peace of the church
to the eve of the Renaissance, 312-1250. *$2. imp. Scribner.

  “The book is divided into twelve chapters, of which the first deals
  with the age of Constantine.... Four chapters following this treat of
  the Romanesque and Byzantine.... Then comes chapter VI., which deals
  with the peculiar characteristics of the later Middle ages.... This
  chapter introduces the treatment of Gothic art, which fills the second
  half of the volume. The discussion of it stops with the fourteenth
  century. There are 66 full-page, half-tone prints and 125 text
  cuts.”—Nation.

  “But while Mr. Lethaby has assimilated the important results of
  foreign research, he is thoroughly independent in his judgments.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 758. Je. 17. 1260w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 186. F. ‘05. 130w.

  “The treatment is so cursory that the reader often finds little more
  than a list of monuments. Mr. Lethaby’s book as a whole shows no new
  grasp of the subject, no general principle or underlying philosophy
  whereby to coördinate many artistic movements.” George Breed Zug.

       — =Dial.= 38: 320. My. 1, ‘05. 430w.

  “In Mr. Lethaby’s book we have an admirable summary of the two chief
  styles of medieval art—the eastward culmination, or Byzantine school,
  and the western, or Gothic.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1364. Je. 15, ‘05. 260w.

         =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 16. Mr. ‘05. 50w.

  “Two apparent characteristics of Mr. Lethaby are a laudable
  willingness to take pains, and a marked readiness to adopt positive
  opinions—to reach final conclusions and avow them.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 339. Ap. 27, ‘05. 1230w.

  “His book is crowded with illustrations, yet there is not one too
  many.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 95. Ja. 7, ‘05. 110w.

  “It has one rather serious defect in the lack of clear bibliographical
  definitions of at least of all the more important books and sources
  referred to.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 119. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1700w.

  “In this book, besides the lucid descriptions of the technical parts
  of the Gothic architect’s work, there are passages of rare insight
  into the spirit of mediaeval builders.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 293. Ag. 26, ‘05. 270w.


=Levasseur, Pierre Emile.= Elements of political economy; tr. by
Theodore Marburg. *$1.75. Macmillan.

  Following practically the four-fold division of this subject, viz.,
  production, distribution, exchange and consumption, M. Levasseur’s
  work is “characterized by clearness and originality of presentation,
  forcefulness of treatment, and conservatism of viewpoint.” (Outlook.)
  The work is inadequate on the subjects of the great industrial and
  economic questions of the day, monopolistic production, unionism and
  strikes, etc. There are no indexes and no lists of references.

  “It is short, succinct, interesting. It may well be used to supplement
  other books. The translators’ work is well done.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 592. S. ‘05. 110w.

  “Lack of logical treatment renders M. Levasseur’s book almost
  incomprehensible to the beginner, for whom it is evidently intended.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 212. O. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “Levasseur’s ‘Elements’ is fluent, commonplace, eclectic.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 931. O. 19, ‘05. 190w.

  “On the whole the work is disappointing. It is decidedly inferior to
  several good textbooks which already exist in English.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 503. Jl. 29, ‘05. 910w.

  “The merits of the original are somewhat dimmed in the present
  version, wherein the phraseology is at times so awkward as to leave
  the author’s meaning seriously in doubt.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 591. Jl. 1, ‘05. 360w.

  “This work is regarded as valuable chiefly for its sound and
  well-balanced statements of economic truths, and for its clear
  discrimination in dealing with new theories.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 70w.


=Levetus, A. S.= Imperial Vienna. *$5. Lane.

  An account of the history, tradition and arts of Vienna, according to
  the sub-title. “The volume ... is both more and less than its subtitle
  implies. There is a good deal of ‘history’ (141 pages out of the 416),
  an indefinite amount of ‘tradition,’ and a very little (ten pages)
  about ‘art, including sculpture and painting under Franz Josef’; but
  there is, in addition, something about literature, the theatre,
  dancing, court festivities, society, education, and the life of the
  common people. And, of course, the guide-book element is all
  there—description of streets, squares, buildings, monuments, churches,
  palaces, &c. The whole is enlivened by more than 150 well-selected,
  and for the most part, very clever illustrations from sketches in
  charcoal, pencil, and pen and ink.” (Nation).

  “An admirable literary and artistic memorial of one of the most
  interesting of European capitals.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 382. Ap. ‘05. 90w.

  “Unfortunately the numerous illustrations by Erwin Puchinger are
  scarcely equal to the text they supplement; they lack character and
  atmosphere, and are devoid of the feeling for their subject which is
  so distinctive a charm of the work of Miss Levetus.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 24: 369. F. ‘05. 220w.

  “Has consulted good, though not many, sources, and is not sensational
  in the treatment of her topics. At its best utterly devoid of literary
  grace, it contains many sentences of almost incredible crudity, and
  some which make one wonder how they could have escaped the eye of the
  most careless proof-reader.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 140. F. 16, ‘05. 710w.


=Lewis, Alfred Henry (Dan Quin, pseud.).= Sunset trail. †$1.50. Barnes.

  Cattle days, and Dodge City, the crown of the Texas cattle region,
  furnish the time and place for this breezy story. Bat Masterson, who
  is a real person, is the hero, and as sheriff has many adventures and
  shows much courage, finally winning the love of a Boston girl by
  killing seven Indians before her eyes.

  * “The book is not compelling in interest.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 130w.

  “Mr. Lewis’s keen wit and almost hypertrophied sense of the ridiculous
  makes the volume intensely interesting to those who have any well
  developed humor of their own.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “Except for Mr. Lewis’s ‘manner,’ they are much like other Western
  tales.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 368. Je. 3, ‘05. 330w.

  “These stories have less fun and more gore than Mr. Lewis’s well-known
  ‘Wolfville days.’”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 195. My. 20, ‘05. 110w.

  “Interesting adventures they are—full of roughness and readiness and
  gun play.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 974. Je. 24, ‘05. 210w.

  “The story is packed with adventure, and there is so steady a flow of
  quiet, often grim humor in it that the reader forgets that for once he
  is not getting his customary scenes of sentiment.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 361. Ag. ‘05. 270w.


=Libbey, William, and Hoskins, Franklin E.= Jordan valley and Petra.
**$6. Putnam.

  Two volumes containing more than 150 halftones of photographs, record
  the interesting and instructive features of a journey from Baerut to
  Jerusalem, covering forty-one days. The first volume gives minute
  descriptions of the make-up of a caravan, methods of dealing with the
  natives, the itinerary of the journey, statements as to the history of
  the places visited, etc. The second volume is devoted to a description
  of Petra, where for five days the party camped in the heart of the
  city.

  * “Many interesting, unique, and valuable features.” H. E. Coblentz.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 380. D. 1, ‘05. 750w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 128. Ag. 10, ‘05. 790w.

  “Apart from this unimportant drawback of mixing pulpit and physical
  geography, however, the book is excellent, and gives a good
  description of the present condition of the country through which the
  Israelites passed before they entered the Promised land.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 605. S. 16, ‘05. 1290w.

  “Apart from its scientific and antiquarian interest, their narrative
  is enlivened with incident, adventure, and humor.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 884. Ag. 5, ‘05. 450w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 283. Ag. 26, ‘05. 210w.


=Lillibridge, William Otis.= Ben Blair: the story of a plainsman.
†$1.50. McClurg.

  The author takes Ben Blair, of worse than unknown parentage, starts
  him along that well trodden road in fiction—Western ranch life, then
  makes of him a real hero, true to his ideals, a supporter of law and
  order, a staunch friend, a dauntless lover, and he places this Dakota
  plowman in triumphant contrast to a New York clubman. While the
  situations are not new in type, they are certainly new in treatment
  and strongly handled, and one regrets that the book did not appear
  sooner, before the constant march of Western writers had won its
  ground away.


=Lilly, William Samuel.= Studies in religion and literature. *$3.25.
Herder.

  “A collection of nine essays.... Some of the subjects treated are:
  ‘What was Shakespeare’s religion?’; ‘A French Shakespeare (Balzac)’;
  ‘A nineteenth century Savonarola (Lamennais)’; ‘Cardinal Wiseman’s
  life and work’; and ‘Concerning ghost stories.’”—Cath. World.

  “The ground covered is extensive, and the skill and versatility
  displayed are of the unusual order that we expect from Mr. Lilly. But
  whatever the topic, or whatever the attitude toward it, Mr. Lilly’s
  work is always interesting and instructive reading.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 830. Mr. ‘05. 160w.


=Lincoln, Joseph Crosby (Joe Lincoln, pseud.).= Partners of the tide.
†$1.50. Barnes.

  A Cape Cod story in which “a small boy is adopted on the death of his
  parents by two maiden kinswomen, goes to school, and falls under the
  influence of the captain of a vessel in the coasting trade. After some
  years on board his ship ... they become the joint owners of a wrecking
  schooner. The interest of the story is pretty well divided between the
  young fellow’s love for a neighbor and schoolmate and his business
  success.” (Dial.)

  “Without being remarkable, the book inspires a hearty liking.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 285. S. ‘05. 70w.

  “It is in the sketches of New England character threaded upon the
  narrative that its chief attractiveness lies.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 394. Je. 1, ‘05. 90w.

  “The book is rural drama of the sort that appeals to the rather old
  and the rather young.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 123. Ag. 10, ‘05. 290w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “It is all written in the best sort of sea talk, and is altogether
  about as good an example of a sea yarn as often gets into print.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 433. Jl. 1, ‘05. 630w.

  “Honest fun and oddity of character make the tale lively reading.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 195. My. 20, ‘05. 70w.

  “A salty story, full of quaint characters with quaint turns of
  speech.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 974. Je. 24, ‘05. 270w.


Lincoln and Douglas debates; ed. by Archibald Lewis Bouton. *60c. Holt.

  Professor Bouton, as a teacher of argumentation has felt the lack of
  available material illustrative of the thrust-and-parry of actual
  debate and has prepared these selections to supply the deficiency,
  choosing them because of their value both as masterpieces of the art
  of debate and as historical documents. Of the seven Lincoln-Douglas
  debates in the senatorial campaign of 1858 in Illinois, those at
  Freeport, Galesburgh and Alton are printed here entire, prefaced by
  Lincoln’s speech of June 16 at Springfield, with which he opened the
  campaign, and supplemented by the famous Cooper institute address of
  Feb. 15, 1860. The volume is well annotated for class use.


=Lindsay, Charles Harcourt. (Charles Harcourt, pseud.).= Good form for
men. **$1. Winston.

  The prescribed code is made the authority for this “guide to conduct
  and dress on all occasions,” yet the suggestions are flexible enough
  to include frequent conditions that are outside the scope of
  established rules. The book is convenient in form and concise in
  treatment.

  “This is probably the most valuable book of the character that has
  appeared in America.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 553. N. ‘05. 180w.

  “What he says as a rule is to the point and unexaggerated.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 70w.

  “It is written in good faith, if not in good form, and contains hints
  that should be helpful.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 555. Ag. 26, ‘05. 940w.


* Liquor problem, **$1. Houghton.

  “The somewhat celebrated Committee of fifty for the investigation of
  the liquor problem was organized in 1893, and has since that time
  through its sub-committees published no less than five volumes
  embodying the results of its labors. Of these volumes two of
  considerable size considered the physiological aspects, one was
  occupied with legislative aspects, one with economic aspects, and one
  with ‘substitutes for the saloon.’”—N. Y. Times.

  * “For the general reader this little book is the most important
  treatise upon the subject. It should receive wide attention.”

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 749. N. ‘05. 150w.

  * “It is unfortunate that this final volume does not make any
  reference to the experience of the last five years, nor to the sharp
  criticism made upon the work of the committee.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 871. O. 12, ‘05. 880w.

  * “Constitutes, as might be expected from the character of the
  investigating parties, about as sane a statement of the real
  conditions of the liquor problem as can be obtained within small
  compass. The value of the book seems to be chiefly in the papers
  contributed by Dr. Billings and President Eliot.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 785. N. 18, ‘05. 310w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 637. N. ‘05. 160w.


=Litsey, Edwin Carlile.= Race of the swift. †$1.25. Little.

  Seven stories of wild animals and the tragedy which follows their
  trail in their quest of food. The title story tells of the plucky run
  of a mother fox foraging for her little ones; The robber baron is the
  story of a feudal hawk; The ghost-coon tells of a coon which was white
  but not a ghost; The spoiler of the folds, follows the hunt of a
  gray-wolf; The fight on the tree-bridge is waged between an old
  raccoon and a little coon-dog; The guardian of the flock is the tragic
  tale of a sheep dog turned traitor; and The King of the Northern slope
  depicts the last fight of a great wild cat. The volume is illustrated
  by Charles L. Bull.

  * “The stories have marked individuality, though the subjects of
  them ... have been treated very often before. Each tale moves rapidly
  and firmly, with perfect adherence to the facts of animal life, and
  without sentimentality.” May Estelle Cook.

       + =Dial.= 39: 373. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

  “These seven tales ... are unusually interesting reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 771. N. 11, ‘05. 300w.


=Little, Archibald John.= Far East. *$2. Oxford.

  “A volume of that excellent geographical series, ‘The regions of the
  world.’ ... The book is no mere compilation, but written out of a full
  experience. Most of the chapters are occupied with China historically
  and geographically.... The description of the Yangtse valley is
  especially good and complete, for on this Mr. Little writes with
  unique knowledge. There are also interesting chapters on Mongolia and
  Turkestan, and a very good and full account of Tibet and the various
  approaches to that land.”—Spec.

  “The style of the book is everywhere lucid, its thought is everywhere
  original and stimulating, and even dry geographical details are
  vivified by their connexion with human history.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 361. S. 16, ‘05. 2400w.

  “It is the kind of book of which there has been genuine need for some
  time.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 276. N. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  “Is a capital illustration of what may be accomplished by judicious
  condensation. Every sentence counts, and the ultimate result is not a
  confusing jumble of facts and figures—as it might easily have been—but
  a clear-cut picture, the details of which are unmistakable.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 626. O. 28, ‘05. 140w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 283. S. 8, ‘05. 1900w.

  “We congratulate Mr. Little on having given us a most readable volume,
  full of information, and yet with that local colouring which is an
  essential for a book to command the attention of the general reading
  public.”

     + + =Nature.= 72: 626. O. 26, ‘05. 780w.

  “It is an admirable summary of the geography and peoples of the Far
  East, interesting to read, valuable for reference, and with an
  abundance of excellent maps that will well repay study.” Cyrus C.
  Adams.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 705. O. 21, ‘05. 2510w.

  “If not technically a geographical expert, Mr. Little possesses quite
  enough scientific knowledge to enable him to deal intelligently with
  the problems at issue; while his personal knowledge of the region and
  people enables him to infuse into his descriptions the special
  interest at which the ‘Regions of the World’ series aims.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 409. S. 23, ‘05. 1720w.

  “Is a most comprehensive and scholarly work, written by one who has a
  lifelong knowledge of the Far East, and is, in addition, an
  accomplished geographer.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 528. O. 7, ‘05. 320w.


=Littlefield, Walter=, tr. See =Noussanne, H. de.= Kaiser as he is.


=Livingston, Luther Samuel.= Auction prices of books. 4v. *$40. Dodd.

  “The editor of ‘American book-prices current,’ ... not satisfied with
  that meritorious labor, has undertaken to combine selectively his own
  series with the English of corresponding title, and with earlier
  sources antedating both. Of the four quarto volumes to result we have
  the first—A to Dick, ‘Auction prices of books.’ ... This is one of
  those enterprises concerning which the bare statement as just made is
  all-sufficient for the connoisseur.”—Nation.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 775. Je. 24. 1590w. (Review of v. 1.)

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 264. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1710w. (Review of v. 2.)

  * “Mr. Livingston has evidently not spared himself trouble to make
  this section complete.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 604. N. 4. 880w. (Review of v. 3.)

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 352. My. 4, ‘05. 220w.

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 53. Jl. 20, ‘05. 140w. (Review of v. 2.)

     + + =Nation.= 81: 240. S. 21, ‘05. 240w. (Review of v. 3.)

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 424. N. 23, ‘05. 360w. (Review of v. 4.)

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 324. My. 20, ‘05. 420w. (Review of v. 1.)

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 497. Jl. 29, ‘05. 550w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “More and more, as it nears completion, does Mr. Livingston’s work
  commend itself to those who have to do with books.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 622. S. 23, ‘05. 240w. (Review of v. 3.)

  * “The value of the work will increase.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 843. D. 2, ‘05. 220w. (Review of v. 4.)

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 947. Je. 24, ‘05. 470w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “There is nothing very remarkable in this portion.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 615. O. 21, ‘05. 140w. (Review of v. 3.)


=Lloyd, Nelson (McAllister).= Mrs. Radigan: her biography, with that of
Miss Pearl Veal and the memoirs of J. Madison, †$1. Scribner.

  A satire upon New York social climbers in which Mrs. Radigan climbs,
  her beautiful sister Pearl climbs with her, and young Jones, the real
  estate agent, is pulled up hanging to their skirts. The titled
  Englishman, the complacent bishop and the cotillion leader appear in
  the story, which overflows with good humor.

  “The book is sprightly and clever without being over-clever, and it is
  written by one who knows his ground.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 477. N. ‘05. 260w.

  “The story, being satire, but satire of a kindly nature, is very
  bright reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 619. S. 23, ‘05. 430w.

  “A rather clever satire, varying from the obvious to some delightfully
  subtle thrusts at modern American society.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 281. S. 30, ‘05. 150w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 761. D. ‘05. 100w.


=Locke, William John.= Morals of Marcus Ordeyne. †$1.50. Lane.

  A London bachelor, contentedly engaged upon a “History of renaissance
  morals” whose life is filled by his valet, his cat and Judith, his
  clever neighbor, comes upon a beautiful oriental child strayed from a
  Syrian harem and takes her to his home. This girl wakens his
  slumbering passions, she elopes with a daredevil fellow, but in the
  end, chastened and developed, returns to Ordeyne.

  “His style is delightful, pointed, witty and finished. But for all his
  admirable craftsmanship there is something wanted, and that an
  essential—vitality.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 664. Je. 24, ‘05. 420w.

  “The chief distinguishing quality of the story, however, is found in
  the literary and artistic merit rather than in its ethical worth.
  Clearly it is a tale written to amuse. The author possesses a
  peculiarly brilliant and finished style.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 107. Jl. ‘05. 430w.

  “It is clever throughout, despite the sentimentalism.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 587. My. 13. 280w.

  “It is a refreshingly whimsical book.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 364. Je. ‘05. 670w.

  “The story is intensely interesting from first to last, besides being
  rich in the sort of literary and scholarly allusiveness that appeals
  most strongly to the cultivated mind.” William Morton Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 389. Je. 1, ‘05. 820w.

         =Ind.= 59: 335. Ag. 10, ‘05. 60w.

  “It is entirely original in conception, and the plot is carried out
  with great skill. The conversations are particularly clever.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 307. My. 13, ‘05. 710w.

  “Unusual, striking, and brilliant to a degree is this story.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 27. Jl. 1, ‘05. 220w.

  “The changes of scene are frequent, the note of passion is dominant,
  and the conclusion, if not unexpected, is gratifying.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 472. S. ‘05. 190w.

  “The story is unconventional, it is interesting, and it is well
  written.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 812. Je. 17, ‘05. 510w.


=Lockhart, John Gibson.= Life of Robert Burns. *60c. McClurg.

  Uniform with the “Library of standard biographies,” this volume
  contains in handy compact form the text of the edition of 1820. It has
  been annotated, and an index added for the use of students and
  readers.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 30w.


=Lockhart, John Gibson.= Life of Sir Walter Scott. *60c. McClurg.

  The Lockhart life of Scott has appeared in an abridged form, newly
  edited with notes for the student’s use. It is uniform with the
  “Library of standard biographies.”


=Lodge, George Cabot.= Cain: a drama. **$1. Houghton.

  A drama dedicated to Jesus of Nazareth. It presents Cain as an heroic
  defender of free thought, to whom is revealed:

               “The power of life, the glory of rebellion.
               The fire and love of liberty, the pride
               Of freedom, poverty, solitude, and pain.”

  He kills his brother that he may not live to pollute humanity by
  spiritual bondage, and for the sake of the light he carries, willingly
  becomes “an outcast from the laws of men.”

  “The diction of the poem is almost as severe as its outline, and is
  sustained throughout at a lofty pitch.” Wm. Morton Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 46. Ja. 16, ‘05. 740w.

  “Is a veritable volcano of poetry, pouring out real fire, mingled with
  smoke and ashes. What Mr. Lodge lacks is the saving sense of humor. He
  has undoubted force and passion. The whole play gives the impression
  of reversed dynamics.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 783. Ap. 6, ‘05. 80w.

  “His mastery of poetic structure is still imperfect. Yet, when all due
  abatement has been made, ‘Cain’ is a book of interesting promise.
  There is here, moreover, in both substance and form, much to reward
  attention.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 73. Ja. 26, ‘05. 420w.

  “Mr. Lodge’s drama is a personal and passionate reading of the story
  of Cain and Abel, in which Cain is presented as a Biblical Prometheus
  daring the wrath of heaven to bring light to the souls of men. He is
  the archetype of the modern free-thinker, while Abel is the cowardly
  formalist.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 18. Ja. 14, ‘05. 340w.


=London, Jack.= The game. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  A story of the prize ring showing two types of fighters,—one a fine
  specimen of manhood, the other fashioned after the brute order. There
  is an idyllic romance too, which of course concerns the higher minded
  boxer and a very human young maiden who grows jealous of her rival
  “the game.” The author has drawn the savage side with deft realism,
  both from the participant’s and the spectator’s viewpoint.

  “Mr. London has in this book made a very decided advance in the matter
  of style.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 809. Ag. 5, ‘05. 300w.

  “This book is simply a good and spirited little report, rather too
  loud for quiet tastes. There is nothing elemental here; this is sheer
  street-bred sensuality, if it is anything.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 138. Jl. 29. 300w.

  “He has produced at least one story which of its kind seems to the
  present writer very nearly flawless—‘The game.’”

   + + + =Bookm.= 22:35. S. ‘05. 620w.

  “It is of the most banal and ordinary stamp, utterly lacking in the
  dramatic power with which its author has been credited hitherto.”

     — — =Critic.= 47: 285. S. ‘05. 110w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1480. Je. 29, ‘05. 280w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “Mr. London seems for the first time unaccountably out of his element
  and outside of the verities.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 528. Ag. 12, ‘05. 730w.

  “Mr. London’s stories are never lacking in power, dramatic quality,
  and picturesqueness, but his love for the strenuous and the tragic has
  led him to end his story in a way that is fairly brutal.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 837. Jl. 29, ‘05. 80w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 140w.

  “The description of the fight itself which forms the greater portion
  of the book is skilfully done. But it is only good journalism.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 160w.


=London, Jack.= The sea wolf. $1.50. Macmillan.

  “A ferryboat sinks in the San Francisco harbor, the passengers perish,
  but Humphrey Van Weyden, critic, æsthete, typical specimen of
  hyper-civilization, is picked up by the ‘Ghost,’ and compelled by the
  captain of that ‘hellship’ to become cook’s scullion. Van Weyden is a
  creature of overdeveloped brain-power, physically a plaything in the
  hands of Wolf Larsen, the ship’s captain, and thus arises a struggle
  between the primitive brutalities of the natural man and this last
  product of the twentieth century.... The plot has further and rather
  more conventional ramifications, but it is primarily the fight between
  the beast in man and the man who has worked out the beast that holds
  our attention, and, secondarily, the overshadowing personality of Wolf
  Larsen.”—R. of Rs.

  “We do not wish to deny the cleverness of much in ‘The sea-wolf,’ but
  we must protest against this picture of rampant inhumanity and
  brutality.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 14. Ja. 7, ‘05. 310w.

  “This romance is one of the strongest and most original stories by an
  American novelist that has appeared in recent years. The story though
  powerful and quite out of the ordinary lines of romance, is not a
  novel that we can heartily recommend to the general reader.” Amy C.
  Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 452. Ap. ‘05. 610w.

  “Thus the story becomes essentially an account of the development of
  character under extraordinary conditions, and its aspect as a
  narrative of adventure is obscured by its aspect as a psychological
  study. It is not a pleasant tale to read—it is too strongly seasoned
  to be that,—but it acquires a certain fascination in the course of its
  telling, and fairly grips the attention in its culminating passages.”
  W. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 16. Ja. 1, ‘05. 440w. (Outline of plot).

  “Altho thousands read in ‘The sea-wolf’ nothing but an exciting tale,
  yet the ethical theorem is developed by argument and illustration with
  a symmetry and completeness rare even in a serious treatise.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 39. Ja. 5, ‘05. 820w.

  “This latest book is the high-water mark of the author’s power.
  Virile, forceful, dashing though he has been from the first entry into
  literature, he can do nothing more memorable than this story of a
  hellship, manned by brute beasts, under a sea-wolf. It is in the
  cruelty, the peace, the awfulness, the beauty of the sea, that Mr.
  London has outdone himself as well as others. The book is not food for
  babes, but for lovers of the sea. He must own strong nerves who would
  ship with Wolf Larsen, but the Iliad of the ocean is opened before
  him.”

   + + + =Reader.= 5: 378. F. ‘05. 600w.

  “In depicting that fatal struggle between him and Van Weyden, Mr.
  London remains entirely impartial. The book is neither a glorification
  of the ‘overman’ nor of his opposite. We are told of the two, and of
  their fight for life, with swift directness, with sincerity and
  strength.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 115. Ja. ‘05. 500w.


=London, Jack.= Tales of the fish patrol. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “The broad bays about San Francisco, and the rivers that run into
  them, are sources of revenue of fishermen of several diverse
  nationalities—Chinese, Italians, and Greeks. The life of the fish
  patrol, whose duty it is to enforce the fishing laws, furnishes plenty
  of opportunities for adventures, exciting and often dangerous. The
  stories in this volume describe some of these adventures simply but
  dramatically.”—Outlook.

  “It is ostensibly a book for boys, but it is good reading for others
  as well.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 579. N. 4, ‘05. 80w.

  * “Have the freshness and vigor of the sea and not a little of its
  heroism.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 712. N. 25, ‘05. 110w.

  * “The stories have a fresh realism and a curt vigor which show
  first-hand work.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 763. D. 9, ‘05. 140w.


=London, Jack.= War of the classes. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  The book is made up of six socialistic studies entitled: “The class
  struggle,” “The tramp,” “The scab,” “The question of the maximum,” “A
  review,” “Wanted: a new law of development.” and “How I became a
  socialist.” It is Mr. London’s purpose, he declares in his preface, to
  “enlighten, to some slight degree,” the minds of a few capitalists.

  “It is an interesting thought-provoking volume, to be read and
  pondered, but truths and half truths are so interwoven that it is
  scarcely a safe guide.”

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 592. S. ‘05. 100w.

  “It is marred somewhat by repetition and lacks the coherence and
  cogency of a logical whole. With all these defects, however, the ‘War
  of the classes’ is no whit inferior in the vigour of its style and the
  sweep and rapid movement of its thought to any of Jack London’s work.”
  Robert C. Brooks.

   + + — =Bookm.= 22: 61. S. ‘05. 1990w.

  “Some of Mr. London’s best and most lasting work is to be found in
  these pages. It is regrettable, however, that certain discrepancies in
  the text have not been more carefully edited.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1190. My. 25, ‘05. 140w.

  * “Develops the socialist attitude on modern social antagonisms in his
  characteristically forcible and striking style.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 249. Ap. 15, ‘05. 290w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 291. My. 6, ‘05. 550w.

  “The essays are full of half-truths, and half-truths that need
  statement. We advise the student of modern industrial problems to read
  this book; but to be slow about accepting either its picture of
  conditions or its proposals for remedies.”

     — + =Outlook.= 80: 144. My. 13, ‘05. 520w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 795. My. 20, ‘05. 290w.

     + — =Reader.= 6: 595. O. ‘05. 390w.

     + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 130w.


=Loney, S. L.= Elements of trigonometry; with answers. *90c. Macmillan.

  This volume “is mainly taken from pt. 1. of the author’s ‘Plane
  trigonometry,’ and is designed as an easier text-book.”—Nature.

  “Altogether an admirable piece of work, and we can pay it no higher
  compliment than to say it is well on the level of those other
  text-books for which Professor Loney is so well known.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 51. Ja. 14, ‘05. 130w.

  “The subject is treated in the usual way, and there is nothing to call
  for special mention.”

       + =Nature.= 71: 507. Mr. 30, ‘05. 110w.


* =Long, John Luther.= Heimweh and other stories, †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “Eight stories, or rather novelettes.... In the first of these, which
  gives its title to the book, we are told the story of a day labourer
  and his wife, from the day of their marriage to their death.... ‘The
  siren’ ... describes a courtship carried on by two bold swimmers, who,
  at last, swim out too far from land, and are drowned.” (Ath.) The
  remaining stories are: The loaded gun; Liebereich; “Jupiter Tonans;”
  “Sis;” Thor’s emerald; and Guile.

  * “His aims are right, and so, for the most part, are his methods.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 686. N. 18. 280w.

  * “Too much sentimentality, not enough humor, and an unfortunate lack
  of compression. Mr. Long’s ingenuity and facile expression prevent
  them from being wholly bad.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 578. D. ‘05. 50w.

  * “These stories do not lack imagination, but at times the gayety
  seems forced, and the conversations are jerkily vivacious.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 382. O. 14, ‘05. 90w.

  * “He has a sense of atmosphere, his point of view is individual, and
  he is not without that kindly humour which laughs while it
  sympathises. But he is terribly sentimental.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 6. D. 9, ‘05. 170w.


* =Long, John Luther.= Miss Cherry Blossom of Tokyo. †$2.50. Lippincott.

  A reincarnation of this Japanese romance, in which wide margins,
  Japanese flowers and fancies which wander across the text, and various
  full page illustrations, some of which are in color, lend to the
  interesting story of Sakura-San and the “excellent barbarians” from
  England and America who play at cross purposes thruout its pages a new
  and subtle charm.

  * “In this and ‘Madame Butterfly’ he is seen at his best.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 20w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 449. D. 16, ‘05. 110w.

  * “The author has contrasted Oriental and Occidental traits in his
  well-known style.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1378. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

 *       =Nation.= 81: 381. N. 9, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Told with charm and well-rendered Oriental atmosphere.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 50w.


* =Long, John Luther.= Seffy; a little comedy of country manners.
†$1.50. Bobbs.

  Old Baumgarten, a Pennsylvania-German and Maryland farmer, has set his
  heart upon marrying his great slow going son, Seffy, to a red-headed,
  tempestuous girl, named Sally, who owns the lands lying between his
  farm and the railroad. He almost brings this about, but Seffy’s
  reticence allows another lover to come between him and his sweetheart.
  Sally marries out of spite and comes to bitterly repent of it, while
  old Baumgarten curses his son, knocks him down and sends him out into
  the world where he learns to fight for things and to get them. In the
  end he comes back to claim all that he lost in his youth.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 447. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.


=Long, William Joseph.= Northern trails: stories of animal life in the
far north. *$1.50. Ginn.

  “Mr. Long takes the reader with him ... to the barren shores of
  Labrador and Newfoundland. Wolves, we meet, that guide lost children
  home, and then disappear into the wilderness; a wild goose that
  caresses his mate goodbye at the approach of the hunter, before going
  out to fight for his home and young; and Pequam, of the weasel family,
  that tempts an Indian to abandon his trail, by killing a deer and
  leaving it across the track. These animals and many more—whales, polar
  bears and salmon—are all introduced to us in the midst of their wild,
  unfrequented haunts. All are endowed with almost human intelligence
  and reason, after the manner of interpreting their actions which Mr.
  Long has made so popular.”—Ind.

  * “There is a charm about Mr. Long’s book that few writers for
  children attain.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 150w.

  * “His stories have a charm and an excellence of their own.” May
  Estelle Cook.

       + =Dial.= 39: 373. D. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “We are willing to let the disputed question of instinct or
  intelligence go, however, and on the strength of the splendid
  descriptions of nature and the always evident love of the wild, accord
  this volume a high place among ‘books of the trail.’”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 873. O. 12, ‘05. 250w.

  “Mr. Long assures us of the accuracy of his data, and maintains the
  reasonableness of his inferences.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 290w.

  * “Aside from the controversial side as to whether these eight stories
  are to be classified as natural history or fiction, these tales of the
  Northern trails are dull and lifeless.” Mabel Osgood Wright.

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 872. D. 9, ‘05. 560w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 718. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.

  “His this year’s story is vigorous, delightful, and refreshing.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 754. D. ‘05. 130w.


Long day. See =Richardson, Dorothy.=


=Loomis, Charles Battell.= Minerva’s manoeuvres: the cheerful facts of a
return to nature. †$1.50. Barnes.

  A novel which “recounts the experiences of Mr. and Mrs. Philip Vernon
  and their city-reared colored cook, Minerva, during a summer sojourn
  in the country.... A fine silk thread of a plot runs through the book,
  stringing together the many humorous situations.”—Pub. Opin.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 478. N. ‘05. 80w.

  “It is a good book to read aloud, but only a chapter or two at a
  time.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 696. S. 21, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The unexpected endings of the many humorous situations will keep
  the reader in a gale of mirth, and when he lays the book down after
  the last chapter, he will feel that he has found a new friend in
  Minerva.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 520w.

  * “Is more in the nature of a vaudeville show than anything else, and
  it is not possible to describe all of the attractions which Mr. Loomis
  offers. They are surely worth a reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 800. N. 25, ‘05. 460w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 88. S. 9, ‘05. 50w.

  “It is not an uproarious story; its humor is quiet; it possesses the
  subtle turn which is symptomatic of its author.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 384. S. 16, ‘05. 230w.


=Lord, Eliot; Trenor, John J. D.; and Barrows, Samuel June.= Italian in
America. $1.50. Buck.

  “The pretty evident purpose of this volume is to reverse the
  prevailing American prejudice against the Italian as an immigrant and
  material for United States citizenship.... [It] uses ... the
  argument ... of statistics, and its authors ... attempt to show first
  of all that the Italian settler is economically a good thing for the
  country.... Secondly, they produce evidence that in the particulars of
  disease and crime he does not supply more than his quota ... and,
  thirdly, they argue from data which they present that he ... adapts
  himself very completely ... to American ways of doing and
  thinking.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The book as a whole is general in its treatment, somewhat
  objectionable because of frequent quotations, and partakes too much of
  the loose character of magazine articles. The spirit of the book is
  much to be commended.” Emily Fogg Meade.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 609. S. ‘05. 460w.

  “The book is optimistic, discriminating and instructive.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 532. My. 18, ‘05. 110w.

  “Is of normal simplicity and clearness.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 579. S. 7, ‘05. 120w.

  “There is room for believing that ‘The Italian in America’ will be a
  potent instrument in molding a saner public opinion.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 666. N. 4, ‘05. 800w.

  “But the labors of others are here presented in logical sequence and
  in a sympathetic spirit, resulting in an interesting and readable
  book. The book is not free from dubious assertions.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 361. My. 4, ‘05. 1040w.

  “It will strike many perhaps that Messrs. Lord, Trenor, and Barrows
  have omitted some essential facts, but both the facts presented and
  the inferences drawn are interesting in substance—even when the manner
  of presentation is dry. Taken all together the cumulative evidence for
  the Italian collected by the authors is impressive.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 259. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1050w.

  “Welcome as a wholesome corrective of fallacy and prejudice.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 140. My. 13, ‘05. 460w.


=Lorenz, Daniel Edward.= Mediterranean traveller, *$2.50. Revell.

  A compact practical guide-book which covers southern Spain, Morocco,
  Algiers, the chief cities of northern Africa, Greece, Asia Minor,
  Palestine, and Egypt. Much historical and general information is
  given, a bibliography precedes each chapter, and there are many maps
  and pictures.

  “This compact work ‘fills a long felt want.’ The proof reading has not
  been done by a classical expert.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 160w.

  “The text is in some portions accurate and business-like, but in
  others it reveals amateurishness, and some inaccuracies and
  misprints.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 211. Mr. 16, ‘05. 370w.

  “The excellence of its method and treatment of the many countries
  bordering on the great interior sea of Europe are unquestionable.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 140. Mr. 4, ‘05. 260w.

  “‘The Mediterranean traveler’ will find here in one volume what
  elsewhere must be picked out of several.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 451. F. 18. ‘05. 60w.


=Loring, Andrew.= Rhymer’s lexicon; with an introd. by George
Saintsbury. *$2.50. Dutton.

  “The lexicon is divided into three parts—Finals, Penults, and
  Antepenults. The words have been grouped according to the accented
  vowel sound and placed in columns in the alphabetical sequence of the
  letters which follow this sound.... Each part of the lexicon has
  fourteen vowel divisions, adopted for reference purposes; and the
  divisions are enumerated in a table of contents, which also includes
  key words illustrating the vowel sounds.”—N. Y. Times.

  “In size and arrangement it is admirable; it might have been larger
  still without being any better.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 678. Jl. 1, ‘05. 280w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 623. My. 20. 450w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 409. Je. 17, ‘05. 290w.

  “Altogether an able book, full of aid to those who make rhymes.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 531. Ag. 12, ‘05. 320w.

  “The arrangement is novel, at first sight a little intricate, but
  truly scientific.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 694. Jl. 15, ‘05. 100w.

  “This may be a very useful book.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 791. My. 27, ‘05. 240w.


=Loring, J. Alden.= Art of preserving animal tracks, $1. J. A. Loring,
Owega, Tioga co., N. Y.

  “Mr. Loring describes in this pamphlet a very ingenious and apparently
  effective method of making molds, and from the mold, casts of the
  tracks of mammals and birds, large and small.... The operation itself
  is clearly and minutely described, and seemingly could be easily
  managed by any intelligent boy.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 757 Mr. 25, ‘05. 130w.


* =Lothrop, Harriet Mulford Stone (Margaret Sidney, pseud.)= Ben Pepper.
†$1.50. Lothrop.

  This is the tenth volume in the popular “Little Pepper” series. “The
  hero is Ben, Mother Pepper’s first-born, her ‘steady-as-a-rock’ boy.
  Christmas shopping in which the Little Peppers take a lively hand,
  Christmas philanthropies, the usual quota of accidents and pranks,
  and, finally, Ben’s decision as to whether he will go to college or
  enter a business office, ‘beginning at the very bottom,’ are the
  features of the story.”—Outlook.

  * “Mrs. Sidney has made him as interesting as others of the Pepper
  family.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 708. O. 21, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 278. S. 30, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 765. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Lott, Noah, pseud.= See =Hobart, George Vere.=


* =Lottridge, Silas A.= Animal snap-shots and how made. **$2. Holt.

  A simple narrative concerning the birds and mammals which the author
  has come to know in the course of various vacations spent in studying
  and photographing them. The pictures illustrate the facts and some of
  the series represent the work of years. The object of the book is to
  arouse, especially in young people, a living interest in the animals
  about them. There are chapters on the woodchuck, skunk, muskrat, fox,
  mouse, squirrel, blue bird, robin, bobolink, crow, owl, hawk and
  others.


=Lovett, W. J.= Complete class book of naval architecture; practical,
laying off, theoretical, with numerous il. and nearly 200 full,
worked-out answers to recent education department examination questions.
*$2.50. Longmans.

  “This work is intended primarily for British students attending
  technical classes.” It “covers the whole field of naval architecture,
  theoretical and practical.”—Engin. N.

  “In this country its field as a text-book will necessarily be limited,
  and as a reference book its treatment of the various subjects, except
  elementary ship calculations, is inadequate.” D. W. Taylor.

     + — =Engin. N.= 53: 529. My. 18, ‘05. 1030w.


=Low, Berthe Julienne.= French home cooking. **$1.20. McClure.

  The author, tho a Frenchwoman by birth, has lived in this country
  twenty-five years. She says: “This is not a book for restaurants,
  hotels, or people who can afford a chef. Most Americans have formed
  their ideas of French cooking from hotels, restaurants, or formal
  dinners, and have never known the home cooking, which is more simple
  and more wholesome. It is also less complicated.... The recipes which
  I shall give are used in well-to-do families and constitute what is
  called in French the ‘bonne cuisine bourgeoise.’” She starts with the
  very arrangement of the kitchen and instructs in those little tricks
  by which the French are able to obtain distinction and flavor in their
  cookery.

       + =Critic.= 46: 565. Je. ‘05. 60w.

  “Mrs. Low’s formulas are in the main so excellent that it would be
  invidious to discriminate. Her success is unequivocal and decisive.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 78. Ja. 25, ‘05. 490w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 34. Ja. 21, ‘05. 330w.


=Low, Sidney.= The governance of England. *$2.25. Putnam.

  “A well-informed, well-written, and interesting description of the
  government of Great Britain, beginning with a definition of the
  British constitution, so difficult of characterization, but explained
  by Mr. Low in a thoroughly rational and comprehensive way.... Mr. Low
  gives a very interesting account of the place and function of the
  prime minister, of the cabinet, of the privy council, of both houses
  of parliament, and of every other form and function of government in
  Great Britain.” (Outlook). “The main view of Mr. Low is that of Lord
  Salisbury and Mr. Balfour, that the power of the house of commons is
  declining and must continue to decline, while that of the cabinet, and
  especially of the inner cabinet, is increasing.” (Ath.)

  “Is a most able and valuable production, marked, too, by unusual
  excellence of style. If we name points on which we have doubts as to
  whether Mr. Low is right, it is with the profound feeling that he has
  given great attention to a subject in which he evidently takes much
  interest, and the facts of which, so far as they are generally
  available, he has mastered.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 79. Ja. 21. 1980w.

  “There can be little but praise for the author’s literary style. It is
  easy, strong and clear, and with a light touch and aptness of allusion
  that never detract from the weighty theme.” John William Russell.

   + + + =Bookm.= 22: 57. S. ‘05. 1400w.

  “There are many clever and some acute observations in the book; but,
  in our judgment, the view given of the English constitution is
  superficial, and in some cases erroneous.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 400. My. 18, ‘05. 2010w.

  “Very admirable book. The plan of the work is so excellently conceived
  and executed that only one or two objections are suggested by a first
  reading. One is to the title. The other objection is to an occasional
  drop into triviality and the college graduate habit of quoting mere
  hackneyed phrases and tags from other languages. There are occasional
  slips in the printing and in the statements. The particular excellence
  of this work has already been indicated as being an interpretation of
  the English constitution as it operates to-day. The value of this book
  is very greatly increased for American readers by the frequent
  comparisons instituted between the English and American political
  systems.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 132. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1650w.

  “Probably no book has yet appeared which, in so untechnical and
  comprehensive a way, places before the reader the elaborate, highly
  complex, and thoroughly democratic governmental system.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 448. F. 18, ‘05. 200w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 70w.


* =Lowell, Mrs. Carrie Thompson=, comp. Art lovers’ treasury; famous
pictures described in poems; forty-eight reproductions of famous
pictures accompanied by poems of noted writers, with text by Carrie
Thompson Lowell. **$1.20. Estes.

  “Forty-eight pictures are reproduced in half-tone, and the editor
  writes a running comment, treating a group of paintings and sculpture
  under some general heading, such as ‘Mythology in poetry and
  sculpture,’ ‘Legends of the saints,’ or ‘Pictures translated into
  verse.’” (Dial.) “An attempt has been made to assemble famous pictures
  and pieces of sculpture, and to bring into association with these
  certain poems that have been inspired by the various works of art that
  are pictured, or which have been written descriptive of them.... Many
  of the best artists are represented, as well as poets such as Dante,
  Keats, Browning, Longfellow, Whittier, Markham, and some others.”
  (Ind.)

  * “An excellent companion volume to Miss Singleton’s ‘Great portraits’
  is this compilation of Mrs. Lowell.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “Pictures and poetry are thoroughly representative, and the
  arrangement, though necessarily loose holds the reader’s interest.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 446. D. 16, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1376. D. 14, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 874. D. 9, ‘05. 150w.


* =Lowery, Woodbury.= Spanish settlements within the present limits of
the United States: Florida. 1562-1574. **$2.50. Putnam.

  “This, the second of Mr. Lowery’s monographs on the history of Spanish
  colonization within the present limits of the United States, deals
  with the Florida settlements of the period 1562-1574, and like its
  predecessors, is based on a careful study of original sources.... An
  interesting feature is—comprehensive exposition of the tribal
  organization, characteristics and customs of the Florida Indians. The
  work contains several maps, more than thirty bibliographical and
  critical appendices, and a good index.”—Outlook.

  * “Scholarly work.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

  * “A treatise not only of prime interest but of solid value, as
  embodying a broader and more than usually judicial statement of the
  vexed themes involved.”

   + + — =Lit. D.= 31: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 600w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 786. N. 18, ‘05. 290w.

  * “So cautious is he, and so frequent are his references to and
  citations from authorities, that from the narrative standpoint his
  book is at times arid and tedious. But it is unquestionably of
  distinct value to the historical student.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 431. O. 21, ‘05. 340w.


=Lowrie, Rev. Walter.= Gaudium crucis: a meditation for Good Friday upon
the seven words from the cross. *90c. Longmans.

  Meditations upon mercy, judgment, love, joy and sacrifice,
  confirmation, accomplishment and duty, and filial trust. The book is
  designed for those who are unable to attend the Good Friday services,
  and to assist the clergy in preparing their sermons.

         =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 70w.


* =Loyson, Mme. Emilie Jane (Butterfield) Meriman (Mme. Hyacinthe
Loyson).= To Jerusalem through the lands of Islam, among Jews,
Christians, and Moslems. $2.50. Open ct.

  “‘A tour of Christian exploration.’ Pere Hyacinthe and his wife (who
  is an American) travelled from Algeria to Jerusalem, by way of Arabia
  and Egypt, and the travels are described in a lively and vigorous
  style.... The idea of the book is not the travel, so much as the
  relativity of religions of the peoples studied ... and Madame
  Hyacinthe Loyson’s point is the universal brotherhood of ... the
  religions of Allah and Jehovah and the Christian religion. In the
  co-operation of the three—and in the honouring by modern Christianity
  of some of the grander and simpler elements of the other two faiths,
  she sees the regeneration of the world.”—Acad.

  * “There is a breadth of view in the book, enthusiasm and some little
  of that spirit which sees good in ‘every country but its own.’ It will
  not please theologians, but it may stimulate the thoughts of the
  ordinary religiously-minded man or woman.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1237. N. 25, ‘05. 260w.

  * “Everywhere in the book there is the intense spiritual earnestness
  of a good woman holding conferences with the leading representatives
  of Islam.” H. E. Coblentz.

       + =Dial.= 39: 379. D. 1, ‘05. 340w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 384. O. 14, ‘05. 230w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 636. N. ‘05. 60w.


=Lucas, Abner H.= Call of to-day. *50c. Meth. bk.

  Sermons preached in the First Methodist Episcopal church, Montclair,
  N. J. They include: The religion for to-day; Work for to-day; The
  commanded strength; Joy for the morning; The mighty appeal of
  usefulness; Re-enlisted strength; and The complete life.


=Lucas, Edward Verrall=, comp. Book of verses for children. $1. Holt.

  Some 200 verses which Stevenson, Browning, Shakespeare, Goldsmith,
  Lewis Carroll, Riley, Longfellow, Scott, Rossetti, and many others
  have written for little folks are gathered into this delightful
  volume, with old ballads, rhymes and songs of Christmas.

  “Altogether, the little volume is one of the most desirable of such
  collections (in small space) now to be got at. There seems to be
  something in it for all good juvenile tastes.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 575. S. 2. ‘05. 230w.


* =Lucas, Edward Verrall.= Life of Charles Lamb. 2v. *$6. Putnam.

  Mr. Lucas “has tried as far as possible to keep the story of the life
  to the words of the original performers and their contemporaries....
  At a wave of his hand witness after witness gets up to testify in his
  own words and tell the reader what he knew of Lamb during the period
  in question.... We are able to see the actual environment of Lamb
  between 1815 and 1825, surrounded ... by the normal frequenters of
  these ‘noctes’ such as George Dyer, Fenwick, Robert Fell, Martin
  Burney, G. Burnett, Randal Norris, George Dawe, Ayrton, Phillips,
  Alsager, and Barren Field. The portraits of most of these intimates of
  the Mitrecourt and Inner Temple-lane are limned with a delicate and
  artistic curiosity. Lamb is depicted in this circle as he lived....
  For all the very happiest things that have ever been said about Lamb
  the enthusiast will find a happy-hunting-ground in these two
  volumes.”—Lond. Times.

  * “Only once, so far as we have noticed, is he betrayed into something
  like over-confidence in his minute research.”

   + + — =Acad.= 95: 999. S. 30, ‘05. 1810w.

  * “Of the man Charles Lamb—the ‘human mortal,’ as distinguished from
  the thinker and writer—Mr. Lucas’s pages reflect a true and lively
  image. He is less successful in reproducing the intellectual features
  of his subject; while his portraits of certain of Lamb’s
  contemporaries—notably that of Coleridge—are not far removed from
  travesty.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 756. D. 2. 880w.

  * “Is likely to prove of more importance than the recent edition of
  ‘The works and letters of Charles and Mary Lamb,’ of which he was the
  editor. It will not supersede the ‘Life and final memorials’ of
  Talfourd, but it contains, mainly in the form of letter and anecdote,
  much of supplementary value, and some matter which is absolutely
  fresh.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + — =Atlan.= 96: 844. D. ‘05. 1080w.

  * “Taking Mr. Lucas’s biography as a whole there is a wealth of
  entertainment in its pages which it would be difficult to
  overestimate. The part that we are least sanguine of recommending is
  the appendix, which seems to us a heavy incubus upon a book which
  ought to carry not an ounce of superfluous material.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 297. S. 22, ‘05. 2440w.

  * “Mr. Lucas has drawn upon a large fund of fresh material, and has so
  generously told the story of both lives in the language of his
  subjects that this biography is really an autobiography.” Hamilton W.
  Mabie.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 827. D. 2, ‘05. 380w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Above all other things Mr. Lucas’s work is one which abounds in the
  essential characteristic of biographical work—sympathy. The vast
  compilation of tiny details of personality and character are not
  thrown together haphazard but are arranged chronologically, and
  indexed in a masterly manner.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 820. D. 23, ‘05. 690w.

  * “The first really complete and adequate Life of that singularly
  delightful writer and admirable man.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 653. O. 28, ‘05. 1550w.


=Lucas, Edward Verrall.= Wanderer in Holland. *$1.75. Macmillan.

  “The combination of Mr. Lucas as narrator with Mr. Herbert Marshall as
  illustrator has given us a charming volume.... It was a happy idea to
  intersperse photographs of some of the more famous Dutch pictures. Mr.
  Lucas is an admirable guide and visitors to Holland could not have a
  more agreeable commentator on their travels past or future.... He not
  only abounds in wise and quaint comments himself, but is the cause of
  our remembering the wisdom of others.”—Sat. R.

  “‘A wanderer in Holland’ is, of course, no substitute for Murray or
  Baedeker, rather is it their essential complement.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 920. S. 9, ‘05. 1050w.

  “If the success of a book of travels is to be measured by the
  travel-fever it excites in the veins of its readers, this volume
  should have a warm welcome.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2:571. O. 28. 2300w.

  “And now we have found all the fault we care to find with this
  charming guide. To say that it ranks a long way after ‘The inland
  voyage’ is only to say that Stevenson is dead. We welcome in it a like
  sense of intimacy—it wears the face of a friend—it talks.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 292. S. 15, ‘05. 1150w.

  * “Mr. Lucas makes no pretension to connoisseurship, but his
  untechnical remarks on pictures are nearly always interesting, and, to
  one reader at least, prove the most attractive part of his writing.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 150w.

  “The fact is Mr. Lucas comes near being in his book exactly what one
  would like a well-informed and companionable fellow-traveler to be if
  one were seeing Holland with one’s own eyes.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 725. O. 28, ‘05. 920w.

  “In short the book is notable among books of travel and description
  for its readable qualities and discriminating and individual taste.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 580. N. 4, ‘05. 120w.

  * “A book of more than ordinary merit—a book with genuinely original
  qualities.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 826. D. 23, ‘05. 150w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 755. D. ‘05. 60w.

  “As we might have expected from his record, he neither bores nor
  dogmatises but his book is full of information and not a little wise
  reflection.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 346. S. 9, ‘05. 370w.

  “It is as a critic of character and manners and a chronicler of art
  that Mr. Lucas interprets his function as a guide.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 468. S. 30, ‘05. 1330w.


=Luccock, Rev. Naphtali.= Royalty of Jesus and other sermons. *50c.
Meth. bk.

  Beauty of thought and simplicity of language mark these sermons which
  apply the teachings of Christ to the conditions of to-day under the
  titles: The royalty of Jesus; The fullness of Christ; The power of a
  surrendered life; The face of Jesus Christ; The brook in the way; The
  gospel for an opulent civilization; The cry of the disinherited; The
  song of Moses and of the Lamb.


=Lucian (Lucianus Samosatensis).= Work of Lucian of Samosata; trans, by
H. W. Fowler, and F. G. Fowler. 4v. *$4. Oxford.

  Four handy volumes in which the translators have happily rendered
  idiom by idiom and “literary allusions, quotations, and technicalities
  of law, philosophy, or art are neatly turned to apt analogues. They
  sound every note in Lucian’s compass, from the mock-heroic
  serio-satiric eloquence of the Nigrinus, the angry contempt of the
  False prophet and the Death of Peregrine ... to the solemn trifling of
  the Fly ... and the demonstration by Socratic induction in the
  ‘Parasite’ that dining out is better than dining.” (Dial.) The fourth
  volume contains a list of notes which explain all allusions to
  classical biography and mythology.

  * “The renderings of Messrs. Fowler have all the ease and ‘élan’ of a
  work originally written in English.” R. Y. Tyrrell.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 846. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1680w.

  “Their translation is decidedly good; they have ventured on some
  daring modernisms, but these we can tolerate if only lightness is
  secured.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 294. S. 2. 2420w.

  “The translation is admirably executed in the freer manner of Jowett’s
  ‘Plato.’” Paul Shorey.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 233. O. 16, ‘05. 1850w.

  “The editors ... deserve high praise for the clearness and vigour of
  their translations.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 265. Ag. 25, ‘05. 1520w.

  “This Fowler translation is a work of high art, for which its authors
  are to be thanked.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 717. O. 21, ‘05. 610w.

  “The translators have with admirable fidelity, vigour, and vivacity
  reproduced the writings of one whom such a critic as Erasmus reckoned
  not only among the most entertaining, but also the most instructive,
  of ancient authors.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 713. N. 4, ‘05. 1870w.


=Lucke, Charles Edward.= Gas-engine design. **$3. Van Nostrand.

  “The book is divided into three parts: 1, Power and efficiency, with
  rules for deciding on the necessary piston displacement; 2, Stresses
  on the various parts of the engine and also with the various cylinder
  arrangements as affecting the turning effort and balance; 3, The
  necessary dimensions of the various parts to resist the stresses with
  both empirical and theoretical formulæ for the computation.”—Engin. N.

  “It is a very notable addition to the literature on the gas engine.”
  Storm Bull.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 526. My. 18, ‘05. 1170w.


=Lützow, Francis, count.= Lectures on the historians of Bohemia. Oxford.

  The Ilchester lectures for the year 1904 “have their origin in a wish
  to do something for the Bohemian cause by illustrating before a
  foreign audience the wealth of Czechish traditions.... While Count
  Lützow alludes briefly to his contemporaries, the chief of his
  attention is devoted to the chronicles of the Middle ages and the era
  of the Reformation. Here the conditions fixed by a popular course of
  lectures compel him to be brief in his notice of all save the now
  famous authorities like Cosmas, Benes of Weitmil, Lawrence of Brezof,
  Sixt of Ottersdorf, and Paul Skála.... He gives us simply and tersely
  the results of the most recent research on technical points in
  conjunction with Palacky’s views on the larger issues.” (Nation.)

  “The count, who is a master of our language, goes through the list of
  Bohemian historians, estimating their merits and furnishing
  characteristic extracts. These are translated into very clear and
  succinct English. Excellent book.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 710. Je. 10. 1860w.

  “To many of our readers we can best convey an impression regarding the
  style and quality of his work by stating that it resembles a
  compressed Wattenbach with an element of current political interest
  added.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 85. Jl. 27, ‘05. 1300w.


=Lyall, Sir Alfred Comyn.= Lord Dufferin, the life of the Marquis of
Dufferin and Ava. *$7.50. Scribner.

  The life of a man to whom fate gave great opportunities, and who was
  big enough to handle and hold them. He was a central figure in many of
  the political events of the last half of the nineteenth century, he
  served as Governor-general of Canada, Viceroy of India, Ambassador to
  St. Petersburg, to Constantinople, Rome and France. This biography is
  compiled from his journal, his letters, and the recollections of his
  friends.

  “But the real value of the book lies in the information it supplies in
  regard to the great movements in foreign and colonial politics that
  have been going on during the last thirty years.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 144. F. 18, ‘05. 1580w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 201. F. 18. 1560w.

  “Making every deduction for the imperfections inseparable from even
  the best biographies, one reaches the conclusions that here a really
  great subject has been treated both adequately and effectively.”
  Lawrence J. Burpee.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 58. Ag. 1, ‘05. 1520w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1358. Je. 15, ‘05. 1040w.

  * “His book is frank yet discreet, and marked in all its parts by
  delicacy of perception.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 342. O. 26, ‘05. 3370w.

  Reviewed by Joseph O’Connor.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 193. Ap. 1, ‘05. 3250w.

  “What is to be regarded as the official biography. It is official also
  in its discreetness—a discreetness at times carried to extremes,
  dimming perception—and in the highly eulogistic tone maintained
  throughout. It may safely be said that Sir Alfred, while presenting a
  work obviously open to criticism, has also presented one of direct
  value to the historical student, and of interest to the general
  reader.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 760. Mr. 25, ‘05. 280w.

  “Sir Alfred Lyall seems to us to have chosen the best way in which to
  tell the story of Lord Dufferin’s life.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 253. F. 18, ‘05. 930w.


=Lydston, G. Frank.= Diseases of society. **$3. Lippincott.

  “A study of social conditions in this country. The police criminal,
  the anarchist, and the large number of moral and physical law-breakers
  are here discussed. The author also deals with such questions as the
  oppression of wealth, the rights and wrongs of organized capital and
  labour, the negro question, and the offences of society at large. The
  book is well illustrated.”—Bookm.

  “The style, although brilliant at times, is open to much criticism. It
  is verbose, often disconnected and rambling. In spite of many
  blemishes the book is of great value. With the general thesis of the
  book and a large percentage of the conclusions, the reviewer is in
  hearty sympathy and heartily commends it to students of social
  problems.” C. Kelsey.

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 350. Mr. ‘05. 1040w.

  “His examination of the question of crime seems exhaustive, his
  inferences inevitable.” Albert Warren Ferris.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 528. Jl. ‘05. 660w.

  “While here and there is much that is interesting, although at times
  crudely presented, the author like many others who write upon the
  subject errs in trying to prove too much from insufficient premises
  and newspaper gossip, and this is especially true when he treats of
  craniometry and physiognomy.” Allan McLane Hamilton.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 183. Ag. ‘05. 1140w.

  “It has not the air of a serious book of science, and indeed contains
  here and there a misplaced facetiousness.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 213. Jl. 27, ‘05. 360w.

  “As monographs the parts are incomplete, and the whole is neither
  sufficiently unified for the ordinary reader, nor clearly cut for the
  student. Nor is the style attractive.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 63. Jl. 20, ‘05. 680w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 57. Ja. 12, ‘05. 600w.

  “This is really a study of the vice and crime problem from a medical
  standpoint.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 255. F. ‘05. 170w.


=Lyle, Eugene P.= Missourian. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  Mr. Lyle finds material for his first story within the tottering
  Empire of Maximilian. The hero is one of Jo. Shelby’s band who,
  refusing to surrender after the fall of the Confederacy, offered their
  services to Maximilian in Mexico. Din Driscoll, Missourian,
  Confederate officer, the “storm center” in every fight, and the
  exquisite, capricious Jacquelin d’Aumerle, secret emissary of Napoleon
  on business of state, figure almost grotesquely in a series of
  thrilling adventures which result from defending each other from
  intrigue and death. In the end this airy coquette of two imperial
  courts chooses to find her happiness within the confines of a
  shut-away Missouri farm.

  * “The fact is Mr. Lyle has been absorbed by his material, instead of
  absorbing it.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 718. N. 25. 200w.

  “Here, for instance, is an example of literary over-seasoning, which,
  far from being exceptional, is fairly characteristic of the book’s
  style.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 135. O. ‘05. 550w.

  “We should be grateful to Mr. Lyle for having given in this novel a
  new and adequate setting for the American hero of love and war.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 930. O. 19, ‘05. 860w.

  “Yet, dramatic, picturesque, brilliant in attack and technique as the
  book undoubtedly is, the interest in it is largely spectacular.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 586. O. 21, ‘05. 510w.

  “It is crude enough in certain details, but its reading leaves no
  doubt as to the fact that Mr. Lyle possesses extraordinary vision and
  power to communicate what his imagination sees.” L. L.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 496. Jl. 29, ‘05. 880w.

  * “Admirably fresh and lively tale.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  “The history is accurate, but unimportant; the romance is of vast
  importance and fairly accurate.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 220. Ag. 12, ‘05. 130w.


=Lyman, Olin Linus.= Oliver Hazard Perry and the war on the Lakes.
$1.25. Amsterdam.

  The brief career of Commodore Perry (1785-1819), midshipman,
  lieutenant, commander of Lake Erie, and the American squadron in the
  Mediterranean is given in this volume which is “a eulogy rather than a
  biography.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “As an elementary history the book is good. It should make rather a
  good ‘reader.’ Mr. Lyman has padded his book tremendously, and has
  indulged in ‘fine writing’ of the worst sort. The author is very chary
  of dates.”

   + — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 275. Ap. 29, ‘05. 370w.


=Lynch, Frederick.= Is life worth living? **30c. Crowell.

  A new volume in the “What is worth while series.” A message of comfort
  showing that life in God’s world is truly worth living, that there is
  but one answer to the question for those who believe in the life
  eternal.


=Lytton, Lord Bulwer-.= Last days of Pompeii. $1.25. Crowell.

  Uniform with the “Thin paper classics,” this pocket volume is printed
  on opaque “Bible” paper in large clear type, is bound in limp leather,
  and contains a frontispiece of the author.




                                   M


=Maartens, Maarten (J. M. W. van der Poorten-Schwartz).= My poor
relations. †$1.50. Appleton.

  Fourteen unpleasant stories of life in a little Dutch village, where
  the people are degraded and low in mind and morals. In “The mother”
  Mary Quint vainly struggles to help her son conquer his inherited love
  of drink. “Jan Hunkum’s money,” “Fair lover,” “The summer Christmas,”
  “The notary’s love story,” “The banquet,” and the rest, are all
  horridly true, and are told in a vivid style that makes them almost
  too real.

  “The book is as oppressive as a nightmare.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 189. Ag. ‘05. 90w.

  “Most of the fourteen stories herein told are pathetic almost to
  tragedy.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 213. Ap. 8, ‘05. 340w.

  “All the stories, while not calculated to make one laugh, will
  undoubtedly keep one’s interest alive.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “It would be hard to name a book in which the characters are so
  uniformly disagreeable as in this collection of short stories.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 858. Ap. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “One may go so far as to compare them to De Maupassant’s though hardly
  to that master’s best.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 764. Je. ‘05. 120w.


=Mabie, Hamilton Wright.= Fairy tales every child should know. **90c.
Doubleday.

  Twenty four “once upon a time” fairy tales collected from various
  countries to amuse and stimulate the imagination of the child of
  today. They include such familiar stories as, Hans and Gretel, Ali
  Baba, The golden goose, One eye, two eyes, three eyes, Blue beard, Red
  riding hood, The ugly duckling, Tom Thumb, Jack the giant killer, Jack
  and the bean stalk, and Puss in boots.

         =Dial.= 39: 20. Jl. 1, ‘05. 60w.

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 12. Jl. 6, ‘05. 160w.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 371. Je. 10, ‘05. 260w.

  “In one respect the book appears to us defective, in that it does not
  state by whom the particular version of each of these child classics
  was written.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 443. Je. 17, ‘05. 260w.

 *   + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 768. D. ‘05. 80w.


* =Mabie, Hamilton Wright,= ed. Myths every child should know: a
selection of the classic myths of all times for young people. **90c.
Doubleday.

  “This volume is uniform with ‘Fairy tales every child should know.’ It
  collects for children’s reading and for school use sixteen
  myth-stories which belong to the world’s literature and appeal to the
  young imagination. Hawthorne’s ‘Wonder-book’ and ‘Tanglewood tales’
  furnish half the material.... Charles Kingsley’s ‘Greek heroes,’ Mr.
  Brown’s ‘In the days of the giants,’ Mr. A. J. Church’s ‘Stories from
  Homer,’ Mr. Mabie’s ‘Norse stories,’ and Miss Emerson’s ‘Indian myths’
  are the other sources. Mr. Mabie furnishes an introduction.”—Outlook.

 *   + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 432. D. 8, ‘05. 40w.

  * “We could wish that Mr. Mabie had put his interesting preface before
  a more consecutive and less heterogeneous collection.”

 *   + — =Nation.= 81: 490. D. 14, ‘05. 230w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 120w.

  * “They are rather stiffly told and frequently the style is too
  difficult and elaborate to be easily understood by children.”

     — + =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 10. D. 9, ‘05. 110w.


=McAlilly, Alice.= Hilda Lane’s adoptions. $1.50. Meth. bk.

  Hilda Lane, kept from the man she loves for twenty years by a war time
  misunderstanding, adopts a sturdy waif named Robert, and a negro girl,
  Liberty, and educates them. Liberty grows up to offer her life to
  white fever sufferers, and Robert, on the eve of a successful career
  and engaged to marry a lovely southern girl, discovers that there is
  negro blood in his veins and nobly consecrates his life to the
  uplifting of the black race. The book is chiefly occupied with the
  negro question.


=McAlilly, Alice.= Larkins wedding. $1. Moffat.

  “An apotheosis of good nature and neighborly kindness. A worthy
  washerwoman related grammatically to Mrs. Partington arranges the
  wedding of her daughter. The respect both have won in their town
  inspires the interested villagers of higher social position to make
  the pathetic efforts of Mrs. Larkins turn out a happy success. A
  change in bridegrooms adds to the general jollity, and the two
  Larkins, mother and daughter, disappear in a haze of prosperity and
  sentiment.”—Outlook.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10:650. O. 7, ‘05. 340w.

  “The story is told with many touches of humor.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14, ‘05. 80w.


=Macaulay, Thomas Babington Macaulay, 1st baron.= Essays; ed. by Lady
Trevelyan. $6. Putnam.

  These six compact little volumes contain nothing but the text of the
  essays and preface as edited by Lady Trevelyan, the author’s sister.
  There are several illustrations in each volume—mainly engravings and
  portraits.

  “Edition is as satisfactory for the purposes of the reader of Macaulay
  as a modest man can desire, handy enough to permit you on occasion to
  put a volume in your coat pocket and take it with you upon a journey,
  yet entirely fit for the library shelves. For it sacrifices to
  compactness not size of type (and the eyes of the reader) but an
  easily dispensable surplus of margin.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10:92. F. 11, ‘05. 250w.

  “Admirably planned for thoroughly comfortable reading, and to take up
  small space in a library. For a good edition which meets all the
  requirements of the average reader, and of a size which makes it
  possible to carry the volumes about when one travels, we do not recall
  a better edition than this.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 348. F. 4, ‘05. 120w.


=Macbean, L., and Brown, John.= Marjorie Fleming. **$1.40. Putnam.

  The famous account of “Pet Marjorie” by Dr. John Brown is here
  reprinted, with much later information and her journals and letters
  hitherto unpublished. There are fourteen illustrations, including
  pictures of the little girl taken alone and with Scott.

  * “We commend this book, sure that it will become a precious
  possession.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1098. O. 21, ‘05. 1000w.

  “Should be welcomed by all admirers of Dr. Brown’s earlier story of
  her.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 283. Mr. ‘05. 50w.

       + =Dial.= 38:52. Ja. 16, ‘05. 120w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 3. Ja. 7, ‘05. 390w.


=McCall, Sidney.= Breath of the gods. †$1.50. Little.

  Little Yuki, a samurai’s daughter, the last of her honorable race, has
  been educated in Washington and returns to Japan with the American
  minister to Tokio, his wife and daughter. Her story is the story of
  the heart of Japan, the nobility, the love of country, the cruelty;
  and when she tramples on her own love and the love of the young
  Frenchman, Pierre, and marries Prince Haganè at the command of her
  father and the call of her country, she typifies the cheerful
  sacrifice of the individual to the system, which is, perhaps, the
  keynote of Japan. The time is that of the present war with Russia, the
  tragedy is horrid and occidental.

  “‘The breath of the gods’ is one of the most artistic novels of the
  year. We doubt if any American writer has given us a truer or more
  intimate insight into the life and the spiritual and intellectual
  concepts of the Japanese than has the author of the ‘Breath of the
  gods.’”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 331. S. ‘05. 1190w.

  “The genre painting, although too crowded with details, is good; but
  the end is disappointing.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 575. O. 28. 310w.

  “In her work one sees an unbounded admiration of traits not fully
  comprehended, rather than a keen and sympathetic understanding of the
  Japanese ideals and their visible exponents.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 814. O. 5, ‘05. 150w.

  “Putting aside the truth or improbability of the story, the book is
  interesting in all parts and thrilling in some.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 147. Ag. 17, ‘05. 670w.

  “‘The breath of the gods’ is worthy of the author of ‘Truth Dexter.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 364. Je. 3, ‘05. 530w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “As a story the book is written in a somewhat hectic and turbulent
  fashion, and its early promise is hardly fulfilled by the melodrama of
  its conclusion.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 390. Je. 10. ‘05. 50w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 160. Jl. 29, ‘05. 110w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 358. Ag. ‘05. 210w.


=McCarthy, Justin.= History of our own times. v. 4 and 5. ea. *$1.40.
Harper.

  “These two volumes conclude the ‘History of our own times,’ begun by
  Mr. McCarthy some twenty-five years ago. The five volumes taken
  together cover the entire reign of Queen Victoria.... This work ... is
  rather a series of essays than a continuous history. All of the
  important events of the period come in for consideration. The greatest
  of these for the empire at large was the Boer war.... The interest and
  value of these volumes rests upon the fact that they are the work of a
  man who knows intimately what he is writing about.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Looking at the work as a whole, we can only describe it as glib,
  fluent, popular—not by any means as a thoughtful and far-reaching
  study of men and the events of our time, and of the tendencies of
  those great movements which they have generated.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1118. O. 28, ‘05. 1940w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 541. O. 21. 110w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  * “But Mr. McCarthy is always readable, and the entertaining quality
  of his work will undoubtedly be of value in bringing to the negligent
  reader some familiarity, at least, with the main features of later
  English politics.” E. D. Adams.

       + =Dial.= 39: 435. D. 16, ‘05. 1390w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  “It does not read like the work of a man behind the scenes, or tell us
  anything that we have not already read in the newspapers. Mr. McCarthy
  writes without any sense of proportion, and freely scamps the
  essential in order to make room for padding. All that can truthfully
  be said is that Mr. Justin McCarthy has the trick of being mildly
  readable even when he is platitudinous and obvious.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 371. N. 3, ‘05. 900w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  “He tells the story in a simple, intelligible way. He is never dry,
  tedious, discursive, labored, or involved. It is not adverse criticism
  to say that he has not written a weighty history.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 743. N. 4, ‘05. 1050w. (Review of v. 4 and
         5.)

  “He is always interesting, and though sometimes gossipy and sometimes
  affected by personal prepossessions, he writes with singular fairness
  of temper. His history is journalistic rather than scientific.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 190w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  * “It is very interesting and of considerable use to students of
  recent events.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 764. D. 9, ‘05. 160w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

  * “We are sorry that we cannot say that it is even a good book of
  reference, for Mr. McCarthy is not methodical enough, nor detailed
  enough, nor accurate enough to make himself an authority on facts. The
  English is slovenly.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 726. D. 2, ‘05. 240w. (Review of v. 4 and 5.)

 *   + — =Spec.= 95: 871. N. 25, ‘05. 300w.


=McCarthy, Justin.= Irishman’s story, **$2.50. Macmillan.

  An autobiography giving the author’s experiences in newspaper work,
  his visits to America, and his parliamentary career (1879-1902),
  covering the Parnell period with its sudden close and the breaking up
  of the Nationalist party.

  “Historical students who may turn to either of these volumes will be
  compelled continuously to keep in mind the nationality and political
  environment of the writers; for with both Davitt and McCarthy every
  Irishman on the popular side is a patriot, an orator, or a statesman.”

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 454. Ja. ‘05. 170w.

  “A record sufficiently varied and full of incident to have a sure
  claim on public interest. It would rank with such a narrative as Mr.
  Riis’s rather than with literary autobiographies, or with intellectual
  documents like Spencer’s account.” H. W. Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 427. Mr. ‘05. 270w.

  “A delightful melange of reminiscence, description, autobiography and
  anecdote, and will be read with genuine enjoyment.”

     + + =Boston Evening Transcript.= F. 8, ‘05. 820w.

  “From first to last these autobiographical chapters have a charm.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1310. Je. 8. 670w.


=McCarthy, Justin Huntly.= Dryad. †$1.50, Harper.

  “The hero is the son and heir of Duke Baldwin of Athens, who ruled
  near the close of the thirteenth century. The heroine, Argathona, is a
  dryad, who remained in the Eleusinian wood after the gods departed.
  There are numerous adventures—joustings, conspiracies, battles,
  enchantments—related with cheerful disregard of everything except the
  interest of the reader.”—Pub. Opin.

  “He has not succeeded in creating the right atmosphere. Mr. McCarthy
  has found a beautiful theme and in spite of his cleverness has handled
  it so roughly that he has deprived it of its external charm and has
  not developed the possibilities of its inherent beauty”

       — =Acad.= 68: 366. Ap. 1, ‘05. 570w.

  “Mr. McCarthy must be congratulated on having so deftly handled the
  supernatural that one hardly feels the impossibility of Argathona.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 395. Ap. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “Decidedly the best that Mr. McCarthy has done.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 285. S. ‘05. 90w.

     + — =Ind.= 58: 958. Ap. 27, ‘05. 240w.

 *   + — =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “A very readable tale after its own unreal fashion.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 539. Ag. 19, ‘05. 50w.

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 50w.

  “Selecting a somewhat vague historical period, he devises an
  impossible plot, worked out by impossible characters. A rather
  pleasing piece of make-believe.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 633. Ap. 22, ‘05. 90w.

  “It may be said indeed that he has woven in this story a tapestry
  whose grace of design and exquisite harmony of color all lovers of
  this kind of story will approve. There is something Tennysonian in the
  silken softness of his style and in his imagery.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 120. Je. ‘05. 210w.

  “The story is told with Mr. McCarthy’s usual verve and lightness.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 70w.

  “Mr. McCarthy contrives to get a real touch of poetry into his
  descriptions of the forest.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 681. My. 6, ‘05. 140w.


=McCarthy, Justin Huntly.= Lady of Loyalty house. †$1.50. Harper.

  “A story of Cromwell’s time, with the brilliant Lady Brilliana Harby
  as the storm centre. Dangers without end beset the lady and her
  admirers true and false, the whole ending happily when the clang of
  wedding bells replaces the clash of swords.”—Critic.

         =Critic.= 46: 93. Ja. ‘05. 40w.

  “A pretty tale and a merry one. This is mostly a skipping,
  happy-go-lucky story, a seventeenth century scherzo.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 787. My. ‘05. 330w.

  “Is a brisk and breezy romance. There is little or no attempt at
  historical accuracy or minute coloring, a fact that is quite
  refreshing. Mr. McCarthy is content to tell a swift and fascinating
  story, in which effort he succeeds thoroughly.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 119. Ja. ‘05. 110w.


=McCaul, Ethel.= Under the care of the Japanese war office. $1.50.
Cassell.

  An English woman’s account of her recent visit to Manchuria to inspect
  the work of the Japanese Red cross society. Their efficient system is
  given in detail and there are many incidents and descriptions typical
  of the land and the people.

  “Gives many interesting glimpses of the kindly side of war.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 16. Ja. 7, ‘05. 300w.

  “Miss McCaul is an honest, straightforward writer, and her book is a
  tonic.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 191. Ag. ‘05. 170w.

  “The practical advantages to be derived from a study of the volume
  under review cannot be questioned.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 163. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1230w.

  “Her letters here collected have in them much of interest, but are
  overloaded with too detailed narrative of personal experiences.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 453. F. 18, ‘05. 140w.

  “Unpretentious, but able and interesting little book. It contains much
  that is valuable to a student of military medicine.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 54. Ja. 14, ‘05. 100w.


=McClain, Emlin.= Constitutional law in the United States. *$2.
Longmans.

  “This text book on American constitutional law is published in the
  “American citizen” series, edited by Prof. Hart.... The classical
  bibliography and references at the beginning of each chapter together
  furnish opportunity for a more extended study of the subjects dealt
  with in the text.... The volume is divided into eight parts ...
  first ... the System of government.... Part II. explains how the
  government is organized. Parts III., IV., and V. deal with the nature
  and scope ... of the legislative, the executive, and the judicial
  branches of the government; Part VI. concerns itself with the
  relations of the states to each other and to the federal government.
  The last two parts are on the relations of the individual to the
  government and on civil rights.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It is an able, fresh, vigorous treatment of the subject, handled with
  assurance and with considerable novelty in method.”

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 948. Jl. ‘05. 90w.

  “Covering in a cursory way so vast a field, the book is necessarily in
  many respects unsatisfactory. It has, however, the decided merit of
  containing a selected general bibliography, topical bibliographical
  references for each chapter, an analytical table of contents, and a
  fairly satisfactory index.”

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 591. My. ‘05. 220w.

  “The volume is very well adapted either for private reading or for
  classes of civics or history in our schools.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 543. Jl. ‘05. 120w.

  “The clear arrangement and concise style, the subordination of detail,
  and the avoidance of a mere mechanical order in the presentation of
  topics save it from stereotyped formality or dull abstruseness. On the
  whole, we should expect to see McClain supplant Cooley to a
  considerable extent in the schools and colleges.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 449. Jl. 8, ‘05. 750w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 318. S. 2, ‘05. 130w.


=McClellan, Elizabeth.= Historic dress in America, 1607-1800; with an
introd. chapter on dress in the Spanish and French settlements in
Florida and Louisiana; il. in color, pen and ink, and half-tone by
Sophie Steel, **$10; hf. lev. or mor. **$20. Jacobs.

  “The work begins with the time of the earliest Spanish occupation of
  the continent, and concludes with the opening of the nineteenth
  century. Within this period the dress of men and women, nobles,
  commoners, and soldiers, is minutely described, the illustrations
  being from contemporary prints, old portraits and similar authentic
  sources.”—Reader.

  “The text is accompanied by excellent illustrations. Its attempt at
  completeness and the care used in arrangement suggest that its
  greatest value is as a book of reference. Therefore it is a matter of
  regret that references for the large number of quotations are not more
  frequent.”

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 715. Ap. ‘05. 130w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 649. My. 27. 610w.

  “This exhaustive and well illustrated volume on the American dress of
  the past should hold a position among the most authoritative works on
  the subject.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 565. Je. ‘05. 110w.

  * “A valuable book of reference.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 34. D. ‘05. 70w.

  “Nothing approaching the completeness of the present work has yet been
  offered.”

   + + + =Reader.= 5: 626. Ap. ‘05. 120w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 682. My. 6, ‘05. 270w.


=McClure, Alexander Kelly.= Our presidents and how we make them. $2.
Harper.

  The present revised edition brings this book of reference down to
  date. An account of the Roosevelt-Parker campaign is given with a
  narrative of its various conventions.

  “As a whole this is a convenient and reasonably accurate handbook of
  American national politics, and only here and there does the author
  make a statement that seems questionable.” H. T. P.

   + + — =Bookm.= 22: 84. S. ‘05. 860w.

  “All these summaries, if not very critical in tone, are readable and
  to the point.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 142. Ag. 17, ‘05. 80w.

  “It is not only a valuable record, but also interesting history.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 357. Je. 3, ‘05. 670w.

  “The style remains involved and awkward and the diction careless.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 394. Je. 10, ‘05. 110w.


=McCook, Rev. Henry Christopher.= Senator: a threnody. **$1.25. Jacobs.

  This poem is a tribute to Marcus Hanna, written by a life-long friend.
  It is divided into five parts: A prologue of a life; Village scenes;
  Transformed villagers; A plea for immortality; and The life beyond.

  “All conducted with a skill evidencing considerable homiletic
  experience.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 90w.


=McCrackan, William Denison.= Fair land Tyrol. **$1.60. Page.

  An enthusiastic description of “happy Tyrol,” in which are mingled
  beauty of landscape, and quaint peasant charm: the toymakers and
  innkeepers of to-day: the patriots and minnesingers of yesterday. The
  traveller is shown where to find interesting sights and scenes and is
  given a knowledge of the part that he may understand the Tyrolese of
  the present. The illustrations are reproduced from photographs.

  “The book is readable and interesting.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 791. Jl. 29, ‘05. 160w.

   + + — =Ath. 1905=, 2: 173. Ag. 5. 1270w.

  “A pleasant account of one of the most delightful of European
  districts.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 191. Ag. ‘05. 110w.

  “Readable for itself, and giving an excellent notion of the country,
  the book is also usable side by side with a guide book, as an
  intelligent and interesting description of the principal places in the
  country.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 528. Je. 29, ‘05. 660w.

  “As a whole his book is disappointing, childishly enthusiastic, and
  not at all convincing as either guide book or account of travel in the
  Tyrol. It is full, however, and one will not go astray in following
  Mr. McCracken as a guide.”

   — + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 294. My. 6, ‘05. 780w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 70w.

  “There is no distinction about the style, which is sometimes
  slipshod.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 284. Ag. 26, ‘05. 170w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 126. Jl. 22, ‘05. 90w.


=McCracken, Elizabeth.= Women of America. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  As a result of several years of observation of the American woman as
  she is found in the large towns and small all over the United States,
  Miss McCracken gives her to us in all her phases, the professional
  woman and the club woman; her ideals and her achievements.

  “This misleading book.... Harmfully sentimental spirit in which the
  fourteen articles ... are written. No information is offered to the
  seeker after fact; and for the theorist there is no basis of
  discussion. The book is simply a rambling series of unilluminating
  anecdotes, strongly personal without being strongly vital in tone.” O.
  H. D.

     — — =Critic.= 46: 281. Mr. ‘05. 600w.

  “The book is often unjust in its criticism, fulsome in its praise,
  illogical in its attempts at argument. It could not be called a
  serious contribution to sociological literature, partly because it is
  a vitascope of photographs from a car window instead of the careful
  canvasses of a Millet, who has known his subjects long, and loved them
  well.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 439. F. 23, ‘05. 460w.

  “The book has far too wide a title.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 338. Ap. 27, ‘05. 640w.

  “Thus, the book is not made up of official statistics, but is the
  fruit of personal meetings with women and visits to the scenes of
  their occupations.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 128. Ja. ‘05. 140w.

  “The art of making what has appealed to herself appeal to her reader
  has been mastered by Miss McCracken.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 616. Ap. 29, ‘05. 970w.


=McCutcheon, George Barr (Richard Greaves, pseud.).= Nedra. †$1.50.
Dodd.

  The elopement of a young couple from Chicago who start for the
  Philippines via New York and London, travelling as brother and sister,
  forms the basis of this story which is turned into an amusing
  extravaganza by a ship wreck in mid-ocean which leaves the hero
  stranded upon the island of Nedra with a new heroine, a girl whom he
  has rescued by mistake.

  “He has given us the kind of story Americans like, incredible, daring,
  delightful and a little absurd.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1154. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

  * “Like most of Mr. McCutcheon’s novels, ‘Nedra’ is not a matter for
  critical appreciation. One may say it is ‘apart’ from it rather than
  ‘beneath it.’”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 885. D. 9, ‘05. 420w.

  “It belongs to the novels of recreation pure and simple, and well
  fulfills its purpose of robbing the reader of the sense of time.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 240w.

  “The story is lively, entertaining, and very improbable.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 578. N. 4, ‘05. 50w.


=McCutcheon, George Barr (Richard Greaves, pseud.).= Purple parasol;
with il. by Harrison Fisher, and decorations by C: B. Falls. †$1.25.
Dodd.

  The owner of a purple parasol, a gray dress and a sailor hat is
  shadowed by a young lawyer who hopes to pile up evidence for a divorce
  case against the erring wife of an old husband. The story becomes a
  romance when the owner of the parasol turns out to be a young and
  beautiful girl.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 652. Ag. ‘05. 110w.

  “Has the merit of lightness and brevity.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 278. Ap. 29, ‘05. 130w.

  “A slight and rather foolish story.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 142. My. 13, ‘05. 40w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 61. Jl. 8, ‘05. 70w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 70w.


=McCutcheon, John Tinney.= Mysterious stranger and other cartoons.
*$1.50. McClure.

  Over one hundred and fifty cartoons which have appeared during the
  past year or so in the Chicago Tribune are gathered into this volume.
  The author expresses the hope that his drawings “may have a permanent
  interest because of the great historical importance of the period they
  encompass” but aside from political matters much space is given to
  genial take-offs of President Roosevelt as bear-hunter and
  glad-hander, and satires of child life.

  * “As a comic history of our own times they are not without value.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “The cartoons are well worth embodying in a form less transient than
  the pages of a daily newspaper.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 383. D. 1, ‘05. 250w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1379. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

  “Preserves too much that is trivial and vulgar (not in the most odious
  sense), and would have been the better for a severe screening. On the
  whole we find the collection rather dreary.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 382. N. 9, 05. 190w.


=MacDonnell, John de Courcy.= King Leopold II., his rule in Belgium and
the Congo. *$6. Cassell.

  The main object of this book “is to tell once more the story of the
  origin and progress and methods of government of the Congo Free State,
  and to refute the charge that Leopold has not fulfilled the pledges
  made under the Berlin act.” (Nation).

  “The writer’s arguments, however, are not convincing, and we wish we
  could attribute their unreality to ignorance of the subject in hand.”

     — — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 584. My. 13. 2800w.

         =Nation.= 81: 62. Jl. 20, ‘05. 590w.

  “The weakness of the book is its redundancy and its tendency to exalt
  into great virtues the king’s most commonplace actions. Its attenuated
  special pleading minimises but does not destroy whatever usefulness as
  a record it may possess.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 814. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

 *       =Spec.= 95: sup. 795. N. 18, ‘05. 290w.


=McDougall, W.= Physiological psychology. *40c. Macmillan.

  This “tiny little volume ... presents a clear account ... of the
  elements of scientific psychology, and is thoroughly up to
  date.”—Acad.

  “Small and unambitious though it be, this book is worth more than the
  little space it would fill in the library of the student of mind.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 416. Ap. 15, ‘05. 370w.


* =McFadyen, John Edgar.= Introduction to the Old Testament. $1.75.
Armstrong.

  “Mr. McFadyen sums up accurately and concisely the established results
  in regard to each book of the Old Testament, avoiding positive
  assertion where the facts do not warrant it. The inexpert reader will
  get from this book in a small compass a clear idea of the results of
  criticism and also of the common-sense method by which they have been
  arrived at.”—Acad.

  * “Mr. McFadyen writes in a most interesting style: and successfully
  brings out both the human interest and the religious value of the
  several books.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1222. N. 25, ‘05. 150w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 889. D. 9, ‘05. 160w.


=MacFarland, Charles Stedman.= Jesus and the prophets; an historical,
exegetical, and interpretative discussion of the use of the Old
Testament prophecy by Jesus and his attitude towards it. **$1.50.
Putnam.

  “Holding Jesus to be more than a prophet, Dr. MacFarland sees that he
  was called to the work of a prophet, to meet a spiritual exigency, as
  the ancient prophets in their time had done.... As Jesus’ disciples
  misunderstood the prophets, so they misunderstood and still
  misunderstand his use of them.” (Outlook.) The author is a
  Congregational minister.

  “No one should hereafter use Dr. Briggs’s or any of the older works on
  Messianic prophecy as authorities without parallel reference to this
  newer treatise.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 151. Jl. 20, ‘05. 230w.

  * “A careful and scholarly examination of the relation of Jesus to Old
  Testament prophecy.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “Dr. MacFarland’s work is of unusual importance for the setting right
  and clarifying of erroneous and confused notions, an excellent
  specimen of the application of critical method for the realization of
  religious values.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 344. Je. 3, ‘05. 370w.


=Macfarlane, Isabella.= Royal knight: a tale of Nuremburg. †$1.25.
Dillingham.

  A story of 15th century Nuremburg, and of twin sisters of a poor and
  widowed mother, one betrothed to a wool-merchant’s son, the other,
  loved by a young German officer whose father is chief magistrate.
  Because the girl holds her honor above her love, the magistrate’s son
  attempts to force her consent by accusing her mother of witchcraft.
  Imprisonment and torture follow, but thru the loyalty of the daughters
  and the advent of their champion, who is no other than Emperor
  Maximilian, all ends happily.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10:304. My. 6, ‘05. 290w.


=Macfarlane, Walter.= Laboratory notes on practical metallurgy: being a
graduated series of exercises. *80c. Longmans.

  “This little book is apparently intended as a first course for
  beginners in practical work in a metallurgical laboratory.... It
  consists of a series of practical exercises, all well within the grasp
  of the average boy, graduated and well arranged with a view of
  developing the habit of observation.... The student is introduced to
  furnace work.... The preparation of the ordinary common alloys
  follows.... Later, the more complex subject of the principles on which
  the process for the extraction of copper, lead, gold, and silver from
  their ores depend is dealt with. The book concludes with a few
  elementary exercises in assaying gold and silver ores, and the
  analysis of coal and coke.”—Nature.

       + =Engin. N.= 53: 639. Je. 15, ‘05. 170w.

  “The book contains much useful information for junior students, and
  can be recommended for their use.”

   + + — =Nature.= 71: 413. Mr. 2, ‘05. 220w.


=MacGowan, Alice, and Cooke, Grace MacGowan.= Return: a story of the sea
islands in 1739. †$1.50. Page.

  In a stirring romance the authors reproduce people and scenes of
  colonial South Carolina and Georgia. In it Diana Chaters, the belle of
  Charleston, and a young Virginian of the historic family of Marshall
  figure prominently. This heroine, “the heartless coquette, is publicly
  jilted as the result of a brutal wager. How she takes her shame, and
  how she builds it into her life, is told by the authors with skill and
  upon somewhat new lines.” (Outlook.)

  “‘Return’ is a capital love-story, one of the very best romantic
  novels of the year.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 447. O. ‘05. 600w.

  * “For the most part the story develops naturally, the characters have
  actual personality, and the savour of romance is well maintained.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 607. N. 4. 220w.

  “The book is written in an excellent literary style.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 98. Jl. 13, ‘05. 240w.

  “A capital tale of love and adventure.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 329. O. 6, ‘05. 420w.

  “A book of fresh, wholesome romance.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 410w.

  “A love-story with plenty of color and movement. It is all very well
  done, vivid, dramatic; but the story is too overcrowded with
  characters; there are too many side issues. Not a little excision as
  well as condensation would have greatly improved a vigorous story.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 195. Ap. 1, ‘05. 180w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “A story with original strength and some novel situations. The
  characters are admirably individualized, the action is lively, and the
  whole picture excellently drawn.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 858. Ap. 1. ‘05. 90w.

  “‘Return’ is a well told tale, and interesting from the first line.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is difficult to conceive of a story in which the element of
  picturesqueness enters more effectively.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 240. Ag. ‘05. 220w.


=MacGrath, Harold.= Enchantment. †75c. Bobbs.

  A group of Mr. MacGrath’s short stories which abound in daringly novel
  situations. The five are “A night’s enchantment.” the adventure of the
  lady in the closed carriage, “The blind madonna,” the adventure of the
  golden louis, “No Cinderella,” the adventure of the satin slipper,
  “Two candidates,” the adventure in love and politics, and “The
  enchanted hat,” the adventure of my lady’s letter.

  “Without being in any way remarkable ... will provide amusement and
  entertainment.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 394. Je. 1, ‘05. 80w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380. Je. 10, ‘05. 110w.

  “Is a collection of five of Mr. MacGrath’s stories—good ones too.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 61. Jl. 8, ‘05. 70w.


* =MacGrath, Harold.= Hearts and masks. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  The sprightly record of a night’s adventure in which the principal
  participants bent upon attending a masked ball thru a fluke are
  mistaken for clever thieves. The plot which thickens about the
  innocent imposters for a time, and which is later cleared up,
  furnishes an exciting hour for the most sated fiction appetite.

  * “Constructed with an art that holds the reader’s interest from the
  first page to the last.”

       + =Dial.= 36: 445. D. 16, ‘05. 180w.

  * “It is a book to be read in a half hour, but it contains adventure
  enough to last a lifetime.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 885. D. 9, ‘05. 300w.


=MacGrath, Harold.= Princess elopes. †75c. Bobbs.

  The chief figures in this story of rapid action are the madcap
  Princess of Barscheit, her grumpy uncle intent upon a suitable
  marriage for her, and a young American medical student. The American
  consul tells the story of a series of adventures capped by the
  princess’s escape from marrying the redfaced Prince of Doppelkinn.
  That she finds the young American with her on this journey is
  certainly not distressing to her, and that he turns out to be the long
  lost heir of Doppelkinn and a much worthier suitor than the father are
  facts which atone for her matrimonial hardships.

       + =Dial.= 38: 394. Je. 1, ‘05. 100w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 309. My. 13, ‘05. 510w.

  “This tale ... will be found altogether diverting, if not convincingly
  real.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 142. My. 13, ‘05. 80w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 61. Jl. 8, ‘05. 40w.


=Mach, Edmund Robert Otto von.= Handbook of Greek and Roman sculpture,
to accompany a collection of reproductions of Greek and Roman sculpture.
*$1.50. Bureau of University travel.

  “Dr. von Mach’s book is not a ‘handbook’ in the ordinary sense of the
  word, but a descriptive catalogue of five hundred plates and
  forty-five text illustrations representing works of Greek and Roman
  sculpture.... The description and discussion of each work is preceded
  by a note giving the material, place, and date of discovery when
  known, museum or other collection in which the work is now preserved,
  and some bibliographical information.”—Nation.

  “The author shows in this book the excellencies of his former work. He
  states his conclusions boldly and independently.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1365. Je. 15, ‘05. 530w.

  “Certainly Dr. von Mach’s style leaves much to be desired. While we
  cannot recommend Dr. von Mach as a perfectly wise guide to such as
  wish to know Greek art, we are glad to express our belief that the
  university prints, accompanied by this handbook, will be of great
  service to the student.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 417. My. 25, ‘05. 1220w.


=McIvor, Allan, pseud.= Overlord. $1.50. W. Ritchie.

  This story of the peons of Canada is a frankly unhistorical tale of
  the freeing of Canada from England in a great war in which the
  “Habitans” and serfs under the leadership of the overlord defeat
  “Pitchener,” the English general. The overlord, aside from his feudal
  ownership along the upper St. Lawrence, owns several United States
  railroads, consequently the president, tho ostensibly neutral, aids
  him, and in return receives Canada as a gift from his grateful hands
  when England is finally defeated.

  “A history which is frankly fictitious. The most surprising thing in
  the book is the bitterness toward England and the English.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 44. Ja. 5, ‘05. 370w.

  “In this curiously heaped up and involved lot of fiction are a vast
  number of tags and ends of stories and undigested ideas, the winnowing
  of which would be hopeless here. It’s a very long, queer book.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 84. F. 11, ‘05. 470w. (Outline of plot).


=Mackaye, Harold Steele.= Winged helmet. †$1.50. Page.

  France in the sixteenth century when Charles of Bourbon was rebelling
  against Francis I. is the setting. The story is one of fighting and
  adventure, of a nobleman who ill-uses his lady, and of my lady’s maid
  who saves her mistress from Saracen slavery by luring a villain into
  quicksand, and does other daring things. In the end the lord and lady
  are reconciled and the maid reaps as her reward the title of Lady of
  Ravelle.

  “An improbable tale, convincing as we read.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 158. Jl. 20, ‘05. 100w.

  “A light romance—rather under average weight in fact. Nor in spite of
  the wings on the helmet and the out-of-the-common incidents mentioned,
  does it make up in spirit what it lacks in baser qualities. It cannot
  carry even its own feathery self as a gallant should.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 149. Mr. 11, ‘05. 370w.

  “A spirited romance of the Weymanesque school. Characters and scenes
  are well imagined and the story ingeniously contrived; but the flow is
  unpleasantly interrupted by repeated transitions from the usual
  narrative form to diary extracts and the like.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 762. Mr. 25, ‘05. 50w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 943. Je. 17, ‘05. 100w.


=Mackaye, Percy Wallace.= Fenris, the wolf: a tragedy. **$1.25.
Macmillan.

  “Fenris the wolf, son of Odin, troubles the serenity of Heaven with
  his barkings of defiance, and with his wolfish desires for Freyja, the
  betrothed of his brother Baldur. In the prologue, Odin ordains that
  Fenris, Baldur, Freyja and himself shall leave their heavenly estate
  and become four mortals. The action of the play consists in the
  conversion of Fenris to charity and human love.... The action passes
  before rune-stones in the northern forest at daybreak or twilight, in
  prison chambers and by deep forest pools.”—Nation.

       + =Critic.= 47: 288. S. ‘05. 100w.

  “There is much beauty in Mr. Mackaye’s work, beauty of poetry and
  thought; he is strong, tender and imaginative, and the more we study
  his play, the more we wish either that it were not a play at all or
  that we might see it acted.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 283. S. 8, ‘05. 340w.

  “As a whole the play fails a little of tragic impressiveness precisely
  because of a certain forcing of the note. It is, nevertheless, a
  poetic venture, of a sincerity and magnitude for which there can be
  nothing but admiration.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 18. Jl. 6, ‘05. 460w.


=McKean, Thomas.= Vortex. †$1.50. Lippincott.

  The serenity of two lives—Anna of the Titian red hair, and her artist
  husband Paul—is jeopardized by a scheming Jesuit who plots to get
  possession of the wife’s fortune for the Church. He uses as a foil
  Elena, an actress, who serves as a model for Paul’s masterpiece
  Spring. In the swirl of complications Father Lamian’s real relations
  to Elena come to light, showing a misspent youth and a deeply
  designing nature.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 631. S. 23, ‘05. 270w.

  “The story is weak and poorly written, annoyingly commonplace in
  expression, and quite unnecessary.”

     — — =Outlook.= 81: 283. S. 30, ‘05. 30w.


=McKechnie, William Sharp.= Magna carta: a commentary on the great
charter of King John. *$4.50. Macmillan.

  “Each chapter of ‘Magna carta’ is given in its original Latin, with an
  English version by Dr. McKechnie following it in smaller type, after
  which comes the commentary. The book includes a select bibliography
  and a list of the authorities consulted by the author, a general
  index, and an index to statutes. In appendices are documents relative
  to or illustrative of King John’s Magna carta.”—N. Y. Times.

  “One feels compelled to state that although for want of something
  better this work will undoubtedly be consulted, nevertheless taken as
  a whole it cannot be regarded as of more than mediocre value.” Henry
  Lewis Cannon.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 137. O. ‘05. 920w.

  “A scholarly and authoritative work based on the results of the latest
  critical research, devoid of rhetorical flourish and meeting the
  requirements of the lawyer and the historian. The book is well
  planned. We are grateful to our author for clearing up the problems of
  Magna Carta in so scholarly and definitive a fashion.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 635. S. 14, ‘05. 830w.

  * “Very readable book.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1157. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “He has given us what will long remain as the standard work on Magna
  Carta, a book remarkable alike for its solid learning, its fertility
  in suggestion, and its characteristic note of moderation and sweet
  reasonableness.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 152. My. 12, ‘05. 1810w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 281. Ap. 29, ‘05. 270w.

  “The first exhaustive commentator on ‘Magna carta’ since the days of
  Richard Thompson.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 193. My. 20, ‘05. 280w.

  “We should be disposed to dismiss his book as nothing more than a
  text-book of unusual thoroughness were it not for one saving merit.
  Mr. McKechnie is not afraid of discussing an abstract and complicated
  question.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 250. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1170w.

  “His conclusions, like his style, are not always inspired, or beyond
  criticism or revision.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 642. Ap. 29, ‘05. 2120w.


=McKibben, Julia Baldwin.= Miriam. $1.25. Meth. bk.

  Miriam, whose birth is hid in mystery, is brought up as a slave in an
  old-fashioned southern household. She is freed by her master, and
  educated in the north where no none knows of the taint in her blood.
  After bravely renouncing love and happiness, confessing to her lover
  and friends the truth, she learns that by birth she is an honored
  daughter in the home where she was once a slave.

  * “A story of the old South of no literary value, and as foreign to
  fact as many others that have been written on similar lines.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 50w.


=Mackie, Pauline Bradford.= Girl and the kaiser. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  The presence of the kaiser upon the pages of this simple little love
  story lends a certain dignity and makes the plot possible, but has no
  real historical significance. Wilhelmina, who has been brought up in
  America, comes to Germany to visit her uncle, the Admiral von Uhland,
  and his pleasure loving French wife. Here she meets two young naval
  officers, and upon the occasion of the kaiser’s visit to her uncle she
  learns of the strict paternalism practiced in the German army and
  navy, and that a rich wife is essential to a poor officer. This is
  where the denouement comes in. In the end the kaiser, who has taken a
  fancy to her, in his favorite role of destiny, points out to her the
  sensible road where she finds both wealth and love.

  “Is a charmingly bright and unconventional story. Though by no means a
  great story, is one of the most clever little romances of the season.”

     + + =Arena.= 33: 339. Mr. ‘05. 250w.


=McKinley, Albert Edward.= Suffrage franchise in the thirteen English
colonies in America. $2.50. Ginn.

  The purpose of the author has been “to present the dynamic or
  developmental aspect of the subject, rather than the analytic; he has
  not been content with a mere summary of the suffrage qualifications in
  the several colonies, but has endeavored to trace the growth of the
  colonial ideals and practices respecting the elective franchise.”

  “Mr. McKinley’s volume is full of interest. Taken in connection with
  Mr. Bishop’s ‘History of elections in the colonies,’ the whole ground
  seems thoroughly covered.” F. W. S.

   + + + =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 134. Jl. ‘05. 230w.

  “In general there is shown the most conservative scholarship. The
  immense amount of material consulted, the care in the verification of
  its vast number of mere facts, and the patience shown in the
  organization of the mass of data, calls forth the highest praise for
  the author’s scholarship.” John L. Conger.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 608. My. ‘05. 530w.


=McKinley, Charles E.= Educational evangelism: the religious discipline
for youth. *$1.25. Pilgrim press.

  Clergymen, and all who are interested in the religious training of
  boys and girls from 16 to 20 will find much of value in this essay,
  which discusses the religious needs of youth and gives suggestions as
  to how the church may meet them.

  “It is one of the most sensible and thoughtful presentations of what
  the spiritual discipline of youth should be, both through the pulpit
  and in the school, that has recently appeared. He shows himself an
  original thinker, a man of insight, and a true lover of youth.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1012. My. 4, ‘05. 110w.

  “Though a small book, this is full of judicious thought well worthy of
  thoughtful consideration.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 759. Mr. 25, ‘05. 150w.


=McKinley, William.= Tariff. $1.75. Putnam.

  “The essay was written in 1896, when Mr. McKinley was governor of
  Ohio, and while the information he had gained as chairman of the ways
  and means committee was still fresh in mind. Naturally the legislative
  and political aspects of the tariff are the ones to which most
  attention is given. The author recognizes his difficulty of dealing
  with the subject in a non-partisan way, but states, ‘It has been my
  honest endeavor to do justice to all directly participating in the
  events narrated. It has been my aim to present as completely as
  possible a review of proposed tariff legislation since the close of
  the Civil war to the present time, as well as a sketch of the measures
  actually enacted, to the end that the student may observe the trend
  and purpose of the leading political parties in respect to this
  economic question.’”—Ann. Am. Acad.

  “The essay was intended for general readers and its merits fully
  justify its being put into book form.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 133. Ja. ‘05. 240w.


=McLain, John Scudder.= Alaska and the Klondike. **$2. McClure.

  The author, who is editor of the Minneapolis Journal, accompanied a
  special sub-committee of the Senate committee on territories to Alaska
  in the summer of 1903 and in a series of articles for his paper
  discussed the resources and possibilities of the country. These
  articles now appear in book form revised, and including statistical
  information on commercial and industrial operations down to 1904.

  “His book is conservatively written, is interesting and seems to be
  believable.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 592. S. ‘05. 420w.

  “It is the most complete and also the most trustworthy book of its
  class that has appeared up to the present time.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 191. Ag. ‘05. 70w.

  “The book should serve for a long time ... in the capacity of an
  authoritative reference work.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 385. Je. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “A clear picture of Alaska—its history, population, occupations,
  resources, and problems.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 428. S. 23, ‘05. 660w.

  “Few of his statements can be designated as erroneous, and these are
  mostly of slight importance.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 19. Jl. 6, ‘05. 890w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 172. Mr. 18, ‘05. 280w.

  “An exceedingly interesting book of travel, which ... justifies the
  claims of the publishers that it has practically the accuracy and
  trustworthiness of a public document.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 294. My. 6, ‘05. 1810w.

  “Not only an entertaining record of travel, but a compact statement of
  the conditions, resources, and needs of the territory. Unquestionably
  the ground is not fully covered, but the amount of information
  derivable from the work is such that for all general purposes the
  treatment is adequate.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 92. My. 6, ‘05. 210w.

  “The present treatise is the best that has so far appeared. It is
  broadly comprehensive.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 220w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 595. O. ‘05. 260w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 125. Jl. ‘05. 90w.


=McMahon, Anna Benneson=, ed. See =Shelley, Percy Bysshe.=


=McManus, Thomas J. Luke.= Boy and the outlaw. $1.50. Grafton press.

  The author, whose boyhood was spent in Harper’s Ferry, where he
  witnessed the famous raid of John Brown, has woven his recollections
  of that time into a story in which a Virginia boy discovers a wounded
  mulatto, one of Brown’s men, the day after the raid, and attempts to
  conceal the outlaw from the authorities. The resulting adventures
  comprise the story, in which a Virginia squire, a doctor, a young
  lawyer and others figure.

  “A story that moves swiftly and directly and contains a good deal of
  pleasant humor and excellent character-drawing.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 117. Ja. ‘05. 70w.


=Macphail, Andrew.= Essays in Puritanism. **$1.50. Houghton.

  Taking Jonathan Edwards, John Winthrop, Margaret Fuller, Walt Whitman
  and John Wesley as the subjects of his essays, the author has written
  a series of sketches which give a better picture of the individual
  types than of Puritanism.

  “An uncommonly readable and instructive book.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 43. Jl. 16, ‘05. 440w.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 818. O. 5, ‘05. 150w.

  “He mingles with his sharp and sometimes acrid treatment of Puritanism
  a good deal of sound and discriminating comment on its more attractive
  side, but on both sides of his view of Puritanism he leaves an
  impression that he has not very thoroughly worked the matter out.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 280. Ap. 29. ‘05. 650w.

  “These essays are bright, readable, entertaining, but they are also
  sometimes smart and a trifle flippant in style, and, in their dealing
  with philosophical thought, superficial. His view, no less than his
  style, is journalistic.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1013. Ap. 22, ‘05. 310w.

  “His book has many attractions; one of them is the pertinence with
  which he makes reflections, called forth in the first instance by the
  past, apply to the present. And he has a way of discerning the real
  greatness of the men whom he describes.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 294. F. 25, ‘05. 230w.


=Macquoid, Mrs. Katharine Sarah Gadsden.= Pictures in Umbria. *$1.50.
Scribner.

  “This is a volume of purely ‘impressions de voyage’ by an intelligent
  observing woman inspired by the history and landscape of Umbria....
  The author has a distinct liking for showing the life of the people by
  describing their physical characteristics and relating their
  conversation, and by throwing these things in contrast with the
  characteristics of the ancient race.”—N. Y. Times.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 823. Ag. 12, ‘05. 530w.

  * “This one is neither too historic nor too artistic to suit many
  tastes.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 60w.

  “The text is so trite and prosaic that it gives the impression of
  being written merely for the sake of furnishing a setting for the
  fifty original illustrations.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 117. S. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Written in a bright and picturesque style, and full of interesting
  anecdotes.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 27: 183. D. ‘05. 110w.

  “When all has been said, the illustrations are by far the most
  interesting features of the book. It is worth publishing for them
  alone.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 129. Ag. 10, ‘05. 380w.

  “The book will form an entertaining companion for the fireside
  tourist, for it is intimately written in unadorned, direct narrative
  style.” Walter Littlefield.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 588. S. 9, ‘05. 130w.


=Macquoid, Percy.= History of English furniture. 20 pts. v. I, pts. 1-3.
per pt. *$2.50. Putnam.

  “The history has been divided into four parts: ‘The age of oak,’
  comprising furniture from 1500 to 1660; ‘The age of walnut,’ from 1660
  to 1720, showing the varied influences of the Restoration and Dutch
  designers; ‘The age of mahogany,’ lasting from 1720 to 1770, in which
  the introduction from France of fresh ideas in design clearly marked
  another change, and ‘The composite age,’ from 1770 to 1820, inspired
  by an affectation of all things classical, combined with an unbalanced
  taste.... There are nearly 1000 illustrations in the entire work, and
  sixty of these are in the exact colors of the originals.”—N. Y. Times.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905. 1: 631. My. 20. 730w. (Review of v. 1.)

  “This book will be valuable, not only to lovers of old furniture, but
  to art students interested in wood-carving.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 155. Jl. 20, ‘05. 560w. (Reviews v. 1., pt. 1.)

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: 273. My. ‘05. 230w. (Reviews vol. I., pts.
         1-2.)

       + =Nation.= 80: 132. F. 16, ‘05. 240w. (Reviews vol. I., pt. 1.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 251. Ap. 15, ‘05. 350w. (Reviews vol. I,
         pts. 1-3.)

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 541. Ag. 19, ‘05. 490w. (Review of v. 1.
         pts. 4 and 5; v. 2, pt. 6.)

  * “It is unnecessary to add anything to what we have already said
  concerning the importance and elegance of this work, which is
  absolutely unsurpassed in its field.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 150w. (Review of v. 2, pts.
         6 and 7.)

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 110w. (Review of v. 2.)


* =McSpadden, Joseph Walker.= Stories from Wagner. (Children’s favorite
classics.) 60c; (Astor lib.) 60c; (Waldorf lib.) 75c; (Handy volume
classics.) limp lea. 75c; pocket ed. 35c. Crowell.

  “The stories considered in this little volume are; Four from the
  ‘Ring’ dramas, also ‘Parsifal, the pure,’ ‘Lohengrin, the swan
  knight,’ ‘Tannhauser, the knight of song,’ ‘The master singers,’
  ‘Rienzi, the last of the tribunes,’ ‘The flying Dutchman,’ and
  ‘Tristan and Isolde.’”—R. of Rs.

  * “For the non-musical as legend and fairytale, for the young music
  lover who has still in anticipation the Wagner music drama, it is a
  capital little book.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 150w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 60w.


* =McVickar, Henry Whitney.= Reptiles. †$1.50. Appleton.

  “The story is based upon a wager made by three men that in five years
  after marriage they will feel the same devotion to their wives that
  they felt before marriage. Two, a wealthy young Englishman and an
  American clergyman, were for the affirmative, one, a clever young
  cynic, for the negative. When the bets were called, the clergyman was
  prepared to pay the full amount like a man of honor, the young
  Englishman to compromise with a third, but the cynic refused to take
  the money, because he, too, lost, since he still loved his wife.”—N.
  Y. Times.

  * “The story is told in a rather impressionistic style, which
  frequently leaves something to be desired.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 794. N. 25, ‘05. 150w.

  * “A thoroughly disagreeable novel.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 40w.


=Macy, Jesse.= Party organization and machinery. *$1.25. Century.

  Party organization is described in its relation to presidential,
  congressional, and senatorial leadership. Professor Macy traces party
  development pathologically rather than historically from its real
  beginning in Jefferson’s administration, as a township or county
  organization, up through state, congressional, and national
  committees. The development of the committees is given, Tammany, and
  the differing party management in various states are fully treated.

  “Students of political and constitutional history will find it of
  great service ... because it treats the problems wisely and brings
  home to the reader forcibly the significance of party organization as
  a fact.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 948. Jl. ‘05. 110w.

  “Prof. Macy deals with his subjects sympathetically. The mode of
  presentation is concrete.” F. I. Herriott.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 606. My. ‘05. 650w.

  Reviewed by Winthrop More Daniels.

         =Atlan.= 95: 552. Ap. ‘05. 300w.

  “This study in political pathology will be a welcome addition to the
  books available to the student of political science. There seems to be
  nothing omitted from this little hand-book that any student of party
  methods or management could possibly wish to know.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 86. F. 11, ‘05. 660w.

  “Survey is very broad. As a rule, Professor Macy is direct and
  explicit but he is not always consistent, and we note occasional slips
  liable to lead to misconstruction of his position. Whatever there is
  of error, however, is not sufficient to vitiate the value of his
  work.”

     + — =Outlook.= 78: 1043. D. 24, ‘04. 290w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 761. D. ‘04. 230w.


=Madison, James.= Writings; ed. by Gaillard Hunt. v. 5, 1787-1790. subs.
*$5. Putnam.

  “Mr. Hunt’s third and fourth volumes, consisting chiefly of Madison’s
  notes of debates in the Federal convention, brought us down to the
  date of its adjournment in September, 1787. The present volume carries
  us but two years and a half farther.... Of a hundred and eight letters
  printed by Mr. Hunt there are only a dozen that have not been printed
  before.... Six came from the Madison papers, two from the collections
  of the New York library, two from the Virginia historical society, one
  from a North Carolina source, and one, a letter of some interest
  written to Philip Mazzei, was once the property of Guizot and is now
  in a private collection in Berlin.... Madison’s speeches in the
  Virginia convention occupy nearly a fourth of the volume. His speeches
  in the first two sessions of the First congress, running to nearly as
  great extent, are also given.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “Mr. Hunt’s annotations are apposite and intelligent.” J. Franklin
  Jameson.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 691. Ap. ‘05. 330w.

  “It is a disagreeable task to criticise a volume which shows so much
  care and intelligent arrangement, but there is evidence of some hasty
  proofreading, or perhaps of slovenly copying. The notes are full and
  judicious.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 271. Ap. 6. ‘05. 560w.


* =Maeterlinck, Maurice.= Old-fashioned flowers, and other out-of-door
studies. **$1.20. Dodd.

  “Half a dozen studies of flowers in colors by Mr. Charles B. Falls,
  and attractive type, paper, and binding lend to the small volume an
  air of distinction which matches the unusual quality of M.
  Maeterlinck’s style. Flowers, like animals, have distinct
  personalities for M. Maeterlinck, but his frequent personifications
  are aesthetically justified by the real feeling that they
  express.”—Dial.

  * “A delightful ‘little volume of nature sketches.’”

       + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.

  * “A little volume of his most subtle and characteristic essays.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  * “Characterized by the singular beauty of Maeterlinck’s style, the
  tinge of mysticism, and the interpretation of thought by sentiment
  which have given all his books subtle individuality.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 442. D. 16, ‘05. 40w.


=Magnay, Sir William, 2d baronet.= Prince of lovers. †$1.50. Little.

  A story founded upon the secret chronicles of two states lying in the
  midst of the Hungarian forest. The time is after the close of the
  Thirty years’ war, when some two hundred of these independent states
  existed in Germany. The princess of one state is about to be
  betrothed, against her will, to the heir of the other, when the heir
  disappears. Disguised as a young lieutenant, he comes to her father’s
  court and wins her love. After nearly losing his life and his throne
  in a series of daring adventures, he elopes with the princess and
  comes to his own. A crafty chancellor, a soldier of fortune, and an
  unscrupulous villain add to the plot.

  “His story is commonplace, and the telling always undistinguished.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 736. Jl. 15, ‘05. 260w.

       + =Ath. 1905,= 1: 746. Je. 17. 110w.

  “Is full of exciting incident and of well-marked characters.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 300. My. 6, ‘05. 330w.

  “The romance is not a bad specimen of its type.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 961. Ap. 15, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 714. My. 6, ‘05. 250w.

  “To label this novel as old-fashioned, is to pay a compliment, not
  cast a slur. It is to say that the author has taken pains and time,
  that his creation is shapely, and dignified.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 119. Je. ‘05. 390w.


=Magnus, Hugo.= Superstition in medicine; tr. from the German by Julius
L. Salinger. **$1. Funk.

  A history of the erroneous ideas and fanciful beliefs that have
  prevailed in the world with regard to sickness and its cure from the
  days of ancient Rome to the present time.


=Mahaffy, John Pentland.= Progress of Hellenism in Alexander’s empire.
$1. Univ. of Chicago press.

  In a series of lectures, which represent the compendium of a long and
  brilliant development of human nature, the author addresses not only
  the general reader who wishes to know something of the expansion of
  Greek ideas toward the East, but the specialist who needs general
  views of the whole into a corner of which his particular field fits.
  He treats Xenophon as the precursor of Hellenism, and brings the
  influences down to the part they perform in modern Christianity.

  “There is little in the book (beyond novelty of presentation) which
  cannot be found elsewhere. It is less excusable that it treats too
  exclusively of problems of the author’s own raising, too little of
  those current at the present time.” W. S. Ferguson.

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 189. O. ‘05. 310w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 420. Je. 16, ‘05. 480w.

  “Such occasional indistinctness does not, however, detract appreciably
  from the general luminousness of the picture, from the inspiriting
  nerve and freshness which we learnt long ago to associate with Dr.
  Mahaffy’s utterances and which show no signs of failing.” E. B.

   + + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 822. O. ‘05. 320w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 159. My. 19, ‘05. 560w.

  “Dr. Mahaffy has made a mistake in attempting to deal in so small a
  compass with so vast a question as the spread of Hellenism.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 344. S. 9, ‘05. 1420w.

  “They are readable and discursive, but they would not convey a very
  clear impression of the period which they profess to describe to any
  save finished scholars.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 353. S. 9, ‘05. 1400w.


=Mahan, Alfred Thayer.= Sea power in its relations to the war of 1812.
2v. **$7. Little.

  The authoritative and widely directed study of Captain Mahan on the
  influence of sea power upon history has resulted in a series of most
  important volumes. In turning his attention to this phase of the War
  of 1812, he has brought to light some entirely new material from
  government and private documents, has treated with special clearness
  the subject of the imprisonment of American seamen, and has given
  emphasis to the records of American privateers. The author traces the
  train of causes of the war from 1651, in order to make clear Great
  Britain’s course. The work is strongly bound and illustrated.

  “No one who reads his latest work will hesitate to say that it is in
  all respects worthy to rank on the same level as its predecessors. The
  vein is as rich as ever, and it is worked with no abatement of skill
  and no diminution of profitable output. He is occasionally prolix, and
  the construction of his sentences is sometimes clumsy and involved.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 366. N. 3, ‘05. 2760w.

  * “His discussion of the conditions which caused the war is the best
  we know of anywhere.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 777. N. 18, ‘05. 1160w.

  * “But whatever its defects, ‘Sea power in its relations to the war of
  1812’ must be rated, like its distinguished predecessors, a
  substantial contribution to the history of naval warfare and a
  suggestive exposition of the force of the doctrine of ‘preparedness.’”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 831. D. 2, ‘05. 940w.


=Mahler, Arthur.= Paintings of the Louvre; Italian and Spanish, in
collaboration with Carlos Blacker and W: A. Slater. **$2. Doubleday.

  “A handbook of the Italian and Spanish sections of the celebrated art
  gallery, and includes also a history of the art of Italy from the
  early workers in the Byzantine manner to the Renaissance, while the
  part devoted to the Spanish schools is given up mainly to Velasquez
  and Murillo. The illustrations show examples of the work of these
  artists as well as of Fra Angelico, Botticelli, Leonardo, Raphael and
  others.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The illustrations are numerous, but too much reduced and too
  indistinctly printed to do more than remind one how inadequately they
  represent the originals.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 1111. O. 21, ‘05. 340w.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 475. N. ‘05. 70w.

  * “The criticism is of the old school, Vasari’s pleasing tales being
  repeated with an apparent obliviousness of the incredulity into which
  they have fallen through the researches of such moderns as Berensen,
  Fry, and others.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 391. D. 1, ‘05. 80w.

  “The book, as embodying the latest results of research, is to be
  relied on. The criticism is unoriginal and often extremely
  commonplace. It is well arranged, the English is smooth.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 278. O. 5, ‘05. 190w.

  “The only charge to be brought against his text is the overstudious
  avoidance of anything like emphasis. The final chapter on Spanish
  paintings shares the merits of the others—clearness, simplicity,
  intelligence.” L. L.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 637. S. 30, ‘05. 1030w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 60w.

  * “The historical, biographical, and technical constituents of this
  commentary are quite readable.”

       + =Spec.= 95: sup. 795. N. 18, ‘05. 490w.


* =Maitland, John Alexander Fuller.= Joseph Joachim. *$1. Lane.

  This volume in the “Living masters of music” series “is only some
  sixty pages in length and is divided into five sections dealing with
  Joachim’s career, violin playing, teaching, influence, compositions,
  each of which is necessarily summarized in the briefest manner....
  Having quickly disposed of the facts of his career, there is space
  found for interesting personal reflections upon the playing and
  influence of Joachim. His character, moral and artistic, which is one,
  is well summed up.”—Acad.

  * “Is a good specimen of condensed biography.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 110w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 304. O. 12, ‘05. 450w.


=Maitland, J. A. Fuller=, ed. See =Grove, George.=


=Major, Charles.= Yolanda, maid of Burgundy. * †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “The time is when Edward IV. reigned in England, and Louis XI. sat
  upon the French throne. Then Charles of Burgundy, styled Charles the
  bad, was feared as the richest and most powerful prince in the
  country, and it was Mary, his beautiful and gentle daughter, who was
  the pawn that the wicked prince would have gladly sacrificed for his
  own ambitious aims.... It is a story bristling with intrigue and
  adventure, with meetings after dark, and love and scorn and villainy
  and fine ladies traveling unattended, and mystery galore, and always
  through it all runs the theme of love—the love of a brave man for a
  beautiful girl.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.

  * “A readable story, though not a high literary achievement.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 711. N. 25, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Is a very good story of its kind.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 796. D. 16, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Charles Major once more shines through brilliant incapacity when he
  attempts ‘Yolande.’”

       — =R. of Rs.= 32: 761. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Malcolm, Napier.= Five years in a Persian town. *$3. Dutton.

  “This is an interesting description of Yezd, ‘in the very center of
  Central Persia,’ where the author was for some time engaged in
  missionary work, and enjoyed unusual opportunities of mixing with all
  sorts and conditions of people. The experience of such a stay as he
  says apologetically, is not a traveler’s experience, but what of
  that?... the sympathetic picture of Yezd scenery, life, and manners
  which he has drawn with minute and vivid accuracy is as memorable as
  it is rare.”—Ath.

  “The real value of ‘Five years in a Persian town’ lies in the
  sympathetic study of native character and modes of thought. In this
  respect Mr. Malcolm will not easily be surpassed, combining, as he
  does, keen insight and a curious subtlety of imagination with an
  incisive style relieved by delightful touches of dry humor.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 69. Jl. 15. 1680w.

  “A keen, but quiet and unobtrusive, sense of the humorous aspects of
  things runs thru the author’s pictures of Yezdi life and enhances the
  attractiveness of the volume.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1112. N. 9, ‘05. 190w.

  “The book fulfils its purpose excellently, and makes a fair guess at
  some Persian characteristics.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 286. O. 5, ‘05. 650w.

  “Mr. Malcolm has given us a very interesting, amusing and instructive
  account of Persian life.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 530. O. 21, ‘05. 320w.


* =Mallock, William Hurrell.= Reconstruction of religious belief.
**$1.75. Harper.

  “Mr. Mallock attempts to aid ‘the thoughtful man of to-day,’ either
  ‘in justifying his old belief by supplying it with new foundations, or
  in building up some new belief which may possibly take its place.’ Mr.
  Mallock demonstrates that, when science has said its last word, it
  inevitably leaves us in some region outside itself in which ‘an
  intellectual solution of the contradiction between scientific and
  religious principles must be found.’”—R. of Rs.

  * “Science can never find a complete explanation of phenomena. The
  attempt to show that it can, and to dispense with philosophy, is the
  cardinal error of Mr. Mallock’s book; it finally leads him to pure
  scepticism, from which he jumps into blind credulity. Much of the book
  is of considerable value. The whole of the third part, in which the
  case for scientific agnosticism is criticised, is admirable,
  particularly the demonstration that chance has no real existence.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1171. N. 11, ‘05. 2190w.

  * “It is a good book to be read at a single sitting, like a good
  novel. To say that it is interesting, well written, and appropriate to
  the times, is to offer it the merest justice; but to describe it as a
  complete success is perhaps going too far. Perhaps it would be more
  successful if it were less complete.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 440. D. 16, ‘05. 1470w.

  * “The soundest part of Mr. Mallock will be found in the
  considerations which he develops in his earlier chapters rather than
  in the more pretentious ‘solution’ which he proclaims in his
  concluding book.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 355. O. 27, ‘05. 1920w.

  * “Mr. Mallock offers nothing really new in his argument, but it
  derives a novel coloring from its relations to recent scientific
  views, and piquancy from his wit and humor. The book is brightly
  written and the thought is throughout interesting. The proof-reading
  leaves something to be desired.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 451. N. 30, ‘05. 1020w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 752. D. ‘05. 100w.

  * “He is doing good service not only to the cause of religious
  apology, but to society, and above all, to truth, which has suffered
  long and much from the timidity of science to push its conclusions to
  logical issue.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 5. O. 14, ‘05. 1860w.


=Mann, Henry.= Adam Clarke. $1. Popular book co.

  “A narrative of the experiences of a family of British emigrants to
  the United States in cotton mill, iron foundry, coal mine, and other
  fields of labor.” The author, whose work as a newspaper man has
  brought him in contact with the phases of life treated in this story,
  tells of the abuses at the immigrant office, and scores the
  protectionists, the settlement workers, the Pittsburg militia, and the
  Pennsylvania railroad. The many hardships suffered by all of their
  class are vividly detailed as the history of the Clarke family
  progresses.

  “The ferocity of the painted picture is such that nobody is likely to
  take it as a literal transcription of conditions—but nobody who knows
  the city or human nature will doubt the existence of a substantial
  basis for some of the author’s fury. To be sure he is a partisan, and
  as is the way of partisans, his eye is single and fixed. Well-informed
  and well-balanced people may read it with profit. It might be less
  good for incipient anarchists.”

  (Outline of plan).

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 52. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1180w.

  “As a novel the work calls for no consideration, but it is deserving
  of attention as an obviously sincere attempt to present the grievances
  and sufferings of the poor in a manner that will quicken sympathy to
  action. Unfortunately, ... the writer, through ignoring the reverse
  side of the shield and through undoubted exaggeration, tends to repel
  rather than attract the thoughtful reader, and to inflame rather than
  broaden the thoughtless.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 651. Mr. 11, ‘05. 90w.


=Mann, Hugh.= Bound and Free: two dramas. *50c. Badger, R: G.

  An argument for sex-emancipation, for doing away with marriage, the
  family, the home as they exist to-day. The author calls the dramas
  which illustrate his point Bound, and Free, he makes the chief
  characters in each declare that they can love many men, or women, as
  the case may be, at the same time and in the same way, but can love
  but one supremely, their soulmate. Most conventional people will
  consider this book immoral.


* =Mannix, Mary Ella.= Children of Cupa. 45c. Benziger.

  A pathetic story of the eviction of the Cupa Indians from their home
  in California on the Warner ranch, told in connection with the
  experiences of a family of campers who spent six weeks of the last
  summer the Indians remained on their ancestral lands at the Hot
  Springs on the old reservation, and learned to know the people and to
  sympathize with them, and to understand their life and the part the
  missions played in it.


=Manzoni, Alessandro.= Sacred hymns [Gl’ inni sacri] and the Napoleonic
ode [Il cinque maggio] of Alexander Manzoni; tr. by Joel Foote Bingham.
*$3. Oxford.

  The translator has aimed “to give the exact sense of the author.” The
  Italian texts are also given in the appendix and there is a portrait
  of Manzoni, a biographical preface, as well as historical
  introductions and critical notes.

  “Dr. Bingham’s translations are painstaking, and, if one knows the
  original, one can recognize that he has given an equivalent for many
  of Manzoni’s thoughts; but the metrical charm and the poetry have
  evaporated. Whoever desires a complete outfit of notes and critical
  opinions on Manzoni’s hymns and ode will find them in this book.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 211. Mr. 16, ‘05. 390w.

  “We have nothing with this rendering.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 676. My. 20, ‘05. 140w.


* =Mar, Alice=, il. Japanese child life, with new stories and verses by
Alice Calhoun Haines. †$1.50. Stokes.

  The strange faces, quaint costumes, odd games, amusements and
  occupations of the little Japanese children are prettily set forth in
  picture and verse. There are eight full-page illustrations in color.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 894. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.

  * “The stories and little poems have grace, quaintness, and charm.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 1039. D. 23, ‘05. 90w.


=Marble, Annie Russell.= Books in their seasons. **30c. Crowell.

  Uniform with the “What is worth while series,” this little volume
  pleads for not “the gentle reader,” but “the sane reader,” suggests
  some authors and books, and asks the reader in his own further
  choosing to follow nature’s moods and seasons, to read books fitting
  to the time, and in harmony with the outer world.


=Marchmont, Arthur William.= Courier of fortune. †$1.50. Stokes.

  “The story is placed in a town known as Morvaix, ruled badly,
  viciously, by one Duke de Rochelle. Reports of the misrule reach the
  ears of the Duke de Bourbon, the suzerain lord, and he sends his son
  Gerard secretly to investigate the charges. This Gerard does, and a
  remarkable chain of circumstances so adjusts matters that the young
  man falls in love, and is loved in return by the very girl that de
  Rochelle means to make his own. Here is fire and tinder in
  plenty.”—Pub. Opin.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 27. Jl. 1, ‘05. 90w.


* =Marden, Orison Swett.= Choosing a career. **$1. Bobbs.

  The founder and editor of “Success” has prepared a volume which will
  undoubtedly prove valuable to all those who need practical aid in
  selecting a life-work. In part one, he discusses the considerations
  which are related to the choice of a life-calling, such as parental
  influence, environment, health, money making, and the temperamental
  and mental qualities which different lines of work demand. Part
  second. Suggestions as to possible careers, contains sound advice and
  helpful suggestions by men and women whose choice has brought them
  success in their various callings. Twenty-eight different trades and
  professions are treated in as many chapters. The book is illustrated
  with the photographs of some of those who have chosen wisely.


* =Marden, Orison Swett.= Making of a man. †$1.25. Lothrop.

  “The cheerful philosophy that Dr. Marden has preached in previous
  books he insists upon in this which consists of a series of talks
  especially intended for young men. Examples of the world’s heroes are
  cited, the world’s leaders of thought are liberally quoted, anecdotes
  are given; and thus, by precept, illustration, and in symposium of
  opinions, Dr. Marden reinforces his own teachings in regard to
  perseverance, ‘self-honor,’ courage, self control, money, success,
  ‘Moral daring,’ and kindred subjects.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 281. S. 30, ‘05. 80w.

  * “He preaches self-control, determination, rectitude, industry,
  thoroughness, courage—and who would gainsay him?”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 400w.

  * “Dr. Marden’s style is full of inspiration and suggestion.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 60w.


=Margoliouth, David Samuel.= Mohammed, the rise of Islam. **$1.35.
Putnam.

  This fortieth volume in the “Heroes of the nations” series, “gives
  first a survey of the conditions of Arabia and Arab life at the time
  when Mohammed first appeared.... The biography of the prophet consists
  largely in following the military, political, and religious campaigns
  with which he spread the religion of Islam, and which Mr. Margoliouth
  traces in detail.... His genius, according to this biographer, was
  equal to the emergencies, but not too great for them.” (N. Y. Times.)

       + =Dial.= 39: 312. N. 16, ‘05. 310w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 660. O. 7, ‘05. 510w.

  “Apart from the dragoon-like treatment of the question of the
  prophet’s sincerity and of all phases of his religious development,
  and despite defects of verbosity and discursiveness, the book is of no
  uncertain value.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 527. O. 28, ‘05. 230w.


* =Marks, G. Croyden.= Hydraulic power engineering. *$3.50. Van
Nostrand.

  In this second edition the author has enlarged the work for the
  purpose of including some examples of new developments connected with
  hydraulic pressing and lifting machinery, and introducing
  illustrations of typical valves and machines. The text has also been
  fully revised.


=Marriott, Charles.= Genevra. $1.50. Appleton.

  This is more than a character study, it is also a soul study of a girl
  of twenty-nine whose young days have been spent quietly on a
  Cumberland farm. Hopelessly out of touch with the simple folk around
  her, she turns to poetry as an emotional outlet and has written a
  number of magazine poems and is publishing a book of verses when the
  story opens. The young artist, Leonard Morris, wakes all the
  slumbering fires of her nature, she is gloriously happy and her poems
  sing of it; when she finds that he fails to understand her, her
  publisher is the first to detect it in the new note of her work. It is
  a single hearted story of loyalty to love and to work. There are some
  good minor characters, her commonplace and ungenial family are drawn
  with pathetic humor.

  “Her life-story is a tapestry of severe design and sombre hue.” W. M.
  Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 17. Ja. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “It is not an exceptionally original theme, but it is not that it
  easily lends itself to dramatic situations, strong character
  contrasts, and the expression of vivid emotions—all valuable adjuncts
  in novel making—and the author of Genevra has used every one of them
  to good advantage, besides giving ample evidence of his being the
  possessor of the same subtle force and style that rendered his
  previous book notable.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 16. Ja. 7. ‘05 1070w.


=Marshall, Archibald.= House of Merrilees. †$1.50. Turner.

  A mystery surrounds the house of Merrilees. Its master dies suddenly,
  his body disappears and with it his fortune which he had converted
  into jewels. The mistress of Merrilees had died abroad some years
  before, and it was given out that their infant son died with her. A
  young cousin takes possession of both the estates and the mystery and
  discovers the real heir in the person of his best friend. There is
  also a love interest.

  “Mr. Marshall has conceived a sufficiently ingenious plot for his
  novel of mystery; but he does not succeed in gripping the attention
  and holding it from the start to the gasp of satisfied excitement at
  the finish.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 198. Mr. 4, ‘05. 200w.

  “This is an excellent story of a mystery so well and so artistically
  concealed that the final disclosure gives rise to a feeling of
  pleasure, not only at the nature of the surprise, but also at its
  inevitableness.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 555. My. 6, 180w.

  * “It all makes exciting reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 861. D. 2, ‘05. 260w.

  * “Is surprisingly good reading.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 700. N. 25, ‘05. 90w.

  “Mr. Marshall is quite entertaining, his imagination is lively, and
  possibly he may regard the novel as a huge joke.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 745. Je. 3, ‘05. 260w.

  “The book will while away an unoccupied hour very pleasantly.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 718. My. 13, ‘05. 160w.


=Marshall, Beatrice.= Queen’s knight errant. †$1.50. Dutton.

  A romance of the days of Raleigh and the virgin queen. A little girl
  is washed ashore in Devon on the land of a recluse alchemist named
  Vidal. A neighboring esquire takes charge of the child and brings her
  up with his own sons. The romance of this waif who turns out to be
  Vidal’s sister, and one of these sons is woven about Raleigh’s love
  affair with Mrs. Throgmorton, their secret marriage, and the anger of
  the queen.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 204. Ap. 1, ‘05. 660w.

  “Too high-flown in style to suit the present taste.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 452. F. 18, ‘05. 20w.


* =Marsland, Frank.= Occupations in life; a fund of practical
information and business advice for boys and young men. $1.50. C. E.
Fitchett, 57 Warren st. N. Y.

  The author who is a mercantile reporter with the Bradstreet company,
  draws easily upon his fund of professional experience in offering
  business counsel to young men. The advice emphasizes an early
  selection of life work, a careful use of spare hours for promoting
  interests along special lines of work, and a better understanding of
  conditions in the business world and the world of occupations.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 586. S. 9, ‘05. 300w.


=Martin, Edward Sanford.= Courtship of a careful man. †$1.25. Harper.

  “A collection of short stories of New York life, having a peculiar
  quality of their own. Quite modern in effect, they have a background
  of good breeding distinctly American. The conversations among
  different members of the families represented are clever, and exhibit
  a complete and happy knowledge of the world.”—Outlook.

  “In this latest book we find Mr. Martin in rather lighter vein than is
  his wont, but as always, excellent company.”

       + =Bookm.= 21: 545. Jl. ‘05. 240w.

  * “Clever and disappointing book.” Frances Duncan.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 454. N. ‘05. 260w.

  “Few writers of fiction can be reproached with too light a touch, but
  we should say that Mr. Martin is one of them.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 470w.

  “The entire collection of stories is delightfully light, breezy, and
  easy and attractive reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 272. Ap. 22, ‘05. 310w.

  “Both the author’s style and his characters may be fitly described as
  alluring.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1058. Ap. 29, ‘05. 60w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 100w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Martin, Mrs. Elizabeth Gilbert.= Homer Martin; a reminiscence. *$1.50.
W: Macbeth, N. Y.

  This beautiful memorial gives us but a slight glimpse into the life of
  the author’s artist husband, whose landscapes, into which he has put
  his best self, she feels are better able to interpret him than she. It
  is illustrated by half tone reproductions of Martin’s better known
  paintings.

  “In the distinction of its perfect English, its reserve where there
  might have been enthusiasm, and its sincerity where there was room for
  flattery, it is a very model for biographers.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 550. Ja. ‘05. 150w.

  “This little sketch was well worth doing. While very modestly done,
  Martin’s claims to greatness are fully presented.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 252. F. ‘05. 70w.


=Martin, Helen Reimensnyder.= Sabina, a story of the Amish. $1.25.
Century.

  Sabina, a pretty Amish maid with wistful eyes, is haunted by a face of
  strange ugliness which appears from time to time as a warning of
  impending disaster to herself or family. A young artist comes to her
  home as a summer boarder, and Sabina falls in love with him.
  Everything points towards tragedy, but the face and her infatuation
  for the artist are alike banished by a fever, and she returns to her
  people and her Amish lover. The real charm of the story lies in the
  Pennsylvania-German dialect and the local color.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 644. S. 30, ‘05. 260w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 336. O. 7, ‘05. 120w.

  “Although the characters of Sabina and Tillie are similar, although
  there is practically the same atmosphere and environment, the second
  book does not equal the first.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 573. O. 28, ‘05. 130w.


=Martin, Hiram=, ed. See =Smet, Father Pierre-Jean de.= Life, letters
and travels of.


=Martindell, Mrs. Charlotte S.= Diary of a bride. **$1. Crowell.

  “If I must choose between dusting unread books and reading undusted
  ones, may the wise fates help me always to choose the latter. I hate
  dusty, grimy books and shall make a desperate effort both to read and
  dust.” So says this bride, and she is as good as her word to establish
  in her home making and her heart-keeping an admirable poise.


=Martineau, James.= Tides of the Spirit. *$1. Am. Unitar.

  “Selections from the writings of James Martineau. The book is edited
  by the Rev. Alfred Lazenby, who contributes a sympathetic
  introduction—an essay on ‘the master who first opened mine eyes to the
  spiritual realities of life and taught me to see the divine within the
  human.’”—Dial.

         =Dial.= 38: 396. Je. 1, ‘05. 60w.


=Marvin, Frederic Rowland.= Companionship of books, and other papers.
**$1.50. Putnam.

  The author has collected in this volume many papers upon as many
  subjects all of which show the touch of one who has lived a scholar’s
  life. The title essay calls the reader’s attention to the author’s
  chosen friends in the world of books, then follows an essay on
  autograph treasures, and one called Modern builders of air-castles,
  which treats of the Brook farm experiment. Papers upon matters
  historical, literary, and religious, follow. The varied subjects and
  the brevity of their treatment make the book one which may be
  profitably picked up in odd leisure moments.

  * “It is a frightful hodge podge of subjects, but one may find a
  number of things of more or less curious interest in the heterogeneous
  mass.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 917. D. 23, ‘05. 300w.


* Mary the queen. 50c. Benziger.

  A story of the virgin Mary for little people.


=Maskell, Alfred.= Ivories. $6.75. Putnam.

  A notable addition to the “Connoisseur’s library.” The author traces
  his subject to every land in every period. He discusses the
  achievement of the earliest dynasties of Assyria and Egypt, shows the
  high place of the Byzantine work, devotes a chapter to Japanese and
  Chinese ivory sculpture, treats some of the technical phases of
  carving, and concludes with a chapter on the nineteenth century and
  present day products of the art. There are numerous beautiful
  illustrations in photogravure and half tone.

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 247. Ag. 19. 1540w.

  “The first compendious account in any language of the progress of
  ivory carving thru-out the world’s history. A high standard of
  excellence is set in this book; it cannot fail to take rank at once as
  the authoritative work upon the subject of which it treats.” Frederick
  W. Goodkin.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 239. O. 16, ‘05. 1750w.

  “The present volume will be found satisfactory and very
  comprehensive.”

     + + =Ind.= 59:696. S. 21, ‘05. 240w.

  “If he could have trusted our capacity and interest a little further
  he would have given us both less and more, and his book might perhaps
  have gained something in coherence, completeness, and proportion.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 284. S. 8, ‘05. 1120w.

  “While our praise, therefore, cannot be very hearty, this still
  remains the largest book of the sort, with the most complete display
  of pictures.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 171. Ag. 24, ‘05. 1070w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 466. Jl. 15, ‘05. 500w.

  “In all his chapters, however, along with much technical information,
  Mr. Maskell enlightens the reader with keen and original observations
  on the significance of the various epochs.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 693. Jl. 15, ‘05. 170w.

  “One of the excellent features of this learned book is the manner in
  which the information has been presented. Clearness of thought and
  arrangement is to be found throughout.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 18. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1490w.


=Mason, Alfred Edward Woodley.= Truants. $1.50. Harper.

  An exciting story of London life in which the truants are a young
  married couple living with the rich and domineering father of the
  husband. To escape this tyranny the young man leaves his wife and sets
  forth to carve a new fortune for her and for himself. He at last joins
  the Foreign legion in Africa and wins distinction, but is called home
  by the news that his foolish young wife has fallen into the clutches
  of an adventurer. The real interest lies in the character of Pamela
  Mardale and her lover who protect and assist the truants and thereby
  find their own happiness.

  “There is a good deal of variety about this romance, but it is not a
  very organic piece of work. The best part of it is that devoted to the
  Foreign legion, of which the author seems to have made a special
  study. It is fairly new ground for the average reader.” W. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 17. Ja. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  “He writes in a prosaic manner of the most romantic passions.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 216. Jl. 27, ‘05. 80w.

  “‘The truants’ is a departure from two established canons of art: that
  the heroine must be interesting, and the motif adequate. The author’s
  style has distinction, color and restraint; his product is fiction to
  be read, not fiction manufactured to be sold.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 254. Ja. ‘05. 420w.

  “Sure to awaken the reader’s interest.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 120. Ja. ‘05. 120w.


=Mason, Arthur James.= Historic martyrs of the primitive church. *$3.20.
Longmans.

  The author “has aimed to present nothing which may not be relied upon
  as historically true.... He has endeavored, he writes, to present the
  stories of the acts of the martyrs during the first three centuries of
  Christianity in a plain and straightforward manner, with only such
  explanations and illustrations as the ordinary reader may require; he
  has omitted lengthy discussions, unnecessary dates, questions of
  genuineness, etc.”—N. Y. Times.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 473. Ap. 29, ‘05. 230w.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 938. Jl. ‘05. 90w.

  “The narratives are set forth in graphic form, and Dr. Mason has
  accomplished a most interesting task.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 653. My. 27. 460w.

  “Mr. Mason writes of them with tender sympathy, devout veneration, and
  scholarly competence.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 397. Je. ‘05. 210w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 224. Ap. 8, ‘05. 160w.

  “Has brought together in a sifted and trustworthy form the chief
  records of the passion of the primitive martyrs.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 810. Je. 17, ‘05. 1270w.

  “A most valuable contribution to the history of Christian life.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 198. Ag. 5, ‘05. 340w.


=Mason, Daniel Gregory.= Beethoven and his forerunners. **$2. Macmillan.

  Dr. Mason, who sent out his “From Grieg to Brahms” two years ago, has
  now rendered the musical world another distinct service. “It has been
  said of Dr. Daniel Gregory Mason that he often ‘expresses what one has
  felt, but never quite formulated.’” The book “opens with a chapter on
  ‘The periods of musical history,’ touches on ‘Palestrina and the music
  of mysticism’ and ‘The principles of pure music,’ followed by
  biographical and critical studies of Hadyn, Mozart, and Beethoven.”
  (Dial.)

  “Displays that firm grasp of the subject which makes it interesting as
  well as valuable reading for the student. There is a chord of
  sincerity in all that Dr. Mason writes; and while he is never
  pedantic, his work shows remarkable insight into the origin and
  development of musical works.” Ingram A. Pyle.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 237. Ap. 1, ‘05. 390w.

  “The book itself is altogether a better book—a more creditable piece
  of writing than its predecessor.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 41. Jl. 6, ‘05. 410w.

  “The author has a happy gift of turning a phrase so that it is easily
  remembered, and a still more valuable gift of a right judgment, which
  makes his phrases helpful and not misleading.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 195. Je. 16, ‘05. 300w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 380. My. 11, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is doubtful if this book of Mr. Mason’s will prove as valuable or
  find as wide acceptance as his earlier one. Mr. Mason ... gives much
  that is valuable in the contemporary discussion of music.” Richard
  Aldrich.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 530w.

  “One of the few writers of to-day who can see the philosophy of
  musical development in its relation to the general progress of the
  world, and can, moreover, write about this in an entertaining way. The
  touch is that of one who not only knows but feels his theme in its
  greatness.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 252. F. ‘05. 110w.


* =Masson, Thomas Lansing (Tom Masson).= Corner in women. **$1.60.
Moffat.

  “A collection of more or less humorous sketches furnished to
  periodicals, and especially to ‘Life,’ in recent times, and well
  supplied with short stories, fables, epigrams, squibs, jokes, and
  humorous verse, with a Gibson girl cover and many other
  pictures.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 20w.

  * “All the ‘follies’ are clever, and there is plenty of variety in
  both subject and manner of treatment.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 80w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1383. D. 14, ‘05. 90w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 765. N. 11, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Like all other books of its kind, this volume suffers from what
  might be called unstable humorous equilibrium, but it contains many
  really funny things.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


* =Masterman, Charles Frederick Gurney.= In peril of change: essays
written in time of tranquility. *$1.50. Huebsch.

  “Mr. Masterman ... attempts to describe the tendencies of English
  civilization, to estimate the nature of its dominant ideals, and to
  point out recent changes which have occurred in these, the nature of
  the foundation upon which they rest, and the likelihood of
  catastrophes in the future. That he is also filled with a passionate
  sense of the injustice of the system which both creates and
  evangelizes the slums, and with a hatred for the idols of the
  marketplace, is evident on every page and lends pathos to much of his
  writing.”—Ath.

  * “A good deal of it is mere journalism. With the modern journalist’s
  eye for effect and instinct for phrasing, Mr. Masterman has also a
  good deal of his love of sweeping statements. It is just this lack of
  balance, this emotionalism, which we think injures the writer’s style.
  His rhetoric is too monotonous, and his pathos too recurrent, to be
  effective. In our opinion, then, the book is clever, interesting, and
  useful, but hardly great. At the same time we welcome its appearance.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 38. Jl. 8. 1430w.

  * “He has studied the life of the poor closely, and has pleaded their
  cause with passionate conviction. He has moreover all the gifts of a
  very persuasive writer, and his style, always easy and attractive,
  rises sometimes to heights of a real eloquence. Mr. Masterman’s
  defects are the defects of his qualities.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 376. S. 16, ‘05. 1480w.

  * “Nobility of temper; catholicity of personal; literary, and
  religious, though hardly of political appreciation; and frequently a
  striking felicity of phrase are among the notes of Mr. Masterman’s
  essays.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 355. S. 9, ‘05. 1260w.


=Matarazzo, Francisco.= Chronicles of the city of Perugia, 1492-1503,
tr. by Edward S. Morgan. *$1.25. Dutton.

  “Matarazzo tells the story of Perugia under the rule of the Baglioni,
  that clan of full-limbed men and lovely women, whose delicate
  complexions and golden locks filled and dazzled him with such a sense
  of their more than human beauty that he almost forgot their crimes in
  his fervid, well-nigh amorous, worship of their splendor and their
  strength. Such is the chronicle which Mr. Morgan has ventured to do
  into English; and it is hardly too much to say that the English is as
  good as the Italian.”—Nation.

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 634. Je. 17, ‘05. 1250w.

  * “Mr. Morgan’s translation, as a piece of English, is most admirably
  done; the archaic flavor he has imparted to the story has a distinct
  charm. There is one complaint to be lodged against him, however: we
  think he should have put his readers in a position where they would be
  better able to judge of Matarazzo’s veracity.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 82: 412. D. ‘05. 530w.

  “A fascinating picture of the moral, social and religious conditions
  of society in a typical Italian city during the Renaissance.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 816. O. 5, ‘05. 190w.

  “We have never seen a translation which has more completely caught the
  spirit of the original.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 522. Je. 29, ‘05. 140w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 365. Je. 3, ‘05. 270w.

  “A careful English translation.” Walter Littlefield.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 588. S. 9, ‘05. 170w.

  “In these chronicles, Matarazzo ... displays a clear, picturesque
  style. He is sometimes garrulous, it is true, but seldom prolix.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 642. Jl. ‘05. 110w.


=Mather, Persis.= Counsels of a worldly godmother. †$1.50. Houghton.

  “We cannot imagine a goddaughter who would not turn a grateful ear to
  the tactful ‘Counsels of a worldly godmother,’ by Mrs. Mather. The
  witty and diplomatic woman of the world, who here attempts to direct a
  debutante to the right path to genuine social success, is not in any
  undesirable sense of the word ‘worldly.’ She stands for the best that
  Society with a large S is capable of producing, and she points to the
  way of attaining that best and of escaping the pitfalls of sham,
  snobbery, notoriety, and ostentation. While her counsels are addressed
  primarily to those who are striving to get on in society, they can be
  followed with advantage by all aspirants to sweet and gracious
  womanhood.”—Pub. Opin.

  “No less wise than witty are these ‘Counsels of a worldly godmother.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 724. O. 28, ‘05. 550w.

  “While she never appeals to a particularly high motive or sets up a
  lofty ideal, the common sense and the sparkle of her curtain lectures
  may attract notice when more serious writing would fail.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 428. O. 21, ‘05. 100w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 636. N. 11, ‘05. 180w.


=Mathew, Frank.= Ireland; painted by Francis Walker; described by Frank
Mathew. *$6. Macmillan.

  Subjective views of the country taken by an artist in colors and
  another in words. The book “is no more than a quiet introduction to
  Ireland” without statistics and without wrangling. “We find a sympathy
  with the poor, a love of wild nature, an appreciation of modest
  perfections, an absence of all ill-temper or rancour which are rare
  and refreshing in a book about Ireland.” (Ath.)

  “On the whole the geography is accurate, and the painter’s sketches
  are in their outline so also. We cannot lay down this interesting book
  without the feeling that it is in many senses over-coloured.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 216. Ag. 12. 840w.

  “Ireland is a sadder, grayer country than Mr. Mathew has described or
  Mr. Walker painted.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 201. S. 7, ‘05. 460w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 399. Je. 17, ‘05. 360w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 125. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

  “He is not always accurate. But he knows his history, and he makes it
  interesting to others.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 813. Je. 17, ‘05. 280w.


=Mathews, Frances Aymar.= Billy Duane. †$1.50. Dodd.

  A story of politics and society in New York, which concerns an
  estranged couple. Billy Duane, the mayor, turns his Madison avenue
  house into political headquarters in his wife’s absence. Mrs. Billy
  objects to rough politicians and cigar stumps, but is fond of roulette
  at any cost and is discovered at the game when a dress-making
  establishment is raided by the police. The affairs of the Duanes and
  numerous friends of their type form the plot, which works out happily,
  ending with a reconciliation.

  “With the flashes of inspiration characteristic of this writer. The
  book is written on a more pretentious scale than its author’s ability
  in character-drawing seems to warrant.”

     + — =Critic.= 46: 478. My. ‘05. 30w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 173. Mr. 18, ‘05. 570w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “A style that is a composite of ‘The duchess’ and certain more modern
  and strenuous American writers.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 758. Mr. 25, ‘05. 70w.

  “It lacks neither rapid movement nor interesting central theme, but is
  written in an irritating staccato style ... which makes it hard to
  read.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 70w.


=Mathews, Frances Aymar.= Marquise’s millions. **$1. Funk.

  An American girl in France, direct heir to her aunts’ immense estate,
  learns that it has been the life long intention of these relatives to
  bequeath their millions to “The Nineteenth Louis” when he should
  return to France and to his rights. She contrives with the aid of an
  ambitious mother and a scheming lover to have the latter impersonate
  the long absent Louis and win the fortune. Finally, her honor asserts
  itself, she discloses the intrigue, and starts out to battle with life
  alone.

  * “This is a romantic little tale of devotion to the Bourbon cause,
  light, readable and effective rather than well written.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1033. O. 7, ‘05. 310w.

         =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “This is a sprightly tale.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 342. My. 27, ‘05. 490w.

  “An original situation which the author has devised and cleverly made
  much of.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 141. My. 13, ‘05. 80w.

  “A really delightful story.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Mathews, Shailer.= Messianic hope in the New Testament. *$2.50. Univ.
of Chicago press.

  “The messianic hope of the Pharisees is formulated as a criterion
  for historical interpretation. With its aid a study is made of the
  messianic ideas of Jesus, the New Testament doctrine of judgment
  and justification through faith; the messiahship of Jesus as the
  basis of the apostolic theodicy; the messianic age and its
  forerunner the gift of the spirit; the resurrection of the body;
  the coming of the kingdom; the ‘consummation.’ As a conclusion
  there is shown the distinction between the essential and the
  formal elements of historical Christianity made possible by such
  an investigation.”—Pub.’s note.

  * “A very able treatment of this theme, conservative in spirit, yet
  thoro in research.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “Is the best monograph on the subject with which we are acquainted.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 982. Ag. 19, ‘05. 620w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 220. Ag. 12, ‘05. 360w.


=Mathot, R. E.= Gas engines and producer gas plants. tr. from the French
by Waldemar B. Kaempffert. $2.50. Henley.

  A practical treatise setting forth the principles of gas engines and
  producer design, the selection and installation of an engine,
  conditions of perfect operation, producer gas engines and their
  possibilities, the care of gas engines and producer gas plants, with a
  chapter on volatile hydrocarbon and oil engines.

  “The original is very clearly written and the translator has succeeded
  in preserving this clearness.” Storm Bull.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 527. My. 10, ‘05. 280w.


=Matthews, (James) Brander=, ed. American familiar verse. See Wampum
library of American literature. v. 3.


=Matthews, (James) Brander.= Recreations of an anthologist. **$1. Dodd.

  Eleven brief papers, by-products of the author’s work upon his four
  anthologies. There are essays upon “Unwritten books.” “Seed corn for
  stories,” “American epigrams,” “Carols of cookery,” “Recipes in
  rhyme,” “The uncollected poems of H. C. Bunner,” and “The strangest
  feat in modern magic.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 96. Ja. ‘05. 50w.

  “A volume of pleasant literary essays.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 54. Ja. 16, ‘05. 70w.

  “Entertaining little volume.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 197. Mr. 9, ‘05. 600w.


=Matthews, Mary Anderson.= Love vs. law. $1.50. Broadway pub.

  The interestingly sketched career of a young Wellesley graduate who
  returns to her Missouri home and determines to study law. This fair
  Portia is admitted to the bar, conducts many a successful case,
  becomes an advocate of equal rights, but withal loses not for a moment
  her girlish winsomeness nor womanly courage. Eventually she becomes
  wholly reconciled to the part that Cupid plays in staying the progress
  of her profession.


=Mauclair, Camille.= Auguste Rodin; the man, his ideas, his work. $4.
Dutton.

  In this account of the sculptor and his work, the sculptor speaks for
  himself and his admiring biographer speaks for him; between them we
  are given a view of the methods of Rodin, and his valuable views upon
  the education of other sculptors.

  “Though M. Mauclair is rather the advocate than the critic, his book,
  if only for the many quotations from the master’s conversations, is of
  genuine interest.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 407. Ap. 1. 1360w.

  “A precise though rather over-eulogistic statement of Rodin’s
  personality and work, and a study of the artist’s psychology and its
  application to his personal ideas upon the technical principles of
  sculpture and his methods of work.”

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 563. Je. ‘05. 160w.

  “M. Mauclair is ... a violent partisan.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 439. Je. 1, ‘05. 590w.

  “M. Camille Mauclair does not leave us with the feeling that we know
  the man Rodin.” Charles de Kay.

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 257. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1630w.

  “From its pages a just appreciation of the artist can be gained.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 227. Ag. 12, ‘05. 1340w.


=Maude, Aylmer.= The Doukhobors. $1.50. Funk.

  Mr. Maude, who made the arrangements with the Canadian government
  which led to the migration of the Doukhobors to Canada, and who thru
  his keen sympathy with the work of Tolstoi was early drawn into a
  close study of this peculiar people, is especially fitted to write
  such a work. It contains a history of the Doukhobors, and traces their
  connection in the past with the Lollards, Anabaptists, Quakers and
  other sects. It also gives a vivid account of their migration to
  Canada, and of the famous “pilgrimage” in 1902, which was finally
  checked by the Canadian government. The author finds in the
  waywardness of so strange a sect, in their lack of appreciation of the
  favor granted by the Canadians, a proof that Tolstoi, sincere and
  earnest and far-seeing as he is, is yet not infallible in point of
  judgment. Incidental to his account of “The Christian commune of
  universal brotherhood” Mr. Maude also takes a stand for individual
  ownership of property. The book, he says, is a public apology for his
  having helped, however unwillingly, to mislead the Canadian government
  as to the nature and religion of the people he has settled among them.

         =Acad.= 68: 608. Je. 10, ‘05. 810w.

  “To Mr. Elkinton’s book that of Mr. Maude may justly be looked upon as
  a pendant.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 103. Jl. 22. 1190w.

  “The disconnectedness and lack of sequence in his chapters ... and the
  large amount of irrelevant matter make the book something of a
  conundrum to the reader until he reaches the final chapter.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 213. Jl. 27, ‘05. 460w.

  “At last we have a work from which the student of sociological
  experiments and systems, as well as the ordinary laymen, can obtain a
  fair, clear, and sufficiently complete conception of the truly
  ‘peculiar’ Russian sectarians about whom so much that is prejudiced or
  erroneous has been written.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 212. Mr. 16, ‘05. 2180w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 69. F. 4, ‘05. 1470w. (Abstract of book).

  “Although not very well put together, is an extremely interesting
  study of ‘a peculiar people.’”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 401. F. 11, ‘05. 410w.

  “His book is not so good as it should be from a deficiency in the need
  of perspective; or perhaps a readiness to use up old material.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 635. My. 13, ‘05. 700w.

         =Spec.= 94: 519. Ap. 8, ‘05. 560w.


=Maule, Francis I.= Only letters. **$1. Jacobs.

  “In the approaching season of the American exodus to Europe, this gay
  record of pleasant travel, written by an intelligent man to his
  brother, will prove a welcome addition to the books set aside to read
  on the steamship. From England, Russia, Egypt, and here and there
  between, the writer gathered impressions.”—Outlook.

  “He is gifted with an extraordinary vocabulary, keen perceptions, and
  a vast treasury of real American humor, sometimes a trifle
  exasperating, but never by any chance dull.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 961. Ap. 15, ‘05. 80w.


=Maurer, Edward R.= Technical mechanics. $4. Wiley.

  “The author shows close sympathy with the point of view of the
  beginner, and appreciation of the fact that at certain points the
  conventional treatment of fundamental principles fails to meet the
  need of the ordinary student. As features of Maurer’s book may be
  mentioned the emphasis everywhere given to the vector nature of the
  qualities dealt with, the parallel treatment of graphical and
  analytical methods in statics, the admirable chapter on work and
  energy, and the satisfactory treatment of the subject of
  units.”—Science.

  “As a sound and practical text-book for the use of students of
  engineering Professor Maurer’s book possesses high merit. The
  exposition is nearly always concise. The soundness of the logic is
  rarely open to question.” L. M. Hoskins.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 21: 302. F. 24, ‘05. 1300w.


=Maxwell, Donald.= Log of the Griffin: the story of a cruise from the
Alps to the Thames. **$2.50. Lane.

  The adventures on land and sea of a strange craft built in the Alps,
  and carried by wagon to Lake Zurich. She sailed the Rhine, and the
  East Scheldt, and arrived at the mouth of the Thames on board a
  steamer. The log is illustrated by a hundred or more sketches of the
  unique cruise.

  “An agreeable novelty in the well-worn ways of European travel.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 286. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

  “Without being in any way a serious work, the narrative commends
  itself as well-told, veracious, original; while in its artistic aspect
  the book is beautiful.” Wallace Rice.

       + =Dial.= 38: 89. F. 1, ‘05. 200w.

  “The account of the evolution of the queer craft and of its adventures
  cannot fail to amuse, if it does not instruct.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 25: 180. Ap. ‘05. 130w.

  “Capital reading.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 78. Ja. 26, ‘05. 340w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 16. Ja. 7, ‘05. 370w. (Condensed narrative.)


=Maxwell, Joseph.= Metapsychical phenomena, tr. by J. I. Finch. $3.50.
Putnam.

  The method and observation of “physical” manifestations are given
  chiefly, such as “table-turning,” “rapping,” and “levitation.” There
  is a preface by Charles Richet, and also an introduction by Sir Oliver
  Lodge. An additional chapter gives a complex case by Professor Richet,
  and an account of some recently observed phenomena by the translator.

  “One leaves Dr. Maxwell’s book with a perfect conviction of his
  honesty, some hesitation about his logic, and entire certainty that
  his records will have no weight with sceptics; but then he does not
  seem to expect to produce any effect on them.” Andrew Lang.

     + — =Acad.= 68: 898. S. 2, ‘05. 1210w.

       — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 693. Je. 3. 1570w.

  “It should be said that, in spite of its size, Dr. Maxwell’s book is
  eminently readable, although the translator has admitted a good many
  disfiguring gallicisms.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 285. O. 5, ‘05. 780w.

  “Modern in its research. It has a well-balanced scientific skill.”
  Pendennis.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 429. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1200w.

  “Interesting as is his book, it cannot well be deemed a weighty
  addition to the literature on this fascinating but elusive subject.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 694. Jl. 15, ‘05. 210w.

  “The effect produced on the mind is mainly cumulative, but by reason
  of the manifest sincerity of the author and his competency and
  experience as an observer, its importance as a contribution towards
  the study of this neglected Cinderella among sciences is
  unquestionably very high.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 249. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1220w.

       — =Spec.= 95: 496. O. 7, ‘05. 2230w.


=Maxwell, W. B.= Ragged messenger. **$1.20. Putnam.

  “A sensational novel, in which the hero, a minister of the church, for
  the sake of his conviction, gives up his parish and preaches on the
  street and in the slums of London. A large fortune comes to him, all
  of which he gives to the poor. He is unrewarded for his sacrifices.
  The heroine, a beautiful woman, is an adventuress”.—Bookm.

  “The book is carefully written, both in matter of style and
  development of the plot. The idea of the story is original, and the
  book as a whole is unusually vigorous and impressive.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 189. F. ‘05. 80w.

  “The reader gets the impression that he is listening to a man talking
  to himself.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 786. Ap. 6, ‘05. 300w.

  “As a study in modern phases this story must be considered something
  more than remarkable. The phases themselves are more than remarkable,
  the motive almost fantastic in spite of the realistic modern London
  setting. The yeast of fate brews and works in the whole, and makes of
  these elements a climax so melodramatic as to seem almost inspired.
  But it is melodrama pathologically inevitable. One may read the books
  and ponder on the meaning of faith, science, and common sense, or one
  may think chiefly of the story—one of humanity probed pretty deep—one
  somewhat daringly planned, but one which shows strength and a seeing
  eye.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 70. F. 4, ‘05. 520w.

  “A powerful story.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 120. Ja. ‘05. 50w.


=Maxwell, W. B.= Vivien. †$1.50. Appleton.

  “The story is told entirely from the point of view of the heroine....
  The hero of the book is a cheerfully profligate earl (the villain
  being gloomily profligate), who is awakened to the seriousness of life
  when the heroine repels his advances, and he succeeds to a dukedom....
  At the end of five hundred and fifty closely printed pages the duke
  repents of his sin and marries the heroine, who is discovered to
  possess ‘the golden current, the divine fire,’ which can apparently
  only be derived from ancestors whose names are in the peerage.”—Spec.

  “Mr. Maxwell has other admirable qualities, notably a keen instinct
  for character, a sense of humour, and many craftsmanlike devices for
  rendering that humour effective.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 856. Ag. 19, ‘05. 890w.

  “The first half of the story is better than the last, for in the last
  we approach very close to sentimental melodrama. It rings feminine.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 267. Ag. 26. 640w.

  “In general, Mr. Maxwell seems to miss the finer point of
  characterization. For all that, there are passages in his book, even
  in the fairy tale part of it, which stir the feelings. He has humour;
  he is master of his words, and he can retain his reader’s attention
  through a very long and unevenly handled story.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 262. Ag. 18, ‘05. 340w.

  “Another story almost as extraordinary and possibly even more intense
  in its holding power [than ‘The ragged messenger.’]” H. I. Brock.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 760. N. 11, ‘05. 1160w.

  “A novel of more than usual interest and strength.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18, ‘05. 90w.

  “It is the product, not of a philosopher, but of a clever reporter, an
  emotional wordy piece of work owing its success to cheap sentiment, a
  fine journalistic style, highly coloured and verbose, effective
  characterisation, and detailed and no doubt accurate accounts of
  life.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 378. S. 16, ‘05. 410w.

  “The book is fluently written, and judged by its own standard, is
  clever.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 323. S. 2, ‘05. 330w.


=Maybrick, Florence Elizabeth (Chandler).= Mrs. Maybrick’s own story.
**$1.20. Funk.

  The author tells the story of her life from the time of her arrest for
  the murder of her husband, through the course of her trial, and the
  fifteen years imprisonment which terminated December, 1903. The
  recital is womanly and pathetic without a trace of bitterness. A legal
  digest of the case is appended.

  “Such a tale cannot help being morbid, but in the main it rings true.
  To those who have an interest in prison life it will not fail to be of
  value, yet for the ordinary reader it would be a book worth while
  avoiding.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 92. Ja. ‘05. 80w.

         =Nation.= 80: 32. Ja. 12, ‘05. 130w.

     + + =New England Magazine,= n.s. 31: 622. Ja. ‘05. 5830w.
         (Condensed narrative of book.)

  “There is no bitterness in the book, but it is a strong indictment of
  British justice, and points out the crying need for a British court of
  appeals in criminal cases.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 127. Ja. ‘05. 220w.


=Meeker, Royal.= History of shipping subsidies. *$1. Published for the
American economic association by the Macmillan co.

  Part one deals with shipping subsidies historically under the
  sub-divisions: Great Britain; France; Germany; Italy; Austro-Hungary;
  Japan; Other countries; and United States. Part two concerns the
  Theory of subsidies and is divided into: Theoretical arguments;
  Popular arguments for subsidy; Political arguments for subsidy; and
  Ethical considerations. There is also a bibliography and an index.


=Meigs, William Montgomery.= Life of Thomas H. Benton. **$2. Lippincott.

  A life of a distinguished statesman of the middle period by one who
  has made a thoro study of his career. The biography contains accounts
  of the many historical events with which the great Missourian was
  connected, such as the admission of his state into the Union, and the
  election of Andrew Jackson to the presidency. His service as United
  States senator, his love of the Union, and his personal influence upon
  the Democrats of his state are dwelt upon.

  “A readable account of the Missourian’s career.”

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 947. Jl. ‘05. 20w.

  “Meigs appeals to the student by a more judicial and critical
  attitude. There is hardly an overstatement or a serious error to be
  found.” W. H. Mace.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 176. O. ‘05. 650w.

  “This must be reckoned the most complete and authoritative biography
  of Benton.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “The author has consulted most of the available authorities on Benton,
  and has gathered much material from hitherto unknown sources. The work
  is the best life of Benton yet produced.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 239. Ap. 1, ‘05. 600w.

  “It is a highly praiseworthy study of the great Missourian, sincere,
  thorough and judicial.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 214. Jl. 27, ‘05. 170w.

  “Lacking in dramatic arrangement and wanting in painstaking accuracy
  of statement.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “Mr. Meigs’s narrative is diffuse but vivacious, and abounds in
  anecdote and illustration. It gives an unusually clear and
  comprehensive survey of a signally useful and pure-minded man.”

   + + — =Lit. D.= 21: 94. Jl. 15, ‘05. 640w.

  “There was distinctly room for a one-volume biography of Senator
  Benton. [Mr. Roosevelt’s biography in the American statesmen series]
  gives a picture of Benton superior to any which can be found in Mr.
  Meigs’s book. The greatest praise that we can award the latter is to
  say that it is the result of painstaking and laborious investigation
  and it will be of considerable value to students of history. The
  material, unfortunately, is put together with very little literary
  skill, and the style is certainly not such as to attract the general
  reading public. It is highly regrettable that Mr. Meigs cannot make us
  take the interest in the character of his picturesque subject which he
  tells he himself feels.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 67. F. 4, ‘05. 1080w.

  “More ambitious in scope than successful in accomplishment.
  Altogether, we have read the work with distinct feelings of
  disappointment, the disappointment being heightened by the reflection
  that the author has undoubtedly grasped Benton’s historical
  importance, and that had he but bestowed on the execution of his task
  the care evident in gathering of materials, he would have given us a
  biography well worth while.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 400. F. 11, ‘05. 400w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 150w.


=Meili, Frederick.= International civil and commercial law as founded
upon theory, legislation and practice, tr. by A. R. Kuhn. **$3.
Macmillan.

  “The author was a delegate from Switzerland to the Hague international
  conferences, and this very thorough discussion was at least in part
  suggested by those conferences. The book of course deals with
  international private law as distinguished from international public
  law, and is in the main concerned with the continental views of this
  branch of jurisprudence.” (Outlook). “Mr. Kuhn has not only translated
  the work, but has supplemented it with additions from American and
  English law. Very useful lists, annotations, and bibliographies
  complete the work.” (R. of Rs.)

  “It is a convenient, if not very skilfully planned survey of the whole
  field. The information which it furnishes as to bibliography is not
  the least recommendation of the book. But the omissions are far from
  few.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 270. Ag. 25, ‘05. 340w.

  “Its exactness of method and thoroughness of research evidently make
  it a work of lasting value to the jurist accustomed to deal with large
  legal topics in a scientific manner.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 444. Je. 17, ‘05. 100w.

  “Professor Meili has written a very useful book for students of
  comparative politics, as well as for lawyers.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 351. S. 9, ‘05. 500w.

  “A very handy and valuable legal work.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 110w.


=Mellor, J. W.= Crystallization of iron and steel: an introduction to
the study of metallography. *$1.60. Longmans.

  “It is certainly a convenience to possess such a book.... In six short
  and lucid chapters—originally lectures delivered in 1904 to the
  engineering students of the Staffordshire county technical classes of
  the Newcastle high school—we are taken from a well-put statement of
  what is known respecting the solidification and cooling of alloys in
  general to the consideration of the phenomena recognized in iron and
  steel in particular, and, lastly, to practical directions for the due
  preparations of specimens for microscopic examination.”—Ath.

  “It must be regarded as an ‘ad interim’ report only. Looking at Dr.
  Mellor’s little volume in this light, we have nothing but praise to
  award it.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 310. S. 2. 540w.

  * “This second chapter is the only unsatisfactory one of the book.
  Confining himself to limited space, the writer has sacrificed
  conciseness to mere brevity. The two predominant features of the book
  as a whole are the great concentration of information into a small
  space, and the interesting manner in which it is presented, which
  latter never fails to attract. This clouding of the main issue by the
  introduction of data not absolutely necessary is one of the principal
  weaknesses of the book. When all has been said, this book is the best
  popular introduction to the study of metallography that we have.”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 54: 528. N. 16, ‘05. 1690w.

  “The presentation is without bias, and each theory and method is
  described and examined as clearly and fairly as the author’s evident
  lack of practical acquaintance with the subject as a whole will
  permit.” A. McWilliam.

     — + =Nature.= 72: 532. S. 28, ‘05. 610w.


=Melville, Lewis.= Thackeray country. $2. Macmillan.

  A volume in the “Pilgrimage series.” “Mr. Melville treats of those
  localities which are of primary interest to those who are acquainted
  with the life and writings of the great novelist. He deals with
  Thackeray’s London homes and the features and associations of their
  neighborhood; his homes in Paris, and other places on the European
  continent, and in America. Special attention is paid to those places
  that form a background of the scenes of Thackeray’s novels.
  Biographical information is also supplied connected with the
  novelist’s residences from his arrival in England from India at the
  age of six until his death in 1863. The volume contains fifty
  full-page illustrations mostly from original photographs by C. W.
  Barnes Ward.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “The author has not tackled his task in the right spirit or performed
  it in the right way; all that he has given us is a rather disconnected
  short life of Thackeray. There are many distinct mistakes. A large
  portion of the book has not anything to do with its supposed subject.
  It is a poor production.”

     — — =Acad.= 68: 84. Ja. 28, ‘05. 230w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 105. F. 18, ‘05. 370w.

  “He has written an interesting book, which will please the reader the
  more, the better he knows the author.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 223. F. 11, ‘05. 190w.


=Menpes, Dorothy.= Brittany. *$6. Macmillan.

  “The latest of the ‘Menpes books’ is devoted to ‘Brittany.’ Mr.
  Mortimer Menpes has made a specialty of traveling with a water-color
  box and a literary daughter, and the results of these travels appear
  each year in time for the holiday trade.” (Nation.) There are some
  seventy-five illustrations, and they show different parts of Northern
  France—peasants, scenes in the markets, street scenes, etc.

  “Her best descriptions, her brightest sketches, are spoilt for the
  reader by unnecessary blots of sloppiness.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 312. S. 2. 160w.

  “Text and illustrations have a common facility and a common lack of
  seriousness which is welcome, or the reverse, according to one’s point
  of view.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 279. O. ‘05. 240w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 501. Jl. 29, ‘05. 260w.


=Meredith, Katharine Mary Cheever (Johanna Staats).= Wing of love. †$1.
McClure.

  “A charming child in this book, and a nice young journalist chap, her
  staunch friend from the day she and her mother find their way to the
  top floor of the New York lodging house where he and two other
  bachelors have their abode. This friendship is quite disinterested,
  the mother receiving only courteous attentions from him, his heart
  being in another’s keeping—facts concerning which subsequently develop
  very prettily to connect them with his romance.”—Outlook.

  “The chief fault in its development lies in the fact that, instead of
  making it a short story, she has padded her little tale until it has
  lost much of its charm.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380 Je. 10. ‘05. 310w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 144. My. 13, ‘05. 80w.


=Merington, Marguerite.= Cranford: a play. $1.25. Fox.

  A comedy in three acts made from Mrs. Gaskell’s well-known story of
  the same name. The full charm of the story is retained in the
  dramatization.

  * “Written with Miss Merington’s usual sprightliness.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 40w.

  “A not unskillful dramatization for amateur theatricals of Mrs.
  Gaskell’s ever fresh and delightful tale.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 333. O. 7, ‘05. 15w.


=Merriman, Charles Eustace.= Self-made man’s wife: her letters to her
son: being the woman’s view of certain famous correspondence. †$1.50.
Putnam.

  “In her letters the mother advises her son on the treatment of his
  wife, on the retention of his ideals, on the writing of books and on
  the reading of them, on quarreling and making up, on the fallacy and
  folly of aphorisms, adages, and other epigrammatic usages, on economy
  in households, and a number of other living topics, and aptly
  illustrates her points by instances taken from her own domestic
  experiences or observations of the experiences of her neighbors.”—N.
  Y. Times.

  “Upon the whole these letters are tedious and disappointing.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 473. Ap. 29, ‘05. 150w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 591. My. 13. 300w.

  “A cup of cambric tea is this book.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 90w.

  “If they are not as entertaining as those of her husband it is only
  perhaps because the reader has already consumed two volumes of his
  epistolary lore and is perhaps a trifle satiated.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 300. My. 6, ‘05. 530w.

  “The number of old jokes and the weary waste of platitudes in this
  book are positively depressing.”

       — =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 50w.

  “The letters have a masculine ring. They exhibit a terse expression, a
  worldly acumen, a sense of humor, and an anecdotal wealth, that
  strongly resemble the style of the self-made man.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 118. Je. ‘05. 440w.


=Merriman, Mansfield.= Mechanics of materials. $5. Wiley.

  A tenth edition, re-written and enlarged, of this text-book which
  “deals with the elastic and, to a limited extent, with the plastic
  properties of materials of construction and the application of the
  laws of strength of materials to the simple machine parts and
  structures. The treatment is essentially theoretical.”—Nature.

  * “The present book is in some respects an excellent treatise. The
  first point which strikes a reader is the great looseness of
  terminology. The author has an aggravating way of describing a thing
  at first very crudely and inaccurately, but without any reservations,
  giving a revised statement much later on and a further revision later
  still, and this in the case of quite simple matters.”

   + + — =Nature.= 73: 25. N. 9, ‘05. 1180w.


=Merriman, Mansfield, and Jacoby, Henry Sylvester.= Text-book on roof
and bridges, pt. 1, Stresses in simple trusses. $2.50. Wiley.

  “Those ... who are familiar with the first edition of this book,
  published in 1888, will hardly recognize the present volume as being a
  revision of the same book.... We now have the dead load stresses, the
  live load stresses and the stresses due to wind and other causes
  treated in separate chapters for the common forms of simple trusses.
  The fifth chapter takes up the consideration of long-span bridges....
  Chapter VI. discusses portal bracing, sway and lateral bracing and
  plate girder design. Chapter VII. treats of deflections.... The final
  chapter takes up cranes, bents, towers, viaducts, and other
  miscellaneous structures. A notable feature of the new edition is the
  extensive use of illustrations, including half-tone views of notable
  truss bridges, folding plates and numerous text drawings.”—Engin. N.

         =Engin. N.= 53: 184. F. 16, ‘05. 230w.


* =Mertins, Gustave F.= Storm signal. $1.50. Bobbs.

  Two intertwined love stories provide the romantic interest in this
  story of the South and the negro. The conditions in the South after
  the Civil war are vividly presented, the good old negro type is well
  drawn, but the real story is that of the negro uprising, when black
  fiends, driven to desperation by the recital of their wrongs in their
  secret meetings, attack and are repulsed. There are strong dramatic
  scenes and characters which, tho unpleasing, are strikingly portrayed.


* =Merwin, Samuel.= Road builders. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “To make an achievement in railroad building dramatic and exciting and
  to hold the reader’s interest in suspense from beginning to end is a
  feat in fiction writing which few men would attempt.... The young
  engineer who with bulldog determination and ever-ready invention puts
  his engineering feat through on time, in the face of cunning enemies,
  natural obstacles, and stupid and criminal employees, is a type, but
  he is also a rousing good fellow.”—Outlook.

  * “There is no lack of well contrived incident, and on the whole the
  book is true to life.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 54: 534. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The tale is clear-cut, terse and thrilling. Altogether the book is
  an industrial romance bristling with human interest.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 710. N. 25, ‘05. 150w.

  * “More important than the adventures and incidents of the feat that
  is finally accomplished, is the evidence Mr. Merwin gives of his own
  growth in character delineation. Each man is different from every
  other, and all are real, whether good or bad.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 260w.


=Metcalf, Maynard Mayo.= Outline of the theory of organic evolution.
*$2.50. Macmillan.

  A series of lectures given by Professor Metcalf before the Woman’s
  college of Baltimore, expanded and put in book form. It is not a
  technical biological book, but it is an introductory survey of the
  biological theory of evolution and is intended for the general reader.
  It gives well established facts in their general outlines, and deals
  with some of the most striking phenomena of anatomy.

  “It is a treatise so clear, simple and fascinating withal, that the
  subject can not only be readily grasped by the most slow-thinking
  reader, but few who peruse the opening pages will be content to lay it
  aside. This book is precisely the work that general readers need. It
  is a volume that should be read by every young man and woman in
  America.” Amy C. Rich.

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 335. Mr. ‘05. 450w.

  “Presents in a clear and simple style the fundamental principles of
  organic evolution in a form very well adapted to the needs of the
  general reader and to those who wish an outline of the theory of
  Darwinism. Perhaps the most striking feature of the book is the wealth
  of clear and very well selected illustrations.”

   + + + =Bot. G.= 39: 301. Ap. ‘05. 160w.

  “Two features of the book are especially praiseworthy: first, the
  clearness and distinctness with which essentials are presented;
  second, the wealth of illustration. It is safe to say that no previous
  popular treatise on evolution has been so completely and so well
  illustrated as this. The chief criticism to be made regarding the book
  as a whole is its failure to give any adequate account of the
  important results of many of the recent investigations in the field of
  evolution.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 92. F. 1, ‘05. 540w.

  “The volume under consideration will find its own place, because it is
  far better than the least technical books on evolution previously
  published. It will form an excellent introduction to the classical
  books on evolution. The author has very successfully attempted to
  write in a non-technical and popular style. No other book in the same
  field is so lavishly illustrated. Without hesitation the reviewer
  recommends the book to those who want information about the theory in
  its non-technical bearings.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 323. F. 9, ‘05. 520w.

  “This is one of the best popular accounts of the theory of evolution
  that have come under our notice. An excellent feature of the book is
  its wealth of pictorial illustration. A few points call for
  criticism.”

   + + — =Nature.= 71: 509. Mr. 30, ‘05. 450w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 256. F. ‘05. 70w.


* =Metchnikoff, Elie.= Immunity in infective diseases; tr. from the
French by Francis G. Binnie. *$5.25. Macmillan.

  Metchnikoff’s theory “is familiar enough now to the reading public
  with its protective forces in the body; leucocytes ready to mass
  together to repulse the assault of germ organisms as well as their
  toxic products; but the work is not primarily on macrophages and
  microphages, but on the great question of immunity from infection.
  This extends through immunity of protozoans, metazoans (multicellular
  plants), and finally of animals—immunity either natural or acquired.
  The ramifications of the work extend over a vast area of
  experimentation and citation of contemporaneous work, but the immunity
  always is attributed, in one way or another, to the protective
  activity of the leucocytes. This makes the work a very agreeably
  unified one, and clearly drawn colored illustrations of the leucocytic
  activity do much to enhance the value of the treatise.”—Pub. Opin.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 54: 646. D. 14, ‘05. 600w.

  * “The present book, however, justifies itself adequately from a
  purely practical point of view.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 966. D. 23, ‘05. 600w.

  * “While the work is primarily for scientific use, there is no reason
  why an intelligent layman should not acquire from its reading a very
  clear and comprehensive idea of immunity in its varied forms.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 603. N. 4, ‘05. 330w.


=Meyer, Rev. F: Brotherton.= Epistle to the Philippians; a devotional
commentary. *$1. Union press.

  The author has not attempted mere criticism, but has “endeavored
  honestly to ascertain the meaning of the epistle, and to beat out but
  pure and unalloyed gold.” Each chapter covers a few verses, the
  commentary is full and clear and the verses covered are noted in the
  margin of each page.


* =Meyer, Hugo Richard.= Government regulation of railway rates; a study
of the experience of the United States, Germany, France,
Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Australia. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  “Professor Meyer, in his preface, declares that he ‘has become firmly
  convinced of the unwisdom of government regulation of railways or
  their rates’; and he has hurried into print with this book lest
  Congress ‘may be led to enact ill-considered laws granting dangerously
  enlarged powers to the Interstate commerce commission.’ Part I. of the
  book describes Prof. Meyer’s studies of the state-owned and operated
  railways in Europe and Australia.... In part II. Prof. Meyer takes up
  conditions in the United States.”—Engin. N.

 *   + — =Engin. N.= 54: 533. N. 16, ‘05. 520w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 936. D. 16, ‘05. 330w.

  * “Apart from the matter of personal opinion on this subject, however,
  Professor Meyer’s book contains much valuable material, which is
  summarized in a way which cannot fail to interest all students of the
  railroad question, whatever may be their views as to the expediency of
  federal legislation.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 637. N. ‘05. 200w.


* =Meyrick, Rev. Frederick.= Memories of life at Oxford and experiences
in Italy, Greece, Turkey, Germany, Spain, and elsewhere. *$3.50. Dutton.

  “The most noticeable feature of this book is in the sidelights it
  throws on the ‘Tractarian movement’ at Oxford, in 1833-41, as well as
  on the ‘Old Catholic reform movement’ on the continent, and
  incidentally on this history of the Church of England during the last
  fifty years or so.... Aside from this, the book contains a
  considerable fraction of entertaining matter connected with university
  social life at Oxford.”—Critic.

  * “We recommend a revision of the index: for several names and
  incidents demanding mention the reviewer has been compelled to hunt
  laboriously through the pages of the book.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 741. Je. 17. 1920w.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 90w.

  * “We cannot rate his book very high, even in the class to which it
  belongs, for it is neither very interesting nor very good-natured.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 225. Jl. 14, ‘05. 500w.

  * “The real value of the book lies not so much in the impressions, the
  appreciations or depreciations, which are given of Newman and Pusey,
  of Keble and Gladstone, and other well-known and great figures, as in
  the incidental vignettes of persons of less note whose portraits are
  more seldom drawn.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 469. S. 30, ‘05. 1120w.


=Miall, Louis C.= House, garden and field. $2. Longmans.

  This collection of short nature studies by Professor Miall of the
  University of Leeds covers a multitude of subjects and gives a wealth
  of useful and interesting information upon fresh air, the dog, the
  cat, birds, bookworms, flies, trees, and whatever chances to attract
  his attention at the moment. The book seems to open our eyes to an
  interested observation of the things around us.

  “It is packed with scientific facts, with clear and practical
  suggestions for class room and study club, and with eye-opening and
  thought-stimulating questions. No arrangement or lack of arrangement
  can destroy the value of the good sense and clarity with which these
  and all the other subjects are treated.” May Estelle Cook.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 386. Je. 1, ‘05. 220w.

  “There is no attempt to be consecutive, and he writes concerning
  whatever for the moment strikes his attention. The object in view is
  to teach teachers rather than pupils.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 37. Ja. 21, ‘05. 1360w. (Survey of
         contents.)


=Michael Angelo Buonarroti.= Sonnets; now first tr. into rhymed English
by J. Addington Symonds. 2d ed. *$1.25. Scribner.

  The second edition of J. A. Symonds’ translation of Buonarroti’s
  sonnets, with the Italian in alternating pages. The notes following
  the text explain the circumstances, as far as known, in which the
  sonnets were written, and make note of the various manuscript versions
  over which Buonarroti worked.

       — =Nation.= 81: 103. Ag. 3, ‘05. 320w.

  “Such as they are, [the translations] are ingenious word renderings,
  which, while not entirely devoid of fine lines, for the most part lack
  color and lightness of rhythm.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 199. Ap. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  “The volume in which they are placed represents both dignity and
  taste.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 761. Mr. 25, ‘05. 180w.


=Michael, Oscar Stewart.= Sunday-school in the development of the
American church. *$1.50. Young ch.

  “The ‘American church’ of the title is the church of which the author
  is a minister—the Protestant Episcopal.... The book will be of
  interest to persons engaged in Sunday-school outside as well as within
  the Episcopal church. It brings especially emphatic testimony to the
  value of Sunday-schools as propagators of churches.”—Outlook.

  “He gives an adequate and interesting account of the Sunday-school
  work of a great church which has always espoused warmly the cause of
  Christian nurture.” William Byron Forbush.

       + =Bib. World.= 26: 394. N. ‘05. 140w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 145. Ja. 14, ‘05. 200w.


=Michaelis Karin (Katharina Marie Bech Brondum=). Andrea, the
tribulations of a child; tr. by John Nilsen Laurvik. $1. McClure.

  The famous Danish author has written the story of a young girl whose
  father and mother are unhappily estranged. The little heroine devotes
  her life to bringing them together and her tribulations and soul
  struggles as revealed in her diary finally accomplish this end, when
  her parents read the pitiful little book together after her untimely
  death.

  “The book has been rendered into ungrammatical American. This story,
  though quite short, contains proof that Karin Michaelis is an artist.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 128. F. 11, ‘05. 280w.

  “The story is a classic.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 327. F. 9, ‘05. 450w.


=Michelson, Miriam.= Madigans. †$1.50. Century.

  Six high-spirited, clever, mischievous youngsters, whose very
  names—among them Split, Sissy, Bep and Fom—suggest the hostile brevity
  that often characterizes the sisterly relations, riot in the
  foreground of this family stage, while a father deep in
  too-much-for-me perplexity, and an irresponsible aunt figure in the
  rear. Tho there are slights, digs and taunts, deep down in the heart
  of each is an untrained affection for the other, and staunch loyalty.
  It is a lively story for young readers, many of whom will discover a
  fellow feeling for some Madigan. Mr. Orson Lowell’s illustrations are
  happily in keeping with the author’s portrayal.

  “Their escapades are brightly told and they are very human.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 93. Ja. ‘05. 30w.

  “Miss Michelson’s humor has rare freshness and charm.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 120. Ja. ‘05. 100w.


* =Mifflin, Lloyd.= Collected sonnets of Lloyd Mifflin; revised by the
author. *$2.60. Oxford.

  Over 200 selections of verse are included in this volume which
  contains, in addition to work which has previously appeared in the
  author’s various books of poetry, several new sonnets which appear for
  the first time in this collection.

  * “A little of Mr. Lodge’s sincerity of passion would have helped Mr.
  Mifflin’s book. Yet no recent collection of verse has been more
  instinct with poetic love of beauty or has shown more ability at
  communicating it in verse.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 508. D. 21, ‘05. 390w.

  * “In spite of inevitable lapses from the simplicity and strength of
  the best examples there is a remarkable uniformity of excellence in
  both the technical achievement and the dignity and interest of the
  phases of feeling expressed.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 863. D. 2, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Written on any conceivable subject, they rarely rise above the
  platitudinous, and at their best are sonorous without being in any way
  impressive.”

       — =Spec.= 95: 761. N. 11, ‘05. 60w.


=Mifflin, Lloyd.= Fleeing nymph and other verse. **$1. Small.

  A group of about fifty poems whose themes include life, love and
  nature. “None of the shorter pieces in Mr. Mifflin’s volume is very
  notable. All have the grace that comes from the sparing, delicate use
  of words, many are picturesque and pleasing in conception; but there
  is a certain softness of tone in them that is not wholly a pleasant
  softness.” (Nation.)

     + — =Critic.= 47: 384. O. ‘05. 170w.

  “There is much delicate art in these songs, and they are freighted
  with a rich burden of thought.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 67. Ag. 1. ‘05. 130w.

  “Mr. Mifflin’s poetry is distinguished by its admirable technical
  qualities.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 458. Ag. 24, ‘05. 150w.

  “On occasions he is out in his scansion and in his grammar. But this
  is to show Mr. Mifflin at his worst. His best, though never quite free
  from the intrusion of the second-best word, shows a power of
  sympathetic description, usually sad, that leaves its mood behind it.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 224. Jl. 14, ‘05. 300w.

  “If there is a lack of pith and fibre in Mr. Mifflin’s lyrics that
  makes against the permanence of the impression left by them, his
  narrative poetry ... is, after all, admirable.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 17. Jl. 6, ‘05. 360w.

  “‘The fleeing nymph, and other poems,’ by Lloyd Mifflin, have the
  light and graceful touch characteristic of their author.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 585. S. 9, ‘05. 210w.


=Mighels, Philip Verrill.= Ultimate passion: a novel. †$1.50. Harper.

  An honest young politician with high ideals accepts the support of a
  corrupt political ring in his race for the presidency in order that he
  may learn their methods and thus combat them. Three women come into
  his life, the foolish daughter of the “boss”, an adventuress, and a
  real woman who arouses the “ultimate passion” which survives when his
  political campaign fails.

  “If you want a good example of the book which overreaches itself by
  deliberate exaggeration, you will find it in ‘The ultimate passion.’”
  Frederic Taber Cooper.

       — =Bookm.= 21: 602. Ag. ‘05. 420w.

  “Mr. Mighels has the meagrest equipment as a novelist, and his
  performance as a whole is so crude that it is scarcely worth while to
  consider its details.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 285. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “Has style (of a sort), an interesting framework, and
  characterizations of no mean order of merit. This is a very vigorous
  book, inspired by genuine passion, and making a skilful progress to
  its logical conclusion.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 115. S. 1, ‘05. 240w.

  “Mr. Mighels’s work seems to us faulty in conception as well as
  execution, and to serve no particular purpose.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 452. Ag. 24, ‘05. 30w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 320. My. 13, ‘05. 150w.

  “A hysterical novel of political corruption.”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 542. Je. 24, ‘05. 6w.

  “Is a masterpiece among political novels.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 94. Jl. 15, ‘05. 180w.


=Miles, Eustace Hamilton.= Boy’s control of self expression. *$2.
Dutton.

  “The introductory chapters are written chiefly for those who have the
  care of boys.... These are followed by chapters on ‘Physical and
  external helps’ toward self-control, mental helps; and the book closes
  with some general remarks, the ‘opinion of a mother,’ a letter to a
  boy, ‘A defense of Latin—rightly taught,’ and ‘A theory about
  excessive blood pressure.’ The volume has illustrations and
  diagrams.”—N. Y. Times.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 436. Je. 1, ‘05. 330w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 297. My. 6, ‘05. 230w.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 376. Je. 10, ‘05. 290w.

  “There are valuable ideas and suggestions in this book on the training
  of boys, but the author attempts to cover so much ground, and does it
  in so haphazard a way, that it is almost impossible to separate the
  wheat from the chaff.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 40w.

     + — =Spec.= 94: 788. My. 27, ‘05. 280w.


=Millar, A. H.= Mary, Queen of Scots. *$1. Scribner.

  In establishing the reasons for difficulty in understanding Queen
  Mary’s character, the author says: “Any natural determination toward
  tolerance which Mary’s character may have originally possessed was
  warped and distorted by her early education; and her disposition, once
  gentle and confiding, may have been changed by her experience of the
  faithlessness of mankind into that form of stolid distrust which
  suspects the truest friend and questions the least interested
  motives.” His biography is based on this view of things. “Mr. Millar
  believes and most readers will believe, that the errors committed by
  Mary Stuart were more of the heart than of the head.” (Outlook.)

  “Mr. Millar’s book is a careful presentation of facts, with a due
  regard for the bearing of the political questions of the time. It is,
  in truth, a well-written piece of history. He is not her partisan
  through thick and thin.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 633. S. 30, ‘05. 1140w.

  “Well written volume.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 281. S. 30, ‘05. 200w.


=Miller, Rev. James Russell.= Beauty of kindness. **30c. Crowell.

  This volume in the “What is worth while series,” sets forth the beauty
  of kindness, “the small coin of love.” It is a plea for the unselfish
  service, for simple kindness in daily life and in little things.


=Miller, Rev. James Russell.= Inner life. *50c. Crowell.

  In this new volume in the “Chiswick series,” Dr. Miller shows that if
  the heart be given to Christ, if the inner life be made beautiful,
  this beauty will show in the deeds of our outer life and the world for
  us will be re-created.


=Miller, Rev. James Russell.= When the song begins. **65c. Crowell.

  Another of Dr. Miller’s devotional books. Its object is to help people
  in learning how to live more beautifully, more victoriously, more
  usefully. It contains twenty chapters upon, The mystery of suffering,
  The joy of the cross, Friendship with Christ, Courage to live nobly,
  Under the All-seeing Eye, and other similar subjects.

         =Outlook.= 81: 580. N. 4, ‘05. 60w.


* =Miller, Olive Thorne, pseud. (Mrs. Harriet Mann Miller).= Kristy’s
surprise party. †$1.25. Houghton.

  “On her birthday Kristy’s uncles and aunts, and some adult friends
  besides, call in a body, and each in turn relates a story, which
  Kristy enjoys very much, and which other little girls may enjoy also.”
  (Outlook.) “In one is a stirring picture of a girl in the Chicago
  fire, another describes a western blizzard and a young girl’s rescue
  of a schoolmate. A good Indian story and sundry others of domestic
  adventure.” (Nation.) The volume is well illustrated by Ethel N.
  Farnsworth.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1388. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “A group well written, full of interest, and suited to middle
  youth.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 406. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 911. D. 23, ‘05. 140w.

  * “The stories are clean, bright, and of considerable variety.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 50w.


=Miller, Peyton Farrell.= Group of great lawyers of Columbia county, New
York. Priv. ptd. De Vinne press.

  Mr. Miller, a lawyer of Hudson, has filled a volume with “interesting
  reminiscences and gossipy personal sketches of such men as Martin Van
  Buren, Samuel J. Tilden, Robert Livingston, Chancellor Robert R.
  Livingston, Edward Livingston, and others. It also contains a brief
  account of the Anti-rent war.” (Am. Hist. R.)

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 722. Ap. ‘05. 60w.

  “An entertaining series of personal sketches. Members of the bar of
  New York state will find Mr. Miller’s pages crowded with interesting
  reminiscences of the great lawyers of the past.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 110w.


=Mills, Edmund James.= Secret of Petrarch. *$3. Dutton.

  “The volume is the work of a literary scholar of analytic type who has
  turned his lenses upon certain disputed points in the lives of the
  lovers and has brought forward various proofs to attest his own
  theories.” (Dial.) “A series of prose studies supplemented by some
  translations and some original verse interpretative of the life and
  genius of Petrarch. The prose consists of small but rather discursive
  chapters touching various points in connection with Laura, her
  identity, her birthplace, her character, and incidents in her
  relations with Petrarch.” (Outlook.)

  “The reader can hardly accept all the author’s conclusions.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 239. Ap. 1, ‘05. 340w.

  “To one acquainted with ... ‘My secret’ ... Mr. Mills’s book is a sad
  disappointment. We suspect that the critical discussions were only
  designed to introduce the drama.”

   + — — =Nation.= 80: 180. Mr. 2, ‘05. 460w.

  “Has quite unconsciously given false values to internal evidence. He
  found in Petrarch’s verse what he wished to find there, and where
  twist, quibble, and distortion fail him he sets down his theory as a
  self-evident truth. Candor forces us to praise Mr. Mills’
  ingeniousness rather than his scholarship. We can freely applaud his
  poetry, however, which gives a far stronger illusion of reality than
  do Landor’s Conversations between the same persons.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 38. Ja. 21, ‘05. 320w.

  “The volume lacks coherence.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 197. Ja. 21, ‘05. 190w.


=Mills, Edmund Mead.= Only a profession and other sermons. (Methodist
pulpit. 2d ser.) *50c. Meth. bk.

  Eight sermons including, besides the title sermon, How to know, The
  all-conquering Christ, The nation’s memorial, As he thinketh in his
  heart, What makes a nation great? Unconscious deterioration, and A
  withered hand.


* =Mills, Weyman Jay.= Caroline of Courtlandt street. **$2. Harper.

  “A highly idealized story of New York life when the eighteenth century
  was young. Caroline of Courtlandt street, the daughter of an actress,
  yearns for her mother’s profession and by way of proving her right to
  enter it plays a pretty little comedy in which her father’s
  aristocratic and snobbish relatives take unconscious but highly
  important parts. The stage fails to gain her in the end, but in the
  meanwhile she has furnished us with a diverting little drama.”—Pub.
  Opin.

  * “A slight but spirited novelette.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 388. D. 1, ‘05. 140w.

  * “An elaborately decorated romance, both as to the narrative and
  setting. The style is flowery.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2. ‘05. 120w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 733. D. 2, ‘05. 60w.


=Milyoukov, Paul.= Russia and its crisis. *$3. Univ. of Chicago press.

  In interpreting the Russian present by the Russian past, the author
  produces the results of long years of study. Professor Milyoukov is a
  representative of the branch of the liberal party known as the
  “Intellectuals,” and his work for freedom has already brought him
  calumny, imprisonment and exile. The aim of his discussion is to
  reveal the internal crisis in Russia as an outgrowth of the historical
  circumstances under which Russian civilization has developed. The
  author has explained the permanent and lasting elements in the
  political, social and religious life of a great world-power.

  “Our pleasure at the thought and learning displayed in the lectures of
  which this volume is composed is marred by the extraordinary fancies
  of its author on the transliteration of names.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 435. S. 30. 810w.

  “With ample knowledge, training, and evident fairness, he is the best
  available guide to a knowledge of present conditions in Russia from
  the historical point of view.” Charles H. Cooper.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 268. N. 1, ‘05. 760w.

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 309. S. 29, ‘05. 1040w.

  “A strong book—one that will not appeal to the general reader, but
  will reach rather the serious and thoughtful.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 556. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1430w.

  “A masterly portrayal of the factors which have determined the present
  constitution of the Russian state, as well as the elements of leaven
  and fermentation at present working in that state.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 446. S. 30, ‘05. 200w.

  * “A very valuable addition to the literature on the subject of
  Russian conditions.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 636. N. ‘05. 200w.


=Minor, Benjamin Blake.= Southern literary messenger, 1834 to 1864 by
Benjamin Blake Minor, editor and proprietor from 1843 to 1847. *$2.
Neale.

  “A history of a magazine which for so many years held the chief place
  in the periodical literature of the South and an honorable one in that
  of the country, written by the gentleman who was its editor and
  proprietor from 1843 to 1847, and who now at the good old age of
  eighty-six, is perhaps the only survivor of those who were personally
  connected with its fortunes. It will have a special interest for
  cultivated people in the South, and incidentally for all students of
  American literary history.”—Critic.

       + =Critic.= 47: 382. O. ‘05. 90w.

  “In spite of obvious faults (and partly because of them) Dr. Minor’s
  book has both permanent value and contemporary interest.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 494. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1350w.


=Mitchell, Charles Bayard.= Noblest quest, and other sermons preached in
the First Methodist Episcopal church, Cleveland, O. *50c. Meth. bk.

  Eight stirring sermons including, besides the title sermon, The
  Supreme Master, A shameless Jew, The dignity of labor, Remember thy
  Creator, A deserted grave, Life’s Jerusalem, and The impartial God.


=Mitchell, S. Weir.= Constance Trescot. $1.50. Century.

  The tragic story of a young northern wife who goes with her husband to
  St. Ann, Missouri, where he is agent for a large estate. He becomes
  involved in a law suit, and is the prey of the prejudices and
  misconceptions so common to the reconstruction period. After his
  murder, Constance lives only to avenge herself upon his slayer, and
  the story becomes a strong psychological study of the charming woman’s
  selfish cruelty. It is a masterly book, unusual, and real, both in
  theme and characters.

  “It is told in a masterly fashion.” Richard W. Kemp.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 386. Je. ‘05. 1640w.

  “A novel of dignity and importance out of material that if treated
  less intelligently would be simply sensational.” C. A. Pratt.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 185. Ag. ‘05. 470w.

  “It is a great triumph, thus out of commonplace materials, and by the
  use of strictly legitimate methods, to produce a work of such singular
  power, and Dr. Mitchell deserves the warmest congratulations upon his
  success.” Wm. Morton Payne.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 42. Jl. 16, ‘05. 490w.

  “The second section of the book is, in fact, open to this dilemma. If
  Constance is in her right mind, the story of her revenge is
  inexplicable and impossible. If she is not, her madness removes it out
  of the range of subjects capable of being made to appeal to the
  imagination of the reader by means of the art of the novelist.”
  Herbert W. Horwill.

   — — + =Forum.= 37: 104. Jl. ‘05. 1000w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 441. Je. 1, ‘05. 600w.

  “This is a good story.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1011. My. 4, ‘05. 630w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 299. My. 6, ‘05. 540w.

  “It is a tale wherein the psychological element, however, does
  overcloud the romantic interest.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 100w.

  “The motif ... is an extremely unpleasant one, and in hands less
  skilled than those of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell the story would be too
  painful. The story is a study of character of a very unusual kind,
  full of insight, experience and skill.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 772. Ap. 1, ‘05. 180w.

  “It is undeniably powerful. The workmanship is of a high order.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 713. My. 6, ‘05. 140w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 239. Jl. ‘05. 390w.

  “Impressive as the book is, one wonders inevitably whether Constance
  was, after all, worth this expenditure of literary power on the part
  of Dr. Mitchell.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 200w.


=Mitchell, Silas Weir.= Youth of Washington: told in the form of an
autobiography. †$1.50. Century.

  To think the thoughts of Washington as he thought them, to express
  them as he might have expressed them, in a word, to command a view of
  men and things as this general and statesman of Mount Vernon looked
  upon them, has been a unique task, to say nothing of the daring
  implied. But Dr. Mitchell has only reversed the great process of
  dramatization. Instead of fitting an actor to the mold of some great
  writer’s conception, as the stage continually does, he starts with the
  man and suits his thoughts and speech to the individual. Years of
  study, fresh enthusiasm, and keen insight into human nature have been
  brought to bear on his unusual task.

  “Dr. Weir Mitchell has added another to the melancholy examples of
  Washingtonion dullness. It is sedate, detailed, conscientious and very
  dull.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 63. Ja. 21, ‘05. 320w.

  “May be judged as history or as fiction, according to the taste of the
  reader, and possesses high merit in either aspect. It would be
  possible to criticize some of Dr. Mitchell’s statements, and the
  conception of Washington’s mother is too harsh and even contradictory
  in detail to be either true or pleasing.” Worthington Chauncey Ford.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 444. Ja. ‘05. 430w.

  “Only a Weir Mitchell or his equal could have accomplished
  successfully the daring feat of personating George Washington. But in
  this book the great George has proven a worthy son of himself, and it
  is hard to realize that the quaint, formal phraseology is not indeed
  his own. His criticisms of his family and himself are frank and
  delightful.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 283. Mr. ‘05. 240w.


=Mitton, G. E.= The dog. $2. Macmillan.

  The autobiography of Scamp, a dog of the streets, who finds a good
  home and a loving mistress and is trained into a first-class
  retriever. He is caught in a trap while hunting, comes into the hands
  of poachers and counterfeiters, sojourns in the London streets and the
  dog pound, and eventually finds his way back to his former mistress to
  end his days in luxury.

  “The book on the dog deals too much with one particular dog and his
  fortunes, and might almost pass as an entirely fictional tale.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 35. Ja. 14, ‘05. 250w.

  “Attractive for the children for whom it was written. Scamp was just a
  dog. The author has not attempted to endow him with human or
  supernatural attributes.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 43. Ja. 21, ‘05. 610w.

  “Cleverly written story. It is a story that will delight boys and
  girls, touching older hearts as well.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 349. F. 4, ‘05. 60w.


* =Mitton, G. E.= Jane Austen and her times. *$2.75. Putnam.

  Not only Jane Austen herself but the society that she drew so
  skillfully is pictured in this volume. Miss Mitton considers Jane
  Austen “more wonderful as a product of her times than considered as an
  isolated figure.” She has therefore aimed “to sketch the men and women
  to whom she was accustomed, the habits and manners of her class, and
  the England with which she was familiar.”

  * “In short, it is a richly human book, for which we owe all the
  praise (except what is due to the reproductions from Reynolds,
  Morland, Hoppner, Bunbury, Romney, and others), and little of the
  blame, to the author.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1170. N. 11, ‘05. 980w.

  * “Is the next best thing to reading one of Miss Austen’s own
  stories.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “A prose and pedestrian piece of book-making, which nevertheless has
  something of the interest that attaches to an interesting subject.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 484. D. 14, ‘05. 150w.


* =Mitton, G. E.= Normandy: painted by Nico Jungman. *$3. Macmillan.

  “Miss Mitton begins with a chapter ‘In general,’ and proceeds to tell
  the stories of the Norman Dukes and the ‘mighty William.’ Then we have
  a full description of Rouen, and chapters on Caen, Falaise, Bayeux and
  the smaller towns, and then a chapter of the greatest interest on the
  famous tapestry, Mont St. Michel, The Cotentin, Dieppe and the coast,
  and a journey up the Seine from Honfleur to Vernon.”—Acad.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 728. O. 28, ‘05. 270w.


=Mitton, G. E.= Scenery of London. *$6. Macmillan.

  “Miss G. E. Mitton, an expert in London lore, furnishes the text,
  while the pictures are reproductions of paintings by Herbert
  Marshall.... There are seventy-five in all capitally reproduced in
  colors.”—N. Y. Times.

  “As illustrations to a book, to be looked at closely and not over
  long, Mr. Marshall’s pictures are excellent, because they come from a
  fine artist, and yet present a variety of moods and likings which are
  entirely suited to such books as these. She has aimed high and done
  some interesting and some pleasing work, and made a readable book.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 779. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1000w.

  “Both artist and author have succeeded in producing what is a real
  addition to the literature of London.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 363. S. 16. 900w.

         =Lond. Times.= 4: 255. Ag. 11, ‘05. 530w.

  “Of the many recent books about London the best to look at is that
  called ‘The scenery of London.’ Miss Mitton discourses agreeably as is
  her wont.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 608. S. 16, ‘05. 280w.


=Monroe, Paul.= Text-book in the history of education. *$1.90.
Macmillan.

  “The framework upon which Dr. Monroe has built his well-written work
  is clear and hardly to be improved upon. Each chapter is headed in the
  table of contents with a phrase expressing the psychological tendency
  of the time or movement which it represents, and these are divided and
  subdivided in an unusually able manner. Facts are made additionally
  easy of location by the index by Miss Scott. Dr. Monroe’s ‘Text-book’
  is hardly what its name implies, but rather a foundation work for
  those who desire to ‘work up’ from it, as the references
  indicate.”—Pub. Opin.

  “A very solid book on the history of education.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 725. O. 28, ‘05. 630w.

  * “It is diligent in research, copious in information, clear in
  analysis, philosophic in trend, and sound in deduction; and, although
  there are passages in it that are somewhat hard reading, occasional
  grammatical lapses, and a needless and sometimes wearisome repetition
  of certain scientific terms ... it is distinguished throughout for
  purity, precision, and force of diction. The treatment of its theme is
  the most exhaustive yet essayed by an American author.” Charles
  Elliott Fitch.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 909. D. 23, ‘05. 2510w.

  “This must be rated as a work of the first rank in its class.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 431. O. 21, ‘05. 410w.

  “A finished, well-unified and arranged work.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 574. O. 28, ‘05. 350w.

  * “The work is broad in range, and provides an immense accumulation of
  data.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 120w.


=Monroe, Paul.= Thomas Platter and the educational renaissance of the
16th century. **$1.20. Appleton.

  This sketch which gives the life of an educator just at the turning
  point in educational history between the mediæval and the modern, is
  important because “The autobiography furnishes such concrete
  information in regard to two phases of the education of the sixteenth
  century: first, the life of the wandering scholar; and, second, the
  spread of the humanistic ideas until they dominate the educational
  activities of the times.”

  “Is a valuable volume which throws a great deal of light on a critical
  and seldom dealt with period of the history of education.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 136. Ja. 12, ‘05. 130w.


* =Montague, Margaret Prescott.= Poet, Miss Kate and I. **$1.50. Baker.

  Miss Kate is a small chestnut mare, I am Miss Dorothy, and the poet is
  David Selwyn, successful and thirty-two, whom his doctor has given but
  twelve months more of life. He determines to spend that twelve months
  bravely, and rents a house in the Alleghanies so that he may “write,
  write, write until the finale,” unhampered by his old New York
  surroundings. Here he meets Dorothy and enjoys his last summer until
  he finds that his growing love for her makes the thought of death more
  bitter; then he runs away. But of course the author does not let him
  die, and the reader feels thruout the pretty, cheery little story that
  all is to be well with him.

  * “The plot is slight, but the nature sketches, the character study,
  and a very piquant way of putting things, give the book a decided
  charm.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 942. D. 16, ‘05. 50w.


=Montgomery, David Henry.= Elementary American history, *75c. Ginn.

  This textbook, the latest of the “Montgomery series,” has been
  prepared to meet the demand for a short continuous narrative history
  of our country, suited to the wants of elementary pupils.

  “Compared with other textbooks of its kind, it has merit. The language
  is simple, and there are many illustrations and maps. This is only
  another example of a book constructed on the college plan, with
  shorter paragraphs and more simple language.” H. O. Gillett.

     + — =El. Sch. T.= 5: 518. Ap. ‘05. 160w.


=Montgomery, David H.= Student’s American history. $1.40. Ginn.

  For this latest edition the work has been thoroly revised and many
  facts have been rewritten, including questions of political and
  constitutional history, the opening of the West and its influence on
  the division of the nation. References have been made more complete,
  and some new maps added.

  “It has all the teaching apparatus of the best type of the modern
  high-school book, and may be cordially recommended.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  * “In attractiveness of presentation and clearness of diction it
  compares favorably with such manuals as McMaster’s and Channing’s.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 758. N. 11, ‘05. 130w.


=Moody, William Vaughan, and Lovett, Robert Morrs.= First view of
English literature. *$1. Scribner.

  “This adaptation of the author’s more advanced ‘History of English
  literature,’ based on the suggestions of many high school and academy
  teachers, is a class-room manual of practical value. Features that
  especially commend the volume are the historical introductions to each
  epoch, dwelling on political and social conditions, important for
  their effect on literature, and the full review outlines given in the
  form of simple and illuminating questions.”—Outlook.

  “The book is a highly finished work, and we commend it.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 396. Je. 17, ‘05. 420w.

  “The book is lucid and concise, noticeably so in its discussion of the
  Renaissance and of Romanticism.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 591. Jl. 1, ‘05. 120w.

  “There is much valuable geographical, descriptive, and annotative
  matter.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


* =More, Charles Herbert.= Character of renaissance architecture. **$3.
Macmillan.

  “Prof. Moore has reduced the mere descriptions of buildings to a
  minimum, having provided many illustrations—twelve photogravure plates
  and 139 drawings and photographs—to make the discussions clear. He
  writes in his introduction about the character of the fine arts of the
  renaissance, the mixed influences actuating the artist of the time—the
  painter’s habits of design, etc. This followed by chapters on the dome
  of Florence, St. Peter’s dome, Renaissance architecture in the
  erection of churches and palaces in Rome and Florence and the North of
  Italy, carving, and architecture of the renaissance in France and
  England.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “It is a book of strong convictions and solid thought.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 34. D. ‘05. 360w.

  * “He is a man of profound and strongly held convictions, and hardly
  allows a page or a half-dozen pages to pass from under his hand
  without a reassertion of the most important of them.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 385. N. 9, ‘05. 980w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 713. O. 21, ‘05. 270w.

  * “In the ‘Character of renaissance architecture’ we have the same
  creative and scholarly qualities of artist and investigator which
  characterized ‘Development and character of Gothic architecture.’ But
  where the latter was synthetical the former is analytical almost to
  the verge of iconoclasm.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 781. N. 18, ‘05. 850w.

  * “This volume is admirably adapted to be a text-book for advanced
  classes in our universities and a reference book for readers
  generally. We are glad to note that the index to the volume is
  specially copious and exhaustive.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 628. N. 11, ‘05. 290w.


=Moore, Frank Frankfort.= Love alone is lord. †$1.50. Putnam.

  Another novel of which Lord Byron is the hero. It concerns his early
  love for his cousin, Mary Chaworth and, altho many chapters are
  devoted to his affair with Lady Caroline Lamb, the book gives him a
  semblance of constancy by making him return to his first love and
  their tragic parting the climax, and end of the book. Madame de Stäel,
  Sheridan, Moore, and other well known people of Byron’s time enter
  into the story.

  * “Mr. Moore has increased our dislike to positive hatred; all the
  worst qualities of this pernicious breed of book are accentuated in
  his present novel.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 1032. O. 7, ‘05. 310w.

  * “Mr. Moore’s is one of the books worth reading.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 754. N. 18, ‘05. 380w.

 *   + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 315. S. 29, ‘05. 540w.

  “Somehow the book leaves us cold.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 759. N. 11, ‘05. 290w.

  “As a novel the book has vigor and interest; as a presentation of
  Byron the poet it is a failure.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 281. S. 30, ‘05. 120w.

  “Mr. Moore has written an interesting story, but it has nothing to do
  with the hero and heroine, Lord Byron and Mary Ann Chaworth.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 573. O. 28, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Byron’s character is sketched sans prudishness by an author whose
  every book guarantees a few hours’ lively entertainment.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 762. D. ‘05. 110w.

  * “We do not blame Mr. Moore for his failure, but for the impudence of
  his attempt.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 529. O. 21, ‘05. 160w.


* =Moore, Mrs. N. Hudson.= Children of other days. †$1.50. Stokes.

  The notable pictures of children of various countries and times after
  paintings of great masters are accompanied by little sketches intended
  to interest the child reader in the portrait. The book is an art book
  of real value to little people.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 535. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.


=Moore, Mrs. N. Hudson.= Lace book. **$5. Stokes.

  The author “tells us in ‘The lace book’ in a concise form, all that
  is interesting in the history of the evolution and production of
  lace in the countries which have given the world the finest examples
  of this delicate fabric. This handsome volume is illustrated with
  engravings from famous pictures of distinguished personages, showing
  how lace was employed in costume at different times; well-chosen,
  full-size examples are also given of the various kinds of lace; and
  an index endows the collector and connoisseur with a book of
  reference.”—Nation.

  “A very handsome and interesting book.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 288. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

  * “A more engaging example of the combination of the useful with the
  agreeable could not easily be found than is provided by this volume.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 380. N. 10, ‘05. 1100w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 158. F. 23, ‘05. 1530w.

  * “A most interesting and readable account of lace from the earliest
  days.”

       + =Spec.= 95: sup. 797. N. 18, ‘05. 230w.


=Moore, T. Sturge.= Albert Dürer. *$2. Scribner.

  An original study rather than a conventional biography. The artist’s
  paintings, drawings, metal engravings, and wood cuts, are critically
  considered, the philosophy of his art is discussed, and the details of
  his life are given. The book is illustrated with half-tones and four
  copper-plates.

  “A very stimulating essay, with sufficient fact, date, and specific
  criticism attached, as is helpful to that study, but no more. As an
  illustrated record of Dürer’s work, the book is a welcome supplement
  to the little volume by Lina Eckenstein, ... though it will not
  replace that as an admirable and business-like summary of the artist’s
  life and work. It must be admitted, first and foremost, that the
  volume is concerned with Mr. T. Sturge Moore’s outlook on life and the
  arts; the author has not lost himself in his subject.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 173. F. 25, ‘05. 1100w.

  “The style is vigorous and picturesque, and, on the whole dignified.
  There seems, further, a lack of cohesion between the various parts of
  the book.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 247. F. 25. 1680w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 475 My. ‘05. 130w.

  “An excellent book marred by an involved and slipshod style.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 358. My. 16, ‘05. 590w.

  “His book is worthy of its place in the series by reason of his
  sympathetic interpretation of Dürer’s work.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1364. Je. 15, ‘05. 190w.

  “Its writing and point of view make it a model of what an art book,
  written for lay readers, should be.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 64. My. ‘05. 150w.

  “A singularly illusive book. While all the words in it are
  intelligible, the exact thing that was intended to be expressed
  somehow escapes one.”

     — + =Nation.= 80: 354. My. 4, ‘05. 590w.

  “What Prof. Thausing, Allihn, Zahn, and Scott never suspected we find
  brought forth with the pride of discovery and illuminated in the
  language of a poet by Dürer’s latest and youngest biographer. In the
  history of biographical writing, of art criticism, and
  connoisseurship, ‘Albert Dürer,’ by T. Sturge Moore, is an
  epoch-making work. Its form and execution present a new model for
  study and imitation. He lays bare the mind, the soul of the artist,
  and shows the inevitableness of what Dürer achieved.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 205. Ap. 1, ‘05. 580w.

  “Mr. Moore is always interesting, and perhaps never more interesting
  than when he is least convincing. His work is certainly a stimulating
  addition to the series in which it finds place.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 757. Mr. 25, ‘05. 230w.


=Moorehead, William Gallogly.= Outline studies in the New Testament,
Philippians to Hebrews. **$1.20. Revell.

  “These studies will be deemed scholarly and sound by such Christians
  as are unreconciled to the scientific and critical doctrines now
  dominant, and disposed to stand by the verbal inerrancy of the
  Scriptures.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 30w.


=More, E. Anson.= Captain of men. †$1.50. Page.

  Merodach, the Assyrian, is the hero of this story of Tyre in the days
  when David was outlawed. Miriam, a slave in the household of the
  richest merchant of Tyre, who is engaged in the tin trade, is the
  heroine. The action is involved, there are many characters and there
  is much cruelty.

  * “It is fairly well written and fairly exciting, but nothing more.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 607. N. 4. 200w.

  “Has some effective scenes, with long wastes of dullness.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 403. Je. 17, ‘05. 440w.


=More, Paul Elmer.= Shelburne essays. 3 ser. ea. **$1.25. Putnam.

  The author, an ex-professor of Sanskrit, received his call to the work
  of literary criticism during the course of two years in which he lived
  a life of solitary meditation. In Series one, of his essays the hermit
  of Shelburne devotes himself to the problems of the soul, he treats of
  Hawthorne, Emerson, Carlyle, Symons, Tolstoy and others, and discusses
  the religious and literary movements of to-day. Series two contains
  papers on English sonnets, Lafcadio Hearn, Hazlitt, Lamb, Kipling and
  FitzGerald. Crabbe, Meredith, Hawthorne, Delphi and Greek literature,
  and Nemesis. The third series treats of Cowper’s correspondence,
  Whittier the poet, Sainte-Beuve, Scotch novels and Scotch history,
  Swinburne, Christina Rossetti, Brownings’ popularity, Byron’s Don
  Juan, Laurence Sterne and Mr. Whitehouse.

       + =Acad.= 68: 847. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1410w. (Review of second series.)

         =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 50w. (Review of second series.)

  * “Mr. More is a critic of many merits, and his ‘Shelburne essays’
  reveal a penetrating and cultivated intellect. But it is obvious that
  he is less comfortable in the æsthetic environment of the sixteenth
  century than in that of the eighteenth.” Edward Fuller.

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 567. D. ‘05. 800w. (Review of second and third
         series.)

  “Is a collection of literary, psychological, and ethical studies, of
  unusual seriousness and power. Our essayist may be thought at times to
  take himself and his hermit experience, and his ‘long course of
  wayward reading,’ a little too seriously. He has certainly read widely
  and wisely, and his essays are unquestionably full of meat.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 18. Ja. 1, ‘05. 670w. (Review of first series.)

  “Both in his fine classical scholarship and in his carefully wrought
  sentences, Mr. More calls to mind the lamented Walter Pater, although
  the Oxford scholar’s reading and literary sympathies, wide as they
  were, strike one as less comprehensive than Mr. More’s.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 17. Jl. 1, ‘05. 490w. (Review of second series.)

     + + =Dial.= 39: 277. N. 1, ‘05. 410w. (Review of third series.)

  “The second series of Mr. Paul Elmer More’s ‘Shelburne essays’ is
  likely to win the favor of book lovers in no less degree than its
  predecessor. Mr. More’s freedom from provincialism is manifest even in
  his style.” Herbert W. Horwill.

     + + =Forum.= 37: 252. O. ‘05. 1320w. (Review of second series.)

  “If Mr. More is able to realize his ideal of the high calling of the
  critic he will eventually be able to exert an influence on American
  literature like that of Brunetiere on French.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1112. N. 9, ‘05. 460w. (Review of third series.)

  * “The Lafcadio Hearn and the Sainte-Beuve [essays] are, perhaps, the
  most remarkable for the depth and penetration of their analysis.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1163. N. 16, ‘05. 60w. (Review of second and third
         series.)

  “His is the criticism that takes infinite pains, dissects out every
  nerve.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 104. Ag. 3, ‘05. 1110w. (Review of second
         series.)

  “Are marked by charm and insight. They are not unduly discursive.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 496. Jl. 29, ‘05. 820w. (Review of second
         series.)

  “He is sound and sane, and he can penetrate sympathetically to inner
  realities of the works and the men he is studying. He is independent
  and he thinks for himself.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 730. O. 28, ‘05. 700w. (Review of third
         series.)

  “Mr. More has the instincts of the scholar and the tastes of the man
  of culture; but his feet are on the ground. And he has a generous
  endowment of that common sense which is the conservator of art, as
  genius is its inspiration.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 678. N. 18, ‘05. 1550w. (Review of first-third
         series.)

  “Whatever his subject, the stamp of leisurely scholarship, of
  well-backed, first-hand knowledge, of that indescribable something
  called ‘style’ attests the writer’s kinship with the best of the
  old-school essayists.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 942. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w. (Review of second
         series.)


=Morgan, Lewis Henry.= League of the Ho-de-no-sau-nee, or Iroquois; ed.
by Herbert M. Lloyd. **$5. Dodd.

  This new edition contains not only an accurate re-print of the edition
  of 1851, but also copious editorial notes, and introduction, personal
  reminiscences of Morgan by Charles T. Porter, a brief biography of
  Morgan with a bibliography of his writings, a sketch of the lives of
  Ely S. Parker and Charles T. Porter, an excellent index, and many
  illustrations.

  “One-volume reprint of the two-volume original lacks nothing desirable
  in the way of critical apparatus.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 381. Ap. ‘05. 180w.

  “Still remains the best and most authoritative work on the subject.
  For his editorial notes Mr. Lloyd has drawn upon every source of
  information, and they reveal his wide and discriminating reading of
  literature on the Iroquois. Not only a work of prime importance to all
  students of Indian life and character, but a book that one reads with
  genuine enjoyment for its own sake.” L. J. Burpee.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 119. F. 16, ‘05. 2300w.


=Morris, William O’Connor.= Wellington, soldier and statesman, and the
revival of the military power of England. **$1.35; hf. lea. **$1.60.
Putnam.

  “This is the most recent volume of the “Heroes of the nations”
  series.... The book is in no sense a biography of Wellington, but
  almost entirely a military history. The Peninsular war forms, as it
  were, the kernel.... But Wellington’s early career is not neglected.
  The promise of his youth ... is well indicated in the first chapter,
  and in the second, the seven years spent in India are ... treated....
  The ninth chapter deals with the campaign of 1815.... The remainder of
  the book, on the duke’s political life, is not so detailed.... There
  are 16 portraits of the principal personages, and 16 maps and
  plans.”—Nation.

  “This is a hopelessly mediocre book. The book has not even ... a
  correct, agreeable, and lucid style. It cannot be recommended even for
  the instruction of the general public and school-boys.” R. M.
  Johnston.

     — — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 692. Ap. ‘05. 260w.

  Reviewed by Edward Fuller.

         =Bookm.= 21: 527. Jl. ‘05. 250w.

  “This seems to us the first really satisfactory account of his career
  and his influence on the military power of England that has been given
  in compact and popular form.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 380. Ap. ‘05. 70w.

  “Mr. Davis remarks in the concluding sentence that ‘the judge’s
  conclusions, although they have been challenged by some high
  authorities, deserve the attention due to acute independent study of
  the original sources of information’; a statement which will probably
  be indorsed by most readers of the book.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 93. F. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  “But on the whole, those who like a résumé of a period will find in
  this book more than a good example of its kind.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 76. Ja. 26, ‘05. 1050w.


=Morrison, Arthur.= Green diamond. †$1.50. Page.

  The pursuit of a lost diamond, which is stolen from the Rajah of Goona
  and sent to England in a magnum of Tokay wine; an American buys the
  wine, and not suspecting its value, sells it. Adventures thrilling and
  blood-curdling follow thick and fast until at last the breathless
  author and reader give up the chase.

  “Arthur Morrison is entitled to rank among the better writers of
  mystery or detective-stories of the present time. ‘The green diamond’
  is, we think, the best of Mr. Morrison’s mystery-stories. It is one of
  the best mystery tales of the present year.” Amy C. Rich.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 342. Mr. ‘05. 450w.

       + =Reader.= 5: 501. Mr. ‘05. 180w.


* =Mortimer, Alfred Garnett.= It ringeth to evensong. *$1.25. Whittaker.

  The trials and blessings of old age are discussed helpfully here for
  people of advancing years. The same optimism of the book commends it
  to the healthy minded no less than to the mortal who looks out
  drearily upon old age.


=Mother Goose.= Only true Mother Goose; ed. by Edward Everett Hale.
†60c. Lothrop.

  A facsimile reprint of “The only true Mother Goose” as published in
  Boston in 1833, including the odd-looking woodcuts. Dr. Hale has
  furnished an introduction to the book “which setting aside the Goose
  fable, is really a valuable collection of political squibs and old
  songs, any where from a century and a half to three centuries old.”
  (N. Y. Times.)

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1386. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

         =Nation.= 81: 257. S. 28, ‘05. 320w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 80w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 281. S. 30, ‘05. 80w.

  * “A quaint little volume.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 60w.


Mother-Light: a novel. †$1.50. Appleton.

  “This book places in the suburbs of Trenton, New Jersey, the
  headquarters of an extraordinary religious cult, something after the
  Theosophical order. Three hundred pages are devoted to describing its
  mummeries and the emotions and experiences of a young woman from Ida
  Grove, Iowa, its chosen high priestess, or ‘Mother-Light’.”—Outlook.

 *       =Ath.= 1905, 2: 267. Ag. 26. 290w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 653. Mr. 11, ‘05. 90w.


=Mott, Frederick Blount.= Before the crisis. †$1.50. Lane.

  A book dealing with America before the outbreak of the Civil war, and
  during the campaign of John Brown and his sons. “The book is full of
  graphically told adventures; but though these are exciting reading,
  the picture of slavery is even more interesting. The slaves depicted
  are under good masters, yet in spite of this the author shows
  conclusively how the characters of both owners and slaves were
  corroded by an institution which involved the absolute dependence of
  one human being on the caprice of another.” (Spec.)

  “Mr. Mott’s romance is a moderately deft piece of workmanship on
  familiar, melodramatic lines.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 336. Mr. 25, ‘05. 180w.

  “It is a thrilling story, however, and well enough told for those
  readers living too far North to detect the author’s egregious errors
  in representing negro character and negro dialect.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 156. Jl. 20, ‘05. 200w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 372. Mr. 11, ‘05. 140w.


=Mott, Lawrence.= Jules of the great heart, “free” trapper and outlaw in
the Hudson bay region in the early days. †$1.50. Century.

  Jules Verbaux, a gaunt French-Canadian trapper, outlawed by the Hudson
  Bay company, which has put a price upon his head, lives the life of
  the hunted, cleverly avoiding capture. He flits like a shadow over the
  frozen north and thru the fury of its storms, trapping where he can,
  but wherever he rears his lone hut some relentless enemy reduces it to
  ashes. A prey to brute passions in a cruel world with all hands
  against him, the great heart of the man still beats warm beneath the
  “petite” cap of his “enfant” who is dead, which he carries constantly
  with him, the sole reminder of the wife whom he believes has deserted
  him. Again and again it prompts him to noble action while his whole
  being calls for vengeance. In the end he is given a bleak sort of
  happiness—but it suffices, and his great heart sighs, “Je suis
  content.”

  * “The book offers interesting reading for boys, and even older
  readers may enjoy the vivid descriptions of the hard life of the
  trapper.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 448. N. 30, ‘05. 220w.

  * “It is not too much to say that this book is splendid: it might not
  be too much to say that it is great.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 749. N. 4, ‘05. 450w.

  * “It is a strong story, happily free from much of the brutality and
  dreariness that have marked so many stories of the frozen north.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 710. N. 25, ‘05. 170w.

  * “They are strong stories of strong men who lived full-blooded lives
  and died in whatever way ‘le bon Dieu willed.’”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 180w.


=Moule, Rt. Rev. Handley C. G.= Second epistle to Timothy: short
devotional studies on the dying letter of St. Paul. *$1. Union press.

  The bishop of Durham “has taken up this heart-moving Epistle with the
  single intention of expounding it after the manner of a Bible reading,
  not for literary criticism or enquiry but in quest of divine messages
  for heart and life.” As the verses are treated in the commentary, they
  are noted in the margin of each page. A poem upon “The martyrdom of
  St. Paul,” written in 1876, is appended.


=Moyer, James Ambrose.= Descriptive geometry for students of
engineering. $2. Wiley.

  This is the second edition of this book. “It is far more than a slight
  revision.... The text has been more than doubled, and the number of
  diagrams increased from 33 to 77.... The text is placed on the
  left-hand pages, and the diagrams, instead of being massed at the end
  of the volume, as in the former edition, are placed on the right hand
  pages, the space not thus used being available for notes by the
  student.” (Engin. N.)

  “As a whole, the book is well adapted to the needs of engineering
  colleges, and in a number of important features is the most
  satisfactory one now available.” Henry S. Jacoby.

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 535. My. 18, ‘05. 510w.

  “We believe that the interests of both theory and practice would be
  better served if the instruction offered by Mr. Moyer were combined
  with such a course as that afforded by Professor Emch’s book.” Cassius
  J. Keyser.

   + + — =Science=, n.s. 22: 115. Jl. 28, ‘05. 160w.


=Muirhead, Rev. Lewis A.= Eschatology of Jesus; or, The kingdom come and
coming: a brief study of our Lord’s apocalyptic language in the synoptic
Gospels. $1.75. Armstrong.

  “The volume is composed of lectures given on the Bruce foundation, and
  is subject to the limitations of its origin. The first lecture
  considers the pre-suppositions of the study; the second, the relation
  of the Jewish apocalypses to Jesus; the third, the actual teaching of
  Jesus concerning the consummation of the Kingdom; and the fourth,
  inclusively, the Son of man.”—Am. J. of Theol.

  “The treatment, as a whole, however, can hardly be called more than
  sketchy. Taken altogether, the book, though stimulating, suffers from
  the fault which besets all exegetical studies dominated by
  pre-suppositions. Mr. Muirhead has said some very sensible things, but
  his volume presumes an attitude of mind ... that one may go the length
  of literary criticism and yet refrain from dogmatic or historical
  changes.” Shailer Mathews.

     + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 343. Ap. ‘05. 710w.

  Reviewed by H. B. Sharman.

     + — =Bib. World.= 25: 233. Mr. ‘05. 970w.

  “Mr. Muirhead submits this view to careful investigation, in excellent
  spirit, cautious yet receptive, and his work is one of the most
  valuable of recent contributions to the understanding of the synoptic
  gospels.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1072. My. 11, ‘05. 130w.


=Muirhead, Lewis A.= Times of Christ. *60c. Scribner.

  “The author of this handy volume is favorably known by his scholarly
  and fruitful work on ‘The eschatology of Jesus.’ To meet the needs of
  junior students he has here expanded and simplified a former edition
  of this manual, which some older students may value as an inexpensive
  and convenient substitute for Schürer’s voluminous work on ‘The Jewish
  people in the time of Christ.’”—Outlook.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 196. My. 20, ‘05. 60w.


=Mulets, Lenore Elizabeth.= Stories of little fishes. †$1. Page.

  This sixth volume in the series of “Phyllis’ field friends” opens with
  the statement that one who goes a-fishing with Phyllis may expect to
  catch strange things, and that under the general title of fishes the
  reader may chance upon an eel, a turtle, or a frog. Then follows a
  mixture of fact and fiction which will delight the young, altho the
  combination of scientific truth and fairy story is rather daring.

  * “They are entertainingly written.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 40w.


=Mulock, Miss, pseud.= See =Craik, Dinah Maria.=


=Mumford, Ethel Watts.= Joke book note book. **75c. Elder.

  This note book for jokes is a clever little conceit, cleverly carried
  out. It is in pocket size with pages left blank for the instant
  jotting down of the illusive joke. An illustrated thumb index makes
  reference to the different divisions easy, while the head pieces,
  which are real heads, the tail-pieces, which are real feet, and the
  general make up, are jocose enough to fit whatever may be recorded.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 384. D. 1, ‘05. 120w.


=Mumford, Ethel Watts; Herford, Oliver, and Mizner, Addison.= Complete
cynic’s calendar of revised wisdom for 1906. **75c. Elder.

  The same cynicisms applied to a new calendar. The book is made as
  attractive as its predecessor, with marginal drawings done in red ink.

  * “This 1906 edition is better as a whole than any of its
  predecessors. The cream of the old ‘twister’ proverbs has been
  retained, and the new ones are equal to the best of the old.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 384. D. 1, ‘05. 70w.


* =Munk, Joseph Amasa.= Arizona sketches. **$2. Grafton press.

  Dr. Munk “describes not only the Grand cañon of the Colorado, with
  which we are all more or less familiar from former accounts, but also
  such little-known phenomena as the Meteorite mountain and the oddities
  of desert vegetation.... There are also interesting chapters on the
  structures of the cliff dwellers, and entertaining accounts of the
  habits and customs of the snake dancers, the modern Moquis. The book
  is profusely illustrated from photographs.”—R. of Rs.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 754. D. ‘05. 120w.


=Munro, Dana Carleton, and Sellery, George Clarke=, eds. and trs.
Medieval civilization: selected studies from European authors. *$1.25.
Century.

  “The compilers of this volume designed it as an aid to instructors and
  students in mediaeval history. The book includes samples of many
  authorities bearing on the points on which the student of mediaeval
  history will be likely to need special illumination.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The volume is especially adapted to institutions where the libraries
  are limited in scope.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 384. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

  “Prepared with praiseworthy care and good judgment.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 445. Je. 1, ‘05. 690w.

  “Each student may use it as an auxiliary. The volume will be
  practically serviceable for the purpose for which it is intended. Even
  readers with fairly correct general conceptions of the period will
  find much that is new to them.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 54. Ja. 28, ‘05. 410w. (Survey of contents.)

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 136. Ja. 26, ‘05. 280w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 509. Ap. ‘05. 60w.


* =Munro, Hugh Andrew Johnstone.= Criticism and elucidations of
Catullus; also Ætna revised, amended and explained. *$4. Stechert.

  A reprint of a volume which “first appeared in 1878, and has for some
  time been a rare book, not easily procured. Mr. J. D. Duff contributes
  a prefatory note to the effect that three short papers, printed by
  Munro in ‘The journal of philology’ after the publication of his book,
  have been added, a few misprints have been corrected, and a few fresh
  notes by Munro himself included. Reference has also been made
  occasionally to discussion of points since Munro’s day. But the book,
  as at present printed, is only two pages longer than in the old form.
  This masterpiece of Munro, with all its liveliness of style, knowledge
  of Latin, and feeling of poetry, ought to be known to every classical
  scholar.”—Ath.

  * “Our best thanks are due to those who have made it available for the
  present generation.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 368. S. 16. 190w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 402. N. 16, ‘05. 200w.


=Munsterberg, Hugo.= Americans; tr. by Edwin B. Holt. **$2.50. McClure.

  “A translation of Professor Munsterberg’s ‘Die Amerikäner,’ recently
  published in Germany. It aims to be a general explanation of the
  American people—their history, their customs and their political and
  social life. He discusses the methods used by the Americans in meeting
  such vital problems as the silver question, trusts, the negro
  question, divorce, huge fortunes, displays of wealth, etc.”—Bookm.

  “The work, in spite of its undoubted merits, lacks the keen
  incisiveness that distinguished the ‘American traits.’ At times the
  style is rather diffuse, and in place of brilliant generalizations one
  gets somewhat barren generalities.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 389. Ap. 8, ‘05. 3090w.

  “We regard the work as one of the most subtly dangerous books, if one
  is not on the alert to detect its fallacies, that has appeared in
  years. Apparently liberal, it is in fact ultra-reactionary in so far
  as its attitude toward true democracy is concerned. The author’s
  desire to make the Americans appear to the best advantage to the
  aristocratic and cultured of monarchial Germany leads him at times to
  indulge in the same sophistical special-pleadings that mark his
  treatment of democracy and the genius of free government which we have
  dwelt upon in our editorial.” Amy C. Rich.

   — — + =Arena.= 33: 333. Mr. ‘05. 1700w.

  “Excellently translated. His work deserves to find an honourable place
  in all libraries as a supplement to the more solid volumes of Mr.
  Bryce.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 76. Jl. 15. 490w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 191. F. ‘05. 150w.

  “By plan, selections of topics, and perspective of presentation, the
  work seems measurably suited to its objective purpose. The
  self-assertive American cannot refrain from expressing with regret but
  with conviction, his inability to endorse the judicial pronouncements
  or the philosophic standpoint of ‘The Americans.’ It is possible that
  we lack the gift to see ourselves as others see us; but we cannot
  candidly laud the lifelikeness of the portrait when we are introduced
  into its presence.” Joseph Jastrow.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 145. Mr. 1, ‘05. 3900w.

  “The translation is ... written in a fluent style and betraying little
  of the awkwardness which attaches to so many translations and at once
  betrays them as such, a cursory examination of passages taken at
  random reveals not a few infidelities, inaccuracies and inaptitudes.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 12. Ja. 5, ‘05. 450w.

  “The tone of the work is essentially optimistic. Of the two [’American
  traits’ and ‘Americans’] the latter is by far the most pretentious. It
  is comparable rather with such a work as Emile Boutmy’s ‘The English
  people.’ To defect of method must be added blemishes of misstatement
  and even errors of prejudice. There can be no doubt that it renders a
  distinct service to the readers of both countries. Seldom have we seen
  such a complete record of American achievement, individual and
  national, as is embodied in the pages dealing with the concrete facts
  of our development.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 446. F. 18, ‘05. 970w.

  “One of the most thoughtful, valuable dissections of American national
  character by a foreigner is ‘The Americans.’”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 210w.

  “The book is a typical specimen of the best German method. The whole
  book is an admirable defence of what is best in American life, but at
  the same time there is a wholesome suggestion of that other side.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 894. Je. 17, ‘05. 1660w.


=Munsterberg, Hugo.= Eternal life. **85c. Houghton.

  “Two friends are sitting at the hearth after a funeral, and one gives
  the other his thoughts on immortality, as recorded here in an imagined
  monologue. There is an Oversoul, whose will-attitudes are the norms of
  the good, the beautiful, and the true. These are eternal. These
  will-attitudes we may make ours, yet they become ours ‘only in so far
  as our consciousness, is the over-individual consciousness, the
  Oversoul.’”—Outlook.

  “His interpretation of life in terms of will is done with
  extraordinary skill and perspicuity, considering the small space
  allotted to the problem in his paper. But his application of the
  theory of will-values to individual immortality appears to us
  unsatisfactory and weak.”

     + — =Cath. World.= 81: 537. Jl. ‘05. 690w.

  “It is a spiritual structure built upon the sands of speculation.”
  Edward Fuller.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 245. S. ‘05. 200w.

  “It is written in a charming manner, and is really a description of
  the author’s philosophy. The fault I find with Professor Munsterberg’s
  philosophy is really this: that it pretends to get rid of time and
  space in considering personality, and yet does not do so, and cannot,
  in the nature of things.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 415. Je. 16, ‘05. 1290w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 139. My. 13, ‘05. 150w.


=Murfree, Mary Noailles.= See =Craddock, Charles Egbert, pseud.=


=Murray, A. H. Hallam; Nevinson, H. W.; and Carmichael, Montgomery.=
Sketches on the old road through France to Florence. *$5. Dutton.

  Mr. Murray has pictured his journey thru Normandy, central and
  southern France, and Italy in a series of sketches which the equally
  artistic descriptive work of Mr. Nevinson on France, and Mr.
  Carmichael on Italy rounds into a volume pleasing and instructive to
  both the mind and the eye.

  “His book is beyond doubt the best colour-book yet issued.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905. 2: 216. Ag. 12, 370w.

  “The illustrations by A. H. Hallam-Murray are full of the romance and
  charm of the places he has pictured.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 480. My. ‘05. 210w.


=Murray, Grace Peckham.= Fountain of youth. **$1.60. Stokes.

  The relation of personal hygiene to health and longevity, all along
  the way from the commonplace in looks to genuine attractiveness is set
  forth clearly and professionally in this very fully illustrated
  handbook.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 659. O. 7, ‘05. 230w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 691. Jl. 15, ‘05. 70w.


=Mustard, Wilfred Pirt.= Classical echoes in Tennyson. **$1.25.
Macmillan.

  Volume III in the “Columbia university studies in English series.” A
  book which sets forth the classical influence in Tennyson’s writings
  by showing the kinship between many of his passages and those of the
  old Greek and Latin authors. There are many explanatory and reference
  notes, including the texts of the passages quoted both in English and
  the original.

  “This attractive little volume, it should be understood, is something
  very much better than the mere digging out of such verses of Tennyson
  as show resemblance to lines in Greek or Latin literature. The
  erudition of the compiler is accompanied everywhere by an exact and
  critical scholarship. Here and there he corrects errors of Tennysonian
  editors and biographers—once a misquotation from memory by Tennyson
  himself. For this and other reasons this book cannot safely be missed
  by any student of Tennyson’s work in general, whether or not he
  happens to be especially interested in its particular subject.”
  Herbert W. Horwill.

     + + =Forum.= 36: 401. Ja. ‘05. 840w.

  “The author is often prone to seek for origins in specific things
  which for centuries have been generalities in thought and language.
  Prof. Mustard writes without prejudice and with a wholesome perception
  of the idiosyncracies of the poet’s mind, of his knowledge, and his
  imagination.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 139. Mr. 4, ‘05. 670w.


=Muther, Richard.= Jean François Millet. *$1. Scribner.

  Although but a brief monograph, this addition to the “Langham series,”
  gives a fair and concise study of Millet’s work. The volume is
  pleasing in size, shape, and illustrations.

  “Is especially notable for the justice of its point of view.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 347. O. 26, ‘05. 860w.

  “If the account somewhat lacks the picturesque phraseology which we
  find in Mrs. Ady’s biography, it has a greater note of authority.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 577. N. 4, ‘05. 130w.


My garden in the city of gardens. See =Cuthell, E. H.=


=Myers, A. Wallis=, ed. Sportsman’s year book for 1905. *$1.25. imp.
Scribner.

  “There are chapters by different writers on the horse racing during
  the year, cricket, football, rugby, motor racing, motor boating, polo,
  lawn tennis, croquet, hockey, lacrosse, amateur athletics, rowing,
  coursing, cycle racing, and yacht racing. These are followed by
  biographies of well-known English sportsmen and sportswomen. The
  illustrations, in black-and-white, include photographic reproductions
  of portraits of English champions, boats, horses, dogs, etc.”—N. Y.
  Times.

         =Nation.= 80: 289. Ap. 13, ‘05. 170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 168. Mr. 18, ‘05. 240w.


=Myers, Albert Cook=, ed. Hannah Logan’s courtship: a true narrative;
the wooing of the daughter of James Logan, colonial governor of
Pennsylvania, and divers other matters, as related in the diary of her
lover, John Smith, esq., 1746-1752. $2.50; ¾ lev. $4. Ferris.

  In the diary of John Smith of Philadelphia, Quaker and business man,
  is recorded the story of his quiet life and of his courtship of Hannah
  Logan, whom he married in 1748. The book is illustrated by facsimiles,
  autographs, silhouettes, and portraits, which aid the diary in giving
  an interesting view of colonial Philadelphia.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 723. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “The extreme frankness and naïveté of the diary, which was intended
  for no eyes but those of Smith himself, add to the pleasantness of the
  book, for which we are grateful to Mr. Myers.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1, 393. Ap. 1. 530w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 160w.

  “A volume exceedingly attractive to students of our colonial history,
  and not unattractive to the general reader.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 273. Ap. 16, ‘05. 270w.

  “The diary is not only a charming and perfectly un-self-conscious
  record of a courtship of those days; it is worth much as a picture of
  the manners and daily life of the Quakers of ‘the Province’.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 271. Ap. 6, ‘05. 640w.

  “As the medium of presenting an excellent picture of colonial home
  life the book also has value.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 397. Je. 17, ‘05. 580w.

  “The plan of the book is original and it will interest many readers.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 604. Mr. 4, ‘05. 70w.


=Myers, Frederick William Henry.= Fragments of prose and poetry. *$2.50.
Longmans.

  A volume edited by the wife of this high minded scholar, poet and
  leader in the work of “Psychical research” three years after his
  death. There is an autobiographical sketch which sets forth his
  struggle with doubt and faith, followed by tributes to Ruskin,
  Gladstone, Watts, Stevenson and other friends who passed before him
  into the unknown. The last section of the volume contains sixty of his
  poems. The whole is well illustrated.

     + + =Arena.= 33: 339. Mr. ‘05. 540w.

  “But here is less an argument than a ‘document,’ the inner life of a
  poet and thinker. His poems which fill nearly half the book, ... are
  so good they should be better; but his congenital sin, perhaps, of
  rhetoric— ... too often gets the best of them.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 438. F. 23, ‘05. 870w.


* =Myrick, Herbert.= Cache la Poudre: the romance of a tenderfoot in the
days of Custer. $1.50. Judd.

  On the slender thread of the story of a young New Yorker who in
  unmerited disgrace disappears from his home, reappears as a western
  tenderfoot, serves under Custer, and wins reputation and a bride, are
  strung pictures of the crude life and thrilling scenes found in
  northern Colorado, Wyoming and Montana in the early seventies. The
  book altho both novel and historical, is not a typical historical
  novel. The numerous illustrations from paintings by Charles
  Schreyvogel, Edward W. Deming, and Henry Fangel, with many photographs
  not only supplement the author’s descriptions but overshadow the text.
  The fact that they represent real people about whom the appendix
  provides further facts, gives the book an added value. There are
  portraits of Custer, Sitting Bull, Rain-in-the-face and other
  characters, and pictures of various scenes from cow-boy life.




                                   N


=Nansen, Fridtjof.= Norway and the union with Sweden. 70c. Macmillan.

  A resumé given temperately and concisely from the Norwegian point of
  view of the events leading up to the present crisis. These events
  cover about a hundred years; the real strife beginning when in 1895 a
  change in the Swedish constitution practically took the administration
  of foreign affairs out of the hand of the king and placed them under
  the power of parliament.

  “A sound little book on the Norwegian side of the dispute, by the
  Norwegian who is most competent to write upon it.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 13. Jl. 1. 160w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 210. Je. 30, ‘05. 320w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 468. Jl. 15, ‘05. 310w.

  * “Thus the book is one to be read before attacking Otté’s larger and
  more exhaustive work.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 882. D. 9, ‘05. 1540w.

  “Nansen’s book, admirable in restraint, will certainly do nothing to
  embitter feeling in either country.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 284. Ag. 26, ‘05. 400w.

  “Dr. Nansen states the Norwegian case in a lucid and forcible way.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 21. Jl. 1, ‘05. 140w.


=Nares, Robert.= Glossary of words, phrases, names, and allusions in the
works of English authors, particularly Shakespeare and his
contemporaries; ed. by J. O. Halliwell and Thomas Wright. *$3. Dutton.

  This work was originally published in 1822, and the present edition
  follows the original text, but includes many new words, phrases, and
  expressions which have been found since the publication of the first
  edition or were overlooked by the author.

         =Nation.= 80: 69. Ja. 26, ‘05. 300w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 202. Ap. 1, ‘05. 390w.


=Nason, Frank Lewis.= Vision of Elijah Berl. †$1.50. Little.

  This story of California is the story of Elijah Berl, a dreamer and
  fanatic, who undertook the great work of making a barren wilderness
  “blossom as the rose,” and, blinded by the light of his glowing
  vision, sought base methods to attain his noble end. His partner who
  applies the “moral straight-edge,” the girl who helps, and the weak
  wife who hinders are strongly drawn. The company’s affairs, the orange
  industry, the building of the irrigation dam, and the feverish land
  boom just before its collapse give the typical atmosphere of the early
  West.

  Reviewed by Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 367. Je. ‘05. 440w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1, ‘05. 120w.

         =Ind.= 59: 209. Jl. 27, ‘05. 260w.

  “Mr. Nason has drawn the character of Elijah with excellent precision
  and clearness.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 311. My. 13, ‘05. 290w.

  “The author evidently knows conditions in California, and is wide
  awake in his study of human character.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 196. My. 20, ‘05. 130w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 27. Jl. 1, ‘05. 170w.


National documents: state papers so arranged as to illustrate the growth
of our country from 1606 to the present day. *72c; lea. *92c; pa. *42c.
Bell, H. W.

  “A valuable little volume containing important state papers, from the
  charter of Virginia, given in 1606 to the Panama ship canal treaty of
  1904.”—Arena.

  Reviewed by Amy C. Rich.

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 451. Ap. ‘05. 160w.


=Naylor, E. W.= Elizabethan virginal book. *$2. Dutton.

  “In his ‘critical essay’ on the contents of the Virginal book in the
  Fitzwilliam museum at Cambridge, ... [the author] gives a careful
  study of nearly 300 pieces of the Tudor period which are almost
  entirely unknown.” (N. Y. Times.) These pieces of Elizabethan music
  include 130 dances, 17 organ pieces, 46 arrangements of forty
  different songs, and certain madrigals, and fantasias, etc.

         =Acad.= 68: 562. My. 27, ‘05. 600w.

  “But the volume as a whole is interesting and instructive; moreover,
  it is the first book on the subject, and therefore welcome. It
  contains many musical illustrations, and there is a capital index.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 251. Ag. 19. 510w.

  * “It is a careful and scholarly work.” W. J. Henderson.

       + =Atlan.= 96: 854. D. ‘05. 60w.

  “It is a valuable work of reference, for it embodies all that can be
  required by one who is desirous of gaining a clear idea of the music
  of this interesting period.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 245. O. 16, ‘05. 270w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 695. S. 21, ‘05. 200w.

  “It must be admitted that he makes out a good case for his thesis.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 305. O. 12, ‘05. 110w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 355. Je. 3, ‘05. 320w.

  “It certainly is a stimulating and graphic method of studying musical
  history that he has embodied in the book.” Richard Aldrich.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 604. S. 16, ‘05. 630w.

 *   + + =Spec.= 95: sup. 908. D. 2, ‘05. 770w.


=Needler, George Henry,= tr. See Nibelungenlied.


=Neidig, William Jonathan.= First wardens. **$1. Macmillan.

  Thirty-seven poems upon such themes as Alvah and Azubah, The adoration
  of the Magi, Wine of laurel, and Lex mundi. There is also a series of
  sonnets called A woman’s ring.

       + =Critic.= 46: 566. Je. ‘05. 130w.

  “Much of Mr. Neidig’s verse, for all its originality and
  unquestionably poetic diction, makes too hard reading to fulfill the
  proper function of poetry.” Wm. M. Payne.

     — + =Dial.= 39: 65. Ag. 1, ‘05. 260w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 17. Jl. 6. ‘05. 250w.


* =Nesbit, Wilbur Dick.= Alphabet of history. **75c. Elder.

  “A thin little book done in brown tones and with a flexible cover....
  It is printed in old art style and bound in Rhinos boards.... Taking
  history alphabetically, the book goes from Alexander to Zenobia, and
  includes such prominent people as Lucullus, Raleigh, William Tell, and
  James Watt.... The illustrations show without overmuch seriousness the
  eminent individuals whose life stories are told.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Twenty-six historical personages ... are portrayed with accuracy,
  completeness, and much cleverness.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 384. D. 1, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 776. N. 18, ‘05. 90w.


=Neville, James J.= Letters of a self-made president. $1. Ogilvie.

  The apparent object of these letters is to ridicule Roosevelt, his
  friends, and his official and unofficial acts. Altho names are
  transposed and facts perverted, there is no real attempt to disguise
  the identity of the executive who entertains Booker at dinner for the
  sake of the negro vote, and assembles the navy at Clam bay for the
  edification of a few visiting friends.

  “Now and then the malice has a spice of wit, but generally speaking
  the letters of a self-made president are rather heavy.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 543. Ag. 19, ‘05. 220w.


=Nevinson, Henry W.= Books and personalities. *$1.50. Lane.

  “The reviews and criticisms of which this book is composed deal with a
  varied company of literary personalities. The net is spread very wide.
  Great and small—Mr. Belloc and Browning, Goethe and Aubrey Beardsley,
  Æschylus and Mr. Yeats, Dolling and De Wet, Carlyle, Heine, and Mr. Le
  Gallienne, and many others—are gathered in. And in dealing with them
  all Mr. Nevinson either has his point of view, or manages to reflect,
  brightly enough, the general tendency of educated opinion.”—Ath.

  “Readable and stimulating these short studies undoubtedly are.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 557. My. 6. 730w.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

 *     + =Atlan.= 96: 848. D. ‘05. 390w.

  “Mr. Nevinson has a charming and lucid style that cannot but give
  interest to his restrained thoughts.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 380. O. ‘05. 100w.

  “He writes in a brisk, self-confident, effective way, with no lack of
  plausible generalizations (not based on painfully exhaustive
  collection of particulars) and a ready supply of apt illustrations. As
  short essays in criticism of the lighter sort, these chapters, despite
  a slight tendency to the dogmatic in their tone are excellent
  reading.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 91. Ag. 16, ‘05. 320w.

  “We have read them all with interest—seldom, indeed, have met with a
  book of the kind which we were so unwilling to lay down—and many with
  much pleasure.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 924. Je. 24, ‘05. 260w.


=New, Edmund H.= Evesham. *50c. Dutton.

  “Americans rarely see Evesham and the beautiful, broad vale in which
  it lies, although they are near it when they make, as all good
  Americans do, their Shakespeare pilgrimage. This little book, one of
  the ‘Temple topographies,’ is, with its line drawings and pleasant
  narrative, an introduction and an incentive to visit a charming
  countryside.”—Outlook.

  “In this volume thorough justice is done to the buildings of a
  charming little Worcestershire town.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 247. Mr. 30, ‘05. 140w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 349. F. 4, ‘05. 50w.


=Newberry, Percy Edward, and Garstang, John.= Short history of ancient
Egypt. **$1.20. Estes.

  A small volume which gives a comprehensive sketch of the Egyptian
  monarchy from its founding to its disintegration, three thousand years
  later. The story is told in the light of the many important
  discoveries which have been made within the last decade. It is a book
  that will arouse the student’s interest in the subject and lead to the
  study of larger works.

  “There is a painful lack of proper proportion. The presentation in the
  little book of the new results from the archaic age deserves
  consideration as a serious contribution. The American edition has some
  serious misprints.”

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 843. Jl. ‘05. 510w.

  “They have written with exactness and clearness, and their product
  should offer the reader an attractive synopsis of the latest
  discoveries.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 382. Ap. ‘05. 70w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 240. Ap. 1, ‘05. 250w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 248. F. ‘05. 80w.


=Newell, William Wells.= Words for music: symphonic series. *$3. Small.

  A little volume of brief lyrics of nature and life.

  “The most noticeable fault of the pieces is found in the frequent
  omission of articles and other small words necessary to the
  construction.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 66. Ag. 1, ‘05. 120w.

  “In ‘Words for music,’ ... a mild and rather wordy mysticism sometimes
  bears poetic fruit in verse of a pleasing, gossamer-like tenuity.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 17. Jl. 6. ‘05. 190w.


=Newman, Ernest.= Musical studies: essays. *$1.50. Lane.

  Mr. Newman’s fearless attitude toward music and composers results in
  an iconoclastic treatment of some of the old masters and a
  proportionately exalted consideration of others of more modern
  schools. In the latter class is Strauss to whom “Mr. Newman
  attributes ... pretty nearly everything except the creation of the
  world.... The essay on programme music is unquestionably the most
  lucid, original, and convincing discussion of that question ever
  printed.” (Nation.)

  “Our author is a clever and thoughtful writer, and even those who
  differ from him will respect his frankly expressed opinions.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 251. Ag. 19. 280w.

  * “His scholarship is good and his point of view established favorably
  for perspective. He writes frankly of old and new masters, and his
  comments are stimulating to the mind of the reader.” W. J. Henderson.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 854. D. ‘05. 170w.

  “Mr. Newman takes his work with vast seriousness and digs very deep.
  The subjects warrant such treatment, but as a result the reader must
  look for matter rather than manner.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 380. O. ‘05. 100w.

  “Mr. Newman also ventures to fly in the face of public opinion with a
  few pages of very depreciative remarks on Gounod’s ‘Faust.’ Here he is
  decidedly in error. In the other essays of this volume we find our
  author much more sane and satisfactory, and less self-contradictory.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 284. O. 5, ‘05. 1500w.


=Newman, Ernest.= Wagner. (Music of the masters ser.) $1. Brentano’s.

  The average lover of music will find Wagner made comprehensible in Mr.
  Newman’s monograph; “not the whole Wagner,” but the “essential Wagner”
  as a musician and a dramatist is the author’s province. Following a
  chapter on Wagner’s development, each of his operas is studied in
  turn, and the really essential motives are given. A chronological
  table and bibliography are included.

  “A refreshing independence of judgment.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 463. Je. 8, ‘05. 340w.

  “It is stimulating and refreshing to come upon so strong and original
  and drastic a piece of criticism as he has delivered in this little
  book.” Richard Aldrich.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 308. My. 13, ‘05. 660w.

  “Mr. Newman always has something to say that is worth saying, and he
  says it without indirection, uninfluenced by partisanship.” Richard
  Aldrich.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 448. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1190w.


=Newman, Eugene William. (Savoyard, pseud.).= Essays on men, things, and
events, historical, personal, political. $2. Neale.

  The sub-title includes the following list of men, who with associated
  events, “historical, personal, political,” are considered in this
  volume: Roscoe Conklin, Thaddeus Stevens, Matthew H. Carpenter, Andrew
  Johnson, John J. Ingalls, Seargent S. Prentiss, Oliver P. Morton,
  Lucius Q. C. Lamar, Samuel J. Tilden. The family of Field, Marcus A.
  Hanna, Thomas B. Reed, Benjamin H. Hill, George F. Hoar, Frank
  Wolford, Stephen A. Douglass and Thomas C. Platt.

  “The form on the other hand is very old-fashioned, with much
  embroidery of classical and Biblical allusion and a generous supply of
  adjectives of heroic size. Altogether people interested in men and
  politics, whatever their individual bias, can hardly fail to derive
  entertainment from Mr. Newman’s essays.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 19. Ja. 14, ‘05. 750w.


Nibelungenlied; tr. into rhymed English verse in the meter of the
original by G. H. Needler. *$1.75. Holt.

  The first metrical translation of this great epic into the English
  language will appeal to students and readers alike. The historical
  background of the work has been supplied in a full two-part
  introduction: the first of which treats of the Nibelungen saga, its
  history, development and forms; and the second, of the Nibelungenlied,
  and the various editions thru which it has passed.

  “Mr. Needler does not show a very keen sense of rhythm nor a great
  command of language. His translation lacks case, and indulges in
  uncomfortable inversions.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 143. Jl. 29. 380w.

  “The book is an interesting work of reference, the value of which is
  enhanced by a scholarly introduction.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 192. Ag. ‘05. 100w.

  “What distinguishes this translation of the great German epic from all
  previous attempts is, in the first place, the faithful and happy
  reproduction of its metrical form. Professor Needler has added a
  succinct but adequate introduction ... altogether the best summary of
  the whole subject to be found in English.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 94. F. 2, ‘05. 500w.

  “The author of this book says that his apology for presenting it is
  that none of the preceding translations reproduces the metrical form
  of the original. His book certainly justifies itself, and stands in no
  need of any apology. The scholarly introduction deserves unqualified
  praise, and is, indeed, quite a model of what such a work ought to be.
  At first sight the versification is not attractive, but the liking for
  it will be found to grow with increasing familiarity.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 86. F. 11, ‘05. 510w.

  “A very satisfactory piece of work.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 96. Ja. 7, ‘05. 50w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 250. F. ‘05. 80w.


=Nicholl, Edith M. (Mrs. Bowyer).= Human touch: a tale of the great
Southwest. †$1.50. Lothrop.

  This strenuous story tells of cattle feuds, train robberies, and
  kidnappers, and of David Kingdon unhappily married to a woman who
  leaves him and spends her life in travel. While she is on the
  continent David meets Sylvia and “the human touch” draws them
  together. The wife is reported lost at sea, Sylvia and David marry and
  live happily on the great cattle ranch until the first wife reappears.
  Heartbreaking scenes follow, the wife is selfish, but Sylvia and David
  are brave and at last are reunited thru the medium of the divorce
  court.

 *     — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 467. O. 7, 320w.

  “In fact, it is a story of unusual excitement, and will hold the
  reader enthralled just so far as his taste may run in this kind of
  shotgun literature.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 307. My. 13, ‘05. 410w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.


=Nicholson, Joseph Shield.= History of the English corn laws. $1.
Scribner.

  A volume which “emphasizes particularly the connection of the corn
  laws with British social legislation in general, and warns against the
  danger of appealing to historical precedents without taking into
  account all the circumstances of the case.... He makes it clear that,
  though the corn laws did not produce constant high prices, the
  fluctuations in price which they did produce were an evil both to the
  farmer and to the consumer.”—Nation.

  “This volume, though avowedly prepared to meet the present
  discontents, is entirely free from partisanship.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 437. Je. 1, ‘05. 410w.

  “The book is a useful treatment, in popular form, of a subject always
  of historical interest, and now closely connected with a topic of the
  day.”

     + + =Yale R.= 14: 229. Ag. ‘05. 220w.


* =Nicholson, Meredith.= House of a thousand candles. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  The story of a young man whose grandfather has willed him the house of
  a thousand candles, which includes an Indiana estate, upon the
  condition that he live in the house a year, otherwise the estate goes
  to Marian. There is a villain, and there are secret passages, and
  other mysterious things, there is shooting and slugging, until the
  reader is prepared for anything, and cheerfully accepts the fact that
  Olivia, whom the heir loves, is really Marian, and is quite prepared
  at the end to greet the grandfather, who, it appears, is not dead
  after all.

  * “A story bristling with adventure.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 905. D. 16, ‘05. 380w.

  * “The story is told with spirit and the people in it are alive—in one
  case, even though dead.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 50w.


* =Nicoll, Rev. William Robertson (Claudius Clear, pseud.)= Garden of
nuts; mystical expositions with an essay on Christian mysticism. $1.25.
Armstrong.

  “A brief series of articles dealing in detail with some texts in the
  Old Testament. The method of Dr. Nicoll’s interpretation is to allow
  Scripture to be the commentary on Scripture. Without deprecating
  modern criticism, he claims that his exposition moves in a region
  which criticism does not touch: ‘The great passages in the Word of God
  are timeless.’”—Ath.

  * “These pages should commend themselves to many who have been struck
  by the sterility of much of the historical handling of the Bible which
  is now in vogue.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 722. N. 25. 90w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 888. D. 9, ‘05. 240w.


=Niemann, August.= The conquest of England; tr. by J. H. Freese. $1.50.
Putnam.

  A translation of “Der weltkrieg-deutsch traume,” which is graphically
  based upon the supposition of war between Germany and England. “For
  the dreams of the German, in the view of this author, are of
  overthrowing the English power, and of an imperial army taking
  triumphant possession of London.... The story, considered as a
  historical romance, is of a type familiar enough.... Throughout it is
  taken for granted that England is the arch-enemy of civilization, that
  its foreign policy is a complex network of rapacity and hypocrisy, and
  that it is deaf to the voice of the higher idealism.” (Dial). “Is
  related in a workmanlike manner. It is a fairly good story, and is
  curiously interesting from the way in which it represents, upon every
  possible occasion, the point of view of the German anglophobe.” W. M.
  Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 127. F. 16, ‘05. 470w.


=Nitobe, Inazo.= Bushido: the soul of Japan. *$1.25. Putnam.

  Nine editions of this book have appeared in Japan. Bushido is the
  Japanese feudal equivalent for chivalry, and signifies “the code of
  moral principles which the knights were required or instructed to
  observe.” “It embodies the maxims of educational training brought to
  bear on the Samurai, or warrior class of Japan, the class that
  throughout the feudal age, which ended only fifty years ago, set the
  standard to the whole people in manners, ideals of character, and
  mental and moral codes of obligation.”

  “Is a misleading piece of special pleading. He makes out his case by
  partial statement and wholesale suppression.”

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 229. Ag. 19. 1510w.

  “Professor Nitobe’s work is not exhaustive. It is the only work,
  however, on the subject given in a language of the West.” Adachi
  Kinnosuke.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 388. Ag. 17, ‘05. 430w.

 *     + =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 573. S. 2, ‘05. 370w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 159. Jl. 29, ‘05. 180w.

  “A delightfully written exposition of Japanese philosophic and social
  thought.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 253. Ag. ‘05. 120w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 248. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1790w.


=Noble, Edward.= Edge of circumstance. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “A sea story in which an English captain and a Scottish engineer
  contend against every ill-hap that could befall a cranky,
  theoretically-built steamship, owned by men who hypocritically profess
  to make her a co-operative enterprise embodying every new patent and
  labor-saving device, while they really mean to save money at the
  expense of the crew’s comfort and safety.”—Outlook.

  “‘The edge of circumstance’ is a striking book, one to be read. Mr.
  Noble attracts immediate attention yet does not shout; he gives us
  exciting situations, yet leaves something to the imagination. Mr.
  Noble is too much of an artist to overload his picture.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 63. Ja. 21, ‘05. 230w.

  * “In ‘The edge of circumstance’ Mr. Noble has created a book with the
  qualities of a masterpiece. The portrait of the derelict alone will go
  down as a wonder of sincere portrayal. The poetry of the things is
  here plain, founded on a knowledge sharper than fancy.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 754. N. 18, ‘05. 750w.

  “It is a rarely good—even a great—book in some respects, and it seems
  destined to take high rank in the sea literature of its class.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 670. O. 14. ‘05. 990w.

  “The author’s method is much like that of Joseph Conrad, but we miss
  Conrad’s glow of imagination.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 381. O. 14, ‘05. 80w.

  * “A sea-story quite exceptional in vivid strength and well worth
  perusing.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 763. D. ‘05. 30w.

  “It is impossible to render full justice to Mr. Edward Noble’s
  striking story in this column.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 57. Ja. 14, ‘05. 710w.


=Noble, Esther Gideon.= Macbeth, a warning against superstition. $1.
Badger, R: G.

  Dwelling upon the strong negative lesson conveyed thruout the tragedy
  of Macbeth, viz., the warning against superstition, Macbeth himself is
  viewed in the light of one steeped in superstition, and the Weird
  sisters, whose material existence is denied, as doing no more “than
  ‘harp’ his fear aright.” “Shakespeare made Macbeth distinctly a man of
  thought, calculation, and caution. It is the abuse, the misdirection
  of this great power for thought which makes the tragedy,” so maintains
  the author of this monograph.

 *   + — =Critic.= 47: 187. Ag. ‘05. 110w.


=Noble, Rev. Franklin.= (comp.) Thoughts for the occasion: fraternal and
benevolent; reference manual of historical data and facts; helpful in
suggesting themes and in outlining addresses for the observance of
timely or special occasions of the various orders. $2. Treat.

  The book is divided into four parts which cover—Social and benevolent
  brotherhoods, Beneficiary and fraternal orders, Religious
  fraternities, and various orders and societies, and includes nearly
  all the fraternal organizations in America.


=Noldin, Hieronymus.= Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, intended
especially for priests and candidates for priesthood; trans. from the
Germ. by Rev. W. H. Kent. *$1.25. Benziger.

  “A history of the cultus and observations upon its theological and
  ascetical importance.”—Cath. World.

  “The historical sketch is brief but valuable. We think, however, that
  this curious evasion of the twelfth promise question will be the sole
  objection which devout clients of the League will make to this book.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 81: 396. Je. ‘05. 590w.


* =Nordau, Max. Simon (Südfeld).= Dwarf’s spectacles and other fairy
tales, tr. from the German by Mary J. Safford. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “The stories were told to Maxa, Mr. Nordau’s little daughter, from her
  fourth to her seventh birthday, and are translated for the benefit of
  other little ladies by Mary J. Safford. There are twenty stories in
  all, and they are about everything from beetles to fairies and from
  rosebushes to white mice. For instance ... there is a tragic account
  of a last year’s fly, which shows how sad it is to outlive one’s
  generation; there is a story of an ungrateful mouse; and a doll that
  was excessively haughty—in fact, there are stories about
  everything.... Young people—and even older ones—will read with
  breathless interest. The book is illustrated with a number of line
  drawings.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1385. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Is worthy to be read and loved by many other children for its
  originality, its pleasant style, and its gentle lessons with touches
  of deeper meaning.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 503. D. 21, ‘05. 40w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 270w.

  * “The grown-up reader is as pleased as the child—with everything but
  the pictures.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 90w.


=Nordenskjöld, Nils Otto Gustav, and Andersson, Dr. Johan Gunnar.=
Antarctica; or, Two years amongst the ice of the South pole. *$5.
Macmillan.

  “It will be remembered that the Nordenskjöld expedition, in the vessel
  Antarctic, left Europe in the summer of 1901, and spent the following
  Antarctic winter in the South polar regions.... The Antarctic was
  caught in the ice, ‘nipped’ and sunk, and it took two relief parties
  to finally rescue Dr. Nordenskjöld and his followers. Notwithstanding
  the loss of the vessel, with many of the scientific notes, much of the
  geographical and other scientific results were saved.... This volume
  is Dr. Nordenskjöld’s own story (prepared in collaboration with Dr.
  Andersson and Captain Larsen, of the Antarctic).”—R. of Rs.

  “In the rapidly increasing literature of Polar enterprise Dr.
  Nordenskjöld’s volume will take a high place. The translator, who has
  preferred to be anonymous, has performed his task with success.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 466. Ap. 15. 2250w.

  “It is mainly as a narrative that the book must be judged, for it
  contains little of scientific interest.” Albert White Vorse.

       + =Bookm.= 22: 171. O. ‘05. 1300w.

  “Their story is told in a sufficiently attractive fashion, tho it
  lacks somewhat of the personal touch that ordinarily vivifies
  narratives of polar exploration.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 455. Ag. 24, ‘05. 920w.

  “To the general reader, the book’s main interest will lie in ... its
  story of romantic adventure. It is as fascinating reading as Robinson
  Crusoe. Antarctic scenery and natural phenomena are vividly
  portrayed.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 427. S. 23, ‘05. 720w.

  “The story is vividly told, and the quaint English of the translator
  rather adds to than detracts from the reader’s enjoyment and interest.
  The illustration of the work is excellent; the index and maps are all
  that could be asked.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 39. Jl. 13, ‘05. 1500w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 345. My. 27, ‘05. 330w.

  “A simple but effective account.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 690. Jl. 15, ‘05. 50w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 124. Jl. ‘05. 310w.

   + + + =Sat. R.= 99: 708. My. 27, ‘05. 1340w.


=Norris, H. L.= Rice papers; stories and sketches of life in China.
†$1.50. Longmans.

  In order to while away the leisure hours of a three years’ service in
  China, the author wrote these nine stories of the Chinese as he saw
  them, placid and cruel, childlike and shrewd. He has created Hong, the
  gate-keeper, who spins marvelous yarns to a youthful audience of two,
  and other characters, which might be real, but are not.

       + =Acad.= 68: 241. Mr. 11, ‘05. 250w.

  “He has turned out capital stories, witty, satirical, yet seemingly
  jumping with facts, even though he says the stories are not true. They
  are better than true; they are well-found. Nine stories ... all good,
  all worth reading and re-reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 410w.

  “But Mr. Norris as a critic is perhaps too irresponsible to carry much
  weight. His attitude is primarily that of the amused onlooker, and his
  aim is plainly to entertain rather than to instruct. In this he is
  almost uniformly successful.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 556. Ap. 15, ‘05. 660w.


=Norris, William Edward.= Barham of Beltana. †$1.50. Longmans.

  Barham of Beltana is a prominent Australian and the love story centers
  about his son and daughter and the son and daughter of Mr. March, an
  Englishman. The book is full of complications, obstacles and
  surprises, into which eccentric old Lady Warden and her secret, two
  huge mastiffs, and a ghost enter.

  “The scenes are pleasantly varied, the situations quietly effective,
  and the characters consistent though not vital. The story is readable
  because it runs smoothly from start to finish, and the interest is
  allowed to accumulate cleverly.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 240. Mr. 11, ‘05. 270w.

  “The story is not particularly well-written.”

     — + =Arena.= 34: 335. S. ‘05. 170w.

  * “There seems almost as little to say against ‘Barham of Beltana’ as
  in its favour.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 524. Ap. 29. 200w.

  “Is fresh, vigorous, interesting; original in its situations,
  unusually clever in its dialogue. A thoroughly enjoyable book.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 204. Ap. 1, ‘05. 710w.

  “This author always writes pleasantly, and entirely in unexceptionable
  English, but the humor and story-interest which his early books had
  are here reflected only in a faint and feeble light.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 855. Ap. 1, ‘05. 40w.

  “Mr. Norris is always readable. The present novel contrives to avoid
  the sameness from which some of Mr. Norris’s recent books have
  suffered.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 444. Mr. 25, ‘05. 120w.


=Norris, William Edward.= Embarrassing orphan; il. by Steeple Davis. $1.
Winston.

  A South American millionaire leaves his daughter to her uncle, Sir
  Edward Denne, with instruction that she and every one else are to be
  kept in ignorance of the fact that she is wealthy until she is happily
  engaged. His object is to save her from fortune hunters, but as it
  happens, this provision leads her into refusing the right man. All
  ends well, however, through the efforts of her uncle.

  “The story is ingeniously complicated and amusing, though after all
  somewhat monotonous.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 378. Je. 10, ‘05. 350w.

  “There are a few dry passages that detract somewhat from the
  cleverness of the balance.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 90w.


=North, Sidney H.= Oil fuel; its supply, composition and application.
*$1.75. Lippincott.

  “A concise and valuable record of the developments in the use of
  liquid fuel for the generation of power ... he deals with the
  distribution and sources of supply of petroleum ... the economic
  aspect of liquid fuel ... the absolute economy as a fuel ... the
  chemical composition of fuel oils ... conditions of combustion in oil
  furnaces.... Turning from consideration of the oil itself to the
  methods of burning it, the author gives a very useful historical
  summary of the early experiments down to the year 1883.... A chapter
  is then devoted to modern burners and methods.... [There are chapters
  upon] the use of oil fuel for marine and naval purposes, [and] oil
  fuel in locomotives.”—Nature.

  “The whole work compares very favorably indeed with the far more
  pretentious treatise on the subject which until now has been the only
  book of reference.”

   + + + =Nature.= 71: 531. Ap. 6, ‘05. 760w.


* =North, Simon Newton Dexter.= “Old Greek,” an old-time professor in an
old-fashioned college; a memoir of Edward North, with selections from
his lectures. **$3.50. McClure.

  “‘Old Greek’ was the nickname, or, more correctly speaking, the pet
  name, by which Edward North, the professor of Greek [for fifty-eight
  years] was known to the students and alumni of Hamilton college. This
  volume, the primary object of which is a biography of Professor North,
  will certainly serve as an illuminating document to explain the
  genesis of the old-fashioned college in the United States, and the
  reasons for its growth and persistence.”—Nation.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 427. N. 23, ‘05. 2020w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 674. O. 14, ‘05. 690w.


=Noussanne, Henri de.= The kaiser as he is; or, The real William II.;
tr. from the French by Walter Littlefield. **$1.25. Putnam.

  From the point of view of one “who does not like the Germans and
  hardly seeks to conceal his contempt for distinctive German
  qualities,” we have an intimate, graphic, much biased, and at times
  sarcastic sketch of the German emperor, including domestic, social,
  political, national and international relations. There are chapters
  dealing with Germany at the accession of William II.; with the manner
  in which “this young man” rid himself of Bismarck; the imperial
  treatment of the Poles; William II. and socialism; William II. as a
  family man, as guest and landlord, at home and on his travels, as head
  of the army, as bandmaster, painter, patron, etc.

  “It is sensational journalism in all its horror. In the less
  objectionable portions of the book there is a mixture of readable
  gossip, more or less well founded, with mere padding.”

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 398. Ap. 1. 140w.

  “The translator has, in general, done his work acceptably, though
  numerous misprints and mistakes in capitalization are to be noted, and
  there are many minor errors of statement that might well have been
  corrected in the English version. The chief objection to the book is,
  however, the prejudice of the author.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 274. Ap. 16. ‘05. 230w.

  “Pity it is that M. de Noussanne did not use a finer satirical pen and
  a less spiteful, even tho he has given evidence as to the healing of
  the Sedan wound.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 725. Mr. 30, ‘05. 180w.

  “There is obvious malice, obvious Gallic animus, obvious indulgence of
  a spirit of levity and mockery, obvious hospitality to anecdotes in
  which the kaiser is a figure of comic opera. Mr. Littlefield, whose
  translation is at many points very happy and who has caught the spirit
  of the whole excellently, regards the more serious parts of the book
  with perhaps a little too much favor.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 100. F. 18, ‘05. 1570w.

  “As a tirade, an example of skilful satire of the boulevard type, it
  is a masterpiece; as sober biography or character analysis, it is
  worth nothing.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “A very witty and keen arraignment of Kaiser William.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 10: 512. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “M. de Noussanne shows us the man behind the monarch, but spares the
  relation of court tattle and backstairs scandal.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 475. S. ‘05. 170w.


=Noyes, Ella.= Story of Ferrara. $2; lea. $2.50. Macmillan.

  “The city that was the birthplace of Savonarola, the home of Ariosto,
  and the refuge of Tasso, will never be wholly forgotten.... The author
  devotes about two-thirds of her book to the history of the city....
  The whole account centres about the ruling family of Este.... In the
  last third of the book we are given a descriptive view of the city,
  its palaces, pictures, streets, churches, and abbeys. In forming an
  idea of what remains of Ferrara’s greatness, the reader is aided by a
  number of interesting illustrations drawn by Miss Dora Noyes.”—Dial.

  “A readable book and a faithful guide to the city’s antiquities, but
  not a history, in the large sense, admitting us to the council of the
  fates.” Ferdinand Schwill.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 138. O. ‘05. 710w.

  “The work is written in easy, dignified English, the narrative is
  interesting, and the historian displays good taste and judgment both
  in her choice and her rejection of materials.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 157. Mr. 1, ‘05. 360w.

  “So comprehensive is the writer’s grasp of her subject that her little
  volume might well be called a microcosm of the renaissance. It is hard
  to do justice to Miss Noyes’s exquisite style and to the penetration
  which comprehends the significance of the motley manifestations of the
  vivid, passionate life of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 899. Ap. 20, ‘05. 290w.

  “The style is somewhat spiritless. At best, it will prove an
  authoritative guide for the student tourist who has much time to spend
  in Ferrara.” Walter Littlefield.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 588. S. 9, ‘05. 500w.


=Noyes, Walter Chadwick.= American railroad rates. **$1.50. Little.

  The author deals with the subject of freight rates rather than
  passenger fares, showing how rates are made, and how they should be
  made, examines the questions of classification and discrimination,
  considers the effect of free competition on the one hand and
  consolidation on the other, shows the movement of rates for the last
  forty years, and compares American rates with those of foreign
  countries.




                                   O


=“O,” pseud.= See Yellow war.


=O., E. G.= Egomet. *$1.25. Lane.

  A collection of fifty-three essays which “are simply the book-talk of
  a book-lover, that and nothing more.” In them E. G. O. frankly states
  his likes and dislikes, but allows his readers to agree or disagree
  with him, just as they choose.

  “They have the double merit of being sincere in themselves and of
  being simply and naturally set down.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 79. Ja. 14. 320w.

  “The author makes no attempt to be profound, but he succeeds in
  interesting even where he does not carry conviction with the statement
  of his opinions. He is delightfully frank, and does not hesitate to
  put forth various literary heresies.”

       + =Boston Evening Transcript.= :7. F. 10, ‘05. 120w.

  “His manifest sincerity in all his literary judgments, and his
  abounding enthusiasm for a wide range of good books make his chapters
  delightful reading.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 156. Mr. 1, ‘05. 480w.


=Oates, William C.= War between the Union and the Confederacy, and its
lost opportunities. *$3. Neale.

  “This is chiefly of interest to military students of the Civil war as
  a criticism of the action of President Davis of the Confederacy, the
  Confederate congress, and Confederate general officers in the field,
  with the object of showing that under other management the South might
  have won.”—Outlook.

  “Rambling and careless in style, frequently in error as to events,
  sometimes grotesque in opinions and occasionally prejudiced against
  individuals. In one sense is worthless and in another is of the
  highest importance as a revelation of men.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 264. S. 28, ‘05. 2710w.

  “Much matter which the future historian will be glad of. The General
  himself speaks frankly as a partisan.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05. 530w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 654. Mr. 11, ‘05. 60w.


=Ober, Frederick Albion.= Hernando Cortés, conqueror of Mexico. **$1.
Harper.

  “Despite its title. Mr. Ober’s book comes under the category of
  history rather than biography, for by far the greater portion is
  devoted to the three years’ campaigning which ended in the Spanish
  conquest of Mexico.... It may be commended to those desirous of
  obtaining a brief, readable account of the conquest and an impartial
  idea of the leading figure therein. An especially interesting feature
  is the identification by its author (who has traveled widely in
  Latin-American countries) of scenes and relics associated with the New
  World exploits of Cortés.”—Outlook.

  * “Readable it certainly is, to one who is not fastidious regarding
  the historical accuracy of the book he is reading.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 313. N. 16, ‘05. 220w.

  * “However the telling is well enough, and the facts seem sufficient
  for the purpose in hand. Except for that purpose the book strikes one
  as distinctly superfluous.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 785. N. 18, ‘05. 250w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 382. O. 14, ‘05. 120w.


=Ober, Frederick Albion.= Our West Indian neighbors. **$2.50; ¾ lev.
**$5. Pott.

  The author, who has visited and studied the islands in 1879-1880, who
  was commissioner to the world’s fair of 1891 from the West Indies, and
  who has furthered his knowledge of them in late years, gives an
  account of the islands of the Caribbean sea, “America’s
  Mediterranean,” their picturesque features, fascinating history, and
  attractions for the traveler, nature-lover, and pleasure-seeker.

  “Many quaint and little known facts are recorded, but the total result
  is very unsatisfactory. The account is rambling and superficial.”

       — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 134. Ja. ‘05. 80w.

  “A timely and good account of the islands of the Caribbean sea.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 191. F. ‘05. 90w.

  “One of the most complete and authoritative of recent books.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 382. Ap. ‘05. 100w.


=Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson.= Abraham Lincoln. **$1.25. Jacobs.

  A full account in compact form of the development of a great man and
  the circumstances which favored this development. The chief battles
  which mark the course of the Civil war are treated rather summarily.
  The book deals essentially with the man, his motives, and personality,
  and the nation’s struggle forms an impressionistic back-ground.

  “This double sectionalism and these standards of elegance are fatal to
  the usefulness of a book which does not pretend to a ‘vast amount of
  research into sources not before used,’ and which presents few new
  ideas. Nor is the execution faultless.” Carl Russell Fish.

   + — — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 901. Jl. ‘05. 630w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 188. F. ‘05. 30w.

  “The author has produced a well-balanced, readable, compact book, that
  gives the important facts of Lincoln’s life. He has brought to his
  work historical training and a practised hand.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 95. F. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “Dr. Oberholtzer writes clearly and forcibly for the most part, but
  with an occasional verbal arrangement that makes his meaning hard to
  understand. The ‘Bibliography’ of this volume is remarkable for its
  inadequacy. Dr. Oberholtzer’s predilection is for such memoirs as
  serve the more sordid and vulgarizing conception of Lincoln’s
  character.”

   — — + =Nation.= 80: 17. Ja. 5, ‘05. 1090w.

  “No man, whichever his side of the fence can fail to find much
  pleasure and satisfaction in contemplating Mr. Lincoln in the angle of
  view in which Mr. Oberholtzer has chosen to look at him. The author
  manages as a rule to be astonishingly fair to both sides and to get,
  in most cases, very close to the truth. There are lapses of course.
  Times, too, when in his eagerness to make bold generalizations the
  author misses things he should have considered.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 36. Ja. 21, ‘05. 640w.


* =O’Brien, William.= Recollections. **$3.50. Macmillan.

  “William O’Brien, the energetic Irish member of the British
  Parliament ... reveals a most interesting and complex personality in
  this work. Many of this vigorous fighter’s recollections concern the
  fierce, endless warfare over Ireland’s rights and wrongs. But he was a
  poet in his youth. He has strong sympathies with the Gaelic revival,
  he was an ardent theatregoer in his young manhood, and is still, it
  seems, in the intervals when the Irish contingent in the House of
  Commons is not active, a dreamer of brave dreams.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Mr. O’Brien writes as a rule in scholarly fashion; but there are
  some passages which fail conspicuously when so considered.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 795. D. 9 690w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 898. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.

  * “Although written from a standpoint differing somewhat from that of
  Mr. McCarthy’s reminiscences, they recall the latter, not simply in
  subject matter, but in tone and treatment. They are pervaded by the
  same geniality, quiet dignity, pathos, tenderness, humor, and
  unfailing optimism.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 942. D. 16, ‘05. 300w.


=O’Connor, Mary Hamilton.= Vanishing Swede. $1.25. Cooke.

  “The story has to do with the discovery of a long-lost silver mine,
  the ‘Vanishing Swede,’ the finding of which was preceded by many
  adventures, hairbreadth escapes from death by the wild beasts of the
  forests, and leads up to the happiness of the young brother and
  sister, who are the principal characters in the story, and of another
  couple. The mysterious character is the Leather hermit, who turns out
  to be the man who had discovered the silver mine.”—N. Y. Times.

  “The humor of the ‘Vanishing Swede’ is of the primitive sort that
  springs only from youth and health; it is not humor, indeed, so much
  as animal spirits.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 382. O. ‘05. 150w.

  “Interesting story of pluck and adventure in the forests of Oregon.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 299. My 6, ‘05. 150w.


=Oertel, Philipp Friedrich Wilhelm (W. D. Von Horn, pseud.).= Maria
Theresa; tr. from the German by George P. Upton. *60c. McClurg.

  “Masculinity of intellect, together with a strength and wisdom, a
  firmness yet kindliness of disposition which but few men have
  manifested” are gifts which enabled Maria Theresa to take her place
  among the famous queens of the world. How she benefited her realm by
  strengthening its laws and bringing about wise reforms is sketched in
  a manner to interest young readers. The volume belongs to “Life
  stories for young people.”


=O’Higgins, Harvey Jerrold.= Smoke-eaters. $1.50. Century.

  Thru his experience on a New York newspaper, the author learned to
  know and admire the men of the fire department, and in the
  “Smoke-eaters” he has written an epic of the city firemen, a story of
  danger and excitement. He follows the fortunes of a certain
  hook-and-ladder crew and thru the smoke and flame their actual
  characters reveal themselves, real and elemental. Captain Meaghan, who
  earns his pension by thirty-five years of gallant service, Lieutenant
  Gallagher, who wins a reputation and his chief’s adopted daughter, and
  Sergeant Pim, whose grim humor relieves many a tense moment, are as
  vivid as their flaming background.

  “They are told with extraordinary simplicity, with no glow of rhetoric
  or splash of color, but they carry complete conviction.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 478. My. ‘05. 90w.

  “At last the American fireman has had something like justice done him
  in our literature.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 293. Je. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “This is a good book for boys, altho not designed especially for young
  readers. It contains much healthful excitement, a mass of information,
  and many lessons in manliness, but no false bravado.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 224. Ag. 12. ‘05. 820w.

  “It is not too much to say that he has written the epic of the New
  York firemen, and not only are they the best sort of stories about
  firemen, but some of them would stand as models of all that any short
  stories should be—so compact, so restrained, and yet possessed of a
  vigor and force that keep expectation keyed to the highest tension.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 178. Mr. 25, ‘05. 770w.

  “The stories are full of action, fine character-drawing, and humor.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 704. Mr. 18, ‘05. 60w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 592. O. ‘05. 210w.


=Okakura-Kakuzo.= Awakening of Japan. *$1.20. Century.

  Assuming that the West has as much to unlearn about the East as the
  East has to learn about the West, the author frames his evolutionary
  study for general enlightenment. He answers the question “From what
  sources are drawn the intellectual and moral qualities which have
  enabled the present generation of statesmen, citizens, soldiers and
  sailors, under an able emperor, to enter suddenly, as a first class
  liberal power, into the company of nations?” The sketch touches the
  conditioning factors of Japanese development from the period of
  isolation during the dark Night of Asia, to the present period which
  the author characterizes as the “dusk of humanity.” He shows Japan in
  her chrysalis state when the shogunate exercised the powers of
  government, in her rallying state when the power of the shoguns was
  overthrown, and in her state of a developing national conscience which
  made ready the way for Commodore Perry and the western aid in the
  restoration. The author’s virility, enthusiasm and conscience are
  stamped upon every page.

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 176. F. 25, ‘05. 290w.

  “He is a poet, a philosopher and a historian, and he possesses in no
  small degree an intimate knowledge of Occidental history and the trend
  of our civilization, while his knowledge of our language enables him
  to write of The awakening of Japan with the skill of a master of
  English. For these reasons this work is a volume that no Occidental
  student of the Orient can afford to slight.”

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 100. Ja. ‘05. 4950w.

  “With Mr. Kakuzo’s views on the older civilization of Japan we
  entirely disagree. Even his chronology is wrong by a thousand years.”

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 396. Ap. 1. 870w.

  “The present work is simpler and more concrete than ‘The ideals of the
  East;’ in its purely literary qualities it would do credit to an
  author writing his own tongue. Now that Lafcadio Hearn is dead, Mr.
  Okakura may be regarded as the foremost interpreter of his people to
  the western world; an interpreter not less subtle, and obviously more
  authoritative.” R. B.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 282. Mr. ‘05. 530w.

  “‘The awakening of Japan’ is marked by the same epigrammatic style and
  forceful utterance that characterize ‘The ideals of the East.’”
  Frederick W. Gookin.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 40. Ja. 16, ‘05. 810w.

  “It is a story of the new Nippon after the brilliant and unscholarly
  fashion of Carlyle.” Adachi Kinnosuké.

       + =Ind.= 59: 388. Ag. 17, ‘05. 500w.

  “One of the best volumes, in brief compass, on Japanese historical
  development, and answering the question, What has enabled the Japanese
  people to escape the fate of the other Asiatic nations when in contact
  with the West? is ‘The awakening of Japan.’ He writes in English with
  a broad culture.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 124. Ja. ‘05. 170w.

  “No more fascinating book on Japan, or one bearing more distinctly the
  character of a multum in parvo, has been produced than this.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 619. Ap. 29, ‘05. 280w.


=Okakura-Yoshisaburo.= Japanese spirit; with an introd. by George
Meredith. **$1. Pott.

  “The volume consists of reproductions of lectures delivered by Mr.
  Okakura at the University of London. The essays take up and discuss
  most of the peculiarly characteristic national traits of the Japanese
  people.”—R. of Rs.

         =Acad.= 68: 599. Je. 3, ‘05. 420w.

  “They are illuminating and instructive, but lack the literary quality
  of the two books by the author’s brother.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 380. O. ‘05. 60w.

  “This book is not so strong or original as ‘The awakening of Japan,’
  but it seems to do more justice to the work and influence of Buddhism
  as the mother and nurse of Japanese civilization.” Wm. Elliot Griffis.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 63. Ag. 1, ‘05. 600w.

  “His little volume has the distinctive characteristics of breadth,
  lucidity, and felicity of expression which gained for the ‘Ideals’
  such a wide and appreciative audience in this country.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 150w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 408. Je. 17, ‘05. 240w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “To philosophic capacity he adds those of criticism and of logical
  arrangement of his materials, all of which combined have enabled him
  to produce a clear, succinct and well-expressed essay on his subject.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 151. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1050w.

  “Really valuable analysis.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 915. Je. 24, ‘05. 2450w.


=Okey, Thomas.= Story of Venice. $2. Macmillan.

  A volume in the “Mediaeval towns” series. The history of Venice as an
  independent state, covering a period of more than a thousand years,
  and including an account of Venetian art. The second part of the
  volume describes the Venice of to-day, dividing it into twenty
  sections and making the description a practical one for the use of
  travellers. There are illustrations by Nelly Erickson.

  “Will be acceptable both to travellers and students.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 271. Mr. 18, ‘05. 330w.

  “This little work is a model of clear and concise narrative. The
  author knows how to make the most of his subject and tells his tale in
  a very attractive way.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 192. Je. 16, ‘05. 850w.

  “The story is told compactly, but with sufficient fullness.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 130w.

  “Such a book is a boon to many men, who will find it concise but not
  perfunctory, learned but never dull.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 346. S. 9, ‘05. 320w.

  “He has had no easy task in compressing into the limits of even the
  larger volumes of this series so great a mass of material; and he has
  performed it with skill and success.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 333. Mr. 4, ‘05. 330w.


=Older, Mrs. Fremont.= Giants. †$1.50. Appleton.

  “One giant is an oil trust magnate; the other a young man who opposes
  him. Scenes are laid in ‘Oilville,’ California, and New York, where
  the young man has carried a reform campaign and become district
  attorney. The book falls in with a popular tone of antagonism to
  trusts as throttling competition.”—Outlook.

  * “The whole narration is pitched in the highest key of
  sensationalism, and the figures that take part in it have but slight
  resemblance to real human beings.” Wm. M. Payne.

       — =Dial.= 39: 308. N. 16, ‘05. 370w.

  “Some readers will consider it rabid, sensational trash; others a blow
  on the right side.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 382. O. 14, ‘05. 60w.


=Olmsted, Frederick Law.= A journey in the seaboard slave states. 2v.
*$5. Putnam.

  A series of letters written for the New York Times during a three
  months’ trip in 1852-3. These letters were revised and published in
  1856, and are now issued again in a two-volume edition. They contain
  an account of the author’s impressions of the southern people, black
  and white, of their institutions, and their social, political, and
  industrial economy.

  “They are like faithful daguerreotypes of the worst features of
  southern civilization. The author’s spirit was so fiercely prejudiced
  against the South....”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 382. F. 16, ‘05. 1150w.

  “Occasionally one finds evidence of partisan feeling, but in the main
  the story reads well, giving a distinct impression of a fair-minded
  observer anxious to see just how things are, and equally anxious to
  make a record of actual conditions.” Francis W. Shepardson.

   + + — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 610. S. ‘05. 520w.


=Oman, Charles (William) Chadwick.= Seven Roman statesmen of the later
Republic. *$1.60. Longmans.

  “The seven statesmen are the two Gracchi, Sulla, Crassus, the younger
  Cato, Pompey, and Caesar. Their lives ... completely cover the last
  century of Rome’s ancien régime; or, more precisely, they cover the
  course of the Roman revolution.... Each of Mr. Oman’s seven statesmen,
  with the exception of Cato, ... represented the monarchial principle,
  each more distinctly than his predecessor. Thus the true meaning of
  the whole process, ... may be brought out by concentrating attention
  upon the personal element.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “Although the cardinal facts of the story are common property and
  allow of no radically new explanation, yet they are invested with new
  interest by Mr. Oman’s literary skill, his graphic and often
  colloquial style, his genial and pungent wit—as of the Oxford
  common-room, his thoroughly individual appreciation of each of the
  leading figures, and his presentation of the whole movement in modern
  and realistic terms.” Henry A. Sill.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 622. Ap. ‘05. 1800w.


One hundred best American poems, selected by John R. Howard. 35c.
Crowell.

  These poems are selected from the works of sixty-four American poets.
  All living authors have been excluded and the editor does not claim
  that he has chosen the one hundred best poems, but one hundred from
  among the best. The selections are given in chronological order,
  beginning with Philip Freneau (1752-1832) and closing with Richard
  Hovey, who died in 1900. An index of authors and another of first
  lines gives easy access to any poem.

 *     — =Nation.= 81: 484. D. 14, ‘05. 70w.

  * “The selection, as a whole, is very satisfactory.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 630. N. 11, ‘05. 340w.

  * “One may quarrel with some of the selections ... but it can hardly
  be said that they do not all deserve praise and preservation.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 732. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


Opal. $1.25. Houghton.

  An unusual story of a living opal, a woman of wondrous beauty, who
  feels “everything a little, but nothing much,” and who is a clever
  reflection of each personality with whom she comes in contact, “a
  thousand women in one.” Then there is the “one woman in a thousand,”
  strong and homely, whose “character and features are at constant
  warfare.” And there is the man in whom lay the possibilities which
  might make of him either “a leader of men or a follower of women.”
  This is the important material. Boston and the other characters are
  mere background. The real woman loves the man, but gives him the opal
  because she fancies it will make him happy. It is the usual story of
  the unlucky stone which brings misfortune to the donor and possessor;
  and the iridescent girl, with no more evil intent than the gem itself,
  wrecks the lives of all who come in intimate contact with her. In the
  end, when what she has done is legally undone, the finer qualities of
  the real woman’s character keep her from her heart’s desire.

  * “Written with such marked individuality of style.” Frederic Taber
  Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 270. My. ‘05. 320w.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 140w.

  “The argument is unusual, and it is strikingly presented. It seems,
  however, to be a theme too extensive for treatment so brief, and there
  are other evidences, slight but convincing, of lack of craftsmanship.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1. ‘05. 200w.

  “Such a flat, foolish and unconvincing creature has, therefore, no
  reason for existence, at least not in a novel.”

       — =Ind.= 58: 1009. My. 4, ‘05. 200w.

  “Of unusual interest and originality. The women are admirably drawn,
  both of them, but the character of ‘the opal’ is a bit of portraiture
  quite unique.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 140. Mr. 4. ‘05. 380w.

  “Most of the story is made up of conversation, which is entertaining.
  The action is rapid.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “The development of the story is skilfully managed, the conversations
  as a rule are very entertaining, and the whole book has the touch of a
  bright, keen, thoroughly trained woman, not by nature a novelist, but
  able to turn her hand to the writing of fiction with unusual
  adroitness both of judgment and skill.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 707. Mr. 18, ‘05. 120w.

  “Is unusually witty and readable.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 772. Ap. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  “The treatment meets the theme but half way. It ought to be a
  masterpiece and it is not.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 243. Jl. ‘05. 200w.


=Oppenheim, E. Phillips.= Master mummer. †$1.50. Little.

  A plotting archduchess hides her orphaned niece, direct heir to the
  family’s millions, away in a convent, and substitutes her own
  daughter’s claim to the fortune. By merest chance a young author
  living a struggling bohemian life becomes the protector of the
  unfortunate girl as she emerges into the world for a brief moment. His
  efforts are strongly seconded by the “master mummer” a great actor,
  who had loved the girl’s mother. Together they foil every attempt of
  the arch-plotters, and bring about well-merited happiness.

  “It has an ingenious plot, and a steady stream of romantic and
  dramatic incident; he writes well, too, without exaggeration, and with
  pretty touches of sentiment. In construction, management, style, and
  variety of incident, we can recommend ‘The master mummer’ as one of
  the best stories of its kind that has appeared for some time.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 420. Ap. 15, ‘05. 200w.

  “The book has the exciting and the dramatic elements that will render
  it popular with a large class of readers who are less critical about
  the form, presentation and probability of a tale than they are about
  its absorbing interest.”

     + — =Arena.= 34: 217. Ag. ‘05. 840w.

     — + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 492. Ap. 15. 240w.

  “Not that there is anything extraordinary or remarkable or great or
  strong or wise or literary about it—it’s just a good story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 365. Je. 3, ‘05. 470w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “The story is frank melodrama, but is readable in its own particular
  line.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 754. My. 20, ‘05. 180w.


=Oppenheim, Edward Phillips.= Mysterious Mr. Sabin. $1.50. Little.

  Mr. Oppenheim’s former books, “A prince of sinners,” and “Anna, the
  adventuress,” as well as the present story, make an incognito
  personage the central figure. The mystery in each case is the sort to
  be dealt with non-professionally. The mysterious Mr. Sabin is an
  unscrupulous French royalist who aids the German government in a
  conspiracy of war against England. His part in the plot is that of
  securing valuable papers recording the coast defenses of England, for
  which services he demands Germany’s conquest of France, and the
  restoration of the monarchy in the person of Prince Henri and his
  cousin, Helene of Bourbon. The coveted papers are the guarded
  possession of an English admiral “partly crazed by the tragic
  destruction of the Victoria, but still so profoundly wise on naval
  matters and coast defenses that the spies of rival empires lay siege
  to a study in which he works at plans to save his country.” Princess
  Helene figures in a pretty romance which in spite of threatening
  intrigue keeps free from politics and diplomatic complications.

  “It is one of the most clever mystery tales of recent years, abounding
  in highly dramatic situations, with a strong and well-sustained love
  interest. In the present story there are many situations and
  happenings that are highly improbable, and in some instances
  practically impossible. Barring this grave fault, however, the story
  is almost all that the lover of romantic fiction could desire.”

   + + — =Arena.= 33: 564. My. ‘05. 520w.

  “We have the impression that the tale is, in fact, not a new one;
  however, it is not bad of its kind.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 102. F. 18, ‘05. 480w.

  “The book has more thrills and less probability to the square inch of
  text than can be found anywhere outside the pages of a dime novel.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 256. F. 18, ‘05. 280w.

  “Skilful in plot.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 619. Ap. ‘05. 500w.

  “It is all glaringly impossible, yet not without power or real
  fascination.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 757. Je. ‘05. 110w.


=Oppenheim, Lassa.= International law. *$6.50. Longmans.

  This, the first of a two-volume treatise, deals with international law
  in time of peace. An introduction discussing the foundation and
  development of the law of nations is followed by four parts: States as
  subjects of the laws of nations; State territory, the open sea, and
  individuals as the objects of the laws of nations; Diplomatic envoys,
  and the like, as agents of states in their international relations;
  and International transactions. The work aims to be an elementary
  text.

  “Taken all in all, Mr. Oppenheim has given us the best treatment of
  the Law of Peace that we have as yet had.” Leo S. Rowe.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 610. S. ‘05. 280w.

  “The merit of the volume is that it presents a fair, well-balanced
  summary of accepted results, and that it puts the reader in touch with
  the best modern literature of the subject.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 158. My. 19, ‘05. 450w.


=Orcutt, William Dana.= Flower of destiny: an episode of the second
empire; with il. by Charlotte Weber. †$1.25. McClurg.

  A charmingly told story of the romance of Napoleon III. and Mlle.
  Eugénie de Montijo which ends with the crown of violets in the forest
  of Compiégne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 293. Je. 1, ‘05. 170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 295. My. 6, ‘05. 280w.

  “Altogether makes a pretty little gift to carry with one on a summer
  vacation.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 120w.

  “A pretty romance.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 391. Je. 10, ‘05. 30w.

  “But great names of themselves do not make a story, and in ‘The flower
  of destiny’ we have little else to look to.”

       — =Reader.= 6: 478. S. ‘05. 110w.


=Orczy, Baroness.= Scarlet pimpernel. †$1.50. Putnam.

  “The Scarlet pimpernel is the leader of a little band of titled young
  Englishmen who make it their business—and pleasure—during the reign of
  terror to assist condemned or suspected emigrés to escape to England.
  An interesting complication arises when the young Frenchwoman married
  to the lazy, careless English lord finds that in putting the French
  agent on the trail of the scarlet pimpernel to save her brother’s life
  she has in reality condemned her husband to death. Of course, he
  doesn’t die, and of course they all, or most of all, lived happily
  ever after.”—Pub. Opin.

  “A thrilling story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 671. O. 14, ‘05. 300w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 506. O. 14, ‘05. 200w.

  * “A melodramatic but picturesque and well told tale.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 315. S. 2, ‘05. 80w.


=Osborn, Frank C.= Osborn’s tables of moments of inertia and squares of
radii gyration, to which have been added tables of the working strengths
of steel columns, the working strengths of timber beams and columns,
standard loads and unit stresses and constants for determining stresses
in swing bridges. $3. Osborn eng. co., Cleveland, O.

  A thoroly modernized edition based upon the work of fifteen years ago.

  “Though it does not meet all the needs of the structural designer in
  its specific field, it promises to be a useful desk companion and to
  regain much of its former prestige.”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 638. Je. 15, ‘05. 440w.


=Osborn, Hartwell, and others.= Trials and triumphs: the record of the
Fifty-fifth Ohio volunteer infantry. *$2.50. McClurg.

  “The Fifty-fifth Ohio was recruited in Huron county (of which Norwalk
  is the county-seat), after the reverses at Bull Run had stirred the
  North to greater efforts; it had its full share of the campaigns in
  Virginia, Tennessee, and Georgia, and of the terrible work at
  Chancellorsville and Gettysburg. This is related with clearness and
  graphic power by Captain Osborn; and, besides the narrative, the book
  is unusually complete in regimental statistics, sketches of officers
  and citizens, and personal notes and recollections of soldiers.
  Photographs, both ‘wartime’ and modern, have been reproduced in
  profusion.”—Dial.

  “The work is in every way a real contribution to the literature of the
  great struggle.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 157. Mr. 1, ‘05. 210w.

  “Its record presents a good picture of the most stirring events of the
  war. East and West.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 112. F. 9. ‘05. 390w.

  “It is a book of incomparable interest to the veterans of the old
  command, of considerable value to historians, and not without interest
  also for the general reader.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 467. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1200w.


* =Osbourne, Lloyd.= Baby Bullet, the bubble of destiny. †$1.50.
Appleton.

  “Baby Bullet is a motor car, a fifteenth hand ‘crock’ of early French
  design, joyfully presented to two American ladies, a girl and a
  schoolmarm, who are discovered by the roadside wearily enjoying a
  tramp in England. The donor ... runs away lest his gift should be
  thrust back upon him. Baby is in a state of sulks, and the two
  Americans climb into her, and hire a carter to tow them behind a
  furniture van. At cross-roads they meet another car, a gigantic and
  glorious machine, with the power of sixty horses, unfortunately
  unavailable because her mécanicien has forgotten the gasolene.... The
  American owner of the big car borrows petrol from the American owners
  of the little, and tows them in exchange. The result is a week of wild
  romance and a thoroughly amusing book.”—Acad.

  * “The light dexterous writing of the book pleases us like clever
  juggling.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1231. N. 25, ‘05. 360w.

  * “The narrative is ingeniously contrived and ought to appeal to a
  large public.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 380. O. 14, ‘05. 80w.

  * “The story abounds in slang and is neither exciting nor amusing.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 689. N. 25, ‘05. 50w.

  * “The narrative moves at a speed suitable to the subject, and the
  pitch of high-spirited comedy is never lowered.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 985. D. 9, ‘05. 200w.


=Osbourne, Lloyd.= Motormaniacs. †75c. Bobbs.

  This little pocket-book contains four short love stories, in each of
  which an automobile is chief matchmaker. In the “Motormaniacs,” a
  break down brings the right man into the story opportunely, and in
  “The great bubble syndicate,” “Coal oil Johnny” and “Jones,” a
  Fearless, a Despereaux, and a Porchar-Mufflin car play important
  roles.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380. Je. 10, ‘05. 210w.

  “Lively, ingenious, and amusing.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 393. Je. 10, ‘05. 4w.


=Osgood, Herbert Levi.= American colonies in the 17th century. 2v. **$5.
Macmillan.

  “The first [volume] is given over to the abortive experiments of
  Gilbert and Raleigh in founding settlements in the New world, to the
  first proprietary province, Virginia, and to the corporate colonies of
  New England; the second, to the later proprietary provinces and to a
  systematic survey of the colonies as a whole, at the close of the
  period under discussion.”—Outlook.

  “In the main, however, the difficulties of the book are of a kind
  almost inevitable from the nature of the topic chosen, and the serious
  reader will find it not only instructive, but full of interest. For
  the student of our institutional beginnings, Professor Osgood has
  provided one of the few treatises which are really indispensable.”
  Evarts B. Greene.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 149. Ja. ‘05. 1530w.

  “Method of presentation and clarity of statement are other
  commendatory traits.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 754. Mr. 25, ‘05. 2380w.


=O’Shea, Michael Vincent.= Education as adjustment: educational theory
viewed in the light of contemporary thought. *$1.50. Longmans.

  “This new work, which is centered around the idea of adjustment, is
  divided into three parts. In Part I. the present status of education
  as a science is faithfully described.... The last chapter of Part I.
  treats of the data for a science of education, discussing the
  respective values of the various classes of facts contributed by the
  study of biographies, autobiographies, and the survival of the fittest
  in education, as well as by the experimentation and research advocated
  by sane leaders in the child-study movement. Especially valuable is
  the section which explains the evolutionary point of view.... Part II.
  examines the meaning and aim of education.... Chapters VI., VII., and
  VIII. of Part II. deal respectively with the implications of
  adjustment as the end in education, with adjustment as affected by
  social organization, and with the general effect of adjustment upon
  teaching.... The method of obtaining adjustment is treated in Part
  III.... Chapters XIII. and XIV. are devoted to the doctrine of formal
  discipline.”—Educ. R.

  “Looked at as a whole, ‘Education as adjustment’ does not reveal
  marked originality; but it is a luminous and vigorous presentation of
  the best educational thought of the present day. It is, furthermore,
  refreshing in that it betrays neither superficiality nor dogmatism.
  His work, tho written in untechnical, popular language, is,
  nevertheless, neither inane nor inaccurate. It is worthy of occupying
  a valued place among the text-books used in normal schools and college
  schools of education.” W. S. Sutton.

   + + + =Educ. R.= 29: 191. F. ‘05. 1610w.


=Osler, William.= Aequanimitas, and other addresses to medical students,
nurses, practitioners. *$2. Blakiston.

  A collection of 18 addresses and essays all pertaining to medicine.
  The title gives the keynote to the volume, the successful nurse or
  doctor must be imperturbable. Dr. Osler gives a review of medical
  science in the nineteenth century, and his thoughts on education,
  investigation, ethics, religion, and the conduct of life. He gives
  advice to young physicians, suggestions as to their relations to both
  patients and nurses, and tells them that the master-word of progress
  is “Work.”

  “Dr. Osler’s extensive sympathy, his elevation of thought, his
  insistence on worthy ideals, his wide reading are all strikingly
  exhibited in the volume before us.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 546. Jl. ‘05. 1060w.

  “The style of Dr. Osler is most felicitous; and those who think they
  care but little for the professional aspect of this volume, will be
  charmed by its graceful expressions, its acute suggestions, its
  thorough good sense.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 193. Mr. 9, ‘05. 1600w.


=Osler, William.= Science and immortality. **85c. Houghton.

  The frankly agnostic spirit of modern “intellectuals” dealt with in
  this volume is best summed up by quotations from the text itself:
  “Though his philosophy find nothing to support it, ... the scientific
  student should be ready to acknowledge the value of a belief in the
  hereafter as an asset in human life.... He cannot be dogmatic and deny
  the possibility of a future state, ... he will ask to be left,
  reserving his judgment, but still inquiring.... Science is organized
  knowledge, and knowledge is of things we see. Now the things that are
  seen are temporal: of the things that are unseen science knows
  nothing, and has at present no means of knowing anything.”

  “The simple and charming style of the writer, as well as his apt
  quotations from the masters, makes this book a delight to read.”

     + — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 400. Ap. ‘05. 200w.

  Reviewed by E. T. B.

       + =Atlan.= 95: 138. Ja. ‘05. 320w.

  Reviewed by H. B. Alexander.

         =Bookm.= 21: 521. Jl. ‘05. 960w.

  “The importance of this little book is quite out of proportion to its
  size. He writes with evident honesty. It is a crystallized statement
  of much that had been in solution, as it were, heretofore; it makes us
  know where the majority of modern scientists stand with regard to the
  only matters that they themselves consider more important than science
  itself.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 816. Mr. ‘05. 1450w.

  “The argument is not of the strenuous sort; the words flow gently and
  naturally, as they expose the mellowed thought of a mature and
  reverent mind.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

       + =Dial.= 38: 87. F. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  “The brief pages of this lecture are of delightful literary charm and
  of great interest as indicating the trend of present thought on the
  subject of the future life.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1072. My. 11, ‘05. 260w.

       + =Reader.= 5: 786. My. ‘05. 210w.


=Osterhout, Winthrop John Van Leuven.= Experiments with plants; with a
preface by L. H. Bailey. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  In this convenient handbook “Professor Osterhout of the University of
  California has given us hints for the experimental study of
  living-plants by means of the very simplest apparatus ... and suggests
  innumerable contrivances which are to be made off-hand in any house,
  and with which the plant can be severely cross-examined.... It is one
  of the most helpful laboratory handbooks, and it deserves wide
  employment in all classes of plant-laboratories.” (Nation.)

  “On the whole we may commend it as one of the very best of its class,
  and in some respects in advance of any similar book known to us. An
  excellent index adds to its value.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 84. Jl. 15. 500w.

  “The book on the whole will be most valuable for teachers of botany in
  high schools.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 270. Ag. 3, ‘05. 110w.

  “The text is, for the greater part, extremely clear and interesting,
  and needed only rather better illustrations to come into the very
  first rank of attractive text-books.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 414. My. 25, ‘05. 240w.

  “In spite of some faults, the book will be found of value to anyone
  compelled to give a course of physiological botany under conditions
  which preclude the use of ordinary laboratory fittings.”

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 364. Ag. 17, ‘05. 460w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 538. Ag. 19, ‘05. 230w.


=Ottley, Rev. Robert Lawrence.= Religion of Israel: a historical sketch.
*$1. Macmillan.

  “The main strength of Canon Ottley’s contribution to the now
  voluminous literature on the subject lies in his able and earnest
  effort to harmonize modern theory with church tradition.... The
  chapters ... likely to be read with some special eagerness are those
  on ‘The primitive religion of the Semites,’ ‘The contact of Judaism
  with Hellenism,’ and ‘The final stage in pre-Christian Judaism.’”—Ath.

  “Those belonging to the author’s school of thought—and their number is
  very considerable—will, however, maintain that the good points of the
  book far outweigh its drawbacks. We are ourselves able to commend it
  as an earnest and serious contribution to a perplexing and deeply
  interesting problem.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 239. Ag. 19. 430w.

  “There is no work in English which tells in such brief compass the
  story of Israel’s faith from Moses to the Pharisees with such
  painstaking loyalty to establish fact.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 876. O. 12, ‘05. 310w.

  * “A compact, semi-popular account of the development of Hebrew
  religion, as understood by a cautious and moderate critic.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

  “It is well drawn and puts much into a small volume in clear as well
  as concise form.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 886. Ag. 5, ‘05. 130w.

  “The compiling is well done, and for a popular sketch of Old Testament
  theology we do not know of anything better.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 150w.

  “His exposition is in fact an admirable specimen of the higher
  criticism, exercised with discretion by one who is neither fettered by
  traditional beliefs, nor bent, as some of the critical school seem to
  be, on breaking with them altogether. We are not always in agreement
  with the conclusions reached.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 900. Je. 17, ‘05. 120w.


=Ottman, Rev. Ford C.= Unfolding of the ages in the Revelation of John.
**$2. Baker.

  Written in an expository style, conciliatory rather than
  controversial, this work upon Revelation throws a new light upon the
  symbolism of the book. The author accepts and advocates the theory
  that “everything from the fourth chapter to the end of the book is
  still future and will follow the removal of the church from the earth
  at the appearing of our Lord.”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 395. Je. 10, ‘05. 310w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 130w.


* Our best society. †$1.50. Putnam.

  “This story narrates the adventures among the rich, vain, and
  reasonably well-cultivated of New York of a young writer and his nice
  wife, and contains vivid and veracious pictures of the dinner party,
  the coaching party, the theatre party, and many other ‘social
  functions,’ glimpses of literary, artistic, and dramatic ‘sets,’ with
  a study of the manners of a mannerless age, and a hint or two of its
  morals.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “This is not a great novel, nor even a good one, but it counts
  because the author has caught the real levity of mannerism in that
  filmy world.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1151. N. 16, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Another book in which the comedy of contemporary American society
  is adroitly set forth and in a unhackneyed way.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 656. O. 7, ‘05. 180w.

  * “A certain skill and comprehension of the situation is evidently
  possessed by the anonymous author.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 429. O. 21, ‘05. 100w.


Our holidays; their meaning and spirit. *65c. Century.

  This group of stories belongs to the “Historical stories” retold from
  St. Nicholas. Beginning with All-hallow-eve, each holiday is taken up
  in turn, with both its historical and present day significance
  emphasized.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 761. N. 11, ‘05. 60w.


* =Outram, James.= In the heart of the Canadian Rockies. **$3.
Macmillan.

  “Mr. Outram has the remarkable record of nineteen ‘first ascents’ of
  peaks among the Canadian Rockies, including the highest mountain in
  Canada yet conquered by the mountaineer. He describes his experiences
  among these majestic peaks with the enthusiasm that might be expected
  of so experienced a mountain-climber.”—Outlook.

  * “Mr. Outram certainly has had some unusual adventures amid the
  Selkirks and Rockies, which he described with animation and a genuine
  command of professional terminology.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 485. D. 14, ‘05. 550w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 753. N. 4, ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 941. D. 16, ‘05. 50w.


=Overton, Gwendolen.= Captains of the world. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  The relations of labor and capital form the basis of this story in
  which appear “The young mechanic who becomes a leader of
  trades-unions; the lovely daughter of the plutocrat mill-owner, who
  cannot marry the Italian prince and fortune-hunter because the
  remembrance of the mechanic haunts her; the contrasted pictures of
  boundless wealth and the misery of the poor strikers and their
  families on the brink of starvation.” (Critic.)

  “There is nothing in this book that can be called original in matter
  or effective in manner.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 94. Ja. ‘05. 130w.

  “This underworld of labor among the iron furnaces, this moneyed
  aristocracy, so resentful of its origin, so tenacious of its position,
  are etched in with keenness and delicacy. Such books as this, with
  their sympathetic comprehension, absence of rancor or partisan bias,
  make for a better understanding and ultimate peace.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 624. Ap. ‘05. 520w.


* =Oxley, James MacDonald.= Family on wheels; adapted from the French by
J. M. Oxley. †75c. Crowell.

  Four interesting French children left orphans, with a mountebank’s
  wagon, an old horse, a trick dog and a remarkably clever elephant as
  their sole possessions, bravely continue the business of their father,
  and give little performances in one little provincial town after
  another to earn a scant living. They meet with many adventures and
  suffer many hardships, but in the end the happiness of all seems
  assured. The children are plucky little things thruout, the dog and
  the elephant are heroic, and the hearts of both young and old readers
  will go out to them all.

  * “An odd and attractive story.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 90w.

  * “A readable story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 895. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.

  * “A story, tender, humorous, pathetic, carrying the charm of the
  French from which it is adapted, and appealing to any child or adult
  interested in animals.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 576. N. 4, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 765. D. ‘05. 60w.




                                   P


=Page, Curtis Hidden=, ed. British poets of the nineteenth century. $2.
Sanborn.

  Selections from Wordsworth, Coleridge, Scott, Byron, Shelley, Keats,
  Landor, Tennyson, the Brownings, Clough, Arnold, Rossetti, Morris, and
  Swinburne. There are also classified “reference lists” indicating for
  each poet the various editions of his works, and all biographies and
  important essays.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 100w.

  “The selections are very full and for the most part complete poems.
  They are designed to give the best of each poet’s work and to give
  some representation of each important period and class of his work.
  Selected such poems as would be prescribed for a college student.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 11. Ja. 7, ‘05. 330w.


* =Page, Curtis Hidden,= ed. Chief American poets: selected poems by
Bryant, Poe, Emerson, Longfellow, Whittier, Holmes, Lowell, Whitman, and
Lanier. *$1.75. Houghton.

  “This volume, Mr. Page tells us, is in no sense an anthology ... it
  ‘attempts to give, for each one of the authors included, all the
  material needed to show his development and achievement, and to give a
  first knowledge of him as man and poet.’ The selection therefore, has
  been made very full, and includes many poems of considerable
  length.... The poems of each author are arranged in chronological
  order and dated. Brief biographical sketches present a summary of each
  author’s life, and there are notes and reference lists.”—Outlook.

  * “A book to be heartily commended for small home libraries.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 764. N. 11, ‘05. 150w.

  * “The whole work done with thorough intelligence and good taste.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 680. N. 18, ‘05. 120w.


=Page, Curtis Hidden=, ed. =See Rabelais, Francois.=


=Page, Thomas Nelson.= Negro: the southerner’s problem. **$1.25.
Scribner.

  “Mr. Page believes that there are only two possible ways to solve the
  negro question in the South—either the negro must be removed, or he
  must be elevated. Granted that the former method is out of the
  question, it only remains to improve him by education.... The old idea
  of educating the negro just as a white man is educated ... has been
  found to be fallacious. The kind of education that Mr. Page advocates
  for the negro is, in brief, just the kind that is given by such
  institutions as Tuskegee and Hampton.”—R. of Rs.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 343. Mr. ‘05. 240w.

  “A book the central interest of which is psychological rather than
  scientific.” W. E. Burghardt Du Bois.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 315. My. 1, ‘03. 1850w.

  “The book shows neither depth of thought nor thoroughness of research,
  but is chiefly notable as the portrayal of the well-known views of the
  less liberal leaders of the South with high authority and great
  literary skill.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 556. Mr. 9, ‘05. 860w.

  “We do not doubt his wish to deal candidly with his subject, but we
  are forced to the conclusion that he lacks the unbiased mind which
  would enable him to do so. His statements are too sweeping, and are
  not supported in all cases by the actual facts, as has, we believe,
  been shown.” Isabel Eaton.

       — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15 :518. Jl. ‘05. 2130w.

  “Mr. Page’s book is honest, kindly, and, barring a few extravagances,
  moderate.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 280. O. 5, ‘05. 1320w.

  “A temperate discussion of the race question from a southerner’s point
  of view.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 127. Ja. ‘05. 130w.


=Paget, Violet.= See =Lee, Vernon, pseud.=


* =Paine, Albert Bigelow.= Little garden calendar for boys and girls.
$1. Altemus.

  “A chatty and truthful account of many of the most interesting phases
  of plant-life. The subject of dispersal and its advantages, of
  movements, and of pollination and the like, are briefly and
  well-treated. The account of the servants which work for the flower is
  admirably presented.” (Nation.) “The book is arranged according to the
  calendar, and the illustrations are from photographs especially made
  for each chapter.” (Critic.)

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *       =Dial.= 39: 46. Jl. 16, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 190w.


=Paine, Albert Bigelow.= Thomas Nast. $5. Macmillan.

  This account of the life and times of “The father of the American
  cartoon,” illustrated with hundreds of his drawings, is virtually a
  political history of our country during the Civil war, and for twenty
  years after.

  “It is a story full of striking incident and human interest, skilfully
  unrolling the picturesque career of a genius who had within him the
  potentialities of an American Hogarth.” Chas. H. Levermore.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 907. Jl. ‘05. 740w.

  “In this life of Nast, Mr. Paine has evinced excellent judgment and
  wise discrimination; yet the work is characterized by that genuine
  sympathy that is one of the requisites of a good biography. It is a
  valuable work.”

     + + =Arena.= 33: 335. Mr. ‘05. 850w.

  “Mr. Paine’s book is an exceptionally good piece of work. He has not
  attempted a minute personal biography; he has given a series of
  striking pictures, which enable one to look over Nast’s shoulder, so
  to speak, and to study at close range some of the most stirring
  periods in the history of the nation and of New York city.” A. B.
  Maurice.

       + =Bookm.= 20: 458. Ja. ‘05. 2850w.

  “Paine has told of his life and described his struggles in a manner
  worthy of the subject.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 92. Ja. ‘05. 130w.

  “It covers the artist’s life in a thorough and interesting way, and is
  adequately illustrated.” Ingram A. Pyle.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 318. My. 1, ‘05. 1930w.

  “The author is an enthusiast, and must be followed in the light of his
  enthusiasm. In narrating the history of the caricaturist, he follows
  that of his own times, and in this way has made, for anyone who
  desires to understand the United States from 1860 to 1896, not only a
  very entertaining, but a very useful volume.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 141. F. 16, ‘05. 810w.

  “There is more history than biography in the attractive volume.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 248. F. ‘05. 130w.


=Palmer, A. Emerson.= New York public school. *$1. Macmillan.

  A history of free education in the city of New York, authorized by the
  board of education and written by its secretary. The book celebrates
  the centenary of the founding of the New York free school system and
  the proceeds are to go to the public school teachers’ retirement fund.
  The history of the free school society and of the public school
  society which succeeded it in 1826 are given, also an account of other
  schools, all of which were finally merged into the existing system.
  The story of the establishment and success of school libraries is told
  in detail. There are portraits, illustrations, and an introduction by
  Seth Low.

  “The book meets a distinct need.” Henry Davidson Sheldon.

       + =Dial.= 38: 270. Ap. 16, ‘05. 170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 148. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1730w. (Abstract of
         contents.)

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 511. Ap. ‘05. 80w.


=Palmer, Frederick.= With Kuroki in Manchuria. **$1.50. Scribner.

  The author, a newspaper correspondent of experience in Eastern
  campaigns, writes an account of his five months in the field. The book
  is dedicated to the Japanese infantry and their skill and readiness,
  and contrasted with the Russian war methods. The volume is illustrated
  by numerous photographs.

  “His entire book is vividly written, and will be found as informing as
  it is interesting in its accounts of the actual fighting.” W. Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 9. Ja. 1, ‘05. 460w.

  “It is fascinating, this collection of field letters. This truthful
  and vivid portrayal is delightful.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 14. Ja. 5, ‘05. 1630w.


=Palmer, William T.= English lakes. *$6. Macmillan.

  Fifteen English lakes “ranging from the lordly Windermere and
  Ullswater, ten and a half and nine miles long, respectively, to
  Loweswater and Rydalmere, which hardly exceed the larger tarns in
  area” are reproduced here. The seventy-five illustrations in color
  produce a panorama effect which is heightened by the descriptive
  matter of the text.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 911. S. 2, ‘05. 170w.

  “Mr. Palmer has written with taste and with commendable reserve in
  distinguishing between poetic feeling and sentimentalism.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 278. S. 30, ‘05. 150w.

  * “One finds a good deal of pleasure of a certain kind in turning over
  his pages, if also some irritation.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 759. N. 11, ‘05. 1260w.


=Paret, Jahlal Parmly.= Lawn tennis. **$2. Macmillan.

  This article, by the foremost American authority on the game, contains
  a history of tennis itself and of the leading players here and abroad.
  It gives technical instruction, from the first rudiments to the most
  advanced theories, and treats of the care of courts and management of
  tournaments. There is a chapter on lacrosse by William H. Madden. The
  volume is copiously illustrated.

  “This is one of the best-written and most scientific treatises on
  lawn-tennis that we have yet had, and forms a suitable companion to
  similar works by Mr. Eustace Miles, Mr. H. W. Wilberforce, and Mr. W.
  Baddeley.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 272. Ag. 26. 1050w.

  “Will be valuable to every player of the game.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1253. Je. 1, ‘05. 30w.

  “A treatise which will be heartily welcomed by all lovers of this
  healthy game.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 436. Mr. 9, ‘05. 280w.

  “Knows the conditions of play in this country and abroad equally well.
  While Mr. Paret’s statement that lawn tennis may be taught nearly as
  well by written instruction as by personal direction may be seriously
  questioned, his remarks on the strategy of the game and the physical
  training for big matches are full of common sense and instruction that
  apply equally well to other forms of exercise.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 84. F. 11, ‘05. 1110w. (Survey of contents.)

  “Mr. Paret who is an authority on tennis, treats of the past, present,
  and future of the sport.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 255. F. ‘05. 70w.


* =Parker, Edward Harper.= China and religion. **$3.50. Dutton.

  “This history of religion in China has the merit of being
  both critical and impartial.... The story of the imported
  religions—Christianity in various forms, Buddhism, Mohammedanism,
  Judaism—is sketched in successive chapters, and lastly Shintoism ...
  which the Japanese are now endeavoring to introduce.... Towards
  missionaries, of whom Americans now constitute the majority if only
  Protestants are counted, Professor Parker’s attitude is both
  respectful and critical, but full value is assigned to their medical,
  charitable, and educational work.”—Outlook.

  * “Prof. Parker’s book is a storehouse of learning; it is free from
  bigotry, and contains a fair and honest statement of what the
  relations of the Chinese have been and are towards foreign religions.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 603. N. 4, 920w.

  * “As the fruit of scholarly research pursued in a sympathetic spirit,
  this history, most timely for the present interest in the now
  beginning renaissance of China, should command the attention of those
  who would understand the past which it builds upon.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 680. N. 18, ‘05. 200w.


=Parmele, Mary Platt.= Short history of Russia. *$1. Scribner.

  A new edition of this history of a great power which brings the
  account down to June, 1904 and the siege of Port Arthur. It contains a
  good index and a list of the princes of Russia from Rurik to Nicholas
  II.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 240w.


* =Parrish, Randall.= Historic Illinois: the romance of the earlier
days. **$2. McClurg.

  Mr. Parrish’s hope has been to provide a readable, interesting history
  of Illinois, emphasizing the picturesque phases that would appeal to
  the reader in a popular sense. He has related the adventures of such
  men as La Salle, Henri de Tonty and George Rogers Clarke, depicted the
  struggles with the Indians, traced the history of old landmarks, and
  brought his narrative down to the coming of the railroad, concluding
  with a chapter on “Historic spots as they appear to-day.”


=Parrish, Randall.= Sword of the old frontier: a tale of Fort Chartres
and Detroit. †$1.50. McClurg.

  A “plain account of sundry adventures befalling Chevalier Raoul de
  Coubert, one time captain in the Hussars of Languedoc, during the year
  1763,” in which he gallantly draws his sword for France and his
  English lady-love in the stirring times of Pontiac’s conspiracy.
  Meeting with treachery from both white men and red, he takes desperate
  chances, escapes from his enemies and wins honor, wealth, and love.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 20w.


=Parsons, Ellen C.= Christus liberator. **30c. Macmillan.

  There have been four preceding volumes in this missionary text book
  series. “In this course an Introduction to the Study of Missions and
  Outline Studies of India, China and Japan have already been issued and
  studied.” This volume is an outline study of Africa. “Sir Harry
  Johnston furnishes an introductory sketch of the geography, races, and
  history of the Dark Continent, while the body of the book is devoted
  to an account of the rise and progress of Protestant missions in the
  several countries.”

  “Concise, well written and readable book.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 875. O. 12, ‘05. 450w.

  “It is necessarily cursory, but it is certainly comprehensive. The
  good example of the book remains even when the English student has
  noted such occasional lapses.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 325. O. 6, ‘05. 410w.

  “A useful handbook, containing much information in a compact and
  readable form.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 219. S. 14, ‘05. 130w.

  “We recommend these volumes as especially valuable for the members of
  Christian Endeavor societies, and for pastoral use by ministers
  endeavoring to awaken in their churches an intelligent interest in
  Christian missions.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 789. Jl. 22, ‘05. 220w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 435. S. 23, ‘05. 220w.


=Paston, George, pseud.= See =Symonds, E. M.=


=Pattee, Fred Lewis.= House of the black ring. $1.50. Holt.

  A story centred around a mysterious log cabin in a valley among the
  Seven mountains. The valley is owned by a tyrant squire and farmed by
  sturdy Pennsylvania Dutchmen. The squire’s daughter, the first to
  thwart her father’s will, falls in love with the son of a new-comer to
  the valley, whose business enterprise threatens the squire’s
  undisputed sway. There is hard feeling, and there is murder, but all
  is made clear by the discovery of a cave under the cabin, and in the
  happiness of the squire’s daughter the traditional curse of “the house
  of the black ring” is lifted.

  Reviewed by Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 600. Ag. ‘05. 230w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 251. Ap. 15, ‘05. 210w.

  “It is not from the literary side an artistic book, but it at least
  may be described as both readable and amusing.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 90w.


=Patterson, Charles Brodie.= Measure of a man. $1.20. Funk.

  An optimistic message of good will to all men, basing its cheer upon
  the supposition that in the great economy of the universe nothing is
  lost. Mr. Patterson discusses, in part 1, the “natural,” the
  “rational,” the “psychic,” and the “spiritual” man. In part II, he
  considers the Son of man “as man,” “as idealist,” “as teacher,” and
  “as healer,” in the last division giving the philosophy and therapy of
  mental healing.

  “It may be said to represent his ripest thought and to epitomize in a
  remarkably clear and comprehensible manner the philosophy, ethics and
  therapy contained in his preceding books.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 108. Jl. ‘05. 1320w.


=Paul, Herbert Woodfield.= History of modern England. 5v. ea. **$2.50.
Macmillan.

  This is a political history of England and its relations with the rest
  of the world, beginning with the last Whig government of 1846. Volumes
  1 and 2 bring the story down to the death of Lord Palmerston, Oct. 18,
  1865. Volume 3 deals with the eleven years following, covering
  important administrations of Gladstone and Disraeli, and closing on
  the eve of the crisis in the East, 1876.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 463. Ap. 29, ‘05. 1240w. (Review of Vol. III.)

  “It is clear, vigorous, and direct. Its movement is rapid, its
  interest seldom lags. It is preëminently readable, and, as a natural
  corollary, highly entertaining. His opinions and especially his
  estimates of character are often improbable, not infrequently absurd.
  This, as has been said, will probably remain the most serious
  criticism of a book in most other ways excellent. Such work as that of
  Mr. Paul may not be judged by the standards of final and definitive
  statement.” Wilbur C. Abbott.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 430. Ja. ‘05. 1810w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

  “On the whole, matters become of importance to the author when they
  rise above the political horizon, and too often not till then. Mr.
  Paul’s vigor seems unimpaired thus far ... his courage seems tempered
  somewhat more by discretion, and his politics diluted with somewhat
  more of those matters which find little place in Parliamentary debate
  or Times editorial.” Wilbur C. Abbott.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 161. O. ‘05. 860w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “Though written with the ability and impartiality of its predecessors,
  it is not so well proportioned.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 10. Jl. 1. 1050w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “There is no reason to suppose that Mr. Paul could not have done
  better work, had he chosen.” Edward Fuller.

     — — =Bookm.= 21: 608. Ag. ‘05. 840w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “Here, much more than in the earlier volumes, he offers valuable
  characterizations of activities and of men not wholly concerned with
  the purely political field.” E. D. Adams.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 90. Ag. 16, ‘05. 890w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “Generally speaking, he has impartiality and insight, and his survey
  of a group of historic facts, more especially of a social or religious
  movement, is often just and penetrating.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 39. Jl. 6, ‘05. 680w. (Review of v. 1-3.)

  “A most charming style. His book is exceedingly good reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 291. My. 6, ‘05. 900w. (Review of v. 3.)

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 883. D. 9, ‘05. 290w. (Review of v. 4.)

  “The third volume now at hand, exhibits the characteristics of its
  predecessors. The charmingly incisive, direct, easy, and epigrammatic
  style, the vivid informativeness, the detachment, the liberality of
  judgment which distinguished them are apparent. The treatment, too,
  remains the same, with all its virtues and its defects.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 880. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1980w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “On the whole, it is an invaluable political history of the past sixty
  years.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 509. O. ‘05. 120w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “We do not know where else to find so good a narrative of domestic
  politics from 1865 to 1876. If it is rarely deep, it is never dull; if
  it is occasionally bitter, it is almost always impartial.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 674. My. 6, ‘05. 1630w. (Review of v. 3.)


=Payne, William Morton,= ed. American literary criticism. See Wampum
library of American literature. v. 2.

  Peace congress. Official report of the thirteenth universal peace
  congress, held at Boston, Massachusetts, U. S. A., Oct. 3 to 8, 1904;
  reported by W: edited by the secretary of the congress. pa. n.p. Peace
  congress committee (B. F. Trueblood, sec’y), Boston.

  A stenographic report of the proceedings of the Universal peace
  congress, Oct. 3-8, 1904, including the addresses given in Boston and
  a brief résumé of the numerous successful and influential meetings
  held after its close in several cities. An account of the preceding
  peace congresses, not only of those held in the modern series
  beginning 1889, but also of the remarkable series of conferences held
  from 1843 to 1853 is prefixed.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 160. Mr. 11, ‘05. 100w.


=Peake, Elmore Elliott.= House of Hawley. †$1.50. Appleton.

  The story of a family in southern Illinois which had remained true to
  the Union, but was southern in all its traditions. The heroine has to
  contend against the whole connection and their prejudices in order to
  marry a young Republican lawyer. Her grandfather, Major Elias, head of
  the family, his quiet wife, and their lazy son are lifelike, their
  southern ways are well pictured; and descriptions of such things as a
  chase with blood hounds after a negro house-breaker, a negro barn
  dance, and an electioneering expedition with Chicago politicians, add
  greatly to the interest and the atmosphere of the book.

  “A careful picture of average life in a small town in southern
  Illinois, drawn with a loving accuracy of minor detail, and pleasantly
  aglow with local color, both physical and social. A skillful touch.
  There is a wholesome womanliness about Mr. Peake’s heroines that makes
  them seem very convincing. Most of the men, however, impress one as
  rather poor specimens of humanity.”

       + =Bookm.= 21: 181. Ap. ‘05. 410w.

  “The book fails of greatness because the plot is too slight and does
  not trouble the deep places that exist in the life of every town,
  however isolated; nor does it ruffle the soul of the reader.”

     — + =Ind.= 59: 392. Ag. 17, ‘05. 250w.

  “The interest of the book lies not in the story, but in descriptive
  passages. The story, if it shows no particular art or invention, it
  remains true that it is about the sort of thing which would have been
  likely to happen in the place where the author has chosen to plant
  it.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 141. Mr. 4, ‘05. 550w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 503. F. 25, ‘05. 110w.


=Pease, Edward R.= Case for municipal drink trade. P. S. King & son.

  “The argument for the municipalization of the liquor traffic is here
  set forth as follows: The system of licensing does not stand the tests
  of efficiency, consequently some drastic reform is called for; high
  license is incomplete and politically impracticable; local veto is
  wrong in principle and likely to be futile in practice;
  municipalization is the only other method suggested.”—J. Pol. Econ.

  Reviewed by I. W. Howerth.

     + + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 137. D. ‘04. 140w. (States argument of
         book.)


=Pease, George William.= Outline of a Bible-school curriculum. *$1.50.
Univ. of Chicago press.

  “Those who are interested in raising the standard of biblical
  instruction in this country will find ... many valuable suggestions.
  In this book there are outlines for reading and study courses for the
  kindergarten and primary grades, as well as for the junior,
  intermediate and senior departments.”—R. of Rs.

  “The most exhaustive study of this subject that has yet appeared.
  Predominantly from the psychological point of view, but with careful
  study also of the biblical side.”

   + + + =Bib. World.= 25: 160. F. ‘05. 30w.

  “This book will prove of great practical service to many Sunday-school
  teachers because it is specific, and should be suggestive to students
  of religious education because of its scope and detail. It is too
  timely not to be read now.” Richard Morse Hodge.

     + + =Bib. World.= 25: 376. My. ‘05. 880w.

  “Any one desirous of pursuing independent lessons with a class of any
  grade would find help in these outlines.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1012. My. 4, ‘05. 70w.

  “Its value lies rather in its application of an intelligent
  educational philosophy to a concrete and apparently practical scheme.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 144. Ja. 14, ‘05. 340w.

  “The book is fully in line with the principles and methods advocated
  by the Religious education association.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 254. F. ‘05. 80w.

  “The minute topical references will be of great help to any serious
  Sunday school teacher.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 653. O. ‘05. 60w.


* =Peck, Ellen Brainerd.= Songs by the sedges. $1. Badger, R: G.

  A little volume of verse which sings of old-fashioned gardens and
  fields, of rosemary and bitter-sweet, and of the minuet and the
  spinet. There is a time-long-ago atmosphere to many of the poems.


=Peck, Harry Thurston.= William Hickling Prescott. **75c. Macmillan.

  This study of Prescott gives an account of the historian’s life and
  personality and a criticism of his works. An opening chapter treats of
  “The New England historians,” then follow biographical chapters based
  largely upon the letters and memoranda contained in Ticknor’s “Life of
  Prescott,” and a discussion of Prescott’s work and its merits.

  “A volume seemingly of no distinctive merit.”

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 935. Jl. ‘05. 50w.

  “With the exception of his introductory chapter, Professor Peck has
  produced, it seems to me, an excellent biographical and critical
  account of ... the accomplished author of ‘The conquest of Mexico.’
  Here and there a careless sentence may be found as well as a trivial
  error or two.” W. P. Trent.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 382. Je. ‘05. 1260w.

  “It is of real interest for its discussion of the historical accuracy
  and permanent value of his works.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “Professor Peck writes of Prescott pleasantly and in his usual popular
  vein.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1128. My. 18, ‘05. 130w.

  “His view of Prescott strictly as a writer ... is concise, clear, and
  judicious. The introductory chapter, on the literary history of the
  country, is to say the least, eccentric.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 489. Je. 15, ‘05. 450w.

  “For the most part his narrative is plain pedestrian ‘copy’ quite
  lacking in the distinction which the author praises in the historian,
  equally lacking in ‘fire’ and the ‘intimate touch.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 322. My. 20, ‘05. 1420w.

  “Now and again Dr Peck allows an excess of enthusiasm to overpower his
  judgment, but, as a rule, he is discriminating.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 248. My. 27, ‘05. 260w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 94. Jl. 15, ‘05. 250w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 766. Je. ‘05. 150w.


=Peck, Theodora.= Hester of the Grants: a romance of Old Bennington.
†$1.50. Fox.

  Revolutionary times in the Green mountain state when it was a part of
  the so-called Hampshire Grants furnish the setting of this story whose
  incidents center mainly about Bennington. A real flesh and blood girl
  patriot, quite as daring as the usual historical novel heroine but a
  bit more winsome is the leading spirit, while a turn coat father, two
  despicable soldier lovers and one gallant one, General Stark, and
  Ethan and Ira Allen figure prominently.

  “A panorama of the times which deserves careful reading and much
  commendation.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1, ‘05. 160w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 395. Ag. 17, ‘05. 60w.

  “We are persuaded that she has it in her to write a book well worth
  the reading, which, despite its merits, ‘Hester of the Grants’ is
  not.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380. Je. 10, ‘05. 300w.

  “On the whole is a very good story of its kind.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 90w.

  “The author has opened one of the most dramatic pages in American
  history, and adorned it with a picture worthy of the text.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 359. Ag. ‘05. 310w.


=Peckham, George Williams, and Peckham, Elizabeth Gifford.= Wasps,
social and solitary; with an introd. by John Burroughs. **$1.50.
Houghton.

  Mr. Peckham and his wife have made a close study of the lives, habits,
  intelligence, and individuality of wasps, and they tell about their
  investigations in a way that is none the less instructive because it
  is interesting.

  “The book has good and vivid illustrations, but it would have been
  better if the actual size of the insects had been indicated in every
  case.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 743. Jl. 15, ‘05. 310w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 150. Jl. 29. 720w.

  “There is ‘a hidden wealth of thought and of austerity’ which makes
  the book a worthy contribution to science and a monument of patient
  and skillful research in a difficult field.” E. T. Brewster.

   + + + =Atlan.= 96: 687. N. ‘05. 600w.

  “While exceedingly pleasant reading, the book is in no sense ‘written
  down’ to its audience, nor popularized in the sense of being diluted
  to superficiality.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 480. N. ‘05. 170w.

  “The book is written so untechnically that a reader who does not know
  a wasp from a bee can understand and enjoy it.” May Estelle Cook.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 387. Je. 1, ‘05. 590w.

  “The charm of the book is in the directness with which the story is
  told, and in the obvious sympathy manifested by the authors with the
  struggles and aims of the active little nest-makers. While the book is
  engagingly written, it is also scientifically accurate.”

   + + + =Nation= 80: 444. Je. 1, ‘05. 680w.

  “Important work on the manners and customs of North American wasps.”
  W. F. K.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 395. Ag. 24, ‘05. 160w.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 219. Ap. 8, ‘05. 840w. (Abstract of book.)

  “An outdoor book as entertaining as it is instructive.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 196. My. 20, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 867. Je. 3, ‘05. 140w.

  “This book reminds one of Fabre’s work. It is not so well written, but
  its information is quite as curious and close as Fabre’s, and we
  should say as trustworthy.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 10. O. 14, ‘05. 150w.

  “There is much detail which, however valuable in itself from the
  scientific point of view, overwhelms the ‘general reader.’ This
  individual may be forgiven for wishing that the authors would
  sometimes give him more generalization or summaries of their
  observations.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 697. N. 4, ‘05. 310w.


=Peel, George.= Friends of England. *$3.50. Dutton.

  Mr. Peel establishes, elucidates, and illustrates two large
  propositions in this companion volume to his “Enemies of England”:
  first, that England built up her empire beyond the seas thru the
  necessity of defence, and not by accident nor by deliberate motives of
  expansion; second, the same European pressure from without is the
  chief cause of the maintenance of the empire.

  “Mr. Peel is no pedant, no formalist, no Dryasdust. Intensely
  interested in his subject, he writes of it with animation; eager to
  convince, though not with the sophist’s eagerness, he is precise
  whether right or wrong and at all times clear.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 270. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1420w.

  “The subjects with which Mr. Peel deals are of the deepest interest,
  and he shows wide reading on every page.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 335. Mr. 18. 660w.

  “There is enough truth and enough originality in his interpretation of
  the Empire to have made his book an extraordinary one, if only he had
  not allowed this enthusiasm to get the better of his judgment. It
  brings out a phase of imperial politics too much neglected by past
  writers.” Frederic Austin Ogg.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 88. Ag. 16, ‘05. 1930w.

  “The whole book is worth reading as a sober and well-informed
  discussion of the great questions of world politics with which it
  deals.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 328. My. 20, ‘05. 670w.

  “A well-written work, Mr. Peel’s book is of value as developing a
  theory which, if acceptable only with obvious limitations, will assist
  to a clearer appreciation of some broad historical movements than has
  generally obtained.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 275. S. 30, ‘05. 1930w.

  “The tale told is fragmentary and unconvincing, and has been better
  told before.”

   — — + =Sat. R.= 100: 21. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1510w.

  “Mr. Peel has the sense of organic movement without which history is
  merely a dull chronicle of accidents; and he has also the gift of wide
  perspective. Our only criticism is that in his endeavour to be
  perfectly clear he sometimes is a little prolix, and that now and then
  he is carried by rhetoric into a slight overstatement. The matter is
  on the whole admirably arranged and attractively presented.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 439. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1780w.


=Peet, Louis Harman.= Trees and shrubs of Central park. $2. Manhattan
press.

  Mr. Peet says: “The purpose of this book is to put within the reach of
  the non-technical city nature lover a handy means of identifying trees
  and shrubs which he meets in his park rambles.” On sixteen maps
  covering the park, two thousand trees and shrubs have been plotted; a
  table accompanying the maps gives both the common and botanical names.
  There is also an index to the common names, wherein the number of the
  page, chapter, map and location is placed for quick reference.

 *   + + =Critic.= 47: 480. N. ‘05. 90w.

         =Nation.= 80: 132. F. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “We cannot too much commend the fullness and accuracy of the lists
  which Mr. Peet here gives us.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 381. My. 11, ‘05. 430w.

  “It is not only a description of the trees, but is a real guide and
  companion, pointing out that which it describes in a manner that is
  wholly comprehensible to the reader. The text is lucid and readable.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 212. Ap. 8, ‘05. 420w.

  * “In every particular it is a handy and useful little volume.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 80w.


=Pemberton, Max.= Hundred days. †$1.50. Appleton.

  Napoleon’s hundred days between Elba and Waterloo form the setting of
  this historical novel which exploits the adventures of a young
  Englishman and a French maid in the secret service of Napoleon. “Mr.
  Pemberton has borrowed the very lady who appears in Mr. Bernard Shaw’s
  ‘Man of destiny’—Mr. Shaw himself borrowed the lady from more or less
  authentic history—and provided her with adventures enough to fill the
  usual number of pages which, outwardly, at least, constitute a novel.”
  (N. Y. Times.)

  “It is a stirring tale, and the characterization is skillful.
  Occasionally the author’s style fails him.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 432. S. 30. 290w.

  “The story offers the conventional blend of fact and romantic fiction,
  is narrated in somewhat indistinct fashion, and proves but moderately
  exciting.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 208. O. 1, ‘05. 100w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 621. S. 23, ‘05. 250w.

  “The story is stirring and the tale is picturesquely told; the plot is
  hackneyed.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 279. S. 30, ‘05. 60w.


=Pepys, Sir William Weller.= Later Pepys; ed. with introd., by Alice C.
C. Gaussen. 2v. *$7.50. Lane.

  “The letters included in these two handsomely bound and finely
  illustrated volumes have been selected from the correspondence of Sir
  William Pepys between the years 1758 and 1825. Sir William Pepys was a
  descendant of the elder branch of the family to which Samuel Pepys
  belonged, and was generally well-known in the latter part of the
  eighteenth century as a friend, and in some cases the intimate, of
  distinguished literary characters of the period. His letters are
  therefore primarily of literary interest, very little reference being
  made in them to ordinary political or social conditions of the times,
  even the stirring events of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars
  receiving but scant notice.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “The only direct historical interest is in the occasional references
  to contemporary historical writers and criticisms upon them. They
  frequently do present some striking incident, or some intimate
  characterization of figures in the field of contemporaneous
  literature. In this connection alone are they valuable for the student
  of history.” E. D. Adams.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 688. Ap. ‘05. 210w.

  “Sir William’s letters, though sometimes dull and prosy, often catch
  something of the vivacity of his correspondents, and those to his son
  in school and college are delightful.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 92. Ja. ‘05. 150w.


=Perkin, Frederick Mollwo.= Practical methods of electrochemistry.
*$1.60. Longmans.

  “After a general account of electrical magnitudes and units, measuring
  instruments, and electrolytic apparatus, the author gives practical
  instructions for electrochemical analysis.... The last and longest
  section of the book deals with preparative electrochemistry.... The
  references to original papers are numerous, and a convenient table of
  five-figure logarithms, with instructions for its use, is contained in
  an appendix.”—Nature.

  “The practical instructions are on the whole adequate and accurate, so
  that the student could acquire with little assistance a sufficient
  acquaintance with the working methods of electrochemistry. Whilst the
  book is satisfactory in this the most important feature, it shows in
  other respects many signs of hasty composition, which greatly detract
  from its value.”

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 5. My. 4, ‘05. 530w.


=Perrin, Raymond St. James.= Evolution of knowledge. *$1.50. Baker.

  In his review of philosophy the author compares the chief systems of
  ancient and modern thought, “the object being to measure the approach
  of each system to the goal of philosophy which is the demonstration of
  the unity of all things ... to demonstrate the fact that knowledge can
  be unified by co-ordinating the sciences.” Pt. I. deals with the
  pre-evolution period of Greece, England, Scotland, Germany and France;
  pt. II. discusses the evolutionary philosophy of Spencer and Lewes.
  The keynote of the treatment is that religious devotion and
  intelligence must develop together.

         =Ath.= 1905, 2: 269. Ag. 26. 80w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 140w.

  “In the demonstration of his thesis the author enters such a labyrinth
  of the metaphysical and mystical that we altogether refuse his lead.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Interesting, if not quite fascinating.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 697. N. 4, ‘05. 320w.


=Perris, George Herbert.= Russia in revolution. **$3. Brentano’s.

  “Mr. Perris’s volume on ‘Russia in revolution’ is a sketch of the
  Russian revolutionary movement from about 1870 down to the present
  time. It consists chiefly of a series of short biographies of the
  principal leaders of the Liberal movement, together with a few
  chapters on the Russian government, and on the financial and economic
  conditions of the country.... The subject, however, is an interesting
  one, and the personal sketches and life stories of Stepniak,
  Volkhovsky, Dr. Soskice, Mark Broido, Mme. Kovalsky, and numbers of
  other revolutionists, often recounted in their own words, are
  significant and thrilling.”—Lond. Times.

  “Is lively and interesting, but somewhat open to the charge that he
  fails to name a good many of his sources and some of his equally
  interesting rivals. Mr. Perris takes pains and knows his subject.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 590. My. 13. 180w.

  “It cannot be said that the author has anything very new to tell us,
  and most of his information has been obtained at second-hand. He sees
  Russia only from the point of view of the extremists.”

     — + =Lond. Times.= 4: 176. Je. 9, ‘05. 520w.

  “These quotations will serve to show M. Perris’s sincere effort to be
  fair and impartial, but the same paragraph furnishes two other
  quotations which equally well illustrate his defective vision in
  consequence of his prejudice against nearly everything in Russia in
  its present form.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 504. Je. 22, ‘05. 1740w.

  “The chief value of this book, however, lies in the personal (and
  frequently pitiful) records and brief autobiographies of the martyrs
  in the cause of Russian political liberty, and also in the
  miscellaneous data on topics which are not contained in Russian
  government reports.” Wolf von Schierbrand.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 386. Je. 17, ‘05. 940w.

  “No doubt the book is put together in an easy, entertaining fashion.
  Although from a non-revolutionary standpoint most of its deductions
  are untenable, the chapters touching upon the economic and political
  condition of the country are not without value and interest.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 121. Jl. 22, ‘05. 520w.

  “In arrangement it is not free from defects, particularly from a
  tendency to retraverse the same or similar ground; but this drawback
  is connected with what is perhaps Mr. Perris’s most distinctive claim
  on the attention of his readers,—his extensive and intimate
  acquaintance with Russian revolutionists, over a long period.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 321. S. 2, ‘05. 1880w.


=Perry, Bliss.= Amateur spirit. **$1.25. Houghton.

  Six essays in which the author commends “combining the professional’s
  skill with the zest and enthusiasm of the amateur.” There are two
  chapters on the college professor, and one entitled “Hawthorne at
  North Adams.”

  “There is a flavour of this conscious condescension in these essays,
  and it takes away from the charm which they possess in spite of it,
  charm both of phrase and anecdote. The ideas are not very subtle; nor
  have they any marked freshness; but to the main idea we heartily
  respond. Mr. Perry is not precise enough; he does not know that
  different things in life should be approached in a different spirit.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 332. Mr. 25, ‘05. 670w.

  “In spite of what we have just said, the quality of the best of the
  contemporary American essayists is rare; and outside Mr. Howells and
  Mr. Alden we know no one who possesses greater gifts of taste and
  style than Mr. Bliss Perry.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 558. My. 6. 720w.

  * “No one wants to hear the crack of a whip in these leisurely papers,
  but there might be a little more mental activity without any sign of
  the strain.” F. M. Colby.

     + — =Bookm.= 20: 473. Ja. ‘05. 880w.

  “To apply to him words of his own, he is one of the ‘speculative,
  amused, undeluded children of this world.’ Sanity, balance,
  kindliness, unite with insight and imagination to give his pages their
  peculiar charm.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 93. F. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “The curious thing about Mr. Perry’s plea for The amateur spirit is
  that it should seem to slight so glaringly the virtue of the mean.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 383. F. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  “All the six essays in the volume have some reference to the working
  of the amateur spirit in the world.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 138. F. 16, ‘05. 940w. (Survey of contents.)

  “The six essays in this volume are very pleasing examples of what
  American writers can do in this branch of literature.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 925. Je. 24, ‘05. 290w.


=Peters, John Punnett.= Early Hebrew story: its historical background.
**$1.25. Putnam.

  “The substance of the book was delivered as lectures on the Bond
  foundation at Bangor theological seminary in November, 1903.... In
  chap. 1, ‘Introductory: literary and archæological,’ the author gives
  a simple, yet clear, sketch of his conception of the literary origin
  of the early books of the Bible, and a general view of the history of
  Palestine before the Israelitish occupation.... In chap. 2, ‘The
  formation of Israel: The origin of the twelve tribes,’ the view that a
  group of Aramean tribes settled among and absorbed tribes already
  resident in Canaan is worked out with considerable detail. In chap. 3,
  ‘The patriarchs and the shrines of Israel,’ it is pointed out that the
  stories of the patriarchs cluster about certain shrines.... In chap.
  4, ‘Survivals—legendary and mythical.’ Dr. Peters gathers together a
  considerable residuum of material, which remains after one has
  subtracted from the patriarchal stories the elements representing
  tribal movements and sanctuary traditions, and in which survivals of
  myths or legends are probably to be found. Chap. 5, ‘Cosmogony and
  primeval history,’ deals with Gen., chaps. 1-11, which is analyzed
  into its various elements.... Chap. 6, ‘The moral value of early
  Hebrew story,’ forms a fitting climax to the whole.”—Bib. World.

  “The book is written for the ordinary reader of the Bible, is
  unencumbered by erudite notes, is written in a clear and attractive
  style, and can be strongly recommended to the untechnical reader, who
  desires to learn how critical study affects the early books of the
  Bible. The book throughout bears evidence of wide reading. The marvel
  is that in such a work, where evidence is often scanty and much has to
  be supplied from analogies often remote, one finds so little from
  which to dissent. The work merits high praise and deserves a wide
  recognition.” George A. Barton.

     + + =Bib. World.= 25: 313. Ap. ‘05. 790w.

  “The book is uncommonly readable.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 191. Ag. ‘05. 90w.

  “We can very heartily recommend the book. It is thoroughly readable,
  pre-eminently scholarly and entirely trustworthy; it is replete with
  valuable archæological knowledge; it has all the marks of an
  accomplished exegete, and its conclusions are in harmony with those of
  many able scholars of the present day.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 841. Ap. 13, ‘05. 760w.

  * “Wealth of archaeological information lends special value to Dr.
  Peters’ scholarly ‘Early Hebrew story.’”

       + =Ind.= 50: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.


* =Peters, Madison Clinton.= Jews in America: a short story of their
part in the building of the republic; commemorating the 250th
anniversary of their settlement. $1. Winston.

  The author has prepared this volume for popular use and states in his
  preface: “It is a book of facts rather than opinions.... The book is
  written with the hope that it may modify the views which the Gentile
  world holds with regard to the position of the Jew, and the author’s
  fervent prayer is that its facts may lead Christians to grant to the
  possession of the Jew the mental, moral, social and spiritual
  qualifications which history affirms.” To this end he has set forth
  facts culled from various sources showing the part which the Jew
  played in the discovery of America, in pre-revolutionary settlements,
  in the wars of the republic, American politics, finance, arts and
  sciences. There are also chapters upon The number of Jews in the
  United States, Characteristics of the Jews, and Anti-Semitism in
  America. The volume is illustrated with photographs of Jews prominent
  in various professions.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 762. N. 11, ‘05. 330w.


* =Peters, Madison Clinton.= Will the coming man marry? and other
studies on the problem of home and marriage. $1. Winston.

  Under such titles as: How to be happy though married; Why so many
  divorces? The ideal wife; The duties of a husband; Money and
  matrimony; The culture of the child; The home and the higher education
  of women; Woman’s rights; and Good mothers the makers of great
  nations, Dr. Peters emphasizes the serious side of matrimony, gives
  good advice to both husband and wife, and discusses education,
  deplores modern extravagance, and makes many suggestions, which, if
  followed, will help to make daily life easier and more worth while to
  both the married and the unmarried.


=Peterson, Maude Gridley.= How to know wild fruits: a guide to plants
when not in flower, by means of fruit and leaf; il. by Mary Elizabeth
Herbert. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  “We have examined every one of the 80 woodcuts in this volume, and
  must pronounce them correct and helpful ... while descriptions of
  three hundred fruit-bearing plants are careful and scientific enough,
  and a key will send the botanist to the order and species, the plants
  are arranged for the use of the casual student by the color of their
  fruits.”—Ind.

  * “This study opens to amateurs a new and comparatively unfamiliar
  field and one in which the writers of botanical handbooks have
  heretofore made few contributions.”

       + =Country Cal.= 1: 492. S. ‘05. 70w.

  “It meets a want, and we are glad to recommend it as a useful guide.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1256. Je. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “As a help to the beginner and a means of stimulating observation it
  may be commended. It is well got up, remarkably free from misprints,
  appropriately illustrated, and provided with an index of vernacular
  names and one of the Latin designations of the plants described.”

     + + =Nature.= 72: 428. Ag. 31, ‘05. 450w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 370. Je. 10, ‘05. 220w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 444. Je. 17, ‘05. 20w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 110w.

         =Spec.= 94: 948. Je. 24, ‘05. 120w.


=Petrie, William Matthew Flinders.= History of Egypt from the XIXth to
the XXXth dynasties. (History of Egypt, v. 3.) *$2.25. Scribner.

  “This is not a work on manners and customs or religion, but is purely
  history, very largely original and representing the author’s own
  researches and conclusions.... The period covered in this volume
  extends from the beginning of the nineteenth dynasty, about 1300 B.
  C., the most brilliant period in Egyptian history, to 342 B. C., when
  the last native king of the thirtieth dynasty lost the throne, and the
  rule passed over to the Persian Ochus. This period is illustrated by
  161 pictures of monuments, mainly halftones, with all the known
  cartouches.... When we remember that the period treated covers the
  entire relation of Israel to Egypt, from Abraham to Jeremiah, the
  value of the volume to biblical students is obvious.”—Ind.

  “His English is still slipshod. The lists of the monuments of every
  king, with provenance and abiding place, that he gives will be
  extremely useful to students; and for the care and pains that he has
  bestowed on their compilation all Egyptologists should be grateful.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 434. S. 30. 760w.

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 933. O. 19, ‘05. 220w.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 654. O. 7, ‘05. 720w.

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 334. O. 7, ‘05. 120w.

  “We may not always assent to his conclusions and combinations, but the
  archæological facts on which they are founded are stated without
  omission or bias, and the conclusions themselves are often brilliant,
  usually ingenious and always stimulating.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 343. S. 9, ‘05. 1100w.


=Pettit, Henry.= Twentieth-century idealist. †$1.50. Grafton press.

  “The heroine, who ‘loves and seeks the truth for its own sake,’ is a
  young and charming girl. She has her own ideas of the ‘true’ faith,
  and tells them to those who argue with her. Adele Cultus, her parents,
  and her friend, join two gentlemen in a trip to the Orient. Paul
  Warder falls in love with the heroine. Together they visit the many
  interesting places, and finally come to understand each other very
  well.”—N. Y. Times.

  “This novel ... is probably an attempt to write biography in the form
  of fiction. It is an introspective, retrospective, meditative,
  idealistic tale.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 317. My. 13, ‘05. 240w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 120w.


=Peyton, William Wynne.= Three greatest forces in the world, and the
making of Western civilization, pt. I, The incarnation. *$1.40.
Macmillan.

  “This trinity of forces is constituted, says the author, by the
  Incarnation, the Crucifixion, and the Resurrection.... In the present
  volume, limited to the first of the triad, he insists at length on the
  extension of virgin generation from the lower creation, as in bees, to
  the higher creation, as in the virgin birth of Christ.”—Outlook.

  “While the author is a man of considerable originality and
  independence of thought he is too much lacking in critical judgment
  and too fond of large sounding generalities to make his work of
  value.”

     — + =Ind.= 59: 152. Jl. 20, ‘05. 80w.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 346. Je. 3, ‘05. 160w.


=Pfleiderer, Otto.= Early Christian conception of Christ; its
significance and value in the history of religion. *$1.25. Putnam.

  “An expansion of a lecture delivered by the author before the
  International theological congress at Amsterdam, in September,
  1903.... The book has been divided into five chapters—‘Christ as son
  of God,’ ‘Christ as conqueror of Satan,’ ‘Christ as a wonder-worker,’
  ‘Christ as the conqueror of death and the life-giver,’ ‘Christ as the
  king of kings and lord of lords.’”—N. Y. Times.

 *       =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 773. O. ‘05. 620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 182. Mr. 25, ‘05. 320w.

         =Spec.= 94: 750. My. 20, ‘05. 410w.


* =Phelps, Albert.= Louisiana; a record of expansion. **$1.10. Houghton.

  “It has been Mr. Phelps’s effort in this latest addition to the
  ‘American commonwealths’ series to give a broad survey setting forth
  Louisiana and its place in the development of the United States.”
  (Outlook). “The fortunes of Louisiana under French and Spanish rule
  are described in the first half of the volume, and its history as part
  of the United States forms the second half of the volume.” (N. Y.
  Times.)

  * “While the specialist may not find much that is new in this work, it
  has for the general reader the advantage of being based upon the
  sources, and is not a mere compilation.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 760. N. 11, ‘05. 350w.

  * “From the narrative standpoint little fault is to be found, the
  style being graceful and flowing and the interest unfailingly
  sustained.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 682. N. 18, ‘05. 170w.


=Phelps, Charles Edward Davis.= Accolade. †$1.50. Lippincott.

  In this story of the fourteenth century “the hero, son of a worthy
  Englishman, being kidnapped into France by a ship’s captain, betakes
  himself to Italy, wins a knighthood through gallantry, and returns to
  his native England with wealth and honor just in time to prevent his
  sweetheart from entering a convent for lack of him. The poets are
  reverenced in the persons of Chaucer and Petrarch, and it is from a
  careful study of the writings of the former that the rather difficult
  and multifarious dialects of Mr. Phelps’s book are constructed.... The
  rudeness of the England of the period and the refinement of Italy
  serve as foils, each for the other, and the whole tale is in the
  nature of a treasure house for the student of customs.” (Dial.)

  “The book shows the most careful study and great painstaking, and
  abounds in varied adventure.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 393. Je. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  “It cannot be said that the mantle of the old storyteller has
  descended upon the modern.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 356. Je. 3, ‘05. 320w.

  “At times the Chaucerian English in the sprightly conversations daunts
  even the conqueror of polyglot dialect, but the real interest of the
  tale carries him safely through to the satisfactory final scenes.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 137. My. 13, ‘05. 90w.


* =Philippi, Adolf.= Florence; tr. from the German by P. G. Konody.
*$1.50. Scribner.

  “In commendably brief space the author gives us a comprehensive survey
  of Florentine history, the part played by all its leading citizens
  both in politics, literature, and art, the origin of all its important
  buildings, with extensive architectural notes about them and excellent
  illustrations of its churches, palaces, groups of sculpture,
  altar-pieces, frescoes, and noteworthy details.” (Nation.) There are
  170 illustrations. The lives of the Florentine painters and
  descriptions of their principal works are also given making the volume
  a good supplementary guide book for the artistic traveler.

  * “The book suffers from being crudely translated from the German.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 430. N. 23, ‘05. 510w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 874. D. 9, ‘05. 130w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 576. N. 4, ‘05. 30w.


=Phillips, David Graham.= Deluge. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  The hero of Mr. Graham’s story is as intrepid in love as in battling
  against Wall street magnates. Simply stated, he is a man who won’t be
  downed,—in the world of finance when a power rises against him he
  hunts for a tiger to fight the bull, and in the battle with giants,
  makes his escape; as for his romance, he quietly determines to marry a
  girl in a social world above him, carries his point, and then proceeds
  to win her love.

  * “As usual, he has written a readable story, but its extravagance
  deprives it of any claim to be taken seriously.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 90w.

  “If the author, as one must infer, intended that we should admire
  Blacklock, he is likely to be disappointed.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 633. N. 11, ‘05. 260w.

 *     — =R. of Rs.= 32: 757. D. ‘05, 60w.


=Phillips, David Graham.= Plum tree. $1.50. Bobbs.

  A story of the tree of political plums. A young country lawyer is
  driven by poverty to accept an assemblyman’s salary from the hands of
  a “boss,” and when his conscience forces him to vote against a bad
  bill he is thrown out of office. He becomes a reform county
  prosecutor, but fails in re-election and accepts a position as lawyer
  for the power company which he had been actively fighting. He makes a
  rich but loveless marriage, becomes a United States senator, and in
  the end, looking back upon the seething furnace of corruption thru
  which he has passed, finds comfort in the love of the girl he had
  renounced in his days of poverty.

  “It is in our judgment far and away the most important novel of recent
  years, because it unmasks present political conditions in a manner so
  graphic, so convincing and so compelling that it cannot fail to arouse
  the thoughtful to the deadly peril which confronts our people.”

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 663. Je. ‘05. 6180w.

  “This novel is definitely better than its predecessors, even though
  its author has not even yet progressed very far in the art of
  portraying women.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 80w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 294. My. 6, ‘05. 760w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 858. Ap. 1, ‘05. 150w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 676. Ap. 29, ‘05. 320w.


* =Phillips, David Graham.= Reign of gilt. **$1. Pott.

  “This work consists of a series of brilliant essays dealing with the
  overshadowing questions of the hour—Plutocracy and Democracy. The
  first half of the volume deals with plutocracy.... Such subjects as
  Plutocracy at home, Youth among the money-maniacs, Caste-compellers,
  Pauper-making, The made-over White house, and Europe laughs, are
  discussed.... The second half of the volume is entitled ‘Democracy.’
  In this division Mr. Phillips considers such subjects as The compeller
  of equality, Democracy’s dynamo, A nation of dreamers, Not generosity,
  but justice, The inevitable ideal, Our allies from abroad, The real
  American woman, and The man of to-day and to-morrow.”—Arena.

  * “Therefore, we say that he who loves the republic should buy, read
  and circulate ‘The reign of gilt.’ The more such books are circulated,
  the more certainly and swiftly will come the democratic reaction for
  which we are all striving.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 661. D. ‘05. 1610w.

  * “It is a most vital subject, and one upon which Mr. Phillips speaks
  earnestly and with an iteration almost Rooseveltian.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.


=Phillips, David Graham.= Social secretary. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  The delightful story of the daughter of an old Washington family, who
  undertakes to carry a western senator’s wife to the top of the
  official-social wave, and succeeds. Incidentally she is rewarded for
  her service by a large salary and—something more. The various types of
  people found in the struggle for social and political supremacy at the
  national capital are well and amusingly drawn.

  * “It is not up to the level Mr. Phillips has maintained in his latest
  works.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 664. D. ‘05. 740w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1482. D. 21, ‘05. 160w.

  “Mr. Phillips’s airy tale is a fascinating one, and, perhaps, if one
  looks closely, he may find beneath the daintily flavored meringue some
  food for thought.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 650. O. 7, ‘05. 270w.

  * “Besides the froth there is some really admirable character drawing
  in the story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 130w.

  “The story is distinctly clever and humorous.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 529. O. 28, ‘05. 150w.


=Phillips, E. C.= See =Looker, Mrs. Horace B.=


=Phillips, Henry Wallace.= Plain Mary Smith: a romance of Red Saunders.
†$1.50. Century.

  Red Saunders’ first appearance as the principal figure in a long story
  will delight readers who have known his sturdy traits and original
  humor in short story fiction. Not being able to stand up under the
  indignities heaped upon him by a father who “felt some scornful toward
  the Almighty for such a weak and frivolous institution as Heaven,” the
  lad when eighteen runs away to sea; and on board the Matilda bound for
  Panama, he meets Plain Mary Smith—plain only in name. How he enters
  into her romance only as the champion of the real lover, and how he
  fights Panamans at the close of a lively revolution with quart cans of
  tomatoes are phases of a humorously interesting tale.

  “Adventures follow one another swiftly, and Red Saunders relates them
  all with wit and vigorous bad grammar.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 429. O. 21, ‘05. 90w.

  “In the relation of the narrative there is much of the humorous
  whimsicality of subject and style which has distinguished Mr.
  Phillips’s shorter stories. Yet there is also a regrettable thinness.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 633. N. 11, ‘05. 250w.


=Phillips, Stephen.= Sin of David. **$1.25. Macmillan.

  This three act drama, is not biblical, altho it is founded on an
  action analogous to that of David to Uriah, the Hittite. The play
  opens in the army of Cromwell and proceeds during the course of the
  English civil war. It is the story of the love of Sir Hubert Lisle for
  the wife of a Puritan captain, the crime which made their marriage
  possible, and their punishment.

  “It is, however, creditable accomplishment, and up to the level of Mr.
  Phillips’s previous work.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 155. F. 4. 840w.

  “‘The sin of David’ is even cleverer than ‘Herod’ and ‘Ulysses’ in its
  superficial dramatic quality, its superficial poetry. But the true
  dramatic fire is not in it.” Ferris Greenslet.

   + + — =Atlan.= 96: 422. S. ‘05. 140w.

  “To one who has read all four plays of Mr. Phillips it appears
  unhappily evident that The sin of David is inferior in movement to
  Ulysses, even as this must rank below Herod, nor is it equal in pathos
  to Paolo and Francesca. There are passages in the play which would
  drag in presentation.” Louis H. Gray.

   + + — =Bookm.= 20: 554. F. ‘05. 970w.

  “Has the fine literary qualities we associate with the name of the
  author. But as an acting play it can have at best a success of esteem,
  for while there are some strong and moving scenes in it, the general
  air is of the closet rather than the stage.” J. B. G.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 91. Ja. ‘05. 710w.

  “The verse is dignified and filled with a haunting melodious charm.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 47. Ja. 16, ‘05. 440w.

 *   + — =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 110w.

  “A play better calculated to ‘place’ him critically than any of its
  predecessors. The chief impression made by it is that it is the
  product of a moderate poetic faculty guided by an industrious and
  self-poised intelligence.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 72. Ja. 26, ‘05. 590w.

  “As a play it ranks lowest in the four plays Mr. Phillips has written;
  this position it maintains as a poem. The work is deftly knitted
  together; it has beauty of form, if not many beauties of line; but it
  has no great situations.”

     + — =Reader.= 5: 382. F. ‘05. 560w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 251. F. ‘05. 40w.


=Phillips, Thomas W.= Church of Christ, by a layman. *$1. Funk.

  This volume is the result of a layman’s investigation of religious
  truth from heathen, Jewish and Christian standpoints. Under two
  general divisions, The history of pardon, and Evidence of pardon and
  the church as an organization, it makes a plea for unity, sets forth
  the original phases of Christianity, reviews all cases of pardon in
  the New Testament, and compares Jesus with other religious teachers.

  * “The author sketches the history of Christianity with all the
  assurance of ignorance and then with equal assurance expounds his own
  theological views.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 1259. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 836. Jl. 29, ‘05. 250w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 512. O. ‘05. 80w.


=Phillpotts, Eden.= The farm of the dagger. $1.50. Dodd.

  A story of a family feud in Dartmoor, early in the nineteenth century.
  The hero is an English gentleman, and a captured American plays an
  important role in the exciting tale, which ends in the sacrifice of
  the parents and the happy union of the lovers.

  Reviewed by W. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 17. Ja. 1, ‘05. 120w.


=Phillpotts, Eden.= Knock at a venture. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  Sketches of Dartmoor men and women told largely in dialect. There is
  grim humor and homely tragedy, there are three cornered love affairs
  and affairs with more corners, there are old men and young, but all
  are real. The stories include, The mound by the way, The crossways;
  Corban; A pickaxe and a spade; and Benjamin’s mess.

         =Acad.= 68: 906. S. 2, ‘05. 310w.

  “Mr. Phillpotts writes always picturesquely, and often with surprising
  vividness.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 368. S. 16. 370w.

  “Written in a light vein for the most part, yet laden also with a
  certain quaint and primitive philosophy.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 22: 234. N. ‘05. 470w.

  “He knows his people and presents them to us with truth and vigour.
  There are no false notes. The last touch is wanting, the spell that
  can send a glow of life and beauty over every page; and they remain
  readable stories, lively and convincing, but not very new.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 287. S. 8, ‘05. 400w.

  “Dartmoor sketches in sombre shades, and excellent of their kind.
  There is a suggestion of Hardy, too, without Mr. Hardy’s later
  morbidness.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 606. S. 16, ‘05. 510w.

  “Taken as a whole, the volume leaves a delightful impression of quaint
  character, soft dialect, and exuberant but not grotesque fancy.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 280. S. 30, ‘05. 110w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 712. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 477. O. 7, ‘05. 200w.


=Phillpotts, Eden.= Secret woman. $1.50. Macmillan.

  This is another story of Dartmoor, and the Dartmoor peasants the
  author knows so well. After twenty years of married life, Anthony
  Redvers, the father of the two grown sons, finds relief from the
  temperamental coldness of his wife, in an intrigue with an unknown
  woman. The discovery, the revenge of the wife and the beautiful
  devotion of the younger son fill out the plot.

  “It is a remarkable novel, a living, breathing piece of work.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 83. Ja. 28, ‘05. 260w.

  “Is constructed on what is almost a Sophoclean scale. Mr. Phillpotts
  moves simply among primitive emotions, and moves with great natural
  insight. He has psychological subtlety, and he has great tenderness.
  He has a sense of the dramatic which materially assists him. Too much
  praise cannot be given to the author for his handling of this big
  theme. The characterization is always good, and sometimes more than
  good.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 105. Ja. 28, 610w.

     + — =Cath. World.= 81: 550. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

  “Those who care to read literature and not mere books will find what
  they want in this great novel.” Charlotte Harwood.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 378. Ap. ‘05. 830w.

  “A study that rivals ‘The scarlet letter’ in earnestness and
  psychological penetration.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 389. Je. 1, ‘05. 280w.

  “The psychology of a weak man and a strong woman is etched with the
  hand of a master.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 559. Mr. 9, ‘05. 290w.

  * “‘The secret woman’ is a great story of the wrong kind.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Phillpotts’s strongest story. A tragedy as grim and inexorable as
  any ever told by ancient Greek. He knows his Devon peasants, and it is
  with humility that we enter one or two protests against his portrayal.
  One may wish the theme less painful, our keen joy in the perfection of
  literary workmanship less marred by the continual constriction of
  heart to which the author compels us. It is not only its author’s
  masterpiece, but it is far in advance of anything he has yet
  written—and that is to give it higher praise than almost any other
  comparison with contemporary fiction could afford.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 83. F. 11, ‘05. 700w.

  “A book of unusual power and passion—by far the best work in fiction
  that Mr. Phillpotts has put forth within the past two or three years.
  There are at least four characters in this book that are original in
  conception, carefully consistent throughout, and subtle in their
  psychological development. Altogether the situation is as strange as
  it is compelling in its force, and it is handled with skill and vigor.
  In all, this is a grim but forceful romance.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 350. F. 4, ‘05. 240w.

  “It is a story of terrible frankness, dealing without evasion with the
  elemental forces of the human tragedy, but without morbid interest or
  curiosity, and binding the penalty to the sin.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 773. Ap. 1, ‘05. 100w.

  “Assuredly the best novel of Mr. Eden Phillpotts.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 756. Je. ‘05. 230w.

  “His themes are simple, but they are far too heavily orchestrated.
  Thus his style, though marked by fine descriptive passages, threatens
  to become laboured and ornate, and is occasionally disfigured by
  recondite epithets and literary preciosities. He seems to us to err by
  the artificial and deliberate invention of incidents designed to
  enhance the tragic quality of the narrative, by a piling up of the
  agony which defeats its own aim, and suggests the element of
  gratuitousness where all should march inevitably to the crowning
  catastrophe.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 331. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1130w.


=Picard, George H.= Bishop’s niece, †$1.25. Turner, H. B.

  “Although the comic element is the last that one expects in a story of
  ‘mixed marriages,’ that is to say of matrimonial alliances between
  Catholic and Protestant, it is really very droll, thanks to the demure
  eccentricity of his pacific Lordship, the Bishop of Isle Madame, and
  the contrasted orthodoxy of his brother, a domineering layman.”—N. Y.
  Times.

  “A neat piece of literary workmanship.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 301. My. 6, ‘05. 90w.

  “The little story shows ingenuity, a quaint humor, and some pretty
  fancies.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 379. Je. 10, ‘05. 260w.

  “Is a well-balanced little conceit with delicate and simple humor.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 158. Jl. 29, ‘05. 230w.


=Pidgin, Charles Felton.= Little Burr: the Warwick of America. $1.50.
Robinson-Luce.

  A book which deals with the youth of Aaron Burr, and his career in the
  Revolutionary war. It tells of his marriage, chronicles the birth of
  his daughter Theodosia, and thruout contradicts all accepted ideas of
  his character by presenting him as a noble gentleman, true to his
  ideals and the victim of unmerited social and political ostracism.

  “Is not very coherent as fiction.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 261. Ap. 22, ‘05. 480w.


=Pier, Arthur Stanwood.= Ancient grudge. †$1.50. Houghton.

  “‘The ancient grudge’ is the irksome sense of obligation felt by one
  young man to another who has saved his life as a boy, and in the main
  the novel is a study of the divergent temperaments of these two men.
  They are students at Harvard together, live in the same town, love the
  same girl, and in the end the mercurial, sanguine, visionary Stewart
  dies heroically and dramatically, while the heroism of Keith (who as a
  boy has saved his friend’s life) takes the form of steady persistence
  and strength of mind and purpose. To some extent the story deals with
  labor questions, but, while it presents some phases of the problem in
  an interesting way, it does not go very deeply into the
  subject.”—Outlook.

  “In thus making a ‘problem novel’ out of what had better have remained
  a story of private interest, Mr. Pier proves rather disappointing.”
  Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 309. N. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is wholesome in tone, high in its ideals. The author has made a
  decided advance in his art since the publication of ‘The triumph,’
  handling his material more firmly, and making a stronger human
  appeal.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 650. O. 7, ‘05. 660w.

  “Few, if any, novels of the season show more thoughtful and solid work
  in character-study than this book, which is, moreover distinctly well
  written. The weakest point is construction.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 523. O. 28, ‘05. 170w.


=Pigou, Arthur Cecil.= Principles and methods of industrial peace.
*$1.10. Macmillan.

  “In this work the author considers the question of not what have
  arbitration and conciliation done, but rather what ought they to do,
  and how they ought to do it.” (R. of Rs.) “The first part of the book
  is historical and descriptive; the second treats of ‘The principles of
  industrial peace.’ The table of contents contains a summary of the
  book, and in appendices problems of wages and industry are treated of
  diametrically.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “The book would have provided easier reading and commanded more
  attention if Mr. Pigou had been more willing to ‘take sides.’”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 705. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1170w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 339. My. 27, ‘05. 150w.

  “His spirit appears to us throughout fair, his understanding and
  appreciation of the point of view of both parties to the industrial
  conflict remarkable, and his advice generally to be both based on
  sound principles and practical of application.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 133. S. 16, ‘05. 440w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 767. Je. ‘05. 80w.

  “Our one criticism of the book is that the author hesitates a little
  between two different intentions. Some of the preliminaries would be
  in place in a large organon, but in a popular handbook they read like
  platitudes, and might well be taken for granted.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 290. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1730w.

  “His general judgment is keen and vigorous, and he has remarkable
  powers of exposition, among which a good literary style is not the
  least. Thus far, at least, I have been unable to see that the economic
  reasoner extracts from his careful labor on curves and diagrams an
  iota of truth which he had not assumed or put in, at the beginning.”
  N. P. Gilman.

   + + — =Yale R.= 14: 224. Ag. ‘05. 640w.


=Pike, Godfrey Holden.= John Wesley: the man and his mission. *$1. Union
press.

  Illustrated and written in a quaint old-fashioned style, this brief
  account of the life of John Wesley, “one of the greatest evangelists
  who ever carried the Gospel to the people,” seems to breathe the
  simple Christian spirit of the man. It is a book which is well adapted
  to children, altho not written for them.


=Pitkin, Helen.= Angel by brevet. $1.50. Lippincott.

  This is the first book of a young New Orleans newspaper writer. The
  story deals with French Creoles of the old regime, and the voodouism
  of the negroes. The heroine invokes the charms of a sorcerer to aid
  her in securing the affections of the man with whom she fancies
  herself in love, and in the course of the complications which follow
  discovers that she is really in love with a clergyman who has long
  been her admirer.

  “The testimony of those in a position to know is that Miss Pitkin has
  not transcended facts. Her development of this fruitful theme is,
  however, most unequal. The entire book, indeed, is full of
  affectations, not only in choice of words but in their collocation.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 844. Ap. 13, ‘05. 280w.

  “The style is precious and exotic to the extreme limit of license and
  beyond. Miss Pitkin’s command of unfamiliar words is marvelous; her
  use of familiar words more marvelous still.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 54. Ja. 28, ‘05. 410w. (Outline of plot.)

  “Miss Pitkin handles her material with much strength; but her hand
  lacks the sure and discriminating touch which comes from practice. Her
  details of plot do not always avoid confusion, and the movement is
  sometimes labored.” J. R. Ormond.

     + — =The South Atlantic Quarterly.= 4: 97. Ja. ‘05. 100w.


=Plato.= Myths of Plato; text and translation; with introductory and
other observations by J. A. Stewart. *$4.50. Macmillan.

  “It was a very happy thought to bring together the myths of Plato and
  examine the lesson of each. We are grateful, moreover, to Professor
  Stewart for giving us the Greek in every case on the page opposite to
  the English rendering.... The excellent account of the Cambridge
  Platonists, More, Cudworth, Clarke, and Smith, will be to some not the
  least interesting part of a work full of thought and learning.”—Acad.

  “Jowett’s translation is so good that it seems churlish to say that
  the present rendering is even more perfect, and reads even more like
  an original composition in English.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 325. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1300w.

  “It may be said in conclusion, that Prof. Stewart’s book—dealing, as
  it does, with a side of Platonism which has been too much neglected—is
  the finest contribution to the knowledge of Plato’s thought which has
  been made in this country of late years.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 429. Ap. 8. 1390w.

  “One cannot read Professor Stewart’s discussion without being moved to
  wonder again and again at the felicitous phrase by which he conveys
  impalpable emotions, by the fineness with which his perception is
  pitched to detect frail sympathies.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 255. Ag. 11, ‘05. 3150w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 106. Ag. 3, ‘05. 1090w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 155. Mr. 11, ‘05. 300w.

  “Though in detail interesting and exegetic, the book does not draw
  very much to a point, and is perhaps rather overweighted. Mr.
  Stewart’s translation, it must be said is not as good a representation
  of the original as Jowett’s.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 742. Je. 3, ‘05. 1320w.

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 895. Je. 17, ‘05. 1660w.


=Platt, Isaac Hull.= Walt Whitman. **75c. Small.

  Mr. Platt’s biography is the outgrowth of partisan beliefs and fancies
  rather than a development from so-called legitimate biographical
  material including clews to Whitman’s inner life. The volume is the
  latest issue in the “Beacon biographies.”

  “It is frankly the statement of a partisan; it contains little or no
  new material; it follows closely the phraseology of previous writers
  and quotes rather too liberally from them; but it is clear, compact,
  sensible summary of the facts of Whitman’s life, so far as they are
  known, and as such deserves commendation.” G. R. Carpenter.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 64. Mr. ‘05. 670w.

  “A concise and highly eulogistic account of Whitman and his works.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 380. Ap. ‘05. 20w.

  “A believer to the fullest extent in the greatness of his work. And
  yet he does not spare criticism.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 127. Ja. ‘05. 80w.


=Plummer, Rev. Alfred.= English church history: four lectures from the
death of Archbishop Parker to the death of King Charles I. *$1.
Scribner.

  “Dr. Plummer aims to be judicially fair in his estimate of men and
  measures in the momentous period in English history from 1575 to 1649,
  but on every page he makes it patent that he is an ardent adherent of
  the church by law established. Elizabeth’s character was far from
  worthy, but it was good of her to fight the Romanists and the
  Puritans, and to preserve the Anglican church intact. James I, the
  wise fool, reached ‘the lowest depths of unpopularity with his
  subjects,’ but, ‘by solid conviction, during the whole of his reign he
  was neither Romanist nor Puritan, but an Anglican.’ Five or six
  particulars are specified in which he served the Church of England a
  good turn. Charles I, the impersonation of ‘incurable duplicity and
  intrigue,’ carried despotism to its utmost limit, and through his
  ‘criminal wrongheadedness and perfidy’ brought about the overthrow of
  both episcopacy and monarchy. Dr. Plummer does not venture to
  enumerate the particulars in which his reign was helpful to the
  Anglican cause.”—Bib. World.

         =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 376. Ap. ‘05. 150w.

  Reviewed by E. B. Hulbert.

     + — =Bib. World.= 25: 317. Ap. ‘05. 160w.


=Plunkett, Horace.= Ireland in the new century. 60c. Dutton.

  A popular priced edition of this now famous book which “begins with a
  chapter on ‘The English misunderstanding,’ and traces the whole
  question of politics, religion, economics, and education to the final
  chapter, which is on ‘Government with the consent of the governed.’”
  (R. of Rs.)

  “It is dull, labored in style, pedantic, and egotistical.”

   + — — =Nation.= 81: 62. Jl. 20, ‘05. 790w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 360. Je. 3, ‘05. 730w.

  “Unquestionably a sane and a healthful contribution to the settlement
  of the ever-difficult Irish question.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 444. Je. 17, ‘05. 250w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 767. Je. ‘05. 280w.


=Plympton, Almira George.= School-house in the woods. †$1.50. Little.

  In her story for young readers Miss Plympton portrays the sweet
  influence of a child who comes to live with her guardians, two
  bachelor uncles,—a child whose “realization of the relationship
  between human beings, so keen as to make her oblivious to the
  distinction made by rank, race, education or even morals” fosters a
  democratic spirit among her school friends. Her sympathy and affection
  for a little colored girl form the larger part of the story.

  * “It is a book which would do best service in being read aloud by a
  judicious editor, who should cull the flowers and skip the thorns.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 406. N. 16, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 868. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.


=Pocock, Roger.= Curly, a tale of the Arizona desert. †$1.00. Little.

  A feud, which began in the Irish land league troubles, is transplanted
  and finished in Arizona where, among Indians, outlaws, and cowboys,
  young Lord Balshannon finds a wife in the plucky daughter of a robber
  chief. The story is real and stirring and the author has lived the
  things of which he writes.

  “The real enjoyment of the book is ... due to the breezy dialect in
  which the book is written, the picturesque vernacular of the ranch.”
  Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 519. Jl. ‘05. 150w.

  “The style in which the cowboy tells the stirring tale is crisp,
  vivid, vigorous and only occasionally marred by coarseness; the
  offense is in expression alone—the thought is not coarse.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 694. S. 21, ‘05. 320w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 110w.

  “Seems to us quite the best cowboy story since Owen Wister’s ‘The
  Virginian.’”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 391. Je. 10, ‘05. 40w.

  “There are several obscure statements and situations in the story.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 868. Je. 3, ‘05. 180w.

  “Among current books of adventure, ‘Curly’ is especially good.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 361. Ag. ‘05. 170w.


* Poems every child should know; a selection of all times for young
people; ed. by Mary E. Burt. *$1.25. Doubleday.

  The poems contained in this volume are those which children actually
  love and with but a few exceptions they are brief enough to be
  committed to memory. They have been divided into five groups each of
  which appeals to a different stage of childhood. The division
  headings: The budding moment; The little child; The day’s at the morn;
  Lad and lassie; On and on; and Grow old along with me, strike the key
  notes of their contents. Nearly all the old favorites and some new
  ones are to be found here. The volume is bound in soft green suede and
  is decorated with drawings by Blanche Ostertag.


=Pollard, Albert Frederick.= Thomas Cranmer and the English reformation,
1489-1556. **$1.35. Putnam.

  An addition to the “Heroes of the Reformation series.” An attempt to
  clear up some of the mysteries surrounding Cranmer, which, the author
  says, are mysteries of the atmosphere he breathed, rather than of
  character. His great work in the compilation of the Book of common
  prayer, and his translations of the Collects is set over against his
  weakness in failing to stand by his convictions against Tudor tyranny.

  “The author has a competent knowledge of what was then going on
  throughout Europe and is safe-guarded against the insularity or
  provincialism which marks the authors of the volumes in Stephens and
  Hunt’s ‘History of the Church of England.’ Its impartiality and lack
  of partisan writing is also to be commended.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 440. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1210w.

  “No one could be better qualified for the task. The book can rightly
  claim to be the first considerable biography of Cranmer which has been
  written according to the canons of modern scientific historical work.
  It is clear, and for the most part consistent and convincing; and
  though it contains nothing that is startlingly new, it arranges in
  useful and readable form a vast amount of hitherto scattered and not
  always trustworthy information. Mr. Pollard’s treatment of the
  archbishop’s career under Henry VIII seems to us ... much less
  satisfactory.” R. B. Merriman.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 861. Jl. ‘05. 920w.

  “This book is an inspiring work, both as a fine biography of a most
  admirable man and as an addition to the conscience literature that is
  so needed to stimulate the moral energies of our age.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 110. Jl. ‘05. 460w.

  “The present work reaches, we think, the high-water mark of his
  achievement. It will form, and rightly form the standard life of
  Cranmer for some time to come. Mr. Pollard in this book is certainly
  not without a bias.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 200. Ag. 12. 1530w.

  “Mr. Pollard offers as good a plea for him as can be offered, and
  offers it in a temperate spirit. His volume is almost a model of what
  such a biography should be.” Edward Fuller.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 279. Mr. ‘05. 330w.

  “The character and ability of Cranmer are skilfully portrayed, and the
  work may be counted as a real contribution to popular knowledge on
  this important period.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 46. Jl. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “Mr. Pollard has done the Archbishop something like justice, and has
  done it in a way that maintains the interest of the reader to the
  last.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 170. My. 26, ‘05. 510w.

  “Mr. Pollard writes pleasantly, with a clear arrangement of his
  subject, and a fair sense of proportion.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 36. Jl. 13, ‘05. 2190w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 110w.

  “Very able and interesting volume. We are grateful to Mr. Pollard for
  his fine vindication of a man who was not without elements of true
  greatness.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 58. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1720w.


=Pollock, Walter Herries, and Pollock, Guy C.= Hay fever. $1.25.
Longmans.

  “Mr. Henry Tempest, stockbroker, is suffering from a severe attack of
  the malady which gives the book its title; to cure it he takes an
  overdose of an Egyptian remedy, recommended by a friend with a
  careless turn for archaeology. The effects of this overdose are
  amazing and mischievous. The stockbroker is transformed from a staid
  and benevolent man of middle-age into a boy of pranks.... He has one
  frantic day of irresponsible delight, and his adventures ... carry one
  on from peal to peal of laughter.”—Acad.

  “It is an excellent farce.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 495. My. 6, ‘05. 260w.

  “The book has all the freshness of a humorous idea worked out and
  finished in the heat of the moment.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 620. My. 20. 150w.

  “It’s all rather pleasant and funny after its fashion.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 365. Je. 3, ‘05. 380w.

  “A farce with only one defect—it is not funny.”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 392. Je. 10, ‘05. 10w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 158. Jl. 29, ‘05. 110w.

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 674. My. 20, ‘05. 130w.


=Pool, Bettie Freshwater.= Eyrie and other southern stories. $1.
Broadway pub.

  Seven short stories, some of which are in the negro dialect, a dozen
  simple poems on various subjects and a concluding story. The
  monstrosity, by Gaston Pool, complete this volume.


=Porter, Frank Chamberlain.= Messages of the apocalyptic writers, the
books of Daniel and Revelation and some uncanonical apocalypses; with
historical introductions and a free rendering in paraphrase. **$1.25.
Scribner.

  “These mysterious writings, most of them not in our canonical
  Scriptures, are our chief source for later Jewish eschatology, and for
  the momentous matter of Messianic dogmatics.... [The author] gives a
  summary view of their nature and subject-matter, and analyzes, at
  considerable length, the books of Daniel and Revelations. In smaller
  space he studies the apocalypses of Enoch, Ezra and Baruch.”—Cath.
  World.

  “A very useful and convenient manual of Jewish and Christian
  apocalyptic from the historical point of view.”

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 79. Jl. ‘05. 20w.

  “An excellent manual. Professor Porter’s introduction to the study of
  these writings is done in a clear, systematic, and erudite manner. His
  tone throughout is scholarly and objective.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 248. My. ‘05. 490w.

  “A little book thoroughly to be recommended.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1131. My. 18, ‘05. 70w.

  * “Is perhaps, the best introduction to the study of Daniel and
  Revelation available.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “In ample introductions and notes Professor Porter has given a
  confessedly obscure subject the lucid treatment it requires.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 857. Ap. 1, ‘05. 140w.


=Porter, Mary (Mrs. Horace Porter).= Secret of a great influence. *$1.
Macmillan.

  In these “Notes on Bishop Westcott’s teachings, the reader ... has set
  before him considerations as to the bishop’s ethical and dogmatic
  teaching.... He then passes to the subject of ‘Bible study.’ ... The
  fifth section treats of Bishop Westcott’s teaching on ‘The Christian
  church’ and ‘The Christian creed’; the sixth is devoted to ‘Worship,’
  public and private; ‘Foreign missions’ and a variety of other subjects
  are also mentioned; and finally we have a paper on Bishop Westcott’s
  ‘Commentaries,’ by Rev. A. Westcott.”—Spec.

         =Spec.= 94: 444. Mr. 25, ‘05. 280w.


=Post, Emily (Mrs. Edwyn Main Post).= Purple and fine linen. †$1.50.
Appleton.

  Fashionable New York forms the background for this story of the
  development of Camilla from a child into a woman. Young, thoughtless,
  fresh from school, she marries Anthony Stuart, who is rich and
  handsome, but who makes of her a plaything not a part of his life.
  Another man comes to cheer her lonely existence, and she awakens on
  the brink of marital shipwreck.

  “The author’s manner of handling her subject is the excuse for the
  book’s existence.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 724. O. 28, ‘05. 290w.

  “There is some clever characterization of modern society, and several
  individuals stand out clearly as real people.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 578. N. 4, ‘05. 110w.


=Pott, Francis L. Hawks.= Sketch of Chinese history. **$1.80. Wessels.

  This volume was written to meet the need of a short history of China,
  it is intended primarily for teachers, and is a brief survey of a
  large field. It contains three divisions, The conquest of China by the
  Chinese (B. C. 2852-206), The first struggle with the Tartars (B. C.
  206-A. D. 589), The second struggle with the Tartars (A. D. 589-1644),
  and includes a chapter on The war with Japan, and Recent events in
  China. There are five maps.


=Pottenger, Milton Alberto.= Symbolism. $2.50. Robertson.

  A treatise on the soul of things, which demonstrates that the natural
  world is but a symbol of the real world, explains why there are but
  ten digits in our mathematical system, and shows the pack of playing
  cards, or book of 52, to be an ancient Masonic Bible, each card a
  symbol of universal law. It reveals new things about many Masonic
  symbols and Biblical expressions and declares that the United States
  is a Masonic nation whose duty and history are to be read in these
  ancient sacred symbols. There are charts and drawings.


=Potter, Mrs. Frances B. (Squire).= Ballingtons. †$1.50. Little.

  Mrs. Potter’s first book is a study of the principles that underlie
  the misery resulting from two unhappy marriages. The main action
  sympathetically follows the awakening of Agnes Sidney from the
  condition of care-free girlhood to the state of restricted wifehood
  with Ferdinand Ballington lording the right of financial despotism
  over her. The author has drawn a spiritually minded woman whose great
  love and keen sense of duty buoy her up when the discovery of
  pettiness and low aims would tend to submerge her. In contrast to the
  tyranny of withholding is portrayed in the sub-action the tyranny of
  giving, in which a wealthy girl, mistress of her own fortune, marries
  a quiet, refined bank clerk. Here a man’s sensitive longing for
  independence is opposed by the dominant freeheartedness and
  worldliness of his wife.

  * “A distinctive book not soon forgotten like the average novel.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 120w.

  “Here and there the workmanship is a bit crude; here and there the
  book would have gained by compression and excision, but, take it all
  in all, it is the most remarkable novel that has come to our desk for
  many a long day. It takes its rare and high place because, as we read
  we say again and again, not ‘This is lifelike,’ but ‘This is life.’”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 672. O. 14, ‘05. 810w.

  * “It is conspicuously lacking in finish of style in places, and is
  not at all points well put together; but it is a real piece of work,
  full of true feeling, genuine insight, and a sincere and sound ethical
  judgment.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 709. N. 25, ‘05. 170w.


=Potter, Rt. Rev. Henry Codman.= Drink problem in modern life. **30c.
Crowell.

  A frank exposition of the drink problem as Bishop Potter views it. He
  believes that the secret of mastery over the great evil of
  intemperance lies not in “legal enactment,” but in “the Spirit of
  Jesus Christ.” He says, “The world waits, we say, for better laws—or
  for better men to administer the laws! No, my brother, it waits for
  love—the vigilance of love, the service of love, the sacrifice of
  love.”

  “... Loose texture and somewhat irrelevant quality of much contained
  in his pamphlet.”

   + — — =Reader.= 5: 788. My. ‘05. 230w.


=Potter, Margaret.= Fire of spring. $1.50. Appleton.

  A mother, regardless of the sleeping fires of youth, marries her young
  daughter to a millionaire plow manufacturer of Chicago. The girl,
  excited by the whirl of preparations, gives little thought to her
  fiance and when she realizes at their first tête-à-tête dinner, that
  this bald, red-faced man audibly eating soup, is her husband, she
  loathes him. A cousin, handsome and worldly, appears and intrigue,
  suspicion, quarrels, and other unpleasant things follow. In the end
  the cousin meets a death of the husband’s planning, and the
  ill-assorted pair, less lovable than when they first met, forgive, and
  come to care for each other.

  “The story has the fault so frequently found when women handle sex
  problems; as though fearful of not being understood, it insists upon
  unsavoury details with unnecessary and repellant frankness. The book
  is irritatingly uneven.”

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 182. Ap. ‘05. 680w.

  “Miss Potter has evidently aimed at writing a ‘strong’ novel, and has
  certainly succeeded in producing something very rank.”

   — — — =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 80w.

  “No one could call this story dull or badly written; but, recognizing
  what will inevitably be called its strength, one must regret the
  novelist’s use of her real power in the working out of such obnoxious
  phases of life—if it is life—in Chicago.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 173. Mr. 18, ‘05. 860w.

  “‘The fire of spring’ belongs to the very best in the season’s
  American fiction.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 160w.


* =Potter, Mary Knight.= Art of the Venice academy, containing a brief
history of the building and its collection of paintings as well as
descriptions and criticism of many of the principal pictures and their
artists. **$2. Page.

  In this volume the author has treated each room in the Royal gallery
  of fine arts in Venice separately, and in her own chosen order. The
  greater pictures she has given in detail while some of the lesser ones
  she has merely outlined, reserving as much space as possible for
  comments upon the artists themselves. The book is well illustrated.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1376. D. 14, ‘05. 110w.

 *       =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “This particular volume is well enough for its class.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 509. D. 21, ‘05. 150w.

  * “Evidently designed as much to decorate ‘the center table’ as to
  illuminate the mind.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.

  * “The author shows care and discrimination in her criticism and
  suggestions.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 667. N. 18, ‘05. 60w.


* =Pottinger, Sir Henry.= Flood, fell and forest; a book of sport in
Norway. 2v. $8.40. Longmans.

  “Sir Henry’s volumes deal with many phases of sport, from elk hunting,
  in which he is a veteran and an adept, to the successful pursuit of
  trout and salmon, from sport with Norwegian red deer to pleasant days
  with ryper and other game birds. The author was one of the earliest
  sportsmen to wet a line on the famous Tana river. This was nearly
  fifty years ago, but the narrative of the expedition and its results
  is so fresh and so vigorous that it is certain to capture the reader’s
  attention.” (Acad.) The volumes are illustrated.

  * “To our thinking, although some of the matter is by no means
  entirely new, these are two of the pleasantest sporting volumes that
  we have encountered during the last three or four years.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1253. D. 2, ‘05. 1280w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 762. N. 11, ‘05. 190w.

  * “We like the temper of the book and a good part of its contents; but
  think it might, with distinct advantage from a literary point of view,
  have been compressed into one volume of moderate length.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 728. D. 2, ‘05. 180w.


=Poulsson, Anne Emilie.= Runaway donkey, and other rhymes for children.
†$1.50. Lothrop.

  Printed in large type upon heavy paper and abundantly illustrated,
  these rhymes, the majority of which are about animals, will appeal to
  all imaginative little folks.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 282. S. 30, ‘05. 15w.

  * “Miss Poulsson’s book should be a welcome addition to every child’s
  library.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 712. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Powell, Edward Payson.= Country home. **$1.50. McClure.

  The author, a fruit-farmer of New York state, deals with the problem
  of successful country home making under such headings as: Selecting
  the homestead, Growing a house, Water supply, Lawns, Orchard, Flowers,
  The insects, The animals, The beautiful and the useful.

  “Is one of the most valuable and practical works of recent months.
  With the witchery of the poet’s art he leads us from page to page,
  until all too soon the end of the volume is reached.” Amy C. Rich.

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 449. Ap. ‘05. 800w.

  “For practical information, Mr. Powell’s is the best book on this
  general theme of a home in the country that has appeared—in America at
  least—for many a day.”

   + + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 9f. My. ‘05. 240w.

       + =Critic.= 46: 480. My. ‘05. 90w.

  “The charm of Mr. Powell’s book is that it urges simplicity of living
  and practical and successful ways of doing things, along with full
  enjoyment of all that is beautiful and healthful in rural life.”
  Priscilla Leonard.

     + + =Current Literature.= 38: 337. Ap. ‘05. 3890w. (Abstract of
         book.)

  “All lovers of rural life will appreciate it. It is full of common
  sense, practical advice, a commendation rarely to be bestowed on books
  of this class; and besides the advice it is excellently good reading.
  The book greatly needs a subject index, for it is good enough to be in
  frequent use as a reference work. It is so completely and so simply
  what it starts out to be—a practical account of a life in the country.
  ‘The country home’ should be put into every country library, and also
  into every school library, for from there it would reach a class of
  people who need just its suggestions and ideas.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 96. Ja. 12, ‘05. 700w.


=Powell, Edward Payson.= Orchard and fruit garden. **$1.50. McClure.

  “The greater part of this book is taken up by advice as to the best
  varieties of fruit to plant, ranging from apples to small fruits and
  including some little-grown fruits and some nut-trees. The usual order
  is reversed here, for after this long dissertation on kinds of fruit,
  there follow a few chapters on culture, training, packing, and
  marketing.”—Dial.

  “It is a good book for the seeker after country living.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 480. N. ‘05. 130w.

  “Our chief criticism on Mr. Powell’s book would be that in these last
  sections he gives ear to too many other advisers. He is at once
  conservative and progressive, and has given us a book valuable to have
  at hand. A serious defect, however, is the lack of an index.” Edith
  Granger.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 381. Je. 1, ‘05. 350w.

  “The illustrations are for the most part good and are well chosen, and
  the practical directions are generally judicious.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 374. My. 11, ‘05. 150w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 281. Ap. 29, ‘05. 180w.

  “His book has the value of accurate, scientific knowledge.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 194. My. 20, ‘05. 70w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 867. Je. 3, ‘05. 170w.


=Powers, Caleb.= My own story. **$1.50. Bobbs.

  “An account of the conditions in Kentucky leading to the assassination
  of William Goebel, who was declared governor of the state, and my
  indictment and conviction on the charge of complicity in his murder.”
  It is also the story of Powers’s life, and of his early days, his
  brief romance, his political career, and the five years of trial and
  imprisonment. The book is written in confinement and is, of course, a
  complete vindication of the author. It is illustrated with
  photographs.

  “On the whole it is done temperately, even complacently, in spite of
  the tragic nature of the circumstances for the author.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 363. Je. 3, ‘05. 650w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 194. My. 20, ‘05. 20w.


=Pratt, Edwin A.= Railways and their rates. Dutton.

  “This volume has been written for traders as well as the general
  reader to show them the actual position of British railways with
  regard to the complaints advanced from time to time on the subjects of
  rates and charges, and the origin, operation, and circumstances of the
  railways of Britain as compared with those abroad.”—N. Y. Times.

  “We find it hard to believe the average railway is so immaculate as
  Mr. Pratt makes out. On the other hand, the book brings out clearly
  the strong points of English railways, their safety, and the superior
  accommodation they give to both passengers and goods.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 635. Je. 17, ‘05. 270w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 575. S. 2, ‘05. 350w.

         =Sat. R.= 100: 187. Ag. 5, ‘05. 270w.


=Pratt, Edwin A.= Trade unionism and British industry. *$1.50. Dutton.

  These articles appeared in the London Times in the fall of 1901 under
  the title of “The crisis in British industry.” They comprise a study
  of the industrial conditions in England. The trade-union situation in
  twenty of the leading British industries is fully treated, and a
  rather severe judgment on trade-union policy and practice is given.

  “Seemingly intimate bearing upon the fiscal controversy. The book,
  taken as a whole, is a severe indictment of what is called the ‘new
  unionism’—the militant unionism. Hostility to trade-unionism is
  written large on every page from cover to cover, and the author’s very
  evident bias makes one question rather than accept his conclusions.
  The book is interesting and informational. The impression grows upon
  one as he reads that the investigation was not a colorless seeking
  after truth, but an attempt to find facts which would bear out a
  theory already formed, and that the trade-unionist was really judged
  without notice and without a hearing.” Edith Abbott.

   + — — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 129. D. ‘04. 1140w.


=Prentys, E. P. and Kametaro Sesamoto.= Japanese for daily use. 75c.
Jenkins.

  “A booklet which will fit the pocket and help the traveller. It is
  full of real talk, brief, to the point, and wholly free from that
  exaggeration of honorifics heard on the stage and overworked by
  novelists and Japanophiles.... Numbers, money, postal rates, and helps
  to pronunciation have not been forgotten in this capital
  manual.”—Nation.

  “We have failed to find a misprint in its sixty-three pages.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 13. Jl. 6, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 253. Ag. ‘05. 40w.


=Prindiville, Kate Gertrude.= Two of the guests. †$1.25. Pott.

  Letters to their friends by the various guests at a house party
  comprise this volume. They are very masculine and very feminine and
  tell the love story of Margaret Exeter, whom the men called an angel
  and the women considered a “bold creature,” and Arnold Gresham, a Sir
  Galahad.

  “The letters are cleverly written.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 244. Ap. 15, ‘05. 300w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “A pretty love story.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 910. Ap. 8, ‘05. 60w.


=Prothero, Rowland Edmund.= Psalms in human life. *$2. Dutton.

  A new edition of this book which cites numerous incidents showing the
  influence of the psalms in historical crises and in critical moments
  in the lives of prominent men and women.

  “With skill, sympathy, and infinite patience he has traced the
  influence of this great hymnary upon successive generations, from
  Origin to our day.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 375. My. 11, ‘05. 490w.


=Prouty, Charles A. and others.= President Roosevelt’s railroad policy.
50c. Ginn.

  A report of a discussion before the economic club of Boston, March 9,
  1905, in which President Roosevelt’s railroad policy is reviewed by
  four men of varying interest in the great question.


=Pryor, Sara Agnes Rice (Mrs. Roger Atkinson Pryor).= Reminiscences of
peace and war. **$2. Macmillan.

  For this new edition of her popular book the author has prepared new
  chapters, one of which describes the origin and first celebration of
  Decoration day in this country; she has also added a number of
  illustrations. The volume gives a pleasing picture of social life in
  the South, beginning with the Washington of President Pierce’s
  administration and ending with the conclusion of the civil war.

       + =Bookm.= 30: 482. Ja. ‘05. 490w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 631. S. 23, ‘05. 280w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 335. O. 7, ‘05. 60w.

  * “This is one of the best and most readable books of its class.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 756. D. ‘05. 50w.


Publisher’s confession. **60c. Doubleday.

  “All persons who have written a book not yet published or who hope to
  write and publish a book in the future will be interested in this....
  The anonymous author defends the publishers against the charges ...
  brought against them by unsuccessful authors. It explains fully the
  way a book is selected, printed, advertised, and sold, and discusses
  the relations between author and publisher as they are and as they
  ought to be.”—Ind.

  “The writing is generally clear, and, apart from some repetitions,
  effective. Of the ‘literary’ class the publisher has a poor opinion.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 134. Jl. 29. 2270w.

  “It may perhaps be shop-talk, but it is so well done, there is in it
  so much sense and sincerity that it will entertain and impress you, no
  matter how far remote you are from books and their makers. Frankly,
  the book is a brief for the publisher.” Beverly Stark.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 384. Je. ‘05. 1200w.

         =Ind.= 58: 903. Ap. 20, ‘05. 100w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 264. Ap. 22, ‘05. 720w.

  “We commend the book to writers (to the experienced publisher it will
  hardly contain any novelty). There are some hints, however, which may
  be useful.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 396. S. 16, ‘05. 310w.


=Puffer, Ethel D.= Psychology of beauty. *$1.25. Houghton.

  Eight papers upon—Criticism and aesthetics, The nature of beauty, The
  æsthetic repose, The beauty of fine art, The beauty of music, The
  beauty of literature, The nature of dramatic emotion, and The beauty
  of ideas.

  “Miss Puffer’s method of treatment is precise and logical without
  being over-technical.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 93. Ag. 16, ‘05. 260w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 251. Ap. 15, ‘05. 200w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 394. Je. 10, ‘05. 330w.

  “A careful and closely woven study.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


=Pullan, Rev. Leighton.= Church of the fathers; being an outline of the
history of the church from A. D. 98 to A. D. 461. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  Volume II. but the first in date of issue, of an eight volume series
  which will deal with the “Church universal.” This volume contains an
  outline of the history of the church from A. D. 98 to A. D. 461. It
  begins with the death of St. John’s last apostle and ends with a
  consideration of the work of St. Leo and St. Patrick.

  “Conscientious and scholarly labor with which Mr. Pullan has brought
  so much valuable information into comparatively brief compass.” A. G.

   + + — =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 822. O. ‘05. 170w.

  “This is a well-arranged and lucidly wrought introduction to the study
  of the important period it covers.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 245. My. 27, ‘05. 80w.

  “Altogether it is a book which students, and especially those already
  on Mr. Pullan’s side, will find valuable for reference and
  information; but we doubt whether it will prove an introduction or a
  stimulus to further study.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 210w.


=Purchas, Samuel.= Hakluytus posthumous; or Purchas his pilgrimes.
*$3.25. Macmillan.

  “The work will be complete in twenty volumes. It is a continuation and
  enlargement of Hakluyt’s ‘Voyages.’ It is made up of unpublished
  manuscripts of voyages, left by Hakluyt after his death, which came
  into the hands of Samuel Purchas. The latter added to them his own
  accounts of the many travels and voyages of Dutch, Spanish, and
  Portuguese explorers and English travelers, besides including numerous
  translations from early books of travel which were then becoming
  scarce.... The text of the present edition is a reprint of that of
  1625, with the exception that errors in spelling and punctuation have
  been corrected and contracted forms of letters extended. Among the
  contents are the accounts of the early expeditions fitted out by the
  East India company, of the adventures of Capt. John Smith in Turkey
  and Virginia, the Arctic discoveries of Barents, Baffin, and Henry
  Hudson, and translations from Acosta, Oviedo, Las Casas, and others.
  All the maps and illustrations of the original edition have been
  included in this reprint, and there is also a facsimile of the
  original engraved title page.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Their real claim to consideration lies in their style, their
  pungency, their wit, their unexpected turns of expression, their
  irresistible quaintness. There is an equal quality about the book
  regarded as a whole.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 234. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1480w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

     + + =Acad.= 68: 575. My. 27, ‘05. 240w. (Review of v. 3 and 4.)

  * “The volumes with increasing force and power speak for themselves.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1095. O. 21, ‘05. 1250w. (Review of v. 5-8.)

         =Nation.= 81: 55. Jl. 20, ‘05. 410w.

         =Nation.= 81: 142. Ag. 17, ‘05. 130w. (Review of v. 3 and 4.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 171. Mr. 18, ‘05. 380w.

  “Too much respect cannot be given to the work of Samuel Purchas. With
  Hakluyt, it shows the advances made by civilization. It is one of the
  foundations on which modern geographical study rests.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 196. Ap. 1, ‘05. 150w. (Review of v. 1 and
         2.)

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 466. Jl. 15, ‘05. 380w. (Review of v. 4 and
         5.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 561. Ag. 26, ‘05. 440w. (Review of v. 5 and
         6.)

  “It is because Purchas helps Hakluyt in making us understand all this
  that he is worth reprinting and rereading.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 19. Jl. 1, ‘05. 2380w. (Review of v. 1-4.)

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 284. Ag. 26, ‘05. 500w. (Review of v. 5 and 6.)

     + + =Spec.= 94: 440. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1620w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

     + + =Spec.= 95: 199. Ag. 5, ‘05. 70w. (Review of v. 5 and 6.)


=Purves, Rev. David.= Life everlasting: studies in the subject of the
future. *$1.50. imp. Scribner.

  “The subjects treated in this volume by a Presbyterian clergyman of
  Belfast, Ireland are: The life everlasting, The resurrection (of
  Jesus and believers), The future life, and Immortality in
  literature.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 760. Mr. 25, ‘05. 120w.


=Putnam, M. Louise.= Children’s life of Lincoln. $1.25. McClurg.

  A new and thoroughly revised edition of a book designed not for
  children’s amusement, but for pure instruction.


=Pyle, Edmund.= Memoirs of a royal chaplain. *$4. Lane.

  Edmund Pyle, chaplain in ordinary to George I., Archdeacon of York,
  and Prebend of Winchester, “represents the Church of England, so far
  as the clergy constitute the Church sunk in coveteousness and sloth.”
  (London Times.) “The letters are valuable for the display not of a
  specially elevated or attractive clerical character, but of the facts
  and feelings of that age from the point of view of a minor
  ecclesiastical politician.” (Nation.)

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 743. Je. 17. 1930w.

  * “He makes an unusual revelation of the scheming and jobbery in
  church preferment.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 476. N. ‘05. 70w.

  “Mr. Hartshorne’s labors have at least furnished a useful source-book
  for historians of the period, however lacking it may be in the
  continuous absorbing interest.”

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 118. S. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “If there is nothing in this volume to excite admiration or
  enthusiasm, there are some curious facts, and one or two amusing
  incidents. Notes should be brief, accurate, and germane to the matter.
  Mr. Hartshorne’s are none of the three.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 200. Je. 23, ‘05. 2280w.

  “He writes with no waste of words, with great frankness, and with
  pretty full and accurate information, as to a large range of
  externals.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 142. Ag. 17, ‘05. 320w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 399. Je. 17, ‘05. 260w.

  “Whatever Pyle says is worth reading. It is only when Mr. Hartshorne
  intervenes that we are sorry.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 945. Je. 24, ‘05. 1470w.


=Pyle, Howard.= Story of champions of the round table. **$2.50.
Scribner.

  “A companion volume to Mr. Pyle’s ‘Story of King Arthur and his
  knights,’ illustrated as that was with wood cuts admirably suited in
  manner and tone to the pseudo-antique style of narrative in which the
  deeds of Sir Launcelot and his fellow-knights are retold.... To boys
  not too young and of the right imaginative cast of mind the book
  should have the fascination which Malory’s tales still have for a like
  class of elder readers.”

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 576. D. ‘05. 50w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1387. D. 14, ‘05. 80w.

  * “It is evident that this writer brings to his task wide knowledge
  and great enthusiasm; we could wish that he did not in large measure
  spoil the good effects of both by diffuseness, affectation of style,
  and prosy sermonizings.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 210w.

  “Mr. Pyle succeeds unusually well in preserving the legendary and
  chivalrous atmosphere of his subject without dulling the interest by
  over-indulgence in archaic language.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 631. N. 11, ‘05. 90w.




                                   Q


=Quarles, Francis.= Sions sonets sung by Solomon the king. *$4.
Houghton.

  A reprint of this poetical paraphrase of the song of Solomon which
  combines the merits of the editions of 1625 and 1680.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 424. Je. 16, ‘05. 180w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 481. Je. 15, ‘05. 60w.




                                   R


=Rabelais, Francois.= Selections; ed. by Curtis Hidden Page. *$2.
Putnam.

  A volume in the series of “French classics for English readers.” In
  the selections the aim of the editor has been to “keep all the
  essential parts of the story, and all the scenes which had most
  literary value and human interest; to retain all the best of the
  historical satire; and to include other parts which have some special
  interest, such as the chapters on education.”

  “Mr. Page has done his task as well as it could be done.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 70w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 326. My. 1, ‘05. 120w.

         =Ind.= 59: 395. Ag. 17, ‘05. 60w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 504. F. 25, ‘05. 140w.

  “The edition is very well got up and generally attractive.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 521. Ap. 8, ‘05. 80w.

  “Dr. Page’s introduction is an interesting and scholarly study of his
  author.”

     + + =Yale R.= 14: 230. Ag. ‘05. 110w.


* =Rae, John.= Sociological theory of capital: being a complete reprint
of the New principles of political economy, 1834; ed. with biographical
sketch and notes by Charles Whitney Mixter. *$4. Macmillan.

  “Rae’s book is a refutation of Smith’s system, and in the course of
  chapter after chapter he carefully takes the author of the ‘Wealth of
  nations’ to pieces. The result is that he arrives at a defense of
  protection as opposed to free trade and of legislative interference as
  opposed to the laissez-faire policy. Professor Mixter in his
  recrudescence of Rae has split the book in the middle, giving the
  first and last parts in an appendix.”—Pub. Opin.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 708. O. 21, ‘05. 150w.

  * “A readable book where only the dismal science existed before.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 763. D. 9, ‘05. 180w.

  * “He has not been content with making a mere reprint, but has
  carefully scrutinized and rearranged the original work so as to make
  it of distinct use for modern readers and valuable as a text-book in
  advanced courses.” I. F.

     + + =Yale R.= 14: 330. N. ‘05. 1250w.


=Ragster, Olga.= Chats on violins. *$1.25. Lippincott.

  In these “chats” the history of the violin, historical and
  biographical sketches of Italian and German makers, and anecdotes of
  great players are given, followed by chapters on the manner of
  preserving and playing the violin and an appendix upon the life of
  Paganini. The illustrations present a series of types of the violin
  from the ninth century to the present day.

  “Miss Ragster’s treatment is clear and concise, and not of such a
  technical nature as to burden the ordinary reader.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 245. O. 16, ‘05. 210w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 305. O. 12, ‘05. 90w.

  “Miss Ragster’s English style is frequently vivacious, but often
  unfinished, and she is imperfectly informed as to the spelling of many
  foreign proper names and other words.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 722. O. 28, ‘05. 580w.

  * “While the book is not technical in any sense, it should be of
  considerable value to all students of the violin.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 700. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.


=Rambaud, Alfred Nicholas; Simkovitch, Vladimir; and others.= Case of
Russia: a composite view. **$1.25. Fox.

  “A presentation of certain phases of Russian life and history by five
  writers who have a first-hand knowledge of the subjects they discuss.
  It comprises: an outline sketch of the successive steps in the
  expansion of Russia; a brief psychological study of the Russian
  people; an interpretation of the Russian autocratic system; an inquiry
  into the progress and possibilities of the Slav; and a survey of the
  religious situation in Russia.”—Outlook.

         =Critic.= 47: 411. N. ‘05. 320w.

  “The proof-reading is inadequate, and the translation is not always
  quite what it should be.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 462. Je. 8, ‘05. 21??w.

  “Most of the matter, however, is somewhat vitiated by having been
  written some time ago.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 220w.

  “As with all ‘composite views,’ the effect is in some respects
  elusive, in others bewildering. But, on the whole, the symposium is
  distinctly helpful, and especially in the direction of assisting to a
  clearer understanding of the dominant traits and qualities of the
  inhabitants of the unhappy land.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 220w.

  “There is a good deal of psychological interest in the essays,
  particularly in that of Mr. Novicow.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 80w.


=Ramsay, William Mitchell.= Letters to the seven churches of Asia and
their place in the plan of the Apocalypse. *$3. Armstrong.

  “A prophet of Christianity, and one who for many years has devoted his
  best efforts to the study of a solution of the problem that confronts
  the religious world upon the meeting of the Asiatic and the European,
  when the barriers of the lofty mountains and arid plains of East and
  West are no more, believes that the great issue is with Christianity,
  and he has written this book to set forth a number of convincing
  proofs of the world-evangelizing principles that have won and are
  winning triumphs for the Christian faith.”—Boston Evening Transcript.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 81. Ja. 28, ‘05. 640w.

  “Ramsay’s fresh and rich book adds much to our knowledge of the Roman
  province of Asia in the first century A. D., and the influence of
  Christianity therein. The book combines the merits of scientific and
  popular history-writing. In three special ways this volume is
  valuable: (1) as a contribution to the understanding of the apostolic
  age; (2) as an aid to the interpretation of the New Testament
  Apocalypse; (3) as a practical study in comparative religion.” C W.
  Votaw.

   + + + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 552. Jl. ‘05. 1180w.

  “His archaeological and historical skill makes [it] of peculiar
  interest.”

       + =Bib. World.= 25: 158. F. ‘05. 20w.

  “The first half of the book is worth more than the last half. The
  style is diffuse; repetitions are frequent; and there are
  long-expanded commonplaces. The book will be welcomed chiefly because
  it contains many items of interesting information and throws much
  light upon the environment of the early Asia Minor Christians.” D. A.
  Hayes.

   + + — =Bib. World.= 26: 71. Jl. ‘05. 980w.

  “In scholarly detail, the story of the seven cities and their various
  symbols is related, and the usages and customs of the early Christian
  era are succinctly set forth.”

     + + =Boston Evening Transcript.= F. 8, ‘05. 400w.

  “His interpretation of particular passages is open to question, but
  his historical, geographical and archæological material on the
  churches addressed in these letters is very full and valuable.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1131. My. 18, 05. 130w.

  * “Some of his interpretations may be questioned, but the wealth of
  information and fact makes his book valuable for reference.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1160. N. 16, ‘05. 60w.

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 81. Jl. 27, ‘05. 1690w.

  “Is rather an introduction than a commentary, and it has much value as
  an introduction to the whole of the New Testament.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 980. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1180w.

  “Requires careful study, which it will amply repay.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 368. Mr. 11, ‘05. 470w.


* =Ranck, George Washington.= Bivouac of the dead, and its author. **$1.
Grafton press.

  The well-known martial elegy. The bivouac of the dead, and a lyric
  called The old pioneer, penned at the grave of Daniel Boone, by the
  same author, are included in this little volume with a story of the
  poems and a brief biography of Theodore O’Hara prepared with the full
  cooperation of his family. The whole forms a fitting tribute to the
  Kentucky soldier-poet.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 898. D. 16, ‘05. 240w.


=Ranke, Leopold von.= History of the reformation in Germany; tr. by
Sarah Austin; ed. by Rob. A. Johnson. $2. Dutton.

  This new low-priced edition of Ranke’s great work is “a reproduction
  of Mrs. Austin’s translation which only included the first six of the
  ten books into which Ranke divided his complete work. It includes the
  history of the German reformation down to the year 1534.” (Acad.)

         =Acad.= 68: 440. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1290w.

  “We have only a fragmentary translation, and ‘editing’ worthy of the
  publisher’s office-boy.”

     — — =Nation.= 81: 12. Jl. 6, ‘05. 100w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 176. Mr. 18, ‘05. 380w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 301. My. 6, ‘05. 280w.


=Ransom, Caroline Louise.= Studies in ancient furniture; couches and
beds of the Greeks, Etruscans and Romans. *$4.50. Univ. of Chicago
press.

  “A rather laborious piece of archæological work in a small field has
  been well performed by Miss Ransom.... Her investigation, in so far as
  it is original, depends upon an examination of monumental sources;
  from the literary she draws little, and that out of the usual
  handbooks, “the volume, a fine quarto, is beautifully illustrated by
  many full-page plates and cuts.””—Nation.

  “It is a slightly expanded college thesis, and a scholarly
  contribution to the archæology of furniture. No phase of the subject
  is overlooked. The results are presented in a manner which, though not
  entertaining to the general reader, will prove highly instructive to
  the student of archæology.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 275. Ap. 16. ‘05. 180w.

  “The plates and other illustrations in the text are many and well
  chosen, and the references and discussions in the notes show careful
  research and sound scholarship.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 99. Jl. 13, ‘05. 130w.

         =Int Studio.= 25: sup. 64. My. ‘05. 170w.

  “The text shows evidence of a scholarly study of them, and, what is
  almost better, the application of much common sense.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 250. Mr. 30, ‘05. 590w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 547. Ag. 19, ‘05. 400w.

  “A work of scholarly research in a limited special field.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 606. Mr. 4, ‘05. 10w.


=Rashdall, Rev. Hastings.= Christus in ecclesia. *$1.50. Scribner.

  “Dr. Rashdall is an efficient representative of the Broad church group
  in the Anglican establishment. In this volume of discourses he
  addresses himself especially to educated men and women. He is
  concerned lest religion be crowded out of life, either by revolt
  against narrow ecclesiasticism or by the pressure of other
  concerns.... To explain some Christian institutions, ideas, and
  practices to educated hearers, with a view to promote an interest in
  the Church and its ordinances at once rational and reverent, is
  therefore the main object of these discourses. Starting from a review
  of the Oxford movement as having restored the idea of the Church to
  its due prominence in Christian thought. Dr. Rashdall discusses in
  considerable detail the institutional side of Christianity.”—Outlook.

  “His outlook is historical. These discourses serve at any rate for a
  temperate and eminently clear expression of what many educated but not
  professional readers will recognize as an intelligible common-sense
  view on points of current controversy.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 84. Ja. 28, ‘05. 140w.

  “Characterized by transparent lucidity and an unadorned simplicity of
  diction.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 652. My. 27. 710w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 330. Ag. 10, ‘05. 120w.

  “The breadth and thoroughness of the discussion make the volume a
  helpful contribution to the reconstructive work now going on in
  religious thought. The general aim is practical. There is a note of
  reality, and of an intentness on reality, running through all these
  discourses.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 758. Mr. 25, ‘05. 260w.

  “In literary quality, too, as well as in the matter and tone, these
  sermons commend themselves to the discerning and sympathetic reader.”
  H. N. Gardiner.

     + + =Philos. R.= 16: 735. N. ‘05. 280w.

  “He is able, earnest, and learned, constructive, occasionally
  conservative, as well as critical.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 640. My. 13, ‘05. 300w.


=Rateau, A.= Experimental researches on the flow of steam through
nozzles and orifices, to which is added a note on the flow of hot water;
authorized tr. by H. Boyd Brydon. *$1.50. Van Nostrand.

  “This little book on the flow of steam is an expansion of” Prof
  Rateau’s “report to the congress of applied mechanics in 1890.... The
  object of the investigation was to determine the conditions governing
  the discharge from large conoidal convergent nozzles and an orifice in
  a thin plate, both above and below the ratio p equals 0.58 P.”—Engin.
  N.

  “His work is painstaking in the extreme. One or two obvious
  typographical errors are noted. It is an interesting addition to the
  literature on the flow of steam through nozzles.” Strickland L.
  Kneass.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 533. My. 18, ‘05. 650w.

  “The translation is clear. It is, however, a defect, for English
  readers, that the principal formulæ are left as given by the author in
  foreign units.”

   + + — =Nature.= 72: 101. Je. 1, ‘05. 210w.


=Rathbone, Eleanor F.= William Rathbone: a memoir. $3. Macmillan.

  In this memoir of her father, a Liverpool merchant, the author gives
  his life, his well-known work in parliament and in various
  philanthropic movements.

  “Very capably written biography.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 368. Ap. 1, ‘05. 350w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 718. Je. 10. 730w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 218. Ap. 8, ‘05. 350w.

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 258. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1870w.


=Ray, Anna Chapin (Sidney Howard, pseud.).= By the good Sainte Anne: a
story of modern Quebec. †$1.50. Little.

  A new edition of this story of a typical Englishman, a Canadian of
  English descent, and a young French-Canadian, all of whom pay court to
  bright, vivacious Nancy Howard, who with her father, a New York
  physician, drop in among the guests at the Maple Leaf. The scenes and
  points of interest in and about Quebec furnish a setting for the
  bright conversations in which the story abounds.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 137. My. 13, ‘05. 80w.


=Ray, Anna Chapin (Sidney Howard, pseud.), and Fuller, Hamilton Brock.=
On the firing line: a romance of South Africa. †$1.50. Little.

  Africa during the Boer war furnishes the setting of Miss Ray’s story
  of love and combat. The hero, a stalwart Canadian, follows an impulse
  to enter the fray as a private and in his narrow field demonstrates
  broad soldierly ability which operates for its full value, not only
  with the girl he loves, but with his rival, the young captain of his
  troop.

  “There is movement and life on every page.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1421. Je. 22, ‘05. 140w.

  “In spite of its conventional plot, holds a lively interest for the
  reader.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 357. Je. 3, ‘05. 250w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “The collaboration in this novel is very successful. A
  well-constructed, entertaining, bright story, permeated by the spirit
  that recognizes and appreciates high ideals.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 194. My. 20, ‘05. 100w.


=Ray, Anna Chapin.= Sidney: her summer on the St. Lawrence. †$1.50.
Little.

  In this new book for boys and girls, Sidney Stayres and her little
  brother Bungay spend an eventful summer with their cousins and their
  friends on the St. Lawrence. There are picnics, and general good
  times, there are accidents and anxious hours, but these doings of the
  true hearted little heroine and those who loved her will prove
  wholesome and entertaining reading for all young folks.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 708. O. 21, ‘05. 150w.

  “The characters seemed posed and artificial.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 631. N. 11, ‘05. 40w.


=Raymond, Edward Brackett.= Alternating current engineering, practically
treated. *$2.50. Van Nostrand.

  “This book is written by a member of the staff of the testing
  department of the General electric company; it consists of two parts;
  the first part contains the general theory of electricity and
  magnetism and a special theory of alternating currents; the second
  part treats of transformers, alternating current motors and
  alternators.... There is a great need for such a book, a book in which
  a young man just starting in practical electrical engineering work
  after college or any other school could find a clear, concise
  exposition of what he needs, what is done in practice, and why it is
  done so and not otherwise.”—Phys. R.

  “In summing up it seems that notwithstanding some defects the book can
  be well recommended to young electrical engineers and to those who
  would like to refresh their memory on the subject of alternating
  currents. It is to be regretted that Mr. Raymond did not write his
  book in coöperation with somebody more familiar with the theoretical
  part of the subject and particularly with the approved methods of
  presenting them in a simple, lucid way. Then the wide practical
  experience of Mr. Raymond would find its right place in the book and
  make it one of the most valuable additions to our engineering
  literature.” V. K.

   + + — =Phys. R.= 20: 190. Mr. ‘05. 1380w.


=Raymont, T.= Principles of education. *$1.40. Longmans.

  The author’s object in writing this book was “to present a brief but
  comprehensive treatment of the problems of education as they have
  shaped themselves in my mind during several years of experience in
  teaching.... It is for the younger members of that profession that my
  book is primarily intended.”

  “Readable and suggestive.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 51. Ja. 14, ‘05. 290w.

  “An interesting and comprehensive treatise on education.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 12. Jl. 1. 690w.

  “The main quality of his book we should describe as common-sense.” J.
  Welton.

   + + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 16: 113. O. ‘05. 800w.


=Rea, Hope.= Tuscan and Venetian artists, their thought and work.
*$1.50. Dutton.

  A new and enlarged edition of these essays which treat of the broader
  aspects of Italian art, using individual artists and their work as
  illustrations. In “Builders and goldsmiths,” the influence of these
  arts upon painting is shown thru Botticelli, while Angelico, the
  idealist, and Signorelli, the realist, are contrasted to show the
  relation between imagination and reality in art, and the fusion of the
  two is illustrated by Raphael and the Venetians. Giotto, Duccio,
  Carpaccio, and Raphael are treated under artists story tellers. There
  is also a chapter on Della Robbia ware. There are thirty-eight tinted
  half-tones.

  “The author writes intelligently, if with no great originality of
  thought, and in a pleasing if not over-exact style.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 194. Mr. 9, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is particularly valuable as a study of the causes which lead to
  the transference of an emotion from the individual to the canvas or
  marble.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 139. Mr. 4, ‘05. 470w.

  “The book may be recommended to those whose sympathy has not yet been
  aroused as it should be for the art of Tuscany and Venetia. Such a
  little book of criticism as this is always needed, not only for the
  unthinking tourist or student, but sometimes also for the thinking.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 248. Ja. 28, ‘05. 230w.


=Read, Carveth.= Metaphysics of nature. *$2.75. Macmillan.

  “By metaphysics Professor Read means the ‘study of the validity and
  adequacy of knowledge and belief’ ... the addition ‘of Nature’ is
  intended to rule out ideals, the matter of ethics, politics, religion,
  and art. Within these limits he claims that his work is conciliatory
  and constructive.”—Ath.

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 803. Ag. 5, ‘05. 760w.

  “Signs are not wanting that he approaches his subject as a man of
  science rather than a philosopher, that is, in a spirit of vindication
  rather than unbiased inquiry.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 47. Jl. 8. 640w.

  “Professor Carveth Read’s ‘Metaphysics of nature’ is a book that must
  take rank at once for importance with Mr. Bradley’s ‘Appearance and
  reality’ and Professor Ward’s ‘Naturalism and agnosticism.’” T.
  Whittaker.

     + + =Hibbert. J.= 4: 205. O. ‘05. 1990w.

  “One of the best parts of the volume is the general discussion of the
  test of truth.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 287. S. 8, ‘05. 600w.

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 527. O. 21, ‘05. 1620w.


=Read, Opie.= American in New York, a novel of to-day. $1.25. Thompson &
Thomas.

  Short sketches are welded together to form this book. There is a
  gallant Kentucky millionaire; “there is a very lovely widow who talks
  to him in the tea room, and to whom he tells quaint tales of the West;
  there is a young man, the millionaire’s adopted son, and a young
  woman, the widow’s niece.... To add to the zest of it too, the
  Colonel—so the millionaire is called—is very fond of playing Haroun Al
  Rashid. There is a villain also.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Really, the present volume furnishes some very good reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 558. Ag. 26, ‘05. 220w.

  “Tells some humorous stories and moralizes more or less shrewdly at
  times. There is too much, however, of his political and social
  dogmatism, and the personal story involved is of the weakest.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 43. S. 2, ‘05. 90w.


=Redgrave, Gilbert R., and Spackman, Charles.= Calcareous cements: their
nature, manufacture, and uses, with some observations upon cement
testing. *$4.50. Lippincott.

  “In its present edition this book is noteworthy for its discussion of
  cement manufacture. Over one-third of the space is devoted to this
  subject. The next largest space is given to composition, chemical
  analysis and constitution. In these sections and in its historical
  notes on the development and early manufacture of hydraulic cements
  the book is superior to any other treatise of which we have
  knowledge.”—Engin N.

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 645. Je. 15, ‘05. 360w.


=Rée, P. J.= Nuremburg and its art to the end of the 18th century; from
the German by G. H. Palmer. *$1.50. Scribner.

  “The librarian of the Bavarian museum at Nuremburg has written a
  careful survey of the art treasures in that city. He scarcely touches
  the history of the place ... but traces the development of German art,
  as illustrated by the buildings and in the museums of Nuremburg, in
  painstaking and elaborate fashion. His treatment of the artists and
  craftsmen who succeeded Dürer will be found especially valuable by
  English tourists who wish to learn something more of designers and
  artist-craftsmen.... This volume of the “Art cities” series is
  abundantly illustrated by one hundred and twenty-three
  photographs.”—Ath.

  “In spite of its merits, we fear that English readers will find it
  hard to digest. The translation of the book looks as if it had been
  ‘made in Germany.’”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 121. Jl. 22. 650w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 645. S. 30, ‘05. 230w.


=Reed, Helen Leah.= Amy in Acadia. †$1.50. Little.

  This is the first volume of a second series of the “Brenda” books; it
  is a story for girls and tells of the experiences encountered by Amy,
  her mother, and her girl friends among the descendants of the exiled
  Acadians. These experiences acquire a peculiar interest thru their
  romantic setting and their historical background.

  “The author manages, with indifferent skill, to convey much
  information for the benefit of young readers—that is, if they do not
  rebel at Amy.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 574. N. 4, ‘05. 40w.


=Reed, John Calvin.= Brothers’ war. **$2. Little.

  Optimistic in tone, looking forward to a glorious and peaceful future
  for a United States truly united, this book, altho written by a
  Southerner, and, to a certain extent, a plea for the South, makes for
  a better understanding between North and South by giving an account of
  the causes which led up to the Civil war in a fair-minded manner which
  admits of the statement that “the brothers on each side were true
  patriots and morally right.” It is an interesting volume and it
  discusses political parties, the great men upon each side, slavery,
  the race question and the Ku-Klux Klan, in a spirit so generous toward
  the North that it will not alienate even a reader in whom strong
  partisan feeling still remains.


=Reed, Myrtle.= At the sign of the Jack-o’-Lantern. **$1.50. Putnam.

  A New York newspaper man and his bride begin their honeymoon in their
  heirloom house which was set on a hill and known as the
  Jack-o’-Lantern, because its arrangement of doors and windows made
  hideous resemblance to a human face. The eccentric donor had added
  wing after wing to the main portion of the house, the reason for which
  becomes apparent when relations, singly and in groups, swoop down on
  the pair to make their annual visit—“to sponge on a dead man as they
  did when he was alive.” In this pandemonium Howard Carr tries to write
  his first book.

  “The author gives us a commonplace farce, all bustle, noise and
  confusion, with scenes and characters that have long ago lost all
  novelty.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 1009. S. 30, ‘05. 450w.

  “It is a disconcerting, but not displeasing blend of folly and
  shrewdness. Some readers will think the book a mere tissue of
  nonsense, others may take a fleeting pleasure in its very absurdity.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 433. S. 30. 260w.

  * “Miss Reed has certainly provided us in this instance with an
  original form of entertainment, and the story should prove
  popular.”—Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 308. N. 16, ‘05. 360w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 576. S. 7, ‘05. 140w.

  * “Myrtle Reed is possessed of a quick sense of humor, is a keen
  observer of life, and an exceptionally alert and alluring judge of
  human nature.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 966. D. 23, ‘05. 420w.

  “Miss Reed is mistress of a delicacy of thought and style which lends
  itself gracefully to the light and airy exaggeration of human
  foibles.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 674. O. 14, ‘05. 710w.

  “We do not find this tale altogether successful in its alternating
  attempts at sprightliness and sentiment. The characters neither act
  reasonably nor talk naturally.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 134. S. 16, ‘05. 50w.


=Reeves, Jesse Siddall.= Napoleonic exiles in America: a study in
American diplomatic history, 1815-1819. pa. 50c. Hopkins.

  This pamphlet is uniform with the “Johns Hopkins University studies in
  historical and political science.” The study centers about the
  unfortunate colonial enterprise called Champ d’Asile on the banks of
  the Trinity river in Texas.


=Reid, G. Archdall.= Principles of heredity, with some applications.
*$3.50. Dutton.

  “While possessing large and varied interest for the general reader,
  this work is specially addressed to medical men.... What is new in the
  work is mainly drawn from evidence, hitherto largely unused,
  concerning heredity, that he has found in the study of disease,
  especially of the zymotic kinds, and also of narcotics. This is held
  to establish conclusively that parental acquirements are never
  transmitted to offspring and that the great mass of variation has
  another origin than that of the action of the environment of the
  germ-cells.”—Outlook.

  “What he has written is evidently the result of wide reading and
  serious logical thinking with regard to the many intricate questions
  involved. At the same time his work is seldom technical, and will be
  nearly always readily intelligible even by those who are not familiar
  with the strictly biological terminology of the subject.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1110. N. 9, ‘05. 760w.

  “He covers too much ground, and appears to have put together matter
  written at different times and in pursuance of different trains of
  thought.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 184. Je. 9, ‘05. 1340w.

  * “We have one fault to find; in a work on the principles of heredity
  one would have expected a fuller discussion than is actually given of
  biometric and Mendelian methods of dealing with that phenomenon.” A.
  D. D.

   + + — =Nature.= 73: 121. D. 7, ‘05. 1330w.

  “He writes with a warmth of conviction that is stimulating to thought,
  and with a mastery of his subject which commands attention.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 89. S. 9, ‘05. 350w.


=Reinach, Salomon.= The story of art throughout the ages; tr. by
Florence Simmonds. **$2. Scribner.

  “A general outline of art from its origin to the present age. It
  includes art in the polished stone and bronze ages; in Egypt, Chaldea,
  and Persia; Aegean, Minoan, and Mycenæan art; Greek art before
  Phidias; Phidias and the Parthenon; Praxiteles, Scopas, and Lysippus;
  Greek art after Alexander the Great; the minor arts of Greece;
  Etruscan and Roman art; Christian art in the East and in the West;
  Romanesque and Gothic architecture; Romanesque and Gothic sculpture;
  the architecture of the renaissance and modern architecture; the
  renaissance of Siena and Florence; Venetian painting; Leonardo da
  Vinci and Raphael—the Milanese Umbrian and Roman schools; Michelangelo
  and Correggio; the renaissance in Germany; the Italian decadence and
  the Spanish school; art in the Netherlands in the sixteenth century;
  the art of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in France; and art
  in the nineteenth century. There are nearly six hundred illustrations
  in the book.”—Bookm.

  “Is a clever and valuable rapid sketch written by an authority.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 706. Ap. ‘05. 60w.

  “The translation is fluent and adequate as a whole, though it is
  occasionally clumsy.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 343. Mr. 18. 490w.

  “The translation before us, in the main, reads well, and the book, as
  a whole, appears in a very acceptable form. Much may be said in praise
  of the work and very little against it. The reader immediately becomes
  fascinated by the style, the independence of thought and judgments by
  the illuminating touches on periods and individual artists. Taken in
  its ensemble, it is possibly the best short history of art, or rather
  the history of the filiation of art schools ever written.” Hugo P.
  Thieme.

   + + + =Baltimore Sun.= : 8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 490w.

  “Excellent as is the treatment of ancient art, it is surpassed by the
  clear and scholarly exposition of art in the Christian era, so that we
  have no hesitation in saying that this book is an indispensable work
  for every library, whether large or small, throughout the land. It is
  a matter of sincere congratulation for the author to find so much
  knowledge in so small a space. The setting given to the text is of the
  same high order as the text itself.”

   + + + =Boston Evening Transcript.= Feb. 8, ‘05. 1140w.

  “A book both critical and fascinating. The translation, by Miss
  Florence Simmonds, is admirably done.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 202. Mr. 16, ‘05. 220w.

  “Well translated and copiously illustrated.”

   + + — =Int. Studio.= 25: 84. Mr. ‘05. 60w.

  “The book is a little masterpiece. His taste and judgment are as sure
  as his knowledge is exact. It is assuredly the best brief general
  history of art, if not the best such history of any length, that has
  yet appeared. It deserved a better and more faithful translation than
  has been given it by Florence Simmonds. One is never certain whether
  he is getting the opinions of M. Reinach or those of Miss Simmonds.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 58. Ja. 19, ‘05. 1590w.

  “The translation is unusually careful and successful, and the reader
  of it loses nothing of the practical utility of the work. The
  distinguishing trait of M. Reinach is his combination of poise and
  alertness. He is not a partisan.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 398. Je. 17, ‘05. 910w.

  “In the style there are surprising vivacity and individuality. The
  individual common sense, the happy and sometimes sharply incisive
  phrases, and the broadly critical spirit of the book are traits rare
  in an outline of this sort.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 197. Ja. 21, ‘05. 260w.

  “Has given us a work of exceptional educational value in his
  splendidly condensed ‘Story of art throughout the ages.’ It serves the
  double purpose of reference book and of introductory work to the art
  of any period. Readable narrative. All that a well-equipped special
  library on art should contain is given in condensed and miniature form
  in this one volume.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 297. F. 25, ‘05. 140w.

  “The rendering into English is clear and satisfactory.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 251. F. ‘05. 90w.


* =Reinsch, Paul Samuel.= Colonial administration. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  This volume in “The citizen’s library of economics, politics, and
  sociology,” “is rather a statement of the various problems confronting
  colonial governments, and an indication of the main lines of solution
  that have been attempted than a complete and conclusive discussion of
  the principles involved. The book gives in small compass a broad
  survey of the most important activities of modern colonial
  governments, and deals with the facts of colonial administration
  rather than with the underlying philosophy. Such topics as education;
  finance; commerce; currency, banking, and credit; agriculture; the
  land policy; and the labor question, are tersely and instructively
  discussed.”—R. of Rs.

  * “The temper and language of Prof. Reinsch’s introductory chapter
  could scarcely be improved. He has for the most part made good use of
  the numerous books cited in his notes.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 684. N. 18. 580w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 631. S. 23, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 638. N. ‘05. 110w.


=Remensnyder, Junius Benjamin.= Atonement and modern thought; with an
introd. by B: B. Warfield. $1. Lutheran pub. soc.

  “Dr. Remensnyder makes a vigorous presentation of the Lutheran
  conception of the Atonement in its antagonism to the characteristic
  tendencies of modern thought. As thus conceived it was an objective
  transaction in which Christ as the sinner’s substitute bore the
  punishment due to sin. The Atonement thus viewed is presented as the
  central truth of Christianity.”—Outlook.

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 757. Mr. 25, ‘05. 160w.


=Renan, Joseph Ernest.= Life of Jesus. 68c. Bell, H. W.

  A reprint in popular form of the scholarly “Life” written by the great
  French Liberal “from the view-point of one who saw in him a great
  prophet, but a son of the Infinite only in the sense that the noblest
  and purest of earth can be termed the sons of God.” (Arena.)

  “Is a volume that should be found in the libraries of all broad-minded
  people. This work will ever remain the loving and masterful labor of
  one of the bravest, ablest and most honest thinkers and scholars of
  the nineteenth century.” Amy C. Rich.

   + + + =Arena.= 33: 451. Ap. ‘05. 610w.


=Repplier, Agnes.= Compromises. **$1.10. Houghton.

  A group of entertaining essays with pure literary merit. The subjects
  which Miss Repplier treats are: Luxury of conversation; The gayety of
  life; The point of view; Marriage in fiction; Our belief in books; The
  beggar’s pouch; The pilgrim’s staff; A Quaker diary; French
  love-songs; The spinster; The tourist; The headsman; Consecrated to
  crime; Allegra.

  “She has always a point of view; she writes in an agreeable style; and
  she is well informed and has taste.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 78. Ja. 21. 320w.

  “They are not meant for the frivolous, but for those who can
  appreciate good literature. She has her own ideas on the subject about
  which she writes, and states them without hesitation or
  qualification.”

       + =Cath. World.= 80: 689. F. ‘05. 220w.

  “The subjects of her essays vary pleasantly and they are all written
  in a purely literary style. Her vivacity is not nervous, but
  intellectual, and the thread of her thought is so interwoven with the
  golden warp of older writers like Johnson, Montaigne and others that
  for once we have the tone of time upon the fresh tapestry of modern
  life. Her reflections shade back into old philosophies. All are
  seasoned with that pleasant gossip which a good-tempered intelligent
  woman has acquired from a wide knowledge of and close friendship with
  the best writers of the last four hundred years.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 154. Ja. 19, ‘05. 450w.


* =Repplier, Agnes.= In our convent days. **$1.10. Houghton.

  Charming personal reminiscences of the author’s childhood in a
  French-American convent school. The stories are real, they are true to
  human nature, true, so those who know declare, to the atmosphere of
  the school itself, and certainly true in that many of the little girls
  who lived and had adventures and murmured profound confidences inside
  those convent walls are prominent women to-day.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 574. D. ‘05. 60w.

  * “Is in Miss Agnes Repplier’s happiest style.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 485. D. 14, ‘05. 370w.

  * “She has never been more delightful than in this little volume.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 440w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 170w.

  * “Delightful studies of girl nature told with humor and literary
  grace.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 681. N. 18, ‘05. 40w.


Representative essays on the theory of style, chosen and edited by
William Tenney Brewster. *$1.10. Macmillan.

  These essays have been selected with the object of supplementing the
  technical works on methods and forms. The volume includes Literature,
  by John Henry Newman; Style, by Thomas de Quincey; The philosophy of
  style, by Herbert Spencer; The principles of success in literature, by
  George Henry Lewis; Style in literature—its technical elements, by
  Robert Louis Stevenson; Style, by Walter Pater; and Our English prose,
  by Frederic Harrison. Professor Brewster has included an introduction,
  notes and questions, and an index.

  “Has performed a useful service for teachers of literature.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 279. N. 1, ‘05. 50w.

  “A volume likely to be of good service to academic students of
  literature and composition.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 382. N. 9, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 648. S. 30, ‘05. 270w.

  “The introduction ... makes skilful use of the material which the
  editor has carefully selected for the body of the volume.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 430. O. 21, ‘05. 90w.

  “A very welcome work.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 575. O. 28, ‘05. 220w.


Revival; a symposium, ed. by Rev. J. H. MacDonald. *75c. Meth. bk.

  Seven addresses which were first delivered before the Chicago
  Preachers’ meeting. They are designed to awaken a more general
  interest in revival work and include sermons by Bishop McDowell, Rev.
  E. B. Crawford, Rev. Chas. Little, Rev. John Thompson, Rev. W. E.
  Tilroe, and Rev. P. H. Swift.

  * “They are excellent as far as they go, but the collection as a whole
  lacks completeness and proportion.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 282. S. 30, ‘05. 80w.


=Reybaud, Henrietta Etiennette Fanny (Arnaud) (Mme. Charles Reybaud).=
La belle paysanne; tr. from the French by Remus F. Foster. $1. Neale.

  A young French student falls in love with the pastel of a beautiful
  woman which he finds in his uncle’s house, and he hears her story from
  an old lover of hers and a priest, and learns how, as a young girl,
  she broke her troth to the marquis and married a handsome peasant,
  whom she afterwards murdered. In the end he finds in his uncle’s
  repulsive old housekeeper the original of his fancy.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 157. Mr. 11, ‘05. 210w.


=Reynolds, Cuyler=, comp. Classified quotations: compiled for general
reference and also as aids in making up lists of toasts and in the
preparation of the after dinner speech and occasional address; with
suggestions concerning the menu and other details connected with the
proper ordering of a banquet; being a reissue of “The banquet book.”
**$2.50. Putnam.

  “The book is a collection of quotations on all sorts of subjects,
  intended to help persons preparing menus for dinners. It evidently
  fills the place for which it was intended, for this appearance is the
  fifth.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The collection is a good one; more general, besides than the needs
  of the banquet. The index is rather meagre.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 240. S. 21, ‘05. 120w.

  * “Mr. Reynolds has the capacity for taking infinite pains, as all his
  work shows, and this collection is remarkably complete.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 140w.


=Reynolds, George F.= Some principles of Elizabethan staging. 50c. Univ.
of Chicago press.

  This study is only a part of a more comprehensive one now in
  preparation, discussing not only Elizabethan plays but also the actual
  construction of the stage itself and the properties which furnished
  it.


=Rhoades, Cornelia Harsen (Nina Rhoades).= That Preston girl. †$1.50.
Wilde.

  A story which depicts the loneliness and suffering of a girl who is
  ostracized because of her father’s dishonest means of attaining
  wealth. She is a refined, unselfish, loyal type of girlhood, a helpful
  acquaintance for any young reader.


=Rhodes, James Ford.= History of the United States from the compromise
of 1850. Vol. 5. **$2.50. Macmillan.

  “Confidence has grown with each succeeding volume that the great
  history of the Civil war is being written.” (Ind.) This fifth volume
  covers the years 1864-66. “In the beginning of this volume, Mr. Rhodes
  gives a brief recapitulation of the salient events of the Civil war,
  and follows this with a detailed account of Sherman’s Georgia
  campaign. Grant’s Appomattox campaign, Lee’s surrender, and the
  assassination of Lincoln are all treated within the limits of a single
  chapter. A long chapter is devoted to an account of society at the
  North during the war, and a similar chapter to society at the South.
  Another chapter is assigned to the treatment of prisoners of war. The
  volume closes with a fair and impartial account of reconstruction.”
  (R. of Rs.)

  “But it would be unfair to regard Dr. Rhodes’s slips in military
  matters as impairing the value of his work. The present volume is a
  perfect storehouse of valuable facts and records. If anything, it is
  too full of material and not sufficiently ordered.” A. R. Ropes.

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 80. Ja. 28, ‘05. 640w.

  “I cannot think of another historian who so constantly produces the
  effect of complete candor, who is so indefatigably minded to tell all
  that can be reckoned of consequence, and to display unreservedly the
  sources of his knowledge and the grounds of his opinions.” W. G.
  Brown.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 181. O. ‘05. 2800w.

  “As a whole it comes up fully to the high standard set in the
  preceding volumes. In the treatment of the controversial questions of
  the time Mr. Rhodes shows the same spirit of impartiality and breadth
  of view which has won for him the admiration of students.” James
  Wilford Garner.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 352. Mr. ‘05. 920w.

  “To the specialist, the work will appeal as authoritative until more
  evidence is forthcoming. The author has performed a distinct service
  in showing that a non-partisan account of our great Civil war need not
  be colorless.” David Y. Thomas.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 230. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1020w.

  “It is hardly possible that the theme will ever be treated with fuller
  detail, more skilfully wrought into a dramatic story. Concerning this,
  as concerning the whole work, it must be said that it will be most
  authoritative among those who are most familiar with the sources of
  information. The general reader may grow to believe fully in the
  author’s conclusions, but the specialist will be convinced by the
  unquestionable force of the testimony offered.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 151. Ja. 19, ‘05. 680w.

  * “This masterful accomplishment entitles Mr. Rhodes to the first
  place among American historians.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 120w.

  “The writer’s method and his even narration make pleasant reading.
  There is the same painstaking examination of authorities, the same
  skilful arrangement of facts, the same balanced (sometimes hesitating)
  judgment, and the same desire to be eminently fair to all parties in a
  controversy.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 177. Mr. 2, ‘05. 1800w.

  “Mr. Rhodes’s treatment of the war itself, and of the issues growing
  out of the war, is that of an unbiased historian, and will meet, we
  think, with the cordial approbation of southern as well as northern
  participants in that great struggle.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 247. F. ‘05. 180w.

  “A considerable part of this volume is given to a chapter describing
  the conditions of society in the northern states during the war, and
  another chapter to society in the southern states. These are among the
  most important and interesting contributions to our historical
  literature. They are hardly entitled to be called brilliant, but they
  are full of good sense, of sound judgments, and of well-proportioned
  groupings of facts. They are likely to be read as long as any
  historical writings of our time. His style is not brilliant, but it is
  a good working style, with the fundamental merits of clearness and
  dignity; and his judgments are the judgments of a man of great common
  sense. All preceding books have at best been materials for such a
  history. Mr. Rhodes’s work is the best narrative of this stirring
  time.”

   + + + =World’s Work.= 9: 5982. Mr. ‘05. 700w.


=Rice, Mrs. Alice Caldwell Hegan (Mrs. Cale Young Rice).= Sandy. †$1.
Century.

  In turning away from Mrs. Wiggs and Lovey Mary, Mrs. Rice has chosen
  to import the irresponsible, hot-headed, impulsive Irish boy, Sandy.
  All the way from stowaway on an American liner to the successful
  college graduate, and the hero of an ambitious romance, he runs a
  curious round of chance which claims him for a boot-black, newsboy,
  peddler, and finally drops him into the keeping of a kind-hearted old
  judge, who starts him along the road to fortune.

  “The story is a good deal more than readable.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 684. Je. 3, 210w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 209. Jl. 27, ‘05. 150w.

  “The book possesses much of the wholesome sweetness of her two earlier
  volumes. There is no denying Mrs. Rice’s pleasant manner of telling a
  story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 316. My. 13, ‘05. 630w.

  “It possesses much of the wholesome sweetness of the philosophy of the
  Cabbage patch.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “A simple, lifelike story full of quiet humor, pathos, and charm.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 195. My. 20, ‘05. 80w.

  “An interesting study of the stuff that Americans are made of, and of
  a variety of cleverly drawn Kentucky types.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 872. Je. 3, ‘05. 190w.

  “Mrs. Rice’s reputation will receive a fine impetus from this
  delightful little story.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 95. Je. ‘05. 140w.

  “Mrs. Rice has given too much attention to the outsiders in ‘Sandy,’
  and the boy and the girl who are the chief actors suffer. The story is
  sketchily drawn; too sketchily, the average reader will think.”

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 243. Jl. ‘05. 300w.

  “Nothing but the dreariest herbage of sentimental commonplace.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 601. My. 6, ‘05. 290w.


=Richards, Ellen Henrietta Swallow (Mrs. R. H. Richards).= Art of right
living. *50c. Whitcomb & B.

  This small volume proffers much commonsense advice on the limitations
  of food, the need of air, exercise, amusement and work.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 299. My. 6, ‘05. 70w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 398. F. 11. ‘05. 30w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 511. Ap. ‘05. 50w.


=Richards, Laura Elizabeth Howe. Mrs.= Tree’s will. †75c. Estes.

  “The reader of Mrs. Richard’s series beginning with ‘Captain January’
  will meet old acquaintances here. Mrs. Tree herself, though dead,
  seems more alive than anybody through her will, its effects, and the
  anecdotes her survivors narrate.”—Outlook.

  * “The book is a gem in its own way.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “Is a worthy successor to ‘Mrs. Tree’ in affording quiet amusement
  for an idle hour. Mrs. Richards writes brightly, humorously, and with
  excellent taste.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 753. N. 18, ‘05. 350w.

  “There are certain touches of pleasant humor here and there in the
  book that almost give it a reason for existence.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 621. S. 23, ‘05. 310w.

  “The picturing of village life, though amusing and touching at times,
  lacks strength and body, seems trivial and fantastic.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 383. O. 14. ‘05. 60w.


=Richardson, Clifford.= Modern asphalt pavement. $3. Wiley.

  This book successfully covers a field hitherto but inadequately dealt
  with. It is “the first authoritative presentation of the subject by a
  representative of the asphalt paving companies, thus making public the
  results of long and patient investigation by them, not heretofore
  accessible to the municipal engineer.... Structurally, Mr. Richardson
  divides an asphalt pavement into three parts or courses; the base, the
  intermediate course and the surface course.” (Engin. N.) He treats his
  subject exhaustively from the selection of materials to the proper
  execution of the work.

  “In conclusion it not too much to say that Mr. Richardson’s book
  should be classed with those which appear too infrequently, but whose
  appearance marks epochs in the industry to which they relate. Even if
  the dictums of the authors are not always accepted or vindicated, they
  set people to thinking and mark out new paths for future progress.” S.
  Whinery.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 633. Je. 15, ‘05. 4240w.

  “The book is likely to prove of great value to municipal authorities.”
  T. H. B.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 316. Ag. 3, ‘05. 600w.


=Richardson, Dorothy.= Long day: a true story of a New York working girl
as told by herself. *$1.20. Century.

  A country bred girl tells of her experiences in New York city. She
  came friendless and unskilled with but a few dollars in her pocket,
  she sought honest work, and found short jobs as a box maker, a
  sweat-shop worker, a liner of jewel-boxes, a “shaker” in a steam
  laundry and at various other occupations all equally unpleasant and
  equally underpaid. The pictures she draws of the working girls’ home
  are painfully sad and realistic.

  * “The book deserves a reading.”

       + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 749. N. ‘05. 170w.

  * “Written with so much understanding and insight.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 890w.

  “The woman who tells her own story is terribly in earnest about it
  all.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 672. O. 14, ‘05. 330w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 663. N. 18, ‘05. 150w.

  * “A story that is nothing less than fascinating.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 757. D. ‘05. 180w.


=Richardson, Norval.= Heart of hope. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “This story of the Civil war offers drama and romance in about the
  usual proportions, but the former of a quality quite unusual—the siege
  of Vicksburg being pictured with cycloramic realism.”—Outlook.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 139. My. 13, ‘05. 30w.

  “This is an uncommonly interesting story of the Civil war. The
  sentimental motive is skilfully woven into the account of the siege.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 475. S. ‘05. 240w.


=Richey, Harry Grant.= Handbook for superintendents of construction,
architects, builders, and building inspectors. $4. Wiley.

  “The subjects which receive particularly thorough and careful
  treatment are: excavating, laying out foundations, testing and
  analysis of stone, stone and bricklaying (which is especially well
  illustrated), testing of soil, piling, timber specifications, steel
  sheet piling, building stones, etc.... A fair amount of space is
  devoted to cement and concrete.”—Engin. N.

  “In general, the book is meritorious and well presented, almost all of
  the matter being of value to building inspectors or superintendents.
  The book compares very well with other books of its kind.” Wm. W.
  Ewing.

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 642. Je. 15, ‘05. 560w.


=Richman, Irving Berdine.= Rhode Island; a study in separatism. **$1.10.
Houghton.

  A volume in the “American commonwealths” series. “There can be no
  doubt that the distinctive characteristic of Rhode Island as a
  political entity has been its separatist tendencies. Founded as a
  protest, it has clearly demonstrated its innate individualism in every
  crisis of its history.... There is reason for Mr. Richman’s assertion
  that even to-day the influence of the old-time thought is making
  itself keenly felt in the political life of the state.... Mr. Richman
  writes with enthusiasm [and gives] concise retrospective
  summaries.”—Outlook.

  * “Mr. Richman has made one of the most instructive and readable
  contributions to the ‘American commonwealths’ series.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 904. D. 16, ‘05. 580w.

  * “His conclusions, on the whole, show discrimination, and his
  treatment is adequate, developing the social and economic as well as
  the political and constitutional history of the state. The most
  serious defect—and it is serious—is an occasional obscuration of
  salient facts in a mass of detail.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 833. D. 2, ‘05. 100w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 728. D. 2, ‘05. 280w.


=Richmond, Grace S.= Indifference of Juliet. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  An “account of Juliet’s repeated refusals of a nice, tall,
  broad-shouldered young man named Anthony. Anthony had been rich, but
  unfortunately lost all his money. Nevertheless he continued to love
  Juliet.... At last, goaded to desperation, he worked out a pretty
  little plan of arousing the lady’s jealousy, which was quite
  successful. With Juliet’s aid he fitted and furnished a dear little
  box of a house in the country, ostensibly for a lovely California
  girl.... After it was all ready for its new mistress Juliet permitted
  herself the luxury of going over it all alone one evening and crying.
  And there Anthony found her. But this is not the end of the story. In
  fact it is only the beginning, and several other romances crop up
  before it is finished.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 245. Ap. 15, ‘05. 380w.

  “A pleasant little love story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17. ‘05. 220w.


=Rickert, Edith.= Reaper. †$1.50. Houghton.

  A story of the primitive life of the Shetland islands where the sea is
  “the great fact of life.” The hero reaps his harvest of content after
  years spent in patient service to a widowed mother, whose fondness for
  drink he strives by eternal vigilance to hide from others. The call of
  the sea is forever in his ears, but in the end, when he is free to go,
  he finds that the desire is conquered and his real happiness lies at
  home in the love of a woman and a little child.

  “The dialect is not particularly unintelligible, but there is a good
  deal of it.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 94. Ja. ‘05. 50w.

  “It is worth reading for itself, and those who love the sea,
  especially, will like it because it is full of the atmosphere of the
  sea, of the simplicity and the mysticism and primitiveness of true
  sea-dwelling people.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 503. Mr. 2, ‘05. 290w.

  “A new field, and a new strong writer in that field. There is much
  quiet power in the story.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 256. Ja. ‘05. 280w.

  “As to its intrinsic interest and picturesqueness there can be no
  doubt whatever.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 717. My. 13, ‘05. 670w.


* =Ridgeway, William.= Origin and influence of the thoroughbred horse.
*$3.75. Macmillan.

  “Treats not only of all the chief breeds of British domestic horses
  known in historical times, but also takes a survey of all the other
  living equidae, as well as of the ancestors of the genus. He has made
  an attempt to treat historically the origin of the various colors
  found in English horses; at the same time indicating the influence
  exercised on the history of the chief nations of the ancient,
  mediaeval, and modern world by the possession of horses.... Besides
  all this he has ‘also tried to point out the lessons of supreme
  importance to the breeder.’ ... A supplementary chapter has been
  included considering ‘The development of equitation.’ There are also
  addenda and a full index, besides numerous illustrations.”—N. Y.
  Times.

  * “He marshals evidence for you as a special pleader, and hammers it
  in as a violent partisan. But at the same time he does not carry his
  audience away. There are too many slips of fact, too many circular
  proofs, too many violations of logic. At the end you are interested,
  stimulated, but not won.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 313. S. 29, ‘05. 1710w.

  * “Prof. Ridgeway on the other hand, has primarily attacked the
  problem from the point of view of the historian and the archaeologist,
  and it must be acknowledged that naturalists owe him a large debt of
  gratitude for bringing into prominence lines of evidence with which,
  from the very nature of the case, they are unfamiliar.” R. L.

     + + =Nature.= 73: 126. D. 7, ‘05. 1950w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 731. O. 28, ‘05. 240w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 942. D. 36, ‘05. 100w.

  * “It is also an encyclopedia of information on the history of the
  ‘Equidae’, collected from every source, from post-Pliocene deposits to
  modern sporting newspapers. Professor Ridgeway, when merely setting
  down information, is apt to flit among countries and ages with a
  dexterity which perplexes the reader.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 655. O. 28, ‘05. 1540w.


=Ridley, Alice, Lady.= Daughter of Jael. $1.50. Longmans.

  With the spirit of a Brutus, Frances Cary, the heroine of this story,
  kills her niggardly and cruel grandfather in order to free her
  brother, the lawful heir, from a rule of terrible bondage. The act was
  inevitable to her philosophy of youth. The book goes on to show that
  retribution will not be restrained by the mitigating circumstance of
  unselfishness in actuating a crime. One has his fill of deep problems.

  “This story deals with the shadow of a very dark deed involving a
  question of casuistry in morals. The book is interesting in a dismal
  way. The odor of chloroform pervades it and hangs heavy on every
  page.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 21. Ja. 14, ‘05. 490w.

  “It fairly bristles with problems. In spite of the undercurrent of
  gloom the story is light and even gay in some of its passages.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 26. Ja. 5. ‘05. 250w.


=Riley, James Whitcomb.= Riley songs o’ cheer. $1.25. Bobbs.

  Over fifty of Mr. Riley’s happiest verses have been collected into
  this volume which is profusely illustrated by Will Vawter. The
  all-golden; A Christmas carol; The first bluebird; Mister hop-toad; A
  passing hail; The twins; A song of the road; and While the heart beats
  young, are included among other old favorites.

 *   + + =Arena.= 34: 660. D. ‘05. 480w.

  * “There is a good deal of commonplace work in the book, but there are
  also bits here and there of Mr. Riley at his best.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 90w.

  * “It is a great pity that Mr. James Whitcomb Riley’s publishers
  should persist in vulgarizing verse so fine as his by cheap and silly
  illustrations.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 508. D. 21, ‘05. 150w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 170w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 631. N. 11, ‘05. 60w.

  * “Wholesome verse, it is, and tinged with a sentiment that is genuine
  though often commonplace.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 70w.


=Riley, Theodore Myers.= A memorial biography of the Very Reverend
Eugene Augustus Hoffman. $5. Priv. ptd. at the Marion press, Jamaica,
Queensborough, N. Y.

  A biography which covers fully the facts of a life upon which the
  author comments as follows: “He was never primarily a theologian, or
  indeed primarily anything but an admirably well-balanced man, in whom
  the note of our common nature was always predominant.... He wrote no
  great books; he ventilated no schemes of sociological or of
  theological improvement to the world; he offered no advice to the
  public for the reconstitution of human society. He simply abode in the
  path of achievement marked out for him by his office as a priest, and
  by his gifts of constitution and rule.... And so he became great,
  because he was faithful, humble, wise, modest.”

  “It is appreciative, orderly, and so full that its 795 pages of noble
  type leave nothing to be desired except an index.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 154. F. 23, ‘05. 290w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 57. Ja. 28, ‘05. 170w. (Statement of
         contents.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 139. Mr. 4, ‘05. 580w. (Abstract of
         contents.)


=Riley, Thomas James.= Higher life of Chicago. *75c. Univ. of Chicago
press.

  A study of the culture interests of Chicago has resulted in the
  exposition of some of the agencies that are working for the betterment
  of the city, including the schools, libraries and the press, civic
  associations and women’s clubs, social settlements, charities, etc.

  “To many who think of Chicago as a great commercial centre merely,
  this account of the higher life will be a revelation.”

       + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 594. S. ‘05. 100w.

  “It is a book of much value both for reference and for the further
  stimulation of cultural and altruistic endeavor.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 327. My. 1, ‘05. 80w.


=Ringwalt, Ralph Curtis.= Briefs on public questions, with selected
lists of references. *$1.20. Longmans.

  A book which “is sure of favor with the young debating community, but
  is also well calculated to enlarge the understanding and settle the
  convictions of journalists and legislators. Its themes are logically
  ordered under three heads, Politics, Economics, and Sociology.”
  (Nation.) Twenty-five individual topics are treated, among them
  Naturalization, Woman suffrage, Negro suffrage, Restriction of
  immigration, Reciprocity with Canada, Government ownership of
  railways, single tax, etc.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 56: 594. S. ‘05. 170w.

  “Great judgment and fairness have been displayed by the author, who
  has been able to sink personal considerations to a marked degree in
  his effort to impartially present a brief outline of the principal
  arguments on each subject discussed.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 329. S. ‘05. 250w.

  “High-school and college students will give this book a warm welcome.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “The scheme and the execution are to be commended, and Mr. Ringwalt
  has had in mind in his bibliography the resources of ordinary public
  libraries.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 481. Je. 15, ‘05. 150w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 361. Je. 3, ‘05. 1160w.

  “Within its chosen field a valuable reference book. The work has been
  done with much care and thoroughness, and the book is not by any means
  limited in its usefulness to those preparing for debates, although its
  peculiar adaptability to that purpose is evident.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 442. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.


=Riordan, William L.= Plunkitt of Tammany hall. †$1. McClure.

  A series of very plain talks on very practical politics, delivered by
  ex-senator George Washington Plunkitt, the Tammany philosopher, from
  his rostrum—the New York county courthouse bootblack stand—and
  recorded by William L. Riordan. “For more than forty years he has seen
  the political game played in New York city.... His has been the
  peculiar distinction of holding four offices at one and the same time
  and drawing salaries for three of them.... He is the old-fashioned
  type of the professional politician, even in Tammany Hall, but he has
  a shrewd, homely sense that is not to be learned from books and that
  would be invaluable in a man without the moral crookedness that
  afflicts this man.”—Pub. Opin.

         =Outlook.= 81: 528. O. 28, ‘05. 90w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 477. O. 7, ‘05. 370w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 638. N. ‘05. 170w.


=Ripley, William Zebina=, ed. Trusts, pools and corporations. *$1.80.
Ginn.

  This volume is “a compilation of special articles, mainly by other
  well-known legal writers, on the great cases which have arisen
  relative to the status of corporate bodies. These cases extend over a
  period of thirty-five years, from the Michigan salt association ... in
  1868 to the recent Northern securities company and the United States
  shipbuilding company.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Doubtless the book will prove a valuable adjunct to the equipment of
  the student. But a further compilation and classification of cases
  would have been more reassuring to the student.”

   + + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 593. My. ‘05. 170w.

         =Dial.= 38: 396. Je. 1, ‘05. 50w.

  “An important and valuable contribution to economic literature.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 295. Mr. 16, ‘05. 540w.

  * “A book of very considerable value.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 352. My. 4, ‘05. 290w.

  “The introduction is a clear and unbiased discussion of the trust
  problem.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 295. My. 6, ‘05. 140w.


=Rishell, Charles Wesley.= Child as God’s child. 75c. Meth. bk.

  A discussion of “baptism and church membership and the teaching of the
  home and Sunday school from the point of view of one who believes in
  gradual growth into the religious life.” (Ind.)

         =Ind.= 58: 1013. My. 4, ‘05. 50w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 144. Mr. 4, ‘05. 210w.


=Rives, Amelie.= See =Troubetzkoy, Amelie.=


=Rives, Hallie Ermine.= See =Dickens, Charles=


=Roberts, Charles George Douglas.= Red fox: the story of his adventurous
career in the Ringwaak wilds and of his final triumph over the enemies
of his kind. †$2. Page.

  “The history of a hero fox of singular beauty and strength, united
  with rare intelligence, adaptability and foresight.... His range was
  the forest, rocky slopes, and backwoods farms of the Ringwaak country
  in eastern Canada. Here he ran the full gamut of fox-experience ...
  leading a joyous and adventurous life till the brightness of his
  renown made him a shining mark for capture. Then, taken by a trick
  formidable for its simplicity, he was sent to the states to make a
  Roman holiday for a fashionable hunt club, but escaped by almost
  super-vulpine sagacity and found safety in the mountains.” (Nation.)
  Fifty full page drawings by Charles Livingston Bull illustrate the
  volume.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Has the fascination of a real jungle story, without owing any
  apparent debt to Mr. Kipling.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 798. D. 9, 210w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 373. D. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  * “It is as charming in style as it is in atmosphere.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1390. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “It is intensely interesting throughout; it ends happily; the
  natural history is sound; and the pictures are numerous and worthy.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 432. D. 8, ‘05. 150w.

  “Mr. Roberts appears to tell his story chiefly for its own sake, but
  he impresses us quite as deeply as if he had tried to enforce it by
  didacticism.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 290w.

  “Is a rare thing among animal biographies. The interest, at least, is
  quite human.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 710. O. 21, ‘05. 410w.

  * “Certainly the story is entertaining, and wins and keeps the
  sympathy of the reader for the four-footed hero.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 140w.

  Reviewed by Mabel Osgood Wright.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 872. D. 9, ‘05. 120w.

  * “Red Fox is one of the most interesting characters in all the annals
  of woods life.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 718. N. 25, ‘05. 170w.

  “The treatment is sufficiently literal to answer all that the author
  claims for his book, and certainly nothing is lost in charm by the
  insertion of what Mr. Roberts considers the animal psychology.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 601. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.


=Roberts, Edmund Willson.= Automobile pocketbook: a compendium of the
gasoline automobile. $1.50. Gas engine pub.

  The object of this little book is “to place before the designer and
  the operator, in a brief manner, a few general notes on the design and
  the operation of the gasoline automobile.” “Somewhat more than
  one-half the book is devoted to the design of various parts, such as
  valve mechanisms, mufflers and axles; and detailed descriptions of the
  best forms now in use are given, accompanied by lettered drawings,
  which enable the average reader to grasp the idea at a glance....
  Several chapters are devoted to the care of various parts of the
  automobile, how to locate troubles and how to make repairs.” (Engin.
  N.)

  “This pocketbook fills a place in automobile literature occupied by no
  other book.”

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 636. Je. 15, ‘05. 280w.


=Roberts, George Simon.= Old Schenectady. *$4.50. Robson & Adee,
Schenectady, N. Y.

  A book which “carries the reader back to 1682, when the Dutch Van
  Curlers, the Vedders, the Tellers, and other Dutch families settled
  there. The author does not attempt a historical narrative, but gives a
  series of pictures of the quaint town in the early days: its pioneer
  settlers; its defenses against Indian attack; its French and Indian
  massacre; its Dutch heirlooms. The value of the book is much enhanced
  by appropriate and well-executed cuts and halftone illustrations.”—Am.
  Hist. R.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 722. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  “Some history, more genealogy, and a modicum of biography well served
  by the compiler of the neatly printed volume, make an interesting
  story. The book bristles with anecdote, reminiscence, and tradition of
  the families ... whose names still count for much in the Mohawk
  valley.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 61. Ja. 28, ‘05. 520w.


=Roberts, Isaac Phillips.= Horse. **$1.25. Macmillan.

  This book “includes an account of the development of the horse from
  the early times and the introduction of improved breeds; a description
  of kinds and grades now in use; a careful study of the different gaits
  and paces of the horse; and many chapters dealing with the most
  approved and practicable methods of training, feeding, driving,
  breeding, and caring for horses.”—Outlook.

  “Even the man who breeds horses for the market may find helpful
  suggestions here. Told in an entertaining way, with an enthusiasm for
  the subject that adds sparkle to the story.”

   + + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 223. Jl. ‘05. 110w.

  Reviewed by Charles Tracy Bronson.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 292. My. 6, ‘05. 570w.

  “The book has unquestioned value, and contains in compact form but in
  clear language much that is valuable.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 1014. Ap. 22, ‘05. 100w.


=Roberts, Morley.= Lady Penelope. †$1.50. Page.

  The lady Penelope Brading, orphaned daughter of an English earl and an
  American heiress, is a young woman of ideas, and ideals. From a host
  of suitors, and there are many as she possesses all things save a
  sense of humor, she chooses eight; a poet, a captain, a successful
  Jew, a young nobleman, a war correspondent, a balloonist, an artist,
  and an American millionaire, and puts them in training, finally
  announcing that she has married one of them secretly. Each pretends to
  be the one and the reader is thoroly mystified even when a baby
  arrives to further complicate the situation.

  “In the present book we find neither matter nor manner.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 151. F. 18, ‘05. 320w.

  “‘Lady Penelope’ is the best book we have seen for the use of those
  newspapers which a few years ago offered prizes for guessing how the
  story would end.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 673. Mr. 23, ‘05. 440w.

  “It is all in its airy way an amazingly clever satire, touching upon
  an astonishing number of solemn and respectable matters in a manner of
  cheerful and spontaneous audacity, which disarms resentment.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 146. Mr. 11, ‘05. 790w.

  “This is an amusing and audacious comedy of cross purposes and
  dramatic situations.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “Original, clever and amusing.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 706. Mr. 18, ‘05. 90w.

       + =Reader.= 6: 478. S. ‘05. 170w.

  “Witty and ingenious.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 757. Je. ‘05. 140w.


=Roberts, Theodore.= Brothers of peril. †$1.50. Page.

  The two brothers of peril are a brave Indian boy and a young English
  cavalier seeking adventure in the New world. The scenes are laid in
  Newfoundland among the Beothic Indians. The author says: “I have dared
  to resurrect an extinct tribe for the purposes of fiction. I have
  drawn inspiration from the spirit of history rather than the letter.
  But the heart of the wilderness, and the hearts of men and women, I
  have pictured in this romance of olden time as I know them to-day.”

  * “A well-fancied tale of old Newfoundland.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 576. O. 28. 50w.

  “We admire Mr. Roberts’s modesty, and commend him for his temperate
  description.”

       + =Bookm.= 22: 182. O. ‘05. 200w.

  “A rarely good tale of adventure in which the characters are vividly
  drawn and the interest is never allowed to fall below the properly
  breathless point.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 495. Jl. 29, ‘05. 870w.

  “A fabric pulsing with thrills, jealousy, pirates, Indian treachery
  and other necessities of a thoroughly good story of adventure.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 221. Ag. 12. ‘05. 90w.


=Robertson, Charles Grant,= ed. Select statutes, cases and documents to
illustrate English constitutional history, 1660-1832; with a supplement
from 1832-1894. **$3. Putnam.

  “The book is the outgrowth of the author’s own needs in teaching
  modern history at Oxford, where he found that ... there was a hiatus
  that needed to be filled by a collection of documents for the epoch
  that opens with the restoration of Charles II.... Among the statutes
  and documents included may be mentioned the Act of uniformity, the
  Test act, the Coronation oath, the Bill of rights, the Act of
  settlement, the Act for the union with Scotland, the Act for the union
  with Ireland, the Abolition of the slave trade. All of the most famous
  cases in English legal history, within the period treated, are
  included.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Careful notes indicate when statutes have been repealed, though the
  system employed does not always make clear just what portions. It is
  spread out too thin to suit the needs of intensive work. The value of
  the bibliography and of many of the page references is much lessened
  by the failure to give the date and place of publication of the
  editions cited. Other examples seem to indicate that the editor’s
  knowledge of the general history of at least part of his period is
  somewhat faulty.” Arthur Lyon Cross.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 877. Jl. ‘05. 790w.

  “In his selection and editing of the statutes and cases that were
  available Mr. Robertson has certainly displayed excellent judgment and
  sound learning.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 110. Jl. 22, 230w.

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 145. Ag. 17, ‘05. 540w.

  “Is indispensable to the reader and student of modern English history.
  The volume forms altogether one of the very best collections of
  documents illustrative of English history.” Stanhope Sams.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 132. Mr. 4, ‘05. 300w.


=Robertson, James Alexander.= See =Blair, Emma Helen=, jt. auth.


=Robertson, Morgan.= Down to the sea. †$1.25. Harper.

  Fourteen stories on various subjects, but all of men whose real home
  is not on land. Under such titles as—“A cow, two men, and a parson,”
  “The mutiny,” “The vitality of Dennis,” “Fifty fathoms down,” “The
  enemies,” “The rivals,” and “A hero of the cloth,” we hear of war
  vessels and other craft, of humorous and exciting happenings, and come
  to know some most enjoyable characters.

       + =Critic.= 47: 382. O. ‘05. 180w.

  “Are in the last degree ingenious in construction and clever in the
  telling. They have, however, two serious faults: they are so
  far-fetched ... and, except for the adventures of Finnegan, they are
  painful to the point of being disagreeable.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1250. Je. 1, ‘05. 200w.

  “In his characterization of the men whom he brings into these stories
  there is all the vigor, simplicity, and natural unforced humor that
  would be expected from one who has been called the ‘Kipling of the
  sea.’”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 215. Ap. 8, ‘05. 860w.

  “Some amusing, some vividly realistic, and others impressive by virtue
  of the style, even when farthest from the probable.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 759. Mr. 25, ‘05. 30w.

  “There are a directness and freshness about the mere way in which Mr.
  Robertson sets about telling a story, that only come when one is
  master of his whole subject, a close observer and friend of his
  characters, a master of the ship, and of the words to describe both
  men and ships. But it is in the humorous that Mr. Robertson excels.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 508. Ap. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “These stories of his have the genuine salt savor and the salt sting.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 592. O. ‘05. 140w.

  “A volume of thoroughly good and amusing stories of many seas.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 60w.


=Robertson, T. W.= Society and Caste, ed. by T. Edgar Pemberton. 60c.
Heath.

  A volume in section III. of the “Belles-lettres” series. The texts are
  printed from the English acting editions which follow the original
  manuscripts. A life of Robertson, an introduction, notes and a
  bibliography are included.


=Robertson, William Graham=, il. French songs of old Canada; with
translations into modern English verse. *$10. Dutton.

  A beautiful gift book of colored drawings which illustrate the stories
  found in these old songs of the French-Canadians. A separate pamphlet
  contains good English translations of the songs.

   + + + =Int. Studio.= 24: 368. F. ‘05, 400w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 115. Ja. 28, ‘05. 150w.


=Robins, Edward.= William T. Sherman. *$1.25. Jacobs.

  Altho there is not room for great detail in this brief account of the
  life of Sherman, many interesting conversations and anecdotes have
  been included which add both to its historical and biographical value.
  The volume is one of the “American crisis biographies” and contains
  chronology, bibliography, and index.


=Robins, Elizabeth (Mrs. G. R. Parkes).= Dark lantern; a story with a
prologue. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  “London society, within the last ten years, makes the surroundings of
  the intrigue and passion that are here dealt with ... Katherine
  Dereham, the heroine, and the ogre doctor, Garth Vincent, however,
  concentrate most of the reader’s attention. Katherine is a beautiful
  girl, who falls desperately in love with a prince, who cannot marry
  her ... and wastes much of her youth in a harmful thralldom to a
  fancy. After her escape from her passion for the prince, burdened with
  a serious illness, she becomes the thrall of the ogre doctor,
  described as ‘the man with the dark-lantern face.’”—N. Y. Times.

  “It is a striking, though scarcely a satisfactory book, and widely
  remote in every respect from the ordinary machine-made novel of
  commerce.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 651. My. 27. 250w.

  “Besides the vigor with which the main theme is handled, the striking
  quality of the book is a certain kind of bigness.” Frederic Taber
  Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 516. Jl. ‘05. 820w.

  “Her characters certainly have vitality, and an extraordinary power to
  interest us.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 116. S. 1, ‘05. 340w.

  “Grotesque in its violation of the elementary principles of art and
  literature.” Herbert W. Horwill.

     — — =Forum.= 37: 103. Jl. ‘05. 610w.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 210. Jl. 27, ‘05. 370w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1152. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

  “‘A dark lantern’ at once sustains the writer’s reputation for
  competent craftsmanship.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 153. My. 12, ‘05. 460w.

       — =Nation.= 81: 101. Ag. 3, ‘05. 660w.

  “It must be called, plainly, a distorted picture. But it is full of
  sincerity, and has much fine detail. In strength, in originality, in
  emotional force it is far out of the common.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 360. Je. 3, ‘05. 830w.

  “Is not what is sometimes called a pleasant book, but it has the
  strength of interest.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 836. Jl. 29, ‘05. 50w.

  “In the New England sense, it is not a nice story, but the able
  characterization and the intense plot give it the right to be.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 283. Ag. 26, ‘05. 230w.

  “Miss Robins may see life awry,—the reader clings to the hope that she
  does,—but she sees it strongly and brilliantly.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 357. Ag. ‘05. 320w.


=Robins, Rev. Henry Ephraim.= Ethics of the Christian life; or, The
science of right living. **$2. Am. Bapt.

  “Part. I. deals with the nature of the ethics of the Christian life:
  the moral agent and the disorder of the moral nature, the remedy for
  moral disorder. Part. II. discusses the scope of the ethics of the
  Christian life: all duty rests on the holy will of God, duty to self,
  duty to society, duty to nature, duty to God. Part. III. considers the
  method of the ethics of the Christian life.”—Am. J. of Theol.

  “Valuable work. The work under review is a contribution to only one
  tract of that larger field.” C. R. Henderson.

       + =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 387. Ap. ‘05. 440w.

  “Grant Dr. Robins’ premises, and you can not escape his conclusions.
  His is not a twentieth century ethical system.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 136. Ja. 26, ‘05. 190w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 254. F. ‘05. 100w.


=Robinson, Albert Gardner.= Cuba and the intervention. **$1.80.
Longmans.

  A book which “falls roughly into three divisions: a review of
  peninsular misrule in Cuba and of the efforts of the Cubans to throw
  off the Spanish yoke; a survey of the American occupation of the
  island, with especial attention to the work of reconstruction; and a
  statement of the conditions prevailing since the Cubans attained
  self-government. An eye-witness of many of the events he describes,
  Mr. Robertson writes with vivacity and warmth.... His point of view,
  however, is primarily and frankly Cuban.”—Outlook.

  “The volume covers the various phases of American activity and gives
  valuable insight into the difficulties of the task confronting the
  American authorities.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 948. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “This is a clear and unbiased account of one of the most interesting
  incidents in our national history.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 729. Mr. 30, ‘05. 280w.

  “While his volume is in some respects extremely useful—notably ... in
  assisting to a better appreciation of the Latin-American character—it
  can scarcely be said to fulfill its main purpose of giving a clear and
  unbiased account of the methods and results of American intervention.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 855. Ap. 1, ‘05. 260w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 319. S. 2, ‘05. 240w.

  “Mr. Robinson sums up the whole case of the United States and Cuba
  with admirable impartiality.”

     + + =Spec.= 91: 644. Ap. 29, ‘05. 190w.


=Robinson, Charles Mulford.= Modern civic art. **$3. Putnam.

  A consideration of the problem of civic improvement as applied to all
  cities, their business centres, streets, residences, tenements, parks,
  and parkways. This second edition is illustrated with numerous
  half-tones and photogravures presenting architectural arrangements for
  city squares, water fronts, and other places of decorative importance.

  “Though flowery in style on occasion, the author handles his subject
  both widely and concretely.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 379. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

  Reviewed by Ralph Clarkson.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 15. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1070w.

  “The author’s analysis is exhaustive, and his treatment is as complete
  and authoritative as our present knowledge of the subject makes
  possible.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 268. Ap. 6, ‘05. 220w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 380. Je. 10, ‘05. 300w.

  “We are glad that a second edition, with the addition of designs, has
  been published of this valuable volume.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 401. F. 11, ‘05. 130w.


=Robinson, E. Kay.= Country day by day. **$1.75. Holt.

  In his garden on the coast of Norfolk, the author has studied bird
  life and plant life and he gives an account of an English year, the
  drama which the observant one may see enacted day by day, by the
  things of feathers and of petals.

  “It forms a vade mecum of pleasant information for all the passing
  hours of the rolling year.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 367. Mr. 25. 570w.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 60w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  Reviewed by May Estelle Cook.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 374. D. 1, ‘05. 210w.

  “As a rule, the author has nothing specially new to tell, and his book
  may be regarded as a guide to what the observant country resident
  ought to see and notice, rather than as an exponent of fresh facts.”
  R. L.

   + + — =Nature.= 71: 418. Mr. 2, ‘05. 250w.

  “It is one of the great merits of the book that this appreciation of
  nature is never allowed to degenerate into sentimentalism.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 574. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.

  “This is a delightful record of a year in the country day by day. It
  is written with a keen sympathy with nature and a true instinct for
  the beautiful.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 621. Ap. 29, ‘05. 710w.


* =Robinson, Edwin Arlington.= Children of the night, **$1. Scribner.

  “President Roosevelt has praised this book of poems, finding in them
  ‘an undoubted touch of genius.’ To this fact no doubt is due the
  reprinting of a little book now eight years old.” (Critic.) “The mood
  is usually serious, and quite removed from the too sweet and pensive
  sadness of one who invokes grief as a becoming adjunct to his
  verse.... The numerous poems of religious feeling are the product of a
  wholesome faith.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “We do not dispute the President’s dictum; but we suspect that he
  has not kept ‘au courant’ with the flood of American minor verse. Had
  he done so, he would think twice before applying the word ‘genius’ to
  Mr. Robinson, notwithstanding the author’s ‘curious simplicity and
  good faith.’”

       + =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “Mr. Robinson’s work has never got half the attention it deserved.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 314. N. 16, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Is a very pleasant little book. No minor poet of the day is less
  indebted to poetic conventionalisms than Mr. Robinson, or more
  securely himself.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 507. D. 21, ‘05. 250w.

  * “They are nearly always individual, and show little tendency to echo
  poets of a larger gift which too often is the hall mark of the minor
  poet.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 290w.

  * “There is an undoubted touch of genius in the poems collected in
  this volume, and a curious simplicity and good faith, all of which
  qualities differentiate them sharply from ordinary collections of this
  kind.” T. Roosevelt.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 913. Ag. 12, ‘05. 1270w.


* =Robinson, Harry Perry.= Black bear. *$2. Macmillan.

  “The black bear tells the story of his cubhood, his joys and his
  troubles, his games and adventures with his sister ‘Kahwa.’ Then comes
  the first terrible experience of his life, a forest fire.... But
  ‘Kahwa’ escapes the fire only to be taken prisoner by men.... She
  tries to escape, but is killed in the attempt. Then follows period of
  loneliness, and in process of time the first great fight and the
  winning of a wife. All this is told with much spirit, and illustrated
  by some excellent pictures. One is quite sorry to leave him sitting
  disconsolately behind the bars of his cage; but then we could not
  otherwise have had his autobiography.”—Spec.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 40w.

  * “Mr. Robinson’s bears live on his pages. The reader begins early to
  feel an active interest in their fortunes and it is maintained to the
  end.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 404. N. 24, ‘05. 500w.

 *       =Lond. Times.= 4: 432. D. 8, ‘05. 50w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 731. O. 28, ‘05. 310w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 890. D. 16, ‘05. 350w.

 *   + + =Spec.= 95: 692. 4, ‘05. 190w.


=Robinson, Sir John Richard.= Fifty years of Fleet street: being the
life and recollections of Sir John R. Robinson; comp. and ed. by F. Moy
Thomas. *$4. Macmillan.

  Forty-seven years as manager of the “London daily news” earned for Mr.
  Robinson, in the words of Mr. John Morley, “the respect and honor of
  everybody who cares for the tradition of English journalism.” Failing
  health was doubtless responsible for the failure of his intention to
  write his autobiography. From the fragmentary diaries, journals,
  jottings, and impressions, the compiler, Mr. Thomas, has constructed
  his “Life and recollections.” “Most of the conspicuous persons in the
  world of politics, literature, art, and music during the past fifty
  years had been the personal friends and associates of the great
  journalist.” (N. Y. Times). Among them were: Queen Victoria,
  Gladstone, Disraeli, Cobden, Mill, Rosebery, Landseer, General Grant,
  Cyrus Field, “Mark Twain,” Artemus Ward, Bret Harte, Archibald Forbes,
  Charles Dickens, Lord Coleridge, Charles Kingsley, Arthur Sullivan,
  Mr. Spurgeon, Mr. Sankey, Sarah Bernhardt, Bismarck, Labouchere.

  “The text is interesting and at times absorbing. A vein of good nature
  and social enjoyment is distinctly visible throughout it.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 56. Ja. 19, ‘05. 1190w.

  “A volume of great interest and considerable value. There can be no
  two opinions of Mr. Thomas’s fitness for the accomplishment of the
  task he undertook in compiling and editing these recollections, for
  during a quarter of a century he was a worker with and a close friend
  of Sir John Robinson. The whole book, though a disappointment to those
  of us who expected a carefully prepared, witty, instructive volume of
  memoirs written by the chieftain’s own hand and with proofs corrected
  and revised by him, is nevertheless one that we have every reason to
  feel grateful to Mr. Frederick Moy Thomas for having compiled and
  edited.” Elizabeth Banks.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 49. Ja. 28, ‘05. 2330w.


=Robinson, Rowland Evans.= Hunting without a gun, and other papers. $2.
Forest & stream.

  A posthumous volume of sketches and stories in which the blind writer
  tells of the joys of the lover of nature, who seeks the creatures of
  the woods, but does not harm them.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 407. Je. 17, ‘05. 380w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 392. Je. 10, ‘05. 30w.


=Robinson, Rowland Evans.= Out of bondage. $1.25. Houghton.

  Seventeen short dialect stories, many of which have already appeared
  in various magazines, are collected under this title. “Out of bondage”
  is a story of the “underground” railroad, in which a Quaker family
  save an escaped negro from his pursuers. A little Quaker maid and her
  lover, and a revengeful disappointed admirer complicate the plot. “A
  letter from Hio,” is another idyll of country life, with a simple love
  motive. “The shag back panther,” a creation of an old Canuck,
  frightens its inventor from the berry patch. “A story of the old
  frontier” is an account of an Indian’s gratitude in liberating a woman
  who had nursed him. Altho the subjects are varied, they all concern
  men, animals, and country life. The treatment is mainly humorous.

  “The very rusticity of his humor increases the verisimilitude of his
  portrait.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 312. Ap. 20, ‘05. 100w.

  “The shrewdness and pointed humor of the different characters are
  revealed with a keenness and delicacy of touch that show long,
  personal acquaintance among these people.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 284. Ap. 29, ‘05. 340w.

  “Surprisingly even in their interest and freshness. Mr. Robinson’s
  stories bring back old Vermont days and show us typical village and
  country people in all their native ruggedness, kindliness, and
  neighborly qualities.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 708. Mr. 18. ‘05. 150w.


=Rodd, Sir James Rennell.= Sir Walter Raleigh. 75c. Macmillan.

  “To Englishmen of to-day,” Sir Walter Raleigh “represents the genesis
  of British imperialism in the modern sense. To Americans, he stands
  for that sixteenth-century daring and love of adventure to which the
  English colonies in the new world owed their existence. The sketch of
  Raleigh ... is a well written account of a career that was full of
  dramatic incident.”—R. of Rs.

  “Sir Rennell Rodd has a sure grasp of his documents and has used them
  with much skill.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 483. Je. 15, ‘05. 530w.

  “He has done his best as far as study goes, toward the solution of
  many mysterious actions on the part of the gallant Englishman. Sir
  Rennell Rodd’s record of social life during the two decades of the
  reign of Queen Elizabeth gives a clear insight into actual
  conditions.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 68. F. 4, ‘05. 1570w. (Survey of contents.)

  “A study rich in atmosphere. There are times when he assuredly assumes
  the role of a special pleader. The proportion is not so well
  maintained as we should desire. But, on the whole, he has acquitted
  himself well, giving us a book which is at once enjoyable and a
  creditable addition to a series of which it forms part.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 350. F. 4, ‘05. 310w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 80w.


=Rogers, A. W.= Introduction to the geology of Cape Colony; with a
chapter on the fossil reptiles of the Karroo formation, by R. Broom.
*$3.50. Longmans.

  A handbook which contains results of investigations made public as
  recently as 1904. There is a geological map and an introduction which
  connects the geological structure with the scenic features.

  “It is a work which will be found of much use to the student of South
  African geology, since it contains in a compact form a good deal of
  information to be found otherwise only by reference to numerous
  scientific journals and official reports.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 504. Ap. 22. 570w.

  “Is sure to remain a standard treatise. Compact and highly attractive
  handbook.” Grenville A. J. Cole.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 35. My. 11, ‘05. 830w.


=Rogers, Joseph Morgan.= Thomas H. Benton. **$1.25. Jacobs.

  This addition to the “American crises biographies” contains a detailed
  account of the Missouri statesman, and gives the chief political
  events from 1820 to the repeal of the Missouri compromise with which
  his public work ended.

  “Rogers did not entirely shake off his editorial habit of popular
  statement when producing a serious historical work.” W. H. Mace.

     + — =Am. Hist.= R. 11: 176. O. ‘05. 650w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 80w.

  “The work is careless and superficial.”

       — =Dial.= 38: 325. My. 1, ‘05. 340w.

  “Mr. Rogers in this account of Thomas H. Benton has assumed more than
  properly belongs to the biographer.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 292. My. 6, ‘05. 420w.

  “In point of literary quality, a decided advance on his ‘The true
  Henry Clay.’ While the treatment is, as a rule, open-minded, it is
  marred at times by invidious and unnecessary comparisons between
  Benton and his notable contemporaries, and by occasional overstatement
  to a degree constituting a serious defect.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 143. My. 13, ‘05. 160w.

  “Mr. Rogers has presented an accurate and impressive picture of Thomas
  H. Benton.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “The author has avoided, rather than sought after, popular effects;
  his own opinions are held in abeyance, and he sometimes assumes too
  large a knowledge on the part of his reader.”

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 593. O. ‘05. 470w.


=Rogers, Joseph Morgan.= The true Henry Clay. **$2. Lippincott.

  The author’s life-long acquaintance with Clay’s “career and
  environment,” and his access to the private papers of the great
  statesman, have put him in touch with the real facts for a biography,
  which tells “the truth about Clay and his failures and successes.” He
  is set forth in the light of the true builder for his country,—the
  “economic development that has compelled the admiration of the world
  had its beginnings in the policies of internal improvements and tariff
  protection to which he stood, if not as father, at least as
  sponsor.... The key to his career, to his failures and successes
  alike, Mr. Rogers finds in his profoundly emotional nature. ‘While
  physically and mentally Clay was a strong man, temperamentally he was
  constituted like a woman.’” (Outlook).

  “The loose rambling, repetitious style, running at times even into
  errors of grammar, informs us at once that we are not to look here for
  the minor accuracies of scholarship. Nor are all the errors minor.
  Read as a whole the book produces an admirable impression. This
  biography detracts no whit, from the value of Schurz’s account of the
  national activities of Henry Clay, but it will give the general reader
  a much better idea of the man.” Carl Russell Fish.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 900. Jl. ‘05. 880w.

  “The emphasis is on the personal side. The author is an admirer of
  Clay, yet he tells the truth about him, not glossing over his defects
  and frailties or attempting to cover his blunders.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 204. Mr. 16, ‘05. 160w.

  “There is an occasional slip of misstatement ... but on the whole a
  painstaking care is evident.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 214. Jl. 27, ‘05. 160w.

  “Mr. Rogers is fair-minded in that he does not scruple to lay bare the
  weaknesses as well as the strength of his hero. Nor has he any race or
  sectional prejudices to air. Lack of a sense of proportion, a feeble
  grasp of the subject as a whole, constitute, indeed, his chief faults.
  The man Clay he sees and comprehends. Of positive errors there are, so
  far as we have noticed, comparatively few.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 235. Mr. 23, ‘05. 280w.

  “Presenting a work markedly deficient in point of literary quality,
  gives an account of the great Kentuckian that is vivid, impartial, and
  philosophic, and that assists us to place him correctly among the
  founders of the United States of the twentieth century.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 241. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1090w.

  “By all odds, the most entertaining and intimate sketch of Clay that
  has yet appeared.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 126. Ja. ‘05. 190w.


=Rohlfs, Mrs. Charles.= See =Green, Anna Katharine.=


=Rolfe, William James.= Satchel guide for the vacation tourist in
Europe; a compact itinerary of the British isles, Belgium and Holland,
Germany and the Rhine, Switzerland, France, Austria, and Italy. *$1.50.
Houghton.

  In this first edition of 1905, the list of hotels has been revised,
  corrections have been made in routes, fares, etc., and local changes
  in London and Paris have been noted. Pockets in the covers contain a
  plan of London and a railway map of the British isles.


* =Roosevelt, Theodore.= Outdoor pastimes of an American hunter. **$3.
Scribner.

  “The first three chapters of the President’s book describe hunting
  trips in Colorado and Oklahoma, after bears, coyotes, cougars, and
  bobcats. Other chapters some of which are reprinted, with additions,
  from previous books, deal with other American big game, the wapiti,
  white-tail and mule deer, antelope, and mountain sheep; chapters are
  also devoted to wilderness reserves, books on big game, and the
  outdoor life of the President and his family at their Long Island
  home.” (Outlook.) The volume is illustrated from photographs by the
  president himself or by members of his family.

  * “All lovers of outdoor sport, all admirers of our strenuous
  President will be delighted with this book.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 582. D. ‘05. 60w.

  * “This latest volume of his own will take high rank among those for
  the novelty of the sports it describes as well as for the freshness
  and spirit of the descriptions. We may say in passing that the
  President is as good a field-naturalist as a sportsman.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 381. N. 10, ‘05. 830w.

  * “To the reader who will approach the book either with a healthy
  interest in outdoor life or with an idle curiosity to read what a
  President has written, the work should prove of interest. The book
  should prove a valued addition to its class.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 742. N. 4, ‘05. 1670w.

  * “Altogether it is an unusual book, and of interest to every one.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Each chapter of the book bears testimony to the vigorous,
  wholesome, straightforward character of its author and to the
  remarkable thoroughness and zest with which he undertakes the study of
  any subject in which he is interested.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 716. N. 25, ‘05. 610w.

  * “Mr. Roosevelt’s literary method in treating of outdoor subjects is
  well known. It is characterized by a thorough-going purpose to do
  something more than merely narrate the author’s personal adventures.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 753. D. ‘05. 230w.

  * “President Roosevelt’s most sensible remarks on the proper means of
  preserving game in a democratic country are worthy of all attention,
  and not less his analysis of the true hunter’s creed, with which every
  sportsman must agree.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 868. N. 25, ‘05. 430w.


=Root. A. I.= A B C of bee culture; rev. by E. R. Root. $1.20. Root.

  “A work of high value to all engaged in this fascinating pursuit. It
  is a cyclopædia in form and arrangement, and is fully illustrated, and
  the present edition has been so thoroughly revised as to be
  practically a new book.”—Outlook.

  “There is nothing more comprehensive and satisfactory obtainable on
  this subject.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 651. Mr. 11, ‘05. 50w.


=Rosadi, Giovanni.= Trial of Jesus; tr. from the Italian by Emil Reich.
*$2.50. Dodd.

  This work of Rosadi’s has been widely read in Italy and Germany, and
  now appears in a translation by Emil Reich, who says of it—“Signor
  Rosadi has approached his problem—apparently a purely legal one—with a
  warmth of sympathy, with a breadth of philosophical view, with a
  purity of religious sentiment that have rendered his book not only a
  noteworthy contribution to the history of Jesus, but a stimulating and
  (we say it unhesitatingly) an edifying work in the best sense of the
  word.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 623. My. 20. 660w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 288. S. ‘05. 120w.

  “Is rich in information of court procedure among Jews and Romans in
  the days of Pontius Pilate, but the total absence of criticism in the
  use of the Gospels renders it unsafe as a guide in historical study.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 152. Jl. 20, ‘05. 40w.

  “We doubt ... if the best English and American scholarship will regard
  Signor Rosadi’s work seriously, and we must admit that the work seems
  to serve no particularly good purpose.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 357. Je. 3, ‘05. 1080w.

  “It is a thoroughly scholarly study.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 346. Je. 3, ‘05. 530w.

  “The particular significance of the work is perhaps due to the two
  facts that it treats the famous trial as a matter of history and gives
  it its proper legal standing, and also that it portrays the
  personality of the man Christ in a way that appeals to a class of
  readers usually indifferent to religious books.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 124. Jl. ‘05. 170w.

  “To English readers it will appear rather too full and rhetorical. We
  cannot praise the translation of the book. We have rarely seen a book
  with more misprints.”

   + — — =Sat. R.= 99: 638. My. 13, ‘05. 440w.

  “Is throughout deeply interesting.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 750. My. 20, ‘05. 390w.


=Rose, Achilles.= Carbonic acid in medicine. $1. Funk.

  The healing qualities of carbonic acid gas known centuries ago and
  used for therapeutical purposes have been re-discovered in modern
  science. The author has set forth the history and general usefulness
  of the properties to medical science.


=Rose, John Holland.= Napoleonic studies. *$2.50. Macmillan.

  Essays, based principally on materials found while working on the
  author’s “Life of Napoleon I.,” which are of interest, with a few
  exceptions, to Napoleonic scholars. These exceptions are found in the
  chapters, “Wordsworth, Schiller, Fichte, and the Idealist revolt
  against Napoleon,” “The religious belief of Napoleon,” and “The
  detention of Napoleon by Great Britain.” The remaining discussions
  relate to: “Pitt’s plan for the settlement of Europe,” “Egypt during
  the first British occupation,” “Canning and Denmark in 1807,” “A
  British agent at Tilsit,” “Napoleon and British commerce,” “Britain’s
  food supply in the Napoleonic war,” “The Whigs and the French war,”
  “Austria and the downfall of Napoleon,” and “The Prussian co-operation
  at Waterloo.”

  “While they vary in their temper and treatment as widely as the
  subjects, yet the author’s personality gives them quite sufficient
  unity to secure the interest of the reader and the continuity of the
  subject. Incidentally they clear up several little mysteries of
  antiquarian interest.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 658. Ap. ‘05. 1270w.

  “Regarding the new essays, they serve to emphasize the value of the
  research work which Mr. Rose has done in the British archives, and to
  prove that in spite of the great number of scholarly studies of the
  Napoleon era, large deposits of unused material still exist.” E. D.
  Adams.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 41. Ja. 16, ‘05. 1520w.

  “Mr. Rose’s essays are marked by the same wealth of information and
  carefulness of statement which appeared in his book. He does not
  dogmatize for the sake of amusing his readers by a sharp saying, and
  inclines to caution whenever he ventures to put forth a
  generalization.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 135. F. 16, ‘05. 470w.


=Rose, Mrs. Mary.= Women of Shakespeare’s family. *50c. Lane.

  “This book is largely made up of suppositions, as indeed might be
  expected, so little beyond names and dates is known about
  Shakespeare’s mother, wife, and daughters ... and it is only fair to
  say that Miss Rose has been careful to do her best with the few facts
  that she has to deal with.”—Spec.

       + =Spec.= 94: 520. Ap. 8, ‘05. 130w.


=Roseboro’, Viola.= Players and vagabonds. $1.50. Macmillan.

  Nine short stories founded upon real incidents met with in the
  author’s life upon the stage. Humor and pathos, episode and character,
  are combined to show the life of the real player folk behind the
  scenes. The first and longest story, “Where the ways crossed,” is the
  pathetic tale of Darley, a young Englishman, who found his longed-for
  chance to play the hero in a burning theatre. “The embroidered robe”
  is a character sketch of two would-be actors, “Her mother’s success”
  makes an unworldly mother the centre of a troupe of very worldly
  actors, “Potent memories” is all pathos, “The clown and the
  missionary,” all humor, “A bit of biography,” tells the story of a ten
  year old boy who forsook his adopted home for the stage. “Our Mantua
  maker,” “A marriage de covenance,” and “A glimpse of an artist,”
  complete the volume.

  “If the reader is not more than entertained, is not touched and
  softened, then he, or she, is adamant.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 298. F. 25, ‘05. 190w.

  “All of them are human and searching and tender, full of a changeful,
  charmful quality that fascinates, brightened by brief triumphs,
  darkened by long poverty and disappointment, warmed by self-forgetful
  helping of others.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 257. Ja. ‘05. 220w.

  “The pathos of her stories rings true and sound, and her all-embracing
  charity engages the fullest sympathy. These tattered waifs and strays
  of life, these, ‘players and vagabonds,’ have found one to plead for
  them whose pleading it would hardly be possible to resist.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 121. Ja. ‘05. 100w.


* =Rosegger, Petri Kettenfeier.= I. N. R. I.: a prisoner’s story of the
cross, tr. by Elizabeth Lee. †$1.50. McClure.

  “A poor German carpenter under sentence of death for an anarchistic
  crime is supposed to write in his cell and from memory the story of
  that other carpenter of long ago—who was condemned as a subverter of
  the established order. Naturally the German carpenter’s own hard
  experience and his own dreams color his story of the other—naturally
  his memory plays him false, naturally (he is of a Catholic country) he
  writes in ideas and incidents from lives of the saints and the like.
  But it is his merging of his own bitter life into that of the Christ
  which makes the book real as other stories dealing with this subject
  are not.” (N. Y. Times.) There are six illustrations in color by Cowin
  Knapp Simson in the Holy Land.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The narrative is a strange and powerful one.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 776. N. 18, ‘05. 500w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.

  * “The story is told simply and colloquially, but with reserve and
  dignity.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 1038. D. 23, ‘05. 120w.


=Rosenthal, Herman,= tr. See =Ganz, Hugo.= Land of riddles.


Roses and how to grow them. See =Barron, Leonard=, ed.


=Ross, Edward Alsworth.= Foundations of sociology. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  It is claimed for Professor Ross that he interests especially
  sociological heresy-hunters; it is also claimed that in this new work
  this same following will find difficulty in singling out any
  censurable utterances. It treats of the scope and task of sociology,
  the sociological frontier of economics, social laws, “mob mind,” the
  social forces, the factors of social change, recent tendencies in
  sociology, the causes of race superiority, “The value rank of the
  American people,” “The properties of group units,” and “The unit of
  investigation in sociology.”

  “This book is, on the whole, devoted to the method, rather than to the
  content, of knowledge. It does much in the way of clearing the cobwebs
  out of the sociological skies. It is, however, a general survey rather
  than a treatise. The present volume can hardly fail to serve, for some
  time to come, as one of the most effective path-breakers in
  sociological inquiry.” Albion W. Small.

   + + — =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 129. Jl. ‘05. 1400w.

  * “No one interested in the development of social theory, or in the
  understanding of social phenomena can afford to leave it unread.” Carl
  Kelsey.

 *   + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 759. N. ‘05. 540w.

  * “Brilliant but somewhat capricious.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1157. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “Easy to read, brief, comprehensive, and introducing the reader to
  most of the conceptions of value. The book’s greatest fault is ...
  that of undervaluing work which is too abstract to meet the conditions
  of a real practical problem.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81:42. Jl. 13, ‘05. 250w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 345. My. 27, ‘05. 210w.

  “His style is rather exuberant, but it is picturesque and rapid.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 396. Je. 17, ‘05. 1410w.

  “The book is of value to the lay reader in that it clarifies not a few
  of the foggy statements and definitions that have been associated with
  this newly developed science to its popular detraction. Professor Ross
  is a clear and forcible writer.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 140w.


=Ross, Janet Anne (Mrs. Henry J. Ross).= Old Florence and modern
Tuscany. *$1.50. Dutton.

  The author, who has lived among the Tuscan peasants for over thirty
  years, has written a series of fifteen papers, eleven of which have
  already appeared in various magazines. The book opens with the history
  of the Misericordia, the brotherhood of pity in Florence, then follow
  chapters upon “A domestic chaplain of the Medici,” “Two Florentine
  hospitals,” “A September day in the valley of the Arno,” “Popular
  songs of Tuscany,” “Vintaging in Tuscany,” “Oil-making in Tuscany.”
  “Virgil and agriculture in Tuscany,” “A stroll in Boccaccio’s
  country,” “The dove of the holy Saturday,” “San Gimignano della Belle
  Torre,” “Volterra,” “Mezzeria or land tenure in Tuscany,” and “The
  jubilee of the crucifix.”

  Reviewed by Anna Benneson McMahan.

       + =Dial.= 38: 351. My. 16, 05. 760w.

       + =Ind.= 58: 1070. My. 11, ‘05. 150w.

  “Well deserve being collected into book form on account of their
  historical research and of their keen observation of actual conditions
  of peasant life in Tuscany. The most attractive article of all in this
  volume is on the popular songs of Tuscany.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 218. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1150w.

  “Written with a distinct and common inspiration and with undoubted joy
  in transcription.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 140. Mr. 4, ‘05. 490w.

  “Mr. Carmichael and Mr. Hewlett have been enlightening us as to
  Tuscany; now comes Mrs. Ross in a smaller volume but with almost equal
  information, especially as to the Tuscan peasants. While we learn more
  about modern Tuscany than about old Florence ... Mrs. Ross’s account
  is noteworthy, although for a more exhaustive treatment one will turn
  to the volumes by Mr. Gardner, M. Yriarte, and Mrs. Oliphant.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 247. Ja. 28, ‘05. 260w.


=Rosse, Florence James.= Philosophy and froth. 50c. Broadway pub.

  Almost 200 little epigrammatic sayings, some of which are clever and
  some of which are not.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 552. Ag. 19, ‘05. 150w.


=Rouse, Adelaide Louise.= Letters of Theodora. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  A girl, who has left a position in a New Jersey college and a faithful
  lover to seek literary honors in unfeeling New York, writes of her
  struggles to a girl friend. A life of grape-nuts in a hall bedroom
  does not discourage her and she has many experiences and flirtations
  which introduce various interesting characters; but in the end she
  marries the original John.

  “Though she really has nothing much to write about, her letters make
  pleasant reading.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 420. Ap. 15, ‘05. 270w.

  “‘The letters of Theodora’ do not constitute a psychological
  brain-twister, but a light and pleasing romance.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 60w.

  “It must be confessed that Teddy has a vivacious way about her which
  makes her letters very pleasant reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 287. Ap. 29, ‘05. 630w.

  “A clever entertaining book.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 857. Ap. 1, ‘05. 70w.

  “May not appeal to a very large public. The public to which it does
  appeal will be select and worth having.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 210w.


=Rouse, G. H.= Old Testament criticism in New Testament light. *$1.
Union press.

  An address given before the Bengali Christian conference of Calcutta
  has been expanded into this volume which is addressed to the general
  reader. It presents “modern views” upon subjects included under the
  chapter headings, Our basis—Christ made no mistakes; Christ’s
  treatment of the Old Testament; The relation of the Levitical law to
  the prophetic history and teaching; The Pentateuch; The authorship of
  Psalm cx.; The historicity, accuracy, and authoritativeness of the Old
  Testament; The book of Daniel; Prophecy; and Critical methods.

  “The higher critics will find in this work much to learn, and much to
  moderate their views, while the uncritical Christian will find much to
  deepen his faith and to strengthen his hold on the Old Testament as
  well as the New Testament.” T. H. L. Leary.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1100. O. 21, ‘05. 710w.

         =Spec.= 95: 56. Ag. 8, ‘05. 180w.


* =Routh, James Edward, jr.= Fall of Tollan. $1. Badger, R: G.

  A dramatic poem in which Quetzal is sent by “the all-father, the high
  Tonaca,” to rule over Mexican Tollan and become a power for good. The
  god of darkness, “lest man should be all blessed,” took the form of
  Lord Tezca who basely seized the throne and “scoffing all but
  careless, jovial wit and witty joy,” ruled until “hostile tribes flung
  down the bronze-wrought gates.” Kingdom followed kingdom, while the
  people dumbly waited for “Quetzal’s hoped return.”


=Rowland, Helen.= Digressions of Polly. †$1.50. Baker.

  Polly and her fiancé furnish the airy dialogue of this book. There are
  twenty-three chapters, each a complete little chat, with its own
  setting and its own amusing climax; but thru them all Polly, the
  light-hearted, with her curls, her dimples and her chiffon ruffles,
  and Jack the resourceful, very human and very much in love, are true
  to their frivolous parts.

  “The result is not equal to the effort.”

       — =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 30w.

  “One of the brightest volumes of dialogue of the season.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 259. Ap. 22, ‘05. 260w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “If it is lacking in originality ... the conversations of the fair and
  frivolous Polly and her fiancé, never dull, are often unusually
  diverting.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 60w.

  “Her froth and her frills make her very good company, indeed, for
  others than the agreeable young man who takes her balls and
  occasionally sends back a very respectable one of his own.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 474. S. ‘05. 250w.

  “She is certainly entertaining, though, perhaps for too many pages.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 70w.


* =Rowland, Henry Cottrell.= Mountain of fears. †$1.50. Barnes.

  “There are contained in this volume eight stories of adventure, having
  a slender thread of connection in that all are narratives by Doctor
  Leyden of strange experiences in his career as a collector for
  museums.” (Pub. Opin.) “They deal with strange and exotic regions such
  as Papua, the Orinoco, Borneo, Curacao, Sulu, the South Sea islands,
  Hayti, and the Malay peninsula.... Drinking, murder, abduction, fraud,
  brutality, cowardice—such are the contents of the book.” (Nation.)

  * “Some of the most unpleasant short stories it was ever the fate of
  an author to invent. There is no denying that in spite of some
  exaggeration and tall talk, the stories are exceedingly well told, but
  why tell them?”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 200w.

  * “The tales are vivid and strange.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Joseph Conrad would have told the story differently, and doubtless
  better, but it is doubtful if he could have created a more convincing
  atmosphere of horror.”

     — + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 700. N. 25, ‘05. 200w.


=Rowland, Henry Cottrell.= Wanderers. †$1.50. Barnes.

  The story of a young Irishman who, fearing that his father’s will has
  given his yacht to a brother, runs away with the coveted boat. He
  takes an artist friend with him, and later picks up an American
  professor’s daughter, with whom both young men fall in love, and her
  chaperone. After many and varied adventures, which include dueling and
  piracy, Brian legally acquires both the yacht and the girl.

  “The style is simple but adequate, there is plenty of humor, and the
  book admirably fulfils its purpose.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 80w.

  “An unpretending tale, entertaining for an hour or two, agreeable in
  its main personages, pleasantly written, abundantly varied in its
  kinds of interest.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1250. Je. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “Rollicking, jovial story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 212. Ap. 8, ‘05. 520w.

  “A light, breezy tale of the sea, with less of storm and stress than
  is common to novels of a marine cast, but sufficiently spiced with
  adventure to keep the interest alive. Leaving numerous improbabilities
  out of mind, the book will serve well to while away a couple of
  hours.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 762. Mr. 25, ‘05. 100w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 508. Ap. 1, ‘05. 320w. (Outline of plot.)

  “The book will be acceptable to those who wish entertainment without
  mental effort.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 472. S. ‘05. 180w.


=Rowlands, Samuel.= Bride. **$3.50. Goodspeed.

  “An interesting reprint.... Save for an entry in the Stationers’
  register under date of 1617, this work has hitherto been unknown to
  bibliography. Last spring a unique copy was purchased from a German
  bookseller for the library of Harvard university, and this is now
  reprinted in partial facsimile, with a brief introductory note. The
  poem ... a conversation between a bride and her attendant maidens
  concerning the respective advantages of the single and married
  estates ... is written in Rowlands’ habitual cleanly-turned six-line,
  stanza.”—Nation.

  “Will add little to Rowlands’ fame.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 329. Mr. 25. ‘05. 1030w.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 110. Jl. 22. 720w.

         =Critic.= 47: 192. Ag. ‘05. 90w.

  “There is nothing in the poem either to add to the poetic treasures of
  our literature or to furnish any new footnotes to literary history.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 229. Mr. 23, ‘05. 220w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 89. F. 11, ‘05. 160w.


=Rowntree, B. Seebohm.= Betting and gambling: a national evil. *$1.60.
Macmillan.

  “The preliminary chapter is devoted to the Ethics of betting and
  gambling, and is by John A. Hobson, M. A. It is followed by The extent
  of gambling, by John Hawke; Stock exchange gambling, by A. J. Wilson;
  Gambling among women, by J. M. Hogge; Crime and gambling, by Canon
  Horsley; The deluded sportsman, by a bookmaker; Gambling and
  citizenship, by J. Ramsey MacDonald; Existing legislation, by John
  Hawke; and The repression of gambling, by R. Seebohm Rowntree. In the
  appendix are given some government bills on the subject, opinions of
  prominent men on betting, a note on pedestrianism, tipping, betting
  statistics, and a bibliography.”—N. Y. Times.

  “We can at all events congratulate Mr. Seebohm Rowntree upon having
  produced an amusing contribution to the faddist class of literature of
  the day.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 623. Je. 10, ‘05. 410w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 505. O. 14, 670w.

  * “Mr. Rowntree treats of the evil of betting in the thoro and
  dispassionate manner he has employed in his other studies.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1158. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

       + =Nation.= 81: 287. O. 5, ‘05. 350w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 377. Je. 10, ‘05. 240w.

  “Such a book as this has long been needed. It is the work of
  specialists for the abatement of a national evil.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 542. Je. 24, ‘05. 300w.

  “As a study the book is very good reading.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 676. My. 20, ‘05. 260w.

  “This volume will be found very valuable as a reference-book.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 504. O. 7, ‘05. 430w.


* =Rowson, Susanna Haswell.= Charlotte Temple: a tale of truth; with an
historical and biographical introd. by Francis W. Halsey; reprinted from
the first Am. ed., 1794. $1.25. Funk.

  This “true story of events in New York city during the Revolution,”
  has seen over one hundred editions, and the present reprint corrects
  many errors which have crept into the various texts and gives an
  historical introduction showing that the people concerned in this
  account of the beautiful and ill-fated Charlotte, who eloped at
  fifteen with an English army officer and died broken-hearted and
  deserted some two years later, concerns people well known in their
  day. The language of the book is quaintly old-fashioned, and the
  unpleasant truths are plainly treated. The story was originally
  intended as a warning to young girls.

  * “Mr. Halsey’s introduction is extremely interesting: a bit of
  bibliographical work of high order, adding enormously to the literary
  value of the volume.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 820w.


=Royce, Josiah.= Herbert Spencer; an estimate and review; together with
a chapter of personal reminiscences by James Collier. **$1.25. Fox.

  “Exactly one-half this volume is occupied by Professor Royce’s
  estimate of Spencer.... Having sketched the general history of
  evolution in bold and strong lines, he reviews the origin and
  significance of Spencer’s own view of evolution.... The third quarter
  of the volume is given to a criticism by Professor Royce of Spencer’s
  educational theories.... The volume is brought to a close by some
  personal reminiscences of Spencer by Mr. James Collier, who was for
  nine years his secretary, and for ten his amanuensis.”—Nation.

  “[Belongs] to the supplementary order of biographical material.” H. W.
  Boynton.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 427. Mr. ‘05. 390w.

  “This little volume is one of the best ... contributions to
  Spenceriana which have been called forth by the publication of
  Spencer’s Autobiography.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 254. My. ‘05. 570w.

  “A most apt supplement to the ‘Autobiography.’”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 187. Ag. ‘05. 50w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 71. Ja. 26, ‘05. 2180w.

  “Professor Royce has given us a rather dreary picture of the
  Englishman, Mr. Collier ... gives a more sympathetic account in his
  personal reminiscences in the latter part of the book.” H. Heath
  Bawden.

     + + =Philos. R.= 14: 361. My. ‘05. 730w.

  “One need hardly ask better help toward a just estimate of the great
  career so lately closed than is afforded by this little book in which
  historical, biographical and critical insights are happily blended.”
  Edward H. Griffin.

   + + + =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 205. Je. 15, ‘05. 700w.


* =Rudy, Charles.= Cathedrals of northern Spain; their history and their
architecture: together with much of interest concerning the bishops,
rulers and other personages identified with them. **$2. Page.

  The author of this well illustrated volume in the ‘Cathedral series’
  “has an unbounded love not only for Spain but for the Spanish people.
  He sees the cathedrals of the Castillian country with enthusiastic
  eyes, and he writes as he sees.” (Ind.)

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1381. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The book, as a whole, will hardly appeal to any but the superficial
  reader.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 210w.


* =Ruskin, John.= Complete works. $37.50. Crowell.

  Thirty volumes containing besides the usual texts of Ruskin’s works at
  least two volumes of author’s notes, bibliography and indices not
  usually found in current editions. The volumes are strongly bound for
  library purposes, the type is large and clear, and the illustrations
  for the set include thirty photogravures, 341 half-tones, and 10 color
  plates, some of which are reproductions of Ruskin’s own sketches, as
  well as Turner’s. The books are boxed and appear in three styles of
  bindings.


=Ruskin, John.= Letters of John Ruskin to Charles Eliot Norton; ed. by
C. E. Norton. **$4. Houghton.

  These letters, covering a period from 1855 to 1887, are edited by
  Professor Norton himself. They are the intimate letters of a man to
  his best friend, some, indeed, have been omitted as too intimate for
  publication, and, beginning where “Praeterita” ended, they form a
  sequel to it and a valuable addition to Ruskin’s autobiography. The
  letters describe the changes which took place in Ruskin’s views of
  art, religion, and life during that period, they show him as a social
  reformer, and political economist, and give his opinions on American
  and European politics. His sketches of the people and places that he
  loved, his inner purposes, his work, and the doubts and perplexities
  that beset him, reveal the writer to us in a new and more lovable
  light. There are a number of illustrations.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 123. F. 11, ‘05. 1240w.

  Reviewed by H. W. Boynton.

         =Atlan.= 95: 425. Mr. ‘05. 590w.

  “The graceful dignity and consummate skill of the comment which
  accompanies them. Not only are they a continuous record of Ruskin’s
  intellectual and emotional life from 1856 on, and thus almost
  completely supplement the unfinished ‘Praeterita,’ but they have the
  advantage over ‘Praeterita’ in being records contemporary to the fact,
  and thus not subject to contamination through subsequent changes of
  mood and of memory. In that of purest friendship, merely as the
  spontaneous record of his inner as well as his outer life. With just
  reticence and balance of judgment, Mr. Norton sums up the work of his
  friend. Ruskin’s comments on his contemporaries are interesting.” G.
  R. Carpenter.

     + + =Bookm.= 20: 455. Ja. ‘05. 1360w.

  “He [Norton] has performed a delicate task with exquisite taste.”
  Jeanette L. Gilder.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 117. F. ‘05. 950w.

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 957. Ap. 27, ‘05. 560w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 36. Ja. 12, ‘05. 2430w.

  “Read with an eye single to the revelation of personality, there is
  hardly a letter here included that does not yield something of value,
  and the effect of the whole is to give us the conviction that we may
  now approach closer to the real Ruskin than has hitherto been possible
  even with the assistance of his ablest interpreters.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 139. Ja. 14, ‘05. 2170w.

  “The letters are indeed revelatory, but, for the most part, they are
  revelatory of a woeful instability of purpose and of a pitiful misery
  of mind. Except incidentally and occasionally, they cannot be said to
  add dignity to the name of the man they characterize.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 497. Mr. ‘05. 710w.

  “Professor Norton was one of Ruskin’s closest friends, and these
  letters make an excellent biography of the great Englishman.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 150w.

  “Fascinating as these letters are to read, their one subject is
  Himself, his own troubles, his own work, his own knowledge: from
  beginning to end it is I.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 407. Mr. 18, ‘05. 1930w.


=Russell, Charles Edward.= Twin immortalities, and other poems. *$1.50;
special ed. *$2.50. Hammersmark.

  The little ode and several other poems contain an interpretation of
  music, but in Graubünden and Pigli, which are written according to the
  classical form of the sonata, music and poetry are most closely
  allied. The book is dedicated to President Loubet, the foremost
  democrat of these times, and in such poems as “Adam’s sons” and the
  “Coronation ode,” the brotherhood of man is set forth.

  “That there is much in this volume to interest both the musician and
  the verse-wright,—perhaps, chiefly, him who stands on the borderland
  between the two arts, the composer of librettos.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 182. F. ‘05. 140w.

  “Rich and varied volume of verse.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 197. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1110w.

  “He has an admirable gift of phrase, which at its best is alive to its
  finger tips.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 293. Ap. 13, ‘05. 850w.


=Russell, Constance, Lady.= Three generations of fascinating women, and
other sketches from family history. *$10.50. Longmans.

  “A gallery is presented in the volume of beautiful women of the past,
  and of those in particular who were the leaders in the society of
  former times.” (N. Y. Times). There are fourteen sketches dealing with
  Lady Russell’s family history, including the families of Campbell,
  Gunning, Lenox, Gordon, and Whitworth, besides side-light information
  concerning contemporaries. There is the Hon. Mary Bellenden, who was
  “incontestably the most agreeable, the most insinuating, and the most
  likable woman of her time;” of the second generation, her daughter
  Caroline, Countess of Ailesbury, a woman of rare charms, who numbered
  among her friends the statesmen and men of letters of the day; of the
  third generation, the Hon. Mrs. Damer, who in both London and Paris
  was a social leader and the center of a host of literary personages.

         =Critic.= 46: 284. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

  “You might call Lady Russell’s book a story of fleeting beauties. Are
  not so much idealizations as realities.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 64. Ja. 28, ‘05. 1260w. (Survey of
         contents.)

  * “This is an admirable literary work now revised and reproduced in a
  most admirable manner.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 180w.


=Russell, George William Erskine.= Sydney Smith. **75c. Macmillan.

  A volume in the “English men of letters series.” A full treatment of
  the life and personality of a man celebrated for his wit, but whose
  more solid qualities as a man of letters, a founder of the Edinburgh
  Review, a lecturer on moral philosophy, a writer of pamphlets, a
  politician, and a clergyman, deserve respect. His humor found him a
  ready audience, and his keen shafts were used to point his morals more
  effectively.

  “Mr. George Russell’s biography is adequate and sympathetic. He has
  selected his material with discretion, and has let Sydney Smith tell
  his own story as far as possible. Now and again the biographer permits
  his own prejudices to intervene, and so strikes a jarring note. The
  book is a coherent, intelligible account of a great man.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 122. F. 11, ‘05. 1800w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 234. F. 25. 1500w.

  “He seems, in short, pretty thoroughly to have summed up the Sydney
  Smith question; no more elaborate study of him is likely to be
  needed.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + + =Atlan.= 96: 276. Ag. ‘05. 690w.

         =Critic.= 47: 188. Ag. ‘05. 90w.

  “Mr. Russell’s chief merit, then, consists ... in the shrewd and
  kindly criticism which he bestows upon Sydney Smith’s energy,
  goodness, wit and occasional foibles.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 420. Je. 16, ‘05. 410w.

       + =Ind.= 58: 1128. My. 18, ‘05. 420w.

  “If there is any fault to be found with Mr. Russell’s book, it is that
  he does not dwell long enough on the purely social side of Sidney
  Smith. Mr. Russell’s brief but interesting biography is well indexed,
  and provides such copious extracts from Sydney Smith’s writings on all
  possible subjects that it is not a bad substitute for his ‘Works,’
  which are not easily accessible to the general reader.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 297. Ap. 13, ‘05. 1200w.

  “If Mr. Morley made a mistake in selecting his subject he has shown
  his editorial wisdom in his choice of author. No one is better suited
  to treat of the great Whig wit than such a representative of the great
  Whig family, the Russells. Having something of a conscience, Mr.
  Russell does not say much about Smith’s literary qualities and
  capacities.” Joseph Jacobs.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 145. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1730w.

  “A very readable life of the great English wit by an interesting
  biographer. Suffers nothing by brevity; for Mr. Russell has succeeded
  in conveying the personality of Sydney Smith and in making his pages
  live in the light of that personality.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 704. Mr. 18, ‘05. 200w.

  “A very readable monograph.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 40w.

  “Sydney Smith is essentially of those writers who speak for
  themselves. The assistance he has received from Mr. Russell is judged
  to a nicety.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 668. My. 20, ‘05. 1900w.

  “Mr. Russell’s volume makes one of the best jest books we have ever
  seen, for there is just enough flour of biography to keep the plums of
  quotation properly apart. If we may hint a fault, it is that in the
  matter of Smith’s churchmanship Mr. Russell seems to make the worst of
  what he considers a bad job.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 441. Mr. 25, ‘05. 690w.


* =Ryan, Thomas Curran.= Finite and infinite. **$1.50. Lippincott.

  The author says, “My purpose is to consider, first, such evidences of
  God’s disposition towards the world, as may be found in the history of
  nature; and, second, as to whether, in the light of science and
  philosophy, we may conceive Him as other than a Person, having such
  attributes as are, to human understanding, inseparable from
  personality.”

  * “Mr. Ryan seems to have read widely in philosophy, with a result
  that should caution all readers to read no more than they can digest.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 939. D. 16, ‘05. 240w.




                                   S


Sabbath-school teacher training course. 1st year: a series of
thirty-nine lessons designed for use in normal classes. **25c. Presb.
bd.

  This volume “contains a course of study for three-quarters of a year,
  and a forth-coming volume will complete the scheme. At the end of the
  first course the Presbyterian board of publication, Philadelphia, will
  arrange for an examination for such as desire it, and a teacher’s
  diploma will be granted to such as satisfy the examiners.... Even if
  the book is not used with a view to a diploma, many Sunday school
  teachers will find it advantageous to make it the ground-plan of
  private study.”—Ind.

  “This first year’s course is admirable in every respect. The well
  selected range of subjects is concise, but sufficiently
  comprehensive.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1013. My. 4 ‘05. 110w.


=Sabin, Edwin Legrand.= Beaufort chums. †$1. Crowell.

  The real adventures of real boys are interestingly told here for young
  readers. The Mississippi river furnishes the scene for camping,
  hunting, fishing, and kindred fun. There is the full quota of
  happenings, and live boys keen on the scent for them.

  * “Real boy books are scarce these days, and ‘Beaufort chums’ ought to
  be hailed as an acquisition to the juvenile library.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 759. N. 11, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 765. D. ‘05. 80w.


=Sabin, Edwin Legrand.= When you were a boy. †$1.50. Baker.

  Humorously sympathetic recollections of the days when “you” played
  ball with the North star nine, preferred illness to the awful
  alternative of going to school, fought “your” fights, made a chum of
  “your” dog, went fishing, swimming, and skating, or, amid “your”
  companions’ jeers, saw “your” first “girl” home from a party. Fifty
  real boy illustrations by Frederic Dorr Steele illustrate the volume.

  * “Will probably outrival most of their predecessors in popular favor,
  since they treat of life from a boy’s standpoint.” Sara Andrew Shafer.

       + =Dial.= 39: 576. D. 1, ‘05. 660w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18. ‘05. 100w.

  * “His boys are quite as ‘real’ as Judge Shute’s and a trifle less
  coarse. The reflections of a man of mature years run between the
  lines.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 723. O. 28, ‘05. 180w.

  * “It is all very amusing and to many of us reminiscent.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 763. D. 9, ‘05. 160w.


Saddle and song; a collection of verses made at Warrenton, Va., during
the winter of 1904-1905. **$1.50. Lippincott.

  An anthology of verses written about the horse, including selections
  from Browning, Byron, Bayard Taylor, Scott, Kipling, Longfellow,
  Kingsley, Quiller-Couch, and others. “No claim is made to have
  exhausted the literature of the English language upon this subject,
  but it is hoped that a sufficient variety, in respect to the types of
  horses and the tasks accomplished by them, has been offered to enable
  those who may read, each to find some horse to his liking or the story
  of some gallant effort that must command his admiration.”

 *       =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 20w.

  * “Within its limits the collection is a good one.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 388. D. 1, ‘05. 170w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 200w.


* =Sadlier, Anna Theresa.= Wayward Winifred. $1.25. Benziger.

  A story of Ireland in which an American finds Wayward Winifred, a
  mysterious child who lives in an out of the way castle with a blind
  old woman, and takes her to America to be educated in a Catholic
  school. In New York the child by chance meets her father and what
  seemed a great mystery turns out to be a very little mystery after all
  and the child and the father both return to Ireland to do honor to
  their old Irish name and restore their old Irish estate.


* =Sage, Elizabeth, and Cooley, Anna M.= Occupations for little fingers:
a manual for grade teachers, mothers and settlement workers. **$1.
Scribner.

  “This little manual illustrates and describes simple forms of
  handwork; including cord and raffia-work, coarse sewing, paper-cutting
  and folding, clay modelling, furniture and upholstery for a doll’s
  house, and crocheting and knitting. The writers are teachers who have
  worked out with their classes the things of which they write. Their
  models are simple and useful articles that will interest the child and
  give his work practical connection with the world about him.... They
  give with each lesson the necessary cost.”—Nation.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. ‘05. 140w.

  * “This is eminently a practical book of instruction and suggestion.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 836. D. 2, ‘05. 190w.


=St. John, J. Allen.= Face in the pool. **$1.50. McClurg.

  A delightful fairy tale of mystery and gallant chivalry. The hero, a
  young prince, is rewarded for kindness to the King of the Gnomes by
  the privilege of beholding in the pool the face of a fair princess. He
  seeks this much beleaguered Astrella, and wins her after many a
  conflict with a wicked fairy. The illustrations are the author’s own
  and include full page colored plates besides a number of pen and ink
  drawings.

  * “Will be read by advanced as well as by juvenile readers.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 50w.

  * “In fact, nothing can be said against it except that it is not as
  good as Grimm or Spenser, while challenging comparison with both.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 489. D. 14, ‘05. 60w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 780. N. 18, ‘05. 120w.


=St. Luz, Berthe.= Black butterflies. $1.50. Fenno.

  The occult is here blended with the ultra frivolous, and the arts of
  Emoclew-Houssein Rao, a worshipper of Doorka, seem all the more
  miraculous because he exercises them upon a group of modern and rather
  vulgar society folk. He wipes the hateful letters, with which a
  jealous husband has branded her, from Rosamond Arbuthnot’s forehead,
  and he frees the deformed master of Castlewalls from his all-consuming
  love for the beautiful Mrs. Demaris in such a manner that neither he
  nor the reader can separate the hallucination from the real.

  “It is not exactly clear what the author is driving at.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 499. Jl. 29, ‘05. 230w.


=Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin.= Portraits of the 17th century,
historic and literary; tr. by Katharine P. Wormeley. 2 pts. ea. **$2.50.
Putnam.

  Sainte-Beuve’s historical and literary portraits of the 17th century
  have been collected and translated by Katharine P. Wormeley, who says
  of her work—“In the following volumes—taken from the Causeries du
  Lundi, the Portraits de femme and the Portraits littéraires—some
  passages have been omitted; these relate chiefly to editions that have
  long since passed away, or to discussions on style that cannot be made
  clear in English. Also, where two or more essays on the same person
  have appeared in the different series, they are here put together,
  omitting repetitions.” The volumes are handsomely bound and
  illustrated.

  “Our enjoyment ... has been greatly marred by the lamentable
  inefficiency of the translation. Miss Wormeley has fallen a victim to
  the fetish of an exaggerated literalness with the most distressing
  result. Her structure is frequently not English; at times it is even
  ungrammatical.” Horace B. Samuel.

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 60. Ja. 21, ‘05. 790w.

  “Although the finer shades of his style have not always been exactly
  rendered by Miss Wormeley, yet the translation, on the whole, is
  fairly good. The value of the work is impaired by the absence of a
  good index.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 78. Ja. 14. 430w.

  “Diverse as are the characters treated of, each one is examined with
  the same charm, the same absence of exaggeration or trivial gossip.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 188. F. ‘05. 120w.

  “It presents in sound, idiomatic English some of the best work of the
  man who holds rank as one of the greatest critics in all literature.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 533. Jl. ‘05. 1510w.

     + + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 75. Ja. ‘05. 190w.

  “To those who have no French, Miss Wormeley’s volumes may be
  commended. She has chosen wisely, and has translated accurately, if
  without distinction.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 476. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1530w.


=Saintsbury, George Edward Bateman.= History of criticism and literary
taste in Europe from the earliest texts to the present day. V. 3.
*$3.50. Dodd.

  The author, professor of rhetoric in the university of Edinburgh,
  devoting this third volume to a survey of the nineteenth century,
  includes a study of English criticism from 1860 to 1900, and gives
  sixteen pages to American critics.

  Reviewed by Ferris Greenslet.

     + — =Atlan.= 96: 106. Jl. ‘05. 470w.

  “A trial balance of the qualities and defects of this great work might
  run somewhat as follows: Professor Saintsbury is unreliable, but
  frequently admirable, on the authors who touch his heart—the
  romantics; he is almost invariably inadequate and unfair to the
  critics he dislikes—the doctrinaires, among them the Germans
  especially; and he is safe only on the critics who bore him—the small
  fry generally. The volume, although its matter is on the whole the
  most attractive of the three, is less readable than its predecessors.
  It is chiefly valuable because the deposit of facts, which careful
  straining will separate, is considerable. Bad guide as he is for the
  highroad, the byways of criticism become accessible through Professor
  Saintsbury’s labors.” F. J. Mather, jr.

     + — =Bookm.= 20: 450. Ja. ‘05. 1820w.

  “It is however, only fair to say that Professor Saintsbury never
  allows his political or religious beliefs, strong as these are, to
  interfere with his judgment. We are a little surprised, perhaps, to
  find the section on Lamb one of the best of the book—a good piece of
  writing without qualification. The poorest chapters of the book—and
  they are poor beyond forgiveness—are those which deal with topics that
  require ideas or the understanding of ideas. A book of irritating
  qualities. He is interesting—despite the continual faults of taste and
  despite the tedium of the subject, he never allows the reader’s
  attention to flag, and that is high praise.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 501. Mr. 2, ‘05. 720w.

  * “In spite of its author’s rather slap-dash fashion, is on the whole
  a valuable, even an indispensable compendium for students of that very
  special criticism which is concerned with books almost exclusively.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1163. N. 16, ‘05. 90w.

  “One must always remember, in reading him, that he writes with the
  strongest possible bias, and that, however useful and even
  indispensable to the student of literature his history is, it is
  rather a work of reference than as a storehouse of reliable literary
  judgments. The style of the volume is deplorable. His offences against
  taste are of various kinds; perhaps the most exasperating is his
  reference to great men by their Christian names.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 155. F. 23, ‘05. 2570w.

  “With all its wealth of material and faithful investigation of
  original sources, it is the work of a cloudy and often incoherent
  mind. ‘Exhaustive’ is the word which comes to the reviewer’s mind as
  he surveys the range of this history. No work in this field covers the
  ground so completely or with such wealth of knowledge.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 397. F. 11, ‘05. 860w.


=Saintsbury, George.= Minor Caroline poets. 2v. v. I. *$3.40. Oxford.

  “This volume contains Chamberlayne’s ‘Pharonnida,’ a ‘heroick poem’ of
  heroic length; Benlowes’ ‘Theophila,’ a ‘divine poem’ in many cantos;
  the poems of Mrs. Katherine Philips, ‘the matchless Orinda;’ and the
  poems of Patrick Hannay, a very obscure person of whom nothing is
  known, and of whose book only six copies remain. Indeed all the
  writers collected in this book are more or less obscure now, and you
  must be interested in the history of English poetry before you can be
  expected to read them.”—Lond. Times.

  “It is well and judiciously edited as a whole, the notes being sparing
  and adequate, while the prefaces—both the general preface and those to
  single authors—if one can stomach the editor’s most unappetizing and
  contorted style, are excellent in substance, alike critical and
  informative.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905. 2: 168. Ag. 5. 1900w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 229. Jl. 21, ‘05. 2320w.

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 107. Ag. 3, ‘05. 400w.

  “We can and do applaud the zeal for true literary criticism and for
  scientific literary history, which prompted Professor Saintsbury to
  reprint and edit the minor Caroline poets, but we cannot and do not
  pretend to endorse all his conclusions as to the merits of the four
  included in the volume before us.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 375. S. 16, ‘05. 960w.


=Salisbury, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, 3d marquis of.= Essays,
v. 1, Foreign politics, v. 2, Biographical. ea. *$2. Dutton.

  “If these essays were now to be reproduced as the work of a man who
  had done nothing else, they would not command attention.... The
  interest which attracts readers to them is the interest in the man
  otherwise so remarkable who wrote them at a time when, as Lord Robert
  Cecil, and as a private member of parliament at odds with his noble
  parent, he found it necessary to do something for his living.... That
  they are partisan goes without saying.... Although the essays are
  divided by the present editor into those of biography and those of
  ‘foreign politics,’ they are all really political and polemical.”—N.
  Y. Times.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 334. Mr. 18. 450w.

  “It is well worth while to collect them in two attractive volumes, not
  only for their intrinsic value, but for the light they throw upon the
  mind of the writer.” Edward Fuller.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 245. S. ‘05. 690w.

  “The first volume is by far the more interesting.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1478. Je. 29, ‘05. 430w.

  “It is patient, scholarly, and sound, and, taken at its own modest
  pretensions, admirable.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 194. Je. 16, ‘05. 740w.

  * “Regarded merely as historical studies, the contributions which Lord
  Salisbury made to the ‘Quarterly review’ are not important. Thanks,
  however, to the trenchant style and their author’s subsequent part in
  foreign politics, they are worth reprinting.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 430. N. 23, ‘05. 1250w.

  “Very well worth reading on many accounts these essays are. But
  perhaps most of all as showing how a highly cultivated modern man and
  acute dialectician may still represent and embody an antiquated theory
  of politics.” Montgomery Schuyler.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 305. My. 13, ‘05. 4430w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 688. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1180w.


* =Salter, Emma Gurney.= Franciscan legends in Italian art: pictures in
Italian churches and galleries. *$1.50. Dutton.

  Although this volume “consists largely of catalogues of pictures,
  frescoes, friezes, stained glass groups, and so forth, it is not
  designed chiefly as a historical study of the works of art with which
  it deals; its main interest is for the Franciscan student.... The
  representations of Francis, his followers and indeed all things
  Franciscan, and the influence of the Saint in early Italian art
  generally, are followed up and chronicled with a pertinacity and
  thoroughness which only the special student can appreciate.”—Acad.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1183. N. 11, ‘05. 380w.

  * “We have found it rather dry reading from any point of view, but
  doubtless there are those who can profit by the information it
  conveys.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 509. D. 21, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Presents the first attempt ever made to bring together into English
  and in small compass the stories around the pictures of Franciscan
  saints.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 360w.


=Salter, William.= Iowa: The first free state in the Louisiana purchase.
**$1.20. McClurg.

  This is not the story of Iowa as a state, but an account of the
  incidents in American history which concern it, from 1673 to 1846,
  from its discovery to its admission as a state into the Union. Its
  varied history, under France, under Spain, in the Louisiana purchase,
  and the territories of Louisiana, Missouri, Michigan, Wisconsin, and
  at last Iowa is followed. The book is illustrated with portraits and
  plans.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 955. Jl. ‘05. 50w.

  “The work is painstaking and careful but its scope is limited.”

       + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 56: 594. S. ‘05. 140w.

  “A vast amount of information is given in this condensed and readable
  shape.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 19. Jl. 1, ‘05. 250w.

  “The story is told in a style that is clear, but without distinctive
  merit of any kind. Neither new knowledge nor original treatment of old
  information is in evidence.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 64. Jl. 20, ‘05. 370w.

  “His narrative lacks the flowing interest one would naturally expect,
  being retarded both by a peculiar inclusiveness of treatment and a
  somewhat halting style.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 444. Je. 17, ‘05. 220w.


* =Saltus, Edgar Evertson.= Perfume of Eros; a Fifth avenue incident.
†$1.25. Wessels.

  “The perfume of Eros” was first published serially under the title,
  “The yellow fay.” It deals with some unlovely members of New York’s
  inner circle. Loftus, handsome and wealthy, picks up a tailor’s pretty
  little daughter and after solemnly promising to marry her establishes
  her in handsome apartments, takes her abroad and finally deserts her
  for the wife of his closest friend. The murder of Loftus on the eve of
  this elopement brings about a trial in which the characters who have
  thus far been good altho weak, perjure themselves and thereby smooth
  things over for the happiness of two of the weakest and wealthiest.

  * “The story is interesting, especially if you regard it as a hooded
  satire.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 811. N. 25, ‘05. 420w.


=Sample, John Calvert.= Properties of steel sections: a reference book
for structural engineers and architects. *$3. McGraw pub.

  A work related to the well-known “Osborn’s tables,” in ground covered.
  An essential difference is that, in the tables of properties of
  compound sections, Sample gives I and r, while Osborn gives I and r2.

  “The book will be frequently found a convenient handbook where much
  designing in steel is to be done.”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 638. Je. 15, ‘05. 230w.


=Sanborn, Alvan Francis.= Paris and the social revolution: a study of
the revolutionary element in the various classes of Parisian life.
**$3.50. Small.

  “The author begins by describing the present-day anarchistic
  philosophy and its developments, and then goes on to tell how its
  propagation is carried on in Paris by speaking, by conferences, by the
  anarchist press, and by acts—the last including insurrectionists’
  outbreaks and individual crimes.”—Outlook.

  “The author has done a rare thing. He has portrayed the radicals of
  society as men and women moved by all human emotions and not as human
  caricatures.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 595. S. ‘05. 240w.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 94. Ag. 16, ‘05. 220w.

  “There is plenty of picturesque material, and he makes the most of it.
  Ordinarily it would be no compliment to an author to say that his
  quotations are the best part of his book, but in this case it is, for
  they are so numerous, and well-chosen and are gathered from such
  diverse and often inaccessible sources as to form a valuable library
  of revolutionary literature.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 897. Ap. 20, ‘05. 690w.

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 175. Je. 9, ‘05. 890w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 1510w. (Outline of
         contents.)

  “It is a study of unusual thoroughness into the condition of Parisian
  life below the surface. The chapters are not as a rule, theoretical,
  but deal directly with actual life and observation, and in this way
  contain much that is picturesque and often even amusing.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 260w.

  “An unusually earnest presentation of what modern anarchy stands for.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 757. My. 13, ‘05. 500w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 123. Jl. ‘05. 200w.


=Sanborn, Mary Farley.= Lynette and the congressman. (†)$1.50. Little.

  The setting of Miss Sanborn’s story is chiefly out-of-door Washington,
  where on long tramps and in a certain Madame de Chatres’ rose garden,
  the friendship between a charmingly naïve Southern girl and a Michigan
  congressman grows apace. There is somewhat of politics, there are
  slight peeps into social Washington, but the main story interest is
  restricted to the natural, spontaneous comradeship between two direct
  and unassuming people.

  * “Things come to pass in a slow, mildly interesting, elaborate sort
  of way which interferes in nowise with the gentle reader’s nap between
  chapters.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 1229. N. 23, ‘05. 110w.


=Sandars, Mary F.= Life of Honore de Balzac. **$3 Dodd.

  The author has given the romantic career of a man of genius, whose
  loves and debts occupied much of his time, but who in his passion for
  labor, wrote his seventy-nine novels, accomplished a colossal amount
  of journalism and wrote several plays. Having achieved all this, he
  died in debt, unappreciated, and broken in hope, and afterwards came
  fame.

  “An account of the events of Balzac’s career accurate in matters of
  fact, and written in a light, agreeable manner. It is not really
  worthy of the occasion.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 493. Ap. 15. 760w.

  “So far this is the best and most complete life of the great French
  romancer.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 563. Je. ‘05. 180w.

  “Its form is attractive, its illustrations are good, and its
  sympathetic tone is alluring and generally well-balanced.” Annie
  Russell Marble.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 413. Je. 16, ‘05. 1170w.

  “Miss Sandars explicitly disclaims all critical intentions. But her
  attitude toward her author implies a judgment. And that judgment, it
  seems to us, errs, if anything, in taking Balzac rather too
  seriously.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 452. Ag. 24, ‘05. 520w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1163. N. 16, ‘05. 80w.

  “In Miss Sandars’s work is presented, for the first time, an
  exhaustive account of Balzac’s life. The story is told simply,
  directly, with sympathy, and not infrequent humor.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 419. My. 25, ‘05. 970w.

  “While sympathetic and unquestionably entertaining, adds little of
  importance to our knowledge of the subject. It is essentially a volume
  of literary ‘small talk’ ... all very diverting, to be sure, but
  hardly constituting a biography.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 856. Ap. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  “Miss Sandars has succeeded, where many have failed, in writing a
  readable and intelligent Life of Honore De Balzac. She has made little
  attempt to estimate the value and character of his writings, and
  therein she is wise, for such few specimens of criticism as she does
  present show neither sympathy nor understanding. Miss Sandars’s sketch
  is not without either coherence or verisimilitude.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 86. Ja. 21, ‘05. 1510w.


=Sanday, Rev. William.= Outlines of the life of Christ. **$1.25.
Scribner.

  “This volume is a reprint of the article ‘Jesus Christ,’ contributed
  to Dr. Hastings’s ‘Dictionary of the Bible.’ ... A notable feature is
  an improved map of the sacred sites, taken from various sources, and
  brought up to the latest stage of knowledge on the subject.”—Spec.

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 75. Jl. ‘05. 150w.

  “His article on Jesus has been recognized as a careful piece of work,
  but it falls short where one most wants light, in the point of a
  clear, satisfying statement of Jesus’s own thought and belief.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1013. My. 4, ‘05. 110w.

  “Strongly conservative in his tendencies, but open-minded, and
  candidly conceding much to the fellow-critics whose conclusions he
  rejects.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 707. Mr. 18, ‘05. 110w.

  “Few scholars can approach the central subject of their religion with
  deeper learning, and with a happier combination of criticism and
  reverence than Dr. Sanday.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 640. My. 13, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 446. Mr. 25, ‘05. 80w.


=Sanders, Henry Arthur,= ed. Roman historical sources and institutions.
(Humanistic series.) **$2.50. Macmillan.

  “The University of Michigan devotes the initial volume of her
  ‘Studies’ to a collection of essays dealing with Roman historical
  sources and institutions.... Apart from Professor Dennison’s
  discussion of the singing of the ‘Sæcular’ hymn, all the papers are
  historical in theme.... Miss Mary G. Williams” contributes a “study of
  Julia Mamæa.... Dr. Duane R. Stuart investigates Dio Cassius’s use of
  epigraphic material.... Professor Drake ... traces the rise and
  decline of the principalitas in the pre-Diocletian army. Dr. G. H.
  Allen ... presents a valuable study of centurions as substitute
  commanders.... Professor Sanders ... collects all versions of the
  Tarpeia myth, following Krahner, and adds some allied stories,” and
  also gives a “discussion of the lost Epitome of Livy.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “They display diligence and zeal. It is perhaps ungracious to object
  to their literary baldness and disjointedness; but none of the essays
  shows a facile pen.” Charles Upson Clark.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 621. Ap. ‘05. 500w.


=Sandys, Edwyn.= Sporting sketches **$1.75. Macmillan.

  Mr. Sandys, author, artist, naturalist, and sportsman, has brought
  together here “picturesque accounts of shooting and fishing, pleasant
  descriptions of out-of-door experiences, practical information for the
  camper, fisher, and hunter.” (Outlook.)

  “Mr. Sandys stands between the genuinely literary sportsman, such as
  Henry Van Dyke, and the mere spinner of wildly improbable yarns. There
  is a swagger in his style that seems unduly artificial now and then.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 259. S. 28, ‘05. 360w.

  “The only trouble with the stuff is its essential artificiality.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 726. O. 28, ‘05. 240w.

  “Rarely are sporting sketches found of interest to so wide an audience
  as this book will attract.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 336. O. 7, ‘05. 90w.

     * + =R. of Rs.= 32: 754. D. ‘05. 40w.


=Sandys, John Edwin.= Harvard lectures on the revival of learning.
**$1.50. Macmillan.

  Lectures which discuss various aspects of the revival of learning
  under the titles—Petrarch and Boccaccio, The age of discoveries, The
  theory and practice of education, The academies of Florence, Venice,
  Naples, and Rome, The homes of humanism, The historian of
  Ciceronianism, The study of Greek.

  “A readable and scholarly work.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 935. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “Dr. Sandys combines with a profound knowledge of books a light touch
  and an appreciation of the spirit of the place.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 175. Ag. 5, 850w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 380. O. ‘05. 90w.

  “When we consider the mass of names and facts handled, the dexterity
  with which Dr. Sandys beguiles our attention is really extraordinary.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 202. Je. 23, ‘05. 580w.

         =Nation.= 80: 396. My. 18, ‘05. 60w.

  “It is a sad pity that so much patient investigation should be so
  little clarified by a sense of proportion and historic insight.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 220. S. 14, ‘05. 370w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 371. Je. 10, ‘05. 1120w.

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 591. Jl. 1, ‘05. 120w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 569. O. 14, ‘05. 1320w.


=Sanford, Frank G.= Art crafts for beginners. **$1.20. Century.

  “To those who feel the need of some art expression, but who cannot
  attend an art school; to those who wish to follow the art of the
  craftsman; to those teachers upon whom demand is made for knowledge of
  the crafts—this little volume is addressed.” Instruction is given in
  design, thin wood carving, pyrography, sheet-metal work, leather work,
  bookbinding, simple pottery, basketry, and beadwork. The book is aided
  in its helpfulness to the beginner by the author’s working drawings,
  and reproductions of photographs.

  “The treatment is terse, careful and suggestive. As a useful little
  manual for the teacher and as a practical guide for the amateur, this
  book should prove of great value.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 76. Ja. ‘05. 200w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 251. F. ‘05. 90w.


* =Sangster, Mrs. Margaret Elizabeth (Munson).= Radiant motherhood,
**$1. Bobbs.

  This “book for the twentieth century mother,” gives good council for
  the mothers of children at various stages of development. It discusses
  baby days, religious training, school, outdoor life and pets, manners,
  home reading and play-mates. There are chapters upon When children
  marry: The grandmother: Motherhood in fiction: Motherhood in the
  Bible: and Questions for the mother’s clubs. There is much that is
  helpful in the volume and it is written in a spirit which approaches
  motherhood reverently, and makes of it a thing both noble and ideal.


=Santayana, George.= Life of reason; or, The phases of human progress.
5v. ea. **$1.25. Scribner.

  A five volume series. Vol. I, “Introduction, and reason in common
  sense,” and Vol. II, “Reason in society,” are already out. Vol. III,
  “Reason in religion,” Vol. IV, “Reason in art,” and Vol. V, “Reason in
  science,” are to follow. “Vol. I, ... ‘Reason in common sense,’ has
  chapters on ‘The birth of reason,’ ‘First steps and first
  fluctuations.’ ‘Discovery of natural objects.’ ‘On some critics of
  this discovery,’ ‘Nature unified and mind discerned.’ ‘Discovery of
  fellow-minds.’ ‘Concretions in discourse and in existence,’ ‘Relative
  values of things and ideas,’ ‘How thought is practical,’ ‘The measure
  of values in reflection,’ ‘Abstract conditions of the ideal.’ ‘Flux
  and constancy in human nature.’ Vol. II, ‘Reason in society,’ deals
  with love, the family, industry, government, and war; the
  ‘aristocratic ideal.’ democracy, ‘free’ society, patriotism, and
  ‘ideal’ society.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “He can be brilliantly brief and weighty, and deliver long-drawn-out
  expositions with harmonious grandeur. He too brings us inspiration in
  a manner as delightful as it is distinguished.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 588. Je. 2, ‘05. 1100w.

  “The style is unfamiliar and singularly disconcerting to anybody who
  is anxious to get at the gist of Prof. Santayana’s message. Trope and
  epigram, flaming phrase and pervasive metaphor, so blur the outline of
  his meaning that impatience gives way at times to absolute
  exasperation.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905. 2: 269. Ag. 26. 740w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

  “For one, therefore, who is willing also to think, the work is
  essentially readable throughout. It is full of keen insight wedded to
  apt expression.” A. K. Rogers.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 349. My. 16, ‘05. 2760w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

  “It is, in fact, an eclectic philosophy, and. like other works of that
  sort, is likely to have more literary than scientific value. Professor
  Santayana’s style is highly polished, in parts too much so.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 461. Je. 8. ‘05. 330w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 89. F. 11, ‘05. 190w. (Statement of contents
         of v. 1 and 2.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 189. Mr. 25, ‘05. 560w. (Review of v. 1 and
         2.)

  “Ingenious, keen, and brilliant in a purely intellectual way, as all
  must confess Professor Santayana’s pragmatic treatment of the life of
  reason to be. those who are intent on a profounder moral pragmatism
  will, we fear, lay the volume containing it down with disappointment
  and regret.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 193. My. 20, ‘05. 550w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

  “Seldom has a materialistic philosophy been presented in finer
  literary garb than in this series of volumes, or with stranger
  contradiction of experimental facts.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 577. N. 4, ‘05. 420w. (Review of v. 3 and 4.)

  “He is always sufficiently independent without being in the least
  eccentric, and has much to say that is highly suggestive; but, in his
  praiseworthy attempt to avoid both dogmatism and polemics, on the one
  hand, and a too schematic and rationalistic method, on the other, he
  seems to the present reviewer constantly to run the risk of treating
  in a very general and somewhat superficial way some of the fundamental
  problems of philosophy.” Ernest Albee.

   + + — =Philos. R.= 14: 602. S. ‘05. 2250w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)

  “The first volume seems to us to be disappointing. It seems to lack
  definiteness of both purpose and expression. The second volume on the
  other hand, seems to us to be somewhat original in substance and
  manner of treatment, and is certainly fruitful in suggestion as well
  as principle.” George S. Painter.

   + + — =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 334. O. 15, ‘05. 2420w. (Review of v. 1 and
         2.)

  “He writes with a real command of language and power of imagery, and
  to most readers his brilliant illustrations and epigrams will be the
  chief attraction of his work. We should be the last to deny their
  charms, but at the same time the thought is apt to be a little
  confused by the splendour of its presentation.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 119. Jl. 22, ‘05. 1740w. (Review of v. 1 and 2.)


=Sargent, Charles Sprague.= Manual of the trees of North America. *$6.
Houghton.

  Information concerning the trees of North America (exclusive of
  Mexico) in a convenient form for the use of students and all those
  interested in trees and tree culture. The book includes a “Synopsis of
  families of plants,” an “Analytic key to families of plants,” a
  “Glossary of technical terms,” tend a complete index. There are six
  hundred and thirty trees described, each one accurately illustrated by
  the drawings of Charles E. Faxon. Professor Sargent has had thirty
  years’ experience in dealing with indigenous trees in the Arnold
  arboretum at Harvard, and the results of the knowledge thus acquired
  are here included, while Mr. Faxon has reproduced leaf-bud, leaf,
  flower, and fruit so ingenuously that each tree may be readily
  recognized at any season, and assigned to its proper group.

  “A book which is indispensable to all students of American trees.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 84. Jl. 15, 470w.

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 280. Ag. 26. 320w.

  “There is no reason why this manual should not become at once
  extensively used by all those interested in trees.” J. M. C.

   + + + =Bot. G.= 39: 301. Ap. ‘05. 150w.

  “It is hard to see how a better or a different manual could be made.
  No serious student of American trees can do without it.”

   + + + =Country Calendar.= 1: 223. Jl. ‘05. 220w.

         =Dial.= 38: 360. My. 16, ‘05. 90w.

  “It will be especially valuable to students in the West and South,
  where the trees are not so well covered by other manuals.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 217. Jl. 27, ‘05. 300w.

  “This task of providing a handy book of reference in fieldwork fell
  naturally to the author and illustrator of the ‘Silva.’ Both have done
  their work well.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 361. My. 4. ‘05. 930w.

  “It cannot fail to be of the greatest value to students of botany and
  forestry.”

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 197. Je. 29, ‘05. 400w.

  “The arrangement is such that reference is easy.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 176. Mr. 18, ‘05. 100w.

  “Is so written that with the least amount of trouble you may find to
  what family of species any particular tree belongs.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 216. Ap. 8, ‘05. 670w.

  “The book is one of permanent value not only to the student of
  forestry but to all who wish to identify the species and genus of
  trees in all parts of the country, so that the work really holds with
  regard to trees such a place as is held in another field by Gray’s
  ‘Botany.’”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is an excellent book to put in the hands of all who are interested
  in village and park improvement, while owners of country places will
  find it indeed a vade mecum.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 150w.

  “This is a book for the reference library in all our high schools.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 440. My. ‘05. 60w.

  “The book is thoroughly satisfactory, and must at once become a
  standard among systematic manuals.” Charles E. Bessey.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 21: 914. Je. 16, ‘05. 690w.

         =Spec.= 94: 645. Ap. 29, ‘05. 50w.


* =Satchell, William.= Toll of the bush. $1.50. Macmillan.

  “A genuine picture of life in New Zealand.... A story—genial, kindly,
  void of bitterness, and perfectly free from platitudinous unreality.
  The author presents a charming heroine, two brothers (one colonial
  born, and one a ‘new chum’ from England), a delightful old colonist of
  the early days, and at least five other characters who are too well
  and faithfully limned to be called simple sketches.”—Ath.

  * “It has a rounded completeness, a full and broad humanity, which are
  by no means characteristic of contemporary fiction. A story full of
  real characterization, and at the same time alive with action,
  movement, and even with adventure.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 574. O. 28. 320w.

  * “There is about the whole book a freshness and flavor of the wilds
  that give it a most welcome individuality.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 448. N. 30, ‘05. 360w.

  * “There is an atmosphere of freshness and truth about the book that
  is most satisfying, and the interest is sustained to the end.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 876. D. 9, ‘05. 600w.

  * “It has a thrilling story and not a few vividly written and exciting
  incidents. It seems to us far the best of the recent tales which have
  come to us dealing with Australasia.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 80w.

  * “It is worth reading chiefly on account of its minor characters such
  as Pine the Maori, and certain passages describing the wonderful
  depths of the bush. The hero and heroine and their love story, and
  with unnecessary complications, are tedious and commonplace, and the
  dialogue is for the most part stilted and rhetorical.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 530. O. 21, ‘05. 160w.

  * “The book is to be heartily commended as an able and original piece
  of work.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 821. N. 18, ‘05. 280w.


=Saunders, (Margaret) Marshall.= Princess Sukey: the story of a pigeon
and her human friends. *$1.25. Meth. bk.

  Altho Princess Sukey, the thorobred pigeon, flutters thru the story,
  the plot is chiefly concerned with the little boy who saved her life
  and with his grandfather, a retired judge, whose heart becomes
  softened to all weak things thru her and who fills his silent house
  with young life, letting the poor and the orphaned find a place in his
  heart and his home.

  “It might be a tract promulgated jointly by the societies for the
  prevention of cruelty to animals and children.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 20: 434. Jl. 1, ‘05. 350w.


=Savage, Minot Judson.= America to England, and other poems. **$1.35.
Putnam.

  The poem which gives the title to this book was read at a banquet
  given to Ambassador Reid on the eve of his departure for England. The
  volume contains other verses for special occasions and selections from
  the best hymns and poems of Dr. Savage.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 480. N. ‘05. 190w.

  * “Despite a considerable fervor of feeling and great readiness of
  phrase and metre, few of the pieces ... are of a sort to engage
  serious poetic criticism.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 303. O. 12, ‘05. 160w.

  * “The hymns lack the fervor in which the great hymns are rich. Mr.
  Savage has kept his product in this field entirely free from the zeal
  without reverence that is so often an offense both to taste and piety
  in modern hymnology. The memorial hymns show catholicity of
  appreciation.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 330w.


=Savage, Minot Judson.= Life’s dark problems: or, Is this a good world?
**$1.35. Putnam.

  “In this series of ten papers ... Dr. Savage re-examines some of the
  questions that have beset humanity as long as humanity has put itself
  on record. Can we, in the face of the evil that exists in this world,
  believe in the goodness and wisdom of things as they are? Are
  suffering and evil reconcilable with an almighty, all-wise, and
  all-good God?”—N. Y. Times.

  “The questions he asks are those that have been put by such as have
  thought and felt deeply since the day of Job onwards, and he writes as
  a man might have done at the beginning of the Christian era.”

     — + =Acad.= 68: 896. S. 2, ‘05. 1490w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 372. Je. 10, ‘05. 820w.

  “The discussion is luminous, rational, and effective.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 392. Je. 10, ‘05. 100w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 130w.


=Savoyard, pseud.= See =Newman, Eugene W.=


=Scaliger, Julius Caesar.= Select translations from Scaliger’s Poetics,
by Frederick Morgan Padelford. 75c. Holt.

  This twenty-sixth volume in the “Yale studies of English” series
  includes “such chapters or portions of chapters as bear most vitally
  upon the fundamental problems of poetics.... The table of contents has
  been translated in full in order that the reader may gain an
  impression of the Poetics in its totality.”


=Schafer, Joseph.= History of the Pacific northwest. **$1.25. Macmillan.

  “In this volume the stirring narrative of the pioneer settlements in
  the territory now embraced in the states of Oregon, Washington, and
  Idaho is told in detail, while the organization and political progress
  of the three state governments are briefly sketched. The author has
  wisely selected for amplification ... the processes by which the
  wilderness was subdued, homes multiplied, commerce extended to all
  parts of the world, and a great civilization developed in a portion of
  our continent that we once called remote and inaccessible.”—R. of Rs.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 11: 229. O. ‘05. 50w.

  “A reading of it leaves the impression that it is the work of one who
  knows his field and whose conclusions may be relied upon.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 209. O. 1, ‘05. 420w.

  “He shows a fine grasp of the relative importance of events. The early
  period of its development is treated with great fullness and in style
  that fascinates the reader.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 267. Ag. 3, ‘05. 80w.

  Reviewed by Robert Livingston Schuyler.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 464. Jl. 15, ‘05. 840w.

  “The treatment is clear and logical, the tone impartial, and the style
  direct and agreeable. The book, in fine, is a useful addition to the
  literature of its subject.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 444. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 123. Jl. ‘05. 130w.


=Scherer, James A. B.= Young Japan; the story of the Japanese people,
and especially of their educational development. *$1.50. Lippincott.

  “Dr. Scherer tells in detail the development of Japan as a nation,
  with much information concerning succeeding rulers and their reigns.
  He discusses every influence that has gradually led the Mikado’s
  empire to its present position among the nations of the world, and
  what this position has meant or means to the native literature, arts,
  or sciences. Anecdotes and legends are used to illustrate certain
  points.... It is profusely illustrated with reproductions of
  photographs taken by and for the author, and drawings by Japanese
  artists.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It is a useful pendant to his former work, ‘Japan to-day,’ and is, in
  effect, a sort of short philosophic history of Japan, which, however,
  is not treated critically.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 229. Ag. 19. 490w.

  “He does not, however, go very far behind the looking-glass.” Wm.
  Elliott Griffis.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 265. S. ‘05. 220w.

  “The style of the book is clear, straightforward, and marked by ease
  and poise. It is the book for the hour; for the chief problems about
  Japan just now concern her real purpose and moral force.” Wm. Elliot
  Griffis.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 62. Ag. 1, ‘05. 390w.

  “A large portion of the book would make an excellent school-text
  book.” Adachi Kinnosuke.

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 389. Ag. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “When he discusses Japanese history, Dr. Scherer is at once accurate
  and philosophical; and his descriptions of Japanese school, street,
  and home life in town and country afford instruction and
  entertainment.”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 470w.

  “It is perhaps the general view of the long education of the Japanese,
  though but slightly touching upon the philosophy which has nourished
  the leaders of modern thought and action.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 522. Je. 29, ‘05. 280w.

  “The story is concise and interestingly written.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “His work is based upon a pretty solid foundation, and will be found
  both entertaining and informing.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 447. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1290w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 253. Ag. ‘05. 60w.


* =Schnabel, Carl.= Handbook of metallurgy, tr. by Henry Louis. 2v.
*$6.50. Macmillan.

  A second English edition of this treatise on metallurgy which is a
  translation of the second German edition. As the preface states: “The
  work is divided into two volumes. The first embraces the metallurgy of
  copper, lead, silver, and gold.... The remaining metals are treated of
  in volume 2, and the most important among them being zinc, nickel and
  mercury.”

  * “If the data were only up to date, the book would form an excellent
  text book for students of metallurgy.” Bradley Stoughton.

     + — =Engin. N.= 54: 643. D. 14, ‘05. 2070w. (Review of v. 1.)

  * “The merits and defects of the book remain much the same as the
  first edition. Prof. Louis is to be congratulated on the translation,
  which makes a valuable work available to British students.”

   + + — =Nature.= 73: 124. D. 7, ‘05. 220w. (Review of v. 1.)


=Schneider, Norman Hugh (H. S. Norrie, pseud.).= Electrical instruments
and testing; how to use the voltmeter, ammeter, galvanometer,
potentiometer, ohmmeter, and the Wheatstone bridge. $1. Spon.

  “This book is intended for practical use and also as an introduction
  to the larger work on electrical testing. The apparatus described is
  modern and universally adopted. The lists are such as occur daily in
  the work of the engine room, power house, or technical school.” It
  consists of practical explanations with numerous examples worked out
  and fully illustrated with diagrams and drawings.


=Schneider, Norman Hugh (H. S. Norrie, pseud.).= Model library, v. 1.
$1. Spon.

  This volume is divided into four books. The study of electricity and
  its laws for beginners, comprising the elements of electricity and
  magnetism as applied to dynamos, motors, wiring, and to all branches
  of electrical work. How to install electric bells, annunciators and
  alarms, including batteries, wires and wiring, circuits, bells,
  alarms, thermostats, annunciators, and the location and remedying of
  troubles. How to make use of them, giving full detailed instructions
  for the manufacture of dry cells of any shape and size. Electrical
  circuits and diagrams illustrated and explained, new and original
  drawings, comprising annunciators, alarms, bells, dynamos, batteries,
  etc. The whole is fully illustrated. There is also a complete general
  index.


=Schoonmaker, Edwin Davies.= Saxon’s drama of Christianity in the North.
$1.50. Hammersmark.

  “There are forty persons of the drama, besides fairies, gnomes, a
  dwarf, and a witch, classified as the ‘Saxon unit,’ the ‘Roman unit,’
  the ‘Greek unit,’ and the ‘Supernatural.’ The distinctions between the
  classes are not sharply made, and unless the reader is thoroly
  informed or highly alert his mind will become more or less befogged in
  following the flight of the Saxons away from the Christians and the
  complicated relations among Oswald, Father Benedict, Sigurd, Selena,
  and Canzier.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It is a long, confused drama in blank verse, where the ambition of
  the author is more praiseworthy than the result of it.”

       — =Ind.= 58: 783. Ap. 6, ‘05. 20w.

  “‘The Saxons’ has the advantage of an unhackneyed theme ... but the
  story is not very clearly told.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 510. Ag. 5, ‘05. 370w.


=Schultz, Hermann.= Outlines of Christian apologetics for use in
lectures: tr. from 2d enl. ed. by Alfred Bull Nichols. **$1.75.
Macmillan.

  After an introductory chapter treating of the problem of apologetics
  and its history, Dr. Schultz free from dogma and creeds discusses the
  nature of religion, postulates, and the reasonableness of the
  religious view of the world, philosophy of religion, religion in its
  historical phenomena, the nature of Christianity, the Kingdom of God,
  Christ, Jesus in history, &c. The volume is well annotated.

  “Thoroughly scientific, and therefore failing to meet the requirements
  of orthodoxy, Professor Schultz’s apologetic is certainly evangelical
  in the best sense.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 885. Ag. 5, ‘05. 400w.


=Schumann, Robert Alexander.= Fifty piano compositions. $2.50. Ditson.

  Mr. Xaver Scharwenka has selected and edited the fifty compositions
  which are included in this addition to “The musician’s library,” and
  has also contributed an introductory study of Schumann. There is a
  bibliography in English, German and French.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 213. O. 1, ‘05. 70w.

  * “While every amateur may miss this or that pet piece, the editor has
  succeeded remarkably in his choice of the half-hundred most precious
  nuggets.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 467. D. 7, ‘05. 80w.

  “As an interpretation this introduction is not equal to the
  introductions of some of the other volumes in this series.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 333. O. 7, ‘05. 40w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 90w.


=Schuster, Arthur.= Introduction to the theory of optics. *$4. Longmans.

  A text-book for teachers and students who are already acquainted with
  the phenomena of light as described in college books of general
  physics. “The first two-thirds of the volume are elementary; that is,
  they explain only polarization, interference, diffraction, the theory
  of optical instruments, and the peculiarities of the different
  crystalline media—phenomena that result simply from light’s consisting
  of transverse vibrations. The remaining third of the book contains the
  deeper theory of light, and is written on a novel plan, the idea being
  to direct students to the original memoirs without repeating their
  contents.” (Nation.)

  “The reviewer feels that Professor Schuster, by clearness of
  exposition and the painstaking work spent in the preparation of such a
  timely and useful book, has put students and teachers of physics under
  no inconsiderable obligation.” E. F. N.

     + + =Astrophys.= J. 21: 382. My. ‘05. 780w.

  “Prof. Schuster has been completely successful within the limits which
  he has laid down for himself. We recommend the work heartily to all
  advanced students of physics, with only a hint of warning that the
  information should be supplemented from other sources.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 53. Ja. 14, 910w.

  “A notable addition to the literature of optical theory, and one which
  will prove of value to every student.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 210. Je. 30, ‘05. 1330w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 198. Mr. 9, ‘05. 480w.

  “Fills a very obvious gap. The treatment is marked throughout by the
  author’s well-known and admirable lucidity of style.”

     + + =Nature.= 71: 457. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1030w.


=Schwartz, Julia Augusta.= Wilderness babies. †$1.50. Little.

  Sixteen delightful stories which tell of sixteen equally delightful
  animal families. Young folks, when they have read them, will feel a
  truly friendly interest in: The one with a pocket: the opossum; The
  one that eats grass in the sea: the manatee; The biggest one: the
  whale; The one that lives in a crowd: the buffalo; and all the rest,
  elk, beaver, rabbit, squirrel, bear, fox, wolf, panther, seal, shrew,
  mole, and bat.

  * “To make the stories quite perfect, it would be well that a
  naturalist should give them careful revision, so they may teach as
  well as charm the children, for whom they are written.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 723. O. 28, ‘05. 390w.

  * “The stories should not only prove attractive to children, but they
  should give them much interesting information about the children of
  the woods.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 718. N. 25, ‘05. 80w.


=Scollard, Clinton.= Odes and elegies. *$1.35. G. W. Browning, Clinton,
N. Y.

  The dream note in poetry, the traditional, and the patriotic are all
  sounded again and again thru Mr. Scollard’s new group of verse. His
  seven pieces are The dreamers, Lawton, On a copy of Keats’s Endymion,
  Elegy in autumn, The march of the ideal, The stars of morning, and The
  Oriskany.

  “A quality of dream-music, of dream-picture, is the most
  characteristic trait of his muse.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 192. Ag. ‘05. 110w.

  “Mr. Scollard’s work sometimes seems labored, but he has imagination
  and lofty idealism for fairly steadfast companions, and they prompt
  him to an utterance which is usually worthy of his theme.” Wm. M.
  Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 65. Ag. 1, ‘05. 300w.

  “Well endowed with a poet’s ideality, possessed of a good mastery of
  difficult metre, and a good command, perhaps a too good command, of
  poetic diction.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 17. Jl. 6, ‘05. 280w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05. 210w.


=Scott, Eva.= King in exile: the wanderings of Charles II. from June,
1646 to July, 1654. *$3.50. Dutton.

  A preface sets forth the kernel of the volume—“These years were years
  of hope, when Royalists still stood in arms in the three kingdoms,
  when the intervention of Europe was confidently expected. But they
  were also years of hope deferred, years that saw the growth of
  divisions and dissensions in the Royalist ranks, the steady decay of
  morals among men capable of a splendid devotion, but not proof against
  all the misery it involved. And to many came the bitterest pang of all
  in the knowledge that these years had witnessed also the dishonor of
  their king.”

  “So exhaustive has been her work that no future investigator will need
  to spend his time in digging where she has digged.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 590. My. 13. 750w.

  “Miss Scott has given us a second book worthy of the reputation she
  gained by her first and we must not leave it without a special word of
  praise for her description of, and constant reference to, her
  authorities, and for the admirable index.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 175. Je. 9, ‘05. 500w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 300. O. 12, ‘05. 560w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 86. F. 11, ‘05. 230w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 323. My. 20, ‘05. 1270w.

  “An adequate and rather minute account of eight years of
  vicissitudes.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 193. My. 20, ‘05. 50w.

  “She has not the tact to present the facts which she has mastered in
  an intelligible or artistic shape.”

     — + =Spec.= 94: 513. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1560w.


=Scott, Leroy.= Walking delegate. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  This novel, by an author who has been active in social settlement work
  on the East side, concerns New York labor unions and tells the story
  of the struggle between “Buck Foley” and the walking delegate who
  defeated him.

  “There is genuine power in the book, and it holds the interest of the
  reader until the very last.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 832. Ag. 12, ‘05. 270w.

  “The characterization of the story is gripping, and the dialogue is
  better than the curate’s famous egg. The style is picturesque without
  being purple.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 74. Jl. 15. 210w.

  “Impresses one from the start as a work of uncommon power and
  realism.”

     + + =Bookm.= 22: 86. S. ‘05. 420w.

  “Tragedy, sentiment, and lively narrative give the book a real
  interest.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 400. Je. ‘05. 80w.

  “A book written without any pretence of style, yet crudely impressive
  by virtue of its picturesque speech and its close acquaintance with
  the conditions depicted.” Wm. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 42. Jl. 16, ‘05. 230w.

  “The tale is an interesting, and even powerful narrative. The
  workingmen of the story are generally true types. But the author has
  somewhat overdone the matter of endowing them with faulty syntax and
  cheap slang.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 452. Ag. 24, ‘05. 140w.

  “Characters, incidents, conversations, setting are of the latest and
  seem impressively real. It is a strong story notable even among good
  novels.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 428. S. 23, ‘05. 560w.

  “Mr. Leroy Scott has planted a literary standard in the field of
  American labor. Strictly speaking ‘The walking delegate’ is not a
  literary work, and, to judge by this example of his diction, Mr. Scott
  is not a stylist.” Stephen Chalmers.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 341. My. 27, ‘05. 1550w.

  “There is little doubt that ‘The walking delegate’ is one of the
  strongest books that the season has produced.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “There is more genuine, living, human sociology in it than is to be
  found in half of the avowed studies of the relations of men in human
  society.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 871. Je. 3, ‘05. 270w.

  “Both as a human document and as a work of art, ‘The walking delegate’
  is a book of extraordinary worth.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 759. Je. ‘05. 140w.


* =Scott, Robert H.= Voyage of the Discovery. 2v. **$10. Scribner.

  An exhaustive account of a three year Antarctic expedition which
  sailed in 1901 and spent two years below the Antarctic circle, making
  a new farthest south record. The geographical and scientific
  discoveries made are given in detail, the adventures met with and the
  new lands, mountains, and glaciers seen, are elaborately described.
  For the benefit of future voyagers there is a minute account of
  management and equipment of the “Discovery.” The books are written by
  the commander of the expedition and are illustrated from photographs
  and sketches, many of which are in color.

  * “Looking on the book as a whole we cannot but think that it would
  have gained by compression, and by a somewhat more definite marking of
  the main lines.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1096. O. 21, ‘05. 1410w.

  * “We cordially congratulate the author and the publishers on having
  combined to produce a book which is in every way worthy of so
  remarkable an expedition.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 581. O. 28. 2510w.

  * “The freshness and novelty of the subject matter command an
  immediate hearing, and the charm of the narrative, the well balanced
  perspective, and above all the manly record of heroic endeavor here
  revealed bid fair to make Captain Scott’s modest account one of the
  classics of polar exploration.” Charles Atwood Kofoid.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 432. D. 16, ‘05. 2880w.

  * “Lieutenant Mulock’s maps deserve special praise for their beauty,
  their accuracy, and their fulness of detail, while it would be
  impossible to speak too highly of the 260 illustrations that are not
  only an adornment to the book, but enable us almost as much as does
  the text to realize the conditions amidst which this expedition spent
  over two years.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 334. O. 13, ‘05. 1460w.

  * “Capt. Scott has written a book that will have a conspicuous place
  among the annals of polar effort, and it is worthy of it.” Cyrus C.
  Adams.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 793. N. 25, ‘05. 2340w.

  * “Captain Scott has a singularly happy style, free from the stiffness
  of Cook and the formality of Ross, yet terse, vigorous and direct.
  This book comes as near perfection as we ever expect a book of travel
  to be.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 685. N. 25, ‘05. 2060w.

  * “Captain Scott has done a splendid piece of work; not the least part
  of it is the production of the ablest and most interesting record of
  travel to which the present century has yet given birth.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 566. O. 14, ‘05. 1490w.


=Scott, Samuel Parsons.= History of the Moorish empire in Europe. 3v.
**$10. Lippincott.

  “Two volumes cover the whole period of Moorish occupation in the
  peninsula, while the third contains kulturgeschichtliche material of
  some interest and value. This is brought forward in the form of a
  series of essays on the arts, institutions, and influence of the
  Muslims, as well as on the Jews and the Moriscoes in Spain.”—Am. Hist.
  R.

  “Mr. Scott’s three volumes are obviously the result of conscientious
  and comprehensive reading in some half-dozen languages, but their
  author lacks the historical temperament. His work, though not without
  a certain old-fashioned dignity of style, is too monotonous to be
  popular and too uncritical in its affirmations to content the trained
  student of history.” F. W. Williams.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 372. Ja. ‘05. 850w.

  “It cannot be said that on the whole the ‘History of the Moorish
  empire in Europe’ is either a safe or a well-balanced book.” A. C.
  Howland.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 354. Mr. ‘05. 920w.


=Scott, Sir Walter.= Waverley novels. 25v. $31.25. Crowell.

  The world created by Scott in his Waverley novels and peopled with
  vitally real characters will never grow old-fashioned nor
  uninteresting. The Waverley novels hold the present day fiction reader
  no less than the student of literature who appreciates the
  significance of the Scott novel as the forerunner of historical
  romance. The present edition is made from newly set type; each story
  contains the author’s own introduction, besides notes, glossary and
  index to characters and scenes. There are excellent illustrations,
  many of them being reproductions of paintings by the Fine arts
  association of Scotland. The books are strongly bound, boxed and sold
  only in sets.


=Scott, Sir Walter.= Ivanhoe. $1.25. Crowell.

  The issue of Ivanhoe as one of those attractive little pocket volumes,
  the “Thin paper classics” series will be welcomed by all lovers of
  Scott.


=Scott, Sir Walter.= Kenilworth. $1.25. Crowell.

  That this thin pocket volume with the limp leather binding of the
  “Thin paper classics” series can contain Kenilworth complete and in
  readable type, will be to the reader both a surprise and a
  satisfaction.


=Scott, Sir Walter.= Kenilworth. $1.50. Crowell.

  Uniform with the other volumes of the “Luxembourg” library, Kenilworth
  appears attractively bound in cloth with gold decorations, a
  photogravure frontispiece and seventeen full page illustrations.


=Scott, William Fry.= Structural designers’ handbook; giving diagrams
and tables for the design of beams, girders, and columns, with
calculations based on the New York city building code. $2. Eng. news.

  “The purpose of this book, as set forth in the preface, is to shorten
  and possibly eliminate ‘much of the computation and drudgery which are
  necessary accompaniments of structural designing.’ ... The work
  provides, in a large measure, the essentials for the design of
  structures when not complicated by truss work or other unusual
  features. The time-saving is to be accomplished by the use of
  diagrams, which take up about one-third of the volume.” —Engin. N.

  “The diagrams are well drawn, and considering the amount of
  information in some of them, are exceedingly clear. So far, too, as it
  has been possible to check them they have been found accurate and
  correct.” R. P. Miller.

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 182. F. 16, ‘05. 1250w.


=Scruggs, William Lindsay.= The Colombian and Venezuelan republics.
$1.75. Little.

  The new edition of Mr. Scruggs’ work contains in addition to former
  editions a chapter on the Panama canal, and the text of the latest
  canal treaty. “The author continues his history of the ‘Panama canal
  projects’ beginning with the failure of the De Lesseps Panama canal
  company and the organization of a new company to take over the
  franchise of the old one, pay its debts, and complete the canal on the
  new plan. He writes of the negotiations of the United States with
  Colombia in 1903, the rejection by the Colombian senate of the
  Hay-Herran treaty, and the final rejection of that treaty.” (N. Y.
  Times). Mr. Scruggs, by virtue of his twenty-seven years of residence
  in Colombia and Venezuela, is able to give first hand facts, and the
  results of his own observation.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 593. My. ‘05. 100w.

  “In his Panama chapter there is nothing of any critical value. He
  writes generally with fairness, but superficially.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 290. Ap. 13, ‘05. 300w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 41. Ja. 21, ‘05. 290w. (Statement of scope).

  “It is to be regretted that in a book of this kind, an authority in
  its field, and so well-printed in every other respect, there should
  be, as the result of careless proof-reading or writing, so many errors
  of the exact sort to mar its particular excellence.” Stanhope Sams.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 214. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1450w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 501. F. 25, ‘05. 160w.

  “His book is probably the most reliable and authentic of any by an
  American author. The chapter on Panama which Mr. Scruggs adds to his
  book contains nothing that is new either in the way of history or of
  conclusion.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 254. F. 18. ‘05. 450w.

  “A volume full of interesting and valuable information.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 509. Ap. ‘05. 120w.


=Seaman, Louis L.= From Tokio through Manchuria with the Japanese.
**$1.50. Appleton.

  The immediate purpose of Dr Seaman’s journey to the front with the
  Japanese army was that of inspecting the sanitary and medical work
  among them. His experiences and adventures incident to that
  undertaking are most interestingly narrated in the present volume. His
  chronicles thrill with the spirit of Banzai Nippon, the shout of
  patriotism in the “Land of the rising sun.” He shows the course of law
  and order that transforms a Japanese citizen into a patriot and
  warrior, and points to the masterly preparation for war, based on
  scientific principles, which Japan has made a national business. The
  book is valuable for its generous amount of general information.

  “Breezy, readable in the first degree. It is spicy and, like red
  pepper, is calculated less to irritate than to stimulate.” W. Elliot
  Griffis.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 471. My. ‘05. 170w.

  “If Mr. Palmer’s book is taken as proof of Japan’s capabilities in
  destructive warfare, that of Dr. Seaman’s ‘From Tokio through
  Manchuria with the Japanese,’ is equally important as showing their
  constructive and conserving qualities.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 10. Ja. 1, ‘05. 830w.

  * “It is one of the most interesting and intrinsically instructive of
  the now numerous studies of the Russo-Japanese war.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 626. O. 28, ‘05. 120w.

  “The text is colloquial in manner.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 216. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1320w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 195. Ja. 21, ‘05. 90w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 125. Ja. ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Spec.= 95: 504. O. 7, ‘05. 160w.


=Seaman, Owen.= Harvest of chaff. **$1.25. Holt.

  A group of clever parodies which array Browning, Wordsworth, Tennyson
  and other poets of the Victorian era in an almost grotesquely modern
  light. The volume is a companion to “Borrowed plumes.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 959. Ap. 27, ‘05. 90w.

  “In many ways a riper book than any of the others. The humor of it,
  while quieter, is more subtle, and the phrase and versification of a
  more finished poetic style.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 18. Jl. 6, ‘05. 470w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 332. My. 20, ‘05. 250w.


=Sebring, Arad Joy.= Girdle of gladness. $1. Badger, R. G.

  Fourteen short poems upon such subjects as, The twenty-third psalm,
  The power of the church, Supremacy of Christ, and Amen of Lord’s
  prayer.

  “Other collections of verse, pleasant but not dynamic, ... comprising
  a dozen or more rather monotonous but sincere devotional poems.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 678. O. 14, ‘05. 30w.


=Sedgefield, Walter John=, ed. See =Battle of Maldon.=


=Seeberg, Reinhold.= Text-book of the history * of doctrines; rev. 1904,
by the author; trans. by C: E. Hay. 2v. $4. Lutheran pub. soc.

  The first volume of Dr. Seeberg’s work treats “History of doctrines in
  the ancient church”; the second, “History of doctrines in the middle
  and modern ages.” The material from which the history is built has
  been drawn entirely from original sources.


=Selincourt, Basil de.= Giotto. *$2. Scribner.

  “The significance of Giotto’s affinities with both the schools into
  which painting in Italy branched off during his lifetime is very
  clearly brought out by Mr. de Selincourt, who recognizes in his
  pictures—a great number of which are here reproduced—the richness of
  imagination that distinguished the Florentines with the feeling for
  grace of form so characteristic of the Siennese.... The useful little
  monograph closes with what is, perhaps, the ablest section of the
  book, a very acute analysis of Giotto’s influence over others.”—Acad.

  “It may ... be fairly claimed that his new biographer has made the
  best of the meagre materials at his disposal and has also succeeded in
  realising to some extent the personality of the gifted master.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 521. My. 13, ‘05. 550w.

  “Mr. De Selincourt, we think, has approached the subject with
  conscientious impartiality and an open mind.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 152. Jl. 29. 2100w.

  “Here as hitherto the illustrations are frequent and sane, moderate in
  the critical and interesting in the biographical sections.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 92. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “Our author succeeds in placing him for the student in the right
  relation to his people and his time.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1365. Je. 15, ‘05. 100w.

  “Taken as a guide-book, it will serve its purpose perhaps as well as,
  if not better than, most of the volumes which have hitherto occupied
  themselves with an exposition of the master’s works, and as such will
  form even a welcome addition to the descriptive literature of its
  kind.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 129. Ag. 10, ‘05. 700w.

  “The connoisseurship lacks a familiarity with the latest and most
  approved authorities, and the criticism, where unconventional, is
  impressive only as an expression of untried emotions.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 342. My. 27, ‘05. 210w.

  “His criticism is sympathetic and illuminating.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 883. Ag. 5, ‘05. 160w.


Senior lieutenant’s wager, and other stories. $1.25. Benziger.

  “Thirty short stories by the foremost Catholic writers.” Some of them
  touch upon church matters from a Roman Catholic view point, in several
  a benign priest appears as good angel, but many are merely little love
  stories containing no question of faith.


=Sergeant, Philip W.= Courtship of Catherine the Great. *$2.50.
Lippincott.

  “Catherine’s love affairs, of course, went beyond all ordinary bounds
  of ‘indiscretion.’ ... It is useful to have in English a statement on
  this subject which covers the ground already traversed of Waliszewski
  and his followers on the continent.... By far the most important of
  the ten or twelve suitors whose affairs with the empress come into the
  present volume were Gregory Orloff, the chief actor in the plot of
  1762, and the Prince Patiomkin.”—Nation.

  “It is unfair to criticise too rigorously a book which is written
  ostensibly for amusement, and is, with all its shortcomings, amusing
  enough.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 207. Ag. 12, 170w.

  “Of new information in his book there is virtually none.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 120. Ag. 10, ‘05. 640w.

  “The book however, granting its right to existence, is well put
  together.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 374. Je. 10, ‘05. 280w.


=Setchell, William Albert.= Limu. 25c. Univ. of Cal.

  “This is the name applied to many species of seaweeds, especially
  those that are edible, by the native Hawaiians.... Professor Dr.
  Setchell gives the results of the investigations made by him several
  years ago, with a view to determining the specific identity of the
  different kinds of limu.”—Science.

  Reviewed by Charles E. Bessey.

         =Science,= n.s. 21: 756. My. 12. ‘05. 130w.


=Seton, Ernest Thompson.= Animal heroes: being the histories of a cat, a
dog, pigeon, a lynx, two wolves and a reindeer. $2. Scribner.

  The author assures us that “Every one of these stories, though more or
  less composite, is founded on the actual life of a veritable animal
  hero.” The first story describes four phases in the life of a slum cat
  whom luxury could not ween from her beloved junk-yard; Little Arnaux
  is a homing pigeon with a long record won by a fearless heart;
  Badlands Billy is the story of a wolf that won. Then follow stories of
  The boy and the lynx, Little warhorse, which is the history of a
  jack-rabbit; Snap, the bull-terrier who enters the story in a box
  marked “dangerous.” The Winnipeg wolf, and The legend of the white
  reindeer. Two hundred drawings by the author illustrate the volume.

  * “The author’s power has increased as his style has become more
  simple and his allegiance to plain facts more indisputable.” May
  Estelle Cook.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 373. D. 1, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1390. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

  “It is not necessary to say much more about Mr. Seton’s nice
  animals ... all bear the stamp of their creator, and all are more or
  less entertaining.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 710. O. 21, ‘05. 310w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 718. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.


=Seton, Ernest Thompson.= Woodmyth and fable. *$1.25. Century.

  A book of booty gathered in the woods, quaint myths and fables, some
  of which are of Indian origin, while some have been whispered to the
  wood lover author-artist by Mother Nature herself. He has pointed them
  with clever morals, and illustrated them with dainty drawings. It is a
  book to pick up in odd moments, for in its prose and rime one can find
  beauty, sympathy, humor, and clever satire; and young folks can learn
  something of the discontented giraffe, the unmannerly porcupine, the
  stubborn land-crab, and other animals with human frailties.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 576. O. 28. 130w.

  “Mr. Seton has great facility and a very pretty wit in these
  matters—especially when self-illustrated.”

       + =Bookm.= 22: 87. S. ‘05. 200w.

       + =Critic.= 47: 478. N. ‘05. 250w.

  “It is a series of chips from the workshop of a man who does larger
  things,—the brilliant joking of a thinker off duty.” May Estelle Cook.

       + =Dial.= 38: 386 Je. 1, ‘05. 360w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1390. D. 14, ‘05. 20w.

  * “Is too scrappy to enhance his reputation among children who know
  him by his ‘Two little savages’ and his animal biographies.”

       — =Lond. Times.= 4: 432. D. 18, ‘05. 30w.

  “This little volume is filled with pretty little suggestions which
  children will not only like, but which it will be good for them to
  read.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 346. My. 27, ‘05. 310w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 94. My. 6, ‘05, 50w.

  “The stories are short and admirably adapted for children.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 100w.

  * “Is most unsatisfactory. It is too difficult for children, too dull
  for grown-ups. Not even the most startling varieties of type can
  arrest the attention.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 12. D. 9, ‘05. 30w.


=Sever, George Francis, and Townsend, Fitzhugh.= Laboratory and factory
tests in electrical engineering. *$2.50. Van Nostrand.

  “The range of the book and its adaptability to its intended use as a
  manual for laboratory and factory testing may be best judged from a
  brief summary of the contents. The first chapter deals with resistance
  tests, temperature coefficient, etc. Dynamo and motor operation
  (direct current) is the subject of the next four chapters. Then
  alternating currents are taken up in ten chapters.... In the closing
  chapter ... electrical measurements of physical nature are taken up,
  such as permeability and hysteresis measurements, potentiometer, test,
  calibration of commercial instruments, etc. This chapter also includes
  some storage-battery tests and incandescent-lamp tests.”—Engin. N.

  “The text is very lucidly written, although at some points too concise
  for ease in reading. The present testing manual will prove a good
  study text for those who have not ample opportunity to become
  acquainted in detail with electrical machines by personal experience.”

   + + + =Engin. N.= 53: 182. F. 16, ‘05. 570w.


=Severy, Melvin Linwood.= Mystery of June 13th. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “Geographically, the plot is hatched in two places,—New Zealand and
  New Jersey. The main theme is the defrauding of a life insurance
  company by a man who claims to be his own brother, after having had
  himself ostensibly murdered, and having had said brother silenced by
  an awful threat.”—R. of Rs.

  * “A tissue of preposterous absurdities, and, moreover, an exceedingly
  badly written book.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 683. N. 18, ‘05. 30w.

  * “Though overloaded with superfluous details and unnecessary
  complications, stands out as a ‘detective story’ belonging to the
  highest class,—after Poe’s.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 763. D. ‘05. 90w.


=Shafer, Sarah Andrew.= Beyond chance of change. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  An idyll of childhood for both children and grown-ups. Rachel, the
  doctor’s little girl, who celebrates her eleventh birthday in the
  first chapter, is the real heroine, but her brothers and sisters and
  her village friends, big and little, play important roles in this
  drama of child days. There is Rachel’s tender conscience, which
  invariably awakes after the mischief is done and leads to confession
  and repentance of such dire deeds as stealing a doughnut and knocking
  the head off the china goat; there is the account of the wooing of
  Nora by Mike, with Rachel’s assistance; of the barely frustrated plan
  of the adventurous band who were about to set out for Idaho to find
  the cave of gold as described in “Idaho Ike; or, The boy billionaire”;
  and there are stories of a tea-party, a church social, a Fourth of
  July, and the dramatic pulling of a first tooth.

         =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 140w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 394. Je. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “Mrs. Shafer comprehends the divine ingenuity of the childish spirit.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 959. Ap. 27, ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 137. Mr. 4, ‘05. 420w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 295. My. 6, ‘05. 230w.

  “Presents no problems and involves no tragedy, but is a delightful
  transcription of life in a little community in the central West before
  the fever and rush of recent years set in.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 773. Ap. 1, ‘05. 80w.


=Shahan, Very Rev.= Thomas Joseph. The middle ages. *$2. Benziger.

  A collection of essays intended to throw light upon church history of
  the middle ages. They are written from a Catholic view-point and
  contain a condensed treatment of “Catholicism in the middle ages,”
  “Results of the crusades,” “The Italian renaissance,” “Baths and
  bathing in the middle ages,” and kindred subjects.

  “Even where no ecclesiastical considerations are involved, the
  author’s habit of facile generalization leads him into ... such
  eccentricities of judgment. The essays are pleasantly written and will
  prove agreeable reading to Catholics.” C. H. Haskins.

     + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 914. Jl. ‘05. 440w.

  “They are always informing and suggestive. We suggest to Catholic
  higher schools and colleges, that they put these fine essays to
  constant use in the class-room of history.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 674. F. ‘05. 350w.

  “A collection of exceedingly well-written historical essays, from the
  Catholic point of view. Dr. Shahan is well read, eloquent, and
  obviously sincere.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 40. Ja. 21, ‘05. 220w. (Gives contents).


=Shakespeare, William.= Hamlet, ed. by Charlotte Porter and Helen A.
Clarke. **50c; limp lea. **75c. Crowell.

  “Hamlet” is the latest play to appear in “First folio” edition of
  Shakespeare’s works. Accuracy of text, and a wealth of illuminative
  material are its distinguishing features. It includes a preface,
  introduction, literary frontispiece, notes discussing argument,
  sources, duration of action, date of composition, early editions,
  illustrations, glossary, variorum readings and selected criticisms.

         =Dial.= 39: 20. Jl. 1, ‘05. 40w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 75. Jl. 27, ‘05. 60w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 608. S. 10, ‘05. 150w.


=Shakespeare, William.= Love’s labour’s lost; ed. by Horace Howard
Furness, sr. (Variorum ed.). *$4. Lippincott.

  “The present text follows the first folio of 1623, and forty-six
  editions have been consulted in the textual notes. The editor provides
  an enormous list of books from which quotations have been taken first
  hand. The appendix, which is exhaustive in its elaboration, deals with
  the date of composition, source of the plot, English, German, French
  criticism, &c., &c.”—Westminster Review.

  “The new volume shows no abatement in thoroughness, conscientious
  zeal, or scholarly discrimination. As before he supplies us with full
  apparatus for textual criticism and interpretation, a carefully
  condensed summary of previous scholarship in matters of date, sources,
  and the like, and the kernel of the contributions of all the more
  important aesthetic critics. In addition to all this, he writes a
  preface bristling with stimulating and provocative suggestions, and
  forming an original contribution of serious importance for the history
  of Elizabethan literature.” W: Allan Neilson.

   + + + =Atlan.= 95: 231. F. ‘05. 1250w.

  “It fully maintains the high standard of its thirteen predecessors. As
  usual, the long preface is one of the best parts of the volume, for
  there we have the genial editor all to himself. The editor attacks his
  material with his usual vigor and vivacity.” W. J. Rolfe.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 184. Mr. ‘35. 490w.

  “The erudition packed away in the volume before us is incommensurable
  in terms of reviewing. We can only thank the editor for his untiring
  single-heartedness, for the lucidity with which he has disposed his
  huge material; above all, for the fine shrewd humor which lurks in
  every page.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 135. F. 16, ‘05. 1940w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 148. Mr. 11, ‘05. 550w.

   + + + =The Westminster Review.= 163: 110. Ja. ‘05. 330w.


=Shakespeare, William.= Merchant of Venice. 35c. Holt.

  Uniform with the “Temple school edition,” this book is designed for
  student use. It contains besides the text of the drama, and
  introduction which gives the life of Shakespeare and an outline and
  history of the play, a glossary and copious notes. There are six
  drawings by Dora Curtis and many illustrations from contemporary
  prints.


=Shakespeare, William.= Sonnets; with introd. and notes by H. C.
Beeching. *60c. Ginn.

  “Primarily addressed to students. The text adopted is practically
  Malone’s revision of the edition princeps, the Quarto of 1609, all the
  variations, with the exception of differences in spelling and
  punctuation being noted. The sonnets have been divided into groups and
  carefully annotated. Dr. Beeching discusses all the most recent
  theories on the subject, besides criticising the work of other editors
  of the sonnets.”—N. Y. Times.

  “We should be at a loss to point out another edition of the sonnets
  where text, introduction and commentary are more nicely adjusted to
  each other. Others may have done more in poetical illustration and
  psychological analysis; but none have produced a more satisfactory
  compendium of all that is really necessary to be known about sonnets,
  or afforded a more serviceable key to their numerous difficulties.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 61. Ja. 21, ‘05. 510w.

  * “Altogether the edition is so well-equipped that it is not likely to
  be superseded for many years. Advanced scholars will find it an
  excellent summary of rival views, almost entirely free from the
  strange temper and fantasy which are a feature of latter-day
  Shakespearean criticism.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 475. Ap. 15. 360w.

         =Ind.= 58: 839. Ap. 13, ‘05. 280w.

  “On the bibliographical side Mr. Beeching’s book ... is inadequate.
  But what he has attempted, Mr. Beeching has done well.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 32. Ja. 12, ‘05. 290w.

  “The notes are clear and full, and the editor has created every
  explanation that is not his own to its original proposer.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 11. Ja. 7, ‘05. 620w.

  “Canon Beeching’s introduction ... is a scholarly and able
  contribution to the literature of the subject.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 177. F. 4, ‘05. 1500w.


* =Shakespeare, William.= Tragedie of King Lear; ed. by Charlotte Porter
and Helen A. Clarke. 75c. Crowell.

  The latest volume in the “First folio” Shakespeare.


* =Shaler, Nathaniel Southgate.= Man and the earth. **$1.50. Fox.

  Thirteen chapters on such subjects as Earth and man, The future of
  power, The exhaustion of metals, The unwon lands, The problem of the
  Nile, The maintenance of the soil, The resources of the sea, The
  future of nature upon the earth, and The last of earth and man, have
  for their purpose the awakening of “a sense of the nobility and
  dignity of the relation man bears to this wonderful planet and the
  duty that comes therefrom.”

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 890. D. 9, ‘05. 270w.


=Shand, Alexander Innes.= Gun room, *$1; *$1.25. Lane.

  This little monograph “gets right at the heart of the man who loves a
  gun and his gunroom, the sort of book that is as conducive of reveries
  as it is to putting one alive to the possibilities of making of his
  gunroom the coziest and most comfortable sort of a den instead of a
  mere armory.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Full of good advice for the man who loves his gun, his dog, and his
  tramp over moors and stubble in search of game. A companionable little
  book is this volume. Little in it that is technical, yet it is full of
  practical hints as to the care of a gun.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 92. F. 11, ‘05. 390w.


* =Sharp, Mary.= Point and pillow lace: a short account of various
kinds, ancient and modern, and how to recognize them. *$2. Dutton.

  “Mrs. Sharp has chapters on Italian needle and pillow laces, French,
  Flemish, English, and Irish laces, made by hand and the machine. The
  closing chapter is a summary, and includes briefly-stated facts about
  laces. A glossary of technical and French, Flemish, Italian, and other
  foreign terms has been inserted. There are many pictures in the book
  showing the different styles of laces.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Is a much more comprehensive volume on the subject than was the
  Goldenberg publication of last year.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1381. D. 14, ‘05. 120w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 727. O. 28, ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 40w.


=Sharp, William.= Literary geography, *$3.50. Scribner.

  “A collection of papers dealing with characteristic features of the
  country, real or described, of a number of widely known writers. The
  numerous illustrations are very helpful to the text in giving the
  reader a clear picture of the lands made familiar to all readers of
  George Meredith, Stevenson, Dickens, Scott, George Eliot, Thackeray,
  Brontë, Aylwin, and Carlyle. There are also, descriptions of English
  lakes, the Thames, and the lake of Geneva. The articles have appeared
  in the Pall Mall magazine during the years of 1903 and 1904.”—Bookm.

       + =Critic.= 46: 480. My. ‘05. 100w.

  “Of the topographical literature now so much in vogue, this book is
  one of the best examples. It is full of interesting matter, is well
  written, and the authors selected for the description (mostly
  novelists) are those about whom every one likes to know; the
  illustrations, often made from special photographs, are numerous and
  uncommonly beautiful.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 202. Mr. 16, ‘05. 280w.

  “Mr. Sharp’s anecdotes are numerous and amusing.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 120. F. 9, ‘05. 570w.

  “Most entertaining book, not by any means exclusively devoted to
  geographical matters, straying, on the contrary, into many by-lanes of
  criticism, reminiscence, and biography. The book is one most
  book-lovers will be glad to have and to read.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 6. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1840w. (Survey of contents).


=Sharts, Joseph William.= Hills of freedom. $1.50. Doubleday.

  The first novel of a young Ohio barrister and Harvard graduate. The
  action takes place in the author’s native state during the period
  preceding the Civil war, and the chief characters are a veteran
  general of the Mexican war, bent upon match-making, and his ward and
  her nephew, a red haired heroine and a bow-legged hero. There are many
  interesting characters, and John Brown and the underground railway
  figure conspicuously.

  “It is cast in the form of a comedy, in which the author caricatures
  irascible old age, love and youth with much clever wit.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 334. Ag. 10, ‘05. 90w.

  “It lacks the awkwardness of a maiden effort, and the seams and
  patches of a labored attempt. It is easy, spontaneous, and all of a
  piece. For succeed he does, in spite of predecessors and conventions.
  The author has a delicate touch, as well as a sprightly manner; not
  all of his effects are broad. The author has a pretty turn for
  epigram, which he uses with becoming discretion.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 255. Ja. ‘05. 330w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 117. Ja. ‘05. 90w.


=Shattuck, George Burbank,= ed. Bahama islands. **$10. Macmillan.

  “This volume is the outcome of an expedition for which Dr. Shattuck
  served as director. His staff contained about twenty scientists, each
  a specialist in some direction; and the volume is accordingly largely
  made up of papers by these specialists on the geology, botany, animal
  and fish life, and soils of the island, together with a historical
  sketch and papers on the sanitary and medical conditions. The book ...
  is beautifully illustrated with photographs.”—Outlook.

  “The work is done throughout in the most scholarly manner.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 191. Ag. ‘05. 120w.

  “Each special student will find his own subject well handled.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 271. Ag. 25, ‘05. 710w.

  “Is a monograph of high and varied interest and general readability.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 397. My. 18, ‘05. 240w.

  “Its completeness and wealth of illustrations render it a more than
  usually striking and handsome example of American thoroughness.” R.L.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 154. Je. 15, ‘05. 1470w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 1058. Ap. 29, ‘05. 90w.

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 125. Jl. ‘05. 130w.

  Reviewed by W. M. D.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 21: 953. Je. 23, ‘05. 1900w. (Abstract of
         contents.)


=Shaw, George Bernard.= Irrational knot. $1.50. Brentano’s.

  Mr. Shaw has given matrimonial orders and filled them out of the
  ordinary. There is an American-Irish electrician for the hero who
  views marriage calmly and impersonally, but determinedly pursues the
  woman he loves as he would the forces to be checked and chained for a
  new electrical machine. After marriage the atmosphere provided for the
  wife’s heart development is stifling and she seeks fancied happiness
  with a former lover. The machine philosophy of the wronged husband
  operates thus: “I can divorce you if I please ... You are free too.
  You have burnt your boats, are rid of fashionable society, of your
  position, your family, your principles ... and if you can frankly give
  a sigh of relief, and respect yourself for breaking loose from what is
  called duty, you are the very woman I want for my wife.”

  “The figures might be cast-iron for anything they show of the
  flexibility and mutability of human life, and they are exhibited, not
  by one who clearly sees and thoroughly understands the springs of
  conduct and the objects of endeavour, but by a youth who in his revolt
  against old conventions has already rushed into grooves of his own.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1094. O. 21, ‘05. 1170w.

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 539. O. 21. 420w.

  “The publishers of the day may be forgiven for thinking that there was
  no public then to appreciate or understand the ‘original morality’ of
  Mr. Shaw at the age of twenty-four. We have got used to the ‘original
  morality’ since then; we could understand a publisher’s refusing the
  book now as being out of date.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 350. O. 20, ‘05. 830w.

  “It is much inferior in interest to ‘Cashel Byron’s profession’ and
  considerably less repulsive than ‘The unsocial socialist’ and ‘Love
  among the artists.’”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 368. N. 2, ‘05. 350w.

  “It is hardly necessary to say that this new book contains much
  brilliant wit, and the cunningly worded results of many acute
  observations of men—and especially women—‘as they really are.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 682. O. 14, ‘05. 310w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 40w.

 *   + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 699. N. 25, ‘05. 320w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 90w.

  * “It is possible that the same mysterious force which drove him
  through the labour of writing it may have had some purpose which will
  sustain others through the labour of reading it.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 8. N. 18, ‘05. 780w.


=Shaw, George Bernard.= On going to church: an essay; from “The Savoy.”
75c. J. W. Luce.

  Mr. Shaw’s arraignment of the man addicted to stimulant is accounted
  for in the observation “that all drugs from tea to morphia, and all
  the drams from lager beer to brandy dull the edge of self-criticism
  and make a man content with something less than the best work of which
  he is soberly capable.” Mr. Shaw’s theory, supported by the sermons
  read in enduring stone, maintains that going to church—not for the
  services but to commune in the sanctuary—supplies the vital want in a
  loftier sense than the drinking-shop, or the conventicle with its
  brimstone-flavored hot gospel.


=Shaw, L. H. De Visme.= Wild-fowl; with chapters on Shooting the duck
and the goose, by W. H. Pope; Cookery by Alex. Innes Shand. $1.75.
Longmans.

  This volume in the “Fur, feathers and fin series” is a “manly book
  written from the sportsman’s standpoint ... and fathered by three
  authors—L. H. De Visme, who supplies the narrative as well as the
  biographies of ducks in general and particular. The chapters on
  shooting the duck and goose are by W. H. Pope, while A. I. Shand winds
  up the volume with twenty-odd pages upon wild fowl cookery. The
  illustrations by Archibald Thorburn and Charles Wymper are unusually
  fine; those of Thorburn, the British master of his craft, being not
  only full of action and feeling, but pictures in the best sense.”—N.
  Y. Times.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 373. N. 8, ‘05. 240w.

  * “The whole volume is written in a direct and vivid manner that,
  while convincing and instructive to the sportsman ... is also
  excellent reading from a narrative standpoint.” Mabel Osgood Wright.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 872. D. 9, ‘05. 430w.

 *   + — =Spec.= 95: 869. N. 25, ‘05. 130w.


=Shearer, J. B.= Modern mysticism. *75c. Presbyterian com.

  A discussion of the covenants of the spirit, as found in the
  scriptures with special reference to the claims of modern mysticism.


=Sheehan, Rev. Patrick Augustine.= Glenanaar. †$1.50. Longmans.

  “Glenanaar” is an Irish story, partly historical, whose motif is the
  stigma which to the mind of the Irishman must be visited upon the kith
  and kin of an informer—any one who has given evidence in a state
  trial. The central figure of the tale is Daniel O’Connell who in
  British parliament as well as in Glenanaar fought for the freedom of
  his native country. A sprightly modern romance claims a good share of
  interest in which an Irish-American, an Irish widow, her two daughters
  and a parish priest figure prominently.

  “The book is of course, written from the point of view of partisan,
  but we confidently believe that even readers as strongly prejudiced on
  the other side will be unable to resist its fascination.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 711. Jl. 8, ‘05. 330w.

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 201. Ag. 12. 250w.

  “Canon Sheehan has suffered from his wealth of imagination, and, by
  condensing into one story materials that should have served to set
  forth two, has injured the unity of his creation.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 81: 832. S. ‘05. 1260w.

  “It is deep-rooted in its racial element, interpreting Irish character
  with an eye by no means blind to its faults, but always with
  penetration and tender sympathy. The tale is somewhat disconnected in
  sequence, but is sweet and wholesome, and withal, not lacking in
  touches of humor.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 113. S. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “Abounding Irish humor and delightful bits of character-sketching are
  to be found in this novel.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 585. O. 21, ‘05. 540w.

  “A vigorous and skilful piece of work.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 218. Jl. 7, ‘05. 270w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “The well-told tale is so full of humor, pathos, and romance that it
  cannot fail to win the interest of every reader.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 447. Jl. 8, ‘05. 370w.

  “Is a story of Irish life filled with a delicate humor and pathos.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 221. Ag. 22, ‘05. 60w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 90w.

  “Irish peasants—real, not stage Irishmen—are excellent company, and
  Canon Sheehan is a good guide.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 282. Ag. 26, ‘05. 390w.

  “The machinery of the story is, then rather cumbrous, but the
  shortcomings of its structure and arrangement are not likely to affect
  a reader who can appreciate eloquence, enthusiasm, and geniality.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 292. Ag. 26, ‘05. 880w.


=Sheldon, Anna R., and Newell, M. Moyca.= Medici balls. *$3.50.
Doubleday.

  The title is derived from the balls on the Medici coat of arms, which
  was everywhere encountered by the authors during their wanderings. The
  journeys consist of trips from Florence to the Mugello, Prato,
  Chianti, Lucca, Pistoja, Brancoli, and Barga. There are over a hundred
  photogravures of people, landscapes, buildings and works of art, an
  index and a full list of illustrations.

  “A charming portfolio of studies to be enjoyed by all.” Anna Benneson
  McMahan.

       + =Dial.= 38: 351. My. 16, 05. 300w.

  “Is narrated in a chatty, discursive fashion, with a due amount of
  historical reminiscence and a vivid description of present
  conditions.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 132. F. 16, ‘05. 220w.

  “The excursions of the authors are of particular interest to the
  lovers of Tuscany, because we are taken into rather untrodden
  districts. The out-of-doors life of these districts is described for
  us in pleasant detail.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 451. F. 18, ‘05. 120w.


=Sheldon, Charles Monroe.= Heart of the world: a story of Christian
socialism. †$1.25. Revell.

  “The story of an Episcopal minister, who wrote and published,
  anonymously, a book entitled ‘The Christian socialist’ and on the
  occasion of his consecration as a bishop renounces his office and the
  pulpit because of the consecrating bishop’s charge to him to oppose
  socialism and this book in particular.”—Ind.

  “It abounds in thrilling situations and sensational episodes which
  have nothing essentially to do with the story.”

       — =Ind.= 59: 582. S. 7, ‘05. 100w.

  “The principles and aims of Christian socialism are here presented
  with dramatic effect in the form of a story.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 908. Ap. 8, ‘05. 110w.


=Sheldon, Walter L.= Duties in the home and family. $1.25. Welch.

  Lessons on household duties prepared for children ranging from ten to
  thirteen years of age. The book has been added to the author’s “Ethics
  for the young” series, and its “ethical keynote is the preservation
  and strengthening of family ties not only in childhood and youth, but
  thruout adult life.” (Educ. R.) “The motives and limits of conduct are
  developed by questions and dialog and enforced by aphorisms, stories,
  poems and illustrations.” (Ind.)

  “This elasticity of treatment strikes us, by the way, as one of the
  most useful characters of this eminently practical work. At the same
  time, Mr. Sheldon’s ethics have a strong backbone.” Wilmon H. Sheldon.

     + + =Educ. R.= 29: 312. Mr. ‘05. 590w.

  “The instruction is not sectarian or markedly religious, and could be
  used in any school.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 673. Mr. 23, ‘05. 60w.


=Shelley, Percy Bysshe.= Complete poetical works, including material
never before printed in any edition of the poems; ed. with textual notes
and bibliographical list of editions by T: Hutchinson. *$2.50. Oxford.

  “This new ‘Oxford Shelley’ gives all the poems and fragments of verse
  that have ever appeared in print, including a surprisingly large
  amount of material not to be found in any former edition. The text is
  the result of a fresh and evidently very thoro collation of the early
  editions, and the various readings are carefully recorded. All of Mr.
  Shelley’s historical and illustrative matter, with most of the similar
  matter worth preserving, is added, supplemented by the editor’s own
  scholarly notes and a full bibliographical list of editions.”—Critic.

  * “Mr. Hutchinson has performed a laborious task both earnestly and
  ably, and we wish his edition the acceptance which it merits.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 368. Mr. 25. 840w.

  “A marvel of editorship and book-making. It is likely to be the final
  authoritative and exhaustive work of its class.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 384. Ap. ‘05. 100w.

  “An authentic, complete, and accurately printed text.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 92. F. 2, ‘05. 220w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 147. Ja. 28, ‘05. 100w.


=Shelley, Percy Bysshe.= With Shelley in Italy, ed. by Anna Benneson
McMahon. **$1.40. McClurg.

  The editor has selected and arranged the poems and letters of Shelley
  which have to do with his life in Italy from 1818 to 1822. The
  selections are grouped under the various years included in the time
  covered. The volume is illustrated with over sixty full-page
  illustrations from photographs of the Italian scenes and works of art
  of which Shelley wrote and among which he lived self-exiled from
  England during the last four years of his life.

  * “Mrs. McMahan’s own writing fills less than a score of her pages,—a
  fact testifying to her marked ability to speak briefly and to the
  point.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 443. D. 16, ‘05. 470w.

 *       =Ind.= 59: 1377. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

  * “The whole forms a delightful sort of poetic itinerary, whether for
  persons who are actually in Italy, or for those who travel in
  imagination only.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 446. N. 30, ‘05. 270w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 769. N. 11, ‘05. 90w.

  * “A very attractive and interesting book to all lovers of Shelley.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 943. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.


=Sheppard, Alfred Tresidder.= Red cravat. $1.50. Macmillan.

  A novel of the Prussia of Frederick William, that fantastic monarch
  whose giant grenadiers wore the badge of the red cravat. A tall young
  Englishman is seized and thrust into the royal guards through the
  influence of his rival for the hand of the beautiful English girl,
  Lady Joan Chrystal. Later the unfortunate guardsman receives the
  king’s orders to marry a certain peasant lass—but he doesn’t. The
  characters are all very human but not at all modern.

  “Compared to the general average of historical fiction, this novel
  must be pronounced a decided success.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 684. Je. 3. 230w.

  “The novel owes much to its setting, and, while a story of adventure,
  seems made upon almost new lines from its leisurely style.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 520w.

  “It aims at something good; it partly achieves that something; yet it
  drags. For it is overweighted with talk ... and errs by excess of
  quaint fancy. The author has done himself most credit in his
  characters. He has as obviously written the book to please himself.
  But he will please many others, too, for whom a bit of learned fooling
  along with some real human nature and some rude human humor does not
  spoil even if it ‘scotches’ a good story.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 198. Ap. 1, ‘05. 450w.

  “It is a fine stirring narrative, not without crudities, and there is
  some good character-drawing, which redeems it from superficiality. The
  style has spirit and charm, and Mr. Sheppard is a master of that kind
  of allusive writing which is best suited to the historical romance.
  The chief faults are diffuseness and an occasional sentimentality,
  which were perhaps inevitable in a first book.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 557. Ap. 15, ‘05. 180w.


=Sheringham, Hugh T.= Angler’s hours. $1.50. Macmillan.

  Anecdotes of fishing expeditions, bits of advice and some philosophy
  are found in these pleasing papers by a fisherman on British streams.

       + =Acad.= 68: 416. Ap. 15, ‘05. 380w.

  “It is a long time since we had a book about angling in which
  practical hints were so takingly varied with admirably penned pictures
  of the delightful surroundings of the art.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 716. Je. 10. 620w.

  “Mr. Sheringham wields the pen of a cultured gentleman.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 14. Jl. 6, ‘05. 490w.

  “There is a pleasant and old-world flavour in his style. There is
  instruction in his essays too.” L. W. B.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 220. Jl. 6, ‘05. 540w.

  Reviewed by Mabel Osgood Wright.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 402. Je. 17, ‘05. 740w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 390. Je. 10, ‘05. 30w.

  “Mr. Sheringham’s book is delightful.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 559. Ap. 15, ‘05. 220w.


=Sherman, Ellen Burns.= Taper lights, $1.10. Gordon-Flagg.

  Eleven cleverly written essays upon such subjects as, The salt lake of
  literature, being the salt tears shed by sympathetic readers, thruout
  the ages; Just a few of the reasons why love grows cold; Between the
  lines, meaning facial lines; The devil’s fancy-work; and The lifting
  of veils in literature.

  “This is a readable though not a striking book.”

       + =Ath.= 1905. 1: 558. My. 6. 450w.


* =Sherman, Waldo Henry.= Civics: studies in American citizenship. *90c.
Macmillan.

  “A book ‘for students who have at least reached high school age.’ ...
  The volume is divided into two parts, ‘Studies in American
  citizenship’ and ‘Collegeville.’ In the first, Land and government,
  Civil organizations, Banks, Civic and municipal institutions, Justice,
  etc. are treated. In the second, ‘Collegeville’ represents a township
  and the various problems of American citizenship are solved in an
  ideal fashion. The Declaration of independence and the constitution
  are appended.”—Ann. Am. Acad.

  * “The purpose is worthy indeed, and some of the methods of
  presentation show that the author is concrete and understands how to
  instruct. But he should not have undertaken to write this book before
  thinking himself out clearly and fully. The sins against good English
  are numerous, and seriously affect the educational purpose of the
  book.”

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 752. N. ‘05. 140w.

  * “Highly practical in its bearings.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 279. N. 1, ‘05. 50w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 641. S. 30, ‘05. 130w.

  * “An excellent handbook for the training of young men for
  citizenship.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 60w.


=Shields, Charles Woodruff.= Philosophia ultima, v. 3. Scientific
problems of religion and the Christian evidences of the physical and
psychical science. **$3. Scribner.

  “The late Professor Shields, of Princeton, obtained deserved
  reputation as a highly appreciated academic preacher, and as a man of
  literary genius.... The best part of his life was given to working out
  the scheme of philosophy whose prolegomena in pamphlet form appeared
  in 1861, and whose concluding volume is now issued. The goal of the
  final philosophy is justly conceived by Professor Shields as combining
  ‘the perfectability of science and the demonstrability of religion.’
  In the present volume the scientific problems of religion and its
  scientific evidences are successively discussed.”—Outlook.

  “He was a man of learning, in a certain obsolescent way, and the work
  may be used to advantage by others than psychologists, for whom it
  should be a document.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 200w.

  “As to the scientific evidence of religion, one must say that
  Professor Shields’s argument so oscillates from strict to loose, and
  from maximum to minimum claims, as to yield rather limited
  satisfaction, except to a somewhat thin-spun conception of the term
  ‘scientific.’”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 335. O. 7, ‘05. 290w.


* =Shirazi, J. K. M.= Life of Omar Al-Khay-yámi. **$1.50. McClurg.

  “This account of the life of Omar from the Persian standpoint,
  together with an explanation of his philosophy as understood by
  admirers in his native land, has been modestly and carefully written.
  The volume is well illuminated with Persian designs.”—Critic.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 40w.

  * “Mr. Shirazi’s English style is clear and simple, and his
  presentation of his points exceedingly interesting.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 383. D. 1, ‘05. 220w.

  * “The only real blemish on the book is the author’s anti-religious
  bias, which he doubtless regards as ‘smart.’ His transliteration of
  Persian names and book-titles shows little consistency. On the other
  hand, he has evidently read deeply in Persian sources for the material
  of his biography.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 470. D. 7, ‘05. 590w.


=Sholl, Anna McClure.= Port of storms. † $1.50. Appleton.

  A young New York physician is loved by a dancer whom he has cured of
  pneumonia, by a lovely young girl, and by a rich and cruel
  enchantress, whose aim in life is social recognition. The little
  dancer hides her secret and sensibly marries someone else, the
  enchantress drives the hero into brain fever by deciding to marry a
  leader of the coveted exclusive set, and the sweet young girl is left
  to claim her doubtful reward.

  “A strenuous story with a problem ending.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 263. Ap. 22, ‘05. 350w.

  “An interesting analytical novel.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1015. Ap. 22. ‘05. 20w.


=Shore, W. Teignmouth.= Dickens, $1. Macmillan.

  An addition to Bell’s “Miniature series of great writers.”

  “Mr. Teignmouth Shore knows his subject thoroughly; his admiration is
  tempered by sound judgment, his praise is never exaggerated. The
  book ... is marked by scholarship, critical ability and good taste.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 126. F. 11. ‘05 80w.

  “The criticism is just on the whole.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 559. Ap. 15, ‘05. 80w.


* =Shorter, Clement King.= Charlotte Brontë and her sisters, **$1.
Scribner.

  A brief enthusiastic biography which supplements Mrs. Gaskell’s “Life”
  and includes many of Charlotte Brontë’s letters which had not appeared
  when that life was written. The depressing story of the whole Brontë
  family is given, and there is much minute detail about the strangely
  intertwined lives of the three sisters and the circumstances under
  which their works were produced.

  * “He is able to correct Mrs. Gaskell on many points. His style, too,
  is of the sloppiest.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1149. N. 4, ‘05. 850w.

  * “Written without prejudice, and with sincere love and admiration of
  the famous sisters, Mr. Shorter’s book is a welcome addition to Brontë
  literature.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 110w.

  * “But the little book cannot honestly be said to have much life or
  interest about it. Its most original point is the view taken by Mr.
  Shorter of the importance of M. Héger in the making of Charlotte
  Brontë.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 381. N. 10, ‘05. 940w.

  * “The task, on the whole, he has performed with much skill, with an
  entire power of making even less enthusiastic readers share with him
  something of ‘the glamour of the Brontës.’”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 724. O. 28, ‘05. 1340w.

  * “Mr. Shorter, to put it briefly, tries to compress far too much into
  one modest volume.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 714. N. 25, ‘05. 200w.


=Shorthouse, Joseph Henry.= Life, letters, and literary remains of J. H:
Shorthouse; ed. by his wife. 2v. *$4.25. Macmillan.

  The first of these volumes contains a critical introduction by the
  Rev. J. Hunter Smith, a great variety of letters written by and to the
  author of John Inglesant, and a detailed account of his quiet life
  which was devoted to culture, literature, and the family chemical
  works at Birmingham. The second volume contains his literary remains,
  including three short stories and other hitherto unpublished writings.

       + =Acad.= 68: 437. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1760w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 683. Je. 3. 2840w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 170w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1163. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 169. Ag. 24, ‘05. 1760w.

  “The book is a worthy and illuminating account of a man whose most
  characteristic work is not destined soon to perish.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 324. My. 20, ‘05. 1570w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 90w.

  “On the whole the first of these volumes gives a fair sketch of the
  man, though the growth and origin of the books, which should be the
  most interesting things in the life are scamped.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 22. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1440w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 713. My. 13, ‘05. 1870w.


=Shute, Henry Augustus.= Real boys. †$1.25. Dillingham.

  The doings of Plupy, Beany, Pent, Puzzy, Whack, Bug, Skinny, Chick,
  Pop, Pile, and some of the girls are here recounted. There are
  snowball battles, fishing excursions, parties, races, fights and
  adventures. The illustrations catch the spirit of the text.

  “The matter is but a variation on the old topics, while the manner has
  no startling touch of brilliancy; but the adventures of Plupy and his
  friends cannot fail to make comfortable reading.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 478. N. ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Lit. D.= 31: 754. N. 18, ‘05. 330w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 555. Ag. 26, ‘05. 340w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 140w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 89. S. 9, ‘05. 120w.


=Sichel, Edith.= Catherine de’ Medici and the French reformation. *$3.
Dutton.

  In this faithful biography the queen regent of France is shown in her
  true colors and appears as an ambitious woman in whom was both good
  and evil, not as the monster of cruelty which history has made
  familiar.

  “Well written, authoritative, and sincere, it is a model of biography.
  Above all, the author has made a patient attempt to brush aside
  superstitions, and to arrive at the truth. Now and again we are not
  able to agree with Miss Sichel.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 439. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1650w.

  “A high standard of literary ability pervades the volume in spite of a
  few lapses.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 521. Ap. 29. 1890w.

  “Miss Sichel’s essays are interesting, and the book as a whole marks a
  distinct advance on the author’s ‘Household of the Lafayettes.’”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 167. Ag. 24, ‘05. 530w.

  “An extremely interesting and comprehensive history of the first
  two-thirds of the life of Catherine de’ Medici.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 326. My. 20, ‘05. 1690w.

  “Is a subtle analysis and vivid presentation of the personalities and
  ideas of the reigns of Henri II. and Francois II.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 245. My. 27, ‘05. 260w.

  “An industrious and careful volume.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 183. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1080w.

  “A series of interesting and attractive historical studies.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 896. Je. 17, ‘05. 2090w.


=Sidgwick, Mrs. Alfred.= Professor’s legacy. †$1.50. Holt.

  A German professor bequeaths his work on corals and his only daughter
  to his favorite pupil, a young Englishman. The completing and
  publishing of the unfinished work prove a simple task in comparison
  with the undertaking to win a girl’s heart. To be sure this scholarly
  individual pursues one steady course instead of resorting to many
  devices, and it is due to a fault of method rather than purpose that
  the end desired is deferred so long.

  “Is one of the most interesting and well-told novels of the season,
  and it should be one of the most popular.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1130. O. 28, ‘05. 370w.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 383. N. 10, ‘05. 460w.

  * “The tale as a whole is quite as entertaining as any of the earlier
  romances of the same type.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 448. N. 30, ‘05. 320w.

  * “Is a very readable little romance—a good companion for a railway
  journey or a rainy afternoon.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 450w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The story is, all in all, well worth reading, although hardly
  likely to become one of the great literary successes of the season.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


=Sidgwick, Henry.= Miscellaneous essays and addresses. *$3.25.
Macmillan.

  “The many-sided activity of the late professor of moral philosophy at
  Cambridge is strikingly represented in this collection of essays and
  addresses. Sixteen in number, they take for theme subjects of an
  ethical, sociological, economic, educational, and purely literary
  interest.... An idea of the varied contents of this helpful volume may
  be conveyed by a few chapter titles: ‘Ecce Homo’ (a criticism of J. R.
  Seeley’s ’Study of the life of Jesus’), ‘The poems and prose remains
  of Arthur Henry Clough,’ ‘The scope and method of economic science,’
  ‘The economic lessons of socialism,’ ‘The relation of ethics to
  sociology,’ ‘The theory of classical education.’”—Outlook.

  Reviewed by F. Kettle.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 45. Ja. 14, ‘05. 820w.

  “As an expression of the personality of Henry Sidgwick the collection
  has interest and value; as an embodiment of the Cambridge spirit it
  has enduring significance for all who care about tracing intellectual
  tendencies. The expression throughout is accurate; nothing is said
  more or less than is intended. The style is lucid, subtle,
  stimulating, never unpleasant, now and again humorous; never
  brilliant, persuasive, or charming. Stronger in criticism than
  construction. Entirely without magnetic quality.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 75. Ja. 21. 2390w.

  “The form of an essay or address is especially suitable to topics of
  this kind, which belong to the border land between the sciences rather
  than to the content of any one of them.” Herbert W. Horwill.

     + + =Forum.= 37: 250. O. ‘05. 1210w.

  “What they give us is a series of side-lights on the development of a
  mind of singular openness to contemporary influences.” J. H. Muirhead.

     + + =Hibbert J.= 3: 604. Ap. ‘05. 3500w.

  “It includes a wide range of subjects—economics, education, and
  literature—and it treats them all with a solidity, a fullness of
  knowledge, a many-sidedness, and an occasional sparkle of dry light
  which keep them alive and informing even when their immediate interest
  has begun to shift or wane.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 185. Ag. 31, ‘05. 3870w.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 149. Je. 15, ‘05. 660w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 41. Ja. 21, ‘05. 290w. (Survey of contents).

  “... These characteristics are palpably apparent—the intellectual
  sincerity, the openmindedness, the faculty of acute analysis, the
  precision of statement, the discriminating taste that were so
  emphatically his.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 246. Ja. 28, ‘05. 190w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 500. O. 7, ‘05. 570w.


=Sidgwick, Henry.= Philosophy of Kant, and other philosophical lectures
and essays. *$3.25. Macmillan.

  “The late Professor Sidgwick, a masterly critic, left unpublished
  lectures and fragments which occupy the larger portion of this volume.
  They discuss the philosophical teachings of thinkers so widely
  contrasted as Kant, Thomas Hill Green, and Herbert Spencer. The
  remainder of the volume consists of essays reprinted from ‘Mind’ and
  the ‘Journal of philology.’ Of the lectures much the greater part is
  devoted to a vigorous criticism of Kant, and these were finished to
  their lamented author’s satisfaction while the others remain less
  complete.”—Outlook.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 266. Ag. 25, ‘05. 1360w.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 280. S. 30, ‘05. 80w.


=Sidis, Boris, and Goodhart, Simon Phillip.= Multiple personality: an
experimental investigation into the nature of human individuality.
**$2.50. Appleton.

  In the main this work is the analysis of a reactionary second
  personality resulting from an accident befalling the Rev. T. C.
  Hanna a few years since. When he returned to consciousness, he was
  possessed of an entirely different self, “which may be understood
  only by comparing it to the birth of a person possessed immediately
  of matured mental and physical functions.” The phenomena of this
  state, the return to his primary personality, and the struggle which
  the physicians experienced in establishing him once more on the
  mental basis of his former self—there being for some time a Dr.
  Jekyll and Mr. Hyde tendency to alternate between the two human
  individualities—make a study as strange as it is interesting and
  important to the scientific world.

  “The close and accurate study of Mr. Hanna’s case throws a flood of
  light on personality and cognate themes, and is a most valuable
  contribution to the literature of psychopathy.” Albert Warren Ferris.

   + + + =Bookm.= 21: 185. Ap. ‘05. 1480w.

  “The most original as well as most interesting portion of the volume
  is given over to a painstaking account of a remarkable loss of
  personality, in many respects the most complete on record.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 20. Ja. 1, ‘05. 390w.

  “Dr. Sidis finds corroboratory evidence in support of his view that
  multiple consciousness is the law, not the exception.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1419. Je. 22, ‘05. 720w.

  “Truly one of the most fascinating of the fairy-tales of science, for
  the observing and recording of which Dr. Sidis and Dr. Goodhart
  deserve all credit.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 121. F. 9, ‘05. 940w.

  “The volume deserves, as it doubtless will find, a useful place in the
  psychologist’s equipment for the comprehension of the varieties and
  the variations of personality.” J. J.

     + + =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 284. Ag. ‘05. 890w.

  “Whatever its positive merits may be, the extraordinary jargon in
  which it is written and the painful dogmatism of its authors go far to
  obscure those merits.”

   — — + =Spec.= 94: 613. Ap. 29, ‘05. 900w.


=Sienkiewicz, Henryk.= Quo vadis, a tale of the time of Nero. $1.50.
Crowell.

  This new volume in the “Luxembourg” series contains “Quo vadis” as
  translated from the Polish by Dr. S. A. Binion and A. Malevsky, and
  seventeen illustrations from drawings by Jan Styka.


=Silberrad, Una Lucy.= Wedding of the Lady of Lovell: and other matches
of Tobiah’s making. $1.50. Doubleday.

  Six short love stories in each of which unromantic Tobiah, the
  dissenter, acts as matchmaker. They are wholesome tales of crude
  times, and each has its own unique adventure in which there is the
  superstition and witchcraft found among the marsh-men; but the will of
  the Lord as manifested in the sturdy Tobiah, always triumphs, and the
  little blind god triumphs also.

  “Miss Silberrad has quality; she has the power to create atmosphere.
  The stories in this book have all the hallmark of real ability, though
  their artificial nature makes them difficult to handle.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 336. Mr. 25, ‘05. 260w.

  “As regards actual writing and imaginative quality, this sheaf of
  short stories is above the usual, if not her usual, level.”

       + =Ath.= 1: 494. Ap. 15, ‘05. 160w.

         =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “A thoroughly enjoyable book. Stories more interesting or more
  wholesome it would be hard to find; still harder to find any of equal
  originality and excellence of workmanship.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 140. Mr. 4, ‘05. 460w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 654. Mr. 11, ‘05. 60w.

  “Something of the dream-spirit of the Norse saga and folklore dwells
  in the stories, so full are they of atmosphere, of poetry, of true
  romance. Full of genuine humanity, too.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 210w.


=Simpkinson, C. H.= Thomas Harrison, regicide and major-general. *$1.50.
Dutton.

  “In this life of Thomas Harrison there is to be found the history of
  the leader of the Fifth-Monarchy men and one of the ablest soldiers of
  the seventeenth century.... Mr. Simpkinson’s book shows how noble a
  character this regicide had. Harrison was as brave on the scaffold as
  he was at Marston Moor or at Appleby Bridge, where his personal
  bravery saved the army.”—Acad.

  “Had the story been written with a clearer style and with fewer
  digressions it would have been more valuable.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 273. Mr. 18, ‘05. 540w.

  “A good half of this book consists of quotations, and long quotations.
  His quotations are inexact; he is not discriminating in his use of
  authorities; his evidence occasionally fails to bear out the
  assertions based upon it; and his judgment is not sound.”

   — — — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 153. O. ‘05. 550w.

  “Mr. Simpkinson’s ‘Life of Harrison’ is scholarly and sympathetic
  without being marred by the parade of extenuation.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 145. Ag. 17, ‘05. 660w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 243. Ap. 15, ‘05. 820w. (Abstract of
         contents.)

  “[The story] is entertainingly, if somewhat unskillfully, told.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1016. Ap. 22, ‘05. 260w.


=Simpson, George.= Naval constructor: a vade mecum of ship design for
students, naval architects, ship-builders and owners, marine
superintendents, engineers and draughtsmen. $5. Van Nostrand.

  “This handbook is a compilation of rules, formulas and tables
  pertaining to shipbuilding, with just sufficient descriptive matter to
  make the application of the rules clear.”—Engin. N.

  “The author has endeavored to arrange the book in a logical manner,
  but he has not succeeded in attaining his object as completely as
  might be desired. He also repeats somewhat. The index is not as
  complete as it should be, and the table of contents is simply a list
  of headings for which no pages are given. The book is certainly
  up-to-date and should receive a warm welcome from all who are
  interested in ship design.” Amasa Trowbridge.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 181. F. 16, ‘05. 920w.

  “There is compactly stowed nearly, if not quite, all the material data
  needed by those engaged in the design, construction, equipment, and
  maintenance of ships.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 32. Ja. 12, ‘05. 80w.


=Simpson, W. J.= Treatise on plague. *$5. Macmillan.

  The obvious need of scientific study along the lines of the history
  and therapeutic aspect of plague in India is partially met by Prof. W.
  J. Simpson’s work of four hundred and fifty pages “elaborately
  illustrated with maps, charts, and diagrams, in which are presented
  the results of the latest studies of the disease made by competent
  specialists throughout the world. Dr. Simpson speaks appreciatively of
  the Clayton gas process of disinfection in India.” (R. of Rs.)

  * “It abounds in points of practical importance, and should,
  therefore, prove a most serviceable text-book to all whose duty brings
  them into contact with plague either directly or indirectly.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 183. Ag. 5. 450w.

  “It marks a distinct and important addition to what has hitherto been
  written about the subject. We have no doubt that it is destined to
  become a valuable and important aid to the student, the medical
  officer of health, to the epidemiologist, the sanitarian, and last,
  but not least, to the administrator.” E. Klein.

       + =Nature.= 72: 529. S. 28, ‘05. 2940w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 256. Ag. ‘05. 150w.


=Sinclair, May.= Divine fire. $1.50. Holt.

  Savage Keith Rickman, son of a cockney book dealer, has in him the
  divine fire of genius which burns within him until, with the passing
  years, all the grosser parts of his personality are consumed. When the
  book opens he has written a tragedy, a classical thing, which makes
  friends for him among the critics even though they do not ask him home
  to dine because he is “not quite a gentleman.” In fact “his notion of
  pleasure was getting drunk and making love to Miss Poppy Grare,” of
  the Variety theatre. His meeting with Lucia Harden, typical of
  refinement and tradition, on whom he inflicts almost physical
  suffering when he “drops his aitches,” gives him an ideal to work
  toward, and he is never really untrue to it, even when he is engaged
  to marry Flossy, the little clerk. With a sense of honor almost too
  keen for the world in which he lives, he struggles on as journalist
  and poet until he reaches success, fame and his ideals. The book is
  unusual in its strength of plot and character, and it is most real
  when it forsakes the ideal and tells us that even the divine fire
  cannot shut out the coarser cravings of a man’s nature when he is
  young, a genius half-awake.

  “Has an acceptable style, in all ways suited to the matter it
  embodies, a style with flexibility and humor employing a large
  vocabulary, cultivated and agreeable. As yet, she lacks that final
  touch of mastery by which a line condenses the whole result of
  ingenious mental processes.”

   + + — =Atlan.= 95: 699. My. ‘05. 630w.

  “Author has accomplished the difficult feat of taking a genius for its
  hero and making him seem plausible. A sound plot. Its faults are
  mainly those of excess. But no page bears evidence of careless work.
  It shows throughout unusual knowledge and an unusual degree of skill
  in applying it, and it ranks unmistakably among the best of recent
  novels.” F. M. Colby.

   + + + =Bookm.= 21: 66. Mr. ‘05. 1070w.

  “One does not hesitate to pronounce this book literature. A keen
  understanding, an ethical interpretation, and a lyric style have
  combined to produce one of the noblest, most inspiring, and absorbing
  books we have read in years.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 129. Ap. ‘05. 110w.

  “It is scarcely a spontaneous work of genius; but it is at least a
  brilliant piece of workmanship, of unusual range and power. The
  comfortably ample canvas abounds in masculine characters, and it is
  not too much to say that there is not a failure, not even a
  commonplace achievement, among them. In dealing with her small group
  of women the author’s penetration becomes blunter, her power weakens.
  Supremely interesting. Admirably constructed. A positive hardness,
  almost a lack of fineness, somewhat disqualify her as a ‘mouthpiece of
  humanity.’” Olivia Howard Dunbar.

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 183. F. ‘05. 630w.

  “Drawn with a firmness of hand that excites one’s admiration. It
  rises, moreover, to real distinction of style, besides being of
  absorbing interest from cover to cover. It is the sort of book that
  one begins by skimming, and ends by giving the closest attention to
  paragraph and phrase.” W. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 18. Ja. 1, ‘05. 260w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 437. F. 23, ‘05. 1160w.

  * “Aside from the literary shop talk in this novel the author has
  touched the heights and depths of inspiration. This is why parts of
  the book seem to sag so woefully.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  “The aim is high, the treatment is eminently appropriate, the interest
  absorbing.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 317. S. 2, ‘05. 1010w.

  Reviewed by H. I. Brock.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1150w.

  “Pervaded by ... seriousness of invention and stamped with the
  distinction of high-class workmanship. This story has great nobility
  of spirit; although somewhat too elaborate, it is a novel to be
  reckoned as one of the real things of the time.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 772. Ap. 1, ‘05. 140w.

  “It is to be regretted that the story, as a whole, does not reach the
  height achieved by the characterization. The impression one receives
  from the whole production is that of a tremendous and generous power;
  a power that includes humor, wit, analytical and philosophical power,
  scholarship, vivid and trenchant strength in characterization.
  Something that critics call ‘fusion’ ... is absent from the book, or
  is not there in full.”

   + + — =Reader.= 5: 622. Ap. ‘05. 1760w.

  * “Though a mediocre piece of construction, marred by diffuseness and
  irrelevancies, this novel should be read for its splendidly successful
  character studies.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 170w.

  “She writes remarkably well, though with a tendency to exaggeration
  and exuberance, and she has the usual feminine weakness for
  adjectives.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 412. S. 23, ‘05. 420w.


=Sinclair, Upton Beall, jr.= Manassas. $1.50. Macmillan.

  This novel without a heroine is really a romantic history of the years
  preceding the Civil war. The story ends with the first battle of
  Manassas. The southern hero attends college in Boston, and there
  becomes an abolitionist; on returning home his eyes are more fully
  opened to the horrors of slavery and he eventually joins the Union
  army. “Manassas” is the first of an epic trilogy, the volumes to come
  being “Gettysburg,” and “Appomattox.”

  “It is one of the most thrillingly interesting books of its kind that
  we have ever read. The real drama of the book is the historical clash
  of the two civilizations, and individuals seem to be made use of only
  by way of incidental illustration. It is history written with warmth
  and an eye for dramatic effect, ... but it is nevertheless essentially
  history. It is a work deserving of very high praise.” W. M. Payne.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 15. Ja. 1, ‘05. 630w.

  “His power is well sustained through the long narrative.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 117. Ja. ‘05. 50w.


=Sinclair, William A.= Aftermath of slavery: a study of the condition
and environment of the American negro; with an introd. by T: Wentworth
Higginson. **$1.50. Small.

  “This book gives the educated negro’s own view regarding the fitness
  of his race for full citizenship. It contains a complete record of the
  civil history of the American negro, showing what the race has done
  for the country in peace and in war, and what the negro has
  accomplished for his own uplifting.”—R. of Rs.

  * “The style is clean and forceful. Of its kind it is the best any
  negro has written. It is the thesis of a special pleader making strong
  his case by ignoring the other side.”

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 752. N. ‘05. 240w.

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1422. Je. 22, ‘05. 190w.

  “He is an able advocate if not altogether a wise one, and his book is
  very readable. He bases his case upon evidence which the other side
  refuses to admit and makes assumptions which they deny.”

   + — — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 354. Je. 3, ‘05. 1350w.

  “He is not intelligent in interpreting Southern conditions or southern
  sentiment.”

     — — =Outlook.= 80: 390. Je. 10, ‘05. 160w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 911. Je. 10, ‘05 430w.

  “His partiality is not envenomed, his plea is glowing, and his
  historical facts have more than common value.”

   + + — =Reader.= 6: 594. O. ‘05. 230w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 765. Je. ‘05. 100w.


=Singer, Hans.= Albrecht Dürer. *$2.50. imp. Scribner.

  A critical essay upon Dürer’s work forms a preface to 48 exquisite
  plates printed in tints and mounted on paper to harmonize.

         =Critic.= 46: 475. My. 05. 70w.

  “In spite of the closeness with which Professor Hans Singer has
  studied the drawings of Albrecht Dürer, it can scarcely be claimed
  that he has succeeded in fully grasping the characteristics that
  render them unique. Moreover, in his efforts to be strictly faithful
  to his own convictions he commits himself to several assertions that
  will hardly pass unchallenged.”

     + — =Int. Studio.= 25: 180. Ap. ‘05. 140w.

  “Compact for the use of students, and almost a necessity for any art
  library.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 63. My. ‘05. 240w.


* =Singleton, Esther.= Great portraits as seen and described by great
writers. **$1.60. Dodd.

  This volume “contains fifty-two ‘process’ reproductions of famous
  portraits ... with words written about them (or inspired by them) by
  writers who are not all great.... The selections are well chosen and
  will be useful to the discriminating student. These is also a list of
  the abiding places of these pictures. Knackfuss, Moreau, Vauthier,
  Julia Cartwright, J. A. Crowe, J. B. Cavalcaselle, Humphry Ward, ...
  Larroumet and Lefroy are among the most authoritative critics of the
  fine arts quoted.”—N. Y. Times.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 447. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.

  * “Is likely to prove of great value to persons not very well-grounded
  in the knowledge of art, and of use, in its way, to many others, who
  are.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 764. N. 11, ‘05. 180w.

  * “On the whole, the compilation has little to recommend it, and some
  of its faults are inexcusable.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 110w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 705. N. 25, ‘05. 60w.


=Singleton, Esther=, ed. and tr. Venice as seen and described by famous
writers. **$1.60. Dodd.

  Fifteen chapters which include extracts from Gautier on “The gondola”
  and “The grand canal”; from Yriarte on “The Rialto”; from J. R. Green
  on “Venice and Rome”; from Ruskin on “St. Marks”; from Taine on “The
  tombs of the Doges”; and from Symonds on “A night in Venice.” The
  volume is profusely illustrated with half-tone plates.

  “A skillful collecting of the best things that have been written by
  the best authorities.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 80w.

         =Dial.= 38: 326. My. 1, ‘05. 60w.

  “A book that is charming to read anywhere, and will be useful for
  travellers in Venice to consult.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 396. My. 18, ‘05. 260w.

  “The book will be especially useful to those who have never seen and
  do not expect to see Venice.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 175. Mr. 18, ‘05. 120w.

  “If an anthology of Venice was wanted, Esther Singleton has supplied
  it.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 195. Ap. 1, ‘05. 830w.

  “Its editing has been done with judgment.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 910. Ap. 8, ‘05. 140w.


=Skene, Norman Locke.= Elements of yacht design. $2. Rudder pub.

  The author aims to give “‘a concise and practical presentation of the
  processes involved in designing a modern yacht’ ... so that the
  operations may be readily grasped by men without technical
  education.... There are chapters on displacement, the lateral plane,
  design, stability, ballast, the sail plan, and construction. A
  thirty-foot cruiser is made the basis of the calculations, and a
  number of tables is appended to abridge the figuring of important
  details. The book is illustrated with numerous outline drawings and
  plates.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “The book will undoubtedly be serviceable to every one interested in
  the subject and possessed of enough technical knowledge to understand
  it.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 181. Mr. 25, ‘05. 290w.


=Skinner, Harriet Pearl.= Boys who became famous men. †$1.25. Little.

  These “Stories of the childhood of poets, artists, and musicians” are
  founded upon fact but are colored to suit the taste of boy and girl
  readers, who cannot but feel a kinship for the young heroes of Beni’s
  keeper: Giotto; The victor: Bach; The little boy at Aberdeen: Byron;
  Tom Pear-tree’s portrait: Gainsborough; Georg’s champion: Handel; Six
  hundred plus one: Coleridge; The lion that helped: Canova; and
  Frederic of Warsaw: Chopin.

  * “The stories are told simply, are readable, and the pictures are
  pleasing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 722. O. 28, ‘05. 60w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 524. O. 28, ‘05. 20w.


=Slater, John Herbert.= How to collect books. $2. Macmillan.

  “Mr. J. H. Slater has been writing on the subject for twenty-five
  years, and is regarded as one of the leading authorities in
  England.... The book ... might better be called a ‘Primer of
  book-collecting.’ Much information interspersed with illustrations, is
  crowded into less than two hundred pages.”—Outlook.

  “The text is generally accurate.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 468. O. 7, 990w.

  “For a beginner the knowledge contained in the volume may be of great
  assistance.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 480. N. ‘05. 80w.

  * “No one but a real collector could have set forth what Mr. Slater
  has put into his volume.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1374. D. 14, ‘05. 250w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 625. S. 23, ‘05. 1020w.

  “With these slight exceptions, which will prove almost immaterial to
  the beginner in book collecting, the manual may be taken as a most
  reliable, though somewhat dull, guide in this fascinating pursuit.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 279. S. 30, ‘05. 160w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 80w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 615. O. 21, ‘05. 390w.


=Sloan, Anna L.= Carolinians, an old-fashioned love story of stirring
times in the early colony of Carolina. $1.50. Neale.

  Mistress Damaris Johnson, the governor’s daughter, whose heart is as
  true to her lover as her father’s is to his king, in coquetry with her
  true feelings offends the man she cares for. He starts for England, is
  captured by pirates, a message from her miscarries, they become
  estranged on his return, and she is piqued into promising her hand to
  an unloved suitor, who in the end nobly releases her.

  “It is a picturesque tale, prettily told.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 278. Ap. 29, ‘05. 470w.


=Small, Albion Woodbury.= General sociology. *$4. Univ. of Chicago
press.

  An exposition of the main development in sociological theory from
  Spencer to Ratzenhofer. The purpose of the work is to furnish a
  working syllabus for a year’s course of lectures and a three years’
  program of seminar work given in Chicago university. “The main objects
  of this syllabus are, first, to make visible different elements that
  must necessarily find their place in ultimate sociological theory; and
  second, to serve as an index to relations between the parts and the
  whole of sociological science.”


=Smart, George Thomas.= Studies in conduct. *75c. Pilgrim press.

  “In this survey of wisely conducted life the subjective interest of
  disciplined and rationalized feeling comes to its full rights, and
  carries the authority of experience.”—Outlook.

  “A book that cannot be exhausted in one reading, or in two.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 395. Je. 10, ‘05. 130w.

  “Altogether these studies in conduct offer a rational and agreeable
  program for making the most of ourselves and our brief span of life.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 507. O. 14, ‘05. 280w.


=Smeaton, William Henry Oliphant.= Story of Edinburgh. $2. Macmillan.

  “This volume, which belongs to the ‘Mediæval towns series,’ is to a
  considerable extent a reproduction of a book which the author
  published last year. Additions, however, have been made, and ‘it has
  been almost entirely re-written.’” (Spec.) “The scheme of the volume
  is sensible. The first portion, dealing with the history of Edinburgh,
  traces the general fortunes of the city without special regard to
  topography; it is briskly enough written, and suitably seasoned with
  classical anecdotes. The second, and in this instance more important,
  division presents a detailed description of the city itself, and
  discusses the places and objects of historic interest.” (Ath.) There
  are many illustrations.

  “The instructions are clear and practical, the comments are generally
  to the point, and the illustrations are decidedly good.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 468. O. 7. 200w.

  * “The book is compact, comprehensive, and portable, and conveniently
  arranged in walks to points of historic, literary and ecclesiastical
  interest in the city and its environs.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1111. N. 9, ‘05. 180w.

  “Has put together a charming volume, full of matter but with little in
  it either of the guidebook or the town history.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 360. N. 2, ‘05. 90w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 640. S. 30. ‘05. 120w.

  “This volume packs an amazing amount of information in small compass,
  and serves it up, moreover, with commendable freedom from dryness and
  encyclopaedic method.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 282. S. 30, ‘05. 170w.

  “A book about Edinburgh can scarcely fail to be interesting, and as
  written by Mr. Smeaton, who knows his subject thoroughly and writes
  about it con amore, this may be ranked with any volume in the series.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 533. O. 7, ‘05. 340w.


=Smedley, A. C., and Talbot, L. A.= Wizards of Ryetown. †$1.50. Holt.

  A clever fairy tale interspersed with nonsense rhymes in which a fairy
  princess goes out into the world with her hero prince to help him
  conquer his kingdom. After wars waged against castles, witches and
  wizards they share their realm in proverbial fairy-tale peace and
  prosperity.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 870. D. 9, ‘05. 270w.


=Smet, Pierre-Jean de.= Life, letters and travels of Father Pierre-Jean
de Smet, S. J.; ed. by Hiram Martin Chittenden and Alfred Talbot
Richardson. $15. Harper, F. P.

  An account of the life and work of the missionary priest in the
  unopened West, recorded chiefly in his own simple words, as found in
  manuscript journals, and his printed works. There are copious notes
  and a life of De Smet by the editor.

  “We strongly recommend this valuable work to all who are interested in
  the history of the North American West and in its aborigines. Also,
  and particularly, to those interested in missions.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 274. Ap. 6, ‘05. 2060w.

  “The most valuable part of this book is that which deals entirely with
  Indian life, and the editors are to be congratulated upon their
  success in keeping this essential and vital part continually the most
  prominent. As no other man has so fully and so deeply understood the
  Indian, so no other has contributed so much information about his life
  and customs or served the cause of justice so well in uprooting the
  prejudice against the aborigines of this country. [The Indian] has
  received his meed of praise, and the final judgment upon his
  character.” Stanhope Sams.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 66. F. 4, ‘05. 2310w.


=Smith, Adam.= Wealth of nations; ed. by Professor Edwin Cannan. *$6.
Putnam.

  This new edition of the famous work of the father of political economy
  follows the text of the fifth edition in all details. The editor has
  added elaborate notes and a comprehensive introduction.

  “Will henceforth be the standard. It is hard to see how the editor’s
  work could be improved save by the discovery of new sources of
  knowledge.”

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 135. Ja. ‘05. 130w.

  “What promises to be its definitive form for many years to come. Along
  with his demonstrated insight into the heart of this classic, Mr.
  Cannan brought other gifts of a rare order to his task,—tireless
  scholarship in ferreting out the ipsissima verba of the text, and
  withal an invigorating freshness of vision into the realities of
  industrial life, a doughty logic, and a dash of cynical humor.”

   + + + =Atlan.= 95: 562. Ap. ‘05. 510w.

  “Marks of extreme care as well as of full and critical knowledge are
  visible on every page. The editor’s notes are of great value even to
  students who are not greatly interested in the niceties of textual
  criticism. In a great measure they serve as cross-references, and
  serve also to keep in mind and define Adam Smith’s characteristic
  inconsistencies and limitations.”

       + =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 136. D. ‘04. 310w.


* =Smith, Albert William, and Marx, Guido H.= Machine design. $3. Wiley.

  A volume which “treats in logical sequence the elements of mechanism
  and machine design, followed by construction in detail of machinery,
  and an excellent chapter on ‘Riveted joints.’ It is well written and
  illustrated, and the effort to lead elementary conception into actual
  construction is consistently followed out, giving the reader, or the
  student, the satisfaction of learning the means and the reason for the
  result obtained.”—Engin. N.

  * “Briefly characterized this is a college treatise, broad and
  elementary in its introduction, thorough in detail, elaborate in
  formulas, limited in references to modern devices and inaccurate in
  some of its practical data.”

   + + — =Engin. N.= 54: 650. D. 14, ‘05. 890w.


=Smith, Bertha H.= Yosemite legends. **$2. Elder.

  Six short legends each representing some folk song of the tribe of
  Ah-wah-nee-chee or Yosemite dwellers. The charm of the text is
  enhanced by the artistic work of Florence Lundborg, who has conceived
  a barbaric pattern, an Indian design for the margin, and has
  contributed thirteen wash drawings reproduced in half-tone. The whole
  make-up of the book suggests the “eerie and the unseen in air, crag,
  and water.”

  “The stories are told with an attractive simplicity that retains a
  flavor of the primitive Indian poetry.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 94. Ja. ‘05. 100w.


* =Smith, Rev. David.= Days of His flesh: the earthly life of Our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. **$2.50. Armstrong.

  A new life of Christ, simple in style. “It throws some light on
  incidents in the life of Christ from portrayal of Jewish habits of
  life and thought. It accompanies the words of Jesus with some
  interpretation, but not with exhortation. It is free from
  scholasticism on the one hand and from ecclesiastical pietism on the
  other.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 336. O. 13, ‘05. 1500w.

  * “Theoretically, the spirit of the writer might be defined as that of
  a broad-minded and free-minded evangelical.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 428. O. 21, ‘05. 120w.


* =Smith, Elmer Boyd.= Story of Noah’s ark; told and pictured by E. Boyd
Smith. **$2. Houghton.

  “The building of the ark, the assembling of the animals, and the
  adventures of the voyage, are all made to yield their full measure of
  entertainment. The dinosaurs that had to be left behind because they
  were too big for the door, the host of other strange beasts ... that
  refused to go in and were therefore ‘doomed to be lost and become
  fossils,’ the other host that went in and, being tossed by the waves,
  regretted it ... all these episodes are pictured with remarkable
  expressiveness and a clever but never too extravagant caricature....
  The plates are artistically reproduced in color.”—Dial.

  * “An amusing book with illustrations gay enough and text simple
  enough to attract any well-regulated child.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 15w.

  * “The pictures are the feature of the book, but they would not be
  half so amusing without the sly and subtle humor of the brief
  descriptions which accompany them.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 383. D. 1, ‘05. 200w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1392. D. 14, ‘05. 30w.

  * “Mr. Smith is too good a draughtsman to be side-splittingly comical,
  but he has a humorous imagination. His text is far less droll, and he
  should procure a literary running-mate for his next venture.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 381. N. 9, ‘05. 150w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 150w.

  * “A capital piece of story-telling by colored pictures—humorous but
  perfectly respectful to Noah and all his family.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18, ‘05. 40w.


=Smith, F. Berkeley.= Parisians out of doors. *$1.50. Funk.

  Parisians of all classes at play, sipping coffee in their pet cafés,
  pelting each other in the fete des fleurs, or enjoying the more
  serious joys of baccarat, fill these pages. But whether at home or
  jaunting by rail or motor car to Trouville, Normandy, St. Cloud or
  Monte Carlo, they are kept innately Parisian and carry with them their
  own distinctive atmosphere.

  “It is never better than picturesque journalism, but, light and frothy
  as his writing is, it conveys a good and vivid idea of certain aspects
  of life in Paris, at Trouville, and other watering-places, at Nice and
  Monte Carlo, and so forth.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 935. S. 9, ‘05. 110w.

  “He shows an absence of dictatorialness, a humor, and a modesty that
  make his volume most entertaining reading.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 60w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 639. S. 14, ‘05. 100w.

  “The style of the author matches its subject. Mr. Smith is not only an
  enthusiastic lover of Paris but he can express this taste for the
  perfection of worldly joys in a voice of exquisite timbre.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 317. S. 2, ‘05. 490w.

  “Is as bright and entertaining as either of its predecessors, ‘The
  real Latin quarter’ and ‘How Paris amuses itself.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 457. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1350w.

  “Sprightly, not always very dignified, cheerfully observant of the gay
  and the picturesque.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 790. Jl. 22, ‘05. 80w.

  “‘Paris out of doors’ has gathered in the spirit of the French
  festivity, has caught much of the nature worship that infects that
  festivity, and in every respect is a delightful and refreshing book.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 350. S. 9, ‘05. 140w.

  “Mr. Smith knows perfectly well how to write good, interesting
  description, and what more interesting people can you find than the
  modern Parisian?”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 80w.

  “This is a very pleasant and readable book. Some of the illustrations
  are good, but the photographs are not invariably successes.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 263. Ag. 19, ‘05. 160w.


=Smith, Francis Hopkinson.= At close range. †$1.50. Scribner.

  “This is a collection of nine short stories.... The object of the
  volume seems to be to bring together some little tales of plain things
  in life in which Mr. F. Hopkinson Smith discovers a grain of gold ‘at
  the bottom of every heart-crucible choked with cinders.’ ... He does
  not confine his stories to any particular stage setting, but wanders,
  as the digger should do, wherever the gold of life is to be found.”—N.
  Y. Times.

  “Mr. Hopkinson Smith has the right knack, although exception must be
  taken to his literary style.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 44. Jl. 8. 220w.

  “The chief characteristic of these nine short stories, tales of ‘the
  road,’ is a realism described with a poetic touch.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 94. Jl. ‘05. 240w.

  “He has set down with humor, compassion and wit the real life that we
  live every day on the outside of story-books and made it refreshing
  with faith and virtue.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 957. Ap. 27. ‘05. 410w.

  “He has the snag-less style of long literary training, yet he shuns
  prolixity.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 280w.

  “The stories deserve reading, and the circulation of such a volume
  will not bring benefit to the author alone.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 235. Ap. 8, ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “This latest collection of short stories renews the impression which
  the earlier volumes from the same hand made of great clearness of
  sight, fresh and vital interest in all forms of life which express
  either beauty or character, a keen sense of humor, and admirable power
  of characterization.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘05. 190w.

  “Always Mr. Smith is the artist—not a photographer.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 633. Ap. 22, ‘05. 280w.

     + + =Reader.= 6: 120. Je. ‘05. 320w.

  “The author, who writes tersely and well, shows that he has keen
  powers of observation, he is also endowed with a sense of humour and a
  capacity for sympathy, and he can in a measure touch, as it has been
  said, both the springs of laughter and the source of tears.”

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 186. Ag. 5, ‘05. 250w.

  “The problems contained in the book are not very subtle, but almost
  all the stories are pleasant reading.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 228. Ag. 12, ‘05. 140w.


=Smith, Francis Hopkinson.= Wood fire in no. 3. †$1.50. Scribner.

  F. Hopkinson Smith invites his readers to join a circle in Bohemia
  about a log fire “that can sparkle with merriment, or glow with humor,
  or roar with laughter, dependent on your mood.” The “High priest of
  the Temple of jollity” is Sandy MacWhirter whose “wide personal
  experience, his many adventures by land and sea make him the most
  delightful of conversationalists ... talking as a painter talks, one
  who sees, and therefore can make you see.” He and his group of friends
  draw up around the fire and swap stories, impressions and terse
  convictions. “Mac” on studio teas is especially convincing; “Art is a
  religion not a Punch and Judy show. Whole thing is vulgar. Imagine
  Rembrandt showing his ‘Night watch’ for the first time to the rag-tag
  and bob-tail of Amsterdam.... Sacrilege, I tell you, this mixing up of
  ice-cream and paint; makes a farce of a high calling and a mountebank
  of the artist.”

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 80w.

  * “MacWhirter and his friends are thoroughly individual. They all know
  stories well worth the telling, and they tell them extremely well.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 388. D. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  * “Has the charm with which Mr. Smith invests all that he writes, a
  charm which is one of projected personality, and must therefore miss
  some uncongenial readers, though these will usually be few.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Mr. Smith never fails to infuse a certain invigorating good
  fellowship into his stories. The book as a whole does not reach the
  high level of Mr. Smith’s more serious fiction.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 712. N. 25, ‘05. 140w.


* =Smith, Frederick Edwin, and Sibley, N. W.= International law as
interpreted during the Russo-Japanese war. *$5. Boston bk.

  “We welcome this attempt to estimate the present state of the science
  [of war] in the light of the new precedents created.... [The authors]
  have reviewed the whole history of the operations, and dealt with
  every point raised, from the volunteer cruisers to the use of wireless
  telegraphy, in a lucid and scholarly manner.... A large number of
  useful documents are reprinted in the appendices, and the authors have
  written a short but admirably clear introduction on the meaning of
  international law.”—Spec.

  * “By far the most interesting part of the volume consists of the
  chapters, full of detail, and well considered, relating to neutrality;
  chapters so full and complete that they might with small change form
  parts of a treatise on international law. It is a piece of well-knit,
  solid work. It embodies research and care. A spirit of moderation, a
  sense of responsibility, is present.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 299. S. 22, ‘05. 1480w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 791. N. 18, ‘05. 650w.

   + + + =Sat. R.= 100: 690. N. 25, ‘05. 470w.

  * “The work may be warmly recommended to all lawyers and students of
  public policy.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: sup. 794. N. 18, ‘05. 370w.


=Smith, Rev. George Adam.= Forgiveness of sins, and other sermons,
**$1.25. Armstrong.

  “Sermons preached by Dr. George Adam Smith, in the pulpit of Queen’s
  Cross Free church, Aberdeen.... They are spiritual expositions of
  theology.... Biblical in substance but not textual.”—Outlook.

  “His new volume of sermons offers an example of the art of expository
  preaching, the more persuasive in that it is not professedly
  expository.” A. K. P.

     + + =Bib. World.= 26: 155. Ag. ‘05. 750w.

  “His discourses are direct, practical and earnest, excellent examples
  of the expository preaching for which Scotch ministers are famous.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 500. Mr. 2, ‘05. 90w.

  “They constitute good models for the minister and good reading for the
  thoughtful and the devout layman.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 958. Ap. 15, ‘05. 340w.

  “The volume of his sermons just published may do something to dispel
  false notions of Professor Smith’s theological system.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 254. F. ‘05. 70w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 368. Mr. 11, ‘05. 490w.


=Smith, Goldwin.= My memory of Gladstone. *75c. Wessels.

  This volume is written by one who knew Gladstone, both socially and in
  a business way and who knew even better the men who were his
  associates in public life. He says that it is thru their eyes that he
  saw Gladstone and he gives his memory of the man and his colossal work
  in a concise and sympathetic manner. The little book will give a
  glimpse of Gladstone and his career to those who have not the leisure
  to read Morley’s Life, to which Prof. Smith pays handsome tribute.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 284. S. ‘05. 60w.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 212. O. 1, ‘05. 200w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 765. Je. ‘05. 80w.


=Smith, J. Russell.= Organization of ocean commerce. $1.75. Ginn.

  This is one of the Univ. of Penn. publications and belongs to the
  series in political economy and public law. “The author confines
  himself exclusively to the presentation of facts and the description
  of processes.... The result is a careful, accurate and minute analysis
  of over sea commerce, which cannot fail to be of the greatest
  interest, not merely to the student of commerce, but to those who are
  actually engaged in the business of ocean transportation. The book is
  divided into three parts, viz.; Traffic, Routes and shipping and
  Harbors and port facilities.” (Ann. Am. Acad.)

  “Dr Smith has produced one of the most satisfactory pieces of economic
  investigation which has appeared in recent years.” E. S. Meade.

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 610. My. ‘05. 970w.


=Smith, Rev. John.= Magnetism of Christ: a study of our Lord’s
missionary methods. $1.75. Armstrong.

  “This book is composed of the Duff lectures on evangelistic theology,
  which were delivered in 1903-4 by the author, who is a minister of the
  United Free Church of Scotland.... He discourses on such subjects as
  ‘The distinctive method of Jesus,’ ‘Christ dealing with individual
  inquirers,’ and ‘Prayer as bringing in the kingdom of God.’”—Spec.

  “Although Dr. Smith wrote his lectures for students, his style is
  almost as simple as that of a Welsh evangelist.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 119. Ja. 28, ‘05. 320w.


=Smith, Mary Prudence Wells.= Boy captive in Canada. †$1.25. Little.

  This is the second story in the “Old Deerfield series,” and the sequel
  to, “The boy captive of old Deerfield.” It tells of the experiences of
  little Stephen Williams, son of the minister of Deerfield, as he lived
  a captive and a burden bearer among the Indians. It describes his
  wanderings with them in northern Vermont, the cold hard winter they
  spent in Canada, and it finally chronicles his liberation and return
  to Deerfield. At the end the varied and thrilling experiences of other
  Deerfield captives is given as revealed by the researches of Miss C.
  Alice Baker.


=Smith, Nicholas.= Masters of old age. *$1.25. Young ch.

  The value of longevity is here illustrated by practical examples. The
  lives of Mommsen, Holmes, Geo. Bancroft, Victor Hugo, S. Weir
  Mitchell, Whittier, and numerous other masters of old age serve to
  show how much of the world’s work is done by its old people. There are
  some good ideas upon the value of keeping in the harness, and on the
  care of both mind and body.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 588. S. 9, ‘05. 310w.

  “As a record of the victories over old age and bodily infirmity won by
  men and women of many sorts this book has a tonic quality both of
  physical and moral efficacy.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 135. S. 16, ‘05. 100w.


=Smith, Orlando Jay.= Balance the fundamental verity, **$1.25. Houghton.

  “‘A key to the fundamental scientific interpretations of the system of
  nature, a definition of natural religion, and a consequent agreement
  between science and religion.’ What Mr. Smith has really tried to do
  is to show that religion and science stand on the same rock, and that
  the law of compensation will explain away many philosophical
  difficulties. There is an appendix containing critical reviews by a
  number of eminent scientific and religious writers, most of which
  commend Mr. Smith’s thesis and the way he has worked it out.”—R. of
  Rs.

  “Mr Smith in his book endeavors to deduce human immortality, and other
  things, from Newton’s postulate that ‘to every action there is an
  equal and opposite reaction.’ The result is unsatisfactory to the
  materialists, who do not accept his demonstration as valid, and
  equally so to those who like the other side of the wall, because it is
  the other side.” T. D. A. Cockerell.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 88. F. 1, ‘05. 150w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 128. Ja. ‘05. 110w.


=Smith, Reginald Bosworth.= Bird life and bird lore. *$3. Dutton.

  A lover of books and of birds writes of his friends the owl, the
  raven, the wild duck, the magpie, the rook and others, giving his own
  observations of them and showing the place they hold in history,
  literature, poetry, and folklore.

  “A well-written and attractive book, of which the only material
  demerit is the rather patchy and uneven effect almost inseparable from
  volumes made up of papers originally published at divers times and in
  divers manners.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 360. Ap. 1. ‘05. 850w.

  “It is pleasantly and allusively classical, for Mr. Bosworth Smith is
  a ripe scholar, and it is written in a style which is always accurate
  and often picturesque.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 495. Ap. 15. 710w.

  “A series of capital essays on British birds.”

       + =Country Calendar.= 1: 221. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

  “The book is one to be on permanently good terms with, for its genuine
  love of all feathered folk, its hatred of cruelty ... its delicate
  humor, and its poetical perspective.” May Estelle Cook.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 386. Je. 1, ‘05. 310w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1152. Je. 1, ‘05. 120w.

  “The particular claim of the book is that it has a local nexus and
  that the tale of the birds is not separated from the life of the
  place.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 161. My. 19, ‘05. 1140w.

  “Has the happy faculty of combining his personal observations with
  those of his predecessors and confreres into a series of pleasing and
  instructive sketches.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 264. S. 28, ‘05. 250w.

  “Besides giving excellent information tells some interesting
  anecdotes.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 120w.

  Reviewed by Mabel Osgood Wright.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 402. Je. 17, ‘05. 230w.

  “Perhaps the best parts of his book are those in which he has brought
  together the references to his favorite birds from ancient and modern
  literature.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 244. My. 27, ‘05. 100w.

  “These essays have a certain charm of style which should appeal to
  nature-lovers the world over.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 80w.

  “He is a real observer of the birds he delights in and he has written
  a very delightful account of the old Rectory and the old Manor house.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 601. My. 6, ‘05. 240w.

  “Very pleasant book. The charm of the book ... lies chiefly in the
  writer’s great love of his subject.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 751. My. 20, ‘05. 1050w.


=Smith, Sara Trainer=, trans. See =Denk, Victor Martin Otto.=


=Smith, Sydney Armitage-.= John of Gaunt, king of Castile and Leon, duke
of Aquitaine and Lancaster, earl of Derby, Lincoln and Leicester,
seneschal of England. *$6. imp. Scribner.

  “So far as we are aware, this is the first detailed study of the
  personality and career of ‘Old John of Gaunt, time-honored
  Lancaster.’ ... Mr. Armitage-Smith has faithfully explored all manner
  of sources of information bearing on the exploits and character of
  this favorite son of Edward III. and favorite brother of the Black
  Prince, this titular king of Castile and Leon and uncrowned king of
  England. The search yields to us a fascinating story of chivalry,
  pageantry, and war, a story of many personages and many
  scenes.”—Outlook.

  “A scholarly but also a highly interesting work.” Laurence M. Larson.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 86. Ag. 16, ‘05. 1240w.

  “He must be congratulated on a width of research and a clearness of
  judgment which more practised hands might envy. He has done much to
  reconcile apparent inconsistencies in the career of the father of the
  first Lancastrian king and to unravel the tangled skein of English
  politics in the last quarter of the fourteenth century.” James Tait.

   + + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 563. Jl. ‘05. 900w.

  “Is an ample and scholarly work.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 342. O. 26, ‘05. 520w.

  “He has turned out a book that is at once scholarly and eminently
  readable. Moreover, his work scarcely runs the risk of being
  superseded.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 300. My. 6, ‘05. 1180w.

  “Told with feeling and intelligence by one who breathes the spirit of
  the times.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 180w.


=Smith, Vincent A.= Early history of India. *$4.75. Oxford.

  From 600 B. C. to the Mohammadan conquest, including the invasion of
  Alexander the Great. A great deal of space is devoted to the invasion
  of Alexander, while the chapters dealing with the mediaeval kingdoms
  of the north, the Deccan and matters of purely local interest are
  brief. The closing chapter outlines the history of the South.

  “Will be welcomed for its very able research into Alexander’s India
  campaign. McCrindle, whom we had thought to have said the last word on
  the subject, is corrected in so important a matter as the place where
  Alexander’s army crossed the Hydaspes.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 47. Ja. 14, ‘05. 290w.

  “Mr. Smith is unusually well qualified for the work he has undertaken.
  This knowledge, combined with a high ideal of the office of the
  historian, ability in the sifting and criticism of evidence, and
  finally the power of presenting in remarkably clear and attractive
  form the fruits of his investigations has led to the production of a
  work of exceptional merit.” George Melville Bolling.

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 121. O. ‘05. 1010w.

  “Nearly a third of the volume is occupied with Hellenic activity and
  influence in India, and there is nowhere so complete and vivid an
  account of the great campaign as is to be found in these pages. Even
  those not interested in India for itself cannot fail to be attracted
  by this chapter in the life of Alexander, which in some regards at
  least may be accepted by historians as a definite statement.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 117. F. 9, ‘05. 630w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 121. F. 25, ‘05. 300w.


=Smith, William Benjamin.= Color line. **$1.50. McClure.

  The author is a southerner and a professor in Tulane university, but
  he tries to give an unbiased scientific treatment of the race problem,
  taking up the question of miscegenation, the danger of the
  “mongrelization” of the white race in the South, and social and
  political future of the negro.

  “The argument is largely rhetorical and contributes nothing to our
  knowledge of what is going on. The book abounds in extreme statements.
  As a plea of an intelligent partisan the book has value, but otherwise
  is not to be compared with the recent volume of Mr. T. N. Page, who
  holds very similar views.”

   — — + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 594. My. ‘05. 230w.

  “There is much that is new in the conception and in the detail of the
  present study. Whether the reader agree or disagree with Professor
  Smith’s conclusions, we can promise him that this is by far the most
  elaborate and important study of the American negro that has yet
  appeared, that it deals with fundamentals and not with the superficial
  manifestations of the conflict between black and white, and that its
  tone is such as to command respectful attention from the reader,
  whatever his prejudices. A style full of terse, vigorous phrases, at
  times enlivened by humor, and again and again shot through with
  illuminating allusions revealing the breadth of culture, the fund of
  reading upon which the scholar can draw at will.” Pierce Butler.

   + + + =Baltimore Sun.= : 8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 1140w.

  “Professor Smith of Tulane University writes as an ‘irreconcilable,’
  but his arguments are strong and well buttressed, and he views the
  subject on several sides.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 50w.

  “Mr. Smith’s book is a naked, unashamed shriek for the survival of the
  white race by means of the annihilation of all other races.” W. A.
  Burghardt DuBois.

     — — =Dial.= 38: 315. My. 1, ‘05. 430w.

  “It is only valuable as an effort to substantiate the South’s
  treatment of the negro. It contains neither scientific accuracy nor
  literary excellence.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 843. Ap. 13, ‘05. 290w.

     — + =Nation.= 81: 280. O. 5, ‘05. 1130w.

  “It may be Professor Smith has allowed his predispositions to color
  his conclusions somewhat.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 82. F. 11, ‘05. 1820w.

  “In six passionately written chapters brimming with science and
  statistics, Professor Smith makes a strong presentation of the
  position of the South on the negro question.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 297. F. 25, ‘05. 500w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 100w.


* =Smythe, William Eilsworth.= Constructive democracy: the economics of
a square deal. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  “This volume presents the evils of the present industrial system and
  proposes three remedies. The first is Senator Newland’s plan for
  dealing with the transportation problem.... The second remedy is Mr.
  Garfield’s plan.... The first remedy would put the railroads, the
  second the trusts, under the supervision of the National government.
  The third remedy is National irrigation for the development of our
  unused lands, and adequate protection of them from the land-grabber,
  that they may furnish an opportunity for the ‘surplus man.’”—Outlook.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 708. O. 21, ‘05. 280w.

  * “We see no evidence that he is familiar with the economic history of
  the past. His book is journalistic rather than academic in its spirit.
  We should like to see his book read and pondered by all journalists
  and congressmen.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 332. O. 7, ‘05. 290w.

 *       =Pub. Opin.= 39: 572. O. 28, ‘05. 320w.

  * “His book impresses one as the work of a keen observer of modern
  industrial life and a thoughtful student of its problems.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 638. N. ‘05. 130w.


=Snell, F. C.= Camera in the fields. $1.25. Wessels.

  “The first part of Mr. Snell’s manual is entitled ‘The camera and the
  dark room’; in this the processes are explained.... Parts 2-5 are
  devoted to the several subjects of Ornithology, Zoölogy, Entomology,
  and Botany; in each the special subject—how bird, beast, insect, or
  plant is to be best ‘taken off’ by the camera—is dealt with. The
  volume is amply illustrated.”—Spec.

  “His sensible remarks on the matters of which he is clearly a master
  himself should be of great value to students of ornithology, zoölogy,
  entomology, and botany.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 369. Ap. 1, ‘05. 170w.

  * “An excellent handbook for those who are interested in the finer
  problems of photography.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 313. N. 16, ‘05. 290w.

  “It is of its kind excellent.” W. P. P.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 153. Je. 15, ‘05. 370w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 515. Ag. 5, ‘05. 250w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 599. Ap. 22, ‘05. 110w.


Society in the new reign; by a foreign resident. $4. Wessels.

  This book supplements “Society in London,” published by the same
  author in 1886. It gives a present day view of “persons and things, as
  well as of a social state generally” both in and out of London, under
  such chapter headings as—The new court and some state pillars, Society
  at school and at play, Where wit, wealth and empire meet, Hencoops and
  heroes, Counter and coronet, Society’s tradesmen and their social
  claims.


Sociological papers, by Francis Galton and others. *$3.60. Macmillan.

  “The volume comprises the papers and discussions at the first meeting
  of the (British) Sociological society, 1904.... Among the subjects
  discussed, ‘Eugenics,’ or what in this country is called
  stirpiculture, takes the leading place.”—Outlook.

  “Marks the opening of a new stadium in the progress of sociology.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 103. F. 4, ‘05. 1130w.

  “The book is welcome not merely because of the excellent papers, but
  also because of the light it throws upon the headway sociology is
  making in England.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 594. My. ‘05. 150w.

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 239. F. 25. 630w.

       + =Dial.= 38: 326. My. 1. 05. 120w.

  “The sociological society is to be congratulated on the appearance of
  its first volume.” W. D. Morrison.

     + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 507. Jl. ‘05. 1250w.

  “The one real addition to knowledge that the volume contains is by an
  outsider, Mr. Harold H. Mann.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 42. Jl. 13, ‘05. 960w.

  Reviewed by F. W. H.

       + =Nature.= 71: 605. Ap. 27, ‘05. 540w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 605. Mr. 4, ‘05. 280w.

  Reviewed by J. H. T.

 *   + + =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 422. D. 15, ‘05. 280w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 510. Ap. ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =Sat. R.= 100: 724. D. 2, ‘05. 1090w.


=Solberg, Thorvald.= Copyright in Congress. 65c. Supt. of doc.

  “A complete bibliography of all the bills relating to copyright which
  have been introduced into Congress, the resolutions and laws which
  have been enacted, and those reports, petitions, memorials, messages,
  and miscellaneous documents which have been printed, together with a
  complete chronological record of all action taken in Congress, in any
  way relating to the subject of copyright, showing how each proposal
  has been dealt with.” The record begins with April 15, 1789, and
  extends to 1904.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 949. Jl. ‘05. 100w.

  “A work of great historic interest.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 269. Ap. 6, ‘05. 270w.


=Somers, Percival.= Pages from a country diary. $2.50. Longmans.

  This diary of a country sportsman treats of English rural life in all
  its phases. There is social life, scenery, and a criticism of hunting
  customs and sporting laws. The whole is enlivened by clever anecdotes
  and original reflections in the things about them by the author and
  his wife, Belinda.

         =Country Calendar.= 1: 492. S. ‘05. 130w.

  “It can be confidently recommended to all who care for records of
  outdoor life flavored with the philosophy of a genial observer of men
  and animals.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 249. Mr. 30, ‘05. 490w.

  “A delightful raconteur is the author, and his stories are short and
  to the point.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 19. Ja. 14, ‘05. 1000w.


* =Sonneck, Oscar George Theodore.= Francis Hopkinson, the first
American poet-composer, and James Lyon, patriot, preacher, psalmodist:
two studies in early American music. *$5. O. G: T. Sonneck, Lib. of
Congress, Wash., D. C.

  “A piece of research in American history based on an examination of
  original sources.... Hopkinson, who was born in 1731, was a man of
  unusual talent; a writer, a politician, an inventor, and an
  enthusiastic musician....* Hopkinson himself laid claim to the title
  of first native composer in a letter dedicating his volume of ‘Seven
  songs’ to Washington.... His rival for historical precedence, James
  Lyon, is a substantial, if less interesting figure.... It is an
  extremely interesting monograph for those who are concerned with the
  neglected past of music in this country.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “It is an invaluable contribution to the history of American music,
  and its production reveals the achievement of a formidable task.” W.
  J. Henderson.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 854. D. ‘05. 180w.

  * “Though the graces of English style are not Mr. Sonneck’s, he knows
  how to make his history not only minutely correct, but interesting.”
  Richard Aldrich.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 448. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1060w.


=Sorley, W. R.= Recent tendencies in ethics. W: Blackwood & sons,
London.

  “This little book consists of three lectures on ‘Some leading features
  of the ethical thought of the present day,’ delivered at Cambridge
  (England) to a summer meeting of clergy held there in July, 1903. The
  chapters in the book are headed respectively: ‘Characteristics,’
  ‘Ethics and evolution,’ ‘Ethics and idealism.’ In the first chapter
  Professor Sorley says that in ‘English ethical thought during the last
  century ... the controversies of the time centered almost exclusively
  round two questions: the question of the origin of moral ideas, and
  the question of the criterion of moral value.’ ... A misapplication of
  the biological doctrine of ‘natural selection’ is also responsible for
  a large measure of the present confusion of ethical thought. This
  brings the reader to Chapter II., in which this misapplication is
  dealt with at length.... Chapter III. deals with the ethics of modern
  idealism.”—Int. J. Ethics.

  “Is avowedly addressed to those whose interest in life is practical
  rather than theoretical; its aim is obviously to be practically
  helpful to such people. It must be owned that to the present critic it
  seems chiefly to warn off from the realm of philosophy all students of
  the quality described. It is perhaps not too much to say that both in
  method and in implied point of view Mr. Sorley’s book is too slight
  and too old-fashioned to do justice either to recent philosophy or to
  Professor Sorley’s position in it.” May Gilliland Husband.

     + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 232. Ja. ‘05. 2340w. (Abstract of book.)

  “The qualities of careful and exact thought, of methodical
  arrangement, and of clear expression are found to characterize the
  volume.” James Seth.

     + + =Philos. R.= 14: 212. Mr. ‘05. 1560w.


=Soto, Hernando or Fernando de.= Narratives of the career of Hernando de
Soto in the conquest of Florida; ed. by E. G. Bourne. **$2. Barnes.

  “A complete and authoritative ‘Narrative of the career of Hernando De
  Soto,’ as found in the original documents, chiefly based on the diary
  of Rodrigo Rangel, his private secretary, together with an account of
  the great expedition to the Southwest of the United States, translated
  from Oviedo’s ‘Historia general y natural de las Indias’ by Buckingham
  Smith. There is an historical introduction by Edward Gaylord Bourne,
  professor of history in Yale university. The conquest of Florida is
  told by a knight who was a member of the expedition. Several
  portraits, hitherto unpublished, of De Soto himself appear in the
  volume, to which is appended his life and some of his letters.”—R. of
  Rs.

  “Prof. Bourne’s editorship is of the best, and the translation
  excellent reading.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 190. F. ‘05. 90w.

         =Ind.= 58: 726. Mr. 30, ‘05. 130w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 197. Mr. 9, ‘05. 960w.

  “A boon alike to the student, to the ordinary reader, even to the
  romance-loving boy.” F. S. Dellenbaugh.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 65. F. 4, ‘05. 2370w.

  “The volumes will be regarded as a valuable and convenient addition to
  both history and literature.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 96. Ja. 7, ‘05. 130w.

  “It would be difficult to find in any language a more direct and
  forceful account of heroic adventures and careless lust for new sights
  and strange experiences. Together with the narratives of Coronado’s
  expedition in the Southwest, an earlier volume of the “Trail makers’
  series,” it is the best possible account of the aboriginal condition
  of the southern United States.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 57. Ja. 12, ‘05. 360w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 120w.

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 814. Je. 17, ‘05. 100w.


=Sousa, John Philip.= Pipetown Sandy. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  A story of Pipetown, its boys, its schools, and its grown people.
  Sandy, the hero, already a leader on the playground, leaves the foot
  of the class and wins the prize in arithmetic and geography thru the
  influence of Colonel Franklin’s weak little son whom he makes his
  friend. Sandy also helps the store keeper to win the widow Foley, and
  takes an active part in the tragic scenes which follow her worthless
  husband’s reappearance in Pipetown.

  “Here we have the annals of a typical American village told with the
  simplicity and the charm of a Goldsmith and the added interest of a
  writer whose intensity of feeling and vivid imagination have enabled
  him to invest simple life and homely circumstances with compelling
  fascination.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 551. N. ‘05. 200w.

  “Parts of the story are really human and attractive.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is difficult to see how it can be of any real value. It cannot
  contribute to the formation of an exalted taste in literature; and a
  boy with a good taste already formed would not care much for it.”

       — =Outlook.= 81: 135. S. 16, ‘05. 90w.


=Spalding, Rev. Henry Stanislaus.= Race for Copper island. 85c.
Benziger.

  This is a boy’s story and tells of the adventures of young Paul
  Guibeau of Quebec and others who ventured into the Indians’ country in
  search of the copper mines in the region of the Great lakes. They
  encounter Iroquois, Hurons, and Miamis, unbroken forests and unknown
  waters, but after the copper ridge is located, Paul, undaunted, writes
  to his people, as the volume closes, that he is setting forth with
  Louis Joliet and Father Marquette to discover “the great river called
  the Mitchi-sipi.”


=Spalding, Rt. Rev. John Lancaster.= Bishop Spalding year book: comp. by
Minnie R. Cowan. **75c. McClurg.

  Quotations from the writings of Bishop Spalding for each day of the
  year.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 60w.


=Spalding, Rt. Rev. John Lancaster.= Religion and art, and other essays,
**$1. McClurg.

  Besides the title-essay the volume contains, The development of
  educational ideas in the nineteenth century, The meaning and worth of
  education, The physician’s calling and education, Social questions.

  “The strongest and bravest voice that speaks for righteousness to the
  people of this country is Bishop Spalding’s. Bishop Spalding’s
  writings are brave and beautiful and inspiring.”

   + + + =Cath. World.= 81: 529. Jl. ‘05. 1050w.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 93. Ag. 16, ‘05. 210w.


* =Spalding, Phebe Estelle.= Womanhood in art. **$1.50. Elder.

  There are in this group of interpretations six of the best known ideal
  conceptions of womanhood in art; Venus de Milo, Eve, Mona Lisa,
  Beatrice Cenci, Madonna of the chair and the Sistine Madonna.

  * “Any good book that celebrates good art is worth while, so Miss
  Spalding’s book is welcome.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 15w.

  * “The text is intended neither for artists nor students of painting,
  but for the ordinary observer who is interested merely in the moral
  significance of the picture, caring nothing for its history or
  technique. Such criticism leans inevitably towards the fanciful and
  the sentimental, but it doubtless appeals to a certain class of
  readers.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 389. D. 1, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1376. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

 *       =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 31. D. ‘05. 40w.

 *     — =Nation.= 81: 449. N. 30, ‘05. 80w.

  * “The book is of the popular sort—full of elemental, moving
  impressions but marred by insufficient historical and critical
  reading.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 796. N. 25, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 80w.


=Sparks, Edwin Erle.= Men who made the nation. $1. Macmillan.

  The history of the United States from 1760 to 1865 is given
  biographically in an account of the lives and labors of Benjamin
  Franklin, Samuel and John Adams, Robert Morris, Alexander Hamilton,
  George Washington, Jefferson, Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and finally
  Abraham Lincoln.

  “On the whole, thanks to the author’s lively style, we get, in a very
  small compass, a better history than many a historian with a more
  ambitious method might have produced.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 142. Ag. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “The process of the evolution of the nation is thus given a
  biographical character in a novel method of writing history.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 84. F. 11, ‘05. 630w.


=Sparks, Edwin Erle.= United States of America. **$1.35. Putnam.

  This is essentially a history of our constitutional evolution, and
  treats of the great movements in our federal life and “those
  centralizing or decentralizing factors which have aided or hindered
  the unification of the states,” of finances, internal improvements,
  the tariff, slavery, and the constitutional aspects of the Civil war
  and reconstruction, little space is given to war and war-time events.

  “His judgments are acceptable; he shows discrimination in the
  selection of materials, a fine art in presentation, a vivacious
  style.” James A. Woodburn.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 883. Jl. ‘05. 810w.

  “The purpose is well carried out, and the work is therefore eminently
  a timely one.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 382. Ap. ‘05. 140w.

  “One can hardly call the work a history in the truest sense; it is
  rather a prose epic of American nationality.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 418. Je. 16, ‘05. 630w.

  “Hardly any former attempt to write our history has taken into account
  so many of the different forces that have influenced its progress. In
  fact, the book is a good summary of the best work done on American
  history. The style is clear and pleasing, except for a tendency to
  sententious truisms.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 785. Ap. 6, ‘05. 360w.

 *   + + =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

  “On the whole, Dr. Sparks’s interpretation of the subject commends
  itself to us as sound.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 217. Mr. 16, ‘05. 830w.

  “Prof. Sparks’ work is a rather agreeable reaction from the
  bellicosity which has been so much in vogue with writers of popular
  histories. Yet we cannot help thinking that Prof. Sparks pays too
  little attention to military affairs.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 13. Ja. 7, ‘05. 740w.

  “Rather a commentary on history. All readers will find the book
  interesting, and to many it will give a wholly new point of view for
  the consideration of American history. Dr. Sparks prefers to treat
  American history as the story of our national expansion. A suitable
  sub-title of his present work would be, ‘A study of national
  development.’”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 756. D. ‘04. 180w.


=Spearman, Frank Hamilton.= Strategy of great railroads. **$1.50.
Scribner.

  “A volume illustrating the field of railroad competition. The various
  subjects treated are the Vanderbilt lines, the Pennsylvania system,
  the Harriman lines, the Hill lines, the fight for Pittsburg, the Gould
  lines, the Rock Island system, the Atchison, the big granger lines
  (St. Paul and Northwestern), the rebuilding of an American railroad,
  the first trans-continental railroad, the early day in
  railroading.”—Bookm.

         =Ath.= 1905, 1: 629. My. 20. 1660w.

  “He writes with a familiarity with his subject that enlightens, and
  with a style that entertains and fascinates.” John J. Hasley.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 196. Mr. 16, ‘05. 820w.

  “But, after proper allowance has been made for shortcomings
  attributable to Mr. Spearman’s optimism, it must be said that his book
  is on the whole, an admirable study of the American railroads of
  today.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 39. Ja. 12, ‘05. 620w.


=Spears, John Randolph.= David G. Farragut. **$1.25. Jacobs.

  This volume is one of the “American crisis biographies” and accurately
  follows the life of the first American admiral from his birth in a
  frontier log cabin to his honored death and the erection of his statue
  in Farragut square. It is the story of years of hard work and
  ceaseless effort put forth in the service of his country. Maps and
  charts illustrate the volume.

  * “Some of Mr. Spears’ eulogies and comments seem a little
  far-fetched.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 845. D. 2, ‘05. 520w.

  * “May be especially commended to parents in quest of a soundly
  suggestive as well as really entertaining book for their boys.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 140w.

  * “The well-known accuracy of Mr. Spears’ writing on historical
  subjects insures in the present volume a painstaking regard to the
  facts of history.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 755. D. ‘05. 120w.


* =Speed, John Gilmer.= Horse in America: a practical treatise on the
various types common in the United States, with something of their
history and varying characteristics. **$2. McClure.

  This interesting treatise “gives a great deal of information about the
  various equine types common in the United States. Mr. Speed is
  merciless in exposing false pedigrees. Some of his comments on origins
  of famous breeds of American horses will probably be unpalatable to
  partisans of this or that great name in the horse world. Yet on the
  whole the book is reassuring to the breeder and admirer of horses.”—R.
  of Rs.

  * “Taken all in all the book should serve its purpose, to interest and
  forward the breeding of good types.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 706. O. 21, ‘05. 640w.

  * “It points out the characteristics of the true thoroughbred with the
  unerring skill of the expert.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 100w.


=Sperry, Charlotte Grace.= Teddy Sunbeam. **$1. Elder.

  Printed in large type upon Teddy Sunbeam’s own gold these “little
  fables for little housekeepers” point many homely morals. Teddy
  Sunbeam is wise, and he talks about Princess Lend-a-hand, gives
  dissertations upon microbes, tells how to sweep, and how to perform a
  number of other daily duties, but tells it all in such an attractive
  manner that little folks will be glad to listen. The book is copiously
  illustrated by Albertine Randall Wheelan.

  “Is a nice little book for nice little girls.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 110w.

  * “A rather original series of little fables.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 767. D. ‘05. 130w.


* =Spielmann, Marion Henry, and Layard, George Somes.= Kate Greenaway.
*$6.50. Putnam.

  “In half a hundred colored plates and many black-and-white pictures we
  find beauty and delicacy pre-eminent and child-loveliness rendered
  with sincerity and sympathy. Such pictures measure a sweet, true soul,
  and the story of Kate Greenaway’s life and the gentle revelations of
  her letters and her friendships (the correspondence with John Ruskin
  most notably) bear out the inference.” (Outlook.) “It is a visit to
  Miss Greenaway at her home, a view of an active mind at work, a
  conversation with authors and artists led and directed by one whom
  they all acknowledged as leader.” (N. Y. Times.)

  * “The authors have felt to the full the quaint charm of this art,
  they do justice to the ‘sweet and fragrant perfume’ that floats about
  the name of Kate Greenaway.”

       + =Acad.= 68: sup. 9. D. 9, ‘05. 1420w.

  * “The peculiar competence of the present writers lies in their eager
  seizure upon all possible points of interest, and their strong sense
  of proportion, which assigns to each item its proper space in a volume
  that has not a dull page or a bit of superfluous ‘padding.’” Edith
  Kellogg Dunton.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 437. D. 16, ‘05. 2320w.

  * “With some of Messrs. Layard and Spielmann’s opinions we are not at
  all in agreement.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 394. N. 17, ‘05. 1630w.

  * “The book is thus more than an ordinary biography.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 190w.

  * “Really charming book.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 707. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.

  * “One can read with real profit other parts of the book, notably the
  introductory chapter, and, at the close, Mr. Spielmann’s judgment on
  Kate Greenaway as artist, delicately worded, enthusiastic yet nicely
  balanced.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 3. D. 9, ‘05. 1410w.


=Spiers, R. Phene.= Architecture east and west. *$4.50. Scribner.

  “This volume of essays, nine in all, and printed in full, is
  illustrated by a photograph of a medallion portrait, a bas-relief, by
  Lanteri, and by many architectural views and details, some of them
  photographic, others made up by the author from different sources or
  drawn from recognized authorities.”—Nation.

         =Ath.= 1905, 1: 439. Ap. 8. 640w.

         =Nation.= 80: 421. My. 25, ‘05. 670w.

  * “The writer of these essays has the power of making technical
  matters plain to the reader who has no special knowledge of
  architecture.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 293. Ag. 26, ‘05. 170w.


=Springer, Frank.= Cleiocrinus. Museum of comparative zoology, Harvard
college, Cambridge, Mass.

  “A complete paper on one of the oldest of known crinoid
  genera—Cleiocrinus.... Various authors ... have had great difficulty
  in placing it in the system of classification.... Mr. Springer does
  not now establish the family Cleiocrinidæ, in so many words, but ...
  it is finally concluded that the genus is intermediate between the
  great groups of flexibilia and camerata; nearest, apparently, to the
  reteocrinidæ. The memoir is illustrated by a beautiful plate of
  drawings by K. M. Chapman and E. Ricker, showing not only aspects of
  cleiocrinus, but also reteocrinus and glyptocrinus for
  comparison.”—Science.

  Reviewed by T. D. A. C.

     + + =Science,= n.s. 21: 388. Mr. 10, ‘05. 420w.


=Squire, Charles.= Mythology of the British islands: an introduction to
Celtic myth, legend, poetry, and romance. *$3.50. Scribner.

  Under such chapter headings as—The gods of the Gaels, Finn and the
  Fenians, The war with the giants, The gods of the Britons, The Gaelic
  Argonauts, The gods as king Arthur’s knights, and The treasures of
  Britain, are given the legends and traditions of the early inhabitants
  of the British islands, the Gaelic and the British Celts.

  “Altogether, then, Mr. Squire may be congratulated on a partial
  success. His research does not penetrate into German authorities; he
  is not fully alive to the anthropological side of the argument; his
  archaeology is not complete. But he knows and loves his subject within
  the boundaries presented by these limitations, and he has the peculiar
  charm of carrying his readers along with him in an attitude of love
  for the subject.” Laurence Gomme.

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 58. Ja. 21. ‘05. 790w.

  “A book which brings together so great a store of knowledge on an
  obscure and fascinating subject in so readable a fashion is indeed a
  treasure, and one cannot but praise the author for his work.” Louis H.
  Gray.

   + + + =Bookm.= 22: 58. S. ‘05. 960w.

  “His treatment of this subject is thorough and conscientious, and he
  has realized his hope of presenting it in a lucid and agreeable form.”

     + + =Nature.= 72: 146. Je. 15, ‘05. 520w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 317. My. 13, ‘05. 240w.

  “Mr. Squire has handled his refractory subject very ably, and has made
  the story of British mythology both lucid and interesting.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 358. Je. 3, ‘05. 1600w.

  * “This book supplies a great literary vacuum. From some of the
  writer’s conclusions scholars may differ.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 4. D. 9, ‘05. 1340w.


=Staley, Edgcumbe.= Raphael; with a short biographical sketch of Raphael
Santi or Sanzio; with a list of principal works. $1.25. Warne.

  Uniform with a series of monographs on the great masters, the “mode of
  presenting Raphael’s life’s work is particularly interesting, while so
  much is being written of his changing place in the rank of the great
  artists, as ascribed to him by current criticism. One has an
  opportunity of studying the various forms in which his genius
  expressed itself: Single figures of saints and angels; biblical and
  historical subjects; renderings of sacred and profane legends; and
  portraits. Then, again, there are the various mediums in which the
  artist worked, as on canvas, and in fresco, etc. In his mural
  paintings, we see how excellently his composition was fitted to the
  various exigencies of architectural decoration.” (Int. Studio.)

  “An excellent volume of illustrations of Raphael’s work. In the clear,
  short, and eminently satisfactory account of Raphael’s life the author
  neither indulges in extravagant praise, nor accepts theories of scant
  foundation.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 92. Ja. ‘05. 90w.

       + =Int. Studio.= 24: sup. 100. F. ‘05. 200w.


* =Stanwood, Edward.= James Gillespie Blaine. **$1.25. Houghton.

  “The scenes and events through which Mr. Blaine moved in the most
  stirring years of his life are now matters of history, and a clear-cut
  biography, such as Mr. Stanwood has written makes a capital medium
  through which the younger generation of American readers and students
  may be made familiar with the post bellum period of our politics. Mr.
  Stanwood gives especial attention to those episodes in Blaine’s career
  which were most frequently represented by his enemies as more or less
  discreditable ... and ... makes an able defense of Blaine against the
  attacks of his political opponents.”—R. of Rs.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 712. O. 21, ‘05. 370w.

  * “Nevertheless, the biography is in some respects highly valuable,
  and should be welcome if only for the new material assembled in a
  scholarly and interesting way.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 270w.

  * “Mr. Stanwood has done his subject full justice without overdoing
  it.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 763. D. 9, ‘05. 370w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 755. D. ‘05. 190w.


Statesman’s year-book: statistical and historical annual of the states
of the world for the year 1905; ed. by J. Scott Keltie and I. P. A.
Renwick. *$3. Macmillan.

  The 1905 edition of this annual is its forty-second issue and shows
  extensive enlargement and revision.

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 527. Ap. 29. 360w.

   + + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 617. Jl. ‘05. 80w.

         =Nation.= 80: 396. My. 18, ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 178. Mr. 25, ‘05. 110w.

  “Not a page of the book is unnecessary or can be spared.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 356. Je. 3, ‘05. 410w.

  “One of the few reference-books which may accurately be described as
  indispensable.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 195. My. 20, ‘05. 40w.

  “The editor has improved this annual from year to year, and the issue
  for 1905 is the best yet.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 768. Je. ‘05. 220w.

  “‘The statesman’s year-book’ continues to grow in size, while its
  arrangement is developed in the direction of completeness and
  convenience.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 682. My. 6, ‘05. 180w.


=Staunton, Schuyler.= Fate of a crown. $1.50. Reilly & B.

  A tale of the revolt which overthrew the monarchy of Dom Pedro in
  Brazil. The central figure is young Harcliffe who is secretary to Dom
  Miguel the leader of the revolutionists. His hair-breadth escapes on
  his way to the home of Miguel in the interior, and the following
  intrigue and adventure which culminate in the overthrow of the
  government supply the historical setting of a romance in which the
  hero supposes himself to be at the mercy of a rival—one who turns out
  to be a spy, a woman masquerading in men’s attire.

  “The character drawing of the book is splendid.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 524. My. 20, ‘05. 550w.


* =Stead, Alfred.= Great Japan; a study of national efficiency. **$2.50.
Lane.

  “A compilation from Japanese sources of all manner of facts calculated
  to throw light on the achievements, aspirations, and problems of
  Japan.... Mr. Stead’s purpose, briefly, is to exhibit the efficiency
  attained by the Japanese in the various departments of life, and to
  show how this efficiency springs from the ‘earnest, thinking and
  eminently practical patriotism of the people.’ With this as a text
  Lord Rosebery contributes a foreword.”—Lit. D.

  * “Mr. Stead’s book largely repeats his work ‘Japan by the Japanese’
  published last year.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 792. D. 9. 680w.

 *     + =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 430w.

  * “To give a full summary of the volume, which displays many of the
  characteristics of the encyclopedia and many of the handbook, is quite
  beyond the limits of a review.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 321. O. 6, ‘05. 3430w.

  * “Mr. Stead’s book is one of the most interesting recently produced
  on the inexhaustible subject of Japan. It does for that country much
  what Mr. Bryce did for the United States with his ‘American
  commonwealth.’”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 851. D. 2, ‘05. 1670w.

  * “His work abounds with the exaggeration to be expected from a
  professional panegyrist.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 596. N. 4, ‘05. 990w.

  * “A study, as we said, to begin with, the work has no claim to be,
  and even as a compilation it might have been better done. A great deal
  of verbiage might have been omitted, certain crudities of style might
  have been corrected.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 714. N. 4, ‘05. 2160w.


=Stead, Alfred=, comp. and ed. Japan by the Japanese. **$5. Dodd.

  A collection of papers written by many of the high officials of the
  Japanese government, and native men of well-known literary ability,
  including Sannomiya, Ito, Inouyé, Oyami, Ariga, Saito, Shibusawa,
  Naruse, Nitobe, Hozumi, and many others. Among the subjects treated
  are the army, navy, finance, schools, religion, commerce, politics,
  art and literature of Japan. There is a preface by the editor and a
  carefully prepared index.

  “It is about as useful as an almanac and not half as good as a
  dictionary. A desk-book of facts and figures concerning political and
  economic Japan. Quite unique as a gazetteer.” Wm. Elliot Griffis.

     — + =Critic.= 46: 185. F. ‘05. 180w.

  “His profound ignorance of the real significance of the work of such
  men as Sir Ernest Satow, Mr. William G. Aston, Prof. Basil Hall
  Chamberlain, and Capt. Frank Brinkley is manifest. The bad
  proofreading and continual misspelling of Japanese names and terms are
  disgraceful. In its cast and scope, the book seems intended mainly for
  the British reader. The facts and figures concerning the army, navy,
  revenue, taxation, and things outward and material are invaluable in
  their way. In treating of art and literature, the writers correct some
  errors of foreign writers, but contribute little that is fresh or
  revealing.”

   — — + =Nation.= 80: 118. F. 9, ‘05. 1530w.


=Stearns, Frank Preston.= Cambridge sketches. **$1.50. Lippincott.

  “Brief biographical sketches of impressive personalities, in the
  literary, artistic, scientific, and political life of New England....
  Agassiz, Lowell, Holmes, Sumner, Andrew, Cranch, Bird, and Howe are
  but a few of those of whom he writes.... His little volume also
  includes Emerson’s eulogy of Major George L. Stearns, printed in the
  Boston ‘Commonwealth’ April 20, 1867.... Sketches of the Harvard of
  forty and fifty years ago; papers read at various literary centennial
  celebrations, and notes of life in Rome in the late sixties.”—Outlook.

         =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “Contains many true things that are not new and doubtless do not aim
  at novelty, and also some new things that are not true, however
  unintentional their falsity. Its chapter on George L. Stevens, the
  author’s father, is its only noteworthy contribution to biography.”

     — + =Dial.= 39: 69. Ag. 1, ‘05. 470w.

  “The book is not without interest, but is decidedly untrustworthy.”

   + — — =Nation.= 80: 458. Je. 3, 05. 370w.

  “Unfortunately, the book is overweighted with some critical literary
  generalities which are out of its modest scope and do not add to its
  readableness.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 361. Je. 3, ‘05. 340w.

  “Their significance is rather that of warm tributes of respect and
  admiration.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 191. My. 20, ‘05. 140w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 957. Je. 17, ‘05. 90w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 90w.


=Steindorff, Georg.= Religion of the ancient Egyptians. **$1.50. Putnam.

  “Dr. Steindorff undertakes to give—and does give—in a manner to
  enlighten minds not utterly scholarly an idea of the nature of
  religion of the ancient Egyptians, and especially he sets out to show
  how that religion grew and changed and finally decayed.... Legends are
  related and hymns quoted, and especial attention paid to deliberate
  attempts of certain rulers to impose new gods upon the people.... The
  third lecture deals with Egyptian temples and religious ceremonies.
  Lecture IV. is concerned with the Egyptian magic, and Lecture V. with
  graves and burials and the Egyptian religion outside of Egypt.”—N. Y.
  Times.

  “Although it is somewhat slight, no fault can be found with Prof.
  Steindorff’s general arrangement of his subject or with the way he has
  treated it.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 435. S. 30. 220w.

  * “The best brief presentation extant in English of the religion of
  Egypt.”

   + + + =Bib. World.= 26: 400. N. ‘05. 10w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 597. S. 9, ‘05. 250w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 540. O. 21, ‘05. 350w.


=Stephen, Leslie.= Freethinking and plain speaking. *$1.50. Putnam.

  “This book ... contains nine chapters which ... were printed in book
  form some twenty years ago, but that publication for a number of years
  has been out of print.... Four of the essays deal with subjects
  connected with theology and religious belief in their bearing on human
  society; the others are casual or occasional papers called out by
  literary or historical events of the time.”—Outlook.

  “They illustrate a side of the author’s character easily
  misunderstood. For here he states with the utmost freedom the views on
  religion which led thoughtless persons to call him an atheist.” Edward
  Fuller.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 244. S. ‘05. 770w.

  “Together these papers make a capital introduction to the lamented
  author commemorated.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 331. Ap. 27, ‘05. 90w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 292. My. 6, ‘05. 600w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1013. Ap. 22, ‘05. 150w.


=Stephen, Leslie.= Hobbes. **75c. Macmillan.

  This life of the great moral and political English philosopher, Thomas
  Hobbes, is the last of Sir Leslie Stephen’s philosophical biographies.
  It is divided into four chapters, the first gives Hobbes’s relation to
  the political and intellectual movements of his time, and his personal
  characteristics. “The remaining three divisions of the book represent
  the parts of Hobbes’s philosophy: the World viewed as a material
  system, subject only to mechanical laws; Man, a body with organs,
  explicable by the same principles; the State, or body politic,
  voluntarily formed, and to be governed only by force, hence only by a
  sovereign power possessed of absolute—i.e., underived and unlimited
  authority.” (Ind.)

  Reviewed by Frances Duncan.

         =Critic.= 46: 280. Mr. ‘05. 1030w.

  “The present work is hardly a contribution to professional
  philosophical criticism. But a better introductory book for the
  general reader could not be desired.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 208. Ja. 26, ‘05. 400w.

  “Never have we seen better done the task of writing about philosophy;
  sometimes there is the air of the blunt, intelligent outsider, but the
  substance is masterly and it is a true and even great philosopher who
  is speaking. Sir Leslie Stephen finds for his readers the
  gratification of many sentences pointed and turned after Hobbes’ own
  manner, with judgments of the same shrewd sort. There is not a dull
  ten minutes in the book.” G. C. Rankin.

   + + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 391. Ap. ‘05. 990w.

  “To many readers, as to the present writer, it will seem that the
  fairest of critics has, after full examination, pronounced judgment,
  and that his judgment is likely to be final.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 35. Ja. 12, ‘05. 2380w.


=Stephen, Leslie.= Hours in a library. *$6. Putnam.

  A new edition of thirty-two critical essays on literary subjects
  including studies of Macaulay, Charlotte Brontë, Kingsley, Scott,
  Hawthorne, DeQuincey, Coleridge, Eliot, Crabbe, and others, and essays
  on the novels of Richardson, Balzac, and Disraeli, Dr. Johnson’s
  writings, The first Edinburgh reviewers, etc.

       + =Ind.= 59: 816. O. 5, ‘05. 170w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 10. Ja. 5, ‘05. 160w.

  “Not strongly bound. Far too many slips in proof-reading. These
  adventures among masterpieces are ... the adventures of a humorist.
  They would often seem inadequate to the Dryasdust, they would often
  baffle the literary mind. Like all strong men, Stephen had his blind
  spots and his hobbies; his criticism was ... by no means unbiased.” H.
  W. Boynton.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 33. Ja. 21, ‘05. 2490w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “One of the most satisfying and pleasing collections of literary
  essays.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 349. F. 4, ‘05. 60w.


=Stephens, Kate.= American thumb-prints; mettle of our men and women.
**$1.50. Lippincott.

  Eight essays entitled: Puritans of the West; The university of
  Hesperus; Two neighbors of St. Louis; The New England woman; A New
  England abode of the blessed; An up-to-date misogyny; “The gullet
  science”; Plagiarizing humors of Benjamin Franklin.

  “Miss Stephens has wide reading, genuine erudition, humour, and
  pungent sarcasm all at her command, and she uses them very tellingly.”

     + + =Bookm.= 22: 85. S. ‘05. 340w.

  “Instinct with the indescribable and unmistakable buoyancy and
  vitality of the great West, combined with something of the rich
  scholarship more often associated with the older East. Possessing as
  she does a command of excellent English, she does not need to write in
  polyglot.”

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 420. Je. 16, ‘05. 470w.

  “A volume of essays written in so personal and characteristic a style
  as to make the title quite appropriate.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 639. S. 14, ‘05. 170w.

  “They are written in a good English style, and we have found much in
  them that is worth recording.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 12. Jl. 6, ‘05. 330w.

  “A small volume of fresh and courageously written essays by a
  cultivated Western woman who is not afraid to say what she thinks, and
  who does think.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 835. Jl. 29, ‘05. 250w.

  “A clever book of essays.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 126. Jl. ‘05. 80w.


=Stephens, Louise G. (Katharine, pseud.).= Letters from an Oregon ranch.
**$1.25. McClurg.

  One of a quartet of middle-aged adventurers tells the experiences of
  the four in settling upon an Oregon ranch. The labors and discomforts
  are humorously chronicled, and the whole genial tale breathes its
  text,—that the novelty and excitement of new fields is rejuvenating to
  those whose youth is past. A dozen photographic views illustrate the
  volume.

  * “A breezy, rather likable book.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 475. N. ‘05. 60w.

         =Dial.= 39: 45. Jl. 16, ‘05. 130w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 405. Je. 17, ‘05. 400w.


=Stephens, Robert Neilson.= Flight of Georgiana. †$1.50. Page.

  “There is nothing new or original about the story, but it has the
  lightness and grace characterizing predecessors from Mr. Stephens’s
  pen, and sword-play to spare. The scene opens at an English inn; the
  Pretender has failed to win the British crown; his adherents are
  fleeing for their lives, but, as they fly, pause to make
  love.”—Outlook.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 278. S. 30, ‘05. 60w.


=Stephens, Thomas,= ed. Child and religion. *$1.50. Putnam.

  This volume in the “Crown theological library,” contains eleven essays
  by eleven prominent theologians. The titles are: The child and
  heredity; The child and its environment; The child’s capacity for
  religion; The child and sin; The conversion of children; The religious
  training of the child in the church of England; The religious training
  of children in the free churches; Baptists and the children; New
  church training; The religious training of children among the Jews;
  and The child and the Bible.

  “Those who are grappling with practical problems will find in these
  essays written from various points of view much that is suggestive and
  helpful.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 134. S. 16, ‘05. 170w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 540. O. 21, ‘05. 440w.

  * “The editor has wisely put his best first—that on ‘The child and
  heredity’ by Professor Jones of Glasgow; it is an acute and
  interesting piece of writing. Of the other essays we cannot speak so
  highly.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 533. O. 21, ‘05. 320w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 125. Jl. 22, ‘05. 290w.


=Stephenson, Henry Thew.= Shakespeare’s London. **$2. Holt.

  A topographical description of London as Shakespeare saw it, compiled
  largely from contemporary sources, and profusely illustrated from old
  prints. It gives an introductory sketch of the Elizabethans, an
  account of the early growth of the city, and a picturesque
  presentation of St. Paul’s, the water front, the tower, the main
  highway, the strand, in fact, the London of the 16th century. The book
  closes with chapters upon theatres, taverns and tavern life in those
  boisterous days.

  “The book may be emphatically recommended to teachers and students no
  less than to the general reader.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 120w.

  * “The volume is compact, and is intended more for the library than
  for the satchel.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1111. N. 9, ‘05. 160w.

  “The book is worthy to have a much fuller index.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 19. Jl. 6, ‘05. 1210w.

  “Interesting and apparently correct in its statements.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 356. Je. 3, ‘05. 960w.

  “Deserving of high praise from two points of view—in that the study of
  London in Elizabeth’s day has been carefully and accurately worked
  out, and in that the description is eminently readable and
  entertaining.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 247. My. 27, ‘05. 110w.

  “He has succeeded so far beyond his original intention as to give an
  exceedingly interesting record of Elizabethan life and times.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 943. Je. 17, ‘05. 80w.

  “Good use is made of the descriptions left by contemporary writers.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 125. Jl. ‘05. 40w.


=Stepniak, pseud. (Sergiei Mikhailovich Kravchinskii).= Russian
peasantry; their agrarian condition, social life and religion. *$1.25.
Dutton.

  “A new edition of a book originally published ten years ago by a
  Russian who knew the economic and social conditions in Russia at first
  hand, and who passionately looked forward to the changes now taking
  place. Owing to the death of Stepniak, the book is issued without
  revision.”—Outlook.

         =Acad.= 68: 369. Ap. 1, ‘05. 70w.

  “He knew the Russian peasantry as no other man save Tolstoy.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 659. Je. 24, ‘05. 620w.

         =Nation.= 80: 331. Ap. 27, ‘05. 90w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 130w.

         =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 60w.


* =Sterling, Sara Hawks.= Shakespeare’s sweetheart. †$2. Jacobs.

  Anne Hathaway’s own story as told by herself is a manuscript which
  Master Jonson is supposed to have hid away in vault beneath the
  Mermaid. It is a pretty story, and might have been true, did we but
  know, for who shall say that the young wife of the gallant Will
  Shakespeare did not follow him to London in boy’s disguise, and take
  part in his plays undiscovered by all save the sharp-eyed queen? And
  who shall deny to them the joy of a great love? Still, charming as it
  is, the story is unsustained by history, and we have long been taught
  to believe that the suggestions for the plots of Shakespeare’s plays
  came to him from sources outside his own life experience.

  * “On the whole the situation is handled skilfully, and the story is a
  charming bit of imaginative writing.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 447. D. 16, ‘05. 180w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 892. D. 16, ‘05. 260w.


=Sterne, Laurence.= Complete works; including life by Percy Fitzgerald;
ed. by Wilbur L. Cross. 12v. subs. ea. $3.50. Taylor.

  “The aim of the publishers is to produce a complete, exact, and
  definite edition. For this purpose they have obtained much of the
  material direct from the British museum, while reproductions of
  letters, and old portraits have been acquired from the descendants of
  Sterne’s patrons and friends in England.”—Bookm.

  “In point of general criticism, perhaps, it is somewhat lacking, but
  in little else. It collects everything of Sterne’s. P. H. Frye.”

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 638. Ag. ‘05. 2580w.

  “Mr. Wilbur L. Cross has written an entertaining and lucid
  introduction that adds to the practical worth of the book.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 384. Ap. ‘05. 70w. (Reviews vol. I.)

  “Is a genuine definitive edition. The editorial work by Prof. Cross,
  whether of an introductory character or in the shape of notes, or in
  the correction of numerous errors or the exclusion of spurious
  material, is of a high order and speaks well for the gentleman’s
  scholarship no less than for his just appreciation of the duties of
  editor. The mechanical features of the edition are in keeping with the
  editorship. The York edition is the most satisfactory interpretation
  that we have hitherto seen of him.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 117. F. 25, ‘05. 1130w.


=Sterner, Ira Ibson.= Picture gallery of souls. $1. Badger, R: G.

  Sonnets and short poems dedicated “to cosmo-psychic energy,” and
  arranged under the headings: Introduction to the public; Sinners and
  society; Sorrow and joy; Lessons from history; Philosophical poems;
  and Toil and genius.


=Sterrett, James Macbride.= Freedom of authority: essays in apologetics.
**$2. Macmillan.

  “The book is ... a defence of authority in religion.... The first
  chapter deals with the relation between authority and freedom; the
  second and third are a criticism of the positions of the late Auguste
  Sabatier, of Dr. Harnack and of the Abbé Loisy; the fourth treats of
  the historical method, and is a defence of the philosophical school
  against the purely empirical; the remaining four chapters contain Dr.
  Sterrett’s own conclusions as to the nature of authority and the
  guidance of the individual Christian.”—Acad.

  “The book, as he himself says, is a series of studies rather than a
  sustained thesis, and, to tell the truth, it is somewhat scrappy and
  inconclusive.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 852. Ag. 19, ‘05. 1380w.

  “His work as a whole is able and it is written with an intensity and
  enthusiasm of conviction which make it eloquent.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 453. Ag. 24, ‘05. 610w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 345. My. 27, ‘05. 210w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 443. Je. 17, ‘05. 680w.


=Stevens, Frank.= Adventures in Pondland. $1.25. McClurg.

  This book combines the charm of a fairy story with the accuracy of a
  natural history. Jackie and Vi, young nature lovers, are invited by
  Lemna the fairy queen of the pond, to visit her domain, and altho they
  go down to the depths of it, the water does not wet them. They make
  friends with the guardian of the pond, Mr. Natterjack the toad, they
  learn how to care for their pets, the frogs and goldfish, and they
  find out all about the life and habits of the pond-people, Master
  Dragonfly, the tadpoles, newts, spiders and all the rest. At the end
  of the summer they regretfully leave the pond to its long winter’s
  sleep.

 *     + =Acad.= 68: 1287. D. 9, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 576. O. 28. 60w.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 432. D. 8, ‘05. 30w.

  * “The book ought to give young readers new interest in humble orders
  of life, and some idea of nature’s adaptation of means to end.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 450. N. 30, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 780. N. 18, ‘05. 260w.

  * “This is an entertaining and instructive book, suitable for all
  children who have, if not a pond, at least a rain-water tub at
  command.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 694. N. 4, ‘05. 110w.


=Stevenson, Robert Louis Balfour.= Works. per v. $1. Scribner.

  A biographical edition of Stevenson which is published in handy volume
  form, in cloth or limp leather, with thin paper, and clear type. The
  literary feature of the edition is the series of introductions written
  by Mrs. Stevenson, each of which gives an intimate account of the
  circumstances under which the book was written, and throws new light
  on Stevenson’s life and work.

         =Dial.= 38: 423. Je. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  * “The text is of course complete and authoritative, and the general
  form of the volumes makes them much more convenient for actual reading
  purposes than either of the two expensive subscription editions.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 391. D. 1, ‘05. 100w.

  “Good taste and a sense of what is interesting have co-operated in the
  prefaces with which Mrs. Stevenson has furnished the several volumes.
  There is nothing which one can reasonably wish had been omitted.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 436. Jl. 1, ‘05. 560w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 500. Jl. 29. ‘05. 140w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 447. Je. 17, ‘05. 20w.

  “One wishes that the biographical prefaces were fuller and more like
  those furnished by Mrs. Ritchie to the Biographical edition of
  Thackeray.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 935. Ag. 12, ‘05. 30w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 335. O. 7, ‘05. 30w.


=Stevenson, Robert Louis Balfour.= Child’s garden of verses. $2.50.
Scribner.

  Jessie Willcox Smith has happily illustrated this new edition of these
  exquisite and well loved verses. In her black and white text drawings
  and full-page colored pictures we find the same appealing charm which
  makes all wanderers in Stevenson’s child’s garden feel that truly

              “The world is so full of a number of things,
              I’m sure we should all be as happy as kings.”

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 448. D. 16, ‘05. 140w.

  * “The whole conception of the book is in perfect good taste.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1389. D. 14, ‘05. 70w.

 *     + =Lond.= Times. 4: 408. N. 24, ‘05. 150w.

  * “Happy the child who receives this book for a gift, as a source of
  instruction in taste both for poetry and for art.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 170w.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 744. N. 4, ‘05. 580w.

  “It would be difficult to imagine a piece of holiday book-making which
  might be more complete and perfect.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 574. N. 4, ‘05. 90w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 707. N. 25, ‘05. 40w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 766. D. ‘05. 170w.


=Stewart, Charles David.= Fugitive blacksmith. $1.50. Century.

  Two stories which run along side by side; one concerning Finerty, the
  jovial Irishman and his family, the other the tale of the fugitive
  blacksmith, as told by his one-time partner, Stumpy, the tramp, in
  Finerty’s sand house in the railroad yards. The whole is in dialect,
  and the characters are both witty and interesting. The blacksmith,
  Bill, a fugitive from justice for the murder of a friend, Tilten, is
  hounded from place to place, meeting with many exciting adventures,
  and at last comes across the man he was accused of murdering. Here the
  devoted Stumpy loses sight of him but later discovers him in health
  and prosperity and shares his changed fortunes.

  “A peculiarly fascinating story.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 569. My. 27, ‘05. 390w.

  “Stumpy’s story is well told and worth telling.” G. W. A.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 544. Jl. ‘05. 430w.

  “A more diverting story has not appeared in many a long day.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 478. My. ‘05. 290w.

  “‘Fugitive blacksmith’ is no unworthy successor to ‘Tom Sawyer’ and
  ‘Huckleberry Finn.’”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 393. Ag. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “Any veteran might well be glad and proud to round off even the
  achievement of a lifetime with a study of human nature such as this
  story of Mr. Stewart’s ‘Blacksmith’ so interesting in fresh and
  unexpected ways, so rich in the fruits of keen and kindly observation,
  and the true artist’s appreciation of much that escapes the untrained
  eye. If it does not prove a worthily popular favorite it will be the
  fault of the popular taste and appreciation.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 179. Mr. 25, ‘05. 940w.

  “Let no one be deterred from reading the book by dislike of Irish
  dialect. The first chapter once passed, the human and humorous
  interest increases rapidly, and it may be added that the dialect
  itself—to many readers a determent—is consistently and carefully
  managed. The story is jolly and original.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 705. Mr. 18, ‘05. 90w.

  “The whole suffused with humor and not lacking in pathos, and wholly
  original.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 773. Ap. 1, ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Stewart may not be another Mark Twain, but he doesn’t need to be.
  He is good enough as he is.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 591. Ap. 15, ‘05. 210w.

  “The book is vivified by clever character sketches shrewdly
  illustrative of life in the grade of society described. The humor of
  the story is abundant and of a particularly natural sort.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 621. Ap. ‘05. 520w.


=Stewart, Wentworth F.= Evangelistic awakening. *75c. Meth. bk.

  “The object of this volume is to give a general view of the present
  evangelistic situation, to indicate some things that have led up to
  this condition ... to set forth some fundamental principles which need
  emphasis, and to outline what are to be, in the author’s judgment, the
  conditions of the future.”

  “As far as it goes it is an excellent book.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 333. O. 7, ‘05. 110w.


=Stiles, Henry Reed.= History of ancient Wethersfield, Connecticut,
comprising the present towns of Wethersfield, Rocky Hill, and Newington
and of Glastonbury, prior to its incorporation in 1693, from date of
earliest settlement until the present time. 2v. *$25. Grafton press.

  “Two ponderous volumes, edited ... from the manuscript of the late
  Judge Sherman W. Davis. The second volume is entirely genealogical,
  but in the first, which is really a series of brief historical
  monographs, occur chapters on such interesting topics as
  Wethersfield’s share in the French and Indian war, Wethersfield’s
  share in the American revolution and maritime history.”—Am. Hist. R.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 720. Ap. ‘05. 70w.


=Stimson, Henry Albert.= Right life and how to live it. **$1.20. Barnes.

  “Volume I. in the ‘Right life series.’ An introduction for the book
  has been written by Dr. Maxwell, superintendent of schools, New York
  city. The volume is intended for growing boys and girls, as well as to
  help teachers and parents. It does not, the author says in his
  preface, propose any new theory of light or advocate any new teaching
  which might be set aside. ‘It furnishes a harmonious and satisfactory
  interpretation of life.’”—N. Y. Times.

  * “It is sufficiently philosophical in its nature and scientific in
  its method to meet the intellectual demands of its readers, and to
  provide a basis for character-building that will stand the strain and
  criticism of after-life.”

     + + =Am. J. Theol.= 9: 779. O. ‘05. 230w.

  Reviewed by John Angus MacVannel.

     + + =Educ. R.= 30: 423. N. ‘05. 970w.

  “It is clear ... its tone is distinctly hopeful, wholesome and manly.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 616. Mr. 16. ‘05. 190w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  “A helpful contribution toward the strengthening of a weak point in
  our educational system. The outlook is comprehensive, on one hand
  including the fundamental problems of thought simply put, and on the
  other dealing with the social problems of the day.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 654. Mr. 11, ‘05. 250w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 634. Ap. 22, ‘05. 210w.


=Stodola, Aurel.= Steam turbines; with an appendix on gas turbines and
the future of heat engines. *$4.50. Van Nostrand.

  This is an English version of the second revised German edition. It
  includes a treatise on “Gas turbines, and the future of heat engines,”
  an elementary introduction to the theory of steam turbines for the
  general reader, and a series of reports of the experiments on the
  many-stage impulse turbines of Zölly, Rateau, Stumpf, Gelpke, and
  others.

  “This work is by far the best of all relating to this subject in any
  language. A number of misprints of the German edition have been
  faithfully reproduced in this translation. The usefulness of the book
  has been considerably reduced by the faulty translation.” Storm Bull.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 527. My. 18, ‘05. 710w.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 219. Jl. 6, ‘05. 770w.


=Stokely, Edith Keeley, and Hurd, Marian Kent.= Miss Billy. †$1.50.
Lothrop.

  A young philanthropist who “leaves a trail of sanitation, repairing,
  mending, soap, and jokes behind her.... Anything but perfect, she
  corrects her own faults briskly, even while she reproves the
  shortcomings of her neighbors, and steers safely between the
  priggishness of some heroines of her class and the dullness of those
  created to listen to the twisted English and logic of their
  beneficiaries.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Pleasant story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 176. Mr. 18, ‘05. 190w.

  “This is an ideal story for young girls—sprightly and full of fun, it
  teaches, nevertheless, a wholesome lesson in the matters of neighborly
  love and the overcoming of false pride.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 300. My. 6, ‘05. 480w.

  “So pleasantly and humorously is the story told that one never for a
  minute imagines while reading it that the authors are ‘pointing a
  moral.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.


=Story, Douglas.= Campaign with Kuropatkin. *$3. Lippincott.

  An English newspaper correspondent’s account of the campaign in the
  East, in which he pays handsome tribute to Russia, whose final triumph
  he considers as assured in spite of the “effective barbarism” of the
  Japanese soldiers. There are many illustrations taken in the field by
  the author.

  “Instead of military history, we have a book of impressions,
  individual and general. Making allowance for its partisanship, this
  volume grows upon one. At first there is a sense of triviality and of
  irritation; later, a feeling of interest, if not of sympathy, arrives;
  there is nothing to arouse sympathy.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 196. Mr. 9, ‘05. 1590w.

  “An interesting work. Mr. Story might have added as a sub-title: ‘As
  much as I was able to see of it.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 109. F. 18, ‘05. 1670w.


Story of the Welsh revival. pa. **15c. Revell.

  A number of newspaper accounts of the religious awakening in Wales,
  brought together for the use of those who look for a similar movement
  in this country.

         =Ind.= 58: 897. Ap. 20, ‘05. 60w.


=Stow, George W.= Native races of South Africa. A history of the
intrusion of the Hottentots and Bantu into the hunting grounds of the
Bushmen, the aborigines of the country. *$6.50. Macmillan.

  “The book is scarcely a treatise so much as an encyclopedia of
  information.... Including an excellent account of the Hottentot
  immigration and the first waves of the Bantu influx from the North, a
  sketch of the distribution of the semi-Hottentot tribes ... much
  information about the Hereros and the little-known races north and
  west of the Kalahari, as well as a history of the first wars of
  Moshesh, the Basuto king, and the doings of early filibusters.... But
  it is primarily a study of the Bushmen, and the tale of one of the
  cruelest wars of extermination ever waged,—a glimpse into an elder,
  almost prehistoric, world of naked savagery.”—Spec.

  “A rather cumbrous mass of speculations, based on laborious and
  praiseworthy investigations.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 134. Jl. 29. 1580w.

  “For a historian who draws much of his material from native tradition,
  Mr. Stow is singularly free from speculation. On the social life and
  habits of the Bushmen, which is the most important part of his work,
  we know from the highest living authority, Miss Lucy Lloyd, that he is
  entirely to be trusted.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 278. S. 1, ‘05. 1550w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 492. Jl. 22, ‘05. 350w.

  “What he says of the Bushmen, then, can be accepted as probably
  correct, and as forming a prospectively valuable contribution to the
  ethnology of South Africa.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 513. Ag. 5, ‘05. 890w.

  “In the main his generalizations strike us as accurate and logical. It
  is as a collection of the data for theory that it is to be prized. On
  this ground it seems to us a very valuable book.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 225. Ag. 12, ‘05. 1490w.


=Stowe, Harriet Beecher.= Uncle Tom’s cabin, or, Life among the lowly.
$1.25. Crowell.

  This famous story is now issued as one of the flexible “Thin paper
  classics” series, with a photogravure frontispiece showing Uncle Tom
  and Eva as drawn by Charles Copeland.


=Strang, Herbert.= Kobo: a story of the Russo-Japanese war. †$1.50.
Putnam.

  “Kobo is a Japanese in good social position, who undertakes the
  perilous duty of a spy. Another prominent character is a young British
  employee in the Japanese naval service. The adventures and experiences
  of these and others make ... a vivid dramatic representation of
  individual doings and happenings in the national tragedy now being
  enacted in the Far East.”—Outlook.

     — + =Critic.= 47: 190. Ag. ‘05. 50w.

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1483. Je. 29, ‘05. 80w.

  “A thorough boy’s tale, on the order of the Henty books.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 200w.

  “A dashing, exciting story of the sort that boys are fond of.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 503. F. 25, ‘05. 80w.


Stray leaves from a soul’s book. $1.50. Badger, R. G.

  Twelve leaves which give soul-struggles and soul-compensations and
  show how thru the ages “my soul and I” have strayed and met again.


=Streamer, Col. D., pseud. (Harry Graham).= More misrepresentative men.
**$1. Fox.

  Col. Streamer adds to his already imposing list of misrepresentative
  men the names of Robert Burns, William Waldorf Astor, Henry VIII.,
  Alton B. Parker, Euclid, J. M. Barrie, Omar Khayyam, Andrew Carnegie,
  King Cophetus, Joseph F. Smith and Sherlock Holmes. The volume is
  humorously illustrated, and is made unique by the author’s foreword
  which makes bold to claim that visions of the almighty dollar have
  power to awaken his muse, and the publishers answer which pampers him
  in his whim for substantial reward.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 446. D. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “Shows no exhaustion of his satiric vein.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 80w.

  “We are willing to swear that these verses are as good as any the
  author has written.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 748. N. 4, ‘05. 220w.


* =Street, George Edward.= Mount Desert: a history; ed. by S: A. Eliot;
with a memorial introd. by Wilbert L. Anderson. **$2.50. Houghton.

  “Many who have visited the interesting island of Mount Desert, have
  wondered what the early history of that region might be.... The first
  colony in Mount Desert was established by the Jesuit priests at
  Somesville, in 1613, but was destroyed next year by the English. A
  century and a half passed before the first permanent settlers came
  from Massachusetts.... In recent years the island has become one of
  the favorite summer resorts on our Atlantic coast. The book is well
  illustrated with views of the island and contains also an excellent
  map.”—Ind.

  * “Is the only history of the island ever written.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1113. N. 9, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 528. O. 28, ‘05. 15w.


=Stringer, Arthur John Arbuthnott.= Lonely O’Malley: a story of boy
life. $1.50. Houghton.

  “The story of a real boy, who knows all about the secrets of
  trap-making, and depends upon a vivid imagination for his games.
  Shunned at first by others of his age, when he comes a stranger to
  town, he wins his place as a leader by fighting the bully and
  conducting a wonderful pirate cruise.”—Outlook.

  “Entertaining story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 670. O. 14, ‘05. 540w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 429. O. 21, ‘05. 50w.


=Strong, Mrs. Isobel (Osbourne).= Girl from home: a story of Honolulu.
†$1.50. McClure.

  About twenty years ago, when Kalakaua was king in Hawaii, a girl went
  to the islands and fell in love with a man worth eleven millions. The
  story tells of her experiences in which many characters, American,
  British, Russian, Japanese, Chinese, and Hawaiian, play a part.

  “The book is best defined as an entertaining volume of travel,
  sugar-coated with an innocuous little romance, and enlivened with a
  vein of mild satire.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 600. Ag. ‘05. 240w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 342. My. 27, ‘05. 410w.


* =Strong, Josiah.= Next great awakening. 75c. Baker.

  A tenth edition of a volume which makes it its object to show “that
  the next great spiritual awakening, so profoundly needed to
  Christianize the new civilization and to lift the nations to a higher
  plane,” will come when the social teachings of Jesus, so long obscured
  and forgotten, are “clearly recognized and faithfully preached.” The
  subject is treated under the headings: The supreme need of the world;
  The law of spiritual quickening; The kingdom of God; The social laws
  of Jesus; The social teachings of Jesus not accepted; and The social
  teachings of Jesus applied will bring social healing and spiritual
  quickening.


=Strong, Josiah.= Social progress for 1905. **$1. Baker.

  Dr. Strong’s experiment in sending out a 1904 year book and
  encyclopedia of economic, industrial, social and religious statistics
  met with such hearty endorsement that he offers a second issue for the
  new year. It contains more material than the 1904 volume, is more
  comprehensive, and has profited by solicited suggestions and
  criticisms.

  “As it is, however, no student and no library should be without it.”

   — + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 597. S. ‘05. 180w.

  “The second issue of the work shows a material advance over the first
  in usefulness. The amount of matter included is very large, and it is
  strictly up-to-date.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 326. My. 1, 05. 60w.

  “It is, on the whole, an excellent volume. We note, however, a number
  of errors, partly due to bad proofreading and partly to faulty
  handling of the statistical tables.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 1191. My. 25, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =N. Y. Times= 10: 287. Ap. 29, ‘05. 150w.

  “A clear improvement is made by the present volume upon its
  predecessor.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1016. Ap. 22, ‘05. 120w.

  “More complete and hence more valuable than ever.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 795. My. 20, ‘05. 170w.


* =Strong, Josiah.= Times and young men. 75c. Baker.

  A new popular edition of a book which is an outgrowth of the writer’s
  personal experience and in which he sets forth his conception of life
  in the hope that “this volume may fix in the minds of the young men
  who read it convictions as to the right course of life so deep and
  immovable that they may be anchored to in the stress of storm.” The
  table of contents includes chapters upon: The great change in the
  physical world, and in the world of ideas; Three great laws which
  never change; The law of service, The law of self-giving or sacrifice,
  The law of love; The three great laws applied to the social problem,
  and to personal problems; and The inspiration of the twentieth-century
  outlook.


=Strunk, William=, ed. See Juliana.


=Stuart, Ruth McEnery.= River’s children, $1. Century.

  This “Idyll of the Mississippi” is a series of connected sketches of
  the negro and creole delta dwellers, where “de ruling lady of dis low
  valley country, it is not de carnival queen; it is not de first lady
  at de governor’s mansion.... It is old lady Mississippi.” There is an
  account of a great flood where “the mother of trouble” received
  prayers and sacrifices from her superstitious worshippers; and the
  story of two old negroes who took charge of their “Marse Harold’s”
  little daughter until his return from the war; finding rest beneath
  the treacherous waters when they had secured for her a father and a
  happy future. Many negro songs and superstitions give the story color.

  “Written with the charm, the humor, the grace, and the pathos so
  familiar to all who know the author’s earlier books.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 190. F. ‘05. 30w.

  “A sort of pagan worship of the great river Mississippi is the keynote
  of this somewhat desultory tale of Creoles and negroes in Louisiana.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 43. Ja. 21, ‘05. 210w.

  “Mrs. Stuart’s humor, is, for once, overcast by pathos. ‘The river’s
  children’ is a pearl brought up by a diver, who knows the waters; one
  that will gain luster as receding years carry farther and farther
  back, the superstitions, the romance, the melodies that have gathered
  around the great river.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 377. F. ‘05. 400w.


=Stuart, Ruth McEnery.= Second wooing of Salina Sue and other stories,
†$1.25. Harper.

  Six short stories of negro life in the far South, entitled, The second
  wooing of Salina Sue; Minervy’s valentines, Tobe Taylor’s April
  foolishness; Egypt; Milady; The romance of Chinkapin castle.

     + + =Bookm.= 22: 182. O. ‘05. 230w.

  “All the sketches are written in her touching, witty style.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 156. Jl. 20, ‘05. 320w.

  “She knows well how to best bring to the surface the exquisite humor
  and pathos of plantation life.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 278. Ap. 29, ‘06. 530w.

  “If Mrs. Stuart strikes no fresh notes in this latest volume, she
  shows no sign of flagging interest in her themes, or of decline in the
  naturalness and interest of her style.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 143. My. 13, ‘05. 100w.

     + + =Reader.= 6: 362. Ag. ‘05. 290w.

   + + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 50w.


=Stubbs, Rt. Rev. William, bishop of Oxford.= Letters of William Stubbs,
bishop of Oxford, 1825-1901; ed. by William Holden Hutton. *$4. Dutton.

  A volume of letters which show the great bishop and learned historian
  to have been a man of genial personality and keen wit.

  “It is to be hoped that, faithfully as Mr. Hutton has executed his
  task,—and his interspersed matter is illuminative and indispensable to
  the best enjoyment of the letters,—that a fuller, more formal
  biography of Bishop Stubbs may some day be written.” Percy F.
  Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 236. Ap. 1, ‘05. 450w.

  “His intercourse with leaders or his church and nation is revealed in
  these letters, in which his personal characteristics as a Christian
  pastor, an ecclesiastical statesman, a scholar, a wit, a friend,
  combine in the portrait of a strong, sincere, and faithful man.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 246. Ja. 28, ‘05. 130w.

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 201. S. 7, ‘05. 3550w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 524. Ag. 5, ‘05. 900w.


* =Sturge, Ernest Adolphus.= Spirit of Japan. The Yurskusha, Tokyo. For
sale by author, 101 Scott St., San Francisco.

  A Californian’s book of verse devoted to the spirit, legends,
  historical events, flowers, trees, birds and scenery of Japan.


=Sturgis, Howard Overing.= Belchamber. †$1.50. Putnam.

  Lord Belchamber, heir to an old name and to an old estate, is shy,
  sickly and good, quite out of place in his high position, in an idle
  and fashionable world, and wishes to renounce it for settlement work.
  His dissipated brother’s marriage to a vulgar variety actress recalls
  him to his duty, to his mother and to his name. He is caught by the
  first clever woman who sets her cap for him and marries her with
  tragic results.

  “‘Belchamber,’ in short, has at once the faults and the freshness of
  the novelist who has told little but observed much; faults of
  construction and perspective ... and freshness of sensation and
  perception.” Edith Wharton.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 307. My. ‘05. 1970w.

  “Admirably well-written book.” Witter Bynner.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 473. My. ‘05. 650w.

  “There is nothing amateurish about either style or construction.” Wm.
  M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 41. Jl. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  “There is nothing hopeful or right in the book.”

     — — =Ind.= 58: 1071. My. 11, ‘05. 200w.

  “There is a sort of old-fashioned touch about some of it, and now and
  then a suggestion of Thackeray.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 10. ‘05. 690w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 160w.

  “Neither strength nor style is lacking in this quite remarkable
  analytical study.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 906. Ap. 8, ‘03. 100w.

  “It is a wonderfully well written book, so well written that the
  wonder grows that the author should have chosen such a malodorous
  subject.”

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 549. Ap. 8, ‘05. 110w.

  “‘Belchamber’ is a disagreeable, morbid and decidedly clever novel of
  aristocratic English life.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 472. S. ‘05. 280w.


=Sturgis, Russell.= Appreciation of pictures. **$1.50. Baker.

  A purely artistical standard of judgment from which to grasp the great
  arts of design has been defined by Mr. Sturgis in his volumes devoted
  to sculpture, architecture, and now to pictures. In the present field
  the work of producing grows complex as “in the matter of
  picture-making there is the transference of actual form and of
  appearance of form, to a flat surface.” The subject is treated
  historically and from the critic’s standpoint, whereas Mr. Poore’s
  “Pictorial composition” in this same “Popular art series” treats
  pictures from the artist’s point of view. There are many illustrations
  reproduced from rare paintings.

  * “The pictures are carefully and thoroughly explained, and much
  unconscious like or dislike of a picture is accounted for by the clear
  reasoning.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 572. D. ‘05. 90w.

  * “Is a good, helpful and instructive book by an authority whose long
  and careful study of the arts has equipped him with a wealth of
  knowledge.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

 *       =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 30. D. ‘05. 200w.

  * “Mr. Sturgis’s book is much the more stimulating to one already
  possessing some knowledge of the subject; Mr. Caffin’s will perhaps be
  more useful to the beginner. Both will help in the spreading of some
  notion of what art is.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 509. D. 21. ‘05. 220w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 704. N. 25, ‘05. 80w.

  * “Mr. Sturgis has filled the requirements of the situation fully.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 666. N. 18, ‘05. 220w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 751. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Sturgis, Russell.= Appreciation of sculpture. **$1.50. Baker.

  To provide a popular work which at the same the student was the
  prevailing idea in Mr. Sturgis’s “How to judge architecture.” In the
  same time maintained high standards of criticism for manner, he now
  offers a work on sculpture, in which he treats the subject in the
  light of both its architectural and monumental value, dwelling upon
  the history, the characteristics of the principal schools, and the
  criticism of standard works; all of which study presents principles of
  analysis and criticism to be employed in understanding other
  sculpture. The book is valuable for the student, the traveler and the
  general reader.

  Reviewed by Wm. Walton.

     + + =Architectural Record.= 17: 189. Mr. ‘05. 2610w. (Abstract of
         book.)

  “With the exception of the omission of some interesting technical
  explanations, which Mr. Sturgis better than most could have given us,
  the book is a very good and helpful one, and much more instructive as
  to the difference between good and bad works than the same author’s
  previous volume on ‘How to judge architecture,’ to which this is a
  companion.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 95. Ja. 12, ‘05. 560w.

  “The book is one that will unfailingly bring to its readers both
  profit and pleasure.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 16. Mr. ‘05. 270w.


=Sturgis, Russell.= Interdependence of the arts; Scammon lectures, The
art institute of Chicago, 1904. *$1.75. McClurg.

  Six lectures and 100 illustrations make up this book. Modern judged by
  ancient art is treated in lectures 1 and 2, first under Representation
  and sentiment, and second under Decorative effects. The other subjects
  are—The industrial arts in which form predominates, The industrial
  arts in which color predominates, Sculpture as used in architecture,
  and Painting as used in architecture.

  “The writer’s views on these subjects are sound, if pedantic and not
  altogether new; they might have been placed in a form rather more
  readily understood, for one may turn many pages before he gains any
  idea of what the author is ‘getting at.’”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 110w.

 *   + + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 30. D. ‘05. 140w.

  “Reads rather like the slightly revised report of extempore talks than
  like a formal treatise.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 150. Ag. 17, ‘05. 1160w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 838. Jl. 29, ‘05. 100w.


* =Sturgis, Russell.= Study of the artist’s way of working in various
handicrafts and arts of design. 2v. **$15. Dodd.

  In this “treatise on the ways in which the artist’s conceptions are
  formed and take visible shape,” Mr. Sturgis “gives a brief description
  of the technique of all the arts practised by man or savage down to
  the nineteenth century ... and even includes in a chapter on the
  ‘Ignored fine arts’ some discussion of fireworks and illumination,
  costume, the dance and stage-setting.” (Int. Studio.) There are one
  hundred and nineteen illustrations.

  * “Though the work is copious, each department is despatched
  succinctly without overburdening detail and not without occasional
  expression of personal judgments and speculation.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 33. D. ‘05. 150w.

  * “A comprehensive work.” C. de K.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 742. N. 4, ‘05. 350w.


Sturmsee: man and man; by the author of Calmire. † $1.50. Macmillan.

  The author’s economic theory is that the workingman gets as large a
  share of the wealth he helps to produce as he actually earns. His
  story deals with many characters in many classes of society but
  chiefly with a young German doctor who loves a princess, comes to
  America, begins at the bottom and becomes reform governor of a western
  commonwealth; and with the romance of an idle leader of cotillions,
  and the intense daughter of a plain, blunt manufacturer of tinware.

  “In the hands of a great writer it might have been a great book,
  because the purpose in it is that of painting the manners of men. But
  then the author launches into deep waters where he is not at home.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 822. Ag. 12, ‘05. 320w.

  * “There is too much social philosophy in the book to interest the
  general reader of fiction. Yet, on the whole, ‘Sturmsee’ abounds in
  lessons of healthy conservatism and conveys much social information.”

     + — =Cath. World.= 82: 417. D. ‘05. 170w.

  “It is not entirely without interest as a story, but it is essentially
  a book of discussions to which a conversational and picturesque form
  of exposition gives point and animation.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 41. Jl. 16, ‘05. 980w.

  “It is informed with learning and reflection, and its plan is
  studiously developed. Yet it would be a mistake to call it a novel.”

     + — =Ind.= 59:451. Ag. 24, ‘05. 170w.

  “The people in the book ... have (for Utopians) an appeal remarkably
  human. And not merely human, but romantic. The author never gets down
  from his hobby. He is always intent to teach you wisdom and demolish
  economic fallacies.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 370. Je. 10, ‘05. 4070w.

  “Has handled his material well or ill according as his readers expect
  sociology or fiction, for there is something of both and not enough of
  either.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 60. Jl. 8, ‘05. 140w.


=Sudermann, Hermann.= St. John’s fire; tr. by Grace E. Polk. $1. H. W.
Wilson co.

  One of three translations of strong new foreign plays appearing in
  America in the last three years, the other two being Edith Wharton’s
  translation of Sudermann’s “Joy of Living,” and Coleman’s translation
  of Maeterlinck’s “Monna Vauna.” The dramatist uses an old German
  peasant custom of lighting bonfires and dancing round them on St.
  John’s eve as an allegorical background for his play. The custom dates
  back to heathen times, and the author in working out his plot makes
  the fires symbolize the outburst in the human soul, after Christian
  centuries, of the wild yearnings and primeval passions of the
  unregenerate man.

         =Outlook.= 80: 247. My. 27, ‘05. 20w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 127. Jl. ‘05. 40w.

  “Miss Polk’s translation is at once faithful to the spirit and letter
  of the original, and to the idiom of our own tongue. It is neither
  slavish nor careless.” Mary Gray Peck.

   + + + =St. Paul Dispatch.= 8. Ap. 29, ‘05. 810w.


=Suess, Eduard.= Face of the earth (Das antlitz der erde); tr. by Hertha
B. C. Sollas, 5v. v. I. *$8.35. (*25s.) Oxford.

  Volume I. of a five volume edition. “Vol. I., which contains four maps
  and fifty other illustrations, is divided into two parts. Part I.
  deals with ‘The movements in the outer crust of the earth’—floods,
  cyclones, seismic areas, dislocations, volcanoes, earthquakes, etc.;
  Part II. is devoted to ‘The mountain ranges of the earth’—the
  ‘Northern foreland of the Alpine system,’ ‘The trend-lines of the
  Alpine system,’ ‘The basin of the Adriatic,’ ‘The Mediterranean,’ the
  Great desert plateau, the Indian mountains, the mountains of South
  America, the Antilles, North America, and the mountains separating the
  continents.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “The English version faithfully follows the original, and supplies
  adequate renderings of the German technical terms.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 82. Jl. 15. 400w.

  “No work on geology since the day of Lyell’s ‘Principles’ has exerted
  so profound an influence upon geological thought as has Suess’s
  ‘Antlitz der erde,’ and no one has mastered the broad geographical
  facts that are associated with the science of the earth, the
  world-concept, in a manner at all comparable with his presentation.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 134. F. 16. ‘05. 430w.

  “Excellent translation of the first volume of the work.” J. W. G.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 193. Je. 29, ‘05. 240w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 121. F. 25, ‘05. 90w.


Super flumina: angling observation of a coarse fisherman, **$1.25. Lane.

  “A volume on the art of Isaak Walton.... Among the topics discussed by
  the ‘fisherman’ are ‘Dashing dace,’ ‘Perches and plants,’ ‘A charge of
  pike,’ and ‘The club of melancholy.’”—N. Y. Times.

  “The book might be summarized briefly as a modern and more erudite
  revival of Izaak Walton, so gentle and so humane is its attitude
  towards the finny tribe, so liberal and comprehensive its learning.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 422. Je. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  “Is a book to irritate the curious rather than to please the
  well-informed or to instruct the ignorant. There is a great deal in
  this book that the learned angler (the appeal is to no other) may
  enjoy in spite of its overload of learning.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 269. Ap. 6, ‘05. 860w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 172. Mr. 18, ‘05. 130w.


=Sutro, Emil.= Duality of thought and language: an outline of original
research. $1.50. Physio-psychic society.

  “The author professes to have made the discovery that there are two
  voices in man, the one of the larynx and the other of the œsophagus;
  and that these two possess unique relation to the ‘soul’ element of
  speech. Tortuous and commonplace repetitions and variations of this
  theme make up the volume.”—Dial

  “Has no claim to consideration except as an example of the confusion
  which may be the fruit of interest and enthusiasm unfortified by
  appreciation of what scientific investigation is or what it has
  accomplished.”

       — =Dial.= 38: 22. Ja. 1, ‘05. 100w.

         =Nature.= 71: 317. F. 2. ‘05. 95w.


=Sutro, Theodore.= Thirteen chapters of American history, represented by
the Edward Moran series of thirteen historical marine paintings.
**$1.50. Baker.

  Full-page reproductions of Edward Moran’s thirteen famous paintings
  with a descriptive essay upon each picture, an introduction and a
  brief biography. Portraits of the artist and his wife, as painted by
  their nephew, Thomas Sidney Moran, are also given.

  “Thirteen excellent half-tone reproductions of scenes connected with
  the history of the United States by the late well-known marine
  painter, Edward Moran, coupled with an interesting descriptive essay
  and prefaced by a careful biography of the artist.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 70w.

  “One of the most important books of the late Edward Moran was the
  series of thirteen marine paintings descriptive of important events in
  American history. They constitute a collection of impressive beauty,
  aside from their function of illustrating some of the most striking
  phases of American history.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 94. Ag. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  “The text ... is rather injudicious in tone.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 118. Ag. 10, ‘05. 220w.

  “This series of historical pictures is thus of graphic interest to
  young and old. It has been a happy idea to reproduce them in a book
  and to accompany them with descriptive essays.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 110w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 515. Ag. 5, ‘05. 330w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 511. O. ‘05. 60w.


* =Suyematsu, K., baron.= Risen sun. **$3. Dutton.

  In this collection of addresses, articles, and letters Baron Suyematsu
  gives to the western world “an impression of Japan both new and
  authoritative ... he ... has cleverly entitled the book, not ‘The land
  of the rising sun,’ but ‘The risen sun.’”(Outlook.)

  * “‘The risen sun’ would gain in historical accuracy if a perhaps
  natural bias—or, should we say predisposition?—were eliminated.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1183. N. 11, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Altogether Baron Suyematsu’s book is a valuable contribution to
  history.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 792. D. 9. 450w.

  * “The book is a superb piece of polemic, with a refreshingly cool and
  judicial temper like Franklin’s and with eloquence that reminds us of
  Beecher.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1479. D. 21, ‘05. 200w.

 *       =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 40w.

  * “The book is somewhat disjointed, patently showing that it is not a
  unified production. But its text is alike interesting and valuable.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 891. D. 9, ‘05. 180w.

  * “The Japanese sun is certainly risen, but when in future,
  distinguished authorities, such as Baron Suyematsu, relate the story
  of her progress they will better attain historical truth, if they give
  some credit where credit is so justly due.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 596. N. 4, ‘05. 550w.


=Swan, Helena.= Girls’ Christian names their history, meaning, and
association. $1.50. Dutton.

  The author “has undertaken to give the origin of the baptismal names
  of women common in English-speaking countries, and to each name to add
  references as to its associations and history.” Her “method of
  treating a name is to give what she declares are its derivatives, then
  its derivation in the form of a statement; then to tell of the
  distinguished women who have borne it, and to give the titles of books
  wherein the name appears.”—N. Y. Times.

         =Nation.= 81: 340. O. 26, ‘05. 310w.

  “A book of considerable interest, though of no importance. She has
  evidently brought more enthusiasm than judgment to her task.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 587. S. 9, ‘05. 610w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 884. Ag. 5, ‘05. 15w.


=Swedenborg, Emanuel.= Four doctrines with the nine questions; tr. by
John Faulkner Potts. Am. Swedenborg.

  The first volume in a new translation of Swedenborg’s theological
  writings. “The four doctrines,” first published at Amsterdam in 1763,
  include the following: I., The doctrine of the New Jerusalem
  concerning the Lord, followed by the nine questions, relating to the
  Lord, the Trinity, and the Holy Spirit; II., The doctrine of the New
  Jerusalem concerning the Holy Scripture; III., The doctrine of life
  for the New Jerusalem from the ten commandments; IV., The doctrine of
  the New Jerusalem concerning faith. The volume is supplied with full
  tables of contents, and an index to Biblical texts.

         =Ind.= 58: 845. Ap. 13, ‘05. 120w. (Review of vol. I.)

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 89. F. 11, ‘05. 170w.

  “A new translation by a competent scholar. In paper, typography, and
  binding the volume is all that a library edition should be.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 002. F. 25, ‘05. 100w. (Review of vol. 1.)

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 512. Ap. ‘05. 70w. (Review of vol. 1.)


=Sweet, Frank Herbert.= Hobby camp. $1. Pilgrim press.

  Kitty, a stenographer with an artistic temperament, is given a
  vacation by her employers and spends it in Hobby camp with Mrs.
  Rounds, whose hobby is doughnuts; Zeke, her son, the hobby boy; two
  college fellows who collect bugs and things; and Mr. Bailey who is
  writing a woodsy book. They all have adventures, especially Zeke, but
  the most wonderful things happen to Kitty, for she finds recognition
  for her drawings and wins the love of a great bear and—someone who is
  not a bear.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 220w.


=Swift, John N., and Birge, William S.= No surrender. $1.50. Broadway
pub.

  The story of a “strange voyage in a strange country,” which narrates
  the stirring adventures of the purloined “Dona Inez,” under her
  piratical crew. These unlawfully minded seamen undergo almost every
  experience in the gamut of marine catastrophe while one of its former
  officers is speeding overland to head off disagreeable contingencies
  with the Chilean naval department.


=Swift, Jonathan.= Journal to Stella, together with other writings
relating to Stella and Vanessa; with the notes of Sir Walter Scott.
*$1.25. Scribner.

  Swift’s well-known classic is the latest issue in the “Caxton series.”
  “The compact size, limp lambskin binding, light paper, large clear
  type, and photogravure frontispiece give an excellent example of
  modern progress in bookmaking.” (Critic.)

       + =Critic.= 46: 284. Mr. ‘05. 60w.


=Swinburne, Algernon Charles.= Love’s crosscurrents. $1.50. Harper.

  A revived and rechristened work which some years ago appeared in the
  “Tatler.” “The situation which Mr. Swinburne presents to us is that of
  four cousins, brought up more or less together, two of whom are women
  and are married. With each is in love the brother of the other, and
  behind them all is the old Lady Midhurst, aunt of one pair and
  grandmother of the other, who plays the part of a shrewd and
  ill-natured Greek chorus.... The book is a study in calf-love, yet
  with something noble behind it; and the background is one of dreary
  country life, worldliness, and cynical old age.” (Spec.)

  “A book so studded with quips and witticisms will always repay
  reading. There is no cleverness shown in bringing the dramatic
  episodes to a clear and sharp point, and the discrimination between
  one character and another is so slight as to be almost imperceptible.”

   — + — =Acad.= 68: 726. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1490w.

  “The prose is among the best that the poet has achieved. It would be
  hard to exaggerate the concision, the polish, and the perfect
  prose-rhythm of these letters. The letters as a whole are pungent
  satire on British morality, its sensual sentiment, and its capacity
  for whitewashing the moral sepulchre.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 165. Ag. 5. 2420w.

  “It is pure comedy, both high-spirited and restrained, both caustic
  and tender.” Olivia Howard Dunbar.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 452. N. ‘05. 230w.

  “We are not going to hail Mr. Swinburne as a great novelist on the
  strength of this performance, but may fairly call it a clever, almost
  brilliant piece of work in a difficult form.” Wm. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 112. S. 1, ‘05. 580w.

  “They will add nothing to Mr. Swinburne’s fame.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 582. S. 7, ‘05. 100w.

  “For our part, better than the story, better even than the incisive
  prologue, we love the dedication with its rioting periods and its
  kingly courtesies.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 225. Jl. 14, ‘05. 950w.

  “As a love-story, the book is entirely ineffective. The style is not
  peculiarly Swinburnean, but it is naturally more vigorous, more
  telling than is common with writers of modern fiction.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 147. Ag. 17, ‘05. 510w.

  “An agreeable kind of old-fashioned love story is involved in ‘Love’s
  cross-currents.’”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 465. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1050w.

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 838. Jl. 29, ‘05. 120w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 60w.

  “While there is hardly a sentence which we cannot read with pleasure
  for its literary savour, its prim ironic elegance, there is not a page
  which we turn with the faintest thrill of curiosity.”

       — =Sat. R.= 100: 184. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1090w.

  “As a novel, indeed, the book has many faults. There are too many
  characters, and their relationships are too complex, for the brief
  introduction to give the reader any clear grasp of the situation.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 157. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1130w.


=Swinburne, Algernon Charles.= Selected poems, ed. by William Morton
Payne. Heath.

  A volume in section VI. of the “Belles-lettres” series. The eighty
  poems selected are printed complete and classified under the headings:
  odes, poems of paganism and pantheism, selections from Songs before
  sunrise, lyrics, sonnets, personal poems, and metrical experiments,
  imitations, and parodies. An introduction, a chronological list of
  writings, an index of first lines and full notes are included.

  “In form and method Mr. Payne’s introduction must be pronounced a
  model. The selection of poems could hardly be improved upon.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 96. Ag. 3, ‘05. 200w.

  “It is as good an anthology of Swinburne as we can expect during the
  poet’s lifetime. The notes are exactly what the reader desires and
  needs.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 525. Ag. 12, ‘05. 3980w.


* =Swing, David.= Truths leaf by leaf, with a characterization by Newell
Dwight Hillis, and introd. by Frank Wakeley Gunsaulus; also a poem by
Dr. Gunsaulus; ed. by Sophie Burt Kimball. $1.50. S. B. Kimball,
Chicago.

  “When proceedings against David Swing for heresy resulted in his
  quitting the Presbyterian church, thirty years ago, and forming the
  Central Congregational church in Chicago, it was a clear gain both for
  preacher and people. His sermons, attractive in their breadth of view
  and depth of feeling, and distinguished by their literary quality,
  drew congregations with an unusually large proportion of men, and were
  regularly printed in his weekly paper, the ‘Alliance.’ The present
  volume draws its contents from ‘his most mature and last unpublished
  writings.’ Characterizations of the beloved preacher by his
  like-minded successors, Drs. Hillis and Gunsaulus, supply the personal
  element required for an adequate memorial.”—Outlook.

  * “Beauty, spirituality, the value of high ideals in life and thought,
  fill these inspiring pages.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 314. N. 16, ‘05. 130w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 80: 887. Ag. 5, ‘05. 100w.


* =Swingle, Calvin F.= Modern locomotive engineering, with questions and
answers. $3. Drake, F: J.

  A plain practical treatise on the construction, care and management of
  modern locomotives. “The book is presented in an attractive form in
  flexible covers. The print is large; the illustrations, of which there
  are many, are clear, simple, and yet comprehensive.” (Engin. N.)

  * “Mr. Swingle has combined between the covers of one book not only
  much that has been treated of in the many smaller books, but he has
  also presented considerable other valuable matter in an original and
  interesting manner.” Arthur M. Waitt.

     + + =Engin. N.= 54: 645. D. 14, ‘05. 1430w.


=Sylvestre, Joshua, ed.= See =Christmas= carols, ancient and modern.


=Symonds, E. M. (George Paston, pseud.).= * B. R. Haydon and his
friends. **$3. Dutton.

  “Haydon was a man much talked of in his day but little mentioned in
  our own. As a critic, despite his own sharply cut individuality, his
  egotism and vanity stood in the way of a proper perspective of men and
  things. As a painter he had undeniable power, and he used it with
  knowledge; he was a painter who thought.... The present well-printed
  volume ... helps more clearly to realize Haydon’s excellencies and
  limitations.”—Outlook.

  * “Miss Symonds is rather too cold a biographer.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1099. O. 21, ‘05. 1550w.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 347. O. 20, ‘05. 1590w.

 *       =Nation.= 81: 509. D. 21, ‘05. 120w.

  * “As a book about art, even about the art of a singularly arid time
  in an arid country George Paston’s Haydon has little value or interest
  to-day. For its ‘collections and recollections,’ George Paston’s
  volume is pleasant reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 850. D. 2, ‘05. 1470w.

 *   + + =Outlook.= 81: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 160w.

  * “With such a subject, then, Mr. Paston could not write a dull book,
  and his ‘Life’ of Haydon does not contain a page that is not alive
  with a grim comedy or poignant with a yet grimmer tragedy.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 715. N. 4, ‘05. 1290w.




                                   T


=Taber, Harry Persons.= Rubaiyat of the commuter: being quatrains
concerning the affairs of every day. 25c. John Bridges, Briarcliff
Manor, N. Y.

  “The woes of the commuter, with the 30-second breakfast, the 8:16
  train which occasionally goes at 8:32, the futile struggle with two
  bushels of Peter Henderson’s seeds and the neighbors’ chickens are too
  feelingly set forth to have been only imagined. The author explains
  his use of the particular form of verse that he has selected on the
  ground of its being an obsessive measure.”—Baltimore Sun.

       + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 240w.


=Taggart, Marion Ames.= Nut brown Joan. †$1.50. Holt.

  A story for girls. The heroine, a brown, lanky child of fourteen,
  dissatisfied with her world, develops into a most attractive young
  woman, the joy of her father, the relief of her invalid mother, and
  the confidante and help of her numerous brothers and sisters. There is
  much wholesome fun, there is trouble, incident, and, above all, real
  human nature.

  “‘Nut-brown Joan’ is to be commended both for its literary merit ...
  and also for its thoroughly wholesome atmosphere. The volume holds a
  very practical lesson for young girls, and the lesson is excellently
  presented.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 411. Je. ‘05. 170w.

  “Points a moral at the same time that it tells a very entertaining
  story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 463. Jl. 15, ‘05. 130w.

  “A wholesome and pretty story.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 94. My. 6, ‘05. 40w.


=Tannenforst, Ursula, pseud.= See =Tilghman, Emily.=


=Tanner, Amy Eliza.= Child: his thinking, feeling and doing. $1.25.
Rand.

  “A résumé of the child-study literature.... Such topics as these are
  treated: the problems of physical growth and abnormality; the feelings
  and ideas of sex; the mental processes; religious and moral ideas;
  emotions; interests; movements; imitation; language; rhythm; music;
  drawing and play. At the beginning of each chapter are definite
  suggestions for collecting data along the line of the chapter. The
  bibliographies at the close of each chapter are most ample.”—Psychol.
  Bull.

  “For normal or college students who should have some groundwork in
  general psychology before studying child psychology, Miss Tanner’s
  book is inferior to that of Dr. Kirkpatrick; for general readers it
  will prove most serviceable.” Henry Davidson Sheldon.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 272. Ap. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “It is profuse in facts, though sparing in generalizations and
  conclusions, and can hardly fail to promote a more judicious study of
  the individual children with whom its readers may have to do.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 142. Ja. 14, ‘05. 80w.

  “Without doubt, it is the most complete, systematic and painstaking
  work of its kind extant. It is certainly unique in its sphere,
  presenting in convenient and readable form a vast amount of
  information regarding child life. It should meet with great favor at
  the hands of those for whom it was written.” Irving King.

   + + + =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 32. Ja. 15, ‘05. 600w.

  “There are special chapters that deserve special mention, some because
  of their merit, such as those treating of ‘Memory,’ ‘Imagination,’
  ‘Conception,’ and ‘Reasoning,’ and the chapter on the various forms of
  ‘Movements’; and others, especially those chapters that deal with the
  so-called physical nature of the child, that might, with advantage, be
  replaced in the text or even rewritten.” D. P. MacMillan.

     + — =School R.= 13: 578. S. ‘05. 460w.

     + + =School R.= 13: 648. O. ‘05. 70w.


=Tapp, Sidney C.= Story of Anglo-Saxon institutions; or, The development
of constitutional government. **$1.50. Putnam.

  “While Mr. Tapp’s book runs along special lines, it is intended for
  the general reader as well as for the specialist. The writer’s purpose
  has been to demonstrate from historical facts that the Anglo-Saxon
  race is the only race that has ever had a true conception of
  republican institutions, or solved correctly the problem of
  self-government. It is only fair to say that Mr. Tapp has accomplished
  his purpose in this book.”—Critic.

         =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 136. Ja. ‘05. 130w.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 384. Ap. ‘05. 70w.


* =Tappan, Eva March=, tr. Golden goose, and other fairy tales; tr. from
the Swedish. †$1. Houghton.

  Six fairy tales from Scandinavian sources told in simple language.
  “‘The golden goose,’ which gives the name to the book, is little Rose,
  the beautiful daughter of a king, whose stepmother, after much cruel
  treatment, has turned her into a goose.... There is the story of a
  giant, the roof of whose house was made of sausages; of the good
  little girl, and the bad in ‘The red and the black box.’ ... There is
  the simple-minded giant who killed himself, not to be outdone by a
  small boy, and other stories, all with excellent pictures in black and
  white, full pages and text, with interesting head pieces.” (N. Y.
  Times.)

  * “Told in an interesting manner.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1386. D. 14, ‘05. 40w.

  * “Is a good addition to the useful work she has done for children in
  other fields.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 489. D. 14, ‘05. 140w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 870. D. 9, ‘05. 210w.


=Tappan, Eva March.= Short history of England’s literature. *85c.
Houghton.

  “An elementary text-book for high schools, by the head of the English
  department in the English high school at Worcester, covering English
  literature from its beginnings in the earliest periods down to the
  novel of the nineteenth century, with numerous illustrations in the
  form of portraits, facsimiles of manuscripts, pictures of objects of
  interest, and with an excellent map in colors.”—Outlook.

         =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 60w.


=Tarbell, Ida Minerva.= History of the Standard oil company. **$5.
McClure.

  An account of the origin, growth, and influence of this first and
  greatest of American trusts. The methods by which the corporation
  gained control of the petroleum output are disclosed, railroad and
  other interests bearing upon the trust’s development are carefully
  investigated. The oil regions themselves and the chief characters in
  this industrial drama are put vividly before us.

  “‘The history of the Standard oil company’ is one of the most
  important contributions that has been made to the vital historical and
  conscience literature of our opening century. The absorbing interest
  of the work, the masterly marshaling of facts and the careful handling
  of details are only surpassed by the judicial spirit that is
  preëminent throughout the work.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 436. O. ‘05. 6230w.

  “It is calm and dispassionate, and calculated to do quite as much if
  not more good than if it were pitched in a high and noisy key. Is to
  the present time the most remarkable book of its kind ever written in
  this country.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 287. Mr. ‘05. 120w.

  “The book is a genuine contribution to that knowledge of the real
  inwardness of things industrial which Americans as a people so lack.”
  Frank L. McVey.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 313. My. 1, ‘05. 2190w.

  “Miss Tarbell’s success, for she has achieved a very distinct success,
  is in having made her story in its logical simplicity and directness
  as fascinatingly interesting as it is disagreeable. She has preserved
  her position as historian and has not abandoned it even temporarily
  for that of the prosecuting advocate.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 840. Ap. 13, ‘05. 600w.

  “This book seems to have been written for the purpose of intensifying
  the popular hatred. The writer has either a vague conception of the
  nature of proof, or she is willing to blacken the character of Mr.
  John D. Rockefeller by insinuation and detraction.”

   — — + =Nation.= 80: 15. Ja. 5, ‘05. 1970w.

  “The value ... lies largely in the fact that the author has no thesis
  to sustain and is willing to let her readers draw their own
  conclusions. It is a model of condensed, graphic statement. The
  dramatic aspects of the story are not lost in the telling, while the
  arrangement of the materials is convenient for the purposes of the
  student and the legislator as well as for general reading.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 394. F. 11, ‘05. 2190w.

  “The author never gets excited, however exciting her story may become;
  she sets forth the facts, and to a considerable extent leaves
  inference and conclusions to her readers. It is, in effect, a liberal
  education in the fundamentals of the trust problem; it is the
  Blackstone of the literature that is growing up around this problem,
  in its entirety the most important of all in commercialized America.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 25. Ja. 5, ‘05. 1140w.

  “Is an exhaustive and yet succinct presentation of the rise and
  development of a great American industry. Her book is in every sense a
  history—not an economic dissertation.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 248. F. ‘05. 210w.


=Tarkington, (Newton) Booth.= Beautiful lady. †$1.25. McClure.

  This is the story of a young Italian of high family and low purse, who
  was forced into shaving his head and using the bald poll as an
  advertisement for a Parisian ballet. It is also the story of “the
  beautiful lady” who saw him sitting ignominiously in a café and was
  sorry for him. Later the young Italian, by reason of his shaved head,
  secures a position as tutor to a young millionaire, and is able to
  save the girl who was sorry from an unfortunate marriage and at the
  same time to make his dashing benefactor happy.

  “A mere trifle, but a delightful trifle, which, lacking the dramatic
  action of ‘Monsieur Beaucaire,’ equals it in the originality of its
  conception, in its pathos, and surpasses it in its whimsical humour.”
  Firmin Dredd.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 615. Ag. ‘05. 300w.

  “Mr. Tarkington has made us see what might have been done; but he has
  failed to do it.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 100w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 580. S. 7, ‘05. 100w.

     + + =Lit. D.= 21: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 440w.

  “The sentiment in it is very pretty, and Mr. Booth Tarkington never
  writes other than gracefully.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 358. Je. 3, ‘05. 410w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 390. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  * “He tells it, too, with the fine artistic flavor distinguishing his
  ‘Monsieur Beaucaire.’”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 760, D. ‘05. 70w.


* =Tarkington, (Newton) Booth.= Conquest of Canaan. †$1.50. Harper.

  Canaan is a small Indiana town, a hot bed of personal grudge and
  prejudice and this story tells of how Joe Louden, returning to Canaan
  to practice law after years of hard study in New York, finds that his
  reckless youth and his departure from his home town under a cloud have
  neither been forgotten nor forgiven. But championed by Ariel Taylor,
  the one true friend of his boyhood, who has just returned from the
  study of art in Paris, he succeeds after a hard and upright struggle
  in conquering circumstances and the prejudices of his townspeople. The
  love story of these two strongly individual characters is unusual and
  well handled.

  * “It contains some admirable chapters of life in a small, gossipy,
  spiteful town, and the characters, all of them, including the dog, are
  alive and interesting, but it is clumsily put together and weakly
  conventional in the concluding portion.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1153. N. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  * “For pure humor in an author, we commend the conversations of the
  old window owls in the National house.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1480. D. 21, ‘05. 900w.

  * “There is no doubt that the book is the best that Mr. Tarkington has
  yet written.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 827. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “‘The conquest of Canaan’ has not lost the note of refinement, but
  it has gained in solidity and distinctness of outline, it is an
  original story in point of plot; it is witty, spirited, romantic, and
  beautifully human in its spirit.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 708. N. 25, ‘05. 220w.


=Tarkington, (Newton) Booth.= In the arena. $1.50. McClure.

  Six short stories of western politics, which deal with reformers and
  machine politicians, lobbyists, law-makers, office seekers, bosses and
  voters. The characters are real and vigorous types created by an
  author who has had practical experience in the game of politics.

  “They have no special excellence of any kind, but they are very
  interesting and clever, and are written with a sound knowledge of the
  subject with which they deal.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 472. Ap. 29, ‘05. 460w.

  “The material is ugly in every case except one; but the telling in
  each case is good. Mr. Tarkington writes with force and feeling, and
  has respect for the literary virtue of restraint.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 589. My. 13. 210w.

  “There is some very good workmanship in ‘In the arena.’ One lays the
  book aside with the conviction that the author’s estimate of the
  situation is a pretty true one, and that he made singularly good use
  of his experience in Indiana politics.” Perry Enders.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 188. Ap. ‘05. 720w.

  “Doubtless, unpretentious as they are, they are among Mr. Tarkington’s
  best work.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 479. My. ‘05. 80w.

  “There is the ring of truth and reality in these stories. The
  characters are human and interesting.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 101. F. 18, ‘05. 790w.

  “Decidedly clever and human tales.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 450. F. 18, ‘05. 40w.

  “There is no doubt that it will afford much entertainment to those who
  do not resent a touch of pessimism in comedy.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 709. My. 27, ‘05. 230w.


=Taylor, Alfred Edward.= Elements of metaphysics. *$2.60. Macmillan.

  “In the volume under review, Mr. Taylor has given us an exposition of
  the principles of metaphysics from a point of view which is in the
  main that of Mr. Bradley.... Mr. Taylor divides his work into four
  books, the first of which is devoted to a preliminary discussion of
  the problem, method and subdivision of metaphysics. This is followed
  by a discussion in Book II. of the general structure of reality....
  The remaining books deal with the more special questions involved in
  the interpretation of nature and the interpretation of life.”—Int. J.
  Ethics.

  “... A full recognition of the many merits of Mr. Taylor’s work, and
  of the value and suggestiveness of his treatment of various
  metaphysical topics. His book is certainly one which all who are
  interested in the present position of metaphysics ought to read.”
  James Gibson.

     + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 251. Ja. ‘05. 1950w. (Statement of
         fundamental position of book.)

  “Compact and well written book. It is the only English book in recent
  times treating metaphysical problems with some completeness that is
  arranged in such a concise and orderly fashion as to permit its being
  used as a text-book on this subject. It gives evidence not only of the
  author’s industry and earnestness, but of unusual vigor and acuteness
  of thought, as well as of a pleasing clearness and definiteness in
  mode of expression.” J. E. Creighton.

   + + + =Philos. R.= 14: 57. Ja. ‘05. 3090w.

  “The strength of Professor Taylor’s book lies not in his constructive
  ontology but in his clear and masterly analysis of general
  metaphysical concepts ... and in the fact that the whole treatment is
  both modern and systematic.” G. T. W. Patrick.

   + + + =Psychol. Bull.= 2: 11. Ja. 15, ‘05. 1840w.


=Taylor, Charles M., jr.= Only a grain of sand; il. by Clare Victor
Dwiggins. **$1. Winston.

  Into the simple story of the life of one of the sands of the sea is
  deftly woven both satire and philosophy. It is an autobiography of a
  little grain that was carried from sea-depths to sea-shore and from
  there was taken to a dingy building where it passed through a fiery
  furnace and became a part of a graceful iridescent vase.


* =Taylor, Henry Charles.= Introduction to the study of agricultural
economics. *$1.25. Macmillan.

  “This is a discussion of economics as applied exclusively to
  agriculture.... It belongs to the series entitled ‘The citizen’s
  library of economics, politics, and sociology.’”—Outlook.

  * “It discusses principles in a judicial spirit, and presents in
  concise form, facts that are of significance.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 629. N. 11, ‘05. 40w.

  * “One of the excellent and useful volumes lately contributed to the
  ‘Citizen’s library.’”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 637. N. ‘05. 130w.


=Taylor, Marie Hansen (Mrs. Bayard Taylor).= On two continents. **$2.75.
Doubleday.

  Mrs. Taylor was the daughter of the noted German mathematician and
  astronomer Hansen, and in this book of memoirs she speaks of her
  girlhood in Gotha, her meeting with her husband, their marriage, their
  travels, and of her husband’s literary and diplomatic career. Her book
  is chatty and entertaining in style, and her anecdotes of the
  Brownings, the Stoddards, Horace Greeley, the Cary sisters, Thackeray,
  and other famous men and women of letters with whom she and her
  husband came in contact are of particular interest.

  * “Though she is rather apt to devote four or five pages to an
  incident for which half a page would be ample, she always rambles
  pleasantly.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 684. N. 18. 330w.

  “Mrs. Taylor writes pleasantly and she has many interesting things to
  say.” Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 344. O. ‘05. 1860w.

  “Altogether, a more agreeable book of its kind could not well be
  imagined.” Percy F. Bicknell.

   + + — =Dial.= 39: 200. O. 1, ‘05. 2150w.

  “In this book and in no other is to be found the most attractive and
  sympathetic record of one of the most interesting of all Americans.”
  L. L.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 514. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1680w.

  * “By temperament and association Mrs. Taylor is peculiarly qualified
  to depict the inner and outer forces that co-operated in the
  development of her gifted husband’s genius, and his reaction upon his
  environment.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 713. N. 25, ‘05. 350w.

  * “It is of value, not, as one would at first suppose, primarily for
  its biographical material, but because of the exquisite simplicity of
  its diction and the charm of the author’s personality.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 828. D. 23, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 150w.


=Taylor, Mary Imlay.= My lady Clancarty. †$1.50. Little.

  A child-wife’s loyalty to her Jacobite husband during his years of
  absence, and in spite of strong family opposition, furnishes the theme
  for a spirited romance. Then when he does return incognito he devotes
  himself to the re-wooing of Lady Betty, fights duels for her, is at
  the mercy of her whims and fancies, and a father’s Whig prejudices,
  but finally thru her courage in daring to beg clemency of the king is
  released from the tower.

  “A trifle, but a rather pleasant one.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 163. Mr. 18, ‘05. 300w.

  “A pretty romance.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 70w.

  “The characterization is consistent and the relations of character are
  drawn ‘on scale,’ so that the effect of human display is harmonious.
  Considered critically, the story is not reasonable or natural any more
  than other romances of the exaggerated class to which it belongs.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 787. My. ‘05. 460w.


=Taylor, Rev. S. M.= Ministers of the Word and sacraments; lectures on
pastoral theology, delivered in King’s college, London, Lent term, 1904.
*$1.50. Longmans.

  “Archdeacon Taylor prints here some lectures delivered to a class of
  students preparing for ordination.... His tone is that of a High
  churchman, but he condemns some of the most objectionable of extremist
  practices.”—Spec.

  “They are full of good sense throughout.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 410. Mr. 18, ‘05. 330w.


=Taylor, Samuel Coleridge-.= Twenty-four negro melodies, transcribed for
the piano. $2.50. Ditson.

  “There are twenty-four transcriptions of folk-melodies, both African
  and American, used as themes for compositions in the style of
  fantasias.”—R. of Rs.

  “This is an extremely interesting work.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 422. Je. 16, ‘05. 120w.

     + + =Ind.= 59: 393. Ag. 17, ‘05. 220w.

  “He is well grounded in technique, and he expresses himself with
  freedom. Although in inventiveness his range seems so far rather
  limited, he is spontaneous and genuine in what he writes.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 248. My. 27, ‘05. 280w.

  “Mr. Coleridge-Taylor has preserved the distinctive traits of these
  melodies, but has given them form and structure.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 768. Je. ‘05. 80w.


* =Tchaikovsky, Modeste.= Life of Peter Il’ich Tchaikovsky; ed. and
abridged from the Russian and German eds. by Rosa Newmarch. *$5. Lane.

  This “volume contains many portraits and excellent views of scenes
  connected with Tchaikovsky’s life, with a striking portrait, and
  facsimiles of letters written by the musician. The editor has tried to
  preserve, in spite of the cutting of three volumes to one, the
  autobiographical character of the work, and has included the series of
  intimate letters which relates the romantic episode of Tchaikovsky’s
  life—his friendship of thirteen years for a woman with whom he never
  exchanged a personal greeting. An account of the composer’s visit to
  America ... is also included in the form of a diary, kept for the
  benefit of his relations.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “Yet in its kind it possesses great value, not only as a
  contribution to the psychology of art, but as a most illuminating
  commentary on Tchaikovsky’s music. We may add that the translation is
  easy and fluent, and that the volume is well arranged and well
  illustrated.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 397. N. 17, ‘05. 590w.

  * “The book is one of great interest to musical people.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  * “But the present life, containing, as it does, an enormous amount of
  interesting material, still fails to hold one’s attention for the
  simple reason that it is too long and is padded out with stuff that
  ought not to be in any biography. On the whole, the book was more
  stimulating in its original condition; but in its present form it will
  serve a future biographer.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 5. N. 18, ‘05. 130w.

  * “Must content ourselves with congratulating Mrs. Newmarch on the
  zeal and intelligence with which she has accomplished her task. Of the
  delicacy, the candour, and the affection shown by M. Modeste
  Tchaikovsky it is impossible to speak too highly.” C. L. G.

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 864. N. 25, ‘05. 1400w.


=Tennyson, Hallam, 2d baron.= Alfred, Lord Tennyson: a memoir by his
son. **$4. Macmillan.

  A new edition which includes in a single volume “all the material in
  the original issue. There are extracts from a number of unpublished
  letters and poems; some FitzGerald letters, others to Aubrey de Vere,
  Rawnsley, and other persons.... The book contains for the most part
  the account of Lord Tennyson’s life, gleaned either from his letters
  and poems or from the writings of his friends.... The impressions and
  general recollections of T. Watts-Dunton, F. W. H. Myers, F. T.
  Palgrave, the Duke of Argyll, and others, have been put in an
  appendix, which also contains some notes ... and a very full index
  besides these, the volume also has a chronology of the books and poems
  by the poet-laureate.” (N. Y. Times.)

         =Dial.= 39: 246. O. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  “The entire get-up is free from any suggestion of cheapening.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 278. O. 5, ‘05. 70w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 625. S. 23, ‘05. 250w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 428. O. 21, ‘05. 20w.


=Thackeray, William Makepeace.= Works. Cornhill ed.; ed. with biography,
bibliography, and special introd. by W. P. Trent, and J. Bell Henneman.
$37.50. Crowell.

  The “Cornhill” Thackeray has achieved a well merited distinction above
  all recent issues of the great novelist’s works in that it includes
  material heretofore unclaimed for the author, but conclusively
  identified as his during recent months of research. There are two
  thousand pages thruout the various volumes which have never appeared
  in any set before. The editorial work in charge of Prof. Trent of
  Columbia college, and Dr. Henneman of the University of the South,
  includes special introductions to every volume, notes and critical
  comments of exceptionally high character, a complete bibliography
  based on the chronology of Thackeray’s life, and a full topical index
  to the entire set. Aside from the better known novels, are the essays,
  burlesques, Christmas stories, criticisms of letters and art, quips in
  Punch, drawings, poems and a new collection of typical personal
  letters. Among the three hundred and more illustrations are a series
  of photogravure portraits of the author, and many of Thackeray’s own
  quaint and whimsical drawings. The books with their substantial
  bindings, heavy paper and good type, deserve a prominent place among
  the great book achievements of the day.

  “The edition is highly satisfactory, both for completeness and
  inexpensiveness.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 22. Ja. 1, ‘05. 70w.

  “By far the most satisfactory edition of Thackeray we have seen in
  recent years.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 121. Ja. ‘05. 160w.


=Thackeray, William Makepeace.= Henry Esmond. $1.25. Crowell.

  Uniform with the “Thin paper classics” series this volume contains the
  history of Henry Esmond, Esq., with an introduction by J. B. Henneman,
  and a portrait of Thackeray as a frontispiece.


=Thackeray, William Makepeace.= History of Henry Esmond: ed. by Hamilton
Byron Moore. 60c. Ginn.

  An annotated edition of Henry Esmond planned to meet the needs of
  advanced high schools and elementary college classes. The text is that
  of the new “Dent edition.”


=Thackeray, William Makepeace.= Letters to an American family; with an
introd. by Lucy D. Baxter and original drawings by Thackeray, **$1.50.
Century.

  Thackeray the man, with his habits, opinions, prejudices, genial
  friendship, love for home and his own, lending an active personal
  charm, fascinates the reader no less than Thackeray the better known
  objective master of the novel. These letters, all of them heretofore
  unpublished, were written to various members of a New York family in
  whose home the novelist was a frequent visitor during his two lecture
  tours in America. They include mainly, letters written from his
  lecture points, full of bright, frank comments upon American people
  and their ways. There are facsimiles of portions of letters, and of
  Thackeray’s own characteristic drawings.

  “Not a line inconsistent with his published writings is to be found.
  ‘The style’ is emphatically ‘of the man’ himself. The so-called
  cynicism that sought to mask a tender heart and too expressive face,
  the great fondness for children and old friends, the gentleness and
  the whimsical humor,—all these traits and qualities are here revealed
  in letters as charmingly colloquial as were ever written. The
  introduction by Miss Lucy W. Baxter strikes just the right note as to
  revelation and reserve, and enables us to realize the charm of the
  ‘brown house’ in Second avenue which Thackeray found so potent.”

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 284. Mr. ‘05. 240w.

  “The charm of these letters, written in grateful affection to his
  friends ...”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 187. Mr. 16, ‘05. 890w.

  “The half-humorous, half-tender familiarity and freedom of these
  communications ...”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 502. Mr. ‘05. 390w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 755. D. ‘04. 120w.

  “A number of easy conversational and very characteristic missives.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 257. F. 18. ‘05. 970w.


=Thackeray, William Makepeace.= Vanity fair. $1.25. Crowell.

  “Vanity fair” has been compressed into one small volume of the “Thin
  paper classics” series, and appears in this handy form without
  sacrifice of clear type. It contains a frontispiece from a drawing by
  Frank T. Merrill.


=Thanet, Octave, pseud. (Alice French).= Man of the hour. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  Johnny-Ivan Winslow, the man of the hour, is the son of an Iowa plow
  manufacturer and a Russian princess whose altruistic dreams took shape
  in championing the Nihilists’ cause. Believing in the redemption of
  the toiler, this mother’s son throws himself and his money at the feet
  of struggling strikers, working in the midst of rioters with the best
  against the worst. The intensity of his subjective relation to his
  cause records only failure in the end, not because of his inability to
  stand at the helm, but because of the operation of a wrong principle.
  There is a steadfast Peggy in the tale whose magnificent faith in the
  triumph of Johnny over his Ivan theories is fully rewarded.

  “This novel considered as fiction merits special notice. It is one of
  the best romances of the year. As a sociological study, it is
  impossible to speak in such favorable terms, for though there is much
  that is fine and true in its spirit, and though we believe that the
  author desires to be fair and just, she has signally failed at many
  points.”

     + — =Arena.= 34: 445. O. ‘05. 800w.

  “While the story is not lacking in strength, nor in that finer
  character-drawing that the writer’s previous work has associated with
  her name, one feels more than once that the plot has been moulded to
  fit a preconceived thesis.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 133. O. ‘05. 390w.

  * “Miss French has given us a book of very genial and human sort, and
  brought to it a gift of shrewd and sometimes humorous observation,
  such as comes only after long practice in the art of fiction.” Wm. M.
  Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 307. N. 16, ‘05. 660w.

  “The latter half of the book is stuffed with not very enlightening
  discussions of labor problems, and it ends in an absurdly conventional
  way.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 581. S. 7, ‘05. 140w.

  * “Octave Thanet is at her best in depicting children. She loves them
  in any rank of life, and gets them on paper in all their whimsicality,
  their straight-to-the-mark directness, their consistent
  inconsistency.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 450w.

  “It is interesting and well developed. Its pages are full of evidences
  of the author’s keen and kindly study of men and things and of her
  aptitude for the lively narration of the results of her observations.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 590. S. 9, ‘05. 860w.

  “Fine in spirit and thoroughly readable also as a story of character
  and incident. It is not a novel of purpose in the sense that argument
  is substituted for entertainment.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 135. S. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  * “Miss French seems to us to have done as good work in this truly
  American novel as in her many admirable short stories.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 110. N. 25, ‘05. 150w.


That reminds me: a collection of tales worth telling. **75c. Jacobs.

  A collection of jests, anecdotes, and repartee culled from the “Tales
  worth telling” column of the Philadelphia public ledger.


=Thatcher, Oliver Joseph, and McNeal, Edgar H.= Source book for
mediaeval history: selected documents: illustrating the history of
Europe in the middle ages. *$1.85. Scribner.

  “The documents include ... the charter of the Ministerials of the
  Archbishop of Cologne, 1154, ... the charter granted by the bishop of
  Hamburg to the colonists, ‘the Hollanders,’ in 1106; the privilege of
  Frederick I, ... for the Jews of the Worms, in 1157; the charter given
  to the Jews of Speyer by the bishop of that city, 1084; a few market
  charters issued at the time of the freedom of the cities of Germany,
  several documents illustrating the rebellion of these cities against
  the lords who governed them, and their acquisition of municipal
  rights, &c. There are also the important charter of Magdeburg, and
  some documents concerning the origin of the Rhine league and the early
  history of the Hanseatic league. An explanatory note, and the names of
  authorities consulted, precede each document. Following is the charter
  given to the Jews by the bishop of Speyer.”—N. Y. Times.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 221. Ap. 8, ‘05. 430w. (Survey of contents.)


=Thaw, Alexander Blair.= Inaugural ode. *50c. Brentano’s.

  “[This] ode written for the inaugural of President Roosevelt ...
  breathes the same spirit of desire that the American republic should
  fulfill its destiny as that destiny has been conceived by the best and
  finest of its citizens.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 30w.

  “It is agreeable to find in a poem for such an occasion an abstract
  idea conveyed with dignity and free from silly optimism.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 264. Ap. 22, ‘05. 190w.


=Thayer, William Roscoe.= Short history of Venice. **$1.50. Macmillan.

  In this one volume the history of Venice is given from the origin of
  the city in 452 to its fall in 1797. It sets forth the growth of the
  republic, the greatness of the Venetians and compares Venice and her
  contemporaries.

  “The first chapters of this history leave much to be desired but the
  final portion of the book is, on the whole, just, admirable and
  inspiring.”

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 132. O. ‘05. 1930w.

  “It is readable and interesting.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1071. My. 11, ‘05. 290w.

  “Mr. Thayer’s outline of Venetian history is a vivid sketch of a
  considerable historical and literary merit. Mr. Thayer is, however, a
  little too one-sided in his undisguised hostility to the Church.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 192. Je. 16, ‘05. 420w.

  “We must relegate small cavils to the background, and speak with warm
  recognition of the skill, discernment, and idealism which mark this
  book.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 221. S. 14, ‘05. 2220w.

  “We are acquainted with no other writing in the English language,
  which is a better introduction to a prolonged, serious study of the
  subject.” Walter Littlefield.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 588. S. 9, ‘05. 640w.

  “It is open to criticism in almost every essential respect.”

       — =Outlook.= 80: 247. My. 27, ‘05. 250w.

  “A model ‘Short history of Venice’ has been written by Mr. William
  Roscoe Thayer.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 765. Je. ‘05. 110w.

  “This is a book of considerable value, telling the story of Venice
  succinctly and lucidly.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 126. Jl. 22, ‘05. 160w.


=Thiers, (Marie Joseph) Louis Adolphe.= Moscow expedition; ed. by
Hereford B. George. *$1.25. Oxford.

  This is a reprint of an extract of Thiers’s “Histoire du consulat et
  de l’empire,” which was published between 1845-1862. It follows
  Thiers’s text in the French but is supplemented by explanatory notes
  in English, and a personal and geographical index.

  “On the whole, however, this volume deserves a cordial welcome. It is
  the first time that a competent authority has produced a careful and
  critical commentary on this portion of Thiers’s work.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 82. Ja. 14, 370w.

     + + =Nation.= 80: 112. F. 9, ‘05. 140w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 100. Ja. 18, ‘05. 670w.


* =Thirlmere, Rowland.= Letters from Catalonia. 2v. *$6. Brentano’s.

  “In addition to attractive descriptions of Ribas, Alcoy, Jativa, and
  many other places visited by English travellers, the book contains a
  large amount of information on Spanish politics and most other aspects
  of Spanish life.”—Ath.

  * “The tone and temper of the book are excellent.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 560. My. 6. 630w.

  * “Though they make no special appeal to travellers, can be read with
  pleasure by any one who has a taste for light reading of a
  miscellaneous nature.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 167. My. 26, ‘05. 680w.

  * “But the whole book undoubtedly has character and reality, a record
  of such sensations, impressions and ideas as lead to essential truth.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 424. N. 23, ‘05. 310w.

  * “He is a good observer and a good narrator.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 110w.

  * “Mr. Thirlmere pays more attention to life than locality, but he
  never forgets his backgrounds. His thumb-nail portraits, his
  meditative and fanciful humor, his apt quotation, and his continual
  cheerfulness leave a very pleasant sensation in the mind.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 921. Je. 24. 210w.


=Thomas, David Yancey.= History of military government in newly acquired
territory of the United States. *$2. Macmillan.

  “Prof. Thomas discusses, not only the legal status of the new
  territory and the legal basis for military government, but also
  presents an account of the actual management of new acquisitions from
  the time of occupation until the organization of territorial or state
  governments. Dr. Thomas contents himself with a statement of the facts
  connected with our military occupation of Porto Rico and the
  Philippines, and attempts to give no verdict as to the character and
  accomplishments of the military governments.”—R. of Rs.

  “There is failure also to give the general constitutional and legal
  basis of military government. The manner in which the foot-notes are
  handled is open to serious criticism. The existence of a monograph of
  this kind is of doubtful utility, if references are not plentiful and
  exact. Frequently the details of military government are overlooked or
  cast aside. The best part of the author’s work is that relating to
  Florida, New Mexico, and California. These acquisitions have been
  remarkably well treated and in general the judgment passed upon events
  is very fair and to the point. Turning to California, we reach the
  most satisfactory portion of the book. Mr. Thomas has given a
  comprehensive outline of the government of territory acquired by the
  United States before the Civil war. His work in that field will
  undoubtedly stand the test of time, and it is questionable if other
  writers can add much to the results obtained.” A. H. Carpenter.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 678. Ap. ‘05. 1200w.

  “The fullest and most valuable part of the book is that dealing with
  the four great acquisitions of Louisiana, Florida, New Mexico, and
  California. The treatment of military rule in other annexed
  territories ... is much briefer and on the whole less satisfactory.
  There is probably nowhere in print a better summary of military
  government in the Philippines and Porto Rico than that given us by Dr.
  Thomas. The work throughout is based on the best of documentary
  materials, and these are referred to in the foot-notes with a fair
  degree of frequency. The index to the work is rather inadequate.”
  Frederic Austin Ogg.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 145. Mr. 1, ‘05. 800w.


=Thomas, Edith Matilda.= Cassia and other verse. $1.50. Badger, R: G.

  The initial poem has a tragic love theme from Zola’s “Rome.” There are
  poems dealing with the soul struggles met with in life to-day, and
  over two score sonnets.

  * “Her level is a high one, and she seldom falls below it. On the
  whole, it is higher than that of any other woman who has written
  poetry in America.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 130w.

  “Too reflective a singer for the higher sort of lyrical utterance, but
  there are touches of distinction upon nearly everything she writes.
  Plainness of speech and subtlety of thought mark her work, and make it
  very precious to lovers of the graver kind of verse.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 201. Mr. 16, ‘05. 450w.

         =Nation.= 80: 294. Ap. 13, ‘05. 60w.

  “Cassia is a most charming poem, but without the splendor, pomp, and
  grim reality of the ancient city in which the fable had its birth.
  Miss Thomas is most felicitous on her own ground, spending her
  abundant and chastened fancy upon the moods that arise from modern and
  personal associations.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 50. Ja. 28. ‘05. 320w.


=Thomas, Edward.= Wales: painted by Robert Fowler; described by E.
Thomas. *$6. Macmillan.

  A picturesque treatment of Wales with brush and pencil, by Mr. Fowler,
  with descriptions and quaint tales by Mr. Thomas.

  * “Between the illustrations and the letterpress there is absolutely
  no connexion.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 729. N. 25. 270w.

  “The illustrations are excellent; some of great beauty and admirably
  reproduced in color. Mr. Thomas is flippant and tiresome; in at least
  one place he is decidedly irreverent.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 480. Jl. 22, ‘05. 410w.

  “The color-pictures show a fine, strong sense of distance and
  perspective, and the artist is also to be praised for his restraint in
  his color-schemes. The literary part of the work is somewhat rambling
  and inchoate, and the note of jocosity is at times forced.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 696. Jl. 15, ‘05. 80w.

  “The illustrations have some merit. The author’s egoism and style are
  irritating.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: sup. 6. O. 14, ‘05. 120w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 355. S. 9, ‘05. 1450w.


=Thomas, Frederick Moy,= comp. and ed. See =Robinson, John R.= Fifty
years of Fleet street.


=Thomas, Theodore.= Theodore Thomas: a musical autobiography; ed. by
George P. Upton. 2v. *$6. McClurg.

  This work was well under way at the time of Mr. Thomas’ death January
  4, 1905. Volume I., entitled “Life work,” tells in the great
  orchestral leader’s own words of his life, his back-sets, his
  determined struggles “to make good music popular,” and his final
  success. Mr. Upton, his friend for thirty years, adds a chapter upon
  “Last days of Theodore Thomas,” and there is further reminiscence and
  appreciation. Volume II., “Concert programmes” has an introduction by
  Mr. Thomas and contains selected programmes covering fifty years,
  beginning with the Mason chamber concerts and ending with the concerts
  of the Chicago orchestra. Both volumes are illustrated with portraits
  and views.

  “To students of musical history in particular, as well as all music
  lovers and musicians, this record of the life and work of Theodore
  Thomas is of great and permanent value.” Lewis M. Isaacs.

   + + + =Bookm.= 21: 650. Ag. ‘05. 860w.

  “The interest of this book naturally centres in the hundred pages or
  so of the autobiography. These chapters constitute a very
  matter-of-fact statement, bare of all ornament, and devoid of the
  slightest literary pretense, yet highly important by virtue of their
  subject-matter.” William Morton Payne.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 227. Ap. 1, ‘05. 2990w.

  “A final record of ‘Works introduced into this country’ by Mr. Thomas
  is a disappointment and lacks the expected value because of its many
  inaccuracies and misstatements.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 329. Ag. 10, ‘05. 770w.

  * “Is a fascinating record of a noble life. It is accompanied by 1,200
  of the great conductor’s programs, a collection of the highest value
  for its indication of the development of musical taste and
  appreciation in America.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 1161. N. 16, ‘05. 40w.

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 359. My. 4, ‘05. 1320w.

  “His own writing is a highly characteristic expression of the man, and
  the book as a whole makes interesting and important contributions to
  American musical history, and to the knowledge of the part played in
  it by Theodore Thomas.” Richard Aldrich.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 273. Ap. 29, ‘05. 1940w.

   + + + =Reader.= 6: 476. S. ‘05. 550w.


=Thomas, W. H. Griffith.= Apostle Peter: outline studies in his life,
character and writings. **$1.25. Revell.

  This is a suggestive handbook, which will be of value to anyone who is
  preparing sermons or lectures on this subject.

  “It is well arranged and full.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1014. My. 4, ‘05. 50w.

  “His book is of a higher type than many manuals of Bible readings, and
  abounds in materials for expository addresses.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 447. F. 18, ‘05. 60w.


=Thompson, A. Hamilton=, ed. See =Elton, Isaac.= W. Shakespeare, his
family and friends.


=Thompson, Arthur Ripley.= Shipwrecked in Greenland. †$1.50. Little.

  A party of four boys and three men, one of whom is a sea captain and
  another black Caesar the cook, while camping near St. John’s,
  Newfoundland, find a steamer abandoned and adrift and set out to
  rescue her passengers and crew. They pass thru many thrilling
  adventures on the coast of Greenland and Labrador in which icebergs,
  sunken rocks, an arctic hurricane, shipwreck, fire and other perilous
  things have a part. They see life as it is lived in the Eskimos’
  villages, but in the end the faithful Caesar succeeds in bringing Phil
  Schuyler safely home to his mother.

  * “A capital book for boys and boys’ sisters.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 90w.

  “An exciting story of life in the arctic regions based upon fact.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 722. O. 28, ‘05. 100w.


=Thompson, Garrett W.= Threads. †$1.50. Winston.

  A tragic tale of an unhappy marriage in which a wife sees only neglect
  of her interests in her husband’s devotion to his career. Her morbid
  imagination fraught with jealousy and hatred works her ruin. There is
  retribution in the visitation of her weakness upon her child. It is a
  negative lesson of psychological import.


=Thompson, Vance.= Diplomatic mysteries. **$1.50. Lippincott.

  “Particular mysteries of which the veil is supposed to be rent away in
  this case include that of the madness of Ludwig of Bavaria.... Another
  story purports to relate what really happened when the powers took a
  hand in Crete and gave that island autonomy.... Yet other stories
  pretend to tell what really happened during that delightful comedy
  wherein the crown prince of Germany gave his grandmother Victoria’s
  ring to Miss Gladys Deacon; yet others are of how President Faure of
  France came to his end, and how the present great war between Japan
  and Russia ... was ‘made in England.’”—N. Y. Times.

  “Mr. Thompson’s style may never be free from affectation and
  unnecessary embellishment, but at least he has done far better work
  than this.”

       — =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 90w.

  “The book is rather fascinating reading, in spite of the circumstance
  that the real truth is probably as different from Mr. Thompson’s
  version as Mr. Thompson’s version is from official history.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 374. Je. 10, ‘05. 390w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 190w.

  “The chief thing that they lack, however, is verisimilitude.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 642. Jl. 8, ‘05. 30w.

  “The stories themselves are engaging and well told.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 158. Jl. 29, ‘05. 160w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 123. Jl. ‘05. 100w.


=Thonger, Charles.= Book of garden design. (Handbooks of practical
gardening, v. 25.) *$1. Lane.

  “The author describes somewhat at length the different schools of
  garden designs.... Advocates first a general spirit of simplicity,
  avoiding both complexity and eccentricity. Then proceeds with
  suggestions for selecting or adapting a site, and for laying out
  drives and paths.... The kitchen-garden and orchard come within this
  scheme.... The last four chapters are devoted to perennials, aquatic
  plants, trees, shrubs, and hardy climbers, and include some suggestive
  lists for practical gardeners.”—Dial.

  “Altogether, the little book is quite likely to be useful to those who
  take their gardening in earnest.” Edith Granger.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 110. S. 1, ‘05. 340w.

  “The happier few who have the delightful task before them of making a
  garden—delightful, but not without trouble—will meet here with
  everything that they want.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 230. Ag. 12, ‘05. 80w.


=Thorndike, Edward L.= Elements of psychology. *$1.50. A. G. Seiler, N.
Y.

  Prof. James says that this book “is a laboratory manual of the most
  energetic and continuous kind.” Further, “I defy any teacher or
  student to go through this book as it is written, and not to carry
  away an absolutely firsthand acquaintance with the workings of the
  human mind, and with the realities as distinguished from the
  pedantries and artificialities of psychology.” Intense concreteness is
  the watchword thruout the discussion, which falls into three parts;
  Descriptive psychology, The psychological basis of mental life:
  physiological psychology, and Dynamic psychology.

  “Brings as its distinctive contribution the emphasis upon the
  practical reaction which the student is induced to make to the
  principles set before him. The excellence and completeness of the
  chapters on the nervous system deserve special commendation.”

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 19. Jl. 1, ‘05. 230w.

  “This book differs from other brief psychologies in being
  pre-eminently teachable. The book is distinguished from its rivals by
  its comprehensiveness and balance.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 695. S. 21, ‘05. 180w.


=Thorndike, Edward Lee.= Introduction to the theory of mental and social
measurements. *$1.50. Science press.

  “Professor Thorndike has prepared this book primarily as an aid in
  doing statistical work of the sort required in laboratories of
  experimental psychology.... It begins simply, and by affording
  abundant material for the student to practice what the text preaches
  gradually develops in his capacity to master the more difficult later
  chapters. The writer makes a point of keeping within the comprehension
  of young students.... The topics to which most attention is given are
  the choice of units of measurement; the measurement of individuals, of
  groups, of differences, of changes, and of relationships; and the
  reliability of measurements and sources of error. Strong emphasis is
  laid upon tables of frequency.... The last chapter contains references
  for further study, and the appendix a multiplication table up to
  100x100, a table of square roots up to 1,000, and a collection of
  miscellaneous problems for additional practice.”—Am. J. Soc.

  “In its special field the book is worthy of a man who is a teacher as
  well as a psychologist.” Wesley C. Mitchell.

     + + =Am. J. Soc.= 10: 697. Mr. ‘05. 600w.

  “An extremely practical and well-planned volume.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 52. Ja. 16, ‘05. 130w.

  “The author has written in an attractive style ... and has made this
  one of the best products of his active pen.” Edward Franklin Buchner.

     + + =Educ. R.= 30: 210. S. ‘05. 650w.


=Thorpe, Francis Newton.= Divining rod: a story of the oil regions.
†$1.50. Little.

  A romance which deals with the early days when oil was discovered in
  Pennsylvania. It follows the fortunes of a farmer in whom the divining
  rod which points out his first well awakens a thirst for the wealth to
  be gained by developing his own land. His daughter is the center of
  the love motive, but the strength of the story lies in the oil, the
  crowding out of the small producers by the large, the uncovering of
  unscrupulous methods, the mad desire for more land, more wells at any
  price.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 939. D. 16, ‘05. 30w.


=Thorpe, Francis Newton.= Short constitutional history of the United
States. *$1.75. Little.

  A brief “history of the state and federal constitutions, their
  origins, principles, evolution, and the interpretation of them by the
  courts.... As an appendix, the constitution of the United States, with
  citation of cases, is printed. There is a special index to the
  constitution, giving article, section, and page, as well as a general
  index to the work at large.... After a rapid survey of the early
  colonial unions and congresses, and of the Articles of confederation
  and their defects, there is a short chapter on the making of the
  constitution, followed by an analysis of The Federalist to show what
  were and are the fundamental principles of the constitution.”—N. Y.
  Times.

  “The style is not attractive, though not often very bad; the
  arrangement is unsatisfactory, and the general method of presentation
  is not telling; the author’s conception of his subject, as in his
  early volumes on constitutional history, is limited. These faults
  might be passed over without too serious consideration if the book
  were accurate in details, and if, with all its apparent weight and
  sturdiness, it were done with care and circumspection.”

     — — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 923. Jl. ‘05. 360w.

  “The book is to be especially commended for its well assorted
  information upon recent constitutions in the various states.” Jesse
  Macy.

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 355. Mr. ‘05. 300w.

  “There is a lack of digestion and a want of perspective. This failure
  to give proper emphasis makes the book sure to fail as a text-book—a
  use for which the author designed it—except in the hands of a very
  experienced teacher.”

     — + =Ind.= 59: 392. Ag. 17, ‘05. 400w.

  * “Exhibits an immense amount of learning on that subject, ill
  arranged and almost devoid of historical sequence.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1156. N. 16, ‘05. 20w.

  “For so small a volume its scope is remarkable; and, notwithstanding
  the heaviness of his theme, and an occasional involved sentence which
  detains the reader, the author presents his matter in a manner to hold
  the interest of even the layman in politics.”

   + + — =Lit. D.= 21: 93. Jl. 15, ‘05. 600w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 172. Mr. 18, ‘05. 810w. (Outline of scope.)


=Thruston, Lucy Meacham.= Girl of Virginia. 75c. Little.

  A popular edition of this story of the lovable, light-spirited
  daughter of a professor of the University of Virginia, and a picture
  of college life from the towns-people’s point of view.


* =Thurso, John Wolf.= Modern turbine practice and water-power plants.
*$4. Van Nostrand.

  The author who has designed turbines both in America and in Europe and
  who has had charge of the hydraulic work in important constructions in
  Canada, says: “The object of this book is to give such information in
  regard to modern turbines and their installation as is necessary to
  the hydraulic engineer in designing a water-power plant, and no
  attempt has been made to treat of the design of turbines.”


=Thurston, E. Temple.= Apple of Eden. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “The celibacy of the Roman Catholic priest; the fact that vows do not
  make a priest free from temptation; the struggle in a high-minded
  priest’s nature between right and passion; the serious meaning of duty
  and renunciation—all these things are clearly set forth. The author
  has intimate knowledge of the priesthood and has no intention of
  disrespect to the cloth. Father Tom, the elder of the two priests
  described, is a capital character—humorous, shrewd, and
  practical”—Outlook.

       + =Acad.= 68: 105. F. 4, ‘05. 520w.

  “It is one of the strongest pieces of psychological fiction that has
  appeared in English in many a long month.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 268. My. ‘05. 340w.

  “In his zeal the author has introduced too many mechanical instances
  for the proving of his cherished point, permitted himself too many
  passages of didacticism and argument,—so that his novel, strictly
  speaking, is spoiled.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 150w.

  “It is a story of considerable power, but its frankness exceeds the
  bounds of what is artistically permissible.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 114. S. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  “It is an interesting book and a clever pen picture.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 261. Ap. 22, ‘05. 690w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.

  “A book of undoubted intellectual force, and one well written in point
  of style and manner.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1058. Ap. 29, ‘05. 120w.

  “He has treated his subject in a bold, firm, unhesitating fashion that
  lifts it above pruriency and the mire. The literary workmanship is of
  first quality.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 240. Ag. ‘05. 280w.


=Thurston, Katherine Cecil.= Gambler. †$1.50. Harper.

  “The ‘gambler’ is an Irish girl whose father lives fast, gambles
  frightfully, and dies from an accident in a horse-race. Married to a
  noble-hearted but tiresome old archaeologist, Clodagh is introduced to
  some fashionable people in Venice; takes her first plunge into bridge
  whist and roulette; is solemnly warned by a young man called by his
  enemies ‘Sir Galahad’ ... withdraws for a time from the giddy whirl;
  but after her husband’s death plunges into fashionable gambling,
  compromises herself, though with no evil intentions with a scheming
  old roué, and is saved from ruin and restored to her eminently
  respectable lover.”—Outlook.

  * “If in no other way, Mrs. Thurston shows plainly that she belongs to
  the lesser ranks of novelists by the fact that she has not the courage
  to work out the theme of her newest story to a consistent end.” Olivia
  Howard Dunbar.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 510. D. ‘05. 300w.

  * “The interest of this book is rather theatrical than real, and we
  could imagine it turned into a highly effective play.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 310. N. 16, ‘05. 200w.

  “The defects of Mrs. Thurston’s literary style and the crudity of her
  methods are more obvious here than in ‘The masquerader.’”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 876. O. 12, ‘05. 140w.

  “Is not inferior in interest to her most widely known novel, while it
  greatly surpasses its predecessor in the vitality of its characters,
  the cohesion of its plot, the fidelity of both to possibility and its
  literary art.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 650. O. 7, ‘05. 380w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 140w.

  “The moral lesson is obvious, perhaps too obvious. As a story the book
  will not compare well in force and originality with ‘The
  masqueraders.’”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 333. O. 7, ‘05. 200w.

  * “While it is not likely to run through as many editions as ‘The
  masquerader,’ it has a higher ambition than that absorbing modern
  fairy tale in that it tries to present a serious study of character as
  well as a series of more or less dramatic incidents.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 708. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 110w.


=Thurston, Katherine Cecil.= Masquerader. $1.50. Harper.

  The chance meeting in a London fog, of a wealthy member of parliament,
  who is an opium eater, and a young writer in reduced circumstances,
  reveals the fact to each that he has a double. This strange revelation
  is seized upon by the former as a means of providing himself with a
  political substitute when the craving for the drug is upon him. They
  change places temporarily with the result that the masquerader wins
  political distinction and the affections of his double’s alienated
  wife, who fancies that she has fallen in love with her husband. In the
  end the drug does its work and the masquerader is made to see that his
  duty lies in quietly continuing the deception.

  “The development of Loder’s character is so well shown and the
  interest of the story is so great that it is only when the book is
  finished that we realize the impossibility of the whole thing, an
  impossibility which militates very strongly against the artistic
  excellence of the novel.” Mary K. Ford.

     + — =Current Literature.= 38: 321. Ap. ‘05. 1340w.

  “The story is so ingeniously told and cleverly constructed that its
  very boldness is in a measure justified.” W. M. Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 18. Ja. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  “The author performs the feat of fitting an impossible plot into the
  realities of daily life, and doing it in a way that deceives the
  reader and holds his interest—while he reads. There is a sense of
  strain about the whole thing—the style, as well as the plot, is
  artificial.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 155. Ja. 19, ‘05. 320w.

  “The quality of the particular adventure is delicate and perilous and
  the book’s evasion of pitfalls is not less admirable than its more
  positive qualities. The critical sense of the reader is stilled by the
  hypnotic and engrossing nature of the narrative. One is delightfully
  deluded and beguiled.”

       + =Reader.= 5: 259. Ja. ‘05. 290w.

  “The ethical problem involved in the secret change of place is solved
  in a new and eminently sane manner. The gradual disintegration of
  Chilcote’s character is a strong piece of work, as is likewise the
  description of Loder’s inner growth.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 119. Ja. ‘05. 120w.


=Thwaites, Reuben Gold=, ed. Early western travels, 1748-1846: a series
of annotated reprints of some of the best and rarest contemporary
volumes of travel, descriptive of the aborigines and social and economic
conditions in the middle and far West, during the period of early
American settlement. 31v. ea. *$4. Clark, A. H.

  Thirty-one volumes containing accurate reprints of rare manuscripts.
  They have been carefully chosen from the mass of material descriptive
  of travels in the North American interior which this century of
  continental expansion (1748-1846) provided, and no manuscript has been
  included unless it possessed permanent historical value. The result is
  a series which the casual reader will find interesting, and the
  historian, teacher and scholar, will find invaluable, as it makes
  available sources of information without which the development of the
  West, its history and its people cannot be fully understood. The
  editor has provided numerous footnotes and an introduction to each
  volume which contains a biographical sketch of the author, an
  evaluation of the book reprinted and bibliographical data concerning
  it. The closing volume is devoted to a complete and exhaustive
  analytical index to the entire series.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 694. Ap. ‘05. 610w. (Statement of contents
         of vols. VII-XII.)

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 696. Ap. ‘05. 120w. (Review of vols. XI. and
         XII.)

  * “Like their predecessors are amply and intelligently edited.”

   + + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 955. Jl. ‘05. 110w. (Review of v. 13-15.)

         =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 227. O. ‘05. 60w. (Review of v. 16-18.)

         =Critic.= 46: 95. Ja. ‘05. 80w. (Review of vol. VI.)

  “The works included naturally vary in literary merit and
  attractiveness, but many of them will compare favorably with the
  better class of modern books of travel, while some, like John
  Bradbury’s ‘Travels in the interior of America, 1809-11,’ to which
  vol. V. is devoted, are as fascinating as the best fiction.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 286. Mr. ‘05. 240w. (Reviews vols. I.-V.)

  “Much of the material is as entertaining as it is quaint, and will be
  thoroughly enjoyed by the ordinary reader no less than the
  specialist.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 383. O. ‘05. 240w. (Review of v. 18.)

  “Thus far the whole series of ‘Early western travels’ is worthy of
  hearty commendation.”

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 611. Mr. 16, ‘05. 830w. (Review of vols. IV-VIII.)

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 691. S. 21, ‘05. 840w. (Review of v. 9-17.)

         =Nation.= 80: 152. F. 23, ‘05. 140w. (Review of v. 10.)

         =Nation.= 80: 209. Mr. 16, ‘05. 320w. (Review of vols. XI. and
         XII.)

     + + =Nation.= 81: 198. S. 7, ‘05. 130w. (Review of v. 18.)

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 34. Ja. 21, ‘05. 660w. (Review of v. 10.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 132. Mr. 4, ‘05. 590w. (Condensed narrative
         of Vol. XI.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 148. Mr. 11, ‘05. 500w. (Review of Vol.
         XII.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 240. Ap. 8, ‘05. 660w. (Review of vol.
         XIII.)

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 503. Jl. 29, ‘05. 470w. (Review of v. 14 and
         15.)

  “He [Mr. Thwaites] leaves out dates.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 532. Ag. 12, ‘05. 400w. (Review of v. 16 and
         17.)

  “The present editor has done little for it except provide an
  introduction and make clear a few points. He corrects a month date in
  a note, but seems unable to insert year dates at all.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 586. S. 9, ‘05. 810w. (Review of v. 18.)

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 1073. Ag. 26, ‘05. 450w. (Review of v. 11.)

  “His story is not often thrilling in its manner of telling, but it has
  some value as a record of early observation of Indian customs and of
  the primitive life of white pioneers.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 628. N. 11, ‘05. 170w. (Review of v. 13.)

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 870. Je. 3, ‘05. 310w. (Review of v. 10 and
         11.)


=Thwing, Eugene.= Man from Red Keg. †$1.50. Dodd.

  This tale of the Red Keg lumber region sets well into the foreground
  the villainy of a country editor whose vicious attacks and
  blackmailing schemes all but wreck the happiness of a town. The “man
  from the Red Keg” is one of the many whose reputations have been
  hammered and slashed by the odious editor of “Chips,” but who
  determinedly resolves to reform his enemy. He works out his
  metaphysical problem patiently disregarding the call of his fellow
  townsmen to deal with the offender summarily, bides his time, and wins
  his reward.

  * “It has all the charm and excitement of an absorbing novel, and the
  instructive value of a biography.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 260w.

  * “The story is not quite as good as its predecessors.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 746. N. 4, ‘05. 140w.

 *   + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 758. D. ‘05. 90w.


=Tiffany, Mrs. Nina (Moore), and Tiffany, Francis.= Harm Jan Huidekoper.
*$2.50. Clarke.

  An account of the life of this remarkable Dutch settler, who in 1796
  at the age of twenty, landed in New York to seek his fortune and
  became a pioneer of progress, a philanthropist, and one of the
  founders of American Unitarianism. There is a full index and
  genealogy.

  “A valuable piece of material for folk-history. Put together from
  family papers and by several hands, it must be acknowledged that the
  style of the narrative as a whole has suffered seriously from a
  literary point of view.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 189. Ag. ‘05. 270w.

  “Parts of it have a somewhat archaic air. The appendix on the Holland
  land company should have some historical value.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 153. F. 23, ‘05. 380w.

  “A volume nominally biographical but ... picturing a vanished state of
  American society.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 203. Ap. 1, ‘05. 260w.

  “The book is full of instructive and charming reminiscences of those
  early days.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 317. My. 13. ‘05. 580w.


=Tigert, John James.= Christianity of Christ and his apostles. 80c. Pub.
house of M. E. ch. So.

  A book provided as a shelter in the present storm of theological
  criticism.


=Tilghman, Emily (Ursula Tannenforst, pseud.).= Thistles of Mount Cedar:
a story of school-life for girls. †$1.25. Winston.

  Life at Mount Cedar seminary is vividly given in this story of its
  teachers and its students, their pranks, plays, merriment and
  misfortunes. Interest centres about the group of girls who call
  themselves “the thistles,” and especially about the wild little
  Hungarian, Verena.

 *     — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 860. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.

  “It is most refreshing to stumble over a book that can be safely
  handled by our children, or our sisters, without fear of antagonizing
  their morals or giving them a false idea of life in general.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 252. Ag. 19, ‘05. 120w.


=Tilley, Arthur Augustus.= Literature of the French renaissance. *$4.50.
Macmillan.

  “Mr. Tilley takes as his special field of inquiry the period lying
  between the date of Francis I.’s accession (1515) and the beginning of
  Malherbe’s movement (1606) to bring back to rule and order the French
  language and literature, disorganized, as he believed, by the rioters
  of the preceding century.... He shows a remarkable familiarity, not
  only with the important, but practically with all documents, literary
  or historical, accessible to the contemporary student.” (N. Y. Times).
  There are chapters on Rabelais, Ronsard, and Montaigne.

  “Mr. Tilley’s contribution to the history of the movement is one which
  merits a high place among its fellows. Bibliographies are becoming
  fairly common in works of reference, but few of them approach those in
  this book either in accuracy or wide range of subject. The index is
  hardly so full as might be desirable.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 647. My. 27. 2270w.

  “The critical attitude of our author is judicious and eminently safe.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 215. Mr. 16, ‘05. 1420w.

  “Thorough and scholarly work. Mr. Tilley’s style, which is singularly
  arid for one who treats literature, is at its worst in his treatment
  of Regnier. It is a pleasure, therefore, to turn from it to his
  conclusion, in which he ably sums up the results of his investigation.
  It is wholly admirable. In thoroughness and accuracy its supersedes
  all previous work in this department, and it is invaluable to students
  of this epoch in France. In evaluating influences, he very often makes
  much of little.” Christian Gauss.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 17. Ja. 14, ‘05. 3100w.


=Tindolph, Helen Woljeska.= Woman’s confessional. 75c. Life pub.

  Epigrammatic extracts from the diary of a woman who was born of a
  distinguished family in Vienna, came to America and “lived and loved
  and erred.”

  * “All of the epigrams are worth reading, even if one does not always
  agree. The strong personality is pervasive and attractive.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 70w.

  “The smartness of the woman’s sayings is indisputable.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 441. Jl. 1, ‘05. 920w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 255. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


=Tipple, Ezra Squier,= ed. See =Asbury, Francis.= Heart of Asbury’s
journal.


=Tobin, Agnes.= Flying lesson. **$2. Elder.

  “This is a second series of translations from Petrarch—containing ten
  sonnets, two canzoni, a ballata, and a double sestina.... If they do
  not succeed in achieving the impossible, that is, in a perfect
  reproduction of the Petrarchian spirit, they have, at any rate, much
  of the rare atmosphere which pervades ‘The house of life’ and
  Rossetti’s translations from the Italian.”—Ath.

  “These translations are of great poetical merit.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 108. Jl. 22. 190w.

  “They are all vitiated in the same fashion. Some good lines occur, and
  we would not deny Miss Tobin the poetic gift; but she should not
  wrestle with Petrarch except in secret.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 103. Ag. 3, ‘05. 730w.

  * “Nothing since Christina Rossetti has risen so high in the pure
  beauty of the sonnet form as these renderings of Petrarch’s
  impassioned lament.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 863. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.


=Todd, Mary Ives.= American Abelard and Heloise. $1.50. Grafton.

  A young clergyman of orthodox faith, adored by the women of his
  congregation and respected by the men, falls in love with the daughter
  of a member of his church, who puts his wife from him because she
  could not believe in the fall of man. This daughter is like her mother
  and in his love for her, the young clergyman resigns his charge and
  starts forth to build up a new religion founded upon the equality of
  the sexes. The book closes with the sacrifice of love until this creed
  shall have become a reality.

  “After carefully reading the 337 pages of arguments and rather dreary
  love story, one is inclined to ask of the author, ‘What’s the use?’”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 311. My. 13, ‘05. 260w.

  “Mushy contents.”

       — =Reader.= 6: 362. Ag. ‘05. 120w.


=Tolstoi, Lyof Nikolaievich.= Anna Karénina. $1.50. Crowell.

  This volume is one of the handsome but popular priced “Luxembourg”
  series, and contains Anna Karénina as translated by Nathan Haskell
  Dole.


=Tomlinson, Everett Titsworth.= Soldier of the wilderness. †$1.50.
Wilde.

  Mr. Tomlinson’s third story in his “Colonial series” is based on
  history centering about the French and Indian war,—the fall of Fort
  Frontenac and the disaster under Abercrombie at Ticonderoga. The
  adventures introduce Abercrombie, Howe, Putnam and Montcalm, a young
  hero Peter van de Bogert, besides hunters, rangers and men prominent
  in those times.


=Tomson, Arthur.= Jean-François Millet and the Barbizon school. $2.25.
Macmillan.

  A new and cheaper edition of a book which describes the life of Millet
  and his relation to the other painters at Barbizon. It also deals with
  “the life and work of Jules Dupre, Narcisse-Virgilia Diaz, and
  Theodore Rousseau, and in a chapter on ‘The influence of the romantic
  school’ are briefly considered Paul Huet, Charles Jacque, Jules
  Bréton, Monticelli, Bastien-LePage, Adolphe Hervier, Harpignies, and
  two or three others. The illustrations number fifty-three, and include
  examples of some of the best known pictures of the artists
  studied.”—N. Y. Times.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 735. O. 28, ‘05. 310w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 280. S. 30, ‘05. 190w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 704. N. 25, ‘05. 150w.


=Tooker, Lewis Frank.= Under rocking skies. †$1.50. Century.

  The captain of a sailing vessel takes his wife and daughter and a
  young minister on a voyage from the Long island coast to the West
  Indies. Thomas Medbury, a youth from their home village, who has
  always loved the girl, seizes the opportunity to ship as mate and in
  the course of the stormy voyage the captain’s daughter, in the light
  of great danger, comes to know her own heart.

  * “Poet, sailor man, and born storyteller are written large on every
  page of ‘Under rocking skies,’ and the result is a picture of the sea
  and life aboard an old-fashioned sailing vessel that charms by its
  simplicity and absorbs by its vividness and reality.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 803. N. 25, ‘05. 510w.

  “Told with not a little spontaneity and incident.”

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 336. O. 7, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The author develops a very pretty romance and refreshes us with
  much charming sea-lore.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 763. D. ‘05. 70w.


=Tooley, Sarah A.= Life of Florence Nightingale. *$1.75. Macmillan.

  A biography written to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the
  famous mission to Crimea. The story of that two years’ service which
  made Miss Nightingale’s name a household word throughout the British
  empire is fully given, and the dignity which her noble and efficient
  labors give to the hitherto stigmatized profession of nursing is well
  described. There is a full account of her life from her birth in
  Florence, 1820, of her childish ministrations to dolls and animals,
  her labors in field and hospital, her work for the soldier after her
  return from the front, her friendships, her literary career, and her
  life at the present day. There are twenty-two illustrations.

  Reviewed by Jeanette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 452. My. ‘05. 750w.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 95. Jl. ‘05. 220w.

       + =Nation.= 80: 460. Je. 8, ‘05. 600w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 86. F. 11, ‘05. 1750w. (Condensed narrative
         of book.)

  “The story is here told with enthusiasm and vivacity.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 450. F. 18, ‘05. 70w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 382. Mr. ‘05. 170w.

  “The story has been well told by Miss Tooley.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 121. Ja. 28, ‘05. 350w.


=Townsend, Edward Waterman.= Reuben Larkmead. †$1.25. Dillingham.

  An unsophisticated young millionaire whose fortune was founded upon
  western beet sugar, comes east to New York and ingenuously relates his
  experiences. Ridiculed in society, fleeced in his business
  transactions, the prey of an army of grafters, he ends by marrying the
  widowed mother of the girl he failed to win.

  “The supine insipidity of the hero destroys whatever interest might
  have been aroused in him at the beginning of the book. A thin plot of
  sentimentality runs through this recital of Reuben’s adventures.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 217. Ap. 8, ‘05. 490w.

  “A crude social satire.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 30w.


=Townsend, Fitzhugh.= Short course in alternating-current testing. *75c.
Van Nostrand.

  “Eight sets of experiments are outlined, in each case preceded by a
  concise discussion of the operating characteristics of the machine in
  question. They deal with: (1) Properties of circuits; (2) the
  alternating current generator; (3) the voltage wave of a generator or
  of a circuit; (4) the transformer (operation, losses and efficiency);
  (5) the induction motor (operation and efficiency); (6) the
  synchronous motor (operation and phase characteristic); (7) the rotary
  converter (operation when driven from either end); and (8) operation
  of alternators in parallel.”—Engin. N.

         =Engin. N.= 53: 182. F. 16, ‘05. 110w.


=Tozer, H. F.=, tr. See =Dante Alighieri.= Divina commedia.


=Tozier, Josephine.= Travelers’ handbook: a manual for Transatlantic
tourists. **$1. Funk.

  “A little book to be put in the handbag of all who are making their
  ‘first trip.’ Money values, how to buy tickets, send luggage, to tip
  the foreign hordes that have to be tipped, to avoid being overcharged
  by cabmen and hotel clerks ... all these things are intelligently
  explained, and many little hints given that will grease the wheels of
  a European trip most acceptably.”—Critic.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 96. Jl. ‘05. 100w.

  “Is one of the most intelligent of its kind. We have detected no error
  worth noticing in the writer’s advice to travellers.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 12. Jl. 6, ‘05. 320w.

  “Her book supplements the ordinary guide books admirably.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 495. Jl. 29, ‘05. 480w.

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 696. Jl. 15, ‘05. 80w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 80w.


=Tracy, Louis.= Great mogul. $1.50. Clode, E. J.

  The exciting incidents of Mr. Tracy’s new story attend the adventures
  of two young Englishmen whom fortune has turned loose in the Indian
  realm of Akbar the Great. Roger Sainton, the giant who is called the
  man-elephant, and Walter Mobray, quick of wit are a unique pair as
  they encounter first the favor of Akbar, then the hatred of his son,
  and finally as they enter the fight for the rescue of the beautiful
  princess Nur Mahal.

  “It will not bear close critical inspection of course—but it will
  reward reading.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 310. My. 13, ‘05. 620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.


Trade unionism and labor problems, ed. by John R. Commons. *$2.50. Ginn.

  This volume like Ripley’s “Trusts, pools, and corporations,” is
  “planned for use specifically as a text-book.... It denotes a
  deliberate attempt at the application to the teaching of economics of
  the case system, so long successful in our law books. With this end in
  view each chapter is intended to illustrate a single, definite,
  typical phase of the general subject. The primary motive is to further
  the interests of sound economic teaching with special reference to the
  study of concrete problems of great public and private interest.” The
  chapters are selected mainly from economic journals and cover a wide
  field successfully, while the introduction, index, and cross
  references render all the material easy of access to the casual reader
  as well as to the student.


=Train, Arthur.= McAllister and his double. †$1.50. Scribner.

  “McAllister’s ‘double’ is a scamp of a valet who gets his master, a
  blasé clubman, into all sorts of scrapes, and extricates him cleverly
  at just the right moment.” (Outlook.) Their experiences are here told
  in eleven independent stories. The volume contains a dozen
  illustrations.

  * “The McAllister stories are entertaining from start to finish, but
  the other stories in the book, with the possible exception of
  ‘Extradition’ show a decided falling off.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1232. N. 23, ‘05. 150w.

  “The stories are certainly lively and readable in a high degree, and
  the book is sure to meet with popular success.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 334. O. 7, ‘05. 70w.

  * “Is immensely entertaining in an irresponsible sort of way.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 711. N. 25, ‘05. 60w.


=Tremain, Henry Edwin.= Last hours of Sheridan’s cavalry. *$1.50.
Bonnell.

  “A reprint of war memoranda by a late brevet brigadier-general, major,
  aide-de-camp in the United States volunteers, originally published in
  sundry journals, and now reprinted in response to frequent requests,
  with an additional chapter compiled from official records and an
  appendix containing further interesting matter. The illustrations are
  a portrait of Sheridan, a map of the Appomattox campaign, and a
  picture of the holding up of Lee’s supply train.”—Critic.

         =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 719. Ap. ‘05. 70w.

         =Critic.= 46: 95. Ja. ‘05. 70w.

  “A sprightly and vivid account of the operations which brought that
  war to a close. An unusually valuable compilation of contemporary
  notes. Sheridan’s work in weaving the final toils around the fated
  Confederacy is here graphically narrated.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 20. Ja. 1, ‘05. 330w.

  “Valuable as a historical record, the volume has also the merit of a
  personal story charmingly and unaffectedly told that will make it of
  interest not only to the participants in the campaign, but to those
  thousands of others who like to read the stories of battles fought and
  victories won. So complete, so personal, and so interesting.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 340w.


=Trench, Rt. Rev. Richard Chenevix.= English, past and present. *75c.
Dutton.

  “This is a new edition of Archbishop Trench’s well-known book
  published many years ago. Emendations and corrections are supplied by
  Dr. A. Smythe Palmer, though surprisingly few of these have been found
  necessary.”—Outlook.

  “The editor has very seldom laid himself open to criticism, and has
  performed a task which cannot have been light with care, tact, and
  skill.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 622. My. 20. 430w.

  “Dr. Palmer ... has done his work carefully without insulting his
  author’s memory.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 627. S. 23, ‘05. 310w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 381. O. 14, ‘05. 90w.


=Trent, William P.= Brief history of American literature. *$1.40.
Appleton.

  A thorogoing text book containing a condensed account of the
  development of American literature, rather than a series of essays on
  leading American authors. The study is presented with marginal topics,
  and has at the end of each chapter a bibliography which has been based
  upon the equipments of the average school library, and which also
  contains helps for further study.

  “A manual both sound and stimulating.” Charles Sears Baldwin.

     + + =Educ. R.= 29: 317. Mr. ‘05. 920w.

  “It is marked by some errors of perspective and emphasis, by a certain
  indiscriminateness and at the same time a curious timidity of
  judgment, and also by a peculiar dryness; but it shows also a rather
  unusual first-hand knowledge of the facts and an equally unusual
  orderliness and lucidity in disposing of them.”

     — + =Ind.= 59: 261. Ag. 3, ‘05. 70w.

  “The author has restricted himself to the limitations of immature
  pupils, and has tactfully written on the level of their
  comprehension.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 688. Jl. 15, ‘05. 170w.


=Trent, William Peterfield.= Greatness in literature, and other papers.
**$1.20. Crowell.

  Eight papers which are designed especially for “those interested in
  the problems that confront the critic and the teacher of literature,”
  but which will not fail to claim a larger audience by reason of their
  timeliness, and their sane, wholesome, and thoroly delightful
  treatment. The first paper takes up the question of, Greatness in
  literature; the second gives, A word for the smaller authors and for
  popular judgment; then follow, The aims and methods of literary study;
  Criticism and faith; Literature and science; Teaching literature; Some
  remarks on modern book-burning; and The love of poetry.

  * “Though Professor Trent is a very clear and fluent writer, there is
  a certain lack of savor, of closeness of grain, in his style.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 451. N. 30, ‘05. 650w.


=Trent, William Peterfield.= Southern writers. **$1.10. Macmillan.

  Altho the Intention Has Been That of Furnishing Supplementary Reading
  for Students, Professor Trent Has Prepared an Instructive Book for
  General Use. the Literature of Representative Writers Of the South Has
  Been Divided Into Three Periods: 1607-1789, the Literature of the
  Colonies and the Revolution, Including Records Taken From diaries of
  colonial gentlemen; 1790-1865, the literature of the Old South,
  including speeches by distinguished southern statesmen; and 1866-1905,
  the literature of the New South, reflecting the spirit of the literary
  renaissance.

  “Is altogether an admirable piece of editorial workmanship.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 121. S. 1, ‘05. 860w.

  Reviewed by Herbert W. Horwill.

     + + =Forum.= 37: 249. O. ‘05. 400w.

  “On the whole a praiseworthy effort, and in the main a successful
  effort, to redeem the South from the charge of actual literary
  sterility.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 332. Ag. 10, ‘05. 420w.

  “The book is open to the criticism that it tends to foster the
  provincial illusion that the larger the number of names the greater
  the repute of the locality. For reference it is valuable, and appears
  to be well done.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 142. Ag. 17, ‘05. 240w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 364. Je. 3, ‘05. 370w.

  “May be confidently recommended to all students of American
  literature, North or South.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 376. Je. 10, ‘05. 440w.

  “This volume has a distinct educational quality for the average
  Northern reader. He will find it in many things of permanent value and
  much that will delight and inspirit him.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 695. Jl. 15, ‘05. 110w.

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 256. Ag. ‘05. 120w.


=Trent, W. P., and Henneman, J. B.=, jt. eds. See =Thackeray, W: M.=
Works.


=Trevathen, Charles E.= American thoroughbred. **$2. Macmillan.

  “This is the latest volume in the ‘American sportsman’s library.’ ...
  The author has supplied the book with pictures of some of the best
  known racers and other ‘thoroughbred’ horses. He opens it with a
  chapter entitled ‘Whence the American thoroughbred?’”—N. Y. Times.

 *   + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 682. N. 18. 670w.

         =Ind.= 58: 1253. Je. 1, ‘05. 260w.

  “An important contribution to our knowledge of the ancestry of the
  American race horse.”

     + + =Nature.= 72: 395. Ag. 24, ‘05. 330w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 201. Ap. 1, ‘05. 240w.

  “Interesting and useful, though ... marred by typographical errors in
  the names of both horses and owners that ought not to mar such
  volumes.” Charles Tracy Bronson.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 292. My. 6, ‘05. 1320w.


=Trevelyan, George Macaulay.= England under the Stuarts. *$3. Putnam.

  This fifth volume of a series of six, covering the history of England
  from earliest times down to 1875, is the first to be issued. It is
  written by the grand-nephew of Lord Macaulay, whose influence is
  noticeable thruout the work. The first two chapters give an account of
  England at the time of the accession of James I. “He develops at the
  outset the thesis on which his entire monograph rests—that the
  significance of the Stuart epoch lies in the fact that whereas the
  continental people of Europe attained nationality only through
  military despotism, the English people under the Stuarts solved the
  same problem unconsciously through a free constitution, manifesting
  and vindicating itself in the face of monarchial despotism.... His
  personal portraits are marked by fairness and breadth of view, this
  being notably the case with the pictures of the first James, the
  second Charles, Cecil, Laud, Strafford, and Pym. The first Charles and
  Cromwell are limned less distinctly, being thrust, as it were, into
  the background of the tremendous upheavals of their day.” (Outlook).
  “The general purpose of the book is to bring the social and religious
  aspects into connection with the political.” (Bookm.)

  “He has given us not so much a history, in the ordinary sense of the
  word, as a sustained, and luminous commentary upon history, high-toned
  and impartial; and the general excellence of its purely literary
  qualities is, so to speak, picked out by not infrequent passages of
  real and picturesque eloquence. It is a fine example of selection and
  condensation.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 135. F. 4. 2780w.

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 330. Mr. 18. 2580w.

  “Mr. Trevelyan’s volume is a piece of special pleading throughout.”
  Edward Puller.

       — =Bookm.= 21: 525. Jl. ‘05. 800w.

  “By blending fact and analysis, creates a picture impressive in its
  outline and suggestive in its language and ideas.” E. D. Adams.

   + + + =Dial.= 39: 38. Jl. 16, ‘05. 1860w.

  “His style is decidedly rhetorical, quick with sincerity and
  atmosphere and of a noteworthy picturesqueness. His scholarship is
  undoubted, wide and careful reading being coupled with a
  discriminative use of authorities.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 454. Ag. 24, ‘05. 610w.

  * “Is one of the best pieces of historical writing that has appeared
  in recent years.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1157. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “This book brings sound scholarship, sensitiveness of temperament, and
  breadth of outlook to bear upon an historical theme of perennial
  importance.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 366. N. 2, ‘05. 1480w.

  “The book ... is evidently an attempt to combine what may be called
  the Green and the Traill methods. The early part of his volume might
  be termed an abstract of Gardiner, while the latter is merely a
  summary of Macaulay with improvements. This strict restriction to the
  political history in the latter part of the book is especially
  unfortunate. Altogether, Mr. Trevelyan’s treatment of Cromwell is
  scarcely illuminating, either on the military or the religious side.
  Allowing for his plan, is carried out with a skill and ability worthy
  of his family tradition, but the plan, I must still contend, is a
  faulty one.” Joseph Jacobs.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 102. F. 18, ‘05. 1840w.

  “Succeeds in interpreting the period ... in terms at once attractive
  and convincing. His style is that of the picturesque school, his
  treatment that of the philosophic, a combination calculated to produce
  excellent results. This must be accounted a work of high merit,
  embodying the results of the latest research and developed along sound
  lines.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 399. F. 11, ‘05. 330w.


=Trevelyan, Sir George Otto.= American revolution. 3v. ea. *$2.
Longmans.

  A new edition in three volumes of a work which originally appeared in
  two parts. It is issued now with a new preface, a portrait of the
  author, and some revision and rearrangement. “The special features of
  this history are the fullness with which it brings out English
  sentiment before and during the Revolutionary period, and the
  clearness with which it presents the Revolutionary struggle as a part
  of the great fight for Liberalism in England.” (Outlook.)

  “It is certain that, as far as the revision goes, the author has left
  uncorrected several mistakes of which he had been duly apprised, in
  all three volumes.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 230. Mr. 23, ‘05. 350w.

  “[The revisions] have been performed in a truly careful and judicious
  manner. “As our recent notice called attention to some uncorrected
  errors, it is only fair to say that many others in part I. have been
  expelled.””

     + + =Nation.= 80: 396. My. 18, ‘05. 260w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 855. Ap. 1, ‘05. 110w.


=Trevelyan, Lady=, ed. See =Macaulay, Lord.= Works.


=Trevelyan, R. C.= Birth of Parsifal. *$1.20. Longmans.

  “This may be described as a lyrical-dramatic fragment ... the theme of
  which is drawn from those Graal romances which furnished Wagner’s
  great music-drama.... The writer’s task is to make us feel the dread
  and impressiveness of a curse denounced by ... the Graal and its
  vague ... priestly knighthood; and to move us by the sorrows and
  interior struggles of the dim figures affected by that curse.”—Acad.

  “Mr. Trevelyan has poetic feeling and a measure of accomplishment. But
  his resources are not equal to the ambitious demands of poetic passion
  and imagination which he makes upon them.”

     — + =Acad.= 68: 171. F. 25, ‘05. 440w.

  “Of more than ordinary merit. It is to Mr. Trevelyan’s credit that
  there are no purple patches.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 620. My. 20. 850w.

  “Mr. Trevelyan has used, to his own loss, the dramatic form for a poem
  that is never dramatic. The poem as a whole will disappoint those who
  know Mr. Trevelyan’s earlier work.”

       — =Lond. Times.= 4: 145. My. 5, ‘05. 410w.

  * “If it does not rise to any great heights, at least is free from the
  faults of much of the blank verse put forth at the present time.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 798. N. 25. ‘05. 120w.


=Treves, Sir Frederick.= Other side of the lantern: an account of a
commonplace tour around the world. $5. Cassell.

  The other side of the lantern, as seen by the king’s physician, is not
  bright. His story is tinged by the sadness of the scenes he saw by
  sick beds and in hospitals, but what he saw, he saw clearly and
  describes with color, charm and reality. He tells of Gibraltar, Crete,
  Port Said, India, Burma, China and Japan, and gives a few words to
  America, which he visited on his way home.

  “Written throughout with an animation obviously unforced.” J. B. G.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 91. Jl. ‘05. 460w.

  “The point of view is that of a cultivated man of the world who is
  able to set his impressions down in excellent English, and the result
  is thoroughly readable.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 382. Je. 1, 05. 840w.

  “The book is both trivial and ordinary, pictures and all. Those who
  like the commonplace may enjoy this book.”

   — — + =Nation.= 80: 459. Je. 8, ‘05. 280w.

  “A book written in terse and epigrammatic style, as full of cleverness
  as anything written by Kipling, and intensely interesting. But there
  is nothing deeper in the book than first impressions. It is the best
  book of travel that has been written for years.” T. H. H.

   + + + =Nature.= 71: 553. Ap. 13, ‘05. 1470w.

  “He has at times a very pretty knack of description.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 277. Ap. 29, ‘05. 990w.

  “... So vivid are the pictures which the traveller draws for us, so
  penetrating his criticism of life and manners. It is the chapters on
  Japan that we find the most interesting part of a highly interesting
  book. We have to thank Sir Frederick Treves for a quite admirable
  volume of travel.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 442. Mr. 25. ‘05. 1970w.


Trident and the net: a novel, by the author of The martyrdom of an
empress. *$1.50. Harper.

  “The book is simply the life-story of a Breton nobleman, of violent
  passions and astounding inability to avoid the paths of obvious folly.
  It begins by depicting his unregulated childhood in Brittany,
  describes his later career as a deserter from the French navy, a
  wanderer over many seas and lands, and a victim of a vulgar ‘liaison,’
  and ends in a squalid lodging-house in New York, where he lies
  desperately ill of pneumonia.”—Dial.

  “We close it with a sense of exasperation at the recklessness of its
  composition and its wasteful use of what might have been the material
  of an admirable work.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 207. O. 1, ‘05. 380w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 643. S. 30, ‘05. 590w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 283. S. 30, ‘05. 110w.


=Trollope, Anthony.= Autobiography. $1.25. Dodd.

  “A new edition of a very interesting book by one of the most
  industrious and in many ways one of the most successful novelists of
  the past generation, printed and bound in a style uniform with the
  excellent edition of Trollope’s novels issued by the same
  publishers.”—Outlook.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 682. O. 14, ‘05. 450w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 523. O. 28, ‘05. 50w.


=Trollope, Henry M.= Life of Molière. Dutton.

  Mr. Trollope “has collected his information from unimpeachable
  sources, he has translated this material into English, combining with
  it lengthy criticisms upon the plays; and the result is a very bulky
  volume.... As the book possesses a moderately good index, it forms a
  useful compendium, a summary of the information at present existing
  concerning Molière and his immediate entourage.”—Acad.

  * “It is not a biography to which a reader will turn again and again
  for the mere pleasure of reading it; it is almost impossible to read
  it for long because of its weight, the dull, uninteresting appearance
  of the page, and more fatal objection still, the heavy, horizontal
  style in which it is written. The volume would have gained vastly had
  it been ruthlessly cut down to half its present size.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1193. N. 18, ‘05. 630w.

  * “It is with honest regret that a reviewer is forced to record his
  opinion that this biography of Mr. Trollope’s is not worthy of its
  theme, and that the biographer has been unable to rise to the height
  of his subject. So far as the mere compilation of the facts is
  concerned, it is possible to praise the book, although not without
  many reservations in matters of detail. But he has not succeeded in
  casting any new light on the facts, and he has failed totally to evoke
  the noble figure of Molière himself and to make us realize the real
  achievements of the greatest of comic dramatists.” Brander Matthews.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 816. D. 2, ‘05. 2310w.


=Troubetzkoy, Amelie (Rives) Chanler, princess.= Selene. **$1.20.
Harper.

  A dramatic poem in blank verse which gives a version of the story of
  Endymion and the moon goddess.

  “There seems, to us, in the choice of theme and in its treatment, a
  true revival of essential poesy, opulent, free, unclouded by
  psychological problem or symbol-compelling obscurity.” Edith M.
  Thomas.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 561. Je. ‘05. 850w.

  “Through the major part of the long piece the princess has written
  admirable blank verse.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 18. Jl. 6, ‘05. 480w.

  “There is no demand upon intense sympathies, the story is well and
  swiftly told, and the poetry fulfills at least two-thirds of Milton’s
  requirement.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 510. Ag. 5, ‘05. 390w.

  “The story is told with the real poet’s rapture in rhythm and in
  delicately tinted phrase. Its cadences are true and songful, its
  imagery fresh in conception and vista-opening.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 474. S. ‘05. 200w.


=Trow, Charles Edward.= Old shipmasters of Salem, **$2.50. Putnam.

  “A plain story, well told, of the old merchant-captains who used to
  sail square-rigged vessels out of the Massachusetts port to the East
  Indies, a hundred years or so ago; and of later voyages, down to the
  decline and extinction of that once-flourishing industry.... The text
  is freely illustrated. The portraits of some of these marine worthies
  are of more than passing interest. That of Capt. Joseph Peabody
  (1757-1844), for instance.... There are several pictures of
  ships.”—Nation.

  “Seems to know little of its connexion with English or American
  history.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 750. Je. 17. 240w.

  “A book containing much curious and interesting matter ... served up
  with a generous pictorial accompaniment.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 241. Ap. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “As a whole this rambling volume has little to attract and nothing to
  hold the general reader.”

       — =Ind.= 58: 1251. Je. 1, ‘05. 110w.

  “The field of narration is not extensive, and the subject is treated
  with all the fulness it deserves. The writer commands an excellent
  style.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 191. Mr. 9, ‘05. 160w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 114. F. 25, ‘05. 1560w. (Abstract of
         contents.)

  “The author seems to have made a faithful study of the documentary
  materials, and the result is a book of no little historical and
  biographical value.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 372. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

       + =Spec.= 94: 790. My. 27, ‘05. 250w.


=Trumbull, Charles Gallaudet.= Pilgrimage to Jerusalem; Pilgrim’s ed.
$2.50. S. S. Times co.

  An account is here given of the “cruise of the delegates to the
  World’s Sunday-school convention held in Jerusalem and of the travels
  of the members of the party elsewhere.” (Outlook.)

       + =Ind.= 58: 1423. Je. 22, ‘05. 100w.

  “Long and over-detailed.”

     — + =Outlook.= 79: 504. F. 25, ‘05. 70w.


=Tschudi, Clara.= Maria Sophia, queen of Naples; tr. from the Norwegian
by Ethel Harriet Hearn. $2.50. Dutton.

  Miss Tschudi now adds a new name to her galaxy of queens. In the
  present biography, the author misses the fine perspective possible in
  the case of her “Marie Antoinette,” and “Queen Elizabeth.” Yet she has
  given a dramatic and sympathetic account with sufficient accuracy to
  make it acceptable of the woman whom Daudet immortalized after a
  distinctive fashion in his “Kings in exile.” While on the one hand it
  seems an indignity to one living to have a panorama of the details of
  private life thrust before her, the book is of atoning interest as a
  study of the events leading to the downfall of the Italian Bourbons.

     — + =Acad.= 68: 732. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1300w.

  “Is rather too slight in substance to make a book of.”

     — + =Nation.= 81: 183. Ag. 31, ‘05. 160w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 437. Jl. 1, ‘05. 280w.

  “The book is entertaining and has less of cloying sweetness than most
  women’s books of its brand.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 495. Jl. 29, ‘05. 560w.

  “Told about it in not too picturesque phrase, and in sometimes
  slovenly style—but this may be due to the translator rather than to
  the author.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 884. Ag. 5, ‘05. 140w.


=Tuckwell, Rev. William.= Reminiscences of a radical parson. $2.
Cassell.

  “All unconsciously the Radical parson reveals to us in this book a
  very charming and thoroughly human personality. A college don, a
  schoolmaster, and then, in later years, the incumbent of a college
  living, Mr. Tuckwell first attracted public attention by his
  unconventional methods of working his parish.... He was getting on in
  years before he delivered his first political speech, though ... he
  had delivered nearly a thousand orations before he decided to
  retire.... There are many political reminiscences of Gladstone, and
  indeed of many other famous men.”—Acad.

  “Mr. Tuckwell’s latest volume is full of entertainment.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 360. Ap. 1, ‘05. 830w.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 455. Ap. 15. 1780w.

  “The combination of scholarly polish, graceful wit, and hard common
  sense in the author of this veracious and on the whole convincing
  narrative, is very pleasing.” Percy F. Bicknell.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 80. Ag. 16, ‘05. 2040w.

  “Mr. Tuckwell writes with a vigor and a directness, and a positive
  candor, and an intensity of conviction that make interesting reading.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 403. Je. 17, ‘05. 1140w.

  “With himself the preacher is exceedingly well contented.”

       — =Sat. R.= 99: 705. My. 27, ‘05. 1140w.

 *   + — =Spec.= 95: 688. N. 4, ‘05. 790w.


=Tuker, M. A. R., and Malleson, Hope.= Rome: painted by Alberta Pisa.
*$6. Macmillan.

  Seventy fine pieces of color-work by Alberta Pisa serve to illustrate
  the twelve chapters upon Rome, her buildings, catacombs, people,
  religion and the Roman question before 1870 and since that year.

  “It is good to meet with an artist who will see Rome for himself and
  paint her as he sees her, even though there be some little discrepancy
  between text and illustrations. Even so, this book is one of the best
  in all this fine series.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 633. Je. 17, ‘05. 770w.

  * “Altogether, it is a book to be read, for breadth of view and depth
  of sympathy. There is but little complaint to make on the score of
  inaccuracies.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 730. N. 25. 620w.

  “The text is almost as fascinating as the illustrations.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 331. Ag. 10, ‘05. 420w.

     + + =Nation.= 81: 40. Jl. 13, ‘05. 740w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 336. My. 2, ‘05. 290w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 336. My. 20, ‘05. 290w.

  “The illustrations are offered as the chief reason for the book’s
  existence; and they are certainly fascinating. But the text is no less
  valuable, and is its own excuse for being.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 373. Je. 10, ‘05. 1730w.

  “In the main they have the readable quality, and offer a good many
  acceptable views of the customs, traditions, and daily life of the
  people of Rome.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 345. Je. 3, ‘05. 270w.


=Turbayne, A. A.= Alphabets and numerals designed and drawn by A. A.
Turbayne. *$2. Van Nostrand.

  Twenty-seven full-page plates which give “severe readable types” of
  letters and numbers. They have been designed “for the designer or
  craftsman to copy, alter, and arrange in their handicraft after their
  own fancy,” and they are based upon old Roman, Gothic, and Italic
  forms.

  “One of the best books for practical purposes that we have had before
  us for a long time.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 760. Je. 17. 310w.

  “A splendid and inspiring vade mecum for the artistic ‘letterer,’
  whether engaged in designing posters, advertisements, or elaborate
  lettered signs.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 515. Ag. 5, ‘05. 220w.


=Turner, Harry Winthrop, and Hobart, Henry Metcalf.= Insulation of
electric machines. $4.50. Macmillan.

  This book is “the result of twenty years of practical work.... Among
  the topics discussed are some properties of insulating materials, the
  insulation on ‘magnet wires’ employed in armature and field windings,
  mica and mica compounds, drying insulations, taping machines and tapes
  and bands, transformer insulation, impregnated cloths and fabrics, oil
  for insulating, &c. There are a bibliography and an index, a large
  number of diagrams, plans ... tables and footnotes. The book appears
  in the ‘Specialists’ series.”—N. Y. Times.

  “It will be welcomed by the electrical engineer as a most valuable
  addition to his library.” Ernest Wilson.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 149. Je. 15, ‘05. 490w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 377. Je. 10, ‘05. 150w.


=Turner, Henry Gyles.= History of the colony of Victoria from its
discovery to its absorption into the commonwealth of Australia. $7.
Longmans.

  “The history begins with an unsuccessful attempt to found a convict
  settlement at Fort Philip, and carries the story of Victoria down to
  the end of the nineteenth century.... The municipal history and the
  astonishing growth of Melbourne ... are particularly well told. The
  same may be said of the chapters dealing with the discoveries of gold
  and with the political and social turmoil which the discovery of gold
  entailed; also of those describing the methods of parceling out
  government lands, ... the causes of the panic and the financial
  disasters of 1890-1893, and ... the long-drawn-out agitation which
  finally led to the establishment of the Australian commonwealth. There
  is an admirable index.”—Am. Hist. R.

  “Mr. Turner’s work is obviously that of an old settler—a labor of love
  on which many years have been spent. Regarded as such, his history of
  Victoria is well done, and far above the average of colonial histories
  written from this standpoint. It is written in a good clear style, and
  generally carries the marks of much industry and care. While few but
  specialists will be likely to read Mr. Turner’s two volumes from
  beginning to end, they contain much that is of value and usefulness to
  more general students, and especially to students who are interested
  in the various new phases of democratic government as it has been
  developed in Victoria.” Edward Porritt.

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 676. Ap. ‘05. 600w.

  “Mr. Turner is more at home in dealing with politicians than with the
  natural features of the country, so that, while the early history can
  be perhaps read with more profit elsewhere, the political story from
  1850 downwards is told with great trenchancy and knowledge.” H. E. E.

       + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 829. O. ‘05. 270w.

  “Their sustained interest depends on the fact that he is in truth no
  mere chronicler of passing events, but a reflective historian. It is
  plainly and frankly critical.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 249. Ag. 4, ‘05. 2000w.


=Turner, Herbert Hall.= Astronomical discovery. *$3. Longmans.

  Six papers comprising the matter originally given in a series of
  lectures at the University of Chicago. Their object is “to illustrate
  by the study of a few examples, chosen almost at random, the variety
  in character of astronomical discoveries.” The subjects treated are:
  “Uranus and Eros,” “The discovery of Neptune,” “Bradley’s discoveries
  of the aberration of light and of the mutation of the earth’s axis,”
  “Accidental discoveries,” “Schwabe and the sun spot period,” and “The
  variation of latitude.”

  “The book is readable and interesting; and also accurate and
  trustworthy, as much ‘readable’ popular science is not. Judged
  according to its scope and purpose, there is little fault to be found
  with the book.” C. A. Y.

     + + =Astrophys. J.= 21: 383. My. ‘05. 560w.

  “There is ample internal evidence, not only that the lectures were
  carefully prepared, but also of judicious selection. The second
  chapter or lecture is probably the least satisfactory in the book.” W.
  E. P.

     + + =Nature.= 71: 410. Mr. 2, ‘05. 910w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 9. Ja. 7, ‘05. 340w.

  “Even to a non-scientific reader, and to the amateur of astronomy the
  book should prove absorbing.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 126. F. 25, ‘05. 640w.

  “Apart from such bearing as it may have on the philosophy of discovery
  Professor Turner’s book gives excellent accounts of several
  interesting chapters of astronomic history.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 633. My. 13, ‘05. 1030w.

  “Lucid and interesting.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 788. My. 27, ‘05. 30w.


=Tweedie, Ethel B. (Harley) (Mrs. Alec. Tweedie).= Sunny Sicily. *$5.
Macmillan.

  An Englishwoman’s observations of Sicily, “its rustics and its ruins,”
  as they now are. Descriptions of real Sicilian eating-houses, market
  places, lotteries, the Mafia, the superstitions of the evil eye,
  Sicilian theatres, etc. There is also a brief Sicilian history and an
  account of various visits to places of interest. The volume is
  illustrated with photographs and a map.

  “Mrs. Tweedie is certainly flippant, with a recklessly slipshod style,
  many inaccurate statements, and spelling that is peculiar either to
  her or to her printer. Is valuable as a sort of ‘chatty’ Baedeker,
  being not only readable, but full of practical hints for the
  travellers who may be attracted by it to this wonderful island.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 122. F. 9, ‘05. 330w.

  “Provides in a very informal and personal way both information and
  entertainment.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 130. Mr. 4, ‘05. 690w.

  “Though by no means so erudite, the present volume, in actual
  information as to present conditions, is worthy of a place alongside
  that standard work, Mr. Paton’s ‘Picturesque Sicily.’”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 197. Ja. 21, ‘05. 210w.

  “She has the delightful, but uncommon, quality of an entertaining
  style wedded to a real knowledge of how to tell a story.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 381. Mr. ‘05. 70w.

  “A brighter and more lively book of travel we have seldom read.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 618. Ap. 29, ‘05. 560w.


=Twigg, Lizzie.= Songs and poems. 60c. Longmans.

  “Miss Twigg’s ... muse belongs frankly to Ireland. The hills, the sea,
  the bogs, the sunset and the dawn, she celebrates in verse that is
  sincere and frequently moving. She ... sings only the earthly charms
  of the green island. The sky and the soil breathe beatitudes for her,
  and she beholds the flowers and cliffs and fields through an
  atmosphere of golden sentiment.”—N. Y. Times.

       + =Acad.= 68: 678. Jl. 1, ‘05. 90w.

  “It takes a well-nigh perfect ear for music to write such verse as
  this. We may well be glad that it is so spontaneous and unaffected, so
  free from bookishness and imitative endeavors.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 30: 350 N. 1, ‘05. 290w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 406. Je. 17, ‘05. 500w.


Tybout, Ella Middleton. Wife of the secretary of state. †$1.50.
Lippincott.

  A story of cosmopolitan Washington of no particular time or
  administration which weaves mystery into a strange mixture of love,
  intrigue and credulity. The wife of the secretary of state plays with
  fire thru her traitorous delivery of valuable state papers into the
  hands of a Russian diplomat. How she manages to come thru apparently
  unharmed, and how the count relinquishes his villainy in a very
  un-Russian like manner are strangely at variance with the expected
  outcome that might require retributive punishment. The khedive’s opals
  owned by the secretary’s wife flash a sympathetic accompaniment to her
  heart moods all thru.

  * “It is a story replete with adventure and excitement.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 280w.

  * “The conversation is lifelike and the characters are distinctly
  individualized. An entertaining novel burdened by no especial
  problem.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 70w.


=Tynan, Katharine.= See =Hinkson, Mrs. Katharine Tynan.=




                                   U


=Ular, Alexander.= Russia from within. **$1.75. Holt.

  After announcing in his preface that his book will come as a shock to
  some very sincere friends of Russia and that the facts he reveals are
  authentic altho they “do not make pretty reading” the author proceeds
  to give “a series of brilliant pictures, written manifestly from the
  standpoint of the revolutionist and lashing furiously the heads of the
  Russian state.” (Pub. Opin.)

  “Though not without its faults, it has the conspicuous merits of being
  clearly and forcefully written and of leaving a series of definite
  impressions on the mind of the reader.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 409. N. ‘05. 920w.

  “The book is not without value for him who can sift the facts from the
  fiction and the denunciation; but it is altogether untrustworthy, and
  cannot but mislead the untrained reader.” Charles H. Cooper.

       — =Dial.= 39: 269. N. 1, ‘05. 350w.

  “The historical portion is full of inaccuracies. Having warned our
  readers that Dr. Ular’s statements require confirmation, we must admit
  that his book is interesting and suggestive, that his knowledge is
  considerable, that his view of M. Witte’s regime appears to us to be
  very just, and that the remarkable story of the elaborate ‘oligarchic’
  intrigue which eventually led to the war in the Far East certainly
  contains an element of truth.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 222. Jl. 14, ‘05. 710w.

  “People who like to read strong statements couched in language which
  is plain to the verge of violence at times, and never courteous, will
  thoroughly enjoy Mr. Ular’s arraignment of everybody and everything in
  Russia—save, possibly, the revolutionists.”

     — — =Nation.= 81: 363. N. 2, ‘05. 2060w.

  “The rashness of language which makes the book particularly readable
  serves, of course, to discredit it as a serious study—but it is
  infinitely suggestive.”

     — + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 635. S. 30, ‘05. 1360w.

     — — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 447. S. 30, ‘05. 270w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 150w.

  “It is certain Mr. Ular’s readers—if he has any—will not take him
  sufficiently seriously to experience any shocks but those of
  contempt.”

     — — =Sat. R.= 100: 121. Jl. 22, ‘04. 420w.

  “Much of his work is of value, but we confess that his account of the
  characters of the Emperor and his Court does not convince us. It is so
  full of a lurid sensationalism that it fails of its purpose.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 152. Jl. 29, ‘05. 340w.


=Underhill, Evelyn.= Gray world. $1.50. Century.

  An imaginative story which dwells experimentally upon the transition
  from life to death, and upon reincarnation. A little slum-child dies
  in a hospital, carrying a vague consciousness of his earthly existence
  to the Gray world of spirits. The awful terrors of the new realm crowd
  in around him until his soul cries for release. So he goes back to the
  world as the son of a London tradesman—bewildered, as once more a new
  consciousness dawns, in the process of unifying his former existence,
  his world of spirits, and the present life. The book follows the
  development of this being thru the struggle to conquer the Gray world
  and its depression. The book is unusual, with language and scheme
  wholly in keeping with the vague, and the unreal which envelop it.

  “Her book, then, is not only readable, but gives rise to that
  intelligent form of gratitude which has been defined as a lively sense
  of favors to come.”

       + =Atlan.= 95: 698. My. ‘05. 240w.

  “A book of unusual imaginative quality, but too morbid to win a
  general popularity. The volume is a very curious and unique
  psychological study, along the borderline of madness.”

       + =Bookm.= 21: 183. Ap. ‘05. 660w.

  “It is intensely serious, no doubt, but it is also animated and even
  enlivened by touches of a highly effective humor.” W. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 38: 124. F. 16, ‘05. 1220w.

  Reviewed by H. I. Brock.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 540w.

  “A weird and fantastic story. The best thing in the book is the pathos
  of the description of the unrestful ghosts.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 120. Ja. ‘05. 60w.

  “The earthly side of the book is as original as the spiritual, though
  far less attractive.”

     + — =Spec.= 94: 519. Ap. 8, ‘05. 390w.


=Underwood, Earl.= Representing John Marshall & co. †$1. Dillingham.

  A genial, slangy, and withal good-hearted drummer “spills” his inmost
  thoughts into the white pages of this book. He jauntily tells of many
  happenings so peculiar that as the news of each of them reaches Mame,
  his queen, she promptly breaks off her engagement. Each chapter
  chronicles a spicy adventure, a break, a reconciliation, but in the
  end Mame seems thoroughly convinced that her drummer is a hero.

  “It is amusing in its way if taken in small doses.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 602. S. 16, ‘05. 230w.


=United States. Library of Congress.= Catalog of the Gardiner Greene
Hubbard collection of engravings; presented to the Library of Congress
by Mrs. Gardiner Greene Hubbard. Lib. of Congress.

  “The plan of the compilation was very generous, and included the
  catalogue proper of engravers, and index of engravers under a
  chronological scheme, by centuries, an index of artists, a portrait
  index, and a list of authorities.... The collection was presented to
  the nation in 1898 by Mrs. Hubbard, and in default of a national art
  gallery the Library of Congress was the most fitting place of
  deposit.... The editor of the volume is Arthur Jeffrey Parsons, who is
  in charge of the collection.”—Nation.

  “The catalogue is clearly arranged and carefully written.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 718. Jl. 8, ‘05. 300w.

  “No similar catalogue exists of an American collection of engravings;
  it will, therefore, prove a convenient book of reference for
  collectors.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 353. My. 4, ‘05. 360w.


=United States. Library of Congress.= Some papers laid before the
Continental Congress, 1775. 15c. Supt. of doc.

  The papers here published are: The declaration on taking arms, July 6,
  1775; Franklin’s Articles of Confederation, July 21, 1775; Reports on
  the Trade of America, July 21, October 2, and October 13, 1775; Report
  on Lord North’s motion, and reports on the committees on Recess and
  Unfinished business.

  “The value of the pamphlet lies principally in the care which has been
  taken to show the evolution of the final document in each case from
  the first draft through the intermediate forms.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 374. My. 11, ‘05. 140w.


=Upson, Arthur.= City, and other poems. *$1. Macmillan.

  In this new edition of “The city,” a poem-drama in which Abgar, King
  of Edessa, in the sixteenth year of the reign of Tiberius is cured of
  his infirmity thru a message from the great Healer crucified at
  Jerusalem, the author has made a few changes which, while they add to
  the poetic effect of his work, do not detract from the dramatic
  strength. The volume also includes Octaves in an Oxford garden,
  written under the spell of the things of which he sings, and some
  two-score sonnets, upon such widely different topics as Sultan’s
  bread, Mona Lisa, The Rezzonico palace and our own Wheat elevators and
  The statue of liberty.

  * “Has something of the cool charm that springs from the imitation of
  Greek models together with appeal that inheres in a Christian theme.
  It never, however, attains any considerable tragic power.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 508. D. 21, ‘05. 40w.


=Upward, Allen.= International spy: secret history of the Russo-Japanese
war. †$1.50. Dillingham.

  The latest doings of that marvelous man, Monsieur H. V., are
  chronicled in this volume, in which he himself tells of his adventures
  when sent to Russia by England in the hope of averting war. He carried
  a peace message from the Czar to the Mikado, was adopted into the
  Japanese royal family, returned to Russia and after barely escaping
  death at the hands of various enemies he succeeded in stealing a
  torpedo boat from the Kaiser for which he was forgiven when his
  mission became known. The beautiful and desperate Princess Y— has an
  important role in this intimate story of courts and rulers.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 707. O. 21, ‘05. 320w.




                                   V


=Vachell, Horace Annesley.= Brothers. †$1.50. Dodd.

  These two brothers are each half of a complete whole, they succeed
  together, each fails alone. Archibald, strong and magnetic, delivers
  the sermons written by his weak and stammering brother, and by their
  spiritual and intellectual force he wins Betty Kirtling, who discovers
  after she has married him, that it is his brother whom she loves.

  “It is an exceedingly well-told tale.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 272. Ap. 22, ‘05. 310w.

  “The book is free from annoying defects, has a well-sustained
  interest, and may be accounted a worthy addition to the season’s
  output.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 477. S. ‘05. 220w.


=Vacher, Francis.= Food inspector’s handbook. $1.50. Van Nostrand.

  The fourth edition of this handbook has been brought down to date and
  an additional chapter on “Statutory powers” included.

  “The author gives sensible advice, and his little volume should be
  found very useful to those for whom it is written.” C. S.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 243. Jl. 13, ‘05. 320w.


=Valentine, Edward Abram Uffington.= Hecla Sandwith. †$1.50. Bobbs.

  This story of a woman of moods, the daughter of a Pennsylvania iron
  master, who married a young mining engineer, regretted it, left him,
  and later awoke to the realization that she loved him, is also the
  story of the mines, the iron workers, and the blast furnace.

  “A leisurely and very charming picture of a Quaker settlement in
  Pennsylvania in 1856.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 785. Jl. 29, ‘05. 330w.

  “It is a pleasure to notice a romance of American life so instinct
  with artistic, literary and scientific excellence as ‘Hecla Sandwith.’
  Here speaks the poet, the historian and the psychologist.”

   + + + =Arena.= 34: 106. Jl. ‘05. 800w.

  “The chief fault of the book is lack of concentration.” Frederic Taber
  Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 517. Jl. ‘05. 380w.

  “There is too much narrative here. The descriptions of nature are
  poetic, the minor characters are particularly well drawn, and many of
  the pictures linger in the memory.”

     + — =Critic.= 46: 479. My. ‘05. 150w.

  “The story is a long one, and not firmly knit together. A book that
  preserves with almost photographic fidelity the manners and customs of
  a time fully departed.”

     + — =Dial.= 38: 393. Je. 1, ‘05. 140w.

  “The book has the merit of careful husbandry in an unworked field, and
  it is well written; a novel of unusual power and interest.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1482. Je. 29, ‘05. 130w.

  “It is unevenly written. But, on the whole, the sense of the art of
  literature is so high and fine and the adhesion to this sense so
  accurate and faithful, that the entire result should be greeted as a
  reawakening among us. There are pages that any novelist, living or
  dead, might have been glad to claim.” James Lane Allen.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 241. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

  “Charming style, keen powers of analysis, and skill in snapshot
  portraiture as well, characterize this study.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 139. My. 13, ‘05. 30w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 591. Ap. 15, ‘05. 260w.

  “His book is full of nature and of human nature: it rings true.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 186. Ag. 5, ‘05. 220w.


=Vance, Louis Joseph.= Terence O’Rourke, gentleman adventurer. †$1.50.
Wessels.

  Terence O’Rourke, an Irish gentleman and soldier, in the capacity of
  commissioned defender—tho backed by the courage and chivalry which
  make an undertaking his own affair—arrays himself in a series of
  adventures against unscrupulous, even villainous royalty. Thru his
  quick wit and marked swordsmanship he rights the wrongs of good women,
  at last winning for himself the love of the princess for whom most of
  his battles are fought.

       + =Ind.= 59: 697. S. 21, ‘05. 170w.

  “Readers of many and varied tastes will delight in the author’s
  fertile imagination and the ever-ready humor which produces and
  disposes of Terence’s trials and tribulations.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 180w.

  “A bit of simple and entertaining romance of the old-fashioned style.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 487. Jl. 22, ‘05. 410w.

  “There is plenty of action, humor, and romance.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 695. Jl. 15, ‘05. 30w.


=Vandam, Albert Dresden.= Men and manners of the third republic. **$3.
Pott.

  “In part a posthumous work; a charming review of the principal events
  of the third republic as seen in the men and events of the times....
  We have a glimpse behind the scenes, and ... we are brought into such
  intimate relations with the actors that we are able to form for
  ourselves a clear and accurate conception of the motives that caused
  the movement that led to the establishment of the third republic. We
  are introduced to Thiers and Gambetta.... But it is idle to mention by
  names the great Frenchmen who appear in the pages of the work; suffice
  it to say that none of those who were prominent in the days following
  the downfall of Louis Napoleon are neglected, much less
  omitted.”—Baltimore Sun.

  “Delightful collection of facts and thoughts.”

     + + =Baltimore Sun.= :8. Mr. 8, ‘05. 500w.

  “Much that is here said about the iniquities of French political life
  may be quite true, and the book, taken in small quantities at a time,
  is not devoid of a certain interest. But a rigorous criticism would
  show that the historian must quote it, if at all, with care.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 154. F. 23, ‘05. 440w.


=Van de Put, A.= Hispano-Moresque ware of the 15th century. *$4. Lane.

  “A contribution to its history and chronology, based upon armorial
  specimens.” This is a small quarto containing 34 plates illustrating
  pieces taken from many public and private collections. There is a
  brief general treatise which, while stating frankly that material for
  a history is lacking, gives much historical information. There is a
  full description of some of the plates.

  “This is the first orderly and intelligent treatise devoted to it.
  Goes far to supply the obvious need of a manual.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 121. F. 9, ‘05. 490w.


=Van Dyke, Henry.= Essays in application. **$1.50. Scribner.

  “A group of twelve essays and addresses, which may be generally
  characterized as the creed or confession of an idealist, and an
  application of his principles to life.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Lit. D.= 31: 957. D. 23, ‘05. 750w.

  “These essays bear his stamp. They are not written solely for
  scholars. They are easily understandable, readable, while his ‘sane
  idealism’ shines through them all.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 749. N. 4, ‘05. 520w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 628. N. 11, ‘05. 40w.


=Van Dyke, Henry.= Fisherman’s luck, and some other uncertain things.
†$1.50. Scribner.

  “The thirteenth edition of a well-known series of essays arranged in
  the form of a holiday book illustrated with most agreeable drawings by
  F. Walter Taylor.” (Critic.) The volume contains beside the title
  essay: The thrilling moment; Talkability; A wild strawberry; Lovers
  and landscape; A fatal success; Fishing in books; A Norwegian
  honeymoon; Who owns the mountains? A lazy, idle book; The open fire; A
  slumber song.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 30w.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 449. D. 16, ‘05. 80w.

 *     + =Nation.= 81: 299. O. 12, ‘05. 40w.

 *       =Outlook.= 81: 381. O. 14, ‘05. 30w.


=Van Dyke, Henry=, ed. Little masterpieces of English poetry, by British
and American authors; ed. by Henry van Dyke, assisted by Hardin Craig.
6v. ea. **75c; set, **$4.50. Doubleday.

  “A companion to the ‘Science,’ ‘Fiction’ and ‘Humor’ series.... For
  the many ... such a collection as this, wisely selected, and adapted
  to the limits of both time and purse of the average reader, is of real
  and not inconsiderable value.” (Outlook.) “In the first of the six
  little volumes we find ballads old and new, in the second, idyls and
  stories in verse, and in the four remaining volumes lyrics, odes,
  sonnets and epigrams; descriptive and reflective verse; and elegies
  and hymns. Each of these major divisions is subdivided according to
  subjects. Living poets are excluded.” (Critic.)

  * “The principle of arrangement followed in this new one is as
  excellent as it is novel. As a rule, admirable judgment has been shown
  in combining these handy volumes, the most remarkable defect being the
  omission of Shelley’s ‘Adonais.’”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 120w.

  * “Dr. van Dyke’s name is a sufficient guarantee of the excellence of
  the selection.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 682. N. 18, ‘05. 80w.


=Van Dyke, Henry.= Music and other poems. **$1. Scribner.

  A collection of poems which take many forms and follow many themes.
  The opening “Ode to music” is followed by sonnets, lyrics, and other
  verses treating of the open, the silent hills, and the hearth and
  home.

  “Dr. Van Dyke’s work is that of a scholar in poetry endowed with a
  graceful gift of lyric speech.” Ferris Greenslet.

     + + =Atlan.= 96: 420. S. ‘05. 570w.

  “They are delicate and graceful in workmanship, the expression of a
  refined and sensitive poetic instinct rather than the outpourings of a
  creative mood.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 197. Mr. 16, ‘05. 390w.

  “Dr. Van Dyke has nearly every good poetic gift except creative
  genius.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 384. F. 16, ‘05. 140w.

  * “In spite of his popularity even Dr. van Dyke, who attempts to
  supply our want of a reflective poet, leaves much to be desired in
  depth and significance.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “There is much that is charming and appealing in these verses. From
  first to last there is evidence of an unusual gift for verbal music.
  If they are a little too honeyed, too academic, they are also the
  production of a skillful artificer in words and of a mind of high
  culture and high ideals.”

     + + =Reader.= 5: 498. Mr. ‘05. 430w.


=Van Dyke, Henry.= School of life, **50c. Scribner.

  In this thin little volume is “eloquently expressed an optimism based,
  not on temperament, but on faith in character, discernment of the
  spiritual possibilities of life, and sound judgment of ethical
  values.” (Outlook.)

  “The characteristic charm of Dr. van Dyke’s former works is extended
  to the present volume.”

       + =Bookm.= 21: 328. My. ‘05. 30w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 909. Ap. 8, ‘05. 50w.


=Van Dyke, Henry.= Spirit of Christmas. **75c. Scribner.

  Four essays for the Christmas tide. The first, “A dream story,” shows
  how power and knowledge are both insufficient to reclaim the world
  from sin, but that the secret of success lies in greater love; the
  second, “Christmas giving and Christmas living,” offers helpful
  suggestions on the spirit of giving; the third, “Christmas keeping,”
  shows the possible purification in the Christmas thought; and the two
  Christmas prayers make a plea for the home and the lonely ones.

 *     + =Dial.= 39: 449. D. 16, ‘05. 60w.

  * “Full of Dr. van Dyke’s spirit of helpfulness, and pervaded by the
  very human charm of his style.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 838. D. 2, ‘05. 50w.


=Van Dyke, Paul.= Renascence portraits. **$2. Scribner.

  Professor van Dyke’s survey embraces “the England, Germany, and Italy
  of the sixteenth century. His concern is primarily with three
  individuals—Pietro Aretino, the Venetian satirist; Thomas Cromwell,
  the unscrupulous minister of the still less scrupulous Henry VIII.,
  and the Emperor Maximilian I.—but the standpoint from which they are
  regarded is such as to necessitate a close examination of their
  times.”—Outlook.

  * “His book appears to have been printed without the proofs being
  read, though this appearance may be due to the author’s own style,
  which is vicious.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 852. D. 2, ‘05. 1240w.

  * “The results, not the details, of research are here exhibited, and
  in a setting of idea which gives color and meaning and movement.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 715. N. 25, ‘05. 310w.


=Van Vorst, Marie.= Amanda of the mill: a novel. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “A novel with a ‘poor white trash’ mill-girl heroine, and a dissipated
  labor agitator for hero, does not sound promising.” (Outlook.) It “is
  clearly meant as a tract on industrial conditions in the new South....
  [It] pictures the life of the factory hands in the cotton mills—a
  life ... which is mainly sickness, suffering and death. There is much
  in the book to arouse sober thought, and certain passages are rich in
  description and characterization.” (Pub. Opin.)

  “Apart from errors in style, and, here and there, in feeling, there is
  a capacity to portray life which shows real power.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 240. Mr. 11, ‘05. 230w.

  “Is not a strong story, though it shows in places, the wish, if not
  the power, to say something vital about love and life and death.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 395. Ap. 1. 420w.

  Reviewed by Herbert W. Horwill.

     + — =Forum.= 37: 113. Jl. ‘05. 220w.

  “Mrs. Van Vorst paints with a strong hand the terrible life in the
  mills.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 260. Ap. 22, ‘05. 610w.

  “Interesting and good work, although its story is improbable and over
  weighted with propagandist theories and statistics.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 137. My. 13, ‘05. 40w.

  “In ‘Amanda of the mill’ she does not control her material; it
  controls her. Over-seriousness forces her into melodrama, with
  improbabilities that were never intended.”

     — + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 633. Ap. 22, ‘05. 130w.

  “An interesting but rather improbable story.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 31: 760. Je. ‘05. 30w.


=Vardon, Harry.= Complete golfer. **$3.50. McClure.

  “Mr. Vardon has four times won the open championship of Great Britain
  and once the American championship. There is no doubt, therefore, that
  he knows how to play golf; and this book proves that he knows how to
  tell others how to do it.” (Outlook.) The book is amply illustrated.

  “Will be read with unusual interest as being the work of one who is
  not only original in his methods and fascinating in his style, but
  also perhaps the most finished and graceful player that has ever
  lived.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 295. S. 2. 1300w.

  “It is a very good book. He never leaves one in doubt as to his
  meaning, and he brings to the succour of his pen a pleasant geniality
  and optimism.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 202. Je. 23, ‘05. 530w.

  “Vardon’s manner of writing is as straightforward and interesting as
  his manner of playing golf.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 608. S. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  “He has accomplished what has often been called the impossible, the
  writing of a helpful book in an entertaining manner by one who is an
  acknowledged expert of the game.” F. W. C.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 652. O. 7, ‘05. 1720w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

  “His descriptions of his style are simple, clear, and interesting, and
  his stories of experiences on the links in this country, England, and
  Scotland are rarely entertaining. His book is full of valuable hints,
  not only for the novice, but for the experienced golfer as well.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 88. S. 9, ‘05. 90w.

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 179. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1270w.

     + + =Spec.= 95: 56. Ag. 5, ‘05. 280w.


=Veblen, Thorstein B.= Theory of business enterprise. **$1.50. Scribner.

  “The work deals rather with the methods of modern financiering and the
  quest of profit rather than with the other less prominent commercial
  data. If we have to choose between the ten chapters of which the
  volume consists, we should particularly recommend the last five as
  appealing more generally to the unbiased reader.... The first five
  seem rather to lead up to the others, and to be an attempt at more
  technical and erudite writing. Much is new of what the author says
  about crises.... The ‘Theory of modern welfare,’ ... the significance
  for the business world at large of the advance in workingmen’s
  wages, ... and the theory of wasteful expenditure” are fully treated.
  “The excellent remarks (pp. 319, 320) about business thinking, and the
  equally keen observation about the absence of thrift among the modern
  industrial workmen and its causes (pp. 325-27) are among the most
  timely in the book.... The points of interest are many, and it is to
  be regretted that we cannot here call attention to all of them.”—J.
  Pol. Econ.

  “The book lacks the desirable quality of terseness and the writer at
  times wanders from the main line of his subject. A commendable feature
  is the formulation of many of his statements in symbols of
  mathematics, which are not incorporated into the text, but in
  foot-notes.” John C. Duncan.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 612. My. ‘05. 250w.

  “Professor Veblen has a preternaturally vivid insight into the
  pathological side of business and society: and he follows
  remorselessly the poisoned tract which his critical scalpel has
  discovered. And yet, despite the fact that the author’s attitude
  renders the highest approval of either the scientific or the ethical
  standpoint impossible, the book is an uncommonly suggestive one. The
  penetrating glance into certain broad and seamy aspects of our
  industrial life prompts to a reflective testing of one’s social
  beliefs and ideals.” Winthrop More Daniels.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 558. Ap. ‘05. 990w.

  “Professor Veblen, except in his satiric moods, tends to an oracular
  and often to a tortuous mode of expression. By reason of its many
  evidences of keen and profound thought, of a high grade of scholarship
  and of a breadth and sureness of vision, the book is notable among
  recent contributions to economics; and tho its usual style is
  difficult, it is yet penetrated by flashes of inimitable satiric wit
  that is delightful.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 727. Mr. 30, ‘05. 570w.

  “Our objection to this work ... is ... the constant use of terms which
  to the lay mind seem unnecessarily studied and anachronistic. The
  excellent qualities of scholarly reasoning and scientific
  demonstration which characterize this book, besides the author’s wide
  acquaintance with the existing economic literature....” A. M.
  Wergeland.

   + + — =J. Pol. Econ.= 13: 115. D. ‘04. 930w.

  “Such a theory as is here set forth may impress the readers of
  sensational magazines: but it is a travesty of economics and an unjust
  aspersion of our business morality.”

     — — =Nation.= 81: 37. Jl. 13, ‘05. 2280w.

  Reviewed by Frank Haigh Dixon.

   + + — =Yale R.= 14: 96. My. ‘05. 550w.


=Vesey, Arthur Henry.= Clock and the key. †$1.50. Appleton.

  An American girl in modern Venice sets her two lovers the task of
  bringing to her a casket of jewels which disappeared five centuries
  before. One man is an Italian duke, the other an American. With the
  girl as the prize, the search for the jewels soon results in a series
  of complicated and exciting adventures, but at last by the aid of an
  old and intricate clock, which is itself the key, the jewels come to
  the girl, and the girl to the man she loves.

  “It is mysterious without being sensational, sparkling without being
  trashy.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 286. S. ‘05. 80w.

  “It really makes a very good mystery story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 140. Mr. 4, ‘05. 370w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 150w.


Views of early New York; with illustrative sketches; prepared for the
New York chapter of the colonial order of the Acorn. priv. ptd. Colonial
order of the Acorn, N. Y.

  This volume “contains six copper plate engravings made by Edwin Davis
  French from views of New York in the early stages of its history....
  ‘These views were selected with care, and graphically represent the
  gradual growth of the city from the little Dutch trading-post,
  situated at the Battery, to the more important city depicted in
  Rollinson’s view of 1801.’ Each view is accompanied by an explanatory
  sketch from a well-known authority.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “The little volume is full of interest to students of New York
  history.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 214. Ap. 8, ‘05. 290w.


=Vigfusson, Gudbrandur, and Powell, Frederick York,= eds and trs.
Origines islandicae: a collection of the more important sagas and other
native writings relating to the settlement and early history of Iceland.
2v. *$14. Oxford.

  These volumes are divided into five books: “Landnámabok—the book of
  the land-taking.... Islandingabok (Libellus islandorum) a collection
  of notes made in the eleventh or twelfth century ... relating to the
  old law and customs of the Norsemen settled in Iceland.... Tales and
  legends relating to the conversion and early church history of
  Iceland, Sagas relating to the history of Iceland during the first two
  centuries ... divided into four sections, which treat of the South,
  the West, the North, and the East quarters respectively.... Sagas
  relating to the exploring voyages of Icelanders.... All or nearly all
  of this matter has, we think, been printed before in Iceland or in
  Denmark, but much of it is now accessible only in books that have
  become scarce, and in texts far from accurate.”—Nation.

  * “The present work is by no means free from some of the faults which
  marked its predecessor, the ‘Corpus poeticum boreale’; but fortunately
  the comparison of the two works will hold for the merits as well as
  the defects.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 646. N. 11. 2650w.

  Reviewed by W. P. Ker.

 *   + + =Eng. Hist. R.= 20: 779. O. ‘05. 1080w.

  * “Deeply as we must regret the loss of these two distinguished men
  before completing their work, the book as it stands is one of great
  value, and will doubtless find a place on the shelves of every
  university library and of every scholar of the old Northern
  literature. The translation is clear, direct, and simple, slightly
  archaic as is right.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 260. S. 28, ‘05. 2910w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 577. S. 2, ‘05. 250w.

  * “In this case the peculiar gifts of mediaeval temperament and
  curious linguistic knowledge of the English translator have given us a
  translation equally spirited and faithful on the whole, often very
  near the picturesque quality of the original and yet good honest
  idiomatic English prose.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 627. N. 11, ‘05. 2020w.


=Villard, Henry.= Memoirs of Henry Villard, journalist and financier,
1835-1900. 2v. **$5. Houghton.

  Henry Villard landed in New York in 1853, a mere boy, without friends,
  money, or a knowledge of English. After suffering almost incredible
  hardships, he finally succeeded as a journalist, representing the N.
  Y. Tribune as war correspondent during the Civil war. His memoirs
  contain valuable accounts of battles, estimates of the commanders, and
  personal descriptions of Lincoln and others. Later he left journalism
  for finance, attaining eminence in this calling also.

  “What separates it from other books of its class is that it is a
  characteristic illustration of American possibilities.” M. A. De Wolfe
  Howe.

     + + =Atlan.= 95: 131. Ja. ‘05. 810w.


=Villari, Luigi=, ed. Balkan question. *$3. Dutton.

  A symposium on the Macedonian question, past, present, and future. Its
  object is to draw the attention of Englishmen to the situation in the
  Balkans, to show that Turkey cannot be reformed from within and that
  the time is ripe to bring about European control. There are chapters
  by English writers on the various aspects of the problem, and by
  French and Italian writers on the attitude and duty of their
  respective countries.

         =Critic.= 47: 410. N. ‘05. 460w.

  “To be sure, it is a piece of liberal propaganda and tells only one
  side of the story, but it is nevertheless a lucid explanation of a
  very complicated situation.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 751. S. 28, ‘05. 540w.

  “There is, in the book before us, considerable repetition, an
  occasional contradiction, and some diversity, not only as to points of
  view, but as to such minor matters as the spelling of geographical and
  proper nouns.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 424. My. 25, ‘05. 1340w.

  “It is a most informing and interesting volume.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 198. Ap. 1, ‘05. 650w.

  “We know of no other volume exhibiting the subject so comprehensively
  and so clearly from the pro-Macedonian standpoint.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 757. Mr. 25, ‘05. 200w.

  “Undoubtedly the most instructive two chapters are those by Mr.
  Valentine Chirol and Mr. Bourchier.”

       + =Sat. R.= 99: 634. My. 13, ‘05. 1020w.


=Villari, Luigi.= Russia under the great shadow. **$3.50. Pott.

  “Unless all the auguries should prove false, the war in the Far East
  should mark the transition of Russia from the Middle ages to the
  twentieth century, from the Eastern to the Western world, from
  barbarism to civilization,” gives the keynote of Mr. Villari’s
  optimism which characterizes this work, altho he brings the reader
  face to face with the dark facts of present conditions. One of the
  strongest chapters in the book is that in the industrial development
  of Russia whose conclusion proves that “M. de Witte’s scheme of making
  agricultural Russia an industrial country was a mistake both
  politically and economically.” (Sat. R.)

  “The book is so good that we find little to say about it. The only
  point upon which we find Mr. Villari inclined to go wrong concerns the
  defects of the Eastern church.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 747. Je. 17. 480w.

  “If it does not claim to be a very profound study, it is,
  nevertheless, a very pleasant book to read, and contains much
  interesting, and even valuable information.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 222. Jl. 14, ‘05. 500w.

  “Mr. Villari has written an excellent account of the Czar’s empire in
  war-time.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 542. Ag. 19, ‘05. 2310w.

  “The work itself strikes us less as that of an observant traveller
  than a compilation of material taken from well-known standard works.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 121. Jl. 22, ‘05. 700w.

  “Is full of shrewd observation and vivid description, and is admirably
  illustrated.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 152. Jl. 29, ‘05. 130w.


=Villiers, Frederic.= Port Arthur: three months with the besiegers.
*$2.50. Longmans.

  An English war correspondent’s story of three months with the Japanese
  army before Port Arthur. It is a vivid and stirring account as far as
  it goes, but unfortunately the author left the army two months before
  the actual fall of the fortress.

  “Mr. Villiers’ impressions ... form a series of word-pictures which,
  although at times they are somewhat disjointed, make interesting
  reading, and this, too, despite the irritating and frequently
  recurring fact that unimportant and somewhat egotistical information
  about the writer and his field companions is unnecessarily obtruded
  upon the attention of the reader.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 174. F. 25, ‘05. 550w.

  “The text is brightly written, in a vein altogether cheerful.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 275. Ap. 16, ‘05. 150w.

  “It is simply the diary of an experienced observer.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 316. Ap. 20, ‘05. 3650w.

  “It is as a study of human nature exposed to exceptional conditions
  that it holds the interest of the reader from the first page to the
  last.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 260. Ap. 22, ‘05. 760w.

  “Taken only for what it claims to be—a picturesque, gossipy narrative
  of personal observation and experience—the book is enjoyable.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 653. Mr. 11, ‘05. 120w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 467. Mr. 25, ‘05. 690w.

  “The narrative throughout is written with a cheerful good feeling and
  fairness which command respect.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 405. Mr. 18, ‘05. 130w.


=Vilmorin-Andrieux, et cie.= Vegetable garden. *$4.50. Dutton.

  “The new issue of the English version of Mm. Vilmorin-Andrieux’
  vegetable encyclopedia makes a volume of nearly 800 pages.... The book
  shows its mixed origin inevitably: the general notes on culture are
  chiefly founded on the practice of the Paris market-gardens; and these
  are followed by directions in smaller type intended for British
  conditions. There is bewildering choice of varieties of every root and
  herb—French, German, Italian, or American.... The botanical and
  historical information is rather disproportionate to the cultural
  directions.... Small woodcuts illustrate the book.”—Sat. R.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 815. Ag. 5, ‘05. 190w.

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 280. Ag. 26. 320w.

  * “With Professor Bailey’s valuable ‘Cyclopaedia,’ and with this minor
  cyclopaedia supplementing that, our gardeners, professional and
  amateur, are well equipped.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 472. D. 7, ‘05. 560w.

  “The book will probably be of more value to the experienced gardener
  than to the beginner.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 45. S. 2, ‘05. 50w.

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 155. Jl. 29, ‘05. 400w.

       + =Spec.= 95: 159. Jl. 29, ‘05. 250w.


=Vincent, Marvin R.=, tr. See =Dante, A.= Inferno.


=Vinogradoff, Paul.= Growth of the manor. *$2.50. Macmillan.

  A volume based upon lectures given at Oxford in the summer of 1904,
  and addressed primarily to students of general history. The author
  gives a full treatment of manorial origins; he states in his preface:
  “All periods of English history had their bearing on the life of the
  manor. Some germs of manorial institutions may be found in the Celtic
  age; the Roman occupation of the island had undoubtedly a powerful
  influence on its economic arrangements; the old English period is
  marked by the full development of the rural township; the feudal epoch
  finds the manor at its height; the dissolution of the manor forms one
  of the processes by which modern commercial intercourse was brought
  about.”

  “His method and the mastery of the details of his subject combine to
  produce a notable book; but we confess to disappointment that he did
  not pursue to a greater extent the test of comparative polity. Broad
  as it is in outline, it is full to the highest degree of the most
  valuable details. A mass of material brought together and classified
  in a manner which must remain of permanent value.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 125. F. 11, ‘05. 780w.

  “On the whole, Dr. Vinogradoff is not convincing in his argument.”

     — + =Lond. Times.= 4: 322. O. 6, ‘05. 1050w.

  “This power of brilliant scientific intuition in individual instances,
  along with his vast general erudition, is what makes Vinogradoff so
  admirable. He is preëminently a ‘case historian.’ But the power of
  summation, of vividly portraying the march of change in its broad
  currents, he does not possess.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 223. S. 14, ‘05. 1490w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 105. F. 18, ‘05. 330w.

  “In handling a subject that promises so much Dr. Vinogradoff has
  displayed an accuracy rare among holders of British professorships.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 315. My. 13, ‘05. 290w.

  “Scholars will not find it easy to accept Dr. Vinogradoff’s
  conclusions in full, but all will perceive in his treatise an
  illuminating contribution to a difficult problem.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 652. Mr. 11, ‘05. 300w.

  “Dr. Vinogradoff in stating his case has also carefully set forth the
  views of those who differ from him, and the result is a book of
  singular value as well as of extraordinary fascination.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 594. Ap. 22, ‘05. 2250w.


=Vitelleschi, Marchesa.= Romance of Savoy. *$7.50. Dutton.

  The romantic rise of the House of Savoy is sketched from its
  subservient position under the insolent protection of the King of
  France to an independent state worthy of the respect of the whole of
  Europe. Two important personages are the center of development, Victor
  Amadeus II., Duke of Savoy, and Anna Maria of Orleans, granddaughter
  of Charles I.

  “Certain peculiarities of diction betray deficient knowledge of
  English on the part of the author or the translator, if it has been
  found necessary to call in the latter.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 488. Ap. 15. 1800w.

  “If she had not attempted to prove too much, to dwell too strongly on
  the importance to Savoy of its connection with the Stuarts, her book
  would have been more convincing.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 533. Ag. 12, ‘05. 1050w.

  “She has been an industrious worker, and has unearthed from the papers
  put at her disposition some interesting things relative to a
  picturesque period in Italian history. She has also, however,
  unearthed some things of rather doubtful permanent worth, and the
  printing of these at times clouds the clearness of her narrative.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 984. Ag. 19, ‘05. 280w.


=Vizetelly, Ernest Alfred.= Emile Zola, novelist and reformer. **$3.50.
Lane.

  A life of Zola by his authorized translator, the son of one of his
  first publishers. Zola’s school days at Aix, his youth in Paris, his
  position with the publisher Hachette, his connection with the Dreyfus
  episode, and the history of his writings, particularly the long
  Rougon-Manquart cycle, are given in full. There is much of his
  contracts with publishers and theatrical managers, and the business
  detail incident to his work.

  “Not one of the five hundred and fifty pages that make up this life is
  out of place.”

     + + =Critic.= 46: 188. F. ‘05. 120w.

  “In some respects Mr. Vizetelly’s ‘Zola’ is a satisfactory, and is
  likely to remain for some time a definitive work. With regard to the
  facts of Zola’s career there is probably no one capable of speaking
  with more authority than Mr. Vizetelly. The book is unnecessarily
  crowded with ‘shop.’”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 266. F. 2, ‘05. 700w.

  * “Tho wanting in conclusion and proportion, is likely to be for some
  time an authoritative source for the facts of the novelist’s life.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 1162. N. 16, ‘05. 70w.


=Vizetelly, Francis (Frank) Horace.= Preparation of manuscripts for the
printer. *75c. Funk.

  A series of directions to authors as to the manner of preparing copy
  and correcting proofs with suggestions on submitting manuscripts for
  publication.

  * “It contains much useful information and sound advice from a man of
  experience in the publishing world.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 837. D. 2, ‘05. 50w.

  * “Altogether, this is likely to be a useful book.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 934. D. 2, ‘05. 130w.


=Von Horn, W. D.= See =Oertel, Phillipp Friedrich Wilhelm.=


=Vries, Hugo de.= Species and varieties: their origin by mutation;
lectures delivered at the University of California; ed. by Daniel
Trembly MacDougal. *$5. Open ct.

  “The present work consists of twenty-eight lectures arranged in six
  groups. The first lecture is an introduction dealing with ‘Theories of
  evolution’ and ‘Methods of investigation.’ ... The second division of
  lectures (II.-IV.) deals with ‘Elementary species in nature.’ ... In
  lectures V.-XV., the author presents the evidence to show that
  ‘varieties’ are produced either by the loss of some marked
  peculiarity, or by latent characters becoming active, or by the
  acquisition of others that are already present in allied species....
  Lectures XVI.-XXIV. Although the author tested many species, only one,
  the evening primrose, Œnothera, gave positive, mutating, results. He
  finds that the various mutations obtained from this species take place
  with a great degree of regularity. Very simple rules of general
  validity, he assumes, govern the whole phenomenon.... Lectures
  XXV.-XXVIII. There is selection of two kinds, between species and
  between varieties.”—Philos. R.

  “‘Species and varieties,’ then, within the field of natural science,
  is clearly the book of the year. On the practical side it gives unity
  and significance to the random observations of every lover of plants.
  On the theoretical side, the work articulates with Mendel’s old
  doctrine of the unit character, the heredity atom which either is, or
  is not, and never splits in passing from one generation to the next.”
  E. T. Brewster.

   + + + =Atlan.= 96: 683. N. ‘05. 850w.

  “‘The greatest contribution since Darwin’ is the universal testimony.”
  H. C. Cowles.

   + + + =Bot. G.= 40: 148. Ag. ‘05. 900w.

   + + + =Ind.= 58: 1187. My. 25, ‘05. 810w.

  “The book is, considering its bulk, very free from misprints.” A. D.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 314. Ag. 3, ‘05. 1560w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 605. Mr. 4, ‘05. 100w.

  “Evidently the work of de Vries may well prove to be an epoch-making
  contribution to the advance of knowledge.” Edward G. Spaulding.

     + + =Philos. R.= 14: 354. My. ‘05. 2760w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 344. Mr. 4, ‘05. 970w.

  “The great service of de Vries’s work is that, being founded on
  experimentation, it challenges to experimentation as the only judge of
  its merits. As to the literary qualities of the book, one has first to
  praise the general method of exposition. It is quite a model.” C. B.
  Davenport.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 22: 369. S. 22, ‘05. 2800w.




                                   W


=Wack, Henry Wellington.= Romance of Victor Hugo and Juliette Drouet.
**$1.50. Putnam.

  A bundle of letters written to Hugo by Madame Drouet in 1851 and
  discovered by Mr. Wack on a ramble thru the island of Guernsey, forms
  the basis of this book. An introduction by M. François Coppée, the
  story of the relations of the poet and Juliette for fifty years and of
  the poet’s life at Hauteville house by Mr. Wack, and many
  illustrations complete the volume.

  Reviewed by Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 509. Je. ‘05. 790w.

  “His book is quite without adequate raison d’etre.”

       — =Dial.= 38: 357. My. 16, ‘05. 530w.

  “The introduction by François Coppée is especially interesting not
  only on account of the view that it furnishes of Hugo as seen by an
  enthusiastic young poet, but because of its literary excellence and
  the charming delicacy with which he has related his experiences.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 42. Jl. 6, ‘05. 330w.

  “One more superfluous example of literary indiscretion.”

       — =Nation.= 80: 352. My. 4, ‘05. 200w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “The literary value of this book lies in the charming introduction by
  François Coppée; the human interest, in the conscientious work of the
  author, who, however, is sometimes in danger of beating his gold leaf
  out too thin.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1061. Ap. 29, ‘05. 170w.

  “Mr. Wellington Wack proves such a pretty apologist that we can easily
  persuade ourselves that we are not reading scandal at all, but a
  ‘worthy literary record.’”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 836. My. 27, ‘05. 340w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 124. Jl. ‘05. 90w.


=Wack, Henry Wellington.= Story of the Congo Free State. **$3.50.
Putnam.

  “Social, political, and economic aspects of the Belgian system of
  government in central Africa. After personal research among the
  documents in the administration office, to which he was given free
  access by the king of the Belgians, the author presents this volume as
  a true and complete history of the affairs of the Congo Free State.
  The work is profusely illustrated with characteristic
  sketches.”—Bookm.

  “His refutation of the British charges is so violent that, considering
  the sources of his information, the argument is not convincing.”

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 595. My. ‘05. 180w.

  “But apart from its value as a plea for the equity and wisdom of King
  Leopold’s administration, the book has an interest which makes a
  strong appeal to the general reader.”

   + + — =Cath. World.= 82: 126. O. ‘05. 620w.

  “We heartily thank the author for the abundant documents, pictures,
  statistics, appendices, and index even more than for his narrative,
  which, while liable for discount as a statement of truth, is rich in
  facts.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 96. Jl. ‘05. 440w.

  “As a polemic it is plain that ... Mr. Wack writes from a prejudiced,
  anti-British standpoint.”

     — + =Ind.= 59: 390. Ag. 17, ‘05. 300w.

  “The most interesting as well as the most trustworthy feature of the
  book is its profuse photographic illustration.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 276. Ap. 6, ‘05. 940w.

  “Mr. Wack’s book, however, seems to be ‘the real thing,’ and is the
  most complete work on the subject that has yet appeared.” James
  Gustavus Whiteley.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 129. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1710w.

  “He makes it evident at the very outset that he did not approach his
  task with an altogether unbiased mind. If his monograph fails as a
  refutation, it is not, however without value as contributing useful
  information in regard to the history and resources of the Free State.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 761. Mr. 25, ‘05. 280w.

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 38: 465. Mr. 25, ‘05. 970w.


=Waddell, Charles Carey.= Van Suyden sapphires. †$1.50. Dodd.

  Miss Gwendolen Bramblestone, one of the guests, at Mrs. Van Suyden’s
  country place for a week-end house party, becomes implicated in a
  mysterious jewel robbery. The story follows her efforts to establish
  her innocence and to recover the gems. Her Scotch lover, the
  “gentleman burglar,” and an ex-jockey detective add to the plot and to
  the character interest.

  “Exceedingly interesting tale in spite of its thinning out toward the
  end.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 347 My. 27. ‘05. 560w.

  “An absorbing story from start to finish.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 391. Je. 17. ‘05. 160w.

  “The plot is most ingenious.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 144. My. 13, ‘05. 130w.


=Waddell, Laurence Austine.= Lhasa and its mysteries; with a record of
the expedition of 1903-4. *$6. Dutton.

  This detailed account of the expedition to Lhasa is written by the
  chief medical officer of the military escort which accompanied Sir
  Francis Younghusband. There is an historical introduction, and there
  are diagrams, plans, maps, and illustrations from photographs taken by
  the author.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 423. Ap. 8. 2210w.

  “His book is decidedly interesting. It contains a great deal of new
  matter regarding the country. The author has seen a great deal, but he
  does not impress us as a man of a scholarly, independent, and broadly
  cultivated mind.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 484. Je. 15, ‘05. 2760w.

  “In the matter of authoritative backgrounds, at all events, Col.
  Waddell’s book on the Lhasa mission and its antecedents is the most
  complete which has so far appeared.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 262. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1640w.

  “Inferior in literary quality to both Mr. Landon’s ‘The opening of
  Tibet’ and Mr. Candler’s ‘The unveiling of Lhasa,’ it deals with the
  subject more broadly and intimately than either.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 241. My. 27, ‘05. 1920w.

  “We may therefore accept the statement made in ‘Lhasa and its
  mysteries’ as an authoritative description, so far as opportunity
  allowed, of the inner life of the people.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 56. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1990w.

  “He writes with clearness and grace, he has an eye for the picturesque
  and curious, and he provides a variety of information in which every
  type of reader may find something to his taste. The only blemish is an
  occasional tendency to egotism.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 320. S. 2, ‘05. 1370w.


=Waddington, Mary Alsop King.= Italian letters of a diplomat’s wife.
**$2.50. Scribner.

  The first part of the book gives an account of a visit to Italy in
  1880, just after Monsieur Waddington had resigned the premiership of
  France, while part 2, Italy revisited, depicts Rome twenty years
  later, after Monsieur Waddington’s death, and describes a new pope and
  a new king and queen. The letters give glimpses of society and
  notables, of state and social functions, of Italian skies and gardens.

  “We feel we cannot have too many books like this—the expression of a
  cultivated, well-bred, cosmopolitan, and always kindly and
  good-natured mind.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 443. Ap. 22, ‘05. 1500w.

       + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 938. Jl. ‘05. 60w.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 494. Ap. 15. 770w.

  “The present volume of Madame Waddington’s letters makes a most
  interesting and intimate history of social life in Italy during the
  past quarter of a century.” Jeannette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 506. Je. ‘05. 780w.

  “The book as a whole, though entertaining, hardly equals its
  predecessor in interest.”

       + =Dial.= 38: 357. My. 16, ‘03. 460w.

  “They are just such letters as one would like to get if he had a
  friend at court, personal, chatty and unaffected.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1070. My. 11, ‘05. 170w.

  “The book has its defects. But, after all, what we absolutely demand
  in a book of this kind is that it shall be interesting; and
  interesting the book is, and full of the atmosphere of Italy.”

   + + — =Nation.= 80: 418. My. 25, ‘05. 1270w.

  “Mme. Waddington in Italy is not perhaps Mme. Waddington at her best.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 212. Ap. 8, ‘05. 1230w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 220w.

  “What the later volume lacks in unity it amply makes up in variety.
  Madame Waddington writes familiarly, but her books are singularly free
  from trivialities and gossip, and one looks in vain for anything like
  malice or scandal.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 1014. Ap. 22, ‘05. 240w.

  “Mme. Waddington’s book is among neither the best nor the worst of its
  class.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 836. My. 27, ‘05. 330w.

     + + =Reader.= 6: 596. O. ‘05. 260w.

  “The stream of pleasant babble flows along so easily and briskly and
  vividly that only a veritable churl could refuse to be vastly
  entertained.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 186. Ag. 5, ‘05. 710w.


* =Wade, Blanche Elizabeth.= Garden in pink. **$1.75. McClurg.

  “Best of All” was blessed not only with a fertile imagination but with
  a husband, “The Other One,” who entered delightedly into all her
  schemes, and together they turned an old fashioned Italian garden into
  a pink garden filling it with all the things that bloom pink and
  gazing at it thru rose colored glasses. Here they and Best of All’s
  sister, called “The Prevaricator,” because she wrote stories, whiled
  away much of a happy summer. A dozen garden photographs printed on
  thin paper and mounted on separate pages, also various border designs
  drawn by Lucy Fitch Perkins, and printed in pink and green, create a
  real pink garden atmosphere.

  * “A novelty in garden books.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 385. D. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  * “A charming volume.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 832. D. 2, ‘05. 210w.

 *     + =Outlook.= 81: 1038. D. 23, ‘05. 90w.


=Wade, Mrs. Mary Hazelton (Blanchard).= Coming of the white men: stories
of how our country was discovered. †75c. Wilde.

  This is the first volume in a series known as “Uncle Sam’s old-time
  stories.” It aims to interest young readers in the beginnings of
  American history, and to arouse patriotism. The present narrative
  covers the period from the time when the Norsemen set foot upon our
  soil down to the establishing of the Maryland colony.


=Wade, Mrs. Mary Hazelton (Blanchard).= Ten big Indians. †$1. Wilde.

  A companion volume of “Ten little Indians.” This sketch includes the
  chiefs and leaders of the tribes from which the ten little Indians
  were drawn. The qualities of the red men and the different periods of
  American history and different sections of the country are represented
  while the author shows that thru such means as bravery, oratory,
  cunning and in a few instances kindness, these braves won power and
  prominence.


=Wagner, Charles.= Busy life; or, The conquest of energy; tr. from the
French by G: Moorhead. 60c. Ogilvie.

  A book of moral teaching intended to instill into the minds of the
  readers the desire for the real things of life, among which there is
  none comparable to energy, which is virtue itself, stimulating in us
  and in others, life, joy, and hope.


* =Wagner, Charles.= Justice; tr. from the French by Mary Louise Hendee.
**$1. McClure.

  “‘A disposition to unfairness, bad faith, and evil speaking, is abroad
  in every field,’ says the author in his preface, ‘and a matter over
  which men do not contend at daggers drawn, is hard to find.’ To
  counteract this evil, the little book teaches the lesson of sweet
  reasonableness and Christian charity.” (Dial.) The contents include:
  The birth of righteousness; Dominion and voluntary service; Mine and
  thine; Science and faith; The love of country—Humanity; The
  churches—The church—Religious justice; Society and the individual
  social justice; The religious conception of work.

  * “Fluent and apparently careful translation. These new chapters
  contain little that is essentially new to those familiar with the
  volumes that have preceded.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 244. O. 16, ‘05. 320w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 636. S. 30, ‘05. 650w.


=Wagner, Charles.= My appeal to America; being my first address to an
American audience. **50c. McClure.

  An appeal for active goodness and the “simple life,” with an
  introduction by Dr. Lyman Abbott, and notes and appendices. The
  profits of the book are to go to a fund to furnish a site for a church
  of which Mr. Wagner is to be the pastor.

  “In remarkably lucid English, occasionally quaint, and always naïvely
  serious, even when expressive of a saving sense of humor.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 706. Mr. 18, ‘05. 120w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 383. Mr. ‘05. 60w.


=Wagner, Charles.= On life’s threshold: talks to young people on
character and conduct; tr. by Edna St. John. **$1. McClure.

  “In talking to young people ... is it necessary to ... be genuine,
  direct and simple. In this respect these talks are excellent, and can
  profitably be studied as models by many of our preachers and teachers.
  The ethical instruction is developed by a process of reasoning instead
  of being based on dogma and authority, and is not even very definitely
  Christian, so there ought not to be any objection to the use of the
  book in the public school of any locality.”—Ind.

  “Pastor Wagner’s power lies in the fact that he is not ashamed to put
  commonplaces in plain language.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 729. Mr. 30, ‘05. 140w.

  “The volume is a careful guidebook to everyday life.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 478. S. ‘05. 220w.

  “Another little volume of thought-provoking, cheerful philosophy.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 512. Ap. ‘03. 100w.


=Wagner, Richard.= Selections from the music dramas of Richard Wagner;
arranged for the piano by Otto Singer. $1.50. Ditson.

  A late addition to the “Musician’s library.” The excerpts are not
  difficult for the amateur and include representative parts of eleven
  operas from “Rienzi” to “Parsifal.”

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 422. Je. 16, ‘05. 90w.

  “The Wagner book is altogether the most satisfactory collection of
  excerpts from the works of that musical Titan that we have ever seen.
  The selection is wise and comprehensive. Mr. Aldrich’s preface is all
  that such a foreword should be.”

   + + + =Ind.= 59: 393. Ag. 17, ‘05. 90w.


=Wagner, Richard.= Richard Wagner to Mathilde Wesendonck; tr. by W.
Ashton Ellis. $4. Scribner.

  “The world is indebted to Mathilde Wesendonck for two great
  achievements—she inspired the composition of ‘Tristan and Isolde,’ and
  she thereby forced the composer to defer the completion of the ‘Ring
  des Nibelungen’ until his powers were in their full maturity. This
  remarkable collection of letters, first published after the death of
  the lady, which took place in 1902, is another fruit of their
  relationship. What the nature or that relationship was, we do not
  propose to discuss.... Its only importance for us consists in its
  artistic results.”—Lond. Times.

  “No lover of the greatest modern master of music should fail to read
  them.” Jeanette L. Gilder.

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 216. S. ‘05. 1050w.

  “If the work has been performed conscientiously,—that is, if there has
  been no improper discrimination in the selection from private
  correspondence, nothing omitted which would tend to develop the real
  character of the man,—the plan is unobjectionable, even admirable, as
  it brings the man himself very near to the reader.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 118. S. 1, ‘05. 520w.

  “To Mr. Ashton Ellis’s fashion of translating we cannot altogether
  reconcile ourselves. The translator, however, deserves the greatest
  praise for the careful way in which he has annotated the letters and
  for the interesting dissertations which he has prefixed and appended
  to them.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 174. Je. 9, ‘05. 2150w.

  “The peculiarities of Wagner’s style are to a considerable extent
  reflected in the English version.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 126. Ag. 10, ‘05. 790w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 369. Je. 10, ‘05. 240w.

  [Mr. Ellis] “produces English prose that is as gnarled as Wagner’s
  German. It is not often that the inner workings of genius have been so
  illumined.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 624. S. 23, ‘05. 670w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 255. Ag. ‘05. 60w.


=Wakefield, Frank H.= Marriage—limited. $1.50. Neale.

  The setting of this story is in a future time when a seven year
  marriage contract is in vogue. This contract may be renewed at its
  expiration, or the parties to it may form new contracts. No one may
  marry more than five times, and all children are brought up and
  educated by the state. The plot concerns a murder and a robbery and
  some clever detective work, but these things seem commonplace, and it
  is the unique state of society that is exciting.


=Walker, Ernest.= Beethoven. $1. Brentano’s.

  The third volume in “The music of the masters” series is a Beethoven
  handbook which gives a sketch, with suggestive motives, of his
  principal compositions, including choral music, vocal music, stage
  music, orchestral works, solo instrument music, chamber music, and
  piano-forte music. The closing chapter gives a composite view of his
  music as a whole, showing both his creative genius and reflected
  qualities.

  “The author has confined himself to criticism which is often of a very
  striking and suggestive kind.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 235. Jl. 21, ‘05. 600w.

  “On the whole one must admit him to be a sane and safe guide and
  suggestive withal.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 464. Je. 8, ‘05. 150w.

  “On the whole, Mr. Walker’s analyses and discussions are enlightened
  and sympathetic.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 355. Je. 3, ‘05. 440w.


=Wallace, Alfred Russel.= My life: a record of events and opinion. *$6.
Dodd.

  “No one would guess this to be the work of an octogenarian.... There
  is no sign of diminished vigour, whether in the earlier part, which is
  written almost entirely from memory, or in the latter, which is
  largely devoted to a trenchant defence of socialism, spiritualism, and
  other darling fads of his old age. The book may be divided into four
  sections, which will doubtless appeal with varying force to different
  readers. First we have boyhood and adolescence—the student; then the
  famous expeditions to South America and the Malay archipelago—the
  naturalist and collector; thirdly, the scientific and literary work at
  home, the intercourse and correspondence with eminent
  contemporaries—the evolutionist; lastly, the struggle with economic
  problems of modern life—the socialist and reformer.”—Lond. Times.

  “Dr. Wallace has been his own recording angel, and those who peruse
  the record cannot but pronounce it well and truly written.” W. P.
  Pycraft.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1119. O. 28, ‘05. 1870w.

  * “Mr. Wallace’s narrative in other words, can hardly be called a
  model of conciseness. Still its wonderful candour wins ample
  forgiveness for its prolixity.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 649. N. 11. 1040w.

  “He writes with the crystalline simplicity that belongs to a sincere
  and candid mind, that invests even trivial things with interest, and
  continues to charm when wit and fancy, unless they be of a very high
  order, seem faded or forced.”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 348. O. 20, ‘05. 2550w.

  “While we fully recognize the very extensive variety and importance in
  many respects of Dr. Wallace’s career we cannot but think he has
  followed an undesirable precedent in rivalling Spencer’s
  self-expansiveness. We cannot imagine any reader who will not find the
  greater part of it worth the reading.”

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 526. O. 21, ‘05. 1670w.


=Wallace, Dillon.= Lure of the Labrador wild. **$1.50. Revell.

  The account of an exploring expedition into the unknown wilds of
  Labrador in the summer of 1903. The trip was undertaken by Leonidas
  Hubbard, jr., who perished from hunger and exhaustion, the author and
  a half-breed Cree Indian as guide. The story is a pitiful one of
  hardship and disappointment. The party set out with inadequate
  provisions, and an insufficient knowledge of the country, and having
  caught but a glimpse of Lake Michikaman, ragged and starving they were
  forced to turn back; winter closed in upon them, Hubbard succumbed,
  and Wallace barely escaped with his life. The story is told simply and
  graphically, and the author while depicting its horrors admits that he
  still feels the lure of the wild saying: “The smoke of the camp-fire
  is in my blood. The fragrance of the forest is in my nostrils. Perhaps
  it is God’s will that I finish the work of exploration that Hubbard
  began.” There are a number of illustrations from photographs and three
  original and accurate maps.

  “It is one of the most interesting accounts of exploration we have
  seen.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 596. My. ‘05. 70w.

  “Seldom has a story of hardship bravely endured been told so
  movingly.” J. B. G.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 472 My. ‘05. 210w.

         =Nation.= 80: 256. Mr. 30, ‘05. 910w. (Condensed narrative.)

  “It is a homely and pitiful story of enterprise, disappointment, and
  starvation. Its manifest moral is that it does not do to start wrong
  if you would go exploring.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 98. F. 18, ‘05. 1620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 170w.

  “It is a wonderfully interesting record, told in a simple and
  straightforward manner.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 706. Mr. 18, ‘05. 220w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 717. My. 6. ‘05. 180w.

  “Presents, in a graphic, literary style, the tragic story.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 381. Mr. ‘05. 160w.

  “It is a vivid, painful, and admirably written account of an exploring
  expedition into that inhospitable wilderness.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 918. Je. 24. ‘05. 340w.


=Wallace, Sir Donald Mackenzie.= Russia. $5. Holt.

  An entirely new and much enlarged edition of a work first published in
  1877. It has been revised and in great part rewritten, bringing the
  history of Russia and her people down to May 1905. The noblesse, and
  the policy of the central government receive adequate treatment, while
  the story of the lower classes, the traders, parish priests, peasants,
  burghers, cossacks, and serfs, their life, customs, local government,
  religion, and the great national movements which affect them, is told
  in detail and in the light of a full knowledge derived from long
  residence among them.

  “The book has thus been brought up to date, without sacrificing any of
  its wisdom, or the political insight and the sane and temperate views
  which have continued for a quarter of a century to give it a leading
  value.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 719. Jl. 8, ‘05. 190w.

  “The most important part of the new book consists in the account of
  the revolutionary movement and in the general considerations contained
  in the last chapter. Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace writes with real
  information, and is, alone among the hosts of writers on Russia whose
  books are just now coming out, to be trusted as a man of authority.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 37. Jl. 8. 1990w.

  “It covers a much broader field than M. Ular even thinks of
  attempting.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 410. N. ‘05. 230w.

  “As a masterly attempt to facilitate one nation’s understanding of
  another, ‘Russia’ stands in the same class as Mr. Bodley’s ‘France’
  and Mr. Bryce’s ‘American commonwealth.’”

   + + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 205. Je. 30, ‘05. 2940w.

  “A book of extreme value on a remarkably difficult subject has been
  rendered invaluable nay, indispensable—for those who wish clearly to
  understand present conditions and future possibilities in the realm of
  the Tsar.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 170. Ag. 24, ‘05. 1110w.

  “Almost every subject is treated of in a method in keeping with its
  nature.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 603. S. 16, ‘05. 1150w.

  “Is the finished product of a man who in every respect is competent to
  deal in a masterly manner with his subject.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 446. S. 30, ‘05. 170w.

  “The work is a large and exhaustive one. It is regarded by many
  Russians as the best work about their country ever written by a
  foreigner.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 190w.

     + + =Sat. R.= 100: 341. S. 9, ‘05. 1480w.

  “Sir Donald Wallace writes of modern parties with a serene
  impartiality, and a clearness and fulness which are only too rare in
  works on the subject. We may differ from the author’s conclusions, but
  we are compelled to respect them; and since he gives his data frankly
  and fairly, he provides the reader, if he be mistaken, with materials
  for an independent judgment.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 152. Jl. 29, ‘05. 1030w.


=Waller, Mary Ella.= Daughter of the rich. †$1.50. Little.

  A favorite among young readers whose popularity demands a new edition
  to which Ellen Bernard Thompson has contributed six full-page
  illustrations.


=Waller, Mary Ella.= Sanna. †$1.50. Harper.

  “The heroine is the center of an admiring circle of homely Nantucket
  folk, one of the vivid blossoms that glow in the fresh salt breezes.
  Each character in the story is distinctly individualized, and humor
  and pathos mingle in their shrewd talk. Somewhat apart, but always
  sympathetic with the village people, are the members of the Torrence
  family, within whose bounds are found the seeds that ripen into
  tragedy and give a dramatic touch to the well-managed plot.”—Outlook.

         =Ind.= 59: 209. Jl. 27, ‘05. 150w.

  “The author’s art falls below her invention. Nevertheless, ‘Sanna’ is
  a well-written, wholesome, breezy tale.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 319. My. 13, ‘05. 360w.

  “Altogether this is a novel quite above the average in construction
  and sustained interest.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 143. My. 13, ‘05. 110w.


* =Wallis, Louis.= Egoism: a study in the social premises of religion,
$1. Univ. of Chicago press.

  The author discusses the proposition that “egoism is the only ‘force’
  propelling the social machine,” which thesis he demonstrates by
  evidence drawn from biblical history; he further maintains that the
  historical criticism of the Bible must be made in the light of
  sociology; finally, he shows the practical bearing of this on the
  present social problems.


=Walpole, Horace.= Letters chronologically arranged and ed. with notes
and indices, by Mrs. Paget Toynbee. 16v. ea. *$2; set, *$32. Oxford.

  Twelve of these sixteen volumes have been published to date. They
  contain the letters in as complete form as possible, giving four
  hundred letters not included in the “Latest edition of collected
  letters,” and which have never before been printed. There is
  additional annotation and an exhaustive index. The edition is
  illustrated by fifty portraits in photogravure, and three facsimiles
  of original letters.

         =Acad.= 68: 195. Mr. 4, ‘05. 1210w. (Review of v. 9-12.)

  “It is sufficient to say that there is no indication that the editor
  has become weary in her work, for the foot-notes still contain ample
  information and represent much labor.”

     + + =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 708. Ap. ‘05. 110w. (Review of vols.
         IX-XII.)

  “The value of Mrs. Toynbee’s work ... does not lie in fresh
  discoveries so much as in the patient devotion with which she has
  sifted and sorted the whole correspondence. The notes ... are
  unobtrusive, and admirable in clarity and conciseness, and, as editing
  goes, this collection of letters could not be bettered.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 40. Ja. 14. 1440w. (Reviews vols. IX.-XII.)

  “It is superfluous to repeat how eminently Mrs. Toynbee’s edition of
  Walpole overtops all others. To render it supremely enduring it needs
  but one addition ... a companion volume of annotations. Mrs. Toynbee’s
  too chary annotation is always pertinent.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 231. Mr. 23, ‘05. 1810w. (Review of vols.
         IX-XII.)

  “This edition of Mrs. Paget Toynbee’s is as complete as possible, and
  otherwise as pleasing and attractive as an edition can be made.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 140w.

 *   + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 898. D. 16, ‘05. 170w. (Review of v. 13-15.)

  “If these letters, then, have not all the airy volatility and gay
  sparkle of Walpole’s earlier days, it is still astonishing how he
  retains his freshness and wit, and these volumes yield to none in
  their interest.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 748. My. 20, ‘05. 2060w. (Re-review of v. 9-12.)


=Walpole, Spencer Horatio.= History of twenty-five years, 1855-1881. 2v.
$10. Longmans.

  The author, who held official positions in the war and post-office
  departments from 1858 to 1899, is the only English writer who has had
  the advantage of being in active service in Downing street while
  engaged in historical research. “The better acquainted a student is
  with the other histories of the middle years of the nineteenth century
  the greater is his indebtedness to Sir Spencer Walpole for the many
  little asides in which he introduces new material, based not on books,
  official or non-official, but on his own personal experience, and on
  information which he acquired first hand during his long and
  distinguished career in the British civil service.... His history
  covers Europe, and to a large extent the United States, as well as the
  United Kingdom and the over-sea possessions of Great Britain. He cites
  an authority for every statement he makes; and his authorities,
  appended as foot-notes, show that there are few sources—British,
  American or European—on which he has not drawn.... The first hundred
  pages in the second volume are devoted to the War of the rebellion and
  to the attitude of England to the Federal and Confederate
  governments.” (Ind.)

  “The style is commonplace and diffuse. At times it is wordy in the
  extreme. The marshaling of all this material has been excellently
  managed.”

   + + — =Ind.= 58: 436. F. 23, ‘05. 900w.


* =Walters, Henry Beauchamp.= History of ancient pottery, Greek,
Etruscan, and Roman; based on the work of Samuel Birch. 2v. *$15.
Scribner.

  “The first adequate treatment the history of ancient pottery received
  was in the two volumes of Dr. Samuel Birch, published in 1857....
  Since Birch’s death, in 1885, so much new material has been gathered
  that a further revision of his work has been demanded.... The results
  of this revision and extension of Dr. Birch’s work are two sumptuous
  volumes of considerably more than five hundred pages each, well
  provided with indexes, and bibliographies.” (Dial). “We have ... in
  the two volumes seventeen chapters devoted to Greek vases and their
  decoration, and one chapter devoted to ‘Etruscan and South Italian
  pottery’; five chapters on Roman pottery, by which is meant the
  pottery of Italy under the Roman rule; and, finally, brief mention of
  earthenware found in Britain, Gaul, and Germany, but evidently of the
  Roman Imperial epoch.... There are sixty-nine plates and many are in
  color.... There are, moreover, two hundred and fifty text
  illustrations.”—Nation.

  * “Mr. Walters has provided us with an instalment which is likely for
  many years to prove a most valuable work of reference for those
  branches of the subject which he includes in his survey. Almost every
  page attests the care and thoroughness with which published
  authorities have been consulted.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905. 2: 475. O. 7. 890w.

  Reviewed by Arthur Howard Noll.

 *   + + =Dial.= 39: 301. N. 16, ‘05. 1280w.

  * “The new publication is practically a complete summary of everything
  now known of classic ceramic art, no source of information, English or
  foreign, having been neglected.”

   + + + =Int. Studio.= 27: 88. N. ‘05. 470w.

 *   + + =Nation.= 81: 283. O. 5. ‘05. 1530w.

  * “Other and more expensive volumes have surpassed it in beauty of
  illustrations; none in its exhaustive and logical treatment of ancient
  pottery and the true and complete meaning of the fragments which have
  come down to us.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 862. D. 2, ‘05. 450w.

  * “The defects in these volumes arise principally from the narrow
  outlook with which they are written. Upon the whole, it is perhaps
  surprising that the attempt to condense so vast an accumulation of
  material into the form of a handbook has been so nearly crowned with
  success; especially as it has been made at a moment when the questions
  of the early history of the art are yet in solution and cannot be
  summarised without danger.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 613. O. 21, ‘05. 1300w.


=Waltz, Elizabeth Cherry.= Ancient landmark. †$1.50. McClure.

  A romance of Kentucky which deals with the question of divorce. There
  is a much-abused heroine, the object of a husband’s violence when the
  drug habit is upon him, into whose head never entered the idea of
  divorce. “But Lucien Beardsley arose upon the horizon. A Virginian by
  birth, a cosmopolitan by education, a man of modern ideas.... Lucien
  found in the unhappy Dulcie a cousin many times removed, and undertook
  to champion her cause, to upset the ancient landmark, to establish the
  new custom of divorce, and to launch the grief-stricken Dulcinea upon
  a new and glittering sea of happiness.” (N. Y. Times.)

 *     + =Ind.= 59: 1229. N. 23, ‘05. 150w.

  “Mrs. Waltz is a born writer of sensational fiction, and carries her
  reader triumphantly through scenes that would be intolerable from a
  less vigorous hand.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 368. N. 2, ‘05. 340w.

  “Many of the personages are drawn with vitality.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 650. O. 7, ‘05. 300w.

  “An exciting story from start to finish.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 380. O. 14, ‘05. 50w.


Wampum library of American literature; ed. by Brander Matthews. **$1.40.
Longmans.

  These three volumes form the beginning of a series which when
  completed will illustrate the development of the various forms of
  American literature. Each volume treats of a single species, tracing
  the evolution of this definite form and presenting in chronological
  sequence typical examples chosen from the writings of American authors
  born prior to 1850. Volume I, “American short stories,” edited by
  Charles Sears Baldwin, contains a comprehensive introduction, and
  selected stories which he divides into two periods, the “tentative”
  and the “new form.” Under the former are selections from Irving,
  Austin, Hall, and Pike; under the latter, Hawthorne, Longfellow, Poe,
  Willis, Kirkland, O’Brien, Hart, Webster, Taylor, Bunner, and
  Frederic. Volume II, “American literary criticism,” edited by William
  Morton Payne, deals with the development of the critical spirit in
  American literature. The introduction shows literary insight and
  critical ability and ranks with the essays which follow. The essays
  selected are entirely upon literary themes, and include selections
  from Dana, Ripley, Emerson, Poe, Ossoli, Lowell, Whitman, Whipple,
  Stedman, Howells, Lanier, and James. Volume III, “American familiar
  verse,” edited by Brander Matthews, who is also editing the edition as
  a whole, contains a, lengthy introduction which defines Familiar verse
  as—“the lyric of commingled sentiment and playfulness, which is more
  generally and more carelessly called vers de société.” A rather
  catholic choice of authors follows—Freneau, J. Q. Adams, Moore,
  Irving, Bryant, Halleck, Drake, Whittier, Longfellow, Holmes, Saxe,
  Lowell, Stoddard, Stedman, Aldrich, and many others.

  “Two compilations, which are fitted to serve a good purpose in advance
  English classes.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 80: 832. Mr. ‘05. 390w. (Reviews vols. I. and
         II.)

  “If the succeeding volumes are as capably edited as the three now
  published, the series will prove of great value in the historical
  study of our literature. From the character of these three volumes it
  is evident that the series when complete will place in their proper
  proportions the successive steps in the evolution of these distinct
  literary forms. The one unfortunate feature in the general plan of the
  library is the arbitrary restriction which prohibits a selection from
  any ~living~ American writers whose birth has occurred since December
  31, 1850.” W. E. Simonds.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 13. Ja. 1, ‘05. 1350w.

  “The ~genre~ of familiar verse is so well adapted to this particular
  purpose, and Mr. Matthews has shown such skill in selection, that his
  own volume will probably bear the test of time as the standard
  anthology. The value of the illustrative material in the others is
  more doubtful.” G. R. Carpenter.

     + + =Educ. R.= 29: 424. Ap. ‘05. 490w. (Reviews vols. I.-III.)

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 250. F. ‘05. 290w.


=Ward, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps (Mrs. Herbert D. Ward).= Trixy. $1.50.
Houghton.

  This story, which is a dramatic argument against vivisection, has for
  its heroine Trixy, a performing French poodle, who, barely escaping
  death on the dissecting table, confronts the accused physician in
  court. The human interest centers about this young scientist who loses
  the affections of the woman he loves, and eventually his own life, by
  his experiments. A young lawyer, an active defender of little dogs and
  kittens, wins the hand of the girl who could not trust herself to the
  vivisectionist.

  “Clever artist as she is, we are not prepared to say that she has
  avoided many an ignominious descent into the pathetic.”

     + — =Cath. World.= 80: 833. Mr. ‘05. 290w.

  “We do not propose to consider it as a story, but as a tract, for that
  is what it is chiefly in the author’s mind. In this case ... we
  question whether the charity which she gives to beasts does not make
  her forget the charity due to human beings. But Mrs. Ward goes so far
  as to make a superstitious use of natural scenery to enforce her
  warning against vivisection.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 99. Ja. 12, ‘05. 850w.


=Ward, H. Marshall.= Trees: a handbook of forest botany for the
woodlands and the laboratory. 6 vol. ea. *$1.50. Macmillan.

  The author has prepared this series as a text-book for all who need a
  guide to their studies. The text is clear and simple and each volume
  is provided with diagnostic tables devised for use in the field. The
  series includes, Birds and twigs; Leaves; Flowers and inflorescences:
  Fruits and seeds; Seedlings; and The habit and conformation of the
  tree as a whole.

  “The book has evidently been compiled with great care. Its value,
  then, to the student, forester or other, is beyond question.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 280. Ag. 26, 480w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “The book is not only an excellent text-book In forest botany, but is
  a capital study in pedagogy as well.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 414. My. 25, ‘05. 420w. (Review of v. 2.)

  “Is, like the earlier volumes in the series, thoroughly interesting
  and accurate.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 360. N. 2, ‘05. 100w. (Review of v. 3.)

  “The work will be found indispensable to those students who wish to
  make an expert study of forest botany. At the same time it is
  expressed in language so clear and devoid of technicalities that the
  amateur who wishes to know something about our trees and shrubs will
  find this one of the most useful guides to which he can turn.”

   + + + =Nature.= 71: 291. Ja. 26, ‘05. 620w. (Reviews vols. I. and
         II.)

  “There is also a very useful and exhaustive index at the end of the
  book.”

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 482. S. 14, ‘05. 410w. (Review of v. 3.)

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 437. Jl. 1, ‘05. 270w. (Review of v. 3.)


=Ward, H. Snowden.= Canterbury pilgrimages. *$1.75. Lippincott.

  “The interest of the book centers around two great tragedies: the fall
  of Thomas the archbishop, and the fall of Thomas the martyr. These are
  bound up with a part of a still greater tragedy: the collapse of a
  grand religious movement, which, with all its human imperfections and
  short-comings, had done a noble work for those who had needed it most,
  the poor, the weak, the suffering.” The text has been improved by many
  illustrations of churches, shrines and relics, and sketches of the
  “pilgrims’ way.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 130w.

  “Altogether it is an interesting excursion through historical lore for
  the illustration of a significant feature of mediaeval English life
  that Chaucer has kept in permanent remembrance.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 620. S. 28, ‘05. 840w.


=Ward, John.= Our Sudan: its pyramids and progress. *$8.40. Scribner.

  The author gives his reader the privilege of skipping the letterpress
  and looking at his seven hundred illustrations. This picture book of
  Soudanese snap-shots is accompanied by chapters “which give
  interesting if not exactly novel, accounts of events and sundry
  episodes in the story of the African continent during the last fifty
  centuries, combined with details of explorations and military
  expeditions to remote spots during the last fifty years.” (Sat. R.)

  “There can be no doubt of its interest or its future popularity.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 557. My. 6. 430w.

  “It is pieced together in so haphazard a manner and with such contempt
  for all sense of proportion that it can hardly be viewed as a serious
  guide to anybody. Mr. Ward makes many needless mistakes.”

   — — + =Sat. R.= 100: 23. Jl. 1, ‘05. 1160w.

     + + =Spec.= 94: 559. Ap. 15, ‘05. 210w.


=Ward, Mary Augusta Arnold (Mrs. Thomas Humphry Ward).= Marriage of
William Ashe. †$1.50. Harper.

  A novel presenting the political and social order existing in London a
  hundred years ago. William Ashe, a rising young statesman of English
  solidity and force, falls in love with Lady Kitty, beautiful,
  eighteen, just released from a French convent, and neglected by a
  mother of doubtful reputation. He marries her and she leads him gayly
  from one scandal to another, ridiculing his influential friends,
  making enemies of the prime minister, Lord Parham and his wife, and
  capping all by writing a bitterly real satire upon the social set in
  which her marriage has placed her. A fragile, captivating creature of
  varying moods, with an hereditary moral madness in her blood, she
  holds our interest, excites our pity, and dominates the book. But
  there are other characters; William’s mother, the strong aristocratic
  Englishwoman, Mary Lyster, cold, narrow, and selfishly hard, and
  Geoffrey Cliffe—a villain with a dash of genius, whose power over
  Kitty began with her desire to penetrate the secret history of a man
  whose poems filled her with a thrilling sense of feeling and passion
  beyond her ken.

  “It is one of the best that Mrs. Humphry Ward has written, the chief
  fault of it being the wearisome middle. The work is not organically
  built up, and though the interest revives towards the end we still
  feel that the book is imperfect. One can well understand that it would
  have been twice as good if Mrs. Humphry Ward possessed the saving gift
  of humour, but she takes many things in life and particularly her own
  sex much too seriously.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 227. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1570w.

  “It is not in any real sense a remarkable book. There is little or
  nothing in it that has not been given before both by the writer
  herself and by others. The hand of the experienced literary artist is
  visible—too visible in fact.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 332. Mr. 18. 730w.

  “Considered not as a problem, but simply as a study in
  incompatibility, ‘The marriage of William Ashe’ is a piece of subtle
  and delicate workmanship.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

   + + — =Bookm.= 21: 269. My. ‘05. 500w.

  “In spite of its lack of humor the book is never dull.” C. Harwood.

       + =Critic.= 46: 472. My. ‘05. 640w.

  “The interest of the work is sustained, rising to an effective
  dramatic climax, and subsiding into the pathos of a closing scene of
  deathbed repentance and forgiveness.” William Morton Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 389. Je. 1, ‘05. 310w.

  “The first and most obvious complaint is against the strange and
  confusing method with which Mrs. Ward uses the motive of her story.”
  Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + — =Forum.= 37: 100. Jl. ‘05. 1470w.

  “It must be admitted that ‘The marriage of William Ashe,’ which is her
  latest, is likewise her strongest book. As usual in Mrs. Ward’s
  stories, as the end approaches, the interest proportionally deepens.
  The outcome is unpredictable. Never was the advantage of Mrs. Ward’s
  method of composition more fully demonstrated than in ‘The marriage of
  William Ashe.’ The crisis is balanced with absolute nicety: the weight
  of a hair will turn the scales. The minor characters of Mrs. Ward’s
  story are drawn with subtlety and power. All in all, ‘The marriage of
  William Ashe’ is to be regarded as an achievement of consummate art.”
  C. H. Gaines.

   + + + =Harper’s Weekly.= 49: 392. Mr. 18, ‘05. 2060w.

  “It is in the adequate presentation and interpretation of Lady Kitty
  that the author has achieved probably her greatest success as a
  literary artist.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 668. Mr. 23, ‘05. 1290w.

  * “Is the most notable book of the year, and will perhaps be the only
  one to survive.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 1152. N. 16, ‘05. 160w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 336. Ap. 27, ‘05. 1710w.

  “Like a rich personality ‘The marriage of William Ashe’ yields itself
  more and more, as one knows it better. It reveals new depth and beauty
  with each reading; one appreciates how superbly the author has
  triumphed over unusual difficulties of situation and of character; and
  with what noble conclusions she has charged a story which might easily
  have sunk into a moral morass. Its place is with the books that do not
  die. Its author stands among the few living writers of fiction to whom
  the Immortals have passed the torch.” M. Gordon Pryor Rice.

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 146. Mr. 11, ‘05. 1680w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 389. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “One of those solid, thorough, able and workmanlike novels in which
  Mrs. Ward has dealt with some of the most serious matters of
  experience and has proved her right to claim a first position among
  the novelists of the day. The story needs condensation in the closing
  chapters, and suffers from lack of humor.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 771. Ap. 1, ‘05. 300w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 549. Ap. 8, ‘05. 400w.

  “The book expresses, doubtless, the flower of her talent. It is full
  of sweet flavors. It has literary beauty of a high order. ‘The
  marriage of William Ashe’ is not a great story or a vigorous one. It
  is an absorbing one.”

   + + — =Reader.= 5: 783. My. ‘05. 920w.

  “Is one of the few stories of which a measure, at least, of endurance
  may be predicted.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 756. Je. ‘05. 350w.

  “The book, in short, has the drawbacks not only of a ~roman à clef~,
  but of a composite photograph. The most attractive and brilliant of
  all of Mrs. Humphry Ward’s novels. The fine literary quality of her
  work remains, the reader is once more charmed by the restrained
  eloquence of her descriptions, and impressed by the penetrating
  analysis of characters so essentially complex as those of Lady Kitty
  and Geoffrey Cliffe. But along with these familiar excellencies one
  notes a marked improvement in technique, a livelier movement in the
  handling of incident and dialogue,—in short, a greater ease, skill,
  and charm in presentation.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 443. Mr. 25, ‘05. 2020w.


=Ward, Wilfrid Philip.= Aubrey de Vere. *$4.60. Longmans.

  A memoir, based on his unpublished diaries and correspondence of
  Aubrey de Vere by his literary executor. The story of a long and
  rather uneventful life is told largely by the Irish poet himself,
  revealing his own mind and temperament, and giving graphic
  descriptions of contemporary great men, Gladstone, Wordsworth,
  Tennyson, Newman, Browning. His gradual change of religious belief
  which brought him from the English church to Rome, his work during the
  famine of 1846-7, and the service done for Ireland by his voice and
  pen, are given in detail.

  “The editor has based his work on diaries and letters, and has spread
  a feast for the lover of literature where no crude surfeit reigns.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 189. Ag. ‘05. 180w.

  “Sufficient to give a true picture of the man himself. Yet not the
  least of the reader’s reward comes from his more intimate knowledge of
  a pure and unselfish life, lived largely in the service of his
  fellows; a poet who here reveals himself most fully as the patriot and
  friend.” Clark S. Northrup.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 7. Ja. 1, ‘05. 1760w.

  “The literary workmanship is all that could be desired.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 39. Ap. ‘05. 360w.

  “Quite sustains his reputation as a master in the difficult and
  delicate art of the biographer.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 290. F. 25, ‘05. 1680w.


=Warden, Florence.= House by the river, $1. Ogilvie.

  A thrilling story of mystery and intrigue which turns on the theft of
  curios and paintings from a valuable collection. The owner himself is
  in the conspiracy to defraud an insurance company.


=Ware, William.= Aurelian, a tale of the Roman empire in the Third
century. $1.50. Crowell.

  The Luxembourg library offers in single volume edition, handsomely
  bound and fully illustrated, some notable work of fiction that ranks
  among the world’s masterpieces. “Aurelian” is one of the four late
  additions to this series.


=Warner, Anne.= See =French, A. W.=


=Warner, Charles Dudley.= Complete writings; * ed. by Thomas R.
Lounsbury. 15v. ea. $2. Am. pub. co., Hartford, Conn.

  The complete works of Charles Dudley Warner, with a biographical
  sketch appear in this handsome “Backlog” edition. “The volumes are of
  the right size, simply bound, the paper and the typography expressing
  the high quality of the work which this set of books preserves in
  permanent form.” (Outlook.)

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 583. D. ‘05. 160w. (Review of v. 12-15.)

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 463. Jl. 15, ‘05. (Review of v. 9-15.)

  * “Everything has been done by the publishers of this edition to give
  Mr. Warner’s work the dignity and refinement of form which it
  deserves. Professor Lounsbury contributes to the series a biography
  which is characteristically clear, vivacious, and illuminating.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 440. Je. 17, ‘05. 970w.


=Warner, George H.= Jewish spectre. **$1.50. Doubleday.

  The author strips himself entirely of race prejudice and almost
  whimsically creates from myth, from history, from literature and
  present day tendencies a composite Israel stamped with characteristics
  of imagination and fact. “The reader does not at once find out what
  the ‘spectre’ is. At first it seems to be a spectral fear that the Jew
  is to crowd out all competitors in the struggle for existence....
  Later it comes out that the really troublesome ‘spectre’ in the
  writer’s mind is the domain of religious speculation.” (Outlook.)

 *       =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘05. 25w.

  * “Mr. Warner negatives too much and constructs too little.” Edith J.
  Rich.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 302. N. 16, ‘05. 1360w.

  “The merit of the book is that it sincerely attempts to put into a
  single volume a literary view of a very difficult subject.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 991. O. 26, ‘05. 530w.

  “A sort of hotch-potch of anecdote and quotation, legend and fact,
  held together by a strain of comment, now ironical, now impassioned,
  which is not likely to convince, but is generally diverting.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 617. S. 23, ‘05. 350w.

  “The book is cleverly written, and makes many good hits at shining
  marks of folly; but that it is, as announced, ‘an extraordinary’ book,
  except in wrongheadedness, does not appear.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 334. O. 7, ‘05. 300w.

  “Yet with all it is a strangely suggestive book, reassuring to any man
  who feels that America is becoming the New Jerusalem, full of careful
  study and hasty deduction, full of leads which the author does not
  work to a conclusion, full of surprises and odds and ends of valuable
  information—and full of contempt.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 602. N. 4, ‘05. 430w.


=Warner, Horace Everett.= Ethics of force. 50c. Pub. for the
International Union by Ginn.

  This little volume contains, in revised form, a series of five papers
  read before the Ethical Club of Washington, D. C., just prior to and
  after the Spanish war. The titles of the papers are The ethics of
  heroism, The ethics of patriotism, Can war be defended on the
  authority of Christ? Can war be defended on grounds of reason? and
  Some objections.

  “Although the book is somewhat academic in tone, it is worth reading.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 82: 118. O. ‘05. 370w.

  “This is the sort of a thoughtful volume on the subject that should be
  placed on the reading-lists of our public schools.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 414. S. 23, ‘05. 340w.


=Warwick, Charles Franklin.= Mirabeau and the French revolution.
**$2.50. Lippincott.

  “This is the well-written story of the most extraordinary character of
  the most extraordinary scene in the drama of modern history, the
  storm-center of that scene till his death.”—Outlook.

  “It has all the failings and the qualities of the writing of the
  enthusiastic amateur.”

   + — — =Acad.= 68: 778. Jl. 29, ‘05. 690w.

  “It is neither a satisfactory biography of Mirabeau, nor a clear,
  sound and well connected synthesis of the early Revolution.” Fred
  Morrow Fling.

     — — =Am. Hist. R.= 11: 157. O. ‘05. 950w.

  “Considered as reading matter, the book offers nothing new.”

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 86. S. ‘05. 270w.

  “We learn nothing new about Mirabeau or the French revolution; the
  style is sometimes absurd.”

   + — — =Critic.= 47: 192. Ag. ‘05. 130w.

         =Dial.= 39: 119. S. 1, ‘05. 250w.

  “Has neither scholarship nor style to recommend it. The style of the
  book is melodramatic.”

   — — — =Ind.= 59: 817. O. 5, ‘05. 320w.

  “It would be a mistake, however to dismiss it as of slight worth. It
  has some very positive merits. The task of exploring the voluminous
  literature treating of the French revolution is no light one, and Mr.
  Warwick must be credited with having considerably facilitated the
  exploration in respect to the period he reviews.”

   + + — =Lit. D.= 31: 498. O. 7, ‘05.

   + + — =Lit. D.= 31: 498. O. 7, ‘05. 320w.

  “Apart from a certain number of verdicts upon individual characters,
  his text contains little that is distinctive. On the other hand it is
  of much higher quality than most of the illustrations which accompany
  it. The book is undeniably amateurish.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 242. S. 21, ‘05. 410w.

  “There is no great distinction in his style, little compelling fire in
  his accounts of people and events; not much subtlety in his judgments.
  He is sometimes prolix and sometimes repeats himself. Clarity and
  intelligibility are the merits of the book; and they are valuable
  qualities.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 340. My. 27, ‘05. 1850w.

  “Mr. Warwick has made effective use of the best authorities in his
  account both of the tragic scene and of the masterful actor.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 246. My. 27, ‘05. 50w.

  “Mr. Warwick faces his subject fairly.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 26. Jl. 1, ‘05. 270w.

  “It has the distinctive merit of being at once a biography and a
  history,—a graphic narrative of events not less than a just, adequate
  and exceptionally suggestive estimate of a great historical figure.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 597. O. ‘05. 200w.

  “An incisive study of the part played by Mirabeau in the French
  revolution.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 124. Jl. ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Warwick’s book on Mirabeau is passable enough. But it contains
  absolutely nothing new in fact so far as we have observed, and it is
  certainly not distinguished for form or point of view or imagination.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 849. Je. 24, ‘05. 260w.


=Washburn, William Tucker.= First stone, and other stories. $1. Fenno.

  These seventeen short stories are as varied in tone as in subject. One
  is a dramatic scene in the rooms of a danseuse, another is a story of
  Madagascar, a third treats of Mormonism, and a fourth concerns a most
  unfaithful wife.


=Washington, Booker Taliaferro.= Tuskegee and its people: their ideals
and achievements. *$2. Appleton.

  A volume prepared by the officers and former students of the normal
  and industrial institute at Tuskegee, Ala., under the editorial
  direction of Booker T. Washington, who writes an introduction. The
  problem of negro education is treated from the inside by the
  intelligent negro. Seventeen autobiographical sketches are furnished
  by Tuskegee graduates who are now following various occupations.

  “It is an unanswerable argument against the critics of the Tuskegee
  movement in particular and of the education of the negro in general.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 41. Jl. 13, ‘05. 1190w.

  “If the stories are marked by a complacency pardonable under the
  circumstances, and if they fail to prove quite all their authors think
  they do prove for negro progress, yet they are not uninstructive.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 465. Jl. 15, ‘05. 400w.

  “The writing is unpretentious and therefore the more forcible.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 936. Ag. 12, ‘05. 180w.


* =Washington, George.= Washington: principal state papers, $1. Century.

  This volume in the “Thumb nail” series “is uniform with the early
  copies of this series which is a small vest-pocket edition richly
  bound in embossed leather. This volume contains W. E. H. Lecky’s
  famous essay on ‘The character of Washington’ taken from his ‘History
  of England in the eighteenth century,’ ‘Washington’s farewell address
  to the people of the United States,’ his ‘Address to the officers in
  1783,’ his ‘Circular letter addressed to the governors of all the
  states on disbanding the army,’ his ‘Farewell orders to the armies of
  the United States,’ and his ‘Inaugural address to both houses of
  congress.’”—Arena.

 *     + =Arena.= 34: 665. D. ‘05. 290w.

  * “Excellent in point of literary discrimination and value.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 731. D. 2, ‘05. 100w.


=Washington, George.= Washington and the West. **$2. Century.

  A volume which contains the diary kept by Washington in September,
  1784, during his journey into the Ohio basin in the interest of a
  commercial union between the Great lakes and the Potomac river. Mr.
  Hulbert’s commentary shows Washington to be an active, wide-awake
  practical man of affairs which is a little-known and less-appreciated
  phase of his character.

  * “It is a valuable addition to the literature dealing with
  Washington, the man and the statesman.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 663. D. ‘05. 410w.

  * “An interesting and valuable book, somewhat too strongly colored by
  certain prejudices which affected the editor from the beginning of his
  task.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 446. N. 30, ‘05. 480w.

  “Mr. Hulbert’s notes, therefore, are as interesting to read as the
  diary.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 743. N. 4, ‘05. 460w.

  “This is a valuable portrait of Washington in an aspect comparatively
  disregarded hitherto, a portrait drawn by himself.”

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 432. O. 21, ‘05. 200w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 634. N. 11, ‘05. 250w.

 *   + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 756. D. ‘05. 110w.


* =Wasson, George Savary.= Green shay. †$1.50. Houghton.

  “The scene of action ... is almost entirely on the shore and in the
  harbor, though the strenuous life of the open sea is always in the
  background exerting its powerful influence on the actors and the
  drama. The author is attempting to show the evil ways into which many
  of the fishing communities have fallen, and their need of moral and
  spiritual help.”—Outlook.

  * “The thread of the story is not very distinct. The humor of the book
  is good, however, though here and there a little underdone, in
  seasoning and overdone in cooking.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 876. D. 9, ‘05. 170w.

  * “As a tract the book makes a strong appeal; as a story it limps a
  little and lacks freshness of conception and treatment; as a portrayal
  of character it is delightfully quaint and humorous.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 710. N. 25, ‘05. 120w.


=Waters, N. McGee.= Young man’s religion and his father’s faith. **90c.
Crowell.

  Eight practical talks which endeavor to reconcile the old thought and
  the new. On the ground that altho our conception of the Bible has
  changed and broadened the book itself is the same, the author declares
  that the young man who believes in the theory of evolution and
  questions the infallibility of the Bible differs from the faith of his
  fathers only in nonessentials and that altho our creeds may be new
  they seek to define the ways of the same loving God.


* =Waters, Thomas Franklin.= Ipswich in the Massachusetts Bay colony;
with seven appendices. *$5. Ipswich historical soc., Ipswich, Mass.

  The author states in his preface: “I have tried to tell accurately but
  in readable fashion the story of the builders of our town; their homes
  and home life, their employments, their Sabbath keeping, their love of
  learning, their administration of town affairs, their stern delusions,
  their heroism in war, and in resistance to tyranny.” Ipswich was a
  typical New England town founded in 1623, and this detailed history
  has been prepared largely from original town documents, facsimiles of
  several of which are given.

  * “Takes its place in the front rank of its class, and can hardly be
  praised too highly for diligent research, candor, taste, style, and
  construction.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 429. N. 23, ‘05. 820w.

  * “An interesting history of an interesting New England town.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 666. O. 14, ‘05. 590w. (Review of pts. 1 and
         2.)


* =Watkinson, William L.= Inspiration in common life. *35c. Meth. bk.

  A series of helpful suggestions which prove that every man’s possible
  happiness is the direct outgrowth of the appreciation and development
  of his hidden worthiness. The volume is uniform with the “Freedom of
  faith” series.


=Watson, Edward Willard.= Old lamps and new, and other verses; also, By
Gaza’s gate, a cantata, $1. Fisher.

  Under the divisions, Old lamps and new, and A forgotten idyl, the
  author gives us dainty verses, nearly all of which sing of love; some
  of the gladness of it, some of its pathos. By Gaza’s gate—a cantata,
  closes the volume. It is sung by Samson, Delilah, and a chorus; the
  words are based on the text of the Polychrome Bible.


=Watson, Henry Brereton Marriott.= Hurricane island. $1.50. Doubleday.

  A young English doctor tells the story of his experiences on the yacht
  of a German prince. The prince, accompanied by his sister, is eloping
  with a French actress; they all bear assumed names, but the crew
  discover the truth, realize that there is great treasure stored in the
  hold, and mutiny, bloodshed and murder follow. The whole account is
  exciting, but hardly cheerful, save for the love story of the doctor
  and the princess.

  “The thing is done with such an air of assurance, the characters are
  so carefully developed and sustained, that we accept it all, in a
  spirit of meek credulity, and even after a period of sober second
  thought admit that it is one of the best sustained stories of rattling
  adventure that has appeared in many a month.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + + =Bookm.= 21: 184. Ap. ‘05. 370w.

  “This is a very stirring story, and is almost as good as Robert Louis
  Stevenson could have made it.” William Morton Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 388. Je. 1, ‘05. 190w.

  “Has skilfully combined all the ingredients that go to make what boys
  pronounce a ‘rattling good story.’”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 132. Mr. 4, ‘05. 240w.

  “For literary qualities it is vastly inferior to Mr. Watson’s
  ‘Galloping Dick,’ but as a lively story of action it is exciting even
  if improbable.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 253. Mr. 11, ‘05. 60w.

  “It is ridiculous, impossible, and altogether unallied to anything
  that any of us is acquainted with in this severely practical world;
  probably it is for that reason that it is so absorbedly interesting
  for a quiet evening.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 392. Mr. 11, ‘05. 210w.

  “Is a capital romance of love and piracy ... and delightfully
  related.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 762. Je. ‘05. 70w.


* =Watson, Henry Brereton Marriott.= Twisted eglantine. †$1.50.
Appleton.

  “A fascinating story of the time when George IV. was Prince of Wales.
  The leading man character is another Beau Brummel, quite well drawn;
  the freshness, beauty, and grace of the heroine are deftly impressed
  upon the reader.” (Outlook.) “Sir Piers had no scruples in asking
  Barbara Garraway, the Hampshire squire’s daughter, to be his mistress;
  when he found that he had misread her character, he had no scruples in
  carrying his efforts to make her his wife to the point of abducting
  her to his country seat.” (Lond. Times.)

  * “The Beau is the book, and our interest in the book ceases when the
  Beau begins to prance like any sensational hero.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 927. S. 9, ‘05. 460w.

  * “The book thus falls somewhere between the mere romance and the
  novel of character. The period is well realized; the story is
  interesting and exciting; but this painful sounding of a shallow type
  delays its movements, and forbids the happy surrender of judgment
  which is the condition of enjoying a romance.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 287. S. 8, ‘05. 400w.

  * “Mr. Marriott Watson has put his best work into ‘Twisted eglantine,’
  and has scored a distinct triumph in Sir Piers Blakiston—an
  achievement, we should imagine, of no small difficulty.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 783. N. 18, ‘05. 400w.

  * “It has passages which may be distasteful to some readers.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18, ‘05. 50w.


=Watson, Thomas Edward.= Bethany: a story of the old South. $1.50.
Appleton.

  Bethany, a village in middle Georgia, is the scene of a novel which
  describes southern life during the period immediately preceding and
  during the earlier years of the Civil war. The author is a well-known
  writer of both biography and history and his present work is almost an
  autobiography, for he tells of the old South as he knew it in his
  boyhood. The greater part of the book is taken up with the comparison
  of Toombs and Stephens, their characters and the issues for which they
  stood. The slavery question is discussed freely, but while showing a
  burning loyalty to the South, there is no bitterness toward the North.

  “A novel of a rambling sort, although the element of truth is much
  larger than the element of invention. The fire-eating southerner has
  not often been exhibited, in either history or fiction, more
  truthfully and vividly than in the present work. We fear that Mr.
  Watson is still sadly in need of reconstruction.” W. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 127. F. 16, ‘05. 480w.

  “Is scarcely a novel at all. It is history localized and presented
  from the deliberately provincial point of view. Is probably more
  nearly veracious than any picture of southern life ever given by a
  southern author. It is a brilliant interpretation, based upon
  impressions received with the vividness of adoring youth, and written
  out with the restraint and judgment of a mature mind. Mr. Watson’s
  literary style is not always good, is often too insolently local in
  phrasing, but it is always graphic and honest.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 209. Ja. 26, ‘05. 600w.


=Watson, William.= Poems; ed. by J. A. Spender. 2v. *$2.50. Lane.

  In this new edition of his works, the author “has made several
  alterations, even in his greater poems, changes which tend undoubtedly
  to perfect the original. The two volumes before us are not large,
  though they contain a good many poems not to be found in the
  ‘Collected works.’” (Spec.) The poems are critical, philosophical, and
  political.

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 328. Mr. 18. 2460w.

  * “This is such an edition of a poet’s work as one usually waits for
  till the author has ceased to be, or at least to write.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 160w.

  * “An edition that is nearly all that could be wished.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 506. D. 21, ‘05. 640w.

  “We would make but one censorious comment. The political verses should
  have been kept out.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 217. F. 11, ‘05. 1370w.


* =Watson, William.= Prayer, *35c. Meth. bk.

  In this little volume uniform with the “Freedom of faith” series, the
  author discusses the nature, purpose, conditions, difficulties, and
  gain of prayer.


* =Way, Thomas R. and Dennis, G. R.= Art of James McNeill Whistler: an
appreciation. $2. Macmillan.

  A third and cheaper edition of a book which “contains chapters on
  Whistler’s various styles and subjects, with many illustrations, some
  of them in color, and a single chapter on the artist as a writer. It
  is not a life of Whistler; it is an appreciation merely.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “The new edition is an excellent compact little book, not differing
  except in outward details from its predecessors.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 471. Jl. 15, ‘05. 260w.

  * “Their method is rather eulogistic than critical.”

     + — =Outlook.= 80: 690. Jl. 15, ‘05. 30w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 80w.


=Wayne, Charles Stokes.= Prince to order. †$1.50. Lane.

  A young Wall street broker, Carey Grey, wakes up one morning to find
  himself in Paris with a new name, new friends, and his black hair and
  beard bleached yellow. It develops that he has come under the power of
  an old phrenologist and chemist who is passing him off as the crown
  prince of the small kingdom of Budaria, whose king is dying. Grey has
  come to himself because the old scientist’s power is weakened by a
  fatal illness, but he keeps up the delusion in order to trap the other
  conspirators. The complications are many; Grey learns that he has been
  forced to embezzle from his own New York firm while under this strange
  influence and his friends believe him dead and dishonored; it is only
  after many adventures that he vindicates his honor, and re-wins his
  American fiancée.

  “Its treatment lacks distinction, but the tale has one or two features
  of originality. It is not a bad specimen of its class: lively,
  entertaining and tolerably ingenious.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 778. Je. 24. 290w.

  “Here we have still another modification of the Zenda story and one
  which shows ingenuity.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 198. Ap. 1, ‘05. 420w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 393. Je. 17, ‘05. 120w.

         =Pub. Opin.= 38: 714. My. 6, ‘05. 150w.

  “The colors in which this comedy are dressed are over strong, but the
  comedy itself is fairly consistent and interesting.”

     + — =Reader.= 6: 474. S. ‘05. 180w.

  “The initial idea in this story is quite promising. The book is
  amusing.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 25. Jl. 1, ‘05. 300w.


* =Webster, Jean.= Wheat princess. †$1.50, Century.

  The wheat princess, an American girl whose father has cornered the
  wheat market, is living with her aunt and her uncle, who is a
  philanthropist, in an old villa on the outskirts of Rome. The wheat
  famine tells heavily upon the Italian peasants; the newspapers blazon
  her father’s name, the peasants rise in hot indignation, with cries of
  “Wheat! wheat!” and her uncle, who has given so much for them, is
  besieged in his luxurious villa. In the end the Americans, their
  altruistic plans laid low, return to America, but the troublous times
  among the poor of Italy have brought to the big hearted wheat princess
  the love of her uncle’s friend, the man who has shared his unselfish
  dreams.

  * “An entertaining and well-written story upon somewhat novel lines.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 684. N. 18, ‘05. 100w.

  * “Strong, graphic, truthful.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 796. D. 16, ‘05. 160w.


=Webster, John.= White devil and The duchess of Malfy; ed. by Martin W.
Sampson. *60c. Heath.

  A volume of the Belles-lettres series. The play-wright’s two
  masterpieces, “The white devil,” and “The duchess of Malfy,” in
  critical text with the original spelling. An introduction and critical
  notes are included among the editorial helps.


=Weingartner, (Paul) Felix.= Symphony since Beethoven; tr. by Maude
Barrows Dutton. $1. Ditson.

  This book about modern symphonies, by the conductor of the Berlin
  royal symphony concerts, and of the Kaim orchestra, is in its second
  German edition. “He holds that no other symphonies comparable to those
  of Beethoven in lofty grandeur, deep significance and perfection of
  beauty, have ever been composed.... He has small praise for the
  successors of the god of his idolatry in the symphony: a kindly word
  for Schubert, Mendelssohn, Bruckner; condemnation for Schumann and
  Brahms; mere cursory mention of Tschaikoffsky, Dvorak, Rubinstein,
  Borodin, Raff, Goldmark, Saint-Saens, César Franck and Sinding ...
  Favoring criticism on Berlioz and Liszt for their symphonic poems....
  Discussion of Richard Strauss, whose earlier tone-poems the author
  says he admires, but whose later, and greater works he cannot
  appreciate.” (Ind.)

  “An interesting and stimulating essay, albeit so short as to be
  fragmentary in parts. The translation of this essay into English was
  worth while, but one regrets that it was not more skilfully done.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 43. Ja. 5, ‘05. 300w.

  “A sympathetic study.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 30: 761. D. ‘04. 100w.


=Weir, Irene.= Greek painters’ art. *$3. Ginn.

  “This book aims to bring together as much information as possible from
  ancient and modern literature, from the reports of archæologists, and
  from the study of specimens in museums and elsewhere, in regard to all
  that relates to color as used by the Greek painters of old. The book
  is amply illustrated.”—Outlook.

  “Miss Weir possesses a delightful enthusiasm for the Greek painters’
  art, supported by knowledge of ancient and modern archæological
  writings as well as familiarity with art works.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 20. Jl. 1, ‘05. 150w.

       — =Ind.= 59: 40. Jl. 6, ‘05. 340w.

  “A decidedly interesting if somewhat formal story of the least
  generally comprehended of the arts of Greece.”

       + =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 89. Je. ‘05. 290w.

  “A curiously offhand and chatty book upon one of the most difficult
  subjects known to the archæologist.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 312. Ap. 20, ‘05. 390w.

  “It is a most important addition to the popular literature of the
  subject. Its scheme is as original as it is entertaining.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 276. Ap. 29, ‘05. 590w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1059. Ap. 29, ‘05. 390w.

  “Miss Irene Weir has ... rendered art students an incalculable service
  in giving them the advantage of the new light which modern discoveries
  have thrown upon the lost art of Greek painting.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 835. My. 27, ‘05. 300w.

  “Although we have to recognize how little we know, we are able to find
  an account of that little in the present volume.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 261. Ag. 19, ‘05. 150w.


=Weiss, Bernard.= Religion of the New Testament; tr. from the Germ. by
G: H. Schodde. *$2. Funk.

  The object of the book is “to give a ‘brief but clear’ answer to the
  question, what is the religion of the New Testament?... The book is
  divided into three parts. In part I, Dr. Weiss describes the
  suppositions or conditions of the redemption described in the New
  Testament. In part II, he discusses the redemption in Christ proper.
  Here the subjects discussed are the redemptive acts of God. In the
  third part he treats of the realization of redemption in the
  individual and in the congregation, in the present and in the world to
  come.”—N. Y. Times.

  “With all his splendid exegetical and critical qualities, Professor
  Weiss does not write in the spirit of the historian. But this is the
  only serious general criticism one feels compelled to pass upon what
  is, in fact, a remarkably able work.” S. M.

   + + — =Bib. World.= 26: 392. N. ‘05. 620w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 153. Mr. 11, ‘05. 280w.

  “As an exegete Dr. Weiss excels. Men of all schools will find
  something to learn from it.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1478. Je. 29, ‘05. 250w.

  “His treatment of the subject is thoroughly objective, and strongly
  conservative. A somewhat less close adherence to the style of the
  original would have made many sentences of this translation easier
  reading for the unlearned, for whom the author intended it.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 708. Mr. 18, ‘05. 240w.


=Wells, Amos Russell.= That they all may be one. **75c. Funk.

  A plea that Christ’s wish that “His followers might be kept from
  schism, and that His church might be maintained in perfect unity,” may
  be realized in the unification of denominations. To this end the
  author advocates union Bible schools and pastorates, and under such
  chapter headings as, Working together; The search for truth; Churches
  and men; Church union and patriotism, he finally arrives at, The
  united church of Christ.

  “It is not so incoherent as its typographical form would indicate.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 530. O. 28, ‘05. 20w.


=Wells, Carolyn.= Dorrance domain; a story. †$1.50. Wilde.

  Four energetic Dorrances left to the care of their Grandmother
  Dorrance once wealthy, now skilfully supporting a large family on a
  small annuity, bemoan their boarding house existence which seems an
  unbearable hardship after the free life in their Fifty-eighth street
  home. A part of the Grandfather’s legacy was the Dorrance domain, a
  rambling summer hotel, which was not easily disposed of and which
  these daring children propose opening and running for a season. The
  success of their scheme and the enjoyment which the novel experiment
  afforded them are told in Miss Wells’ usual sprightly and humorous
  manner.

  * “Miss Wells is just the writer to make it the kind worth reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 895. D. 16, ‘05. 120w.

         =Outlook.= 81: 575. N. 4, ‘05. 40w.


=Wells, Carolyn.= Patty in the city. †$1.25. Dodd.

  The friends of “Patty at home” will find her quite as delightful to
  know amid the conditions of New York life, where “she resides in an
  apartment overlooking Central park, attends a fashionable school,
  makes new friends, and keeps her old ones.” (Outlook.)

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 648. S. 30, ‘05. 220w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 578. N. 4, ‘05. 70w.


* =Wells, Carolyn.= Satire anthology. **$1.25. Scribner.

  “Beginning with the ancients (Aristophanes, Horace, and Juvenal) ...
  the selections work down to such very modern exemplars of the species
  as Mr. Owen Seaman and Mr. Gelett Burgess. Sprinkled through the list
  of authors we note such out-of-the-way names as those of Ruteboeuf,
  Abraham à Sancta Clara, Villon, and Béranger. The collection is,
  however, mainly one of English verse, from the Elizabethans on.”—Dial.

  * “The selections, from innumerable authors, have been made with
  skill; but certain of the pieces from very minor modern authors might
  have been spared in favor of some omitted bits from Lowell and Holmes,
  both of whom are rather inadequately represented.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 150w.

  * “May safely be depended upon to provide both amusement and
  instruction.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 450. D. 16, ‘05. 100w.

  * “It is ungracious to find fault where there is so much of good. We
  are glad to get the anthology as it stands.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 905. D. 16, ‘05. 610w.

  * “Contains most of the representative and well-known bits of this
  sort of literature.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 640. N. ‘05. 70w.


=Wells, Carolyn, and Taber, Harry Persons.= Matrimonial bureau. †$1.50.
Houghton.

  The story of a girl who, weary of “waiting for the prince,” sees her
  maid happily married thru the agency of a matrimonial bureau, and
  decides to start one of her own. She invites a cousin, who invites a
  friend, who invites another friend, and they all stay all summer.
  Everybody falls in love at cross purposes, a beautiful stranger
  arrives to confuse confusion, and it is all very complicated and
  amusing, but is untangled in the end.

  “The efforts of a New England spinster to be a machine god are amusing
  and some of the conversations hang together well.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 70w.

  “We have never read a more improbable tale, and not often one that so
  completely failed to amuse.”

   — — — =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 220w.

  “The small volume is packed with jokes of the kind visible without a
  glass.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 203. Ap. 1, ‘05. 40w.

  “Here and there are some love scenes very human, very delicately
  wrought. Briefly, ‘The matrimonial bureau’ is like the ‘Summer girl,’
  passing fair, fair but passing.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 214. Ap. 8, ‘05. 330w.

  “It is an excellent book for summer reading, being as light as air.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 392. Je. 17, ‘05. 130w.

  “A book of the slightest sort, hardly comedy, more accurately
  described perhaps as a summer farce.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 1014. Ap. 22, ‘05. 80w.

  “As a literary soufflé, light, well-flavored and well-browned, this
  little story will be a tasty addition to the midsummer feast of
  reading.”

       + =Reader.= 6: 359. Ag. ‘05. 190w.


=Wells, Herbert George.= Kipps: a monograph. †$1.50. Scribner.

  “An uneducated, awkward, and uncultivated clerk in a London draper’s
  establishment suddenly has a large fortune left him, attempts to get
  into high society, is made use of and swindled right and left, but
  finally has the courage to break away, to marry the girl of his
  choice, even though she be a servant girl, and to live his own life.
  In the end fortune smiles on him a second time, but now in moderation,
  and he is left a happy, contented husband and father; and, by a twist
  of Mr. Wells’ whimsical fancy, is made the proprietor of a bookshop
  which he manages on the theory that ‘one book is about as good as
  another.’”—Outlook.

  “The book, in fact, has a purpose, but that purpose is not allowed to
  interfere with its vivacity; and ‘Kipps’ is, indeed, the most amusing
  book and at the same time the tenderest book that Mr. Wells has ever
  written.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1129. O. 28, ‘05. 900w.

  * “He has set aside the speculations of scientific imagination, and
  deals with warm human life to-day. This is the work which was designed
  for him in the end, and we cannot doubt that he will continue to
  devote himself to it.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 681. N. 18. 650w.

  “Deals with his subject in a strong, broad manner, intensified by his
  understanding of such detail of life as the minor incidents of retail
  trade.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 478. N. ‘05. 50w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 1113. N. 9, ‘05. 220w.

  “The merit of the novel, however, is not in the story, but in the
  observation. He never, for a single page, fails to be amusing.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 358. O. 27, ‘05. 780w.

  “Is a humorous story, but it is not a trifling one, and though it
  deals largely with humble folk, it has to do, in a broad and forceful
  way, with much of the seriousness of life.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 649. O. 7, ‘05. 500w.

  “The story in its substance is rather sordid and dull.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 382. O. 14, ‘05. 170w.

  “Kipps, indeed, carries a social question to be long pondered, and the
  author’s side-talks are an important contribution to the old but
  never-ended discussion.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 633. N. 11, ‘05. 290w.

  * “Is another triumph in the art of presenting character.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 759. D. ‘05. 100w.

  * “Mr. Wells, as usual, writes cleverly, brilliantly, wittily.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 658. N. 18, ‘05. 820w.

  * “We have found Kipps in many ways the most human and sympathetic of
  Mr. Wells’s stories.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 718. N. 4, ‘05. 1060w.


=Wells, Herbert George.= Modern Utopia. *$1.50. Scribner.

  Mr. Wells departs from the Utopia-makers of the past in that his
  Utopia is a world-state using a universal language. The author deals
  “with strictly modern and current conditions, and imagines a new state
  of society, whose social basis has been improved and whose social
  problems have been settled.” (N. Y. Times.)

  “Seems to us to mark an advance even on the high level of excellence
  which Mr. Wells had before attained.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 414. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1290w.

  * “We can discover nothing in this sample, however, that goes beyond
  good-natured satire of conditions which none would be so poor as to
  defend.” A. W. S.

       + =Am. J. Soc.= 11: 430. N. ‘05. 250w.

  “There has been no work of this importance published for the last
  thirty years.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 519. Ap. 29. 2450w.

  “The form he has chosen for ‘A modern Utopia’ is exceedingly
  unfortunate. The essay appended ... is a contribution of real value to
  the theory of thinking and written in a style as witty and original as
  that of Professor James.”

     — + =Ind.= 58: 1307. Je. 8, ‘05. 740w.

  “Mr. Wells meant this work as a very serious one. Many readers of it
  will find its perusal trying, and will fail to realize, as proper
  compensation for the task of reading the same, whatever grist it
  offers for the mind.”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 427. S. 23, ‘05. 990w.

  “Mr. Wells’s Utopia is far the most interesting, imaginative, and
  possible of all the Utopias written since the inventions and
  discoveries of science began to colour our conceptions of the future.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 144. My. 5, ‘05. 1650w.

  “In the present book Mr. Wells has become still more moderate and
  practicable and hopeful, without in the least derogating from his
  ingenuity and originality.” F. C. S. S.

     + + =Nature.= 72: 337. Ag. 10, ‘05. 1280w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 313. My. 13, ‘05. 300w.

  “It is carefully thought out and reasoned, and holds together much
  better than the ideal commonwealths imagined by his predecessors.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 342. My. 27, ‘05. 1340w.

  “The method of presentation adopted is exceedingly happy.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 345. Je. 3, ‘05. 310w.

  “It is an admirable piece of literature and a book of unlimited
  suggestiveness. As literature and as philosophy, ‘A modern Utopia’ is
  Mr. Wells’ masterpiece.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 764. Je. ‘05. 220w.

  “The book, both in matter and in form, has been carefully studied and
  thought out. Mr. Wells’s book seems hardly likely to rank as, or to
  remain, a classic Utopia.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 610. O. 21, ‘05. 2040w.


=Wells, Herbert George.= Twelve stories and a dream. †$1.50. Scribner.

  In this volume of stories Mr. Wells “has but rarely any prophetic or
  scientific axe to grind. His stories deal with the marvelous under
  many aspects, but always in the light of his half-joyous,
  half-whimsical humor.” (R. of Rs.)

  “None of them is equal to the best of his former tales, but there are
  some that are very amusing and some quite gruesome.”

     + — =Ind.= 58: 1308. Je. 8, ‘05. 100w.

  “Enough have surely been mentioned to show the varied entertainment
  which Mr. Wells offers and to indicate our opinion that he has never
  offered any better.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 327. My. 20, ‘05. 590w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 395. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “In at least half of these stories Mr. Wells is seen at his best.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1062. Ap. 29, ‘05. 160w.

  “‘Twelve stories and a dream’ will not lower Mr. Wells’ reputation as
  an imaginative writer, which his previous volumes probably did.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 763. Je. ‘05. 80w.


=Welsh, Charles=, ed. See Famous battles of the Nineteenth century.


=Wendell, Barrett.= Temper of the 17th century in English literature.
**$1.50. Scribner.

  “Prof. Barrett Wendell, of the English department at Harvard
  university, has gathered his lectures on English literature, delivered
  on the Clark foundation at Trinity college, Cambridge (1902-‘03), into
  a volume.... These are the first regular lectures concerning English
  literature ever given by an American at an English university.
  Together, they are practically a literary study of the age of Dryden.
  The purpose in these lectures was, he declares, to indicate the manner
  in which the national temper of England, as revealed in
  seventeenth-century literature, ‘changed from a temper ancestrally
  common to modern England, and to modern America, and became, before
  the century closed, something which later time must recognize as
  distinctly, specifically, English.”—R. of Rs.

  “Prof. Wendell is always interesting, whether we agree with him or
  not, and the Clark lectures ... have much good matter in them, with
  perhaps as much that is by no means so good.”

   + + — =Critic.= 47: 92. Jl. ‘05. 190w.

  “Smoothness of style ... Though this volume is of such high merit that
  it will take a place at once as one of the recognized authorities on
  its subject, it is not likely that all its positions will be accepted
  without a demur.” Herbert W. Horwill.

   + + — =Forum.= 36: 407. Ja. ‘05. 1970w.

  “The title of this book is more philosophical than the contents
  warrant; instead of obtaining one final impression, we remember the
  separate remarks—often wise, suggestive and illuminating—on separate
  authors.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 1016. My. 4, ‘05. 260w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 250. F. ‘05. 130w.

  “Its author seems wholly destitute of any pretension to critical
  discernment. The diction and style, as might be expected, are on a par
  with the rest of the book. It is scandalous that a great university
  like Cambridge should tolerate such standards of information and
  criticism as this volume exhibits.”

   — — — =Sat. R.= 99: 704. My. 27, ‘05. 1960w.


=Wertheimer, Edward von.= Duke of Reichstadt. **$5. Lane.

  Dr. Wertheimer’s monograph on the Duke of Reichstadt makes use of a
  vast deal of new biographical material. The study covers the political
  setting of the life in detail, painstakingly going over the whole
  piece of statecraft involved in Napoleon’s Austrian marriage, dwelling
  at length upon the influence which the alliance exerted upon the
  policy of Napoleon and of his opponents. The short uneventful life of
  Napoleon’s son is of less interest than the stirring history which the
  father tried to shape for the glory of a permanent kingdom. “It is to
  the fact that he was his father’s son that the fame of the Duke of
  Reichstadt is due ... the shadow of a great name surrounds him, and
  historical writers record and discuss his every act as if he had been
  a real king, instead of merely the If, Yes, and Perhaps of Modern
  European history.” (N. Y. Times.)

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 1124. O. 28, ‘05. 1780w.

  “As a rule, however, the narrative runs easily—perhaps more so than is
  the case with most translations.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 536. O. 21, 2040w.

  * “The translation, on the whole, is very satisfactory, though there
  are occasional lapses into awkwardness or obscurity. Here and there
  one may question the justice of Dr. Wertheimer’s remarks. But these
  and a few other blemishes do not detract from the value of a most
  careful and interesting work, which presents the first complete and
  authoritative account of the life of this unfortunate prince.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 337. O. 13, ‘05. 1360w.

  “Mr. de Wertheimer’s book is a valuable contribution to historical
  knowledge. The author’s style, however, is somewhat confused, and his
  judgment is far from critical.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 386. N. 9, ‘05. 1050w.

  “He has scraped everything together, sorted it out, sifted it, and
  arranged it in what must be acknowledged to be an interesting story.
  The matter is not important, however. The English translation of Mr.
  de Wertheimer’s book is good.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 669. O. 14, ‘05. 860w.

  * “It is as interesting as it is valuable as a contribution to a
  strangely neglected period of European history.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

  * “Dr. Wertheimer has chosen wisely to present the details of a sad
  career with the fulness, the accuracy, and the impartiality of a
  scholar.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 869. N. 25, ‘05. 1410w.


=West, George Stephen.= Treatise on the British freshwater algae.
*$3.50. Macmillan.

  “Certainly there is no book upon any phase of cryptogamic botany for
  which there has been so much need, and for which the demand in recent
  years, has been so great, as one dealing comprehensively with the
  freshwater algæ.... A good general discussion of the methods of
  multiplication and reproduction in algæ, together with a reference to
  the question of polymorphism and a rather full exposition of the
  particular theories of the author regarding phylogeny, precedes the
  specific treatment of the six classes, Rhodophyceæ, Phaeophyceæ,
  Chlorophyceæ, Heterokonteæ, Bacillarieæ, and Myxophyceæ.... The book
  is fully illustrated and too much cannot be said for the successful
  effort to secure new and accurate drawings of not only the more
  recently described genera, but for the older forms as well.”—Science.

  “The work has been thoroughly done throughout, and its value is
  greatly increased by an exhaustive index. The plates are sufficiently
  characteristic for most identifications, and the descriptions and keys
  are good.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 93. F. 2, ‘05. 90w.

  “Is particularly well qualified to write such a book. The need of a
  treatise upon the freshwater algæ has been referred to; that this book
  will come as near to filling such a need as one of its scope, written
  by one man, could possibly be expected, is all that is necessary to
  say regarding its worth.” George T. Moore.

   + + + =Science=, n.s. 21: 184. F. 3, ‘05. 900w.


=West, W. K.= George Frederick Watts. $1.25. Warne.

  A biographical sketch of Watts by W. K. West, with an essay on his
  art, and an outline of the sixty-five pictures reproduced in the book,
  by Romualdo Pantini.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 205. Ap. 1, ‘05. 230w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 856. Ap. 1, ‘05. 60w.


=Westcott, Rev. Frank Nash.= Church and the good Samaritan; mission
addresses to men. **$1. Whittaker.

  A series of Lent addresses to men. They include The lawyer’s question,
  The Jericho road, The priest and the Samaritan, The Samaritan and the
  Jew, The wayside inn, The two pence.

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 758. Mr. 25, ‘05. 60w.


* =Westcott, Frank N.= Heart of catholicity. $1. Young churchman.

  A defence of the conception of the church which is held by the “high
  church” party of the Anglican communion. It regards the church as a
  divine institution let down from above, the dispenser of truth and
  salvation as against the view held by the members of that communion in
  common with other protestants that the church is a historic growth
  which has developed out of human needs and which is seeking truth and
  salvation. The author means by “catholicity” the former conception of
  the church, but the term ought to be big enough to include both views.

         =Outlook.= 81: 134. S. 16, ‘05. 150w.


=Westrup, Margaret.= Coming of Billy. $1.25. Harper.

  “Billy’s coming will be a pleasure to readers of all ages, for Billy
  is a delightful addition to the real small boys of fiction. His
  parents send him from India to Rose Cottage, England, where he is a
  source of continual surprises, not always agreeable to his maiden
  aunts. He takes a hand in the love affairs of the ‘youngest and
  prettiest’ Miss Primrose.”—Outlook.

  “The reviewer fancies that the whole book is much more likely to
  interest mature, and even elderly readers, than children.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 432. S. 30. 230w.

  “A delightfully humorous story that is told with a wholly charming
  grace and simplicity.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 710. O. 21, ‘05. 470w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 134. S. 16, ‘05. 70w.


=Weyman, Stanley John.= Starvecrow farm. †$1.50. Longmans.

  “The story is placed in the early part of the last century; the
  heroine, engaged to one man, elopes with another, on whose head there
  is a price. The couple are captured the day of their flight from the
  girl’s home, but the man escapes, leaving the girl in the hands of the
  law. The world thinks her an accomplice, and as her family repudiates
  her, she has to fight her battle alone.”—Pub. Opin.

  “A novel that is likely to be read with delight on a wet day in a
  country house or on a railway journey.”

     + — =Acad.= 68: 1025. O. 7, ‘05. 320w.

  “It is as good as any of those which have preceded it from the same
  pen, and to say this is to pay it a high compliment.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 396. S. 23. 420w.

  “Its structure is rather flabby. Looking back over the book, we feel
  that we ought to have been more excited over it than we were; but the
  truth is that Mr. Weyman is both wordy and a little uncertain.”

       — =Lond. Times.= 4: 295. S. 15, ‘05. 510w.

  “It goes—goes a-cantering and takes you along with it.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 707. O. 21, ‘05. 440w.

  * “Like the others, a thoroughly readable story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 150w.

       — =Outlook.= 81: 579. N. 4, ‘05. 100w.

  “In ‘Starvecrow farm’ there are the same easy flow of narrative, the
  lively dialogue, the dramatic sense, and the well-developed plot which
  characterize all that this author does.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 573. O. 28, ‘05. 110w.

  “As a vigorous, wholesome, and well-constructed tale it deserves to
  win wide acceptance.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 434. S. 23, ‘05. 740w.


=Whall, C. W.= Stained-glass work. **$1.50. Appleton.

  A simple text-book, which the author has written “in a gossipy style,
  using very few technical terms and explaining every seemingly
  difficult passage, just as though he were giving oral instruction.”
  (N. Y. Times.) There are photographic reproductions of windows in
  English churches, and many diagrams.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 474. Jl. 15, ‘05. 390w.

   + + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 352. S. 9, ‘05. 200w.


=Wharton, Edith Newbold (Jones).= House of mirth. †$1.50. Scribner.

  A society novel, cruel in its reality. Lily Bart, beautiful and
  twenty-nine, the orphaned child of a New York merchant, feels her
  whole being calling for the stamp of permanent possession upon the
  luxury which she has always enjoyed at the hands of her friends.
  Relentlessly the author enmeshes her in the toils of debt incurred at
  bridge; in scandal, the price of a trip upon a friend’s yacht; and,
  almost in a loveless marriage,—only the wealthy Rosedale himself
  recoils from it when society no longer smiles upon Miss Bart. She is
  dropped from stage to stage of society, the unhappy victim of
  circumstance and environment, but holding the reader’s full sympathy
  thru an innate nobility which is submerged but never eliminated. The
  end is hard—but could it all have ended otherwise?

  “Mrs. Wharton has done many good things—she has never done anything
  better than this. Her dialogue is clever, fresh and sparkling; she has
  a fine discrimination—a natural, unstudied discrimination—in the use
  of words; and her style is graceful and fluent.”

   + + + =Acad.= 68: 1155. N. 4, ‘05. 330w.

  * “It is a pitiful story, told with restraint and insight and not a
  little subtlety.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 718. N. 25. 160w.

  * “As a piece of artistic creation, it falls short of supreme
  excellence.” Olivia Howard Dunbar.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 509. D. ‘05. 580w.

  “She still has a fine manner, but it is like the fine gowns of her
  heroines, a fashion of the times for interpreting decadent symptoms in
  human nature. What she says will not last, because it is simply the
  fashionable drawing of ephemeral types and still more ephemeral
  sentiments.”

     + — =Ind.= 59: 150. Jl. 20, ‘05. 820w.

     + — =Ind.= 59: 1151. N. 16, ‘05. 250w.

  * “Miss Bart is a blend of Becky Sharp and Gwendolen Harleth. She is
  not as compellingly human as the one, nor as inspiring as the other.
  Frankly, Mrs. Wharton has surpassed George Eliot in this theme. Not
  only is Lily Bart more congenial and better, as a human variation,
  than Gwendolen or Becky, but Mrs. Wharton’s style is more plastic and
  seductive than that of Mrs. Lewes.”

     + + =Lit.= D. 31: 886. D. 9, ‘05. 820w.

  * “A dozen other novels of the year are good; but this book is really
  good. What Mrs. Wharton appears to lack is in a word the creative gift
  at its fullest. She sees with certainty and her hand is as sure as her
  eye. But with the richest imaginations something takes place beyond
  this.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 421. D. 1, ‘05. 790w.

  * “A feeling for fair play obliges us to protest Mrs. Wharton’s
  picture as a prejudiced one, yet it is not consciously unveracious.
  Though depressing, it is not wholly unprofitable.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 447. N. 30, ‘05. 1100w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 824. D. 2, ‘05. 190w.

  “The story is the product of the most carefully calculated, the most
  skilfully handled, artistic values and effects; but the workmanship is
  the manner, not the substance of the novel. A story of such integrity
  of insight and of workmanship is an achievement of high importance in
  American life.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 81: 404. O. 21, ‘05. 1590w.

  * “It is by all odds the greatest novel of recent years.”

   + + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 796. D. 16, ‘05. 490w.

  * “We have touched only the main theme, which like the whole story, is
  worked out in a manner to stamp the writer a genius, and give her name
  a place in the history of American literature.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 757. D. ‘05. 380w.

  “Her reputation will certainly not suffer any decline by the
  publication of her new novel.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 657. O. 28, ‘05. 660w.


=Wharton, Edith Newbold (Jones).= Italian backgrounds; il. by E. C.
Peixotto. **$2.50. Scribner.

  Mrs. Wharton says, “As with the study of Italian pictures, so it is
  with Italy herself. The country is divided not in partes tres, but in
  two; a foreground and a background. The foreground is the property of
  the guidebook and of its product, the mechanical sightseers; the
  background, that of the dawdler, the dreamer, and the serious student
  of Italy.” The nine chapters are—An Alpine posting inn, A midsummer
  week’s dream, The sanctuaries of the Pennine Alps, What the hermits
  saw, A Tuscan shrine, Sub umbra liliorum. March in Italy, Picturesque
  Milan, and Italian backgrounds: then there are twelve illustrations
  reproduced from Peixotto pictures.

  “The book is written with genuine knowledge, with large and generous
  sympathy, and in excellent English.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 798. Ag. 5, ‘05. 1220w.

  “Her style is extraordinarily good, but her thought is pedantic and
  inhuman.” G. R. Carpenter.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 609. Ag. ‘05. 550w.

  “Has an air of spontaneity, as well as of competence, an irresistible
  grace, countless descriptive felicities, and the fervent glow of a
  genuine enthusiasm.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 287. S. ‘05. 150w.

  “Through this traveller’s story runs a fine thread of scholarship, of
  savoir faire, of cosmopolitanism, not easily to be matched in
  travel-literature. The book has what we call distinction of style, as
  impossible to resist as to define.” Anna Benneson McMahan.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 351. My. 16, ‘05. 930w.

       + =Ind.= 58: 1311. Je. 8, ‘05. 190w.

  “When Mrs. Wharton leaves the countryside and speaks of pictures and
  sculpture, she is apt to be less satisfactory. She is almost too
  impartial in her appreciation.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 215. Jl. 7, ‘05. 640w.

  “Mrs. Wharton has many unusual qualifications for writing on the art
  of Italy in its many phases, among others a brilliant style, historic
  research and a catholicity of taste.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 508. Je. 22, ‘05. 910w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 265. Ap. 22, ‘05. 270w.

  “Like the text, they [the illustrations] press the ‘culture’ of
  elusive expression very near to the vanishing point.” Walter
  Littlefield.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 588. S. 9, ‘05. 940w.

  “This attractive quarto shows the combination of thorough knowledge
  based on original research, ability to enter into and value different
  aspects of life and different forms of art, and a finished and
  suggestive style.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 643. Jl. 8, ‘05. 250w.

  “The book is full of exquisite impressions concerning matters not to
  be found in the guide books.”

     + + =Reader.= 6: 597. O. ‘05. 220w.

  “An intimate acquaintance with Italian art and nature, an insight into
  southern life, and an exquisite literary style,—all of which belong to
  this writer—are necessary for such a study.”

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 50w.

  “A great deal of charming description is scattered through this
  volume.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 470. S. 30. ‘05. 2560w.


=Wharton, Edith.= Italian villas and their gardens; il. with pictures by
Maxfield Parrish, and by photographs. **$6. Century.

  To come so absolutely under the spell of Italy’s garden-magic as is
  possible thru Mrs. Wharton’s word exposition and Mr. Parrish’s color
  interpretation, is almost as rare a privilege for the traveler who has
  visited those haunts as for the stay-at-home tourist. Magic which in
  its first supernatural impression defies analysis, often yields to
  laws of formation in the sober moments of consideration. Thus does
  Mrs. Wharton show that the seemingly spontaneous glory of Italian
  gardens is, after all, the result of garden-craft which the architects
  of the Renaissance resolved into a three-fold problem: adaptation of
  the garden to the architectural lines of the house it adjoins;
  adaptation to the requirements of the inmates of a house, in the sense
  of providing shady walks, sunny bowling-greens, parterres and
  orchards, all conveniently accessible; and, lastly, adaptation to the
  landscape around. There are fifty illustrations, in color and in black
  and white by Maxfield Parrish. Months of close observation and
  sympathetic study have been devoted to the large undertaking and the
  harmony with the subject matter which the De Vinne press has wrought
  into the book workmanship is exquisite.

  “Mr. Parrish has performed his part of the task in a delightful and
  satisfactory way. The impression, the atmosphere, created by the
  illustrations, is not sustained in the text.”

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 166. F. ‘05. 1260w.

  “The text is well written and contains much information concerning the
  villas and gardens selected for treatment.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: 179. Ap. ‘05. 150w.

  “This is a notable volume, all the more so from the archæological and
  historical associations which it recalls.”

     + + =Spec.= 94: 118. Ja. 28, ‘05. 70w.


=Wheeler, Candace Thurber (Mrs. Thomas M.).= Doubledarling and the dream
spinner. †$1.50. Fox.

  Doubledarling is a little girl “twice as good and twice as beautiful
  as other children.” When she tells her father how her little discarded
  red shoes led her in the night to the land where the old shoes go, he
  promises her a dream machine which will tell her wonderful stories all
  night long; and on Christmas morning her dream spinner hangs on a peg
  by her bed ticking out story after story to her. The book tells about
  these dreams and also of Doubledarling’s waking hours, her friends and
  her pets. One regrets the commonplace realism which lets an ordinary
  burglar finally make away with the dream spinner. Dora Wheeler Keith
  has illustrated the volume.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 50w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 381. O. 14, ‘05. 60w.


=Wheeler, Everett Pepperell.= Daniel Webster, the expounder of the
constitution. **$1.50. Putnam.

  “This is at once a tribute to the genius of Daniel Webster and a handy
  manual to the decisions which, following Webster’s arguments before
  the United States Supreme court, have molded the constitution to make
  it adequate to our needs. While Mr. Wheeler’s chief concern is with
  the constitutional questions laid before the court, he is not
  unmindful of the senatorial side of Webster’s career from the
  constitutional standpoint, and chapters are given over to the replies
  of Calhoun and Hayne, involving the nature of the republic, and to the
  famous ‘Seventh of March’ speech, which brought such disappointment to
  the enemies of slavery.... Interest is heightened by the inclusion of
  hitherto unpublished accounts of several of the more important cases,
  and by an appreciative study of Webster as a lawyer.”—Outlook.

         =Am. Hist.= R. 10: 717. Ap. ‘05. 90w.

  “Its manifest position as a special pleader for Mr. Webster’s memory.
  Is particularly desirable as giving us new light on old subjects
  through its first publication of many facts which aid to a clearer
  view of the principles of the constitution.”

     + + =Boston Evening Transcript.= F. 8, ‘05. 550w.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 130. Mr. 4, ‘05. 950w.

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 399. F. 11, ‘05. 130w.

         =Yale R.= 14: 229. Ag. ‘05. 100w.


=Whelpley, James Davenport.= Problem of the immigrant. *$3. Dutton.

  A brief discussion, with a summary of conditions, laws and regulations
  governing the movement of population to and from the British empire,
  the United States, France, Germany, Belgium, Austria-Hungary, Russia,
  Spain, Portugal, Denmark, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Italy, and
  Scandinavia.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 242. Mr. 11, ‘05. 260w.

  * “Such data is not easily accessible to the average student or
  legislator, and the volume will be of great service.”

     + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 753. N. ‘05. 110w.

  “A useful work of reference. Such frantic statements as these are a
  serious disfigurement in a book professing claims to accuracy.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 45. Jl. 8. 430w.

  “This hasty ‘book of the hour,’ for such it evidently is, interests in
  parts, particularly in its emphasis upon emigration as a matter of
  international concern.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 578. S. 7, ‘05. 180w.

  “His summaries seem excellent and correct. The observations and brief
  discussions with which he accompanies them are illuminating and to the
  point.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 33. Jl. 13, ‘05. 270w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 313. My. 13, ‘05. 200w.

  “The book is more useful than any other bearing on the same subject.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 452. Jl. 8, ‘05. 720w.

  “Mr. Whelpley’s careful study of the general problem of emigration and
  immigration throughout Europe, our colonies, and the United States
  will be found a particularly useful addition to a class of recent
  books that is now somewhat extensive.”

     + + =Sat. R.= 99: 710. My. 27, ‘05. 340w.

  “Mr. Whelpley’s ideas are worthy of respect, and the materials which
  he has provided should be invaluable to the political student.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 434. S. 23, ‘05. 510w.


* Where the road led and other stories. $1.25. Benziger.

  Twenty-eight Roman Catholic stories written by fourteen Roman Catholic
  authors. The stories are love stories, but some are of filial love,
  some of maternal love, and some of the love of religion. The authors
  include Anna T. Sadlier; Mary T. Waggaman; Magdalen G. Rock; Mary E.
  Mannix; and Mary G. Bonesteel.


=Whibley, Charles.= Literary portraits. *$2.50. Scribner.

  Essays on Rabelais, Phillippe de Comines, Philemon, Holland,
  Montaigne, The library of an old scholar (the poet William Drummond),
  Robert Burton, and Jacques Casanova.

  “The appreciation is clear and just, and the author is to be
  congratulated on the decision and delicacy of his touch and the
  simplicity of his style. The average of the volume is fully up to that
  high standard of culture which is evident in all Mr. Whibley’s
  published works.” Frank Schloesser.

     + + =Acad.= 68: 13. Ja. 7, ‘05. 600w.

  “The level of performance here is singularly even and singularly
  high.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 78. Ja. 14. 580w.

  “There is perhaps little art in the various portraits, and there is
  certainly no pretence at originality; but there is sympathetic
  understanding, and thorough and conscientious labor.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 475. My. ‘05. 170w.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 323. My. 1. ‘05. 930w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 153. Mr. 11, ‘05. 360w.

  “‘Literary portraits’ shows marked ability and is to be classed among
  the books of criticism of the higher standard.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 198. Ap. 1, ‘05. 1020w.

  “Mr. Whibley has finished these portraits with a skillful and graceful
  pen. Readers in a critical mood and readers for entertainment will
  both find his work attractive.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 760. Mr. 25, ‘05. 160w.

  “We miss the illuminating phrase. The fresh judgment and the
  historical setting is often wholly omitted. Mr. Whibley has ‘the
  practiced hand,’ and is apt to be content with that amount of
  accomplishment.”

     — + =Sat. R.= 99: 637. My. 13, ‘05. 180w.

  “This seems to us the best of Mr. Whibley’s volumes of essays, the
  most mature in style and thought, and the most attractive in
  subject-matter. He has studied each of his writers with a minute care
  and has read deeply in contemporary literature, so that they are
  presented to us in the true setting of their age. His judgments have
  now the sanity which can only come from a full experience and a full
  enjoyment of a wide field of literature. His style ... has acquired a
  body and force which it did not always possess, and his essays are
  admirable, if for nothing else, for their mastery of clear, graceful,
  and vigorous prose. Sometimes his comment is a little over-strained.”

   + + + =Spec.= 94: 87. Ja. 21, ‘05. 1830w.


=Whibley, Leonard=, ed. See =Companion= to Greek studies.


=Whiffen, Edwin T.= Samson marrying, Samson at Timnah, Samson Hybristes,
Samson blinded: four dramatic poems. $1.50. Badger, R: G.

  These four dramatic poems deal with four dramatic incidents in the
  life of Samson. The first tells of Samson’s revenge upon the
  Philistine youths who, at his wedding-feast, illtreat his father and
  win from his bride the solution to a certain riddle. The second tells
  of further revenge upon the Philistines and includes the setting of
  foxes and fire brands among their corn and vineyards. In the third
  drama Samson is tried before the elders of Judah, and his mother
  reveals to him his divinely appointed mission—to free his people. In
  the fourth the action centers about the effort of Delilah to discover
  the secret of his strength and closes with Samson blind and a captive.


=Whitaker, Herman.= Probationer, and other stories. †$1.25. Harper.

  Thirteen short stories of life in northwestern Canada. “Most of them
  deal with the days when the factors and commissioners of the Hudson
  bay company were the lords of the land, and ruled with an iron hand.
  The history of the great fur company is full of romance, and there is
  a peculiar fascination about life in those northern regions.”
  (Outlook.)

  “Some of his stories are thrilling, some humorous, some tame. In
  narrative Mr. Whittaker has a good deal of manner—too much, and not
  always his own.”

     + — =Nation.= 80: 442. Je. 1, ‘05. 260w.

  “A book which is unusually vigorous and suggestive.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 213. Ap. 8, ‘05. 770w.

  “The stories are full of strength and vigor and the atmosphere of the
  woods.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 858. Ap. 1, ‘05. 80w.

  “No one has so pictured the life of the trappers and traders of that
  country since Gilbert Parker wrote of ‘Pretty Pierre’ and his people.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 713. My. 6, ‘05. 120w.

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 761. Je. ‘05. 70w.


=White, Andrew Dickson.= Autobiography of Andrew D. White. **$7.50.
Century.

  A record of diplomatic service which began in 1854 when Mr. White went
  to St. Petersburg as attaché of the American legation, and ended when
  on his seventieth birthday, 1902, he resigned his duties as ambassador
  to Germany. The two volumes contain an account of his work as state
  senator, as a college professor, and finally, president of Cornell, as
  a commissioner to Santo Domingo, and the Paris exposition (1878), as
  minister to Germany and Russia, as a member of the Venezuelan boundary
  commission, and president of the American delegation at the peace
  conference of the Hague (1899). There are descriptions of the emperor
  of Germany and Czar Nicholas II, and their courts, and many anecdotes
  and crisp comments. The man, his life, his many fields of labor, and
  the great men and events with which he came in contact, are all set
  forth in detail.

  “The value of the volumes seems chiefly to arise from the charmingly
  simple tale of personal experience told by a man of wisdom and
  insight, a tale told with considerable literary skill.”

   + + + =Am. Hist R.= 10: 925. Jl. ‘05. 470w.

  “In ‘The autobiography of Andrew D. White’ we have one of the most
  brilliant, interesting, instructive and in many ways important works
  of recent decades. These examples will be sufficient to illustrate the
  reckless character of our author’s statements whenever the facts run
  counter to his prejudices and views which in later years he has
  imbibed from the privileged interests and reactionary influences that
  have environed him.”

   + + — =Arena.= 34: 97. Jl. ‘05. 7000w.

  “The volumes are full of interest for the general reader, but so ill
  arranged that those may be repelled who by better construction would
  have been attracted.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 589. My. 13. 880w.

  “Its interest is due not to any novelty of fact, for the entire book
  is an open page of history, but to an instinct or habit of
  truthfulness that pervades its pages like an atmosphere.” Theodore T.
  Munger.

   + + + =Atlan.= 96: 556. O. ‘05. 7900w.

  Reviewed by John W. Russell.

   + + + =Bookm.= 21: 603. Ag. ‘05. 1460w.

  “I have found this a most readable book from cover to cover, the story
  of a strenuous life told with simple directness.” Jeanette L. Gilder.

     + + =Critic.= 46: 449. My. ‘05. 1460w.

  “In arrangement the work is a model. By his skill in the selection of
  material, and by his admirably lucid and even style, the author has
  made every page intensely interesting.” Clark S. Northrup.

   + + + =Dial.= 38: 260. Ap. 16, ‘05. 1780w.

  “To the student of the problems of higher education in America, Dr.
  White’s ‘Autobiography,’ full as it is of matters of general interest,
  should prove especially interesting and important.” Clark S. Northup.

     + + =Educ. R.= 30: 101. Je. ‘05. 1030w.

  “Altogether this is a full book, with something for everybody, putting
  one in touch on many sides with modern times; an adequate narrative of
  an exceptional career.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 812. O. 5, ‘05. 1080w.

  “A better account of the founding of Cornell, of which he was so long
  the honored and successful head, has never been given, and perhaps in
  no other of his pages do we see so clearly the practical idealism,
  which, running throughout his life story like a golden thread, makes
  it so well worth the telling.”

   + + + =Lit. D.= 31: 187. Ag. 5, ‘05. 630w.

  “Viewed as a narrative the book is excellent, and only needs more
  continuity; viewed as a collection of essays, it is naturally
  inadequate.”

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 149. My. 12, ‘05. 2680w.

  “By the side of the recent contributions of Hoar, Stillman, Newcomb,
  Dwight, Le Conte, Villard, and Conway, the autobiography of White will
  hold an honored place.”

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 272. Ap. 6, ‘05. 2110w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 121. F. 25, ‘05. 180w.

  “Nor does it possess that intimate charm which has made a literary
  classic of more than one ingenuous personal narrative. There is little
  in these two volumes which can fail to interest the serious reader in
  one way or another.” H. W. Boynton.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 321. My. 20, ‘05. 1410w.

  “If he is not entirely without prejudice of egotism, he displays those
  qualities after the manner of great men.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 240w.

  “These volumes ... have a value for all his countrymen not surpassed
  by any American autobiography within our knowledge.” James M. Whiton.

   + + + =Outlook.= 80: 132. My. 13, ‘05. 5600w.

  “Mr. White is an octogenarian, with a full life behind him, but two
  hundred pages would have been ample space for it.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 28. Jl. 1, ‘05. 160w.

  “It is eminently characteristic of its country of origin.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 51. Ag. 8, ‘05. 740w.

  “There is a want of continuity. Repetitions occur, and sometimes when
  they were unintended. He has written a book to interest all who are
  interested in the modern world.” Simeon E. Baldwin.

   + + — =Yale R.= 14: 210. Ag. ‘05. 1770w.


=White, C. V.= Peace conference: poem. $1. Badger, R: G.

  This poem is dedicated to the American delegates of the International
  peace conference, which met at the Hague, May 18, 1899. It sets forth
  the harm which war has done thruout history, and declares that the
  time for universal peace is here. It closes with the prayer,

                   “Lord God endow
                   Us with thy blessings now,
                   And plenteous peace the whole world o’er
                   Establish thou forevermore.”


=White, Fred M.= Crimson blind. $1.50. Fenno.

  The strands of this story are marvelously twisted. A villain, a fiend
  in human shape, has plunged his family into dishonor to gain his ends,
  but by the aid of a clever doctor, whose future had also been involved
  in the general ruin, a young novelist who applies fiction methods to
  the case, and a girl cousin who feigns death in order to be free to
  solve the mystery, the whole is ferreted out, bit by bit. It is an
  ingenious plot with manifold complications.

  “This is a really fine sensational novel.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 735. Jl. 15, ‘05. 230w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 320. My. 13, ‘05. 210w.


=White, George.= Practical course of instruction in personal magnetism,
telepathy, and hypnotism. $1.25. Dutton.

  A practical course of instruction setting forth the manner in which
  any student may acquire powers over himself, over his fellow men, and
  even over time and space.

       — =Acad.= 68: 683. Jl. 1, ‘05. 740w.

  Reviewed by Pendennis.

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 430. Jl. 1, ‘05. 680w.


=White, T. Hyler.= Petrol motor and motor cars: a handbook for
engineers, designers, and draughtsmen. *$1.40. Longmans.

  A book which the author feels is needed, because recent automobile
  literature has not been written for the benefit of designers.
  Practical rules for the design of the essential parts of motors and
  motor cars are given, accompanied by figures. There are tables of
  various kinds to facilitate calculations and to convert English units
  into metric measures. The illustrations are good, but are not drawn to
  a given scale.

  “The formulas which are given seem to be of a rational nature; but to
  the reviewer it seems a fault that the derivation of the same are
  never given. The author discusses at various places the several
  alternatives for the many parts of a modern automobile; he gives his
  reason for his choice very clearly and never uses superfluous words,
  for which fact he deserves praise. Of course it ought not to be
  necessary to state that it is not always possible to agree with his
  conclusions. As a book for the special purpose of helping the
  designers of these engines it appears to the reviewer that it is the
  best existing book in the English language, notwithstanding the
  criticisms which have been made above.” Storm Bull.

   + + — =Engin. N.= 53: 186. F. 16, ‘05. 750w.


=White, W. Hale.= John Bunyan. **$1. Scribner.

  This is the third volume in the Literary lives series which aims to
  furnish biographical and critical estimates. It treats of Bunyan’s
  life and characteristics. “Bunyan is not altogether the representation
  of Puritanism ... the qualification necessary in order to understand
  and properly value him is not theological learning, nor in fact any
  kind of learning or literary skill, but the experience of life, with
  its hopes and fears, bright day and black night.” “Pilgrim’s progress”
  is fully treated and there are lesser studies of “Grace abounding,”
  the “Life and death of Mr. Badman,” and “The holy war.”

  “If the reader would spend the amount of time required to read this
  book in the careful perusal of any one of Bunyan’s great pieces, he
  would probably catch more of the spirit of the Bedford dreamer, and
  gain a clearer and higher conception of his genius, than these pages
  by Mr. White are able to furnish.”

       — =Am. J. of Theol.= 9: 377. Ap. ‘05. 140w.

  * “The writer does with success what he has to do, and imagines very
  well the personality of the great John.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 368. Mr. 25. 230w.

  “The final chapter is a very unsatisfactory treatment of ‘Bunyan and
  Puritanism.’”

     + — =Bib. World.= 25: 316. Ap. ‘05. 80w.

  “A very interesting study. Mr. White has so many admirable things to
  say of the man and the spirit of his writings that one regrets that he
  should have devoted so much of his space to a detailed summary of
  Bunyan’s principal works.”

     + + =Contemporary R.= 87: 299. F. ‘05. 920w.

  “The book proves to be a sympathetic, even a devout, study of its
  interesting theme.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 119. S. 1, ‘05. 340w.

     + — =Nation.= 80: 79. Ja. 26, ‘05. 940w.

  “An interesting and well written biography. But it lacks background.
  The picture of the times is inadequate.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 246. Ja. 28, ‘05. 190w.

  “Mr. White has made us see Bunyan the man, and through him the great,
  sober, deadly earnest English folk, of whom he was the interpreter.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 126. Ja. ‘05. 80w.


=Whitefield, George.= Selected sermons; ed. with introd. and notes, by
Rev. A. R. Buckland. **50c. Union press.

  The text of this volume is with some slight changes that of the
  “Sermons on important subjects” published in 1828. The six sermons are
  entitled—The necessity and benefits of religious society,
  Regeneration, A penitent heart the best New Year’s gift, The almost
  Christian, Glorifying God in the fire, and Jacob’s ladder.


=Whiting, Lilian.= Florence of Landor. **$2.50. Little.

  Lilian Whiting weaves a charm into the living drama that was set in
  the scenic enchantment of Florence during the period of Walter Savage
  Landor. She draws the Florence still vital with color, the romance,
  the tragedy and passionate exaltation and despair of the fifteenth
  century, and shows the sympathetic common interests of the English and
  American colony including permanently the Brownings and the Trollopes,
  and welcoming as visitors from time to time, George Eliot, Frances
  Power Cobbe, Frederick Tennyson and a number of the Brook farm men and
  women. The book creates the author’s usual ideal atmosphere, and is
  handsomely illustrated from photographs.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 581. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “There are so many good things in Miss Whiting’s book, that the pity
  is all the greater that the writer has never acquired the literary
  virtues of restraint and selection.”

     + — =Dial.= 39: 443. D. 16, ‘05. 370w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 835. D. 2, ‘05. 230w.

  * “Uses a great mass of material with fine discretion. At times her
  pen seems to flag, and she repeats from mere weariness; but far
  oftener she shows the nice discrimination of the true critic and the
  grace of the trained writer.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 834. D. 2, ‘05. 280w.

 *     + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 826. D. 23, ‘05. 180w.


=Whiting, Lilian.= Joy that no man taketh from you. **50c. Little.

  The realization of the Kingdom of Heaven in the hearts of men right
  now and here through the great power of love is the problem which
  Lilian Whiting meets. This joy may be achieved by the soul “so that
  neither death nor privation nor loss nor disappointment, not trial in
  any of its innumerable forms, shall dim its radiance or diminish its
  energy.”


=Whiting, Lilian.= Outlook beautiful. *$1.25. Little.

  In chapters entitled The delusion of death, Realizing the ideal,
  Friendship as a divine relation, The ethereal world, The supreme
  purpose of Jesus, An inward stillness. The miracle moment may dawn on
  any hour, Miss Whiting sets forth her convictions regarding the
  relation of this life to the life eternal.

  “It is unusually rich in helpful thought for those who enjoy
  transcendental and broadly religious discussions.”

     + + =Arena.= 34: 330. S. ‘05. 320w.

  “The book is entirely characteristic of the author, and as such will
  recommend itself to her considerable public.”

     + + =Critic.= 47: 283. S. ‘05. 40w.

  “It is a rhapsody, a carnival of spiritual joy.” David Saville Muzzey.

     + — =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 526. Jl. ‘05. 70w.

  “She weaves a fabric not overstrong, but light, and firm enough for
  every-day uses.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 142. My. 13, ‘05. 80w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 61. Jl. 8, ‘05. 90w.

  “Her philosophy and style are very stimulating and suggestive.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 32: 254. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


* =Whitney, Caspar.= Jungle trails and jungle people; travel, adventure
and observation in the Far East. **$3. Scribner.

  “Recent travels in the Far East, in India, Sumatra, Malay, and
  Siam.... The record of a trip prompted by the lust of adventure, and
  by the desire to see strange lands and strange peoples, and to hunt
  strange animals. Mr. Whitney has caught the trick of making a little
  human interest enhance the vivid story of some thrilling or stirring
  hunting adventure.... Hunters or servants, enlighten us as to the
  mental and moral habits of the natives of the countries
  described.”—Dial.

  * “Mr. Whitney has written a volume of travel and adventure that will
  make his name conspicuous among American hunters.” H. E. Coblentz.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 378. D. 1, ‘05. 380w.

  * “If he had been less journalistic in style and the printer more
  careful, the reader’s pleasure would have been increased. Mr. Whitney
  has given us a pleasing account of a region little known to the white
  man.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 770w.

  * “Is a most interesting and informing volume.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 706. O. 21, ‘05. 570w.

  * “His descriptions of some of his guides and hunters are intensely
  diverting. He makes very real the life in the jungle.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 717. N. 25, ‘05. 160w.


=Whitney, Helen Hay.= Sonnets and songs. **$1.20. Harper.

  “All the sonnets and most of the songs give evidence both of
  temperament and of the study of the older poets, and frequently attain
  a richness of tone that neither could have accomplished without the
  other.” (Nation.) “Their mood is chiefly that of quiet wistfulness,
  touched by the fears and sorrows of uncertain human fate, but open
  also to the influences of wholesome joy and unaffected sentiment.” (N.
  Y. Times.)

  “Every one of which is a finished bit of art. The work is of so even
  an excellence that it offers little room for choice.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 275. N. 1, ‘05. 480w.

  “Love poems, of a passion and sincere subtlety that are none too
  common.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 303. O. 12, ‘05. 300w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 656. O. 7, ‘05. 660w.


=Whitney, Mrs. Helen Hay.= Verses for Jock and Joan. †$1.50. Fox.

  The marginal drawings and the many full page pictures in color by
  Charlotte Harding, with which this volume of little-folk’s verses is
  illustrated make it an unusually attractive giftbook.

  * “A pretty book with graceful verses and dainty illustrations.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 584. D. ‘05. 10w.

  * “Challenges comparison with Betty Sage’s ‘Rhymes of real children’
  of a year ago. The verse is correspondingly humorous, perhaps a trifle
  more sophisticated.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 503. D. 21, ‘05. 60w.

  * “The verses are not without point, but are entirely lacking in that
  ‘turn of the phrase’ which makes the verses of Stevenson or Lewis
  Carroll dwell in the memory of a child.”

     + — =R. of Rs.= 32: 767. D. ‘05. 110w.


=Whitson, John Harvey.= Barbara, a woman of the West. 75c. Little.

  A new popular edition of a story which follows the fortunes of a young
  woman in search of her ne’er-do-well husband. He has some claim to
  literary attainments, starts off on a tour of fortune hunting, and
  becomes mentally deranged. The scenes shift from Kansas plains to
  Cripple Creek, thence to San Diego, and the story ends happily despite
  the fact that Barbara’s Enoch Arden reappears after her second
  marriage.


=Whitson, John H.= Justin Wingate, ranchman. †$1.50. Little.

  Life in the West, where the interests of the ranchman and the farmer
  are at war is shown thru the medium of story characters. The hero who
  enters the fight in the Colorado legislature, the doctor who
  sacrifices all for the unworthy woman who was once his wife, the
  rancher, choleric but honest, and the son who disgraces him, stand out
  clearly in the scenes of love, political strife and danger.

  Reviewed by Frederic Taber Cooper.

       + =Bookm.= 21: 367. Je. ‘05. 160w.

         =Dial.= 38: 392. Je. 1, ‘05. 120w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 272. Ap. 22, ‘05. 80w.

  “Is a wonderfully vivid presentation of the largeness of Western
  horizons. Mr. Whitson is not so happy in his love stories as in his
  politics and adventure.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 374. Je. 10, ‘05. 360w.

         =Outlook.= 80: 246. My 27, ‘05. 40w.


Who’s who, 1905; an annual biographical dictionary. *$2. Macmillan.

  A book of biographic data about living Englishmen. This edition
  contains over seventeen thousand biographies, each of which has been
  submitted for personal revision.

   + + + =Critic.= 46: 96. Ja. ‘05. 50w.

   + + + =Int. Studio.= 24: 370. F. ‘05. 60w.

   + + + =Nation.= 80: 32. Ja. 12, ‘05. 90w.

  “Improved in arrangement.”

   + + + =Outlook.= 79: 197, Ja. 21, ‘05. 60w.

   + + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 532. Ap. ‘05. 70w.


=Whyte, Rev. Alexander.= Apostle Paul. *$1. Jennings.

  Sixteen lectures upon the apostle Paul, which follow his life and form
  a comprehensive study of him as preacher, pastor, man of prayer, and
  chief of sinners, from the first lecture, Paul as a student, to the
  last, Paul the aged. Five sermons, and an appreciation of Walter
  Marshall are also included in the volume.


=Whyte, Rev. Alexander.= Walk, conversation and character of Jesus
Christ our Lord. $1.50. Revell.

  Addresses offered to the multitude which are “innocent of criticism,
  but beautifully devout and sweet.” (Outlook.)

  “Is composed of original, somewhat visionary, studies of the life of
  Christ.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 331. Ag. 10, ‘05. 50w.

  “Is a simple in thought, not obtrusively original, and expressive of a
  genuine personal religion.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 936. Ag. 12, ‘05. 80w.


=Wiborg, Frank.= Commercial traveller in South America; being the
experiences and impressions of an American business man on a trip
through Panama, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, the Argentine and Brazil. **$1.
McClure.

  “Mr. Wiborg’s business trip around the coast and across the continent
  of South America is ... an individual view of a business proposition,
  and is made readable by descriptions—a business man’s descriptions—of
  the beauty of the country, and enlivened by some travelling
  ‘anecdotes.’ A well-drawn map elucidates the whole considerably and
  makes a very unified piece of work.”—Pub. Opin.

  “Its descriptions of the country where conditions have changed rapidly
  have some value because of their freshness and of the writer’s candid
  expression of an alert business man’s ideas.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 716. O. 21, ‘05. 620w.

  “Principally as a plea for more intimate business relations between
  the north and south continents of this hemisphere the work is of
  value.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 448. S. 30, ‘05. 110w.


=Wiggin, Kate Douglas (Smith) (Mrs. G. C. Riggs).= Rose o’ the river.
†$1.25. Houghton.

  The simple story of Rose, a country girl, “a fragile pink rose
  blossoming on the river’s brink,” and Stephen Waterman, a sturdy young
  farmer who lives on the other side of the Saco, is prettily told in
  this volume. Rose’s fancy for a city man interrupts their love for a
  time, but in the end she returns happily to Stephen. As a background
  for the slight plot, Mrs. Wiggin gives us the dangerous trade of the
  lumberman, and the river, a thing of beauty, strength and passion.

  “Mrs. Wiggin has contributed a charming picture to the ever-increasing
  gallery that shows us American country life.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 1008. S. 30, ‘05. 330w.

  * “This is a rather slight and mildly interesting story.”

     + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 642. N. 11. 190w.

  “With a slight plot and commonplace incident, the author, through her
  clever delineation of Maine manners and peculiarities, makes up an
  amusing story that may be read in a couple of hours.”

       + =Cath. World.= 82: 266. N. ‘05. 210w.

  * “The originality and humor that belong to Mrs. Wiggin’s best work
  are altogether lacking. In spite of a certain rather specious charm,
  ‘Rose o’ the river’ must be classed with the pot-boilers.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 579. D. ‘05. 70w.

  “A pretty story, pleasantly told by Mrs. Wiggin in her usual limpid
  style.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 989. O. 26, ‘05. 130w.

  * “It is ‘manufactured’ from the start, and the attempt to bestow
  ‘color’ and stir emotion are cruelly patent, tho perfectly null.”

       — =Lit. D.= 31: 797. N. 25, ‘05. 360w.

  “Rose is a pretty girl, and her story is a pretty story with a pretty
  moral.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 305. S. 22, ‘05. 200w.

  * “‘Rose o’ the river’ is as slender a tale as ever walked into print
  on the merits of an author’s name.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 488. D. 14, ‘05. 120w.

  “The story is written with a graceful sprightliness which is always
  part of Mrs. Wiggin’s stories, but beside those other two [Rebecca and
  Penelope] Rose simply cannot live.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 635. S. 30, ‘05. 240w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 822. D. 2, ‘05. 100w.

  “The author, as is usual with her, keeps well on the right side of the
  line that divides sentiment from sentimentality.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 335. O. 7, ‘05. 80w.

  * “It is certainly inferior to the author’s usual excellent work.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 600. N. 4, ‘05. 80w.

  “Her shrewdness and humour act as antiseptics to her strong vein of
  sentiment. She is tender without being effusive, reticent without any
  taint of priggishness, entertaining without resort to extravagance of
  facetiousness.”

       + =Spec.= 95: 570. O. 14, ‘05. 850w.


=Wight, Emily Carter.= Denim elephant; il. in colours. †50c. Stokes.

  This little volume in the “Christmas stocking” series presents in a
  succession of colored pictures and their accompanying text an episode
  in the life of the denim elephant which belonged to the baby and
  interfered with the rest of the farmyard, the woolen rabbit, tin cat,
  china pig, rubber dog, cotton goose, and wooden cow, which belonged to
  Edith and Philip.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 894. D. 16, ‘05. 200w.


=Wilbrandt, Adolf.= New humanity; or, The Easter island; tr. by Dr. A. S
Rappoport. $1.50. Lippincott.

  Helmut Adler, an enthusiast and the hero of this story, is modeled
  after Nietzsche. He has a plan for improving the human race by taking
  a few chosen followers to a secluded isle where they may rear a
  perfect race. He loses his reason and dies, and his daughter and her
  lover decide that the island of perfection can exist only in their own
  souls.

  “But we have seldom seen a worse piece of work as translation than the
  volume before us.”

     — — =Acad.= 68: 567. My. 27, ‘05. 960w.

  “The story is told with a certain morbid power, but drags heavily in
  the telling, and is only moderately successful in the delineation of
  the several types of character which people its pages.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 41. Jl. 16, ‘05. 160w.

  “If the book is doctrinal and the doctrines heavy, it is not therefore
  a heavy book. On the contrary, there is so much sincerity in each
  point of view, combined with so much lightness of pen, that it is even
  absorbing reading; the way is tortuous, indeed, but not slimy.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 148. Ag. 17, ‘05. 780w.

  “The translation is sufficiently clear to carry the meaning of the
  German writer to the English reader. It is certainly not a work of
  literary art, but that does not matter.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 376. Je. 10. ‘05. 540w.


=Wilde, Oscar Fingall O’Flahertie Wills.= De profundis. **$1.25. Putnam.

  A masterpiece of literary expression penned by Oscar Wilde during his
  detention in Reading jail, and the last prose he ever wrote. Into it
  he has put his bitterness in his downfall, his misery in the first two
  months of prison discipline, and the final triumph of a chastened
  spirit, a conviction that “there is not a single degradation of the
  body which I must not try to make into a spiritualizing of the soul.”

  “He has added to our literature a work which from its intrinsic value
  is sure to command the attention of thinking men, from its style the
  admiration of literary artists, from the tragedy of which it records a
  part the pity of human hearts.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 397. Ap. 1. 1070w.

  “The essay has ... great literary charm, and possesses unquestioned
  authenticity as a contribution toward the comprehension of the
  abnormal and in many ways inexplicable psychology of its author.”

     + + =Dial.= 38: 359. My. 16, ‘05. 330w.

  “‘De profundis’ is one of the orchids of literature. As a
  self-revelation, for it is sincere even in its manifestation of his
  fundamental insincerity, this little book ranks with the ‘Confessions
  of Rousseau’ and the ‘Journal of Amiel.’ Both from its style and as a
  study in abnormal psychology ‘De profundis’ is one of the most
  noteworthy and interesting books that have appeared for a long time.”

     + + =Ind.= 58: 842. Ap. 13, ‘05. 920w.

  * “Is one of the saddest, most terrible, yet most fascinating books of
  recent times.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 1161. N. 16, ‘05. 30w.

  “It is one of the most sincere, of all self-revelations, and will go
  far towards setting Oscar Wilde’s memory right with the world for
  which he affected to care so little.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 58. Jl. 20, ‘05. 1800w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 205. Ap. 1, ‘05. 450w.

  “The analysis of sorrow, which occupies a considerable part of the
  volume, is without question, worthy of living and doubtless will live.
  Least of all its qualities should this book be commended for its
  literary style and yet for its style alone it is worthy of reading.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 388. Je. 17, ‘05. 240w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 592. Ap. 15, ‘05. 470w.


=Wilde, Oscar.= Intentions. *$1.50. Brentano’s.

  Four essays which gayly and ruthlessly assail what we have thought
  were truths, and give us others in their place. The decay of lying,
  defends lying as a fine art; Pen, pencil and poison, is an artistic
  appreciation of that prince of poisoners, Thomas Griffiths
  Wainewright; The critic as artist, in dialogue form, is divided into
  two parts containing some remarks upon the importance of doing
  nothing, and upon the importance of discussing every thing. The
  concluding essay, The truth of masks, is styled A note on illusion.

  * “Disciple-wise, the editor of the present reprint is rather zealous
  than judicious in his manner of introducing the text.” H. W. Boynton.

     + — =Atlan.= 96: 847. D. ‘05. 600w.

  * “‘Intentions’ is an interesting book to the student of literature;
  it contains much that is well put; but even its virtues are vitiated
  by a false conception of the real meaning of life.” Edward Fuller.

     + — =Critic.= 47: 568. D. ‘05. 390w.

         =Dial.= 39: 213. O. 1, ‘05. 50w.


=Wilder, Marshall Pinckney.= Sunny side of the street. **$1.20. Funk.

  Recollections of some 300 more or less well known people with whom the
  jester-author has come in contact. Three presidents, a king, and
  various great preachers, actors, politicians and soldiers contribute
  to the “garland of blossoms” plucked from “the gardens of humor and
  pathos” in the weaving of which the author modestly claims as his own
  merely “the string that binds them together.”

  “Cannot fail to interest the many friends of the author. Mr. Wilder’s
  writing is on a par with his speaking.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 475. N. ‘05. 50w.

  “The loquacity of the author, his well-known success in ‘getting
  around,’ his chatty tone, make a very cheerful book.”

     + + =Lit. D.= 31: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 580w.

  “He tells many good stories. He nearly always lives up to his doctrine
  of amiability. We can recommend his book as cheerful reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 452. Jl. 8, ‘05. 360w.

  “The dense personal fog that surrounds this work casts diminutive
  shadows on the sunny side, and many of the anecdotes of which the book
  is composed savor of spice and antiquity.”

       — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 383. S. 16, ‘05. 150w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 255. Ag. ‘05. 50w.


=Wiley, Harley Rupert.= Treatise on pharmacal jurisprudence, with a
thesis on the law in general. $2.50. Hicks-Judd.

  This text-book is “A pioneer in its peculiar field” and aims to give
  “a presentation of the principles, with a collection of the leading
  cases, which define the legal aspects” of the profession of pharmacy.
  Over 200 cases are cited and the ground defined is fully covered.


* =Wiley, Sara King.= Alcestis and other poems. **75c. Macmillan.

  “A priestess of classic song comes with two-fold, precious offering,
  in this presentation of Iphegeneia, that flower of Argos ... and in
  the retold story of Alcestis, whom Hercules brings back from the gates
  of death.”—Critic.

  * “A beautiful and welcome work, shone upon as by the white light of
  Greek art, has been contributed in this volume to the poetry of the
  year.” Edith M. Thomas.

       + =Critic.= 47: 511. D. ‘05. 130w.

  * “Mrs. Drummond’s treatment of the fables has no very novel features,
  but she has realized its mood very vividly, and made of it a compact
  and moving little drama.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 508. D. 21, ‘05. 50w.


* =Wilkins, Augustus Samuel.= Roman education. *60c. Macmillan.

  “In ninety-two pages the whole system of Roman education is
  presented.... Dr. Wilkins divides the story of Roman education into
  two periods: the ‘purely national stage, when as yet there was no
  outside influence,’ and the effects of Greek influence from the middle
  of the third century, B.C. onwards on ‘the distinct departments of
  literary—or what we might call now secondary—education,’ and in the
  higher training of rhetoric and philosophy.... In four chapters,
  ‘Education in the ‘early republic,’ Education under Greek influence,’
  ‘Elementary schools and studies,’ and ‘Higher studies—rhetoric and
  philosophy,’ he gives all the information that can be possibly
  discovered on record and the natural inferences from it.... The final
  chapter deals with the Endowment of education in ancient Rome.”—Acad.

  * “There are few teachers who will not benefit by it; few interested
  in any way in education who will not read it with pleasure and
  profit.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 966. D. 16, ‘05. 910w.

  * “We know no other work to which one could go for so complete and
  accurate an exposition of what is known about Roman education.”

   + + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 395. S. 23. 1760w.

 *     + =Lond. Times.= 4: 317. S. 29, ‘05. 360w.

  * “It contains in six chapters and a hundred pages all that is really
  known upon this subject, and it is the best compendium which we have
  seen. Its style is pleasant, and the method of treatment makes the
  book easy to read.”

   + + + =Nation.= 81: 402. N. 16, ‘05. 170w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 683. O. 14, ‘05. 230w.

  * “The present volume offers a singularly clear, accurate, and
  trustworthy statement of the somewhat scanty information that is to be
  found in Roman writers on the subject of education.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 817. N. 18, ‘05. 1750w.


=Wilkins, Philip A.= History of the Victoria cross. *$6. Dutton.

  This volume contains an account of “the 520 conspicuous acts of
  bravery which have called for as many bestowals of the decoration,
  instituted in 1856 and made retroactive for the Crimean war. These
  plain tales are accompanied by a remarkably large number (392) of
  portraits of the recipients; by statutory and narrative appendices; by
  a table of awards of the cross by branches of the service; and by a
  personal index.” (Nation.)

  “The scheme has been very carefully and soberly carried out.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 290. Ap. 13, ‘05. 220w.

  “A very interesting account of the 520 men who have won the cross.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 340. My. 27, ‘05. 1030w.

  “Though we must confess that some of the narratives are somewhat bald,
  and that the author has neglected many excellent opportunities, Mr.
  Wilkins’s records are interesting.”

     + — =Spec.= 95: 158. Jl. 29, ‘05. 150w.


* =Wilkins, William Henry.= Mrs. Fitzherbert and George IV. **$5.
Longmans.

  “For more than a century there has been no moral doubt of the marriage
  of Maria Fitzherbert and George IV. of Great Britain. For the last
  seventy years it has been practically certain that the proof of that
  marriage was deposited in Coutts’s bank, in London ... [these
  papers] ... King Edward placed at the disposal of the author of this
  volume, and thus enabled him to prove conclusively that Mrs.
  Fitzherbert was the wife of George, Prince of Wales, later George
  IV.... Although he writes as a partisan of Mrs. Fitzherbert, he is
  fair-minded enough to write of the king: ... ‘His faults were many and
  grave, but ... there must have been some good in him or a good woman
  would not have loved him.”—N. Y. Times.

  * “In his Life of Mrs. Fitzherbert he has reached a higher level, both
  as regards literary excellence and in the interest attaching to his
  subject.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 1219. N. 25, ‘05. 1930w.

  * “Mr. Wilkins displays his usual lucidity in narrative and firm grasp
  of his subject. These things [errors] do not detract materially from
  the merit of Mr. Wilkins’s well-written and historically important
  work.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 716. N. 25. 1860w.

  * “If Mr. Wilkins’s ideas are not remarkable, nor his style brilliant,
  he may be congratulated upon having accomplished the task he set
  himself by clearing the memory of an injured woman.”

     + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 393. N. 17, ‘05. 1920w.

  * “Mr. Wilkins has handled his material ably, making a book at once
  interesting and valuable.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 160w.

  * “Mr. Wilkins has made a very complete biography of Mrs.
  Fitzherbert.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 870. D. 9, ‘05. 650w.

  * “The book is fustian from beginning to end, and is not at all below
  Mr. Wilkins’ form.”

     — + =Sat. R.= 100: 722. D. 2, ‘05. 1850w.

  * “It is easy in such a work to fall into the role of mere purveyor of
  scandal, but Mr. Wilkins never loses sight of his main theme, and the
  book is primarily a study of character. If now and then he seems to
  speak from a brief, on the whole he sticks soberly to facts, and his
  comments are generally fair and convincing. He has performed a
  delicate task with good taste and good sense, and has produced what is
  not only a volume of entertaining gossip, but a solid contribution to
  the history of the epoch.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: sup. 788. N. 18, ‘05. 1480w.


=Wilkinson, Kosmo.= Personal story of the upper house. *$3. Dutton.

  The main purpose of this book is to set forth “how the peers of
  England, from being an estate of the realm, grew into an independent
  parliamentary assembly; how and by what personal agencies the
  hereditary chamber became in a sense the parent of the elective; on
  what issues, by what degrees, it co-operated with other agencies to
  establish the house of commons; how then, from seeing in that chamber
  its natural ally, if not its political offspring, the upper house
  gradually discovered in the lower a rival and a foe.”

  “He has undoubtedly succeeded in his intention of writing what is most
  likely to find acceptance with those who read to be interested as well
  as informed.”

       + =Acad.= 68: 391. Ap. 8, ‘05. 660w.

  “Is a good book of gossip about the Lords, in which there are plenty
  of stories and few mistakes.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 1: 335. Mr. 18. 160W.

  “There is no partisanship in his estimates and judgments. There are
  some really masterly characterizations, especially among those of
  later times. References to authorities are few and far between, and
  here and there he makes statements which seem to need the support of
  good authorities.”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 335. Ag. 10, ‘05. 550w.

  “Mr. Wilkinson writes agreeably. He also shows a considerable range of
  reading.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 120. Ag. 10, ‘05. 400w.

  “A book that is neither pure history nor pure gossip, and yet comes
  near to being both.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 404. Je. 17, ‘05. 1680w.

  “As history the value of the work is, to be sure, of rather negative
  character.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 131. S. 16, ‘05. 1680w.

  “In his concluding pages Mr. Wilkinson is obviously hampered by the
  fact that he is dealing with events and men too near our own time, and
  writes too much in the style of the professional parliamentary
  lobbyist. But this book as a whole is a most valuable addition to the
  series of useful manuals to which it belongs, and is perhaps the most
  readable of them all.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 916. Je. 24, ‘05. 2290w.


=Wilkinson, William Cleaver.= Modern masters of pulpit discourse.
**$1.60. Funk.

  Criticisms and appreciations of the foremost preachers of France,
  England and America. “As critical sketches of homiletic art they have
  a special value for every preacher who is, as he should be, a student
  of the art.” (Outlook.)

  “The author evidently enjoyed writing it. But. personally, we prefer
  the ‘formless infelicity’ of Newman.”

       — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 399. S. 23. 410w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 754. S. 28. ‘05. 90w.

  “For the general reader there is enough of warm life in them.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 293. Je. 10. ‘05. 160w.

  “The essays are all eminently readable, and have the appearance of
  carefully formed judgments.”

   + + — =Spec.= 95: 262. Ag. 19, ‘05. 280w.


=Williams, Henry Smith=, ed. See =Historian’s= history of the world.


=Williams, Henry Smith, and Williams, Edward Huntington.= History of
science. 5v. Harper.

  “The plan followed by the editor in chief and his collaborator (Dr.
  Edward H. Williams) is to give a brief biography of the scientific men
  to whose labors the world of to-day is indebted, prefacing these
  biographies by a brief account of the beginnings of science and
  connecting them by references to the circumstances amid which each
  investigator worked.... In his second volume Dr. Williams carries on
  his story through the dark ages, among the Arabians, the most famous
  investigators of their time, into the western world, giving the
  biographies and telling of the labors of astronomers, physicists,
  physicians, down to Franklin and Linnaeus.... In the last three
  volumes Dr. Williams treats of the development of the physical
  sciences, of the chemical and biological sciences, and of the present
  aspects of science.”—N. Y. Times.

  “Inevitably, the murmuring shallows of science are more in evidence
  than its silent deeps; its thaumaturgics than its revelations. All
  this is somewhat trying to the student. For the student, however,
  there is already no lack of adequate works in this field; he should be
  the last to begrudge to the general reader the one book which best
  meets his demands.” E. T. Brewster.

     — + =Atlan.= 96: 690. N. ‘05. 390w.

  “He has diligently collected an abundance of material of an
  encyclopedic kind. His treatment of many topics is disproportionate
  and cloudy. Some of the blunders are inexcusable.”

   — — + =Ind.= 58: 381. F. 16, ‘05. 570w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 56. Ja. 28, ‘05. 440w. (Outlines scope and
         contents).

  “Without many noticeable omissions or slurring of important events.
  The story he tells, dry as it might be under certain circumstances, is
  fascinating as told by Dr. Williams. The volume might almost be a
  history of modern British science alone; to Dr. Williams apparently,
  American contributions to the subject are merely incidental.
  Proof-reading is careless. Inconsistent in the spelling. An index of
  little value makes part of the last volume; the work is worthy of a
  good one.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 99. F. 18, ‘05. 1190w.

  “Error is by no means absent, and some of the defects which the work
  betrays are surprising, but, viewing it in the large, it must be
  agreed that its excellencies far outweigh its faults and that it is of
  genuine value to both student and general reader. The style is
  picturesque, fluent, and clear. Altogether, the fifth volume, in
  striking contrast to its predecessors, must be accounted ill advised
  and weak.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 79: 956. Ap. 15, ‘05. 1030w.


* =Williams, Hugh Noel.= Queens of the French stage. *$2.50. Scribner.

  “A set of biographical essays entitled ‘Queens of the French stage,’
  which cover the period from Louis XIV to the Revolution, beginning
  with Armande Béjart (Molière’s wife) and ending with the celebrated,
  and notorious Clairon.” (Nation.) “Mr. Williams gives both the
  ‘backstairs’ and the theatrical biography of his subjects.... The
  picture is not a pleasant one, for the book resolves itself into the
  story of liaisons, jealousies, infidelities, intrigues, and scandals
  in high life and low.... The book, a substantial volume of some three
  hundred and fifty quarto pages, is pleasantly illustrated with eight
  or ten full-page half-tone reproductions after contemporary drawings
  or paintings.” (Dial.)

  * “Culled from many sources, these gossiping lives of six actresses
  make very entertaining reading.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 70w.

  * “Written in a clear vigorous style, the book makes interesting, if
  not very stimulating reading.”

       + =Dial.= 39: 443. D. 16, ‘05. 280w.

  * “The volume is readable and accurate in most matters save that of
  French quotations, in which elementary blunders are altogether too
  frequent.”

     + — =Nation.= 81: 424. N. 23, ‘05. 140w.

  * “The author’s not inconsiderable learning, tact, taste, and elegant
  literary style, actually do honor to the careers of the ladies whose
  portraits painted by famous contemporary brushes are among the art
  treasures of the world.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 765. N. 11, ‘05. 430w.


=Williams, John Rogers.= Handbook of Princeton. **$1.50. Grafton press.

  Dr. Woodrow Wilson has written a sympathetic introduction to this
  volume which “in very good taste describes most of the interesting
  objects and places of patriotic association in that university town of
  Revolutionary memories.... The book is fully illustrated for the eye
  of the absent.” (Nation.)

       + =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 30w.

  “Except in one or two very minor matters, the accounts here given are
  accurate and sympathetic.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 143. Ag. 17, ‘05. 140w.

  “A very readable manual.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 70w.


=Williams, Theodore C.= Elegies of Tibullus. $1.25. Badger, R. G.

  The consolations of a Roman lover done into English verse. Twenty-four
  elegies of books I., II., III., and two short pieces of book IV., in
  the translation of which the author has “always been faithful to the
  thought and spirit of the original except in the few passages where
  euphemism was required.”

  “A free but exquisite translation.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 94. Ag. 16, ‘05. 50w.

  “Though it is in no sense a slavish rendering, it does present the
  substance of Tibullus with remarkable fidelity.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 304. O. 12, ‘05. 520w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 678. O. 14, ‘05. 30w.


=Williams, William Henry.= Specimens of the Elizabethan drama from Lyly
to Shirley, A.D. 1580-A.D. 1642. *$1.90. Oxford.

  “Nearly a hundred typical and representative scenes, complete in
  themselves, have been selected.... A short appreciation is prefixed to
  each section, notes being added.”—Dial.

  “Mr. Williams does not in our judgment always do the best with the
  material that his plan leaves him.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 521. My. 13, ‘05. 560w.

  “It is pervaded by the atmosphere of ripe literary scholarship.”

   + + + =Critic.= 47: 288. S. ‘05. 150w.

         =Dial.= 38: 277. Ap. 16, ‘05. 60w.

         =Dial.= 39: 20. Jl. 1, ‘05. 60w.

  “In all substantial matters—connecting introductions, notes, and
  text—(so far as we have, tested it) his work as an editor seems to be
  well executed.”

   + + — =Nation.= 81: 105. Ag. 3, ‘05. 820w.

  “The specimens are generally well chosen, though it is easy to
  complain of some omissions.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 99: 637. My. 13, ‘05. 420w.


=Williamson, C. N., and A. M.= Lightning conductor. †$1.50. Holt.

  The popularity of “the strange adventures of a motor-car” has
  warranted this revised and enlarged edition, including a frontispiece
  by Eliot Keen, and sixteen full-page illustrations from photographs of
  the scenes of the story in France, Spain and Italy.


=Williamson, Charles Norris, and Williamson, Mrs. Alice Muriel.= My
friend the chauffeur. †$1.50. McClure.

  This book “relates the incidents of a motor-car trip through southern
  Europe of two young Englishmen (one a lord masquerading as a
  chauffeur), and three American women, a widow of thirty-nine
  masquerading as twenty-eight, her daughter of seventeen, masquerading,
  for her mother’s sake, as thirteen, and her niece, an heiress,
  masquerading as a poor relation. A prince, poor but dishonest,
  masquerading as a man of property and honor, hovers around as the
  villain of the piece.” (Outlook.)

       + =Acad.= 68: 1008. S. 30, ‘05. 370w.

  “Altogether a bright and pleasing story.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 651. O. 7, ‘05. 330w.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 170w.

       + =Outlook.= 81: 429. O. 21, ‘05. 160w.

  “There is a certain charm and pleasantness in this work, which
  inclines one to approbation, though, truth to tell, there is but
  little solid merit in it.”

       + =Sat. R.= 100: 345. S. 9, ‘05. 220w.


=Williamson, Charles Norris and Alice Muriel.= Princess passes: romance
of a motor car. $1.50. Holt.

  A traveling love story, half of which takes place in the automobile of
  the heroine of “The lightning conductor”; the other half is an Alpine
  walking tour. Lord Lane, lately jilted, finds consolation in a
  delightful boy, his “little pal,” whom he meets in his travels, and
  whom he later discovers to be an American heiress, the Mercedes for
  whom the Winston’s car was named. The story wanders over northern
  France, Switzerland, and the Italian lakes, ending at Monte Carlo.

  “This story is so delightful that we are not disposed to carp
  over-much at the impossibility of its central situation.” William
  Morton Payne.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 389. Je. 1, ‘05. 150w.

  “It seems almost too slender to be gravely criticised in matters of
  plot, character-drawing, and the like. Its staple is sheer, wholesome
  fun, brisk and bubbling, but not loud or crude.” Herbert W. Horwill.

       + =Forum.= 37: 111. Jl. ‘05. 120w.

  “The descriptions of the road are unusually good and the breath of the
  high Alps is in the book.”

     + + =Ind.= 59: 392. Ag. 17, ‘05. 110w.

  “If the story taxes belief, the characters are lifelike enough to
  satisfy any novel reader in good standing.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 378. My. 11, ‘05. 310w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 20: 180. Mr. 25, ‘05. 530w.

  “Is, if anything, more saturated with the sunshine and fun of
  automobile adventure than ‘The lightning conductor.’”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 394. Je. 17, ‘05. 200w.

  “There is a pretty little romance in the book, and delightful
  descriptions of scenery, castles, quaint inns, and travel by donkey.”

       + =Outlook.= 79: 1015. Ap. 22, ‘05. 220w.


=Williamson, James M.= Life and times of St. Boniface. *$2. Oxford.

  “Dr. Williamson gives us, in a sufficiently readable and popular
  manner, the life of the Englishman who, in the turmoil of the eighth
  century, was raised by fortune and his own merits to the primacy of
  the church in Germany.”—Acad.

       + =Acad.= 68: 33. Ja. 14, ‘05. 190w.


=Willis, Henry Parker.= Our Philippine problem: a study of American
colonial policy. $1.50. Holt.

  “A review of our experience as a nation in governing the Philippine
  islands and an appreciation of the main elements of the Philippine
  problem as it now presents itself.” There is a frank discussion of
  civil government, civil service, legal and judicial systems,
  constabulary, political parties, the church, American education in the
  islands, social conditions, and kindred subjects, all treated from the
  view point of an “anti-imperialist.”

  * “It needs to be stated at the beginning that this book is frankly
  critical of our Philippine policy, and particularly of the
  administration thereof. Further perusal and analysis of the book will
  convince many readers, perhaps unwillingly, too, that the criticisms
  and charges it contains are not only serious and grave in the extreme,
  but that their authenticity seems unquestionable. In style it is
  unusually readable and entertaining.” J. E. Conner.

     + — =Ann. Am. Acad.= 26: 761. N. ‘05. 1070w.

  * “Is a careful ‘study of American colonial policy,’ well deserving
  the attention of the politician and historian. The author is
  thoroughly master of his subject.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 646. N. 11. 300w.

 *       =Critic.= 47: 479. N. ‘05. 80w.

  “Mr. Willis somewhat prejudices his case as an impartial critic by the
  expression of his own adverse opinion in the preliminary chapter,
  before he has presented his evidence to his readers. No modern
  government has ever been more severely impeached of high crimes and
  misdemeanors against the spirit of the institutions of its people,
  than has the government at Washington in these chapters.” John J.
  Halsey.

       — =Dial.= 39: 271. N. 1, ‘05. 370w.

  Reviewed by George R. Bishop.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 633. S. 30, ‘05. 2720w.

  “The serious defect of the book is that it is not what it purports to
  be. It is really an almost unqualified accusation against the American
  government, not only of unfitness and failure, but of prejudice,
  insincerity, and sordidness.”

     — — =Outlook.= 81: 89. S. 9, ‘05. 510w.

 *   + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 667. N. 18, ‘05. 240w.

 *       =R. of Rs.= 32: 639. N. ‘05. 150w.


=Willoughby, William Franklin.= Territories and dependencies of the
United States: their government and administration. *$1.25. Century.

  The seventh volume in the “American state series.” The field covered
  in Dr. Willoughby’s discussion is that of the actual policy and the
  action taken by the United States in respect to the government and
  administration of the various dependent territories which have
  successively come under its sovereignty, and the conferring of
  political rights upon their inhabitants.

  * “Mr. Willoughby’s volume will repay careful study.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 471. D. 7, ‘05. 480w.

  Reviewed by Robert Livingston Schuyler.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 464. Jl. 15, ‘05. 1140w.

  “Generally speaking, the treatment is concise yet thorough.”

     + + =Outlook.= 80: 695. Jl. 15, ‘05. 110w.

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 317. S. 2, ‘05. 190w.

         =R. of Rs.= 32: 510. O. ‘05. 90w.


* =Willson, Robert Newton.= American boy and the social evil: from a
physician’s standpoint. $1. Winston.

  Four plain talks—originally delivered to students and now published by
  Dr. Willson “for the purpose of more widely introducing a difficult
  and delicate subject in a plain but thoroughly clean way.” The talks
  are: The nobility of boyhood: the boy’s part in life’s problem,
  delivered to the boys of Philadelphia during the summer of 1904, at
  the request of the department of public health and charities; Clean
  living: a problem of school and college days, a talk to the students
  of the University of Pennsylvania, Oct. 10, 1903; The social evil in
  America and The relation of the citizen to the social evil, addresses
  to the students of the Union Theological seminary, April, 1905.


* =Wilson, Bingham Thoburn.= Village of Hide and seek. $1.25.
Consolidated retail booksellers.

  The village of Hide and seek lies at the end of a perilous cliff
  journey over which Aunt Twaddles, a fat, coarse-skirted witch of the
  mountains, conducts two children in search of pennyroyal. In her own
  realm the witch is transformed into a beautiful fairy queen of the
  dolls, and with her brother Santa Claus furnishes rare entertainment
  for the visitors.

 *     + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 911. D. 23, ‘05. 200w.


=Wilson, Calvin Dill.= Making the most of ourselves. **$1. McClure.

  This series of talks for young people is broad in its scope and
  includes fifty chapters of helpful advice upon subjects which may be
  included under such headings as education, deportment, religion, work
  and spiritual development. The boy or girl who reads these discourses
  carefully, and heeds them cannot go far wrong in big or little things.


=Wilson, Ella Calista.= Pedagogues and parents. **$1.25. Holt.

  It has been the author’s purpose to show the possibilities within the
  power of a parent of supplementing the work of the teacher, to show
  what is distinctly the teacher’s work and what the parent’s duty and
  privilege. “The pedagogue studies the laws of childhood; the parent,
  the temperament and needs of his particular child; the school-teacher
  advances the children in regiment, lock-step; the parent in their
  natural gait, in their strugglings and self-directed sprawlings.” The
  book is humorously dedicated among others to parents “whose concern
  for their dear little ones makes them so irregularly bold that they
  dare consult their own reason in the education of their children,
  rather than wholly to rely upon old customs.”

  “It is not a treatise. Its historical chapters meander and are
  cheerful and chatty. Of the ideals of the past it gives amusing
  glimpses. A book to set tongues and pens to wagging, a book to read
  from preface to finis with the relish of combat or agreement. Whether
  you deny or assent, you are bound to laugh.” Adele Marie Shaw.

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 81. F. 11, ‘05. 2140w.

  “The book is witty, full of wholesome advice to parents and to
  teachers, and is just the kind of reading for the interested mothers
  in our women’s clubs.”

     + + =School R.= 13: 200*. F. ‘05. 230w.


=Wilson, Floyd Baker.= Man limitless. $1.25. Fenno.

  In eleven papers treating of such subjects as love, work, memory,
  suggestion, and accomplishment, is given a metaphysical and psychic
  study of the possibilities of man, unlimited power resident in one’s
  selfhood, which may be made use of thru discipline.

  “Mr. Wilson’s cry is: Down with the chains! Down with limitations! And
  he succeeds in persuading us fully that there is no need for any of
  these.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 188. Ag. 5, ‘05. 70w.


=Wilson, Harry Leon.= Boss of little Arcady. †$1.50. Lothrop.

  “Mr. Wilson writes of an Illinois village just before and just after
  the great war, of a shy boy who adored a schoolgirl with two yellow
  braids tied with a scarlet ribbon, of another boy who was not shy, of
  a marriage and a going-away to the stricken field with a sad little
  miniature inside a blue coat.... He writes of black Clem, who came
  from Virginia, and was ‘Miss Cah’line’s pus’nal property,’ in spite of
  the Emancipation proclamation ... of ‘Miss Caroline’ herself ... Miss
  Caroline’s daughter, Katharine Lansdale ... and Jim, a setter dog.”—N.
  Y. Times.

  “It is a whimsical book that Mr. Wilson has given us this time, a book
  that is scarcely a novel at all, in the accepted sense, a book that
  drags somewhat at the start, at the same time that it is
  surreptitiously fastening its hold on you.” Frederic Taber Cooper.

     + — =Bookm.= 22: 134. O. ‘05. 370w.

  “His new book has leisurely ease of movement and a humor that is
  simply captivating.” Wm. M. Payne.

       + =Dial.= 39: 209. O. 1, ‘05. 250w.

  “A picture of the Western town more truthful, because more
  affectionately touched with misty hues of the imagination, than are
  the raw splotches of ‘local color’ miscalled ‘novels of the West.’”

   + + — =Ind.= 59: 579. S. 7, ‘05. 400w.

  “The scheme of writing the novel in four books is a lazy one that
  disturbs the unities. We want the illusion of all the balls in the air
  at once.”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 586. O. 21, ‘05. 420w.

  “It is a fine thing of its kind, and will please many, the pleasing of
  whom is worth a man’s time and trouble.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 539. Ag. 19, ‘05. 900w.

  * “A delightfully human, kindly and refreshing tale.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 823. D. 2, ‘05. 170w.

  “There is real pleasure to be derived from its perusal if too much is
  not expected in the way of incident and action.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 80: 1073. Ag. 26, ‘05. 90w.


=Wilson, James Grant.= Thackeray in the United States, 1852-3, 1855-6.
2v. **$10. Dodd.

  A two-volume account of Thackeray’s visits to the United States. His
  lecture course on the English humorists and the Georges are described,
  and various anecdotes, conversations and letters are given. There is a
  bibliographical list of the writings of Thackeray published in the
  United States, followed by Thackerayana, and the numerous mentions of
  him in periodicals. There are twenty-six portraits of Thackeray, many
  of his drawings, and several facsimiles of letters.

  “Small faults are easily found, and though the book may not be as
  learned as possible, it is surely one that should have distinct
  popularity.”

   + + — =Critic.= 46: 188. F. ‘05. 110w.

  Reviewed by M. F.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 189. Mr. 16, ‘05. 900w.

  “American readers will find in these two volumes nothing to complain
  of everything to correct an ancient notion we all had that Thackeray
  was cynical.”

       + =Ind.= 58: 1308. Je. 8. ‘05. 630w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 6. Ja. 7, ‘05. 1460w.

         =R. of Rs.= 31: 249. F. ‘05. 70w.

  “Two garrulous and amiable volumes.”

       + =Spec.= 94: 256. F. 18, ‘05. 1380w.


=Wilson, William Robert Anthony.= Knot of blue. †$1.50. Little.

  This is not an historical romance altho the scene is laid in old
  Quebec. The heroine, the ward of the governor, and the hero, her
  childhood playmate, are both the victims of the wicked plots of the
  villain thru whom the hero is made to appear faithless to both his
  country and his love. There are many thrilling scenes, enacted by many
  players, but in the end each wins his true deserts.

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 402. Je. 17, ‘05. 330w.

  “A story of love and adventure, full of movement and romance.”

       + =Outlook.= 80: 193. My. 20, ‘05. 50w.


=Winkley, Jonathan Wingate.= John Brown, the hero: personal
reminiscences, *85c. West, J. H.

  The author was a boy in Kansas in 1856, and there came in contact with
  the great abolitionist hero. The object of his little book is to throw
  some side light upon John Brown’s character, and he gives some new
  historical material, and recounts adventures in which he was too young
  to participate except as an eye witness. There is an introduction by
  Frank B. Sanborn. The illustrations include a representation of a bust
  of John Brown and two views of the Adair cabin.

         =Am. Hist R.= 10: 719. Ap. ‘05. 50w.

  “We are glad Dr. Winkley has set down his personal experiences and
  impressions in so interesting and vivid a manner.”

       + =Arena.= 33: 672. Je. ‘05. 160w.

  “Although the matter of the book is slender in amount, and spread thin
  by both author and printer, and although the glimpses we get of John
  Brown are few and fleeting, the publishers are still within the truth
  in announcing that ‘The book has the interest of a romance,’ and that
  ‘the young will read it as if it were especially “a story for boys,”
  and the old will find in it matters to revive their enthusiasm.’”

       + =Dial.= 38: 240. Ap. 1, ‘05. 290w.

  “Another slight, and wholly unpretentious volume, quickly read.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 132. F. 16, ‘05. 200w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10:150. Mr. 11, ‘05. 400w.


=Winslow, Charles Edward Amory.= Elements of applied microscopy: a
text-book for beginners. $1.50. Wiley.

  A presentation of the elements of microscopic study under the
  headings: Function and parts of the microscope. Manipulation of the
  microscope, The mounting and preparation of objects for the
  microscope, Micrometry, and the camera lucida, The microscopy of the
  common starches, Foods and drugs and their adulterants, The
  examination of textile fibers, The microscopy of paper, The microscope
  in medicine and sanitation, Forensic microscopy, Microchemistry,
  Petrography and metallography.

  “Mr. Winslow’s text is practical.”

     + + =Engin. N.= 53: 295. Mr. 16, ‘05. 460w.


=Winter, Alice.= Prize to the hardy. $1.50. Bobbs.

  Mrs. Winter’s story of early Minnesota days is built up around a
  successful financial magnate of a typical western town, his daughter,
  in whose veins flows a trace of the blood of Indian chiefs,—a very
  modern, very feminine, very human specimen of lovable young womanhood,
  a young Maineite who demonstrates his fitness to be called the
  “hardy,” and his rival, the near approach to a contemptible villain.
  There are close range views of the typical Swede farmer, dips into the
  hardships to be endured in the small Dakota towns, and a thrilling
  picture of a forest fire’s devastation. The local coloring thruout is
  consistent and characteristic.

  “Told in a spirited manner. It is a story that will appeal to the
  general reader in search of a pleasing and somewhat exciting
  love-tale.”

       + =Arena.= 34: 221. Ag. ‘05. 250w.

  “The book is not incapably written. The book’s greatest fault is its
  utter lack of originality.”

     + — =Critic.= 46: 381. Ap. ‘05. 90w.

  “In short, without being remarkable in any special way, ‘The prize to
  the hardy’ is a good readable, human story, and cleverly written at
  that.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 244. Ap. 15, ‘05. 370w.

       + =Outlook.= 79: 708. Mr. 18, ‘05. 90w.


=Wise, John Sergeant.= Lion’s skin. †$1.50. Doubleday.

  On the surface the book is the story of a certain Powhatan Carrington,
  who bore arms in his ‘teens for the Confederacy, and became a Richmond
  lawyer and politician. On turning Republican he found himself so
  unpopular among his townspeople, that he removed to New York, where he
  and his northern wife prospered exceedingly. Underneath is an analysis
  of the conditions of the South since the Civil war, and a political
  history of Virginia from the first steps in reconstruction to the
  election of the governor in 1885.

  “‘The lion’s skin’ spells information rather than diversion.”

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 651. Ag. ‘05. 270w.

  “In this book there is far more history than fiction.” Wm. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 39: 42. Jl. 16, ‘05. 290w.

       — =Ind.= 58: 1132. My. 18, ‘05. 320w.

  “As a novel Mr. Wise’s book, while it contains some excellent material
  will not hold the average reader’s attention. But it only ostensibly a
  novel. It is rather a personal explanation, and as such will interest
  persons who know who Mr. Wise is.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 178. Mr. 25, ‘05. 630w.

  “Mr. Wise cannot be accounted a success as a novelist, but as a
  historian he is clear and forceful, and his book calls for careful
  consideration.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 857. Ap. 1, ‘05. 320w.

  “As a piece of fiction the book is a negligible quantity, but as the
  narrative account of the movement of events and the development and
  importance of the predominant feelings in the South before, during,
  and immediately after the war it is a worthy contribution to our Civil
  war literature.”

   — + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 713. My. 6, ‘05. 160w.

  “A new kind of reconstruction story, cleverly weaving together fact
  and fiction, and discussing the negro problem frankly and
  impressively.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 31: 508. Ap. ‘05. 160w.


* =Wishart, Alfred Wesley.= Primary facts in religious thought. *75c.
Univ. of Chicago press.

  Seven essays, intended to state in a simple and practical manner the
  essential principles of religion, and to clear it from confusion
  arising from theological changes and historical criticism.

  * “They are well adapted by their brevity and simplicity to the need
  of the average man. If they fall short in any point, it is in not
  recognizing the essential identity of religion and morality beneath
  their superficial differences.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 891. D. 9, ‘05. 170w.


=Wisser, John P., and Gauss, Henry C.=, comps. Military and naval
dictionary. 50c. Hamersley.

  Authentic and clearly worded definitions of all terms used in the
  United States army and navy, with a well-defined statement of the
  powers of each department of the United States government and the
  duties of all government officials.

  “The work has been condensed into a small handbook, and constitutes a
  handy volume of reference, the words selected having been clearly
  defined in simple English. It will be of use not only to the general
  reader unfamiliar with the terms who wishes to learn their meaning,
  but also for the Navy, Army, the National guard, the Naval reserve,
  and others interested in military matters.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 165. Mr. 18, ‘05. 200w.


=Witchell, Charles Anderson.= Nature’s story for the year. $1.25.
Wessels.

  Under such chapter headings as—The universal strife, Signs of spring,
  April days, May muses, June joys, An August song, Signs of autumn, and
  Wintry days, is given the story of the denizens of nature’s own land,
  the thickets and the tree tops; history of a year and what the
  changing seasons bring to the things that creep and fly.


* =Wittigschlager, Wilhelmina.= Minna, wife of the young rabbi. $1.50.
Consolidated retail booksellers.

  Minna, a beautiful girl of unknown parentage, born among poor Russian
  Jews, is forced to marry when only thirteen years old a man whom she
  has never seen. The morning after her marriage she runs away from her
  bridegroom and leads a wandering life buffeted by fate and humanity
  hither and yon, caring for her little son as best she may. She comes
  to America, but later returns to Russia as an anarchist, only to
  discover, upon the assassination of Alexander II., that the czar she
  has plotted to kill is her father. She is sent to Siberia, but is
  pardoned, and in the end is reunited to her husband, whom she has come
  to love. This is but a small part of an exciting story, which gives a
  remarkably vivid and most unflattering picture of the Russian Jew.


* =Wolf, Edmund Jacob.= Higher rock: sermons, addresses, and articles;
comp. by a committee of the Board of publication. $1.50. Lutheran pub.
soc.

  A memorial edition of Dr. Wolf’s sermons, papers and addresses. “They
  are the ripe fruit of a thoughtful and scholarly mind. Laymen and
  ministers alike will find the book not only readable but clear and
  profitable.”


=Woljeska, Helen.= See =Tindolph, Helen Woljeska.=


=Wollant, Gregoire de.= Land of the rising sun; tr. from the Russian by
the author, with the assistance of Madame de Wollant. $1.50. Neale.

  “The first portion of M. de Wollant’s study is a short description of
  the Japanese islands, following which there is a historical sketch of
  the people and an outline of the history of Christianity in Japan.
  Part two contains the author’s impressions of the Japan to-day,
  impressions which were derived from trips to northern as well as
  southern Japan. The descriptions of the people and of the public and
  domestic life are well considered, and in addition M. de Wollant
  appends some interesting observations on economic and financial
  Japan.”—Pub. Opin.

  “While he evidently aims to be accurate and impartial, his
  observations and opinions are naturally colored by his nationality,
  but we nevertheless find the book very interesting.”

     + — =Critic.= 47: 478. N. ‘05. 180w.

  “Where he has occasion to refer to authorities his choice is usually
  the best, and his personal comments on contemporary conditions reveal
  an observer of such insight that it is a matter for regret that he has
  not often seen fit to delve a little deeper beneath the surface which
  he portrays so admirably.”

       + =Lit. D.= 31: 625. O. 28, ‘05. 280w.

  “An interesting and impartial book on Japan. The book is decidedly
  worth reading.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 606. S. 16, ‘05. 1370w.

  “A Russian’s estimate of Japan is interesting. It is especially
  interesting, as in the present case, when it is given by a clever,
  keen-sighted Russian.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 234. S. 23, ‘05. 430w.

  “The narrative is lacking in literary merit and is at times
  incoherent, but as the book is a translation, a great many of the
  faults of style and composition may be due to that fact.”

     + — =Pub. Opin.= 39: 479. O. 7, ‘05. 130w.


=Wollaston, Arthur Naylor.= Sword of Islam. *$3. Dutton.

  “This book is an enlargement of the author’s previous work,
  ‘Half-hours with Muhammad.’ The first half of the book gives the story
  of Mohammed’s life and teaching, the early history of Islam, and a
  sketch of the dynasties under which Islamic civilization reached its
  highest development: the second half is devoted to a description of
  the more important tenets of the Mohammedan faith and the beliefs of
  the various sects into which Islam is divided.”—Spec.

  “Such statements are inexcusable, all being devoid of foundation
  beyond popular misconception due to ignorance.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 800. Ag. 5, ‘05. 980w.

       + =Ind.= 59: 751. S. 28, ‘05. 160w.

  “This volume may stimulate an interest which it cannot satisfy.”

       — =Nation.= 81: 199. S. 7, ‘05. 120w.

         =N. Y. Times.= 10: 317. My. 12, ‘05. 270w.

  “He has done his work of choosing and mingling in an able manner. Mr.
  Wollaston has made a connected story out of many diverse books and
  articles. The result of his work we consider valuable, as being many
  riches in a little space.”

   + + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 450. Jl. 8, ‘05. 1590w.

       + =Outlook.= 80: 839. Jl. 29, ‘05. 40w.

  “‘The sword of Islam’ may serve a purpose as a book of reference for
  the general reader; but it can hardly ‘awaken an interest in the
  history of a religion and its followers.’”

       + =Spec.= 94: 790. My. 27, ‘05. 560w.


=Wood, Charles Seely.= Camp fires on the Scioto. †$1.50. Wilde.

  The third story in Mr. Wood’s series on the opening up of the
  Northwest territory. It is based on the historical records of surveys
  made after the Indians had been driven to the northwest. The hardy
  courage of these government surveyors forms the undertone of the tale,
  which in particular sketches the heroism of Morris Patterson, a lad
  who had been orphaned by the cruelty of the Indians, and who resolves
  to take his father’s place in the company at Massie’s Station on the
  Ohio river, and to support his little sister.


=Wood, Eugene.= Back home. †$1.50. McClure.

  Stories which will carry all those who, in childhood, have known the
  country, thankfully back to the old school-house, the Sabbath-school,
  the swimming hole, the county fair, the circus and the many other
  things of youth which were once delightfully real and now seem
  delightfully funny. The illustrations by A. B. Frost add greatly to
  the book.

  * “His style, too, is that of the tricky journalist, and not of the
  literary artist. That Mr. Wood is not lacking in ability, whatever may
  be his deficiences in taste, is shown by the sustained excellence of
  one chapter, ‘The firemen’s tournament.’”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 798. N. 25, ‘05. 660w.

  “The human touch that makes the whole world kin is to be felt in these
  homely, humorous sketches.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 380. O. 14, ‘05. 160w.

  “They are well worth reading two or three times over.”

       + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 506. O. 14, ‘05. 220w.


=Wood, Henry.= Life more abundant: scriptural truth in modern
application. **$1.20. Lothrop.

  “The burden of Mr. Wood’s attempt here is to free the Bible from the
  old, hard, literal infallibility which has at once hidden its deeper
  spiritual meaning from its friends and been the most telling weapon in
  the hands of hostile critics.”—Pub. Opin.

     + + =Outlook.= 81: 234. S. 23, ‘05. 200w.

  “Those who are familiar with the inspiring, optimistic tone always
  struck by Henry Wood in his various writings on new thought topics
  will not be disappointed in this, his latest volume.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 39: 476. O. 7, ‘05. 490w.


=Wood, T. Martin.= Drawings of Sir E. Burne-Jones. *$2.50. Scribner.

  An importation of the Newnes set of drawings with an introductory
  essay by Mr. Wood. There are forty-seven illustrations, mostly
  reproductions of studies for “The Aenid,” “The masque of Cupid,”
  designs for windows, two or three characters from Tennyson, “The
  nativity,” and “The entombment,” “The dream,” “The car of love,” “The
  sirens,” children, hands, a wing, etc. The frontispiece presents a
  study in red chalk. There are several other pictures in tints, mounted
  on harmonizing paper. The others are in half-tone. The cover design is
  printed in three colors from a drawing by Granville Fell.

  “Scholarly essay. Carefully selected and well reproduced, though in a
  few cases losing something of their charm through over-reduction, the
  drawings here collected include typical examples of a great variety.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 25: 180. Ap. ‘05. 260w.

         =Int. Studio.= 25: sup. 63. My. ‘05. 190w.

  “An altogether satisfactory publication not only for the reason that
  great pains have been taken to present the drawings through various
  processes in a striking and intelligent manner, but also because we
  have these reproductions preceded by an excellent essay by T. Martin
  Wood, who writes with utter frankness concerning the artist’s
  draughtsmanship, its development and the feats it achieved.”

     + + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 178. Mr. 25, ‘05. 260w.


* =Wood, T. Martin.= Drawings of Rossetti. *$2.50. Scribner.

  “This year’s addition to the ‘Modern master draughtsmen’ series ... is
  an ideal study, both in text and illustration, of a distinctive phase
  of a great artist’s work.... There is an interesting discussion of the
  proper critical attitude from which to approach Rossetti’s work, and
  the fifty drawings reproduced in the present volume are treated as
  illustrative material for various theses, thus receiving considerable
  detailed attention.... Many are printed in tint and mounted upon rough
  paper of a harmonizing shade. They represent all stages of work, from
  the rough sketch to the elaborate highly-finished drawing that was so
  characteristic of Rossetti’s genius.”—Dial.

  * “The introductory comment ... is a discriminating and illuminating
  piece of criticism.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 383. D. 1, ‘05. 280w.

  * “Valuable addition to the Newnes series.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 27: sup. 33. D. ‘05. 210w.


=Wood, Walter Birbeck, and Edmonds, James Edward.= History of the Civil
war in the United States, 1861-1865. *$3.50. Putnam.

  This history of the civil war was written by two officers of the
  British army, from an impartial English point of view. “Mr. Spenser
  Wilkinson in a short introduction commends this book because he is
  convinced ‘that the true nature of war and its relation to national
  life can be learned from a study of the American Civil war as a
  whole.’ ... It tells why and how the war was fought, and though there
  is much in it which the general public may read with profit and
  interest, its detail and wealth of maps show that it is intended
  rather for the specialist.” (Sat. R.)

  * “Whatever may be the cause of the want of clearness, which we have
  named, it deprives the book of some of that value which, given its
  accuracy, would otherwise have attached to it, as a text-book. We have
  to congratulate our authors upon their index, the compilation of which
  has evidently been most careful, to the great advantage of the
  volume.”

   + + — =Ath.= 1905, 2: 431. S. 30. 1070w.

  * “It would have been all the more welcome if they had attempted less,
  and omitted some of the many details with which they load their
  pages.”

   + + — =Lond. Times.= 4: 317. S. 29, ‘05. 720w.

  * “The authors are scrupulously fair. They have kept a good proportion
  in their narrative. But they very certainly have not, as Mr. Spenser
  Wilkinson would have us believe, produced an authoritative military
  pronouncement on the subject.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 511. D. 21, ‘05. 1030w.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 713. O. 21, ‘05. 240w.

   + + — =Sat. R.= 100: 412. S. 23, ‘05. 290w.


=Woodman, H. Rea.= Noahs afloat. $1.50. Neale.

  A jocular account of the voyage of the ark, which begins with the
  third day out and ends when the Noahs and the stowaway, John Smith,
  have packed up their belongings and are ready to land. The book is
  largely taken up with humorous family discussions of up-to-date
  subjects. Some lively incidents are furnished by the animals.

  “It is carefully written, and those who like this kind of humor may
  like it very much.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 457. Jl. 8, ‘05. 600w.


=Woodward, William Harrison.= Desiderius Erasmus concerning the aim and
method of education. *$1.30. Macmillan.

  “This study of the life work of Erasmus as an educator is
  characterized by ... thoroughness, lucidity, and sympathy.... Erasmus
  as sketched here is not an altogether attractive personality.”—Int. J.
  Ethics.

  “To inquirers into the origins of modern culture, and to students of
  the history of education generally, this book will prove invaluable.”
  R. E. Hughes.

     + + =Int. J. Ethics.= 15: 390. Ap. ‘05. 700w.


Working men’s college, 1854-1904. See =Davies, J. Llewelyn=, ed.


=Workman, William Hunter, and Workman, Fanny Bullock.= Through town and
jungle: fourteen thousand miles a-wheel among the temples and peoples of
the Indian plain. *$5. Scribner.

  A book devoted to the “temples and people of India,” giving studies of
  the six styles of Indian architecture, the Buddhist, Indian-Aryan,
  Jain, Dravidian, Chalukyan, and Mohammedan, and the innumerable
  variety of people and adventures encountered “from Cape Comorin to the
  Himalayas and beyond.” There are over two hundred illustrations.

  “It is a worthy record of a remarkable journey.”

     + + =Ath.= 1905, 1: 334. Mr. 18. 1580w.

  “It would be most unfair to deny the value of the material, both
  textual and pictorial, here gathered together, however unsystematized,
  or the fact that no other recent work on India gives any such general
  impression of the Indian peoples and architectures.” Wallace Rice.

   + + — =Dial.= 38: 383. Je. 1, ‘05. 580w.

  “The incidents and excitements, as well as the studious results, of
  this trip are well told.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 269. Ap. 6, ‘05. 340w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 188. Mr. 25, ‘05. 1280w.

  “The narrative does not quite justify one’s expectations. In spite of
  their unusual powers of endurance, these seasoned travellers found a
  good deal to grumble about.”

     + — =Sat. R.= 100: 346. S. 9, ‘05. 260w.


=Wright, John, pseud.= See =Bourne, R. William.=


=Wright, Louise Wigfall (Mrs. D. Giraud Wright).= Southern girl in ‘61:
the wartime memories of a Confederate senator’s daughter. **$2.75.
Doubleday.

  “The narrative begins in Texas, continues through the author’s
  child-life in Washington; and, during her school days in Boston,
  carries the thread of the public story rather than her own,
  reproducing letters showing progress of events in the South. She
  reached Richmond just after the battle of Manassas; her record ends
  with Kirby Smith’s surrender; prominent men and women are introduced
  in incident, anecdote, and by portrait.”—Outlook.

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 575. D. ‘05. 90w.

  “The volume under review has an interest and value that the social
  histories have not.” Walter L. Fleming.

     + + =Dial.= 39: 269 N. 1, ‘05. 920w.

  “These books are really worth while, if for no other purpose but to
  show how ridiculously fallacious are the Southern heroines made up by
  writers like Cyrus Townsend Brady and George Gary Eggleston.”

       + =Ind.= 59: 986. O. 26, ‘05. 100w.

  * “A girl sees only the surface of things, and what she does not
  understand she is not likely to remember, nearly half a century later.
  So the recollections are about what one should expect. They are
  pleasing, although often thin.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 405. N. 16, ‘05. 1890w.

  “Not even a tag of poor verse ... can rob ‘A southern girl in ‘61’ of
  its literary quality or historical value, its pathos, and its fine
  humanity.” L. L.

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 558. Ag. 26, ‘05. 1160w.

  * “Mrs. Wright’s book is decidedly one to read.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 820. D. 2, ‘05. 120w.

  “The book has a substantial interest that only the author could
  supply, and some of the correspondence introduced has the value of
  historical documents.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 282. S. 30, 05. 200w.

  * “‘The feminine spirit of the Confederacy,’ which has been made one
  of the chapter titles of this book, is cleverly interpreted by this
  writer, who was actually a part of the stirring scenes which she
  narrates.”

       + =R. of Rs.= 32: 756. D. ‘05. 160w.


=Wright, W. Aldis=, ed. See =Ascham, Roger.= English works.


=Wright, William Burnet.= Cities of Paul: * beacons of the past
rekindled for the present. **$1.10. Houghton.

  A study of the cities of Tarsus, Tyana, Ancyra, Philippi, Old and New
  Corinth, Ephesus, Colossai, and Thessalonica, which not only shows the
  setting of the Apostle’s life and helps to our understanding of the
  Pauline epistles, but points out that the Apostle encountered the same
  vices, social, political, and commercial, that threaten our own
  municipalities today, and shows how he dealt with them.

 *       =N. Y. Times.= 10: 851. D. 2, ‘05. 180w.

  * “With such a purpose Dr. Wright has put his ample knowledge to a
  highly instructive as well as entertaining use.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 887. D. 9, ‘05. 100w.


=Wylie, Edna Edwards.= Ward of the sewing-circle, †$1. Little.

  Orphaned Johnny Beal becomes the little “human hand-me-down” of the
  Smithville sewing-circle. Each member takes charge of him for two
  months at a time, and with all the divided management, it is no wonder
  that the little fellow jumbles his various parting injunctions. His
  only solace is Tab, his cat which kind fate smuggles past the wrathy
  spots in his foster mothers’ tempers.


=Wyllie, William Lionel, and Wyllie, M. A.= London to the Nore; painted
and described by W. L. and M. A. Wyllie. *$6. Macmillan.

  This volume “deals with territory between the metropolis and the sea,
  and is included in the ‘Beautiful book’ series.... It is described by
  Mrs Wyllie and the many colored pictures and other sketches are by W.
  L. Wyllie, A. R. A. The party ‘does’ London to the Nore, along the
  Thames, and the Medway to Rochester. The book is made up of a series
  of traveler’s impressions with what might be called a partly
  historical and partly contemporaneous background.”—N. Y. Times.

  “In Mr. Wyllie’s pictures in ‘London to the Nore,’ we are struck
  chiefly by the wholesome sentiment and the microscopic eye. Mrs.
  Wyllie’s text is a too frivolous accompaniment.”

   + + — =Acad.= 68: 779. Jl. 29, ‘05. 400w.

  * “Amongst the many delightful publications resulting from the happy
  collaboration of an artist and author that have recently appeared,
  high rank must certainly be given to ‘London to the Nore,’ with its
  sympathetic interpretations of typical river scenes and vivid
  word-pictures of their environment.”

     + + =Int. Studio.= 27: 182. D. ‘05. 190w.

     + + =Lond. Times.= 4: 255. Ag. 11, ‘05. 520w.

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 485. Jl. 22, ‘05. 350w.

  “In every way a most delightful book.”

     + + =Spec.= 95: 159. Jl. 29, ‘05. 410w.


=Wyman, Rev. Henry H.= Certainty in religion. 50c; 10c. Columbus press.

  “Father Wyman has met many doubters in his long missionary career, and
  this book is a summary of his most persuasive arguments with them. It
  will serve, we trust, as a manual for many other zealous
  priests.”—Cath. World.

  “A book of really convincing power.”

     + + =Cath. World.= 81: 251. My. ‘05. 380w.




                                   Y


=Yechton, Barbara, pseud. (Lydia Farrington Krause).= Some adventures of
Jack and Jill. †$1.50. Dodd.

  “A pretty story of a group of English children who lived in Santa
  Cruz, West Indies. Little Jill, the narrator, looks up to her brother
  Jack with loving admiration. The mischief they get into and the honest
  way they get out make delightful reading.”—Outlook.

  * “The story is well told.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 20w.

  * “It is a good story for boys and girls, any one in fact.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 795. N. 25, ‘05. 210w.

  * “Refinement and gentleness characterize this wholesome chronicle of
  childish thoughts and doings.”

       + =Outlook.= 81: 430. O. 21, ‘05. 60w.


Yellow war, by “O.” **$1.20. McClure.

  Dramatic episodes of the war in the Far East are given here with a
  touch of imagination which only adds to their reality: we see things
  as the yellow men must see them. There are scenes of war on sea and
  land, scenes at the front, and at home, most of which tell of the
  systematic subordination and sacrifice of the individual to the
  system.

  “It is a book which gives an excellent idea of the actors in the war.”

     + + =Acad.= 68: 172. F. 25, ‘05. 320w.

  “There is much idealization rather than a precise report, and the
  result is an impression even more veritable than the others have been
  able to convey, notwithstanding a certain sense of the fiction that is
  truer than mere fact.” Wallace Rice.

     + + =Dial.= 38: 417. Je. 16, ‘05. 890w.

  “On its face a collection of detached recitals, many of them
  thrilling, but not incredible, this volume, when carefully read,
  reveals more than tales of adventure. The anonymous writer is clearly
  distrustful and unsympathetic, but he tries to be impartial.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 204. S. 7, ‘05. 1480w.

  “On the whole, it is a book of blood-stirring reading—a sort of prose
  glory song of the wonderful little yellow man.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 262. Ap. 22, ‘05. 550w.

  “Remarkable for their vividness and intensity.”

     + + =Outlook.= 79: 1062. Ap. 29, ‘05. 280w.

  “It is quite likely that this fiction is a truer picture in spirit of
  the Japanese than much of the fact we have been fed on.”

     + + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 755. My. 13, ‘05. 360w.

  “It is a word panorama of its great battles and sieges by one who has
  studied the characters of the men of the two nations engaged in it.
  The style of this narrative is highly direct and intense, full of life
  and color.”

   + + + =Reader.= 6: 597. O. ‘05. 180w.

  “The merely literary merits of his book are great. Most of the book
  can only be described as lurid; and yet the author writes simply, is
  never rhetorical, and clearly labours to be temperate and exact. The
  book is not impartial, sometimes it is palpably unfair, and now and
  then it is impossibly fantastic. But at its best it comes nearer a
  kind of genius than any war correspondence we remember.”

   + + — =Spec.= 94: 405. Mr. 18, ‘05. 800w.


=Young, Egerton Ryerson.= Hector my dog. $1.50. Wilde.

  Hector grows very human to the animal lover as with a high degree of
  intelligence he records his dog thoughts and narrates his Northland
  adventures. Particularly interesting is the author’s suggestion that
  the devotion and loyalty which a dog renders his master must be
  preserved as a part of all good in the final reckoning.

  * “Knows his subject and its surroundings thoroughly.”

       + =N. Y. Times.= 10: 821. D. 2, ‘05. 90w.

  * “He has written some excellent descriptions of sledge-trips and
  other characteristic experiences of that frozen country, but his book,
  as a whole, is marred by a touch of sentimentality and a tendency to
  point a moral.”

     + — =Outlook.= 81: 718. N. 25, ‘05. 100w.

  * “There is plenty of adventure and danger, animal jealousy and human
  love. The book is pleasant—fascinating indeed—and morally healthy.”

       + =Spec.= 95: sup. 907. D. 2, ‘05. 60w.


=Young, Janet=, comp. Psychological yearbook. **$1. Elder.

  Quotations showing the laws, the ways, the means, the methods, for
  gaining lasting health, happiness, peace and prosperity.


=Young, Jeremiah Simeon.= Political and constitutional study of the
Cumberland road. $1. Univ. of Chicago press.

  “The introductory chapters on the early transportation difficulties
  and the first roads to the West are a most convenient summary of that
  interesting problem in our early economic history. The two following
  chapters on the genesis of the Cumberland road, its location,
  construction and administration, will be welcomed by everyone who has
  had to lecture on the subject. The long constitutional controversy is
  clearly outlined, taking up the question of eminent domain,
  jurisdiction, Monroe’s veto, and the final surrender of the road to
  the states through which the road passed.”—Ann. Am. Acad.

  “The treatment is in the main historical. The style of the author is
  both good and bad. It is clear, but marred by numerous repetitions of
  lines and even paragraphs, giving us the impression that the chapters
  were written at widely separated times. There is, moreover, an
  unfortunate failure of correspondence at times between the text and
  citations. The book is a very readable and logical discussion of a
  most interesting subject. It is marred, however, by certain faults of
  style and inaccuracies in details.” Alonzo H. Tuttle.

   + + — =Am. Hist. R.= 10: 696. Ap. ‘05. 330w.

  “This is an admirable little monograph, a source study of a
  constitutional question of great historical significance. The
  monographic study will greatly aid the general historian in getting a
  sure grasp of the main questions involved.”

   + + + =Ann. Am. Acad.= 25: 346. Mr. ‘05. 130w.


=Younghusband, Francis Edward.= Heart of a continent. *$2. Scribner.

  This narrative of travels in Manchuria, across the Gobi desert, thru
  the Himalayas, the Pamirs, and Hunza, 1884-1894, was issued several
  years ago, and is now republished in cheaper form, owing to the
  renewed interest which recent events have awakened in both Colonel
  Younghusband and the entire region traversed. At the time of this
  expedition Manchuria was practically a closed country, Russia had not
  thought of occupying it, and the account is one of thoro pioneer
  explorations, of interesting experiences and observations on the
  people and the general conditions. There are half a dozen
  illustrations.

  “For full details of their remarkable journey, Mr. James’s book must
  be consulted; but the brief account of it given by Col. Younghusband
  is sufficiently full for ordinary purposes, and is replete with both
  interesting and valuable information.”

     + + =Nation.= 80: 157. F. 23, ‘05. 1960w.


=Ystridde, G.= Three dukes. **$1.20. Putnam.

  “A story portraying life among the upper classes of Russia. A pretty
  English girl accepts the position as a governess to two grown
  daughters of an eccentric Russian nobleman. The mother is very anxious
  to get her daughters married. Three dukes are attracted by the beauty
  of the governess and the fancied dowries of her pupils, but the path
  of love is very rugged.”—Bookm.

  “Nowhere is there a glimpse of the author’s self, the book is as free
  from personal feeling and bias as a police report. She records what
  she has seen and heard, and her photographs of scenes and people bear
  the stamp of truth and individuality.”

       — =Acad.= 68: 150. F. 18, ‘05. 230w.

  “A vivacious and readable picture of Russian life, containing a good
  many sharply drawn characters who sound as if they had human
  prototypes.”

       + =Critic.= 46: 564. Je. ‘05. 50w.

  “The genuineness of the local coloring is undeniable, and the deft
  manipulation of both characters and incident shows unusual talent. The
  book has a charm. The interest is kept up throughout.” W. M. Payne.

     + — =Dial.= 38: 125. F. 16. ‘05. 210w.

  “To an English speaking, American thinking reader much of it seems
  futile and much else of it dull. Similarly all of it seems to lack
  that sense of humor which is nothing more or less than a sense of
  proportion.”

       — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 20. Ja. 14, ‘05. 400w.




                                   Z


* =Zacher, Albert.= Rome as an art city. *$1. Scribner.

  A volume in “The Langham series of art monographs.” “This little book
  gives a rapid but comprehensive survey of the art of Rome, piloting
  the reader with considerable skill through the successive
  phases—classical, Christian, renaissance—down to the present day, and
  leaving him at last in a position ‘to distinguish the characteristic
  note in her art, and to divine the secret of its world-wide
  reputation.’ ... The scheme of the book is suitably assisted by a few
  photographs of typical buildings and pictures.”—Ath.

  * “The general tone is modest.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 730. N. 25. 160w.

  * “It is surprising to find the amount of information he has got into
  this narrow space.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 408. N. 16, ‘05. 430w.


=Zangwill, Israel.= Celibates’ club, being the united stories of the
bachelors’ club and the old maids’ club. †$1.50. Macmillan.

  Genial stories of how the old maids’ and bachelors’ clubs came to be
  united. A dramatic critic married in order to have some one handy to
  make use of the second complimentary ticket, and then the theatres
  began to send but one ticket. An epicure married his bad cook that he
  might be free “to hire a good one.” Young Dickray married the daughter
  of his father’s ghost in a spirit of atonement; this is not as weird
  as it sounds. There are many other stories in the same vein.

  Reviewed by G. W. Adams.

     + — =Bookm.= 21: 312. My. ‘05. 520w.

  “‘The celibates’ is not to be stolidly masticated—it is tabasco rather
  than oatmeal porridge, and should be used accordingly.”

       + =Critic.= 47: 452. N. ‘05. 780w.

  “The author’s humor is not all British any more than that of George
  Bernard Shaw.”

     + — =Lit. D.= 31: 498. O. 7. ‘05. 340w.

  “Is a collection of extravagant tales and character sketches. But the
  book is no better than an exhibition of the journalistic talent for
  writing up exhaustively from the slightest foundation of facts or
  fancy.”

       + =Nation.= 80: 441. Je. 1, ‘05. 570w.

  “It is clever—only too clever, witty, lively, cynical, even
  sentimental. Yet, after its fashion, human also. Above all, it is Mr.
  Zangwill’s own.”

     + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 194. Ap. 1, ‘05. 650w.

  “Whimsicality too elaborate and often forced is made to take the place
  of humor, with the result that the reader is often puzzled and
  sometimes wearied.”

     + — =Outlook.= 79: 960. Ap. 15, ‘05. 80w.

       + =Pub. Opin.= 38: 716. My. 6, ‘05. 500w.

  “All the stories abound in wit and humor in detail, and ... some of
  the verses are brilliant.”

     + + =R. of Rs.= 31: 758. Je. ‘05. 220w.


=Ziémssen, Ludwig.= Johann Sebastian Bach; tr. from the German by George
P. Upton. **60c. McClurg.

  The life of Bach, contrary to most artists’ careers, manifests no
  repression of spontaneous, all-around development. “He was an
  affectionate father, laboring manfully and incessantly to support a
  large family; a good citizen ... a musician without an equal in the
  profundity of his knowledge and the richness of his productions; the
  founder of modern music, the master of the organ, a composer of the
  highest forms of sacred music; a plain humble man.” This view of the
  man fills the volume which belongs to “Life stories for young people.”

  * “The story is well told, with commendable fidelity to fact, and the
  translation is exceedingly good.”

     + + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 100w.


=Zilliacus, Konni.= Russian revolutionary movement: a history of the
various uprisings from the beginning. *$2.50. Dutton.

  “M. Zilliacus writes primarily for Finlanders, who have no à priori
  sympathy with Russian democracy, and require to be convinced that the
  cause of their nation is bound up with the larger cause of reform. He
  therefore gives a summary of recent history, showing the steps in the
  development of the autocracy, the consequent misgovernment, and the
  elements in the state which have now been arrayed against it.”—Spec.

  * “We are able for this and other reasons to commend this volume.”

       + =Ath.= 1905, 2: 142. Jl. 29. 560w.

  “The account is of absorbing interest, and may well be read by all who
  desire to obtain an inside view of the underlying causes of present
  conditions in Russia.”

     + + =Dial.= 39: 313. N. 16, ‘05. 400w.

  * “He claims to have misrepresented no facts, and to have verified
  them, so far as possible, by reference to other than revolutionary
  sources, a claim which appears to us to be thoroughly well-founded.”

       + =Lond. Times.= 4: 243. Jl. 28, ‘05. 580w.

  “He frankly sympathizes with the revolutionists. But his general
  statements are abundantly supported by specific facts.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 728. O. ‘05. 400w.

  “A word of praise is due the unnamed translator, whose version is
  smooth, flowing, and altogether readable.”

   + + — =Outlook.= 81: 630. N. 11, ‘05. 220w.

  “The book is conspicuous by a rare moderation of tone.”

   + + + =Spec.= 95: 152. Jl. 29, ‘05. 230w.


=Zimmer, George Frederick.= Mechanical handling of material. *$10. Van
Nostrand.

  This is the first book written in English devoted to the subject of
  mechanical loading and transportation of materials. It treats of
  elevators and conveyors of various kinds, of ropeways and cableways,
  grab buckets, dump cars, unloading by coal tips, automatic weighing
  machines, floor and silo warehouses for grain, cantilever cranes, etc.
  There are 542 illustrations.

  “The scarcity of data and the apparent unreliability of some of the
  data given form the most disappointing feature of this volume. There
  are many otherwise good illustrations whose value is greatly reduced
  by the absence of dimensions.”

     + — =Engin. N.= 53: 637. Je. 15, ‘05. 1240w.

  “The book will be indispensable to all engineering firms, consulting
  engineers, and architects who have to deal with this important
  question.” T. H. B.

   + + + =Nature.= 72: 290. Jl. 27, ‘05. 810w.


=Ziwet, Alexander.= Elements of theoretical mechanics. *$4. Macmillan.

  This is a revised edition of “An elementary treatise on theoretical
  mechanics,” by the junior professor of mathematics in the University
  of Michigan, and is intended especially for students of engineering.
  Kinemetics, statics, and kinetics are the main divisions of the book,
  which states in its preface: “This work is not a treatise on applied
  mechanics, the application being merely used to illustrate the general
  principles and to give the student an idea of the uses to which
  mechanics can be put.”

  “Is an excellent introduction to the science of analytical mechanics.
  His exposition is in general sound and logical.” L. M. Hoskins.

   + + + =Science=, n. s. 21: 302. F. 24, ‘05. 1120w.


=Zola, Emile.= Selections; ed. by A. G. Cameron. *80c. Holt.

  In choosing these selections the editor has endeavored to illustrate
  Zola’s “patriotic, sociological, and descriptive sides, expressed in
  the mastery of his style and literary workmanship.” The text includes
  L’Attaque du Moulin, Le grand Michu, Le paradis des chats, Les Halles,
  L’Ile du diable, and nine other selections. An English introduction,
  notes and bibliography fits the book for student use.

     + + =Critic.= 47: 475. N. ‘05. 90w.

  “It would have been better if Mr. Cameron had given the source from
  which he took each of the pieces he has chosen.”

   + + — =N. Y. Times.= 10: 396. Je. 17, ‘05. 290w.


=Zollinger, Gulielma, pseud. (William Zachary Gladwin).= Widow
O’Callaghan’s boys. $1.50. McClurg.

  Widow O’Callaghan’s boys have lost not a whit of their popularity
  during the seven years since their first appearance. The brave
  cheerful struggle of the mother in launching seven boys upon useful
  careers is as refreshing and helpful as ever. Mrs. O’Callaghan brought
  her boys up on the teaching that “The Lord niver puts little b’ys and
  big jobs together. He gives the little b’y a chance at the little
  jobs, and them as does the little jobs faithful gets to be able to be
  the men that does big jobs easy.”

 *     + =Critic.= 47: 577. D. ‘05. 30w.

  * “Quite inimitable in Mrs. O’Callahan’s Irish way of putting things,
  which furnishes the salt to the solid nutriment of the story.”

       + =Nation.= 81: 407. N. 16, ‘05. 150w.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Please note that the publisher split hyphenated last names. The
      portion after the hyphen was listed before the forename. The
      portion before the split was listed after the forenames with a
      hyphen. E.g. E. Burton-Brown was listed as =Brown, E. Burton-.=
 2. Removed the bold markup from book titles with no author listed. This
      is to be consistent with book titles with authors listed. Also the
      publisher was inconsistent in the book title markup--usually only
      the first word but sometimes the entire title.
 3. Included “and” in the authors bold markup to be consistent with
      majority practice in this book.
 4. Added missing “A” heading on p. 1.
 5. Changed “feeling” to “feelings” on p. 4.
 6. The initial digit in 940w on p. 11 was illegible
 7. “Kryburg” on p. 31 is listed as “Kyrburg” in Wikipedia.
 8. Removed the misplaced phrase “rank of the church” from p. 31.
 9. The volume numbers are missing for the “Baltimore Sun” on pp. 44,
      88, 212, 288, and 327.
10. Changed “take” to “taken” on p. 44.
11. Added “be” after “to” on p. 47.
12. Changed “Is” to “As” on p. 53.
13. Changed “con-methods” to “methods” on p. 54.
14. Changed “breath” to “breathe” on p. 68.
15. Added “, ‘05” after “Jl. 22” on p. 72.
16. Changed “become” to “becomes” on p. 82.
17. The volume number is missing for the “Boston Evening Transcript” on
      p. 90.
18. Changed “is” to “as” on p. 91.
19. Changed “in” to “is” on p. 102.
20. Changed “fact” to “face” on p. 107.
21. Added “is” after “it” on p. 116.
22. Changed “come” to “came” on p. 124.
23. Changed “has” to “have” on p. 134.
24. The “Westminster Review” on p. 171 is missing date and number of
      words.
25. On p. 177 there is some text missing between “hand” and “sovereign”.
      The missing text may be “handled that the” per Internet.
26. Changed “view” to “(Review” on p. 192.
27. Changed “his” to “her” on p. 214.
28. Changed “with” for “will” on p. 231.
29. The last two digits of the “Nation” number of words entry on p. 284
      were missing.
30. Changed “passed” to “pass” on p. 322.
31. Reversed the two lines after “the student was the prevailing idea in
      Mr. Stur-” on p. 338.
32. Changed “a count” to “account” on p. 357.
33. Reversed the two lines after “It is as a study of human nature
      exposed to” on p. 363.
34. Changed “parts” to “part” on p. 375.
35. Removed duplicate second “Spec.” review on p. 376.
36. Changed “or” to “of” on p. 379.
37. Silently corrected typographical errors.
38. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
39. Did not use a hanging indent in book description in text version.
      This is to aid with electronic processing described below.
40. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
41. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
42. Enclosed spaced font in ~tildes~.


 The structure is

            a) information about the book, b) publisher's blurb (or
              excerpt from a review), c) review information including
              rating.

            The text has been formatted to hopefully make it easier for
              a programmer to extract the data.

 Book information

            Are preceeded by two blank lines.

            Are not indented in order to assist with extraction.

            Generally follow the format: =Author.= Book title. Price.
              Publisher.

            Some listings did not include an author. As previously
              mentioned, bold format was removed form the book titles to
              assist with extraction.

            Authors titles and honorifics were placed within the bold
              (=) markup.

            Person job titles such as editor or translator were placed
              outside the bold markup just before the book title.

            Occasionally additional information such as translator or
              editor are included after the book title and before the
              price.

            Many listings are cross references (“See”) to another place
              in this digest.

 Publisher's blurb (or excerpt from a review)

            Are wrapped paragraphs indented two spaces.

            If there are two paragraphs following the book information
              then the first one is generally the publishers blurb.

            Subsequent paragraphs until the next book are exerpts from
              reviews.

 Review information including rating was formatted as follows

            Asterisk (if any) indented one space.

            Plus and minus ratings (if any) occupying the fourth through
              eighth positions, right justified.

            Abbreviated magazine title enclosed in equals ‘=’ signs
              beginning at the tenth position then the reference data
              follows.

            In the reference to a magazine, the first number refers to
              the volume, the next to the page and the letters to the
              date.(Quoted from Other Abbreviation section.)

            Word count (if any) is included as the last item of data in
              the reference.

 Book information extraction regex example:

            Probably needs to be a two step process:

            Step 1 extract the works where the author is listed, for
              example:

                 regex: (?<=\n{3})[\* ]{0,2}\=([^=]+?)\=

                 output: Author: $1

            Step 2 extract the works without listed authors, e.g.:

       regex: (?<=\S\n{3})[\* ]{0,2}([A-Z][^\=\d\$\*†]+?) [\*\†\d]

       output: Title: $1

            The full solution of capturing the title and publisher are
              left to the user.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CUMULATIVE BOOK REVIEW DIGEST, VOLUME 1, 1905 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


