The Project Gutenberg eBook of Books Worth Reading
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Books Worth Reading

Author: Greening & Co. Ltd.

Release date: January 18, 2017 [eBook #54005]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOKS WORTH READING ***

                           BOOKS WORTH READING

                           BEING A LIST OF THE
                    New and Forthcoming Publications
                                   OF
                          GREENING & CO., LTD.

                             20 Cecil Court
                           Charing Cross Road
                              LONDON, W.C.

                              _SEASON 1901_




GENERAL LITERATURE, CRITICISM, POETRY, ETC.


=_English Writers of To-Day:_= Being a Series of Monographs on living
Authors. The following are the first volumes in the Series:--

=_Rudyard Kipling._= The Man and His Work. Being an attempt at an
“Appreciation.” By G. F. MONKSHOOD, Author of “Woman and The Wits,” “My
Lady Ruby,” etc. Containing a portrait of Mr Kipling and an autograph
letter to the author in facsimile. A new and cheaper edition. Crown 8vo,
cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“He writes fluently, and he has genuine
    enthusiasm for his subject, and an intimate acquaintance with
    his work. Moreover, the book has been submitted to Mr Kipling,
    whose characteristic letter to the author is set forth on the
    preface.… Of Kipling’s heroes Mr Monkshood has a thorough
    understanding, and his remarks on them are worth quoting”
    (extract follows).

    =Globe.=--“It has at the basis of it both knowledge and
    enthusiasm--knowledge of the works estimated and enthusiasm for
    them. This book may be accepted as a generous exposition of Mr
    Kipling’s merits as a writer. We can well believe that it will
    have many interested and approving readers.”

    =Scotsman.=--“This well-informed volume is plainly sincere. It
    is thoroughly well studied, and takes pains to answer all the
    questions that are usually put about Mr Kipling. The writer’s
    enthusiasm carries both himself and his reader along in the
    most agreeable style. One way and another his book is full of
    interest, and those who wish to talk about Kipling will find it
    invaluable, while the thousands of his admirers will read it
    through with delighted enthusiasm.”

=_Bret Harte:_= a Treatise and a Tribute. By T. EDGAR PEMBERTON, Author
of “The Kendals,” “Life of Sothern,” etc., with a new portrait of Mr Bret
Harte and a Bibliography. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Spectator.=--“A highly interesting book.”

    =Daily Mail.=--“An interesting biography full of good things.”

    =Sunday Sun.=--“A pleasant and interesting memoir.”

    =Whitehall Review.=--“a truly delightful book.… Written
    in no mean spirit of adulation, it is a well-balanced,
    characteristic, and fair estimate of a personality and a mind
    far above the average.”

    =Sunday Special.=--“It is an intensely interesting life story
    Mr Pemberton has to tell.… This little volume is eminently
    readable, full of excellent stories and anecdotes, and is in
    short a very admirable commentary upon the work of one of the
    brightest masters of the pen that the great continent oversea
    has produced.”

    =Daily Express.=--“Every true lover of Bret Harte ought to
    get Mr T. Edgar Pemberton’s book. There are not many authors,
    alas! that would bear study at close range, but here certainly
    is one where knowledge of his early struggles and trials will
    only increase our affection and interest in the man himself and
    his stories. Mr Pemberton has shown in this book the qualities
    of an ideal biographer. His touch is light, his figure stands
    clear, and we find in his work a strong human note we learned
    long years ago to associate with the creator of M’Liss.”

=_Algernon Charles Swinburne._= A Study. By THEODORE WRATISLAW (Dedicated
to Theodore Watts-Dunton), with a new portrait of Mr Swinburne and a
Bibliography. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Daily News.=--“Mr Wratislaw’s work is always dignified and
    eloquent, and not without critical acuteness.”

    =Review of the Week.=--“It is not only a study, it is an
    entertainment. It has dignity and no dulness.… Though an
    appreciation, it is not an exaggeration. The summing up, though
    masterly, is not tyrannical. It is concise and sufficient, and
    is as artistically written as artistically informed. Author
    and publisher have combined to make the book one not only to
    peruse, but to possess. The price is more than moderate, the
    _format_ more than presentable.”

    =Court Circular.=--“This little volume forms an excellent
    handbook to his (Swinburne’s) writing. It is not simply
    an eulogy, but rather a discriminate appreciation and a
    loving analysis of the poet’s works, which are dealt with
    chronologically as they were published. The exposition helps
    greatly to elucidate many of the poems, and the criticisms are
    fair and unbiassed. Those who know their Swinburne well will
    find a new pleasure in the poems after reading this book, and
    those who have hitherto been deterred from studying him are
    put in possession of a golden key to unlock the gateway of an
    enchanted garden. Mr Wratislaw has fulfilled his task ably and
    well, and has earned the gratitude of all lovers of English
    poetry.”

       *       *       *       *       *

VOLUMES OF E. W. O. T. (in active preparation).

=_George Meredith._= By WALTER JERROLD.

=_Hall Caine._= By C. FRED. KENYON.

=_Arthur Wing Pinero._= By HAMILTON FYFFE.

=_W. E. Henley_=, and the “NATIONAL OBSERVER” Group. By GEORGE GAMBLE.

    =_Mrs Humphrey Ward_= } In One Volume.
    =_Mrs Craigie_=       } By W. L. COURTNEY.

=_Thomas Hardy._= By a well-known Critic.

=_Realistic Writers of To-day._= By JUSTIN HANNAFORD.

=_The Parnassian School in English Poetry._= (ANDREW LANG, EDMUND GOSSE
and ROBERT BRIDGES.) By Sir GEORGE DOUGLAS.

=_Richard Le Gallienne._= By C. RANGER GULL.

       *       *       *       *       *

=_The Wheel of Life._= A Few Memories and Recollections (de omnibus
rebus). By CLEMENT SCOTT, Author of “Madonna Mia,” “Poppyland,” etc. With
Portrait of the Author from the celebrated Painting by J. MORDECAI. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo, crimson buckram, gilt lettered, gilt top, 2s.

    =Weekly Sun= (T. P. O’Connor) says:--A Book of the Week--“I
    have found this slight and unpretentious little volume bright,
    interesting reading. I have read nearly every line with
    pleasure.”

    =Illustrated London News.=--“The story Mr Scott has to tell
    is full of varied interest, and is presented with warmth and
    buoyancy.”

    =Punch.=--“What pleasant memories does not Clement Scott’s
    little book, ‘The Wheel of Life,’ revive! The writer’s memory
    is good, his style easy, and above all, which is a great thing
    for reminiscences, chatty.”

=_Some Notable Hamlets_= of the Present Time. (SARAH BERNHARDT, HENRY
IRVING, BEERBOHM TREE, WILSON BARRETT and FORBES ROBERTSON.) By CLEMENT
SCOTT, Author of “The Drama of Yesterday and the Drama of To-day,” etc.
Illustrated with portraits drawn by W. G. MEIN, and an appreciation of Mr
Clement Scott by L. ARTHUR GREENING. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d.

    =Pilot.=--“This book will be eagerly read by all who, not
    having had an opportunity of seeing this or that actor in the
    character, is anxious to know ‘how it was done.’”

    =Court Circular.=--“Interesting and valuable. Indeed it would
    be difficult to name any better theatrical criticism. The style
    is nervous and vivid, and the critical acumen displayed of a
    high order.… The criticisms are a valuable contribution to
    dramatic literature, and will be read with great interest by
    all playgoers.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“The dramatic critic’s vivid impressions and
    subtle analysis enable us to compare the varied interpretations
    which dramatic genius have put upon Shakespeare’s great
    creation. They will make interesting reading for the student
    as well as the playgoer, for Mr Scott does not fail to note
    deviations from this or that text, and departures from
    traditional ‘points’ and hackneyed effects.”

=_“Sisters by the Sea.”_= Seaside and Country Sketches. By CLEMENT SCOTT,
Author of “Blossom Land,” “Amongst the Apple Orchards,” Etc. Frontispiece
and Vignette designed by GEORGE POWNALL. Long 12mo, attractively bound in
cloth, 1s.

    =Observer.=--“The little book is bright and readable, and will
    come like a breath of country air to many unfortunates who are
    tied by the leg to chair, stool, or counter.”

    =Dundee Advertiser.=--“It is all delightful, and almost as good
    as a holiday. The city clerk, the jaded shopman, the weary
    milliner, the pessimistic dyspeptic, should each read the book.
    It will bring a suggestion of sea breezes, the plash of waves,
    and all the accessories of a holiday by the sea.”

=_A Vagabond in Asia._= A Volume of Travel off the Beaten Track. By
EDMUND CANDLER. With Illustrations from Photographs, and a Map showing
the Author’s route. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Morning Post.=--“Brightly written and full of observation
    that throws vivid and playful sidelights here and there, and
    provides entertainment that does not always appertain to works
    of travel.”

    =Daily Express.=--“A delightful and intimate work.”

    =Sunday Special.=--“There is an intense enthusiasm, a poetic
    fervour, and a dry sense of humour, such as you only find at
    intervals among books.”

    =Outlook.=--“These records of _Reiselust_, or go-fever, as we
    may call them, are off the beaten track, are novel, manly and
    picturesque.”

    =Standard.=--“The book is written with humour, his impressions
    of men and places are vivid, and the charm of the volume is
    heightened by illustrations, some of which bring us face to
    face with typical natives of the East, whilst others afford
    fair glimpses of tropical scenery.”

=_Captain Mayne Reid:_= His Life and Adventures. By his WIDOW and CHAS.
COE, U.S.A. With numerous Portraits and Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth
gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Daily Graphic.=--“A fascinating work in which Captain Mayne
    Reid’s life is carefully and sympathetically sketched.”

    =World.=--“The career of this popular writer was adventurous
    and thrilling, and Mrs Mayne Reid tells in the most
    entertaining manner the literary history of her husband and
    the eventful incidents of his career. Altogether it is a
    fascinating biography of an interesting person.”

    =Weekly Despatch.=--“A truly fascinating volume which should be
    read by everyone.”

=_The Messiahship of Shakspeare._= Sung and expounded by CLELIA (CHAS.
DOWNING). Demy 8vo, art cloth gilt, 5s.

    =Daily Telegraph= (W. L. COURTNEY) says:--“It is a wonderful
    book that Mr Downing has written, and no brief analysis could
    do it adequate justice.”

    =Review of the Week.=--“It is a very remarkable book, and the
    ideas set forth in it are startlingly original.… The man who is
    not moved to think deeply after reading this book must indeed
    be ‘dead to the soul.’ In a style that is beautiful in its
    simplicity, Clelia works out his conclusions with marvellous
    skill.”

    =Westminster Review.=--“Contains much sound criticism of a new
    and daring kind.… The book should be read by all Shakspearean
    students.”

=_God in Shakspeare._= An Evolution of the Ideal in the Poet’s Works. By
CLELIA (CHAS. DOWNING), Author of “The Messiahship of Shakspeare.” Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Daily Chronicle.=--“Intelligent and scholarly, acute and
    careful.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“A knowledge of Shakspeare unrivalled except
    by Mr Swinburne.”

    =Scotsman.=--“Really profound insight. Keen and clever
    analysis.”

=_A Book of the Poster._= By W. S. ROGERS. Profusely Illustrated with
Examples of Poster Work by the famous Poster Artists of the day. 4to,
cloth, 7s. 6d.

    =Sketch.=--“A complete and valuable work upon an important and
    interesting subject.”

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“A large and handsome book. Well written
    and beautifully illustrated.”

    =Whitehall Review.=--“The way Mr Rogers has done his work is
    a testimonial at once to his knowledge and a monument to his
    taste. This very handsome volume … is worthy of a place in
    anybody’s library.”

    =Bookman.=--“An interesting and valuable book for all
    interested in poster work and poster collections. The
    illustrations are thoroughly representative and excellently
    produced.”

=_Northern Lights and Shadows._= Stories of Eskimo Life. By R. G. TABER,
with some folk lore tales translated from the original Eskimo, and an
autograph letter from the Marquis of Lorne reproduced in facsimile. Crown
8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Daily Chronicle.=--“We take pleasure in commending the book
    because of its freshness and genuine excellence. Mr Taber has
    undoubtedly struck what is a virgin soil so far as fiction is
    concerned. The local colour of the story is novel--so novel,
    in fact, as to give quite an unusual interest and value to the
    book.”

    =Umpire= (Book of the Week).--“Mr Taber has the gift of
    story-telling, and he has the peculiar satisfaction of being
    first in an entirely new field. There is undoubted fascination
    in his pages.”

    =Outlook.=--“Well written and decidedly entertaining. It
    is to be hoped that Mr Taber may produce another series of
    characteristic stories, as direct in their appeal to the
    sympathy as are these.”

    =Literature.=--“Fresh and uncommon. Mr Taber really gets the
    Arctic atmosphere and feeling into his work.”

=_Woman:_= A Study and Defence. Adapted from the French of ALFRED
FOUILLÉE by the Rev. T. A. SEED. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d.

    =Review of the Week.=--“An interesting little book. The
    scientific arguments are lucidly and convincingly put.”

    =Sunday Special.=--“There is much curious information in this
    little book, first as to the scientific origin and formation
    of the feminine portion of humanity, and next as to woman’s
    limitations and powers.”

    =Scotsman.=--“It is a suggestive essay on the eternal question
    of the Eternal Feminine, the principal points in which problem
    it states with neatness and brevity, and argues out with
    commendable conciseness.”

=_Some Home Truths_= re =_The Maori War_=, 1863 to 1869, on the West
Coast of New Zealand. By Lt.-Col. EDWARD GORTON (New Zealand Militia),
late Captain H. M. 29th and 57th Regiments. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d.

=_A Trip to Paradoxia_=, and other Humours of the Hour. Being
Contemporary Pictures of Social Fact and Political Fiction. By T. H. S.
ESCOTT, Author of “Personal Forces of the Period,” “Social Transformation
of the Victorian Age,” “Platform, Press, Politics, and Play,” Etc. A new
and cheaper edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Standard.=--“A book which is amusing from cover to cover.
    Bright epigrams abound in Mr Escott’s satirical pictures of the
    modern world.… Those who know the inner aspects of politics
    and society will, undoubtedly, be the first to recognise the
    skill and adroitness with which he strikes at the weak places
    in a world of intrigue and fashion.… There is a great deal of
    very clever sword-play in Mr Escott’s description of Dum-Dum
    (London), the capital of Paradoxia (England).”

=_Bye-Ways of Crime._= With some Stories from the Black Museum. By R. J.
POWER-BERREY. Profusely Illustrated. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Outlook.=--“Decidedly you should read Mr Power-Berrey’s
    interesting book, taking laugh and shudder as they come.”

    =Sheffield Independent.=--“We do not remember to have ever seen
    a more popularly-written summary of the methods of thieves
    than this bright and chatty volume. It is the work of a writer
    who evidently has a most intimate knowledge of the criminal
    classes, and who can carry on a plain narrative briskly and
    forcibly. The book fascinates by its freshness and unusualness.”

    =Liverpool Review.=--“This is no fanciful production, but
    a clear, dispassionate revelation of the dodges of the
    professional criminal. Illustrated by numerous pen and ink
    sketches, Mr Power-Berrey’s excellent work is useful as well
    as interesting, for it will certainly not assist the common
    pilferer to have all his little tricks made public property in
    this lucid and easily-rememberable style.”

=_The Art of Elocution_= and Public Speaking. By ROSS FERGUSON. With an
Introduction by GEO. ALEXANDER. Dedicated by permission to Miss ELLEN
TERRY. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, strongly bound in cloth, 1s.

    =Australian Mail.=--“A useful little book. We can strongly
    recommend it to the chairmen of public companies.”

    =Stage.=--“A carefully-composed treatise, obviously written
    by one as having authority. Students will find it of great
    service.”

    =Literary World.=--“The essentials of elocution are dealt with
    in a thoroughly capable and practical way. The chapter on
    public speaking is particularly satisfactory.”

=_The Path of the Soul._= Being Essays on Continental Art and Literature.
By S. C. de SOISSONS, Author of “A Parisian in America,” etc. Illustrated
with portraits, etc. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 10s. 6d. (in preparation).

=_From the Book Beautiful._= Being Some Old Lights Re-lit. By the Author
of “The Hypocrite” and “Miss Malevolent.” Cloth gilt, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.

    =Lloyd’s.=--“Full of reverence, yet glows with vivid
    imagination.… These are Bible stories in a most novel and
    attractive form, never irreverent, but full of the keenest
    interest.”

    =British Weekly.=--“Among the many attempts which have recently
    been made to fill out the Bible stories with the realistic
    touches suggested by our increased knowledge of the conditions
    of life in ancient times, this anonymous volume will take a
    high place. Seven stories are retold, some from the Old, some
    from the New Testament. To certain tastes they may seem too
    elaborately wrought, the author evidently relishes what is
    gorgeous, and his descriptions of Potiphar’s house are very
    richly inlaid with ornament, but whatever be the judgment of
    readers in this respect, there can be no question as to the
    effective realism of the narratives. Certainly some of the
    stories will convey both to children and adults fresh and
    memorable conceptions of Biblical scenes.”




MARIE CORELLI


=_Patriotism or Self-Advertisement?_= A Social Note on the Transvaal War,
1899-1900. By MARIE CORELLI. Sixth Edition. 4to, sewed, 2d.

=_Nebo:_= The Merchant of Susa. A Drama in Three Acts. By A. J. FERREIRA.
Small 8vo, hand-made paper, art cloth, gilt, 2s. 6d. nett.

    =Daily Mail= (Glasgow).--“The story unfolded is very
    interesting and full of exciting incidents.”

    =Aberdeen Free Press.=--“A highly readable piece of work, and
    it would, we feel sure, if suitably mounted and in the hands
    of capable actors, prove eminently effective on the stage. The
    action is rapid, there are no diffuse vapourings, and there is
    ample scope for attractive scenic effect.”

    =Independent= (Sheffield).--“The Assyrian setting makes a novel
    background, and there is movement and some striking situations
    in the play.”

=_Ideal Physical Culture_=, And the Truth about the Strong Man. By
APOLLO (the Scottish Hercules and Sandow’s Challenger). Fourth Edition.
Profusely illustrated, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =To-day.=--“It is a very sensible book, and Apollo knows what
    he is talking about.”

    =County Gentleman.=--“Will prove useful to aspiring young
    athletes.”

    =Westminster Gazette.=--“Those who take an interest in Physical
    Culture will find the manual instructive and useful.”

    =Football Echo.=--“‘Ideal Physical Culture’ scatters to the
    wind much of the nonsense and bunkum written _ad nauseam_ about
    the strong man, his biceps, his triceps, the muscular fat, and
    his stupendous feats.”

=_The Year Book of the Stage._= Being an annual record of criticisms of
all the important productions of the English Stage, with copious Index
and complete Cast of each Play recorded. Compiled by L. ARTHUR GREENING.
About 260 pages, strongly bound in cloth, 3s. 6d.

=_A History of Nursery Rhymes._= By PERCY B. GREEN. This interesting
Book is the result of many years research among nursery folklore of all
nations, and traces the origin of nursery rhymes from the earliest times.
Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Morning Post.=--“Contains a great deal of pleasing information
    concerning the origin of our nursery songs, fairy tales and
    games … and the author treats his subject in a manner which is
    both entertaining and intelligible.”

    =World.=--“Will be found entertaining by everybody.”

    =Spectator.=--“The reader will find much curious matter in Mr
    Green’s volume.”

    =Examiner= (Cork).--“A comprehensive and thoroughly interesting
    book.”

    =Madame.=--“A most interesting book.… To those mothers who have
    their children round them in the story-telling twilight this
    book of Mr Green’s should be a treasury of delight.”

=_In Quaint East Anglia._= Descriptive Sketches. By T. WEST CARNIE.
Illustrated by W. S. ROGERS. Long 12mo, cloth, 1s.

    =Observer.=--“That East Anglia exercises a very potent spell
    over those who once come under its influence is proved by the
    case of George Borrow, and all who share in the fascination
    will delight in this brightly written, companionable little
    volume.”

    =Graphic.=--“It is a prettily got up and readable little book.”

    =Saturday Review.=--“Will be welcomed by all who have come
    under the charm of East Anglia.”

=_A Man Adrift._= Being Leaves from a Nomad’s Portfolio. By BART KENNEDY,
Author of “Darab’s Wine-Cup,” “The Wandering Romanoff,” etc. This very
entertaining book is a narrative of adventures in all parts of the world.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    Mr ANDREW LANG, in the course of a long and laudatory notice
    in =Longman’s Magazine=, said:--“It is a strange photograph
    of rude and violent life. The narrator always carries his
    life in his fist. He describes, better than any other writer,
    the existence of a tramp, and gives an amazing account of the
    brutality, and even torture, practised on workers in some
    parts of the United States.… The book is as simple in style
    as Swift’s writing; a kind of labouring Trelawny might have
    fathered these _adventures of a younger son_.”

    Mr RICHARD LE GALLIENNE (in the =Idler=).--“‘A Man Adrift’
    has held me as few recent books have power to do. The book is
    ‘real’ because it has first been really lived, and then been
    really written. Mr Kennedy’s book has held me, not only by
    its reality, but by its courage, its pity, its humour, its
    all-embracing humanity, its quiet fierceness. ‘A Man Adrift’ is
    a brave book.”

    =Morning Leader.=--“The record of an adventurous life, when
    well told, always appeals to the imagination and sympathy of
    the reader, and ‘A Man Adrift’ is such a record. Presumably the
    adventures are real; they have all the vividness of reality at
    all events, and one follows the hardships and wanderings of the
    narrator with keen interest.… Mr Kennedy is to be congratulated
    on his ‘Man Adrift.’”

    =County Gentleman.=--“This is the book of a strong man. It has
    vigour, originality and power, and comes as a refreshing change
    after the maudlin sentimentality of most modern stories.… Mr
    Kennedy has a characteristic style. He writes in short, crisp
    sentences that are at once direct and fearless. It is mainly
    his own story that he tells in this strangely fascinating
    volume.”

=_Woman and the Wits._= Epigrams on Woman, Love, and Beauty. Collected
and edited by G. F. MONKSHOOD, Author of “Rudyard Kipling: The Man and
His Work,” “Lady Ruby,” etc. New and revised edition. Small 8vo, art
vellum, gilt extra, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.

    =Great Thoughts.=--“The most beautiful book on my table is
    ‘Woman and the Wits.’… In this lovely volume of about 200 pages
    some of the wisest, wittiest, tenderest epigrams on woman and
    on cognate topics to be found in ancient and modern times, have
    been brought together with taste and judgment.”

    =Ladies’ Pictorial.=--“The compiler of this dainty little
    volume has produced a veritable lucky bag for the dipper who is
    anxious to find something smart and clever.”

    =Madame.=--“A book that should find favour on every woman’s
    table.”

    =Literary World.=--“The epigrams are well selected, and should
    form a perfect armoury for any young bachelor put up to propose
    the toast of ‘The Ladies.’… There is good variety too.”

=_Dress in a Nutshell._= By “R.” A Booklet every woman who wishes to
dress tastefully should certainly possess. Crown 16mo, cloth, 1s.; sewed,
6d.

=_Weeds and Flowers._= Poems by WILLIAM LUTHER LONGSTAFF, Author of “The
Tragedy of the Lady Palmist.” Crown 8vo, art cloth, gilt extra, gilt top,
2s. 6d. nett.

    =Sun.=--“Mr Longstaff has real fire and passion in all of his
    work. He has a graceful touch and a tuneful ear. There is
    exquisite melody in his metre.”

    =Times.=--“He has passion and energy enough to stock half a
    dozen average minor poets.… But he has in him something of the
    stuff of which poetry--as opposed to verse--is made.”

    =Court Circular.=--“Unquestionably a poet of a very high
    order--musical, suggestive, imaginative and picturesque. ‘In
    the Times to come’ is a beautiful poem, full of suggestion,
    with a subtle melody of its own. How well Mr Longstaff can
    write is seen in ‘A Hopeless Dawn.’ It is the work of a true
    poet. Mr Longstaff’s poems deserve more extended notice.
    There is art in his work, and music; and his verse is full of
    promise. Mr Longstaff’s muse is frank and sincere, and many of
    his readers will forgive her for not posing as a prude.”

=_Ballads of Ghostly Shires._= By GEORGE BARTRAM, Author of “The People
of Clopton,” “The White-headed Boy,” etc. Dedication accepted by Theodore
Watts-Dunton. Small 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. nett.

    =Speaker.=--“We hail with the greatest pleasure Mr George
    Bartram’s ‘Ballads of Ghostly Shires.’”

    =Academy.=--“His descriptive passages have the true poetic
    touch, and a fresh grace about them. He is, in truth, well
    worth reading, and has the distinction of writing narrative
    verse well in a lyric age. It is a breezy, picturesque, taking
    little book.”

    =Athenæum.=--“Mr Bartram has the gift of description, and his
    vigorous narrative verse moves swiftly.”

    =Sunday Sun.=--“Remarkable and beautiful poems. Enjoyable
    reading.”

=_Village Life and Feeling._= Songs and Verses. By RUPERT UPPERTON, the
Ploughboy Poet. 2s. 6d. nett.

    =Scotsman.=--“This is a pleasant and an interesting volume of
    healthy English verse.… The book deserves to be read, and will
    interest any curious lover of poetry.”

    =North Star.=--“Amusing and instructive poems illustrative of
    village life. Those who are on the lookout for new recitations
    should examine this volume.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“His humour and satire are genial and
    well-meaning. He is not without sentiment, and his lyrical
    pieces will be heartily appreciated.”

    =Morning Leader.=--“There is some good stuff and not a little
    quaint feeling in the verses of Rupert Upperton.”

    =St Andrew’s.=--“Many a simple soul--and there are millions of
    such in our land--utterly unable to appreciate the poetry of
    the critics, will find itself charmed, purified and elevated
    by the kindly muse of Mr Upperton. Messrs Greening & Co. have
    done their work well, and enshrined these ‘woodnotes wild’ in a
    beautiful piece of letterpress.”




HER MAJESTY’S EDITION


=_Rip Van Winkle_=, together with “THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW.” By
WASHINGTON IRVING, and the Complete Literary and Theatrical History of
the Story by S. J. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD, Author of “Fame, the Fiddler.” With
Portraits of Her Majesty’s Theatre Company, and Illustrations by W. G.
MEIN. Dedicated to Mr H. Beerbohm-Tree. Crown 8vo, art cloth, decorative
cover by Will Smart, top edge gilt, 2s.

    =Bookman.=--“This edition of Irving’s famous legends is in
    every way to be commended. Type, paper and illustrations are
    good, and Mr Fitz-Gerald adds to the originals the stage and
    literary history of ‘Rip van Winkle,’ which is well worth
    reading.”

    =Pall Mall Gazette.=--“A pretty and interesting little book.”

    =Topical Times.=--“A really interesting memento, and it costs
    only 2s.--a perfectly absurd price for a book of this size and
    quality. Beautifully bound in green cloth, red lettered, it is
    well printed, and artistically illustrated by Mr Will G. Mein.”




Greening’s Masterpiece Library

“A handsome and artistic series.” _Vide_ Press.


=_Ringan Gilhaize._= A Romance of the Covenanters. By JOHN GALT. Edited,
with an Introduction, by Sir GEORGE DOUGLAS. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt
edges, 3s. 6d.

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“The splendid panorama it gives of
    some of the most stirring and far-reaching events in Scottish
    history, and the skill shown by the author in so arranging his
    materials that the historic is always subordinated to the human
    interest, render the book in every way worthy of revival.”

=_Rasselas._= A Romance of Abyssinia. By Dr JOHNSON. Edited, with an
Introduction, by JUSTIN HANNAFORD. Illustrated by W. S. ROGERS. Crown
8vo, cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.

    =Morning Leader.=--“Well printed and pleasant to handle.”

    =Globe.=--“A very acceptable edition. The text is set forth
    in large, bold type; Mr W. S. Rogers supplies eight graphic
    illustrations, while Mr Justin Hannaford furnishes an
    introduction in which the literary history of the story is
    pleasantly recounted.”

=_Vathek._= An Eastern Romance. By WILLIAM BECKFORD. Edited, with an
Introduction, by JUSTIN HANNAFORD. Illustrated by W. S. ROGERS. Crown
8vo, cloth, gilt edges, 3s 6d.

    =Saturday Review.=--“A work of vivid and picturesque
    imagination, great power, and no small originality. It is
    saturated with the fragrance and voluptuousness of the East.”

    =Outlook.=--“In the way of Eastern romances ‘Vathek’ has always
    easily stood first. The present edition is handsomely got up,
    and contains several well-executed illustrations.”

=_The Black Tulip._= A Romance of Old Holland. By ALEXANDRE DUMAS.
Newly done into English, with Introduction, by S. J. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD.
Illustrated by JOHN HASSALL. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Sun.=--“A delightful edition artistically bound and
    attractively got up. Mr John Hassall is seen at his best in the
    illustrations.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“We recommend it, not only as one of the
    most interesting, but as without exception, and in every sense
    of the word, the most readable of Dumas’s works.”

=_The Epicurean._= A Tale of Mystery and Adventure. By THOMAS MOORE.
Edited, with an Introduction, by JUSTIN HANNAFORD. Illustrated by WILL
SMART. 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.

    =Bookman.=--“An interesting, well-produced reprint of Moore’s
    popular Eastern romance.”

    =Great Thoughts.=--“It is as bright, and fresh and entertaining
    as when first it took the reading world by storm in 1827.”

    =Whitehall Review.=--“This reprint is welcome, and the manner
    in which it is printed, bound and produced, is a credit to the
    eminent firm who are responsible for the edition.”

=_Salathiel;_= or, The Immortal. A Wonderful Romance of Old Palestine.
By Dr GEO. CROLY. Edited and revised, with an Introduction, by Rev. T.
A. SEED. Illustrated by W. G. MEIN. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. (In
preparation.)

=_Asmodeus;_= or, The Devil on Two Sticks. An Illustrated Edition of
the Celebrated Novel by LE SAGE, Author of “Gil Blas.” Edited by JUSTIN
HANNAFORD. Illustrated by JOHN HASSALL. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.
(In preparation.)

=_Colomba._= A Corsican Romance. By PROSPER MERIMÉE, Author of “Carmen.”
Edited, with an Introduction, by Rev. T. A. SEED. Illustrated by W. S.
ROGERS. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. (In preparation.)

    _Several well-known and popular works by great writers are in
    active preparation for this artistic series of masterpieces._




POPULAR FICTION


=An Obscure Apostle.= A Powerful and Dramatic Tale, translated from the
Polish of Mdme. ORZESZKO by Count S. C. de SOISSONS. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Saturday Review.=--“An absorbing and delightful story, and
    we are sure it will be read with the greatest pleasure by
    those who can best appreciate the merits of the finer kinds of
    fiction.”

    =British Weekly.=--“A good story, dramatic, poetic and
    pathetic.”

    =Daily Graphic.=--“An admirable translation of a fine,
    intensely human tragedy. One reads it from first to last
    entirely fascinated.”

    =Bookman.=--“A deeply impressive story it is, and if Madame
    Orzeszko has written others equally good, we must hope Count de
    Soissons will translate them for us.”

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“A curious and interesting story,
    which, apart from its power, deserves notice because of the
    novelty of its material. The jaded appetite, weary of English
    drawing-rooms, Californian mines, and Indian flirtations, will
    here find an absolutely fresh _entourage_ to a very remarkable
    story.… It is pictorial, poetic and dramatic.”

=The Modern Argonauts.= A Novel. By ELIZA ORZESZKO, Author of “An Obscure
Apostle.” Translated from the Polish by Count S. C. de SOISSONS. Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Liverpool Review.=--“‘The Modern Argonauts’ is a remarkable
    piece of fiction; a work of powerful conception, of original
    and charming expression, and of noble and exhilarating thought.”

    =Spectator.=--“Madame Orzeszko paints in ‘The Modern Argonauts’
    the domestic tragedy of a successful modern millionaire
    with a boldness and a vigour that remind one of Jokai. The
    characterisation shows the influence of modern ideas in their
    most advanced and disintegrating form.… It is a luridly
    picturesque problem novel.”

    =Daily News.=--“The picture which Madame Orzeszko presents,
    painted on impressionist lines, with suggestions of the
    symbolistic school, is distinctly striking.… Each of the
    characters in this stirring work is individualised with great
    skill.”

    =Daily Chronicle.=--“A powerful story, clever and amusing.”

    =Dundee Courier.=--“The story is powerful; the English
    vigorous; the moral commendable.”

    =Evening Times.=--“Its power fascinates us. The originality of
    the conception, the skill with which the characters are drawn,
    and the vigour and vividness of the writing testify not only
    to keen insight into human nature, but to Madame Orzeszko’s
    maintenance to the eve of threescore years rare and youthful
    freshness.”

=A Girl of the North.= A Tale of London and Canada. By HELEN MILECETE.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Saturday Review.=--“It is piquant and up-to-date. Miss
    Milecete’s style is engagingly direct and simple, and she has a
    natural talent for story-telling.”

    =Topical Times.=--“A pretty story, charmingly written.… It is
    pleasant to read, mainly because it is well written, but its
    glimpses of existence in Canada and West End life do not lack
    either picturesqueness or humour.”

    =Outlook.=--“There is some clever writing in this novel, and
    the Canadian chapters are particularly fresh and picturesque.”

=An Exile in Bohemia.= A powerful and enthralling Novel. By ERNEST E.
WILLIAMS, Author of “Made in Germany,” etc., etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=A Detached Pirate.= A Novel. By HELEN MILECETE, Author of “A Girl of the
North.” Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Ladies’ Pictorial.=--“A clever and audacious book. The story
    is told in letters, and very clever letters they are … Miss
    Vandeleur is not _nervy_, and I prefer her wholesome audacity
    to the wild wailing of ‘The Love Letters of an Englishwoman.’”

    =Court Circular.=--“A bright and fascinating book.”

    =Truth.=--“A light and bright modern story of a _divorcée_
    with herself as co-respondent. Her habit of masquerading as
    a man got her into this truly American scrape, and the truly
    American way in which she got out of it and was re-united to
    her Othello, is told in the difficult form of letters with a
    spirit worthy of so whimsical a plot.”

=Committed to His Charge.= A Canadian Romance. By KATE and ROBINA LIZARS.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Athenæum.=--“This book is decidedly interesting. The authors
    have a very pleasant gift of gaiety and an agreeable way of
    expressing themselves.”

    =Daily News.=--“Both interesting and amusing.”

    =Record.=--“Very clever and humorous.”

    =Daily Graphic.=--“A clever and entertaining novel.”

    =Christian World.=--“The incidents connected with the four
    years’ rectorship of Tom Huntley are cleverly arranged and as
    cleverly told.… We have nothing but praise for this book, which
    is strongly suggestive of George Eliot’s ‘Scenes from Clerical
    Life.’”

=His Grace’s Grace.= A Powerful Novel. By the Author of “The Hypocrite,”
“Miss Malevolent,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

=Where the Oranges Grow.= A Humorous Novel. By N. A. LEYKEN (the Russian
Mark Twain). Translated from the original by Count S. C. de SOISSONS.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=The Tragedy of a Pedigree.= An Interesting Story. By HUGO AMES. Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Sketch.=--“Such easy epigrammatic talk as is to be found in
    this book is not often met with. It is witty and delightful,
    and the characters seem to be drawn from life with a
    master-pen.”

    =Scotsman.=--“An excellent story, well written and easily read.”

    =Sunday Special.=--“Can be recommended as a bright, terse,
    epigrammatic novel of to-day. There are so few writers who are
    capable of constructing a neat and telling epigram that the
    present volume is doubly welcome.”

    =Vanity Fair.=--“This novel is entertaining, suggestive, gently
    cynical and quick with promise.”

    =Madame.=--“It is a crisp delineation of modern social life,
    abounding in excellent characterisation, sparkling dialogue
    and epigrams that are new and smart. There is scarcely a page
    of the book that does not contain a sentence worth reading a
    second time and then marking with pencil for another perusal.”

=Red Fate.= A Powerful Novel. By EDMUND FORBES. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 6s.

    =Daily Despatch.=--“In ‘Red Fate’ we have a daring book. Messrs
    Greening have in Mr Forbes the writer of a strong book that
    will cause some talk.”

    =The Scotsman.=--“The story possesses the merits of freshness,
    originality and ingenuity. It is written in an animated and
    picturesque style, and is full of life and incident.”

    =Onlooker.=--“Mr Edmund Forbes has drawn a striking study, and
    his style and language are always most scholarly. Grellier is
    a real and living character. It is a book that could only have
    been written by one endowed with the imagination and musical
    pen that betray the poet.”

=The Prettiness of Fools.= A Realistic and Powerful Novel. By EDGAR
HEWITT. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Literary World.=--“Very entertaining reading.”

    =Dundee Advertiser.=--“A singularly strong story.”

    =Morning Post.=--“An ambitious book, ambitious in its style
    and in the bold way it affects to tackle matters which are
    generally reserved for private conversation. At the same time
    it were ungracious to deny that Mr Edgar Hewitt has written a
    very clever book, full of keen observation, and not unseasoned
    with humour.”

    =Gentlewoman.=--“A powerful and interesting book, with the
    interest kept up till the end … altogether a very amusing and
    clever book.”

=The Magnetism of Sin.= A Tale Founded on Fact. By “ÆSCULAPIUS.” Crown
8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Midland Mail.=--“An interesting story.… Exceedingly well
    written.”

    =Daily Despatch.=--“‘The Magnetism of Sin’ is a story as choke
    full of mystery as any tale could be.… The author of the
    book--who is obviously a very daring young man--has written a
    story which is as remarkable in its way as ‘The Mystery of a
    Hansom Cab.’”

    =Evening News= (Manchester).--“Lovers of the sensational in
    fiction will find plenty to interest them in ‘The Magnetism of
    Sin.’… The story is full of romance and dramatic incident, the
    chapters dealing with the raid on the house by the police, the
    fight for liberty, the bold escape of the double-dyed traitor,
    and his subsequent capture and execution in Australia being
    particularly thrilling.”

=The After-Taste.= A Novel. By COMPTON READE, Author of “Hard Lines,”
“Under which King,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    Dr PARKER (of the City Temple) says:--“From beginning to end
    the action of the story is most vivid and most natural. It must
    certainly win itself many readers.”

    =Literary World.=--“This novel is decidedly above the average.”

    =Daily Graphic.=--“Amply repays for the reading, for it is
    written with a keen sense of the fitness of things, and without
    setting probability at nought--qualities not too frequently
    found in novels. It is written in a sympathetic style, and
    keeps the attention centred in the interesting career of the
    heroine.”

=Daughters of Pleasure.= A Novel. By ANNA, COMTESSE DE BRÉMONT. Crown
8vo, cloth gilt, 6s.

    =Topical Times.=--“Brisk and spicy without being blatant and
    salacious … a very good book, which says a lot of things that
    wanted saying frankly but delicately. It is, at the same time,
    an engrossing romance.”

    =Globe.=--“Readers will find plenty of cleverness and ‘go,’
    the Bohemian side of artistic life being described with
    verisimilitude as well as graphic force.”

    =Books of To-day.=--“A story of deep human interest, set forth
    with undoubted literary talent, sense of style, and an ability
    to handle pure narrative that is rare and welcome. A book which
    can not only be read with interest, but re-read.”

=The Seekers Of Sentiment.= A Series of Powerful Stories. By a
“WESTMINSTER SCHOOLBOY.” Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=The Power of the Past.= A Novel. By DAISY HUGH PRYCE, Author of “The
Pasha,” “Goddesses Three,” “Valda Hanem,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 6s.

=A Son of Africa.= A Tale of Marvellous Adventures. By ANNA, COMTESSE DE
BRÉMONT, Author of “Daughters of Pleasure,” “The Gentleman Digger,” etc.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Morning Post.=--“Written with unmistakable power.”

    =Weekly Times.=--“Deserves to be the success of the season.”

    =World.=--“Contains striking incidents graphically related. We
    cannot fail to admire the ingenuity displayed by the writer.”

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“A strange and weird story is ‘A Son of
    Africa,’ the latest from the pen of Anna, Comtesse de Brémont,
    author of ‘The Gentleman Digger.’ From the writer of that story
    we expect and get vivid word-pictures and local colouring. The
    descriptions of scenery and incident are wonderfully striking
    and impressive.… Such is the story of ‘A Son of Africa’ in
    brief outline. The filling in is sometimes lurid, but always
    forceful. It is written with power and grip.”

=The Gentleman Digger.= Realistic Pictures of Life in Johannesburg. By
ANNA, COMTESSE DE BRÉMONT, Author of “A Son of Africa,” etc. New Edition,
revised to date, with a new Preface. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Academy.=--“The Comtesse de Brémont presents us with a
    terribly realistic picture of life in Johannesburg during the
    raging of the gold fever.”

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“Those who like a good story, pleasantly
    told, should read ‘The Gentleman Digger.’… Readers who turn
    their attention to this volume will, apart from the interesting
    plot, gain much insight into the manners and customs of a land
    which is only just breaking into civilisation as we understand
    it.”

    =Spectator.=--“The characters are true to life, and the
    narration is continuous and spirited. The Comtesse de Brémont
    knows how to describe people and places, and there is local
    colouring.”

=Cynthia’s Damages.= A Story of Stage-_craft_. By REGINALD TURNER. Crown
8vo, cloth gilt, 6s.

=In The World of Mimes.= A Story of Theatrical Life. By LEWIS MELVILLE,
Author of “The Life of Thackeray,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=Mora:= One Woman’s History. An Interesting Novel by T. W. SPEIGHT,
Author of “The Crime in the Wood,” “The Mysteries of Heron Dyke,” etc.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =Scotsman.=--“One may run through the story of ‘Mora’ with
    considerable enjoyment of the brisk development of an amusing
    little drama.… It is clever in contrivance, and lively and
    entertaining.”

    =Athenæum.=--“The story is pleasing and wholesome. Its general
    character is that of a comedy with occasional lapses into the
    realm of drama.… ‘Mora’ is quite like literature, with some
    amusing scenes, and a general prevalence of good temper.”

=Two Days in a Life-time.= a Novel. By T. W. SPEIGHT, Author of “Mora,”
etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

=For Himself Alone.= A Novel. By T. W. SPEIGHT, Author of “The Mystery of
Heron Dyke,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

=Ashes Tell no Tales.= A Novel. By Mrs ALBERT S. BRADSHAW, Author of
“False Gods,” “The Gates of Temptation,” “Wife or Slave,” etc. Cloth, 3s.
6d.

    =Lady.=--“A strong and dramatic novel.”

    =Record.=--“The story shows great power and the character of
    Julie is a wonderful creation.”

    =North Star.=--“The book is considerably above the average,
    and bears evidence of insight into character and skill in
    plot construction of no mean order. The story has a thrilling
    interest, and is dramatically told.”

=Ira Lorraine.= A Story of To-day. By CORALIE FEVEZ. Crown 8vo, cloth
gilt, 6s.

    =Illustrated London News.=--“Full of incident and movement.”

    =Weekly Despatch.=--“This is a very pretty love story
    charmingly told. The characters are cleverly drawn. There are,
    of course, trials, and the lights and shadows of a woman’s
    troubled career, but what love story was ever written without
    its trials and the inevitable ‘all’s well’? In the case of ‘Ira
    Lorraine’ the end is satisfactory.”

=A Comedy of Temptation;= or, The Amateur Fiend. A Tale. By TRISTRAM
COUTTS, Author of “The Pottle Papers.” Cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Daily News.=--“A very bright and breezy little story,
    wholesome and amusing.”

    =Athenæum.=--“May be heartily recommended. A really ingenious
    story, and provides quite pleasurable excitement, while
    throughout the book runs a vein of facetious humour which will
    make it doubly welcome.”

    =Echo.=--“A very sprightly tale, which, despite the
    extravagance of its leading motive, is full of humour--good
    humour and human nature.”

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“The author of the unquestionably
    humorous and conspicuously successful ‘Pottle Papers’
    has given the novel-reading public another ‘taste of his
    quality’ in this fantastic story.… The element of surprise
    predominates throughout this eminently entertaining narrative;
    unexpectedness is the essential characteristic of all its more
    salient incidents, comical or tragical; its dialogue sparkles
    with genuine, irresistible fun.”

    =Spectator.=--“Mr Tristram Coutts has a genuine gift of
    humour, and his account of the chequered courtship of a young
    London clerk is enlivened with many hilarious touches. The
    account of the household of Mr Merridew, the irrepressible, if
    impecunious, optimist who named all his numerous progeny after
    famous commanders and authors, is really delightful.”

=The Weird Well.= A Tale of To-day. By Mrs ALEC M’MILLAN, Author of “The
Evolution of Daphne,” “So Runs my Dream,” etc. Art cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Scotsman.=--“Carefully constructed and written with skill,
    which makes it always agreeable to read.”

    =Literary World.=--“An interesting, brightly-written story.”

    =Weekly Times.=--“Very powerfully written. Will be read with
    breathless interest.”

=Such is the Law.= An Interesting Story. By MARIE M. SADLEIR, Author of
“An Uncanny Girl,” etc. Cloth, 6s.

    =Vanity Fair.=--“A very entertaining novel.”

    =Sun.=--“An undoubtedly clever novel, told in vigorous
    language.”

    =St James’s Budget.=--“So full of incident is ‘Such is the Law’
    that we are unable to do more than touch the fringe of the
    plot, and must leave to the reader the task of watching the
    development of the new romance, which produces an aftermath of
    happiness for Lavender, and brings a thoroughly interesting
    story to a satisfactory close.”

=---- And Afterwards?= A Powerful Novel. By Mrs HAROLD GORST, Author of
“Possessed of Devils.” Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=A Virtue of Necessity.= A Powerful Tale. By HERBERT ADAMS. Cloth gilt,
6s.

    =Sun.=--“A powerful, stirring tale of the present day. From
    start to finish it is interesting, especially to lady readers.”

    =Literary World.=--“The writing is good, and many of the
    remarks are smart and pungent while free from any straining
    after cleverness.”

    =Record.=--“Eminently readable throughout.”

    =Athenæum.=--“The dialogue is natural and well rendered.”

=The Shadow on the Manse.= A Story of Religion and the Stage. By CAMPBELL
RAE-BROWN, Author of “Kissing-Cup’s Race,” etc. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Public Opinion.=--“An excellent novel in every way.”

    =Bookman.=--“An interesting story well told.”

    =Weekly Sun.=--“A touching story and a clever one.”

    =Literature.=--“The situations are … treated with a satirical
    bitterness of tone. But many of the scenes are strong in
    themselves, cleverly arranged, and treated with power and
    reticence.… There are occasional faults, but the tenderness
    with which Mary Paul’s self-sacrifice is recorded, makes us
    inclined to condone them and to congratulate the author.”

=A Social Upheaval.= An Unconventional Dramatic Satirical Tale. By
ISIDORE G. ASCHER, Author of “An Odd Man’s Story,” “The Doom of Destiny,”
etc. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 6s.

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“The hero is an interesting dreamer,
    absorbed in his schemes, which are his one weakness. To women,
    save when they can further the good of his cause, he is
    obdurate; in business, strong, energetic and powerful. He is
    shown to us as the man with a master mind and one absorbing
    delusion, and as such is a pathetic figure. No one can dispute
    the prodigality and liveliness of the author’s imagination; his
    plot teems with striking incidents.”

    =Vanity Fair.=--“The story tells itself very clearly in three
    hundred pages of very pleasant and entertaining reading. The
    men and women we meet are not the men and women we really come
    across in this world. So much the better for us. But we are
    delighted to read about them, for all that; and we prophesy
    success for Mr Ascher’s book, particularly as he has taken the
    precaution of telling us that he is ‘only in fun.’”

=A Cry in the Night.= An exciting Detective Story. By ARNOLD GOLSWORTHY,
Author of “Death and the Woman,” “Hands in the Darkness,” etc. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s.

    =Pall Mall Gazette.=--“The book is ingenious and cleverly
    constructed, and there is no lack of exciting reading, it is
    melodramatic, but is relieved by humour characteristic of Mr
    Golsworthy.”

    =Athenæum.=--“A creditably ingenious tale of crime and
    detection, drawn with spirit and humour.”

    =Morning Post.=--“We must give Mr Golsworthy high praise for
    the way in which he plays the game. Old hands as we are at
    these things, we were for a long time completely baffled by
    the plot as the most wooden-headed detective of fiction.… It
    is an excellent book of its particular kind. Mr Golsworthy
    has succeeded admirably in the careful, clever, amusing
    character-drawing of an odd group of subsidiary folk. These
    are very human people who stick in the mind after the book is
    closed.”

=A Dead Woman’s Vow.= A Powerful Story. By EMILE ZOLA. Translated by
Count S. C. de SOISSONS. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

=Sapho.= A new Translation, by G. F. MONKSHOOD, of DAUDET’S celebrated
Romance. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

=Thaïs.= A new Translation, by E. F. MOODY, of the celebrated Romance of
Old Egypt by the great French novelist, ANATOLE FRANCE. Crown 8vo, cloth,
3s. 6d.

=Shams!= A Social Satire. By ----? This is a remarkable and interesting
story of Modern Life in London Society. It is a powerful work, written
with striking vividness. The plot is fascinating, the incidents exciting,
and the dialogue epigrammatic and brilliant. “Shams” is written by one
of the most popular novelists of the day. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo, art
cloth, gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Public Opinion.=--“This novel is a daring attack. The author,
    whoever he may be, is a clever writer, and the pictures of the
    seamy side of idle London life are described by him with vivid
    power.”

    =The Outlook.=--“Something wrong-headed, sensual, and Corellian
    is anticipated, nor is one disappointed.… Bound to command the
    public.”

    =Christian World.=--“A pungent, cleverly-written, and
    altogether out-of-the-common-rut Society novel. The author
    unsparingly exposes the ‘little ways’ of smart people.… Every
    _sane_ reader will wish the author success in his efforts
    to expose the hollowness and rottenness of ‘aristocratic
    _virtuous_ London.’”

    =The North Star.=--“The book is of a most daring character,
    but the author has treated his theme in a very clever manner.…
    Messrs W. H. Smith & Son refuse to circulate ‘Shams,’ objecting
    to it on moral grounds. This act on their part, however, will
    not greatly interfere with the sale of the book, which really
    castigates vice. We believe it will be as widely read as the
    works of Ouida and Marie Corelli.”

=Romance Of a Harem.= Translated from the French of “Dans L’ombre du
Harem” by CLARENCE FORESTIER-WALKER. Crown 8vo, art vellum, 5s.

=The Idealist.= A Realistic _Roman-a-clef_. By GROVE JOHNSON. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d.

=Zoroastro.= An Historical Romance. By CRESWICK J. THOMPSON, Author
of “Poison Romance and Poison Mysteries,” “The Mystery and Romance of
Alchemy and Pharmacy,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

    =To-day.=--“There is no lack of excitement in ‘Zoroastro.’ The
    tale is a good one, and should be popular.”

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“A sound and entertaining piece of work.”

    =Universe.=--“A splendidly-written romance of a
    sixteenth-century magician, and there is no lack of interest
    throughout the book. The various ideas of the time,
    descriptions of the customs and modes of living, are cleverly
    woven into the story.”

=The Sword of Fate.= An Interesting Novel. By HENRY HERMAN, Author of
“Eagle Joe,” “Scarlet Fortune,” etc., and Joint Author of the “Silver
King,” “Claudian.” Crown 8vo, art cloth, 6s.

    =Vanity Fair= says:--“The hand that wrote the ‘Silver King’ has
    by no means lost its cunning in painting broad effects of light
    and shadow. The description of life in Broadmoor is, we fancy,
    done from actual observation. It is quite new.” And the critic
    of =Black and White= sums it up pithily as “A story which holds
    our attention and interests us right from the first chapter.
    The book is as exciting as even a story of sensation has any
    need to be.” Speaking of the scene of Mr Herman’s drama, the
    beautiful county of Devonshire, where the greater part of the
    story takes place, the =Manchester Courier= says: “The author’s
    descriptive powers vividly portray the lovely spots by the
    winding Tamar, while the rich dialect of the district is so
    faithfully reproduced as to become not the least feature of an
    exciting tale.”

=Outrageous Fortune.= Being the Confessions of Evelyn Gray, Hospital
Nurse. A Story founded on fact, proving that truth is stranger than
fiction. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Liverpool Review.=--“A smart, anonymous novel. The story is
    capitally written, and is extremely interesting. Evelyn Gray’s
    adventures are narrated in a style so realistic as to leave the
    impression that the writer is either a medical man or one who
    has had very intimate acquaintance with hospital life.”

    =Lloyd’s.=--“A strong book, and one that readers will find
    interesting. It is undoubtedly clever and well written.”

    =Daily Graphic.=--“The characters are cleverly drawn, and the
    revelations of hospital life, of private nursing, and of the
    manners and customs of the ‘celibate’ clergy should ensure the
    volume considerable popularity.”

=Seven Nights with Satan.= A Novel. By J. L. OWEN, Author of “The Great
Jekyll Diamond.” Cover designed by W. S. ROGERS. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“We have read the book from start to
    finish with unflagging interest--an interest, by the way, which
    derives nothing from the ‘spice,’ for though its title may be
    suggestive of Zolaism, there is not a single passage which is
    open to objection. The literary style is good.”

    =Truth.=--“I much prefer the ghastly story ‘Seven Nights with
    Satan,’ a very clever study of degeneration.”

=The Green Passion.= The Study of a Jealous Soul. A Powerful Novel. By
ANTHONY P. VERT. Cover designed by ALFRED PRAGA. Crown 8vo, art cloth,
3s. 6d.

    Mr DOUGLAS SLADEN in =The Queen=.--“A remarkably clever book.…
    There is no disputing the ability with which the writer handles
    her subject. I say _her_ subject, because the minuteness of
    the touches, and the odd, forcible style in which this book
    is written, point to it being the work of a female hand. The
    book is an eminently readable one, and it is never dull for a
    minute.”

    =The Monitor.=--“A wonderful piece of writing. The only modern
    parallel we can find is supplied in Mr F. C. Philipps’s ‘As in
    a Looking Glass.’”

    =Whitehall Review.=--“In ‘The Green Passion’ the author traces
    with much ability, and not a little analytical insight, the
    progress of jealousy in the breast of a woman who is born
    with a very ‘intense,’ although not a very deep, nature.…
    There is in Mr Vert’s work a certain tendency towards realism
    which has its due effect in making his characters real. They
    are no loosely-built fancies of the journalistic brain, but
    portraits--almost snapshot portraits--of men and women of
    to-day.”

=An Idol of Bronze.= An Exciting Novel of Life in Western America. By
LOUISE PALMER HEAVEN, Author of “Chata and Chinita?” Crown 8vo, cloth,
3s. 6d.

=Our Lady of the Ice.= An Interesting Story of Alpine Adventure. By Miss
CONSTANCE SUTCLIFFE. Crown 8vo, ornamental cloth, 6s.

=Madonna Mia,= and other Stories. By CLEMENT SCOTT, Author of “The Wheel
of Life,” “Sisters by the Sea,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Punch.=--“‘Madonna Mia’ is genuinely interesting. All the
    stories are good; you are ‘Scott free’ to pick ’em where you
    like.” (The Baron de B. W.)

    =Weekly Sun.=--“Shows Mr Scott’s sturdy character-painting and
    love of picturesque adventure.”

    =World.=--“Clement Scott is nothing if not sympathetic, and
    every one of the ten stories is not only thoroughly readable,
    but is instinct with sentiment; for Mr Scott still retains
    a wonderful enthusiasm, usually the attribute of youth.
    ‘Drifting’ is a very fresh and convincing narrative, founded,
    we understand, upon truth, and containing within a small
    compass the materials for a very stirring drama. ‘A Cross of
    Heather,’ too, is a charming romance, told with real pathos and
    feeling.”

=The Dolomite Cavern.= An Exciting Tale of Adventure. By W. PATRICK
KELLY, Author of “Schoolboys Three,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Observer.=--“A story full of exciting adventure.”

    =Saturday Review.=--“The plot is ingenious, and the style
    pleasant.”

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“Lovers of the sensational in fiction
    will find abundance of congenial entertainment in Mr W. P.
    Kelly’s new story. In the way of accessories to startling
    situations all is fish that comes to this ingenious author’s
    net. The wonders of primitive nature, the marvels of latter-day
    science, the extravagances of human passion--all these he
    dexterously uses for the purpose of involving his hero in
    perilous scrapes from which he no less dexterously extricates
    him by expedients which, however far-fetched they may appear
    to the unimaginative, are certainly not lacking in originality
    of device or cleverness of construction.… This is a specimen
    incident--those which succeed it derive their special interest
    from the action of Rontgen rays, subterranean torrents, and
    devastating inundations. The book is very readable throughout,
    and ends happily. What more can the average novel reader wish
    for in holiday time?”

=The Lady of the Leopard.= A Powerful and Fascinating Novel. By CHAS.
L’EPINE, Author of “The Devil in a Domino.” A new edition. Crown 8vo, art
cloth, 6s.

    =Public Opinion.=--“A remarkable book.… We are plunged into a
    delicious and tantalising romance; incident follows incident
    like a panorama of exciting pictures. Fertility of imagination
    is everywhere apparent, and the _dénouement_ is artfully
    concealed till it bursts upon the reader with a suddenness that
    fairly takes away his breath.”

    =Liverpool Post.=--“A very skilfully-constructed story,
    mysterious and strange, with a natural explanation suggested
    of all the mystery which does not spoil one’s enjoyment
    (here follows analysis of plot). This is the bare outline of
    the story up to a certain point; it is impossible to convey
    adequately an idea of the awe-inspiring characteristics of the
    story. Readers can safely be recommended to turn to the book
    itself.”

=The Love Thirst of Elaine.= A Powerful Novel. By JUSTIN HANNAFORD. Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s.

=Miss Malevolent.= A Realistic Study of Modern Life in London. By the
Author of “The Hypocrite.” Second edition, with a new Preface. Art cloth,
3s. 6d.

    =Saturday Review.=--“The great novel-reading public, which
    found ‘The Hypocrite’ to its taste, will not be disappointed
    in the author’s latest effort. The writer has a knack of
    character-presentment which means that his people live; he has
    a dramatic instinct; he is at times on the verge of real wit;
    he knows certain phases of literary and artistic life well; and
    his story is original enough to hold the interest throughout.”

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“It is decidedly clever.… An improvement
    on ‘The Hypocrite.’ There is real power shown in the drawing of
    Kitty Nugent.”

    =Scotsman.=--“You don’t get far into this novel--about a couple
    of pages--before the epigrams begin exploding and the repartee
    detonating, and the subtle terse and quart of wit with wit
    fuffuffing, like so many squibs and crackers on the Queen’s
    Birthday; and this coruscation is kept up in a way to make your
    hair curl until the end of the story.… The author has abundant
    literary aptitudes, exemplified over and over again by the
    pages of this clever book.”




GREENING & CO.’S POPULAR HALF-CROWN NOVELS

Well Printed in Large Type, and Strongly Bound in Artistically-Designed
Cloth Covers.


=_The Hypocrite._= A Modern Realistic Novel of Oxford and London Life. By
the Author of “Miss Malevolent,” “From the Book Beautiful,” etc., etc.
Seventh Impression. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    ⁂ _This book has been “boycotted” by Messrs Mudie and Messrs
    W. H. Smith & Son as being “unfit to circulate in their
    libraries,” yet it has been praised by the press as being “a
    powerful sermon and a moral book.”_

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“A book by an anonymous author always
    arouses a certain inquiry, and when the book is clever and
    original the interest becomes keen, and conjecture is rife,
    endowing the most unlikely people with authorship.… It is very
    brilliant, very forcible, very sad.… It is perfect in its way,
    in style clear, sharp and forcible, the dialogue epigrammatic
    and sparkling.… Enough has been said to show that ‘The
    Hypocrite’ is a striking and powerful piece of work, and that
    its author has established his claim to be considered a writer
    of originality and brilliance.”

=_The Tragedy of the Lady Palmist._= By W. LUTHER LONGSTAFF, Author
of “Weeds and Flowers,” etc. An exciting tale, descriptive of the
“Behind-the-Scenes of the Palmist’s Bohemia.” Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Literature.=--“The story strikes the fresh note of having
    been lived, experienced, and does not come to one as a stale
    invention. There is human nature in it, and passion, of a kind:
    tragedy too.… We should say, ‘Read the book by all means.’”

    =Echo.=--“Its general air of out-Bourget-ing Bourget. You will
    ‘see life’ in its story, no doubt, for it has a measure of
    pathos, insight and power, but most certainly you will not see
    life steadily.”

    =Morning Leader.=--“Vivid with the strange lusts and cruel
    desires of an imagination enslaved to the body … powerful
    enough in the imaginative treatment of the characters.… The
    luridness is simply Titanic.”

=_In Monte Carlo._= A Tale by HENRYK SIENKIEWICZ, Author of “Quo Vadis,”
“With Fire and Sword,” etc., etc. Translated by S. C. de SOISSONS. Crown
8vo, art cloth, with a new Portrait of the Author, 2s. 6d.

    =M. A. P.=--“Very light and dainty in its tone. ‘In Monte
    Carlo’ is a typical example of the work of the great Polish
    writer.… It is the old, old tale of a man with a maid--plus
    a lady with the instincts of the vampire, who lives in the
    gambling hell of Europe.”

    =Pall Mall Gazette.=--“It is beyond all question the work of a
    great artist. It is subtly analytical and psychologically true.
    So triumphant is the art of the Polish novelist that we follow
    the story with lively sympathy and unflagging interest.… It is
    always interesting; the clear, able and convincing portrayal
    of the two leading characters gives the book its chief value.
    There are wise sayings and occasional epigrams, and the
    thumbnail sketches of Mrs Elsen’s lovers are wholly admirable.”

=_My Lady Ruby and John Basileon: Chief of Police._= Two stories by G. F.
MONKSHOOD, Author of “Rudyard Kipling: The Man and His Work,” etc. Cloth,
2s. 6d.

    =Monitor.=--“‘My Lady Ruby’ is charming, and as witty as she
    is charming.… ‘John Basileon’ evinces imagination and subtlety
    of a highly vivid and intense quality. The note of the book
    is modern, but of a modernity far removed from that of the
    term understood by the French Symbolists and the English
    Degenerates. Messrs Greening & Co. are to be congratulated on a
    publication which is likely to arouse considerable attention in
    those literary circles from which approbation is praise indeed.”

=_“Fame, the Fiddler.”_= A Story of Literary and Theatrical Life. By S.
J. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD. Crown 8vo, cloth, new and cheaper edition, 2s. 6d.

    =Graphic.=--“The volume will please and amuse numberless
    people.”

    =Pall Mall Gazette.=--“A pleasant, cheery story. Displays a
    rich vein of robust imagination.”

    =Standard.=--“There are many pleasant pages in ‘Fame, the
    Fiddler,’ which reminds us of ‘Trilby,’ with its pictures of
    Bohemian life, and its happy-go-lucky group of good-hearted,
    generous scribblers, artists and playwrights. Some of the
    characters are so true to life that it is impossible not to
    recognise them. Among the best incidents in the volume must be
    mentioned the production of Pryor’s play, and the account of
    poor Jimmy Lambert’s death, which is as moving an incident as
    we have read for a long time. Altogether, ‘Fame, the Fiddler’
    is a very human book, and an amusing one as well.”

=_Darab’s Wine-Cup,_= and other Powerful and Vividly-Written Stories. By
BART KENNEDY, Author of “The Wandering Romanoff,” etc. New and cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =St James’s Budget.=--“A volume characteristic of the author’s
    splendid powers.”

    =M. A. P.=--“Mr Kennedy writes powerfully, and can grip the
    reader’s imagination, or whirl it off into the strangest
    domains of glamour and romance at will.… There is a future for
    this clever young man from Tipperary. He will do great things.”

    =Critic.=--“Of a highly imaginative order, and distinctly out
    of the ordinary run.… The author has a remarkable talent for
    imaginative and dramatic presentation. He sets before himself
    a higher standard of achievement than most young writers of
    fiction.”

    =Cork Herald.=--“Gracefully written, easy and attractive in
    diction and style, the stories are as choice a collection as
    we have happened on for a long time. They are clever; they are
    varied; they are fascinating. We admit them into the sacred
    circle of the most beautiful that have been told by the most
    sympathetic and skilled writers.… Mr Kennedy has a style, and
    that is rare enough nowadays--as refreshing as it is rare.”

=_Dona Rufina._= A Nineteenth Century Romance. Being a Story of Carlist
Conspiracy. By HEBER DANIELS, Author of “Our Tenants.” Second Edition.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Lady.=--“A thrilling romance with a mediæval atmosphere,
    although the scene is laid in the Cotswolds in the year of
    grace 1898. The story is well constructed, and is a good
    example of the widely-imaginative type of fiction that is so
    eagerly devoured by young people nowadays.”

    =Eastern Morning News.=--“Readers will be fascinated by the
    stirring scenes, the swiftly-moving panorama, the enacted
    tragedies, the wild, passionate, lawless loves depicted in the
    most sensational manner in this volume.”

=_Lord Jimmy._= A Story of Music-Hall Life. By GEORGE MARTYN. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Outlook.=--“The book is both humorous and dramatic.”

    =Vanity Fair.=--“The author has a peculiar knowledge of the
    ‘Halls’ and those who frequent them; and especially, as
    it seems to us, of those Jewish persons who sometimes run
    them. And he has made good use of his knowledge here. But
    there is more than this in the book; for ‘George Martyn’ has
    considerable descriptive talent. His account, for instance, of
    the fight between the hero and the butcher is quite good. The
    story is straightforward, convincing, and full of human nature
    and promise.”

=_The Wandering Romanoff._= A Romance. By BART KENNEDY, Author of “A Man
Adrift,” “Darab’s Wine-Cup,” etc. New and Cheaper Edition, crown 8vo,
cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =The Outlook.=--“Mr Bart Kennedy, a young writer of singular
    imaginative gifts, and a style as individual as Mr Kipling’s.…
    The writing of this story is strongly original in manner.… A
    powerful book.”

    =Weekly Times.=--“‘The Wandering Romanoff’ is really good
    work.… We have read nothing finer for a long while.”

=_A Tragedy of Grub Street._= By S. J. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD, Author of
“Fame, the Fiddler.” A new and cheaper edition of this popular book,
cloth, 2s. 6d.

=_The Gates of Temptation._= A Natural Novel by MRS ALBERT S. BRADSHAW,
Author of “False Gods,” “Wife or Slave,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Midland Mail.=--“The characters are vividly drawn. There are
    many pleasant and painful incidents in the book, which is
    interesting from beginning to end.”

    =Aberdeen Free Press.=--“Mrs Bradshaw has written several good
    novels, and the outstanding feature of all of them has been her
    skilful development of plot, and her tasteful, pleasing style.
    In connection with the present story we are able to amply
    reiterate those praises. The plot again is well developed and
    logically carried out, while the language used by the authoress
    is always happy and well chosen, and never commonplace.…
    The story is a very powerful one indeed, and may be highly
    commended as a piece of painstaking fiction of the very highest
    kind.”

=_Mad?_= An Exciting Story of Predestination. By J. PYM LOUGHNAN. Crown
8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Evening Times.=--“We must congratulate Mr Loughnan on his
    originality in conceiving an extraordinary character, and on
    working out the story with quite blood-curdling thrill.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“If the leading idea of the story is a
    little exaggerated, there can be no doubt as to the skill with
    which the author has worked out the details.”

=_The Lady of Criswold._= A Sensational Story. By LEONARD OUTRAM. Crown
8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =North British Advertiser.=--“A thrilling tale of love and
    madness.”

    =Whitehall Review.=--“No one can complain of lack of sensation,
    it is full of startling episodes. The characters are drawn with
    a rapid and vigorous touch. The interest is well maintained.”

    =Court Circular.=--“It reminds us forcibly of a story in real
    life that engrossed public attention many years ago. Whether
    this was in the author’s mind we cannot say, but the book is
    deeply interesting, the characters well and strongly drawn, and
    we doubt not this tale will fascinate many a reader.”

=_The Resurrection of His Grace._= Being the very candid Confessions of
the Honourable BERTIE BEAUCLERC. A Sporting Novel. By CAMPBELL RAE-BROWN,
Author of “The Shadow on the Manse.” Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Scotsman.=--“The book is lightly and briskly written
    throughout. Its pleasant cynicism is always entertaining.”

    =St James’s Budget.=--“A sporting romance which is indisputably
    cleverly written.… The book is full of interesting items of
    sporting life which are fascinating to lovers of the turf.”

    =Sporting Life.=--“The character of the heartless _roue_,
    who tells his story, is very well sustained, and the rich
    _parvenu_, Peter Drewitt, the owner of the favourite that is
    very nearly nobbled by the unscrupulous Beauclerc, is cleverly
    drawn. Altogether it is an exciting and an uncommon tale, and
    is quite correct in all the sporting details.”

=_Anna Marsden’s Experiment._= An Interesting Novel. By ELLEN WILLIAMS.
Crown 8vo, art cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Outlook.=--“A good story cleverly told and worked out.”

    =Echo.=--“A very natural and interesting tale is carefully set
    forth in Ellen Williams’s clever little book.”

    =Monitor.=--“Miss Williams has here seized on an original
    concept, and given it fitting presentation. The ‘experiment’ is
    a novel one, and its working out is a deft piece of writing.
    The psychology of the work is faultless, and this study of
    a beautiful temperament, in a crude frame, has with it the
    verity of deep observation and acute insight.… We await with
    considerable confidence Miss Williams’s next venture.”

    =Sheffield Independent.=--“The writer has treated a delicate
    and unusual situation with delicacy and originality. The
    heroine’s character is drawn with firmness and clearness, and
    the whole story is vivid and picturesque.… The history of
    the experiment is exceedingly well told. Keen insight into
    character, and cleverness in its delineation, as well as shrewd
    observation and intense sympathy, mark the writer’s work, while
    the style is terse and clear, and the management of trying
    scenes extremely good.”

=_Farthest South._= Being an account of the Startling Discovery made by
the Wise Antarctic Expedition. A Humorous Story. By HAROLD E. GORST,
Author of “Without Bloodshed,” “Sketches of the Future,” etc. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Daily Graphic.=--“Very easy, light reading, and reminds one of
    ‘Three Men in a Boat.’ Just the book for a railway journey.”

    =Bookman.=--“A lively and very amusing tale of a wonderful
    discovery made by the Wise Antarctic Expedition.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“An amusing skit on Polar expeditions.… The
    book contains plenty of fun.”

    =Whitehall Review.=--“It is an amusing book, worth reading by
    those who are on the lookout for a hearty laugh.”

    =Vanity Fair.=--“An amusing little book. It is very good
    fooling, and good fooling is sometimes better than heavy
    wisdom.”

=_An Uncanny Girl._= A Story. By MARIE M. SADLEIR, Author of “Such is the
Law,” etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“A remarkable tale. The narrative teems
    with surprises.… There is plenty of ‘go’ in ‘An Uncanny Girl.’”

    Sir EDWARD RUSSELL says in =Liverpool Post=:--“A very clever
    and subtle story.… The action is exciting, and the invention
    of incidents adroit. But beyond this popular merit there is
    that of clever and characteristic description.… Mrs Sadleir
    is ingenious as a story-teller, and vigorous and pungent as a
    writer.”

=_The Cigarette Smoker._= A Powerful and Daring Story. By the Author of
“The Hypocrite.” Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.




CHEAPER FICTION


=_The Derelict and Tommy._= By the Author of “’Twixt the Devil and the
Deep Sea.” Cloth, top edge gilt, 2s.

    =Graphic.=--“A simple story invested with an unusual
    distinction and charm.”

    =Glasgow Times.=--“A capital tale. Entertaining reading.”

    =Nottingham Guardian.=--“A romance which holds one’s interest
    enthralled.”

    =Literary World.=--“The story has a frank directness and a
    reality that make it thoroughly readable.… The story is well
    expressed and the characters have vitality. Altogether a
    satisfactory little tale.”

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“The story is out of the common, both in
    manner and treatment.”

    =Lloyd’s.=--“Clear and brilliant.”

=_The Black Tulip._= ALEXANDRE DUMAS’S Celebrated Romance. Translated
by S. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD. Illustrated with Portraits. 260 pp. Crown 8vo,
cloth, gilt top, 2s.

=_Pelican Tails._= A Collection of smart, up-to-date Tales of Modern
Life, written, edited and selected by FRANK M. BOYD (Editor of “The
Pelican.”) One of the most popular and entertaining volumes of short
stories that has ever been published. An ideal companion for a railway
journey or a spare hour or two. Demy 8vo, picture wrapper designed and
drawn by W. S. ROGERS, 1s.

=_The Devil in a Domino._= A Psychological Mystery. By CHAS. L’EPINE,
Author of “The Lady of the Leopard,” “Miracle Plays,” etc. Long 12mo,
cloth, 1s.

    =Truth.=--“The story is written with remarkable literary
    skill, and, notwithstanding its gruesomeness, is undeniably
    fascinating.”

    =Sketch.=--“It is a well-written story. An admirable literary
    style, natural and concise construction, succeed in compelling
    the reader’s attention through every line. We hope to welcome
    the author again, working on a larger scene.”

=_Shadows._= A Series of Side Lights on Modern Society. By ERNEST MARTIN.
(Dedicated to Sir Henry Irving.) Crown 8vo, art cloth, gilt tops, 2s.

    =Western Mercury.=--“Clever sketches, intensely dramatic,
    original and forceful, based on scenes from actual life, and
    narrated with much skill.”

    =Weekly Times.=--“A series of pictures sketched with
    considerable power. The last one, ‘Hell in Paradise,’ is
    terrible in the probable truth of conception.”

    =Northern Figaro.=--“Mr Martin’s descriptive paragraphs
    are couched in trenchant, convincing language, without a
    superfluous word sandwiched in anywhere.… ‘Shadows’ may be read
    with much profit, and will give more than a superficial insight
    into various phases of society life and manners.”

=_Death and the Woman._= A Powerful Tale. By ARNOLD GOLSWORTHY. Picture
cover drawn by SYDNEY H. SIME. Crown 8vo, 1s.

    =Literary World.=--“We do not remember having read a book
    that possessed the quality of _grip_ in a greater degree than
    is the case with ‘Death and the Woman.’… Every page of every
    chapter develops the interest, which culminates in one of the
    most sensational _dénouements_ it has been our lot to read.
    The flavour of actuality is not destroyed by any incredible
    incident; it is the inevitable thing that always happens.
    ‘Death and the Woman’ will supply to the brim the need of those
    in search of a holding drama of modern London life.”

=_The Fellow-Passengers._= A Mystery and its Solution. A Detective Story.
By RIVINGTON PYKE, Author of “The Man who Disappeared.” Long 12mo, cloth,
1s.

    =Whitehall Review.=--“Those who love a mystery with plenty of
    ‘go,’ and a story which is not devoid of a certain amount of
    realism, cannot do better than pick up ‘Fellow-Passengers.’ The
    characters are real men and women, and not the sentimental and
    artificial puppets to which we have been so long accustomed
    by our sensationalists. The book is brightly written, and of
    detective stories it is the best I have read lately.”

=_That Fascinating Widow_=, and other Frivolous and Fantastic Tales, for
River, Road and Rail. By S. J. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD. Long 12mo, cloth, 1s.

    =The Referee.=--“Another little humorous book is ‘That
    Fascinating Widow,’ by Mr S. J. Adair Fitz-Gerald, who can be
    very funny when he tries. The story which gives the title to
    the book would make a capital farce. ‘The Blue-blooded Coster’
    is an amusing piece of buffoonery.”

    =The Globe.=--“The author, Mr S. J. Adair Fitz-Gerald, has
    already shown himself to be the possessor of a store of humour,
    on which he has again drawn for the furnishing of the little
    volume he has just put together. Among the tales included are
    several which might be suitable for reading or recitation, and
    none which are dull. Mr Fitz-Gerald frankly addresses himself
    to that portion of the public which desires nothing so much as
    to be amused, and likes even its amusements in small doses.
    Such a public will entertain itself very pleasantly with Mr
    Fitz-Gerald’s lively tales, and will probably name as its
    favourites those titled ‘Pure Cussedness,’ ‘Splidgings’ First
    Baby,’ and ‘The Blue-blooded Coster.’”

=_Rip Van Winkle_=, together with “THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW.” By
WASHINGTON IRVING. Illustrated with Drawings by W. G. MEIN. Crown 8vo,
art cloth, decorative cover by WILL SMART, top edge gilt, 2s.




Illustrated Books for Children


=_The Grand Panjandrum_=, and other fanciful Fairy Tales for the youthful
of all Ages, Climes and Times. By S. J. ADAIR FITZ-GERALD, Author of
“The Zankiwank and the Bletherwitch,” etc. Many full-page and smaller
Illustrations by GUSTAVE DARRÉ. Second Edition. Square 8vo, art cloth,
gilt, 3s. 6d.

    =Truth.=--“A decided acquisition to the children’s library.”

    =Ladies’ Pictorial.=--“Quite one of the brightest of the
    season’s gift books.”

    =Morning Post.=--“Bright and thoroughly amusing. It will please
    all children. The pictures are excellent.”

    =Echo.=--“Of the pile (of children’s books) before us, Mr
    Adair Fitz-Gerald’s ‘Grand Panjandrum’ is the cleverest. Mr
    Fitz-Gerald needs no introduction to the nursery of these days.”

    =Pall Mall Gazette.=--“A charming little book. Simply written,
    and therefore to be comprehended of the youthful mind. It will
    be popular, for the writer has a power of pleasing which is
    rare.”

    =Literary World.=--“A handsomely-bound, mouth-watering, in
    every way up-to-date volume, written especially for and on
    behalf of the toddler or the newly breeched.”

    =People.=--“A delightful story for children, something in the
    style of ‘Alice in Wonderland,’ but also having some flavour of
    Kingsley’s ‘Water Babies.’”

    =Sun.=--“Good fairy stories are a source of everlasting joy
    and delight. Mr Adair Fitz-Gerald breaks fresh ground and
    writes pleasantly.… The book has the added advantage of being
    charmingly illustrated in colour by Gustave Doré.”

    =Weekly Sun.=--“Mr Adair Fitz-Gerald is a well-known writer
    of fairy stories and humorous books for the young. ‘The Grand
    Panjandrum’ is just the sort of book to please youngsters of
    all ages, being full of pleasant imaginings, and introducing
    its readers to a host of curious people.”

=_Nonsense Numbers and Jocular Jingles For Funny Little Folk._= Written
by DRUID GRAYL, with full-page Illustrations by WALTER J. MORGAN. 4to,
cloth boards, 3s. 6d.

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“Full of quaint pictures, which will
    delight and amuse the little folks.”

    =Record.=--“A really witty book. Just the sort of nonsense that
    appeals to little folk, and the pictures are quite laughable.
    There is an abundance of really good humour to be got from
    these pages, which are altogether free from vulgarity.”

    =World.=--“Appeals directly to children, and would make a
    delightful present for any little boy or girl.”

    =Daily Telegraph.=--“Will be productive of many a happy
    half-hour.”

    =Lloyd’s Newspaper.=--“A very amusing book indeed is this
    volume of nonsense verse. The jingles are excellent and such as
    children delight in, while the pictures are also ludicrously
    funny.”




Greening’s Humorous Books


=_The Pillypingle Pastorals._= A Series of Amusing Rustic Tales and
Sketches. By DRUID GRAYL. Profusely Illustrated by WALTER J. MORGAN.
Crown 8vo, art cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =Vanity Fair.=--“Most certainly entertaining, and readers will
    enjoy it. It is well illustrated.”

    =Scotsman.=--“A lively book of comical yarns. It is frivolous,
    doubtless, but it is funny, and any reader will like it who
    enjoys a hearty laugh.”

    =Outlook.=--“The stories are well told, and tend to provoke
    laughter.”

    =Phœnix.=--“A delightful collection of stories. There is
    something refreshing and invigorating about them.”

    =Literary World.=--“An amusing bit of humour.”

    =Midland Mail.=--“A budget of fun, and good fun too. There is
    not a dull page in it.”

=_The Pottle Papers._= Written by TRISTRAM COUTTS, Author of “A Comedy
of Temptation.” Illustrated by L. RAVEN HILL. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 2s. 6d.

    =Sheffield Daily Telegraph.=--“Anyone who wants a good laugh
    should get ‘The Pottle Papers.’ They are very droll reading
    for an idle afternoon, or picking up at any time when ‘down
    in the dumps.’ They are very brief and very bright, and it is
    impossible for anyone with the slightest sense of humour to
    read the book without bursting into ‘the loud guffaw’ which
    does not always ‘bespeak the empty mind.’”

    =Pall Mall Gazette.=--“It contains plenty of boisterous
    humour of the Max Adeler kind … humour that is genuine and
    spontaneous. The author, for all his antics, has a good deal
    more in him than the average buffoon. There is, for example,
    a very clever and subtle strain of feeling running through
    the comedy in ‘The Love that Burned’--a rather striking bit
    of work. Mr Raven Hill’s illustrations are as amusing as they
    always are.”

=_The Pottle’s Progress._= Being the Further Adventures of Mr and Mrs
Pottle. By TRISTRAM COUTTS, Author of “The Pottle Papers,” etc. Crown
8vo, 3s. 6d. (In preparation.)

=_Dan Leno, Hys Booke._= A Volume of Frivolities: Autobiographical,
Historical, Philosophical, Anecdotal and Nonsensical. Written by DAN
LENO. Profusely illustrated by Popular Artists. Seventh Edition. Crown
8vo, art cloth, gilt edges, 1s. 6d. Popular Edition, sewed, picture
cover, 6d.

    =DAN LENO, HYS BOOKE=, is, says the =Liverpool Review=, “the
    funniest publication since ‘Three Men in a Boat.’ In this
    autobiographical masterpiece the inimitable King of Comedians
    tells his life story in a style that would make a shrimp laugh.”

    This enormously successful book of genuine and spontaneous
    humour has been received with a complete chorus of
    complimentary criticisms and pleasing “Press” praise and
    approval. Here are a few reviewers’ remarks:--

    =Scotsman.=--“Bombshells of fun.”

    =Lloyd’s.=--“One long laugh from start to finish.”

    =Globe.=--“Full of exuberant and harmless fun.”

    =English Illustrated Magazine.=--“A deliciously humorous
    volume.”

    =Catholic Times.=--“The fun is fast and furious.”

    =St Paul’s.=--“It is very funny.”

    These are a few opinions taken at random from hundreds of
    notices.

    Says the =Daily News= (Hull):--“The funniest book we have read
    for some time. You must perforce scream with huge delight at
    the dry sayings and writings of the funny little man who has
    actually killed people with his patter and his antics. Page
    after page of genuine fun is reeled off by the great little
    man.”

=_Bachelor Ballads_= and other Lazy Lyrics. By HARRY A. SPURR, Author of
“A Cockney in Arcadia.” With Fifty Illustrations by JOHN HASSALL. Crown
8vo, art cloth, 3s. 6d.

    =St James’s Gazette.=--“Distinctly clever.”

    =Globe.=--“Mr Spurr goes in for humour, and with very
    considerable success.… Altogether he is as funny as he is
    fluent. Mr Hassall’s illustrations are also genuinely comic.”

    =Nottingham Guardian.=--“The fun is genuine and hearty.”

    =Weekly Sun.=--“These ‘Bachelor Ballads’ are excellent fun.”

    =Literary World.=--“The book is good from beginning to end,
    and its excellent illustrations by John Hassall are fittingly
    humorous.”

    =Sheffield Independent.=--“It is a rare thing to find humour in
    rhyme without vulgarity, and fun without feebleness. One is,
    as a rule, inclined to laugh too rarely with the joking poet,
    and sigh often at the pity of his hideous staleness. Mr Spurr
    is the exception. His unostentatious rhymes abound in neat
    literary turns, brim with good humour, and jig to a natural
    sprightliness. He can pass, too, the test of persistent punning
    without causing the gorge of the reader to rise. In brief, he
    is a really humorous versifier, and the illustrator of his
    work has happily caught his spirit. A man who can turn out in
    thirty-two lines twenty-five puns on cricket, and work in a
    love story too, may be regarded as having shouldered the mantle
    of Hood.”

=_That Fascinating Widow._= By S. J. A. FITZ-GERALD. Cloth, 1s. (_For
particulars see page 26._)

=_Farthest South._= A Humorous Story. By HAROLD E. GORST. 2s. 6d. (_For
particulars see page 24._)




Guides, Etc.


=_London._= A Handy Guide for the Visitor, Sportsman and Naturalist. By
J. W. CUNDALL. Numerous Illustrations. Fourth Year of Publication. Long
12mo, cloth, 6d.

    =Vanity Fair.=--“A capital little guide book. No bulky volume
    this, but a handy booklet full of pithy information on all the
    most important subjects connected with our great city.”

    =Outlook.=--“A handy booklet, more tasteful than one is
    accustomed to.”

    =Pelican.=--“As full of useful and entertaining information as
    is an egg of meat.”

    =Bookman.=--“A very lively and readable little guide.”

    =To-day.=--“One of the best guide books for visitors to London.
    It is a model of lucidity and informativeness, and the profuse
    illustrations are admirably executed.”

    =Glasgow Herald.=--“A useful little work for those who have no
    desire to wade through many pages of information before getting
    what they want.”

=_America Abroad._= A Handy Guide for Americans in England. Edited by
J. W. CUNDALL. With Map and numerous Illustrations. Eleventh Year of
Publication. 6d.

=_In Quaint East Anglia._= Descriptive Sketches. By T. WEST CARNIE.
Illustrated by W. S. ROGERS. Long 12mo, cloth, 1s. (_See page 8._)

=_“Sisters by the Sea.”_= Seaside and Country Sketches. By CLEMENT SCOTT,
Author of “Blossom Land,” “Amongst the Apple Orchards,” Etc. Frontispiece
and Vignette designed by GEORGE POWNALL. Long 12mo, attractively bound in
cloth, 1s. (_See page 4._)




INDEX


                                                                PAGE

    Adams, H. A Virtue of Necessity,                              17

    Alexander, George. Introduction to Art of Elocution,           6

    After-Taste, The. (Compton Reade),                            14

    America Abroad. (J. W. Cundall),                              29

    Ames, H. The Tragedy of a Pedigree,                           13

    Anna Marsden’s Experiment. (E. Williams),                     24

    ---- And Afterwards. (Mrs H. E. Gorst),                       17

    Apollo. Ideal Physical Culture,                                7

    Asia, A Vagabond in. (E. Candler),                             4

    Asmodeus. (Le Sage),                                          11

    “Æsculapius.” The Magnetism of Sin,                           14

    Ascher, Isidore. A Social Upheaval,                           17

    Ashes Tell no Tales. (Mrs A. S. Bradshaw),                    16

    Bartram, George. Ballads of Ghostly Shires,                    9

    Bachelor Ballads. (Harry A. Spurr),                           29

    Beckford, W. Vathek,                                          11

    Black Tulip, The (Alexandre Dumas),                    11 and 25

    Boyd, F. M. Pelican Tails,                                    25

    Book of the Poster, A. (W. S. Rogers),                         5

    Book Beautiful, From the,                                      7

    Bradshaw, Mrs A. S. Ashes Tell no Tales,                      16

    Bradshaw, Mrs A. S. Gates of Temptation, The,                 23

    Bye-Ways of Crime. (R. J. Power-Berrey),                       6

    Candler, E. A Vagabond in Asia,                                4

    Carnie, T. W. In Quaint East Anglia,                           8

    Clelia. Messiahship of Shakspeare, The,                        4

    Clelia. God in Shakspeare,                                     5

    Cigarette Smoker, The. (Author of “The Hypocrite”),           25

    Comedy of temptation, A. (T. Coutts),                         16

    Committed to His Charge. (Kate and Robina Lizars),            13

    Colomba. (Prosper Merimée),                                   11

    Corelli, Marie. Patriotism or Self-Advertisement?,             7

    Coutts, T. The Pottle Papers,                                 28

    Coutts, T. A Comedy of Temptation,                            16

    Croly, George. Salathiel,                                     11

    Cry in the Night, A (A. Golsworthy),                          17

    Cundall, J. W. London,                                        29

    Cundall, J. W. America Abroad,                                29

    Cynthia’s Damages. (E. Turner),                               15

    Dan Leno, Hys Booke. (Dan Leno),                              28

    Daniels, Heber. Dona Rufina,                                  23

    Daughters of Pleasure. (De Brémont),                          14

    Darab’s Wine-Cup. (Bart Kennedy),                             22

    Daudet. Sapho,                                                18

    Dead Woman’s Vow, A. (Emile Zola),                            18

    Death and the Woman. (Golsworthy),                            26

    De Brémont, Comtesse. A Son of Africa,                        15

    De Brémont, Comtesse. Daughters of Pleasure,                  14

    De Brémont, Comtesse. The Gentleman Digger,                   15

    De Soissons, Count. The Path of the Soul,                      6

    Derelict and Tommy, The. (C. Forestier-Walker),               25

    Detached Pirate, A. (Helen Milecete),                         13

    Devil in a Domino, The. (C. L’Epine),                         25

    Dona Rufina. (Heber Daniels),                                 23

    Downing, C. Messiahship of Shakspeare,                         4

    Downing, C. God in Shakspeare,                                 5

    Dolomite Cavern, The. (W. Kelly),                             20

    Dress in a Nutshell. (“R.”),                                   9

    Dumas. The Black Tulip,                                11 and 25

    East Anglia, In Quaint. (Carnie),                              8

    “English Writers of To-day” Series--
      Rudyard Kipling. (G. F. Monkshood),                          1
      Bret Harte. (T. E. Pemberton),                               2
      Swinburne. (Theodore Wratislaw),                             2
      George Meredith. (Walter Jerrold),                           2
      Hall Caine. (C. Fred. Kenyon),                               2
      A. W. Pinero. (Hamilton Fyffe),                              2
      W. E. Henley. (George Gamble),                               2
      Mrs Humphry Ward,              } in one
      Mrs Craigie, (W. L. Courtney), } volume,                     3
      Thomas Hardy,                                                3
      Realistic Writers of To-day. (J. Hannaford),                 3
      The Parnassian School in English Poetry. (Sir G. Douglas),   3
      Richard Le Gulliene. (Ranger Gull),                          3

    Elocution, The Art of. (R. Ferguson),                          7

    Epicurean, The. (Thomas Moore),                               11

    Escott, T. H. S. A Trip to Paradoxia,                          6

    Exile in Bohemia, An. (Ernest E. Williams),                   12

    “Fame, the Fiddler.” (S. J. Adair Fitz-Gerald),               22

    Farthest South. (H. G. Gorst),                                24

    Ferguson, Ross. The Art of Elocution,                          6

    Ferreira, A. J. Nebo,                                          7

    Fevez, Coralie. Ira Lorraine,                                 16

    Fellow-Passengers, The. (R. Pyke),                            26

    Fitz-Gerald, S. J. A. A Tragedy of Grub Street,               23

    Fitz-Gerald, S. J. A. The Grand Panjandrum,                   27

    Fitz-Gerald, S. J. A. That Fascinating Widow,                 27

    Fitz-Gerald, S. J. A. Fame, the Fiddler,                      22

    Forbes, Edmund. Red Fate,                                     13

    For Himself Alone. (T. W. Speight),                           15

    Forestier-Walker, C. The Derelict and Tommy,                  25

    Fouillée, Alfred. Woman,                                       5

    France, Anatole. Thaïs,                                       18

    From the Book Beautiful. (Author of “The Hypocrite”),          7

    Galt, J. Ringan Gilhaize,                                     10

    Gates of Temptation, The. (Mrs A. Bradshaw),                  23

    Gentleman Digger, The. (Comtesse de Brémont),                 15

    Girl of the North, The. (H. Milecete),                        12

    God in Shakspeare. (C. Downing),                               5

    Gorton, Lieut.-Col. The Maori War,                             6

    Gorst, H. E. Farthest South,                                  24

    Gorst, Mrs H. ---- And Afterwards,                            17

    Golsworthy, A. Death and the Woman,                           26

    Golsworthy, A. A Cry in the Night,                            17

    Grand Panjandrum, The. (S. J. A. Fitz-Gerald),                27

    Green, Percy B. A History of Nursery Rhymes,                  10

    Green Passion, The. (A. P. Vert),                             19

    Grayl, Druid. Nonsense Numbers and Jocular Jingles,           27

    Grayl, Druid. Pillypingle Pastorals, Guides, etc.,            29

    Hamlets, Some Notable. (C. Scott),                             3

    Hannaford, Justin. The Love Thirst of Elaine,                 20

    Harem, Romance of a,                                          18

    Heaven, Louise P. An Idol of Bronze,                          20

    Herman, H. The Sword of Fate,                                 19

    Hewitt, E. Prettiness of Fools,                               14

    Hypocrite, The. (Anonymous),                                  21

    Hypocrite, The. (Author of “Miss Malevolent”),                21

    Hypocrite, The. (Author of “From the Book Beautiful”),         7

    Hypocrite, The. (Author of “His Grace’s Grace”),              13

    Hypocrite, The. (Author of “The Cigarette Smoker”),           25

    Ideal Physical Culture. (Apollo),                              7

    Idealist, The. (Grove Johnson),                               18

    Idol of Bronze. (L. P. Heaven),                               20

    In Monte Carlo. (H. Sienkiewicz),                             22

    In the World of Mimes. (L. Melville),                         15

    In Quaint East Anglia. (T. W. Carnie),                         8

    Ira Lorraine. (Coralie Fevez),                                16

    Irving, Washington. Rip Van Winkle,                           10

    John Basileon. (_See_ “My Lady Ruby”),                        22

    Johnson, Dr. Rasselas,                                        10

    Johnson, Grove. The Idealist,                                 18

    Kelly, W. P. The Dolomite Cavern,                             20

    Kennedy, Bart. A Man Adrift,                                   3

    Kennedy, Bart. Darab’s Wine-Cup,                              22

    Kennedy, Bart. The Wandering Romanoff,                        23

    Lady of Criswold, The. (L. Outram),                           24

    Lady of the Leopard, The. (C. L’Epine),                       20

    Le Sage. Asmodeus,                                            11

    Leno, D. Dan Leno, Hys Booke,                                 28

    L’Epine, C. The Devil in a Domino,                            25

    L’Epine, C. The Lady of the Leopard,                          20

    Leyken, N. Where the Oranges Grow,                            13

    Lizars, K. and R. Committed to His Charge,                    13

    Longstaff, W. L. Weeds and Flowers,                            9

    Longstaff, W. L. The Tragedy of the Lady Palmist,             21

    London. (J. W. Cundall),                                      29

    Loughnan, J. Pym. Mad?                                        23

    Love Thirst of Elaine, The. (J. Hannaford),                   20

    Lord Jimmy. (G. Martyn),                                      23

    Mad? (J. Pym Loughnan),                                       23

    Madonna Mia. (C. Scott),                                      20

    Man Adrift, A. (B. Kennedy),                                   8

    Magnetism of Sin, The. (“Æsculapius”),                        14

    Maori War, The. (Lt.-Col. E. Gorton),                          6

    Martin, E. Shadows,                                           26

    Martyn, G. Lord Jimmy,                                        23

    Mayne Reid, Captain. (Mrs M. Reid),                            4

    M’Millan. A. The Weird Well,                                  16

    Messiahship of Shakspeare, The. (Clelia),                      4

    Merimée, P. Colomba,                                          11

    Melville, L. In the World of Mimes,                           15

    Miss Malevolent. (Author of “The Hypocrite”),                 21

    Milecete, H. A Girl of the North,                             12

    Milecete, H. A Detached Pirate,                               13

    Mora. (T. W. Speight),                                        15

    Moore, Thomas. The Epicurean,                                 11

    Modern Argonauts, The. (Eliza Orzeszko),                      12

    Monkshood, G. F. Rudyard Kipling,                              1

    Monkshood, G. F. My Lady Ruby,                                22

    Monkshood, G. F. Woman and the Wits,                           9

    My Lady Ruby. (G. F. Monkshood),                              22

    Nebo. (A. J. Ferreira),                                        7

    Nonsense Numbers and Jocular Jingles. (Druid Grayl),          27

    Northern Lights and Shadows. (R. G. Taber),                    5

    Nursery Rhymes, A History of. (P. B. Green),                   8

    Obscure Apostle, An. (Madame Orzeszko),                       12

    Orzeszko, Madame. The Modern Argonauts,                       12

    Orzeszko, Madame. An Obscure Apostle,                         12

    Our Lady of the Ice. (Constance Sutcliffe),                   20

    Outrageous Fortune. (Anonymous),                              19

    Outram, L. The Lady of Criswold,                              24

    Owen, J. L. Seven Nights with Satan,                          19

    Path of the Soul, The. (De Soissons),                          6

    Patriotism or Self-Advertisement? (Marie Corelli),             7

    Pemberton, T. E. Bret Harte,                                   2

    Pelican Tails. (F. M. Boyd),                                  25

    Physical Culture, Ideal. (Apollo),                             7

    Pillypingle Pastorals. (Druid Grayl),                         28

    Pottle Papers. (T. Coutts),                                   28

    Poster, A Book of the. (W. S. Rogers),                         5

    Power of the Past, The. (Daisy Pryce),                        14

    Power-Berrey, R. J. Bye-Ways of Crime,                         6

    Prettiness of Fools, The. (E. Hewitt),                        14

    Pyke, R. The Fellow-Passengers,                               26

    Pryce, Daisy Hughes. The Power of the Past,                   14

    Rae-Brown, C. The Shadow on the Manse,                        17

    Rae-Brown, C. The Resurrection of His Grace,                  24

    Rasselas. (Dr Johnson),                                       10

    Reade, C. The After-Taste,                                    14

    Red Fate. (E. Forbes),                                        13

    Resurrection of His Grace, The. (Rae-Brown),                  24

    Ringan Gilhaize. (J. Galt),                                   10

    Rip Van Winkle. (W. Irving),                           10 and 26

    Rogers, W. S. A Book of the Poster,                            5

    Romance of a Harem,                                           18

    Sadleir, Mrs. An Uncanny Girl,                                25

    Sadleir, Mrs. Such is the Law,                                16

    Salathiel. (Dr Croly),                                        11

    Sapho. (Daudet),                                              18

    Scott, C. The Wheel of Life,                                   3

    Scott, C. Madonna Mia,                                        20

    Scott, C. Some Notable Hamlets,                                3

    Scott, C. Sisters by the Sea,                                  4

    Seed, Rev. T. A. Woman,                                        5

    Seekers of Sentiment,                                         14

    Seven Nights with Satan. (J. L. Owen),                        19

    Shadow on the Manse, The. (Rae-Brown),                        17

    Shadows. (E. Martin),                                         26

    Shams! (Anonymous),                                           18

    Sienkiewicz, H. In Monte Carlo,                               22

    Social Upheaval, A. (I. G. Ascher),                           17

    Son of Africa, A. (De Brémont),                               15

    Speight, T. W. Mora,                                          15

    Speight, T. W. Two Days in a Life-time,                       15

    Speight, T. W. For Himself Alone,                             15

    Spurr, H. Bachelor Ballads,                                   29

    Stage, The Year Book of the. (L. A. Greening),                 7

    Such is the Law. (Sadleir, Mrs),                              16

    Sutcliffe, Constance. Our Lady of the Ice,                    20

    Sword of Fate, The. (H. Herman),                              19

    Taber, R. G. Northern Lights and Shadows,                      5

    Thaïs. (Anatole France),                                      18

    That Fascinating Widow. (S. J. A. Fitz-Gerald),               26

    Thompson, C. J. S. Zoroastro,                                 18

    Tragedy of Grub Street, A. (S. J. Adair Fitz-Gerald),         23

    Tragedy of a Pedigree, The. (Hugo Ames),                      13

    Tragedy of the Lady Palmist, The. (W. L. Longstaff),          21

    Trip to Paradoxia, A. (T. H. Escott),                          6

    Two Days in a Life-time. (T. Speight),                        15

    Turner, R. Cynthia’s Damages,                                 15

    Uncanny Girl, An. (Mrs Sadleir),                              25

    Upperton, R. Village Life and Feeling,                        10

    Vagabond in Asia, A. (E. Candler),                             4

    Vathek. (W. Beckford),                                        11

    Vert, A. P. The Green Passion,                                19

    Village Life and Feeling. (Rupert Uppington),                 10

    Virtue of Necessity, A. (H. Adams),                           17

    Wandering Romanoff, The. (Bart Kennedy),                      23

    Weeds and Flowers. (W. Longstaff),                             9

    Weird Well, The. (Alec M’Millan),                             16

    Wheel of Life, The. (C. Scott),                                3

    Where the Oranges Grow. (N. A. Leyken),                       13

    Williams, Ernest E. An Exile in Bohemia,                      12

    Williams, Ellen. Anna Marsden’s Experiment,                   24

    Woman. (Rev. T. A Seed and A. Fouillée),                       5

    Woman and the Wits. (G. Monkshood),                            9

    Wratislaw, T. Algernon Charles Swinburne,                      2

    Year Book of the Stage, The. (L. A. Greening),                 7

    Zola, E. A Dead Woman’s Vow,                                  18

    Zoroastro. (C. J. Thompson),                                  18







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOKS WORTH READING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


