The Project Gutenberg eBook of London Cries & Public Edifices
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: London Cries & Public Edifices

Author: John Leighton

Release date: November 20, 2018 [eBook #58312]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Curnow, Chuck Greif and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON CRIES & PUBLIC EDIFICES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)








                            [Illustration]




                             LONDON CRIES

                                   &

                            Public Edifices

                            [Illustration]

                                  by

                                 LVKE
                                LIMNER
                                  ESQ

                          GRANT AND GRIFFITH.

                   SUCCESSORS TO NEWBERY AND HARRIS

             1 CORNER OF SAINT PAUL’S CHURCH-YARD, LONDON.

                                 1851.

                  [Illustration: THE TOWER OF LONDON.

               POTS & KETTLES TO MEND, BELLOWS TO MEND.]




POTS AND KETTLES TO MEND!--COPPER OR BRASS TO MEND!


The Tinker is swinging his fire-pot to make it burn, having placed his
soldering-iron in it, and is proceeding to some corner or post, there to
repair the saucepan he carries.--We commence with the most interesting
edifice in our capital,


THE TOWER OF LONDON;

the fortress, the palace, and prison, in which so many events, connected
with the history of our country, have transpired. The building with four
towers in the centre is said to have been erected by William the
Conqueror, and is the oldest part of the fortress. The small bell-tower
in the front of our picture is that of the church of St. Peter’s, (the
tower being a parish itself,) on the Tower Green, erected in the reign
of Edward I. Our view is taken from Tower Hill, near which was the
scaffold on which so many have fallen. To the left of the picture stood
the grand storehouse of William III., destroyed by fire, Nov. 1841.

The Regalia is deposited here, and exhibited to the public, as is also
the Horse Armoury. The present constable of the Tower is the Duke of
Wellington.


RHUBARB!--FINE TURKEY RHUBARB!

This drug is carried about for sale by Turks, often habited in the
costume of their country. They are Turkish Jews, as Mahomedans seldom
travel. The mode of fixing his caftan also indicates him to be one; it
is fastened on the left: the Turks make a distinction by adjusting
theirs on the right.


THE EAST INDIA HOUSE

is situated in Leadenhall Street: it was built in 1726, and afterwards
enlarged, in 1798, by Mr. Jupp, who erected the present front, the
pediment of which, by Bacon, exhibits an allegory of the Company, under
the protection of George III.: on the apex is a statue of Britannia; on
the right hand is a figure of Asia, and on the left one of Europe. Here
is conducted all the official business relating to the Company, which
now rules a population of 85,000,000 natives of India, besides
51,000,000 who are directly or indirectly affected by them. It contains
a Library and Museum, open to the public, free, on Saturdays.

[Illustration: THE EAST-INDIA HOUSE.

RHUBARB.]

[Illustration: THE BANK OF ENGLAND.

MATCHES.]


MATCHES!--BUY A BOX OF MATCHES OF A POOR GIRL!

Of all the poor itinerants of London the Match-sellers are the poorest,
and subsist as much by donations as by the sale of their wares. The old
match, a splinter of wood, with ends dipped in brimstone, is fast
disappearing before the modern lucifer or congreve. The poor creature
here represented is appealing to a lady and gentleman, (whose shadows
are seen in the picture,) on their way to the


BANK OF ENGLAND.

This great national establishment was erected in 1788 by Sir John Soane:
it covers about eight acres of ground, and consists of nine open courts,
almost all the rooms being on the ground-floor, lighted from above,
beneath which are very extensive cellars, used for the deposit of
bullion. This building is raised on the course of the ancient stream of
Wall-Brook. In the Pay-Hall, where the notes are issued and exchanged,
is a marble statue of William III., founder of the Bank, by Cheere. The
Court-Room windows overlook a piece of ground, laid out as a garden:
this was formerly the churchyard of St. Christopher’s; nearly the whole
of this parish is within the walls of the Bank, the church having been
removed in 1780, after the riots. The Bank of England is isolated from
all other buildings, and fire-proof.


ORANGES!--BUY ORANGES AND LEMONS!

Here is a poor Irish boy endeavouring to dispose of his oranges to some
passengers outside an omnibus, in Cornhill, near the


ROYAL EXCHANGE.

The merchants used, in olden times, to meet in Lombard Street, until Sir
Thomas Gresham built the first edifice here, in 1567, from the designs
of Henrick, a Fleming, who, it is said, made constant journeys from
London to Flanders, to obtain materials and workmen. All the stone,
slate, iron, wainscot, and glass, came from Antwerp; so that the first
Exchange might be considered a Dutch building. This pile was burnt down
at the Fire of London, in 1666, and a second Exchange was built on the
old site, by Gernan, the first stone of which was laid by Charles II.,
and was completed in 1669, at an expense of £59,000, and was again
destroyed by fire in 1838. The present edifice occupies the same spot,
of which Prince Albert laid the first stone; and it was opened, with
great display, by her Majesty, Queen Victoria, in October, 1844, during
the mayoralty of Sir W. Magnay. It is from a design by William Tite; the
pediment, seen in the drawing, is by R. Westmacott, Jun.

[Illustration: THE ROYAL EXCHANGE.

ORANGES, SWEET ST:MICHAEL ORANGES.]

[Illustration: THE MANSION HOUSE.

BUY A CAGE FOR YOUR FINE SINGING BIRD.]


BUY A CAGE FOR YOUR FINE SINGING-BIRD!

These little prisons are principally manufactured and sold by
foreigners, who have them of all sizes and shapes (to suit the nature
and habits of the little captive melodists).


THE MANSION-HOUSE

is the official residence of the Lord Mayor of London during his
mayoralty; it is situated at the west end of Cornhill, in Mansion-House
Street.

When it was first resolved, by the Common Council, to build the
Mansion-House, Lord Burlington sent a design of Palladio, for their
approbation and adoption. The first question in court was, not as to the
applicability of the plan, but as to whether Palladio was a freeman of
the city or no. Some discussion ensued, and a member rose, stating it
little mattered, as it was notorious that Palladio was a Papist, and
incapable as a matter of course. Lord Burlington’s proposal was
rejected, and the design of a freeman and Protestant adopted. The
architect was originally a shipwright, and it has been likened to a
deep-laden Indiaman. The portico is supported by six Corinthian columns.
On the pediment is an allegory of the wealth of London. Here the Lord
Mayor holds his court, as chief magistrate of the city. It was erected
in 1753.


OLD CHAIRS TO MEND!--RUSH OR CANE BOTTOMS--OLD CHAIRS TO MEND!

This artificer does not necessarily pay much rent for workshops, as he
commences operations with his canes or rushes up the nearest court or
gateway; or, if the chairs are not wanted in a great hurry, asks
permission to take them home, that he may work them in his back-room
with more convenience, returning them to their owners when he next comes
his rounds.


THE OLD COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, WARWICK LANE,

was erected in 1674, from designs by Sir Christopher Wren, and consists
of a quadrangular court. The room over the gateway, surmounted by a
cupola and crowned with a ball, was the Lecture Theatre. In the
court-yard, which has been roofed in, and is now used as a butchers’
market, are statues of Charles II. and Sir J. Cutler. The building is
now occupied by a coppersmith. Warwick Lane is chiefly tenanted by
slaughtermen and carcase-butchers, being near to Newgate Market. Our
view is taken from Paternoster Row, the literary mart of the world. The
new College of Physicians is situated in Pall Mall East.

[Illustration: OLD COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS WARWICK LANE.

OLD CHAIRS TO MEND.]

[Illustration: SMITHFIELD.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW’S HOSPITAL, CHURCH, & CATHEDRAL OF SAINT PAUL.

CAT’S MEAT DOGS MEAT.]


CATS’ MEAT!--DOGS’ MEAT!

The food for these domestic animals is sold about London from barrows or
small carts, and consists generally of the flesh of horses. As the
vendor approaches, the cats or dogs bound out at the well-known cry,
often forming such a group as we have here, in


SMITHFIELD;

which is the only cattle market in London. It was formerly situated just
without the city walls. It has been used as a cattle market since 1150,
and was then, as we have stated, in the fields, but is now in the very
heart of London. Our view was taken on Friday afternoon, during the
horse market. Hay and straw are sold here on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and
Saturdays. In the background may be seen the tower of the church of St.
Bartholomew the Less, and the entrance to Bartholomew’s Hospital: the
present building was erected in 1730. Immediately above the gateway of
the hospital is seen the dome of


ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL,

for a nearer view of which we turn to the title-page. It was built by
Sir Christopher Wren, on the site of the former, (burnt in the great
fire,) and cost £736,000: it took thirty-five years building, the
expenses of which were raised by a duty on coals.


DUST OH!--DUST OH!

The costume of the Dustman bears a strong resemblance to that of the
coalheaver, who appears to be of the same family, probably through their
both being connected with the same material, the one before it is burnt,
the other after. They formerly rang a bell to intimate their approach,
but made so much noise therewith, as to cause the legislature to
interfere, prohibiting its use.


ST. JOHN’S GATE, CLERKENWELL.

This building is the only relic of that once powerful military order of
monks, St. John of Jerusalem. The priory was established about 1100, but
it was forty years after this that they became a military order, and the
noblest of the time sought admission into its ranks. In the thirteenth
century they were said to possess thirteen thousand manors, in various
Christian lands. The house was suppressed by Henry VIII., who used it as
a military storehouse. In the reign of James I. the gate was given to
Sir Roger Wilbraham. Here, in 1730, Cave printed the “Gentleman’s
Magazine,” which still bears a view of the gate on its cover; it is now
used as a public-house, and called the Old Jerusalem Tavern. It has
lately been partially restored by voluntary subscriptions.

[Illustration: ST JOHNS GATE, CLERKENWELL.

DUST O!!!]

[Illustration: TEMPLE BAR.

BUY A LACE OF THE POOR BLIND.]


PITY THE POOR BLIND!

The blind must gain a livelihood, as well as those who are blest with
sight; but, alas! how few are the arts which can be performed by one so
bereft: hence the necessity of an appeal to the benevolent--“Pity the
poor blind!” He sells cabbage-nets, kettle-holders, or laces, doubtless
the work of his own hands in the evenings, which we term “blindman’s
holiday.”--We are proceeding along Fleet Street, soon to pass under


TEMPLE BAR,

which is the only remaining city gate. It was built in 1670, by Sir
Christopher Wren, after the great fire. On this, the city side, are
statues of James and Anne of Denmark; on the other are Charles I. and
II. The gate is now only closed on such occasions as the Queen going in
state to the city, when she is not admitted until the pursuivant has
knocked and permission been granted by the Lord Mayor.

On the top of this gate were formerly exhibited the heads of traitors:
the last exposed here were those of persons who suffered after the
rebellion of 1745.

Horace Walpole, in a letter dated 16th Aug., 1746, says, “I have this
morning been at the Tower, and passed under the new heads at Temple Bar,
where people make a trade of letting spy-glasses, at a halfpenny each,
to view them.” One of the iron spikes remained till the present
century.


UMBRELLAS TO MEND!--ANY OLD ONES TO SELL!

During the day the Umbrella-mender goes his rounds, repeating these
words, “Umbrellas to mend! Sixpence apiece for your old broken
umbrellas!” and, having collected enough, he returns home to patch and
mend, after which he or some of his family hawks them about for sale.
Here he appears in his glory, under the auspices of St. Swithen, the
patron saint of umbrella and patten-maker. It is the Strand, near


SOMERSET HOUSE.

On this site formerly stood Somerset Palace, built by Edward Seymour,
Duke of Somerset, about 1549. The present building was begun in 1774,
after a design by Sir W. Chambers. The Strand front is one hundred and
thirty feet long, has a rustic basement supporting Corinthian columns,
and is crowned in the centre with an attic, surmounted by a group
consisting of the arms of Britain supported by the genius of England and
Fame. Nine large arches compose the basement, three of which open into
the court. The key-stones are nine masks, representing the ocean and the
eight chief rivers of England. In the quadrangle, directly fronting the
entrance, is a bronze figure of the Thames, by Bacon; also a statue of
George III. It has a Thames front, with a spacious terrace and
water-gate.

[Illustration: SOMERSET HOUSE.

UMBRELLAS TO MEND, ANY OLD ONES TO SELL.]

[Illustration: COVENT GARDEN MARKET.

CHERRY RIPE; ROUND & SOUND 4ᴰ. A POUND.]


CHERRIES, ROUND AND SOUND!--FULL WEIGHT, FOURPENCE A POUND!

Of cherries there are a great variety; most come from the county of
Kent, and are sold in the streets of London, sometimes as low as one
penny per pound! the sellers of which are often addicted to giving short
weight, as their customers apprehend, hence the cry of “full weight.”


COVENT-GARDEN MARKET.

The ground on which this market stands belonged to the Abbots of
Westminster, and was called Convent Garden. On the destruction of the
monasteries it was given to the Duke of Somerset; and, after his
misfortunes, was granted to the Earl of Bedford, in 1552, who let it for
building, and Inigo Jones designed the piazza, a portion of which
occupies the north and part of the east sides. The origin of the market
was casual. Persons came here, and stood in the centre of the square,
until it grew to the establishment of a market, which consisted of rough
sheds until about 1830, when the present market was built by the Duke of
Bedford. One part is devoted to vegetables, and others to fruits,
flowers, and plants.


THE COSTARD-MONGER

(so called from an apple of that name) is an itinerant vendor of garden
stuff. He mostly transports his vegetable wares in a cart drawn by a
donkey. His cry varies with the seasons and their produce: at one time
we have “Cabbage plants,” “New potatoes,” or “Asparagus;” at another,
“Fine young peas, fresh gathered,” “Ripe rhubarb,” “Baking or boiling
apples:” he is now calling “Gooseberries! fourpence an ale-house quart,
gooseberries!” In the background is a seller of


HEARTHSTONES AND FLANDERS BRICK.

Punch’s opera is proceeding along Bow Street with dog Toby in the rear,
from whose petty stage we turn to one of the largest in the metropolis,


COVENT-GARDEN THEATRE.

The former theatre was burnt down, Sept. 20, 1808, and the present one
erected on its site, at a cost of £150,000, by R. Smirke, R.A., who has
taken as his model the temple of Minerva at Athens, and the first stone
was laid in September, 1809, by George IV., then Prince of Wales. It was
built with great rapidity, having been completed in less than a year
after the destruction of the former building. Along the front are
basso-relievos representing the ancient and modern drama; and in niches
at either end figures of Comedy and Tragedy, by Flaxman.

[Illustration: COVENT GARDEN THEATRE.

THE COSTARDMONGER.

HEARTH STONES, & FLANDERS BRICK.]

[Illustration: TRAFALGAR SQUARE.

WITH PART OF THE NATIONAL GALLERY AND SAINT MARTIN’S CHURCH

IMAGES, BUY IMAGES.]


IMAGES!--BUY IMAGES.

The dealers in these articles are mostly Italians. The class of subjects
sold in the streets were formerly of common-place interest, such as a
parrot, horse, cat, or cow, but our vendor has some of a higher
class--the Farnese Hercules, Baily’s Eve at the Fountain, Cupid and
Psyche, Chantrey’s bust of Sir Walter Scott, &c. See, there is a
Greenwich pensioner directing the attention of a young sailor to the
Nelson column: he is perhaps describing the victory of the Nile or
Trafalgar. There is a student of the Royal Academy observing their
movements, very likely to introduce the scene in his next picture.


TRAFALGAR SQUARE

is an open space, bounded on the north by the National Gallery of
Pictures and the Royal Academy of Arts, on the east by St. Martin’s
Church, south by Northumberland House and Charing Cross, and on the west
by the new College of Physicians: in the centre is the Nelson column; on
either side are fountains. The National Gallery was built in 1837, by
Sir W. Wilkins. St. Martin’s Church was erected in 1722, by Gibbs: Nell
Gwyn, who was buried here, left a weekly entertainment to the
bell-ringers, which they still enjoy. The Admiralty being in the parish,
it is usual to announce naval victories from the belfry of this church.


BAKED POTATOES, ALL HOT!

_How_ VERY _cold it is_! the Potato-merchant jumps about to warm his
feet. It is fine time for the boys; they are pelting each other with
snowballs. The drayman leads his team with care, lest they should slip
on the icy road. See the snow on the statue of Charles; it recalls to
mind the burial of that unfortunate monarch,--the snow that fell then
was looked upon as type of his innocence.


CHARING CROSS.

So named, from a cross erected there by Edward I., to commemorate his
affection for his beloved queen, Eleanor. The cross marked the last
resting-place of the body on its way to Westminster: the exact spot is
now occupied by the equestrian statue of Charles I.; it is in bronze,
and was executed by Le Sœur, in 1633, for the Earl of Arundel.


NORTHUMBERLAND HOUSE,

the town residence of the Duke of Northumberland, forms one side of
Trafalgar Square. It was built by Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton, in
whose time it was called Northampton House. In 1643 it fell to Algernon
Earl of Northumberland, by marriage; since then it has been called
Northumberland House. The only part seen from the street is the screen,
which was repaired about 1752, but supposed to have been built in the
reign of Edward VI. On the top is a lion passant. A spacious court
intervenes between this and the house, behind which are extensive
gardens reaching down to the river. Bernard Jansen was architect of this
ancient house, to which Inigo Jones erected a fourth side.

[Illustration: CHARING CROSS.

WITH NORTHUMBERLAND HOUSE, AND STATUE OF KING CHARLES THE FIRST.

BAKED POTATOES ALL HOT.]

[Illustration: WHITE HALL.

BOW POTS.]


BOW POTS! (OR BAY POTS!) TWO A PENNY!

They are mostly sold by women, who obtain them from Covent-Garden Market
or from nurserymen in the suburbs, and are offered to the lovers of
nature in the more dense parts of our city. You perceive it is warm
weather--a glorious summer’s day; the dust flies, and the watering-cart
is about to render it more pleasant. We are in


WHITEHALL,

opposite the Banqueting House. It was begun in 1619, from designs by
Inigo Jones, and is only part of a vast plan left unfinished by reason
of the troubled times. Here was executed King Charles I. He passed to
the scaffold through the north-end wall (to the left of the picture).
George I. converted it into a Chapel Royal, for which it is now used:
the ceiling was painted by Rubens, in 1629; the subject is the
Apotheosis of James I., for which he received £3000. In the square
behind is a bronze statue of James II., by Gibbons. The Banqueting House
cost about £17,000; and Inigo Jones, the architect, received but 8_s._
4_d._ per day, with £46 per annum for house-rent. The master mason,
Nicholas Stone, received 4_s._ 10_d._ per day. Such were the wages of
architectural labour in those days; though it is true that the value of
money was greater then than it is now.


WILD DUCK, RABBIT, OR FOWL!

Wild Ducks from the fens of Lincolnshire; Rabbits from Hampshire, and
Poultry from Norfolk. Our dealer has procured his stock at Leadenhall
Market, and is now crying them in Piccadilly.


STRAWBERRIES,

from Battersea and Fulham, where they are grown in large quantities, and
sent to Covent-Garden Market, from whence the London dealer purchases
them in large baskets (called rounds), containing many pottles.


BURLINGTON HOUSE.

We have given the entrance gateway, for no other part of this splendid
mansion can be seen from the street. This house was built by Richard
Boyle, third Earl of Burlington, (who is said to have erected it there
because he was certain no one would build beyond him,) from his own
designs, assisted by Kent, who was his intimate friend and companion. It
is very large, has a stone front, and a circular Doric colonnade joins
the wings. Here were deposited those exquisite specimens of Grecian art,
the Elgin Marbles, previous to their purchase by Government and removal
to the British Museum.

[Illustration: BURLINGTON HOUSE, GATEWAY.

WILD DUCK RABBIT OR FOWL.

STRAWBERRIES.]

[Illustration: SAINT GEORGES HANOVER SQ:

NEW MACKEREL.]


MACKAREL!--NEW MACKAREL!

Perhaps there are more of this fish sold than any other: they are very
plentiful during spring. There is a law that permits of their being sold
on Sundays, before divine service, on account of their perishable
nature; for it has been stated 10,000 mackarel, worth £200 in the
morning, would not be worth twenty shillings on the following day. Here
comes the beadle, crossing George Street, to warn off a fish-woman, for
it is eleven o’clock by


ST. GEORGE’S, HANOVER SQUARE.

This church was one of fifty, erected by act of Parliament in 1724. John
James was the architect. The first stone was laid by General Stewart,
with the following ceremony:--Having made a libation of wine, he
pronounced these words: “The Lord God of heaven preserve the church of
St. George!” It is dedicated to St. George the Martyr, in honour of
George I. The subject of the altar-piece is the Last Supper, attributed
to Sir James Thornhill. This church is remarkable for the number of
fashionable marriages celebrated here.


BUY A BOX!--BUY A BAND-BOX!

These useful articles are mostly the manufacture of the persons who
carry them about for sale: they are of all shapes and sizes--cap-boxes,
bonnet-boxes, clothes-boxes, &c.


OLD CLOTHES!

“_Clo! Clo!!_” This is the abbreviated cry of the old clothesman, when
going his rounds. The trade is mostly conducted by Jews, who take the
morning purchases to Rosemary Lane, (commonly called Rag Fair,) near
Tower Hill, where they dispose of them to dealers, who patch, mend, and
sell again to the public. Our Jew, judging from his beard and band round
his waist, is some dignitary of the synagogue; he has just made a
purchase of an old court suit at


ST. JAMES’S PALACE.

It is a plain brick building, and was erected by Henry VIII. in 1551.
Queen Anne was the first to hold her court here, since which time it has
been uniformly used for that purpose. Here is the Chapel Royal, in which
our present Queen was married to Prince Albert: it is used only for
purposes of state. King Charles I. passed the last eleven days of his
life here, during his trial. A great portion of the south-eastern corner
was destroyed by fire, in 1809.

[Illustration: SAINT JAMES’ PALACE.

OLD CLOTHES.

BUY A BOX, A BAND BOX.]

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY.

AND TOWER OF SAINT MARGARET’S CHURCH.

MILK BELOW.]


MILK BELOW!

Of dealers in milk there are two classes,--the one keeping cows, the
other purchasing from large dairymen in the outskirts, and retailing it
on their own account. Their customers mostly live in neighbouring
streets, which are called “milk-walks,” and are often disposed of as
other trades. It is stated that fifteen thousand cows are necessary to
supply London with milk, and it has been calculated that it is usually
adulterated one-third. The milk-carriers of London are mostly Welsh
girls, and did, until of late, wear the national hat. Our sketch
exhibits one of them carrying home the produce of her master’s cows from
St. James’s Park, while a man drives a cow and calf from the pasture
there; but this is a picture of the past. The park no longer affords
pasture for cattle; population has driven them farther away. The
background remains the same.


WESTMINSTER ABBEY.

The present church was erected by Henry III. and his successors; the
western towers are by Sir Christopher Wren. Behind the altar is the
chapel of Edward the Confessor, in which is kept the coronation chair:
adjoining is the chapel of Henry V. Around these chapels are nine
others, dedicated to various saints. Next to the eastern end of the
church stands the chapel of Henry VII. The first stone was laid in Feb.,
1503, by Abbot Islop; the building cost £14,000, an enormous sum for the
period. It was designed by Sir Reginald Bray. The Abbey contains the
monuments of many great men; one spot is occupied by poets, and called
“Poets’ Corner.” In the foreground may be seen the tower of the parish
church of St. Margaret’s, Westminster.


YOUNG WATER-CRESSES!

The morn has been proclaimed with “Sweep! Soot oh!” The inmate of the
downy bed has turned again to slumber--then follows “Milk!” and now
comes “Water-cresses!” ’Tis half-past eight; all are up, the door is
mopped, and Betty runs to get the usual penny for the poor old dame in
Milbank, Westminster. From here we obtain a good view of


LAMBETH PALACE,

which is the principal residence of the Archbishop of Canterbury. It is
a very extensive and irregular pile, the principal part of which was
built since the thirteenth century, the oldest part being the chapel.
The great hall was erected by Archbishop Juxon, about 1600. The gate
seen in the picture was built by Cardinal Morton in 1490, in front of
which, to this day, is distributed the bishop’s dole, or alms, to thirty
poor parishioners of Lambeth, ten of whom are served each day; among
them are distributed three stone of beef, ten pitchers of broth, five
quartern loaves, and twopence in copper. At the back of this gate is the
Lollards’ Prison, a small room of great strength, in which prisoners
have been confined for their religious opinions. Adjoining is the parish
church of Lambeth.

[Illustration: LAMBETH PALACE.

WATER CRESSES.]

[Illustration: NEW HALL LINCOLNS INN.

KNIVES & SCISSORS TO GRIND.

BUY A MAT, A ROPE OR PARLOUR MAT.]


KNIVES TO GRIND!--SCISSORS TO GRIND!

We here have a grinder executing a job under the entrance gateway to New
Square, Lincoln’s Inn; who, if we may judge from the smile of
satisfaction playing on his countenance, has had merry work amongst the
cleavers of Clare Market, adjacent. Hoping he may find the like success
with the pen-knives of the lawyers of Lincoln’s Inn, we wish him “Good
day!”


BUY A MAT!--BUY A DOOR OR PARLOUR MAT!

They are manufactured of different materials: rope and rush mats for
hall-doors. Parlour and carriage mats are made of sheep-skins, with the
wool on, dyed of various hues.


NEW HALL, LINCOLN’S INN,

is situated on the eastern side of Lincoln’s Inn Fields: it is of Tudor
architecture, designed by Philip Hardwick, R.A., and consists of an
extensive dining-hall, spacious library, and benchers’ drawingroom. It
was opened Oct. 30, 1845, by the Queen, accompanied by his Royal
Highness Prince Albert. Lincoln’s Inn is one of the principal inns of
court.


SWEEP!--SOOT OH!

This trade was, until of late, performed by small boys, who used to
climb up chimneys, brushing away the soot as they went, until they
arrived at the top, where they performed a rattle of triumph on the
sides of the pot. Poor little sweep! your “occupation’s gone;” the term
“climbing boy” will soon become obselete, for chimneys are now swept by
machines, such as the one on the shoulders of the boy in our picture. He
has been his morning’s round, and perceives a chimney on fire, which he
is off to extinguish, seeming to enjoy it much, no doubt on account of
the extra fee on such occasions. The boys have got out the parish engine
and the beadle. It is the 1st of May, the sweeps’ grand day, when they
perambulate the streets and collect donations, decked in ribbons and
finery, and dance round the ivy bower, called “Jack in the Green,” to a
drum and pandean pipes, which revelry seems to be forgotten in the
excitement of the moment: the smoke rolls over-head; it must be in
Guildford Place, opposite


THE FOUNDLING HOSPITAL.

Its name indicates its use. It is a plain brick edifice, with a chapel
in the centre, founded, about the year 1722, by Captain Thomas Coram. It
covers a large space, and is enclosed within a wall: here the children
play. There are about 360, who are educated in a plain manner; and when
old enough the boys are apprenticed, and girls put to service.

[Illustration: FOUNDLING HOSPITAL.

SWEEP.]

[Illustration: NORTH WESTERN RAILWAY.

MUFFINS, CRUMPETS.]


MUFFINS!--CRUMPETS!--ALL HOT MUFFINS!

This is an evening cry in winter, reminding us of a cheerful fire,
curtains drawn, pleasant company, the hissing urn, and a goodly pile of
these toasted luxuries hot and tempting. They are sold by boys or men,
who carry a small bell, which they ring between the times of calling out
their wares. Night is fast approaching, the lamp-lighter is at work,
while the last rays of departing day gild the horizon, behind the
portico of


THE NORTH-WESTERN RAILWAY.

This is the most important line of communication up the country, and the
most extensive in the kingdom: it was commenced in 1837, and originally
called the “London and Birmingham Railway,” from its ending in that
town, 112 miles from London; but it is now the grand trunk line of
numerous tributaries. Our view is of the Doric portico at the Euston
station, Euston Square; it is built of granite, from a design by Philip
Hardwick, R.A., and is 70 feet in height.


BUY A BROOM!

These tasteful articles are cut out of a single piece of wood, and
carried about our metropolis by Bavarian women, who sing pleasing
ditties in broken English; they are very tidy, and have a picturesque
appearance. Here we have one offering a broom to the inmates of a
carriage in the Regent’s Park, near


THE COLOSSEUM.

It was erected some few years since for the exhibition of a panorama of
London, painted by Mr. Horner, after sketches taken from a scaffold
above the dome of St. Paul’s Cathedral, (during the repairs of the ball
and cross,) at sunrise, before the lighting of the innumerable fires.
This glorious scene has been beautifully described by Wordsworth, in one
of his sonnets:--

    “Earth has not any thing to show more fair:
     Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
     A sight so touching in its majesty:
     This city now doth like a garment wear
     The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
     Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
     Open unto the fields and to the sky;
     All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
     Never did sun more beautifully steep
     In his first splendour valley, rock, or hill;
     Ne’er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
     The river glideth at his own sweet will:
     Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
     And all that mighty heart is lying still!”

                       [Illustration: COLISEUM.

                             BUY A BROOM.]

                            [Illustration:

                      IN TWENTY SIX ILLUSTRATIONS

                                  THE
                                 CRIES
                                  OF
                                LONDON
                                  AND
                            Public Edifices

                                  BY
                              LUKE LIMNER
                                 ESQ.]





End of Project Gutenberg's London Cries & Public Edifices, by Luke Limner



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON CRIES & PUBLIC EDIFICES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


