The Project Gutenberg eBook of Six Little Ducklings
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Six Little Ducklings

Author: Katharine Pyle

Release date: February 24, 2015 [eBook #48350]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIX LITTLE DUCKLINGS ***

Six Little Ducklings

[Illustration: The mother looked and stared]




[Illustration]




Six Little Ducklings

    Written and Illustrated
    by
    KATHARINE PYLE
    Author of “Tales of Two Bunnies,”
    “The Christmas Angel,” “In the Green Forest.”


    New York
    Dodd, Mead & Company
    1915

[Illustration]




    COPYRIGHT, 1915

    BY DODD, MEAD & COMPANY




Six Little Ducklings




I


OLD MOTHER DUCK and her six little ducklings lived in a hollow tree
down by the river, and here they were all as happy as the day was long.
They had the whole of the broad bright river to swim about on, and
there was no one to bother them or drive them about.

Mother Duck had not always lived in the hollow tree. Once she had lived
in a farmyard back in the country and away from the river. But she had
not been very happy there. For one thing, there was a very cross old
watch-dog in the farmyard. He was kept chained to his dog-house through
the day, and never set loose until the other animals had gone to bed,
but he used to snap at the ducks and chickens whenever they came near
his dog-house, and that frightened them.

Then there was no place to swim but in a muddy little duck-pond that
almost dried up in the heat of summer.

But the worst thing of all at the farmhouse was the way the farmer’s
wife used to steal the duck’s eggs. No matter how carefully Mrs. Duck
hid her eggs, Mrs. Farmer always found them and took them away. Once
she put a number of them in a hen’s nest, and allowed a hen to set
on them. After a while the hen hatched out eleven of the cunningest,
fuzziest, yellowest ducklings that ever were seen. The hen was just
as pleased and proud as though she had laid the eggs herself. But she
didn’t in the least know how to bring up a brood of ducklings. Mrs.
Duck could see that very plainly. She didn’t even want them to get
their feet wet and she almost had a fit when they went into the water
one day.

[Illustration: She pointed with her wing to a farmhouse in the distance]

After that Mrs. Duck made up her mind she would not stay at the farm
any longer. She started off into the wide world early one morning
without saying anything to any one, and waddled on and on and on until
after a while she came to the hollow tree beside the river.

Here she made a nest and hatched out a little brood for herself, and
brought them up the way young ducklings should be brought up, and was
very happy.




II


THERE were six of the little ducklings, and their names, beginning with
the eldest were, Squdge and Queek, Buff, Pin-Toes and Fluffy, and the
littlest and cunningest one of all was named Curly Tail.

Buff and Fluffy and Curly-Tail were girls, and the other three were
boys.

One fine day when the wind was blowing, and the leaves were rustling,
and the little wood-rabbits jumping high and kicking their heels for
joy, Mother Duck told the little ducklings she was going to take them
for a picnic.

“Oh, goody! goody!” they cried, and clapped their wings for joy.

[Illustration: How cosy it was there in the hollow tree]

Mother Duck got out a little basket of meadow grass that an old muskrat
had made for her, and she and the children packed it full of luncheon.
There were crisp watercress, and wild celery, and little snails, and
all sorts of good things such as little ducklings like to eat.

As soon as the basket was packed they started off.

The ducklings thought they would probably go down to the river, but
instead of that Mother Duck led the way off into the wood, directly
away from the water.

“Where are we going, mother? Where are we going?” asked the little
ducklings. But the mother only smiled and shook her head and would not
tell them.

After a while they came out of the wood and into a meadow-land where
there was a heap of high rocks.

“Here’s where we’ll have our picnic,” said Mother Duck.

She put down the basket, and unpacked the food, and then she and the
ducklings sat down around it, and ate and ate. And how good it all
tasted! Just as food always does on picnics.

After they had all finished, and could eat no more, Mother Duck said,
“Come now; let us climb up to the top of the rocks and see what we can
see.”

[Illustration: So he got right under the rain-pipe where the water
spouted hardest]

That was fun, too—clambering up over the rocks. The ducklings scrambled
and slipped and queeked, and their mother helped them; so after a while
they found themselves on the very tip top of the highest rock of all,
and oh, how the wind did blow up there.

“Now look!” said Mother Duck. “Do you see over there?” and she pointed
with her wing to a farmyard in the distance. “That is where I used to
live.”

“Why, mother,” cried the ducklings, “we thought you’d always lived down
by the river in our tree!”

“No, indeed; I lived right there in that farmyard,” answered their
mother; and then she began to tell them about it, and of her life
there, and of how if she had stayed there they might have had a hen
for their mother instead of her. That seemed a horrible thing to the
little ducklings—that they might have had some other mother instead of
their own. They wanted to know what a hen was, because of course they
had never seen one, living where they did. Their mother tried to tell
them, but they could not understand very well.

“I wouldn’t like a hen for a mother,” cried Squdge; “but I would like
to see a farmyard, and to hear a dog bark, and a cow moo. Do they make
as big a noise as thunder? Will you take me there some time, mother?”

But Mother Duck told him, no indeed. It would be very dangerous to go
back to the farmyard. If the farmer and his wife saw the ducklings they
might catch them and shut them up in a coop, and never let them get
away again.

The thought of that frightened the other ducklings—only Squdge said
stoutly, “She couldn’t catch _me_! I can peck too hard and run too
fast, and I wish you _would_ take me there some time, mother, just to
see it all.”

Mother Duck made no answer, for looking up she saw that rain-clouds
were gathering over head.

“Hurry, children, hurry,” she cried. “There’s going to be a storm, and
we must get home before it begins.”

Down they scrambled in a great hurry, and started off through the woods
as fast as they could, and they made such good time that they reached
the hollow tree just as the first great drops began to fall.

They were all out of breath and rather tired, especially Curly-Tail,
but as their mother said, that did not really matter as long as they
had escaped a wetting.

[Illustration: Pinching it tight he began to pull]




III


HOW cosy it was there in the dry hollow of the tree, with the rain
beating harder and harder outside and streaming down the tree trunks.

After a while the ducklings got out their play-things and began to play
with them, but soon they tired of this, and nestling down about their
mother they begged her to tell them a story.

“A story?” said Mother Duck. “Very well. What shall it be about?”

“Tell about Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail!” cried Squdge and Queek.

“No, no; don’t tell about that,” begged Curly-Tail, almost in tears.
“That’s too sad a story, mother. It always makes me cry.”

“Pshaw! I wouldn’t be such a baby as to cry over a story,” cried
Squdge. “Go ahead, mother! Tell it, won’t you?”

The other four little ducklings wanted to hear it, too, so Mother Duck
told Curly-Tail if she didn’t want to listen she could run over in the
corner and play by herself for awhile, and when that story was finished
she could come back and choose another one—any one that she liked, and
her mother would tell it next.

So Curly-Tail, who was always sweet and obedient, went over in the
corner and got out her doll, and began to play, while Mother Duck told
the others the story.

And this is the sad tale of Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail.

[Illustration: They fell over backward on the ground]




IV


“WIGGLE-WAGGLE-WISK-TAIL was a very naughty little duckling. He
quarrelled with his brothers and sisters, and he always wanted the best
of everything for himself, and, worst of all, he was often disobedient
to his dear good mother. Sometimes his mother hardly knew _what_ to do,
it worried her so to have him so naughty.

“Over and over again Wiggle-Waggle’s mother had told him that he must
never go out of doors when it was raining. (You know I have often told
you that myself, my dears,” said Mother Duck. “It is very, very bad for
little ducks to go out in the rain. Flat water, like ponds and puddles
and rivers, is good for them, but when water comes down from overhead
like rain, or water-falls, it is very bad for them. Sometimes they get
drowned in it.)

“One day it began to rain and rain and rain around
Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail’s house.

“His mother was very busy that day. She did not have time to watch over
the children, but she never thought any of them would be foolish enough
to go out in the rain. She had told them too often about the danger of
it.

“But Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail would not believe anything that any one
told him. He waited until his brothers and sisters were busy over their
play, and then he slipped away very quietly, and out into the rain.

“Oh, how good it felt. He raised his bill and caught greedily at the
drops as they fell.

“‘It’s wet’, said Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail to himself, ‘but it isn’t wet
enough.’

“Just around the corner a rain-pipe came down from the roof of the
farmhouse. The rain roared down it and spouted out like a waterfall.

[Illustration: Out from under the bank swam old Mrs. Muskrat]

“‘Whew! This is the wettest thing I ever saw!’ cried Wiggle-Waggle. ‘I
guess this is the place for me!’

“So he got right under the rain pipe where the water spouted hardest.
It felt good on his back, and he held up his head, and opened his beak,
and swallowed the water as fast as he could. Then he was wet inside as
well as out—wet enough at last.

“‘If only mother could see me now,’ he giggled to himself.

“So he swallowed, and _swallowed_, and SWALLOWED until after awhile he
was so full of water that he burst, just like a balloon that has been
blown too full of air; and that was the end of him.

“Not till the rain was over did his mother find he was not at home.
Then she came out to look for him, but she could not find him. She
called and called him but he did not answer and he did not come. He
never came home.

“Then his mother wept for him, and his brothers and sisters wept for
him, but they never saw Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail again, because he was
lying under the rain pipe all burst.”

That was the sad story of Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail that always made
Curly-Tail cry. Not until it was ended would she come out of the
corner, but when she did come and it was her turn to choose a story she
chose a very different sort of one for her mother to tell—for she chose
a funny story that made all the little ducklings laugh and laugh.

But the mother liked to tell them about Wiggle-Waggle-Wisk-Tail every
now and then. She thought the story was a good lesson for them.

[Illustration: He determined to come up and live in the wood where it
was dryer]




IV


THE rain rained itself out in the night, and the next morning, when the
little ducklings awoke, they found, to their glee, that the sun was
shining bright and clear. That meant they could go down to the river
for a swim as usual.

Very soon after breakfast the whole family started for the river.
The ducklings ran ahead, while Mother Duck waddled after them. Only
Curly-Tail stayed by her mother’s side, walking beside her, and holding
to a fold of her skirt. She always liked to be close to mother.

“Don’t go in the water until I get there, children,” Mother Duck called
after the others as they ran ahead.

“No, mother, we won’t,” answered the ducklings.

Squdge was a large, stout, active duckling. He could run faster than
any of the others, and so he was the first to reach the river bank.
There he began looking about for any tid-bits he could find in the way
of a fat beetle, a grass-hopper or a tadpole. He was a very greedy
duckling. Often and often his mother was obliged to tell him not to be
so greedy, but to share things with his little brothers and sisters,
but he was not always willing to do this.

Now as he peered about with his bright black eyes he suddenly espied
near the mud-bank a little round hole, and just showing over the edge
of the hole was what looked like the tail of a particularly fine, fat
worm.

“Oh, ho!” thought Squdge to himself. “Here’s a fine fat morsel. I’ll
just pull it out and eat it before any of the others come to share it
with me.”

With his broad little beak he made a dive at the tail, and pinching it
tight he began to pull.

[Illustration: She gave one to Fluffy and one to Curly-tail]

Now the tail did not belong to a worm at all, but to a little brown
snake that had been lying there in the hole (which was its home) fast
asleep.

When it felt some unseen thing nipping its tail and holding it, it
was terribly frightened. It began to pull and struggle, trying to get
loose, and Squdge kept pulling and trying to get it out. It must be a
wonderfully fine fat worm to pull so hard, he thought, and the more it
pulled the more determined he was to have it.

Before he could get it out, however, Queek and the others saw him, and
up they ran, eager for a share of anything he might have caught.

They, too, seized hold of the tail and began to pull. All of them
together were too strong for the snake. It had to come. Out they
dragged it, out and out, longer and longer. Last of all its head
slipped out from the hole. Then it twisted around, hissing with fright.

When the ducklings saw what they had caught—that it was not a worm
but a SNAKE—they were so terrified that they fell over backward on the
ground and lay there, afraid to move. They dared not even look to see
whether the snake had gone or was making ready to swallow them. If they
had only known it, it had been just as much frightened as they, and as
soon as it was free it had slipped away into the water to nurse its
pinched tail in quiet.

They were still lying there when their mother and Curly-Tail reached
the place. At first Mother Duck did not know what had happened to them;
she was afraid they were hurt or sick. But when she had helped them to
their feet, and found they were only frightened and not hurt at all she
began to laugh at them.

“But now you see, children,” she said more seriously, “what comes of
being greedy. If you hadn’t been in such a hurry to catch the worm and
gobble it down you would have waited till I came, and I could soon have
told you it was not a worm you had found, but a snake.”

[Illustration: Around from the other side of the burdock came a great
grey feathery creature]

The little ducks felt quite ashamed of themselves. They felt they had
acted in a very silly and greedy manner. Moreover, they felt quite sad,
for their mother said they were so hot and frightened she could not
allow them to go into the water just yet. They would have to sit on the
bank for a while and cool off.

Then she took Curly-Tail down to a shallow place in the river and
caught a nice little tadpole for her, while her brothers and sisters
had to sit in a row along the bank and look on.

It was not very long, however, before their mother called to them that
they could come, and the little ducklings ran joyously down the slope
and slipped off into the water. There they paddled up and down, and
stood on their heads, and ran water races with each other as merrily as
ever, their adventure with the snake quite forgotten.




V


WHEN the ducklings stayed at home instead of going to the river (that
was when it was too cold and stormy for them to swim) they had a number
of toys to play with. Squdge and Queek had a little cart, and they had
a tame beetle that they had trained to pull it. Sometimes they gave the
dolls a ride in the cart. There were two dolls; one belonged to Fluffy,
and one belonged to Curly-Tail. Mrs. Muskrat had made the dolls for
them;—the same old muskrat who had made the picnic basket for their
mother. The dolls were made of two old gnarled pieces of root that Mrs.
Muskrat had gnawed and shaped with her sharp teeth until they looked
just like two little wooden ducklings.

[Illustration: The two fowls were pleased to see each other]

Fluffy and Curly-Tail loved these two little duckling dolls better
than anything they had; they dressed and undressed them, and took them
to bed with them at night, and sometimes even took them down to the
river with them.

The other ducklings often wished they had dolls, too, but Mrs. Muskrat
had only made the two, one for Fluffy, and one for Curly-Tail. The way
she had happened to make the dolls for them and not for the others was
this:

One day the duck family had gone down to the river for their usual
swim, and afterward Mother Duck felt very sleepy. She sat down on the
bank in the warm sun, and all the little ducklings sat around her, and
blinked and blinked, and after a while they all went to sleep. The
ducklings were the first to waken. They opened their eyes and stirred
about, and presently they said, “Mother, may we go up the river bank a
little way?” For they were tired of staying in one place.

Mother Duck was too sleepy to do more than open her eyes a tiny crack.
“Yes; only don’t go too far, and don’t go in the water.”

The little ducks promised they wouldn’t, and then they ran merrily away
together.

Soon they came to a place where the bank was quite high and overhung
the water. Here they began to amuse themselves by pushing bits of mud
and pebbles over into the water to make a splash.

Presently they heard something stirring and rustling down there
beneath. They stopped and listened and looked. Squdge and Pin-Toes even
crept to the edge of the bank and leaned far over trying to see what
was there. Fluffy was afraid if they did not take care they might fall
into the river.

[Illustration: Instead of taking it Bright Eyes looked quite disgusted]

Suddenly out from under the bank swam old Mrs. Muskrat. Her house was
just exactly under where the ducklings were standing, though they had
not known it. She had been busy finishing her housework and now she
was starting out on some errand she had down the river. She always
swam when she wanted to go anywhere. She could go more quickly and
safely that way than by land. She had on a calico dress and a white
apron, and a pair of big spectacles were on her nose. (All her clothes
were waterproof, and shed off the water just the way a duck’s feathers
do.) She looked so funny with her nose almost under water and her
dress bunching up, and her tail dragging behind her, that some of the
ducklings began to laugh.

“Oh don’t laugh,” begged Fluffy, who was a very polite little duckling.
“She might hear you.”

“No she won’t; she can’t hear us down there,” said Queek.

“I don’t care whether she does or not,” cried Squdge, “she’s so funny
looking.” And he laughed till he almost fell over.

Then all the other ducklings began to laugh, too;—all except Fluffy and
Curly-Tail. Fluffy and Curly-Tail did not laugh. They were troubled to
think their brothers and sister could behave so rudely, and to an older
animal. To be sure Mrs. Muskrat never looked round to see who they
were, and that was some comfort.

Now as it happened the old muskrat did not have to look round in order
to see them, though the ducklings did not know that. When the light
shone on her spectacles it made them just like looking-glasses, and
she could see in them what was happening behind her. She saw, in her
spectacles, that Squdge was laughing and pointing at her. She saw the
others laughing, too, all except Fluffy and Curly-Tail, and she saw
that those two did not laugh, but looked worried and sorry. She saw all
this, but she did not take any notice of it. She just swam quietly on
down the river and out of sight.

But two or three days afterward an old toad knocked at the hollow tree
and said he had a message for Mrs. Duck.

[Illustration: The chicks huddled together on the leaf while the
ducklings pulled it]

This toad had been living down by the river for some time, but it was
so damp there that it had given him rheumatism, so he had determined to
come up and live in the wood where it was dryer.

Mrs. Muskrat had heard of this, and so she asked him, as he would be
going past the hollow tree to leave a message there for her.

This was the message. She wanted Mother Duck to send the two little
ducklings who hadn’t laughed at her the other day down to see her. It
was about something very important.

“That’s me and Curly-Tail, mother! We were the ones who didn’t laugh,”
cried Fluffy. “But what do you s’pose she wants with us, mother?”

“I don’t know, but you had better go and see.”

The two little ducklings were not very anxious to do this. They felt
very shy about going all alone down the river to make a visit.

“_I’ll_ go,” said Squdge. “I don’t mind.”

“No indeed you won’t go,” said the mother. “You’ve been too naughty.
Mrs. Muskrat doesn’t want to see any little duckling that has been as
rude to her as you have been.” At last she told Fluffy and Curly-Tail
that she herself would go part of the way with them.

She took them down within sight of the muskrat’s house, and then she
sent them on alone.

Fluffy and Curly-Tail walked on very slowly, often stopping to look
back at their mother as she stood there watching them.

“Will you knock when we get there, Curly-Tail?” asked Fluffy.

“No, you knock.”

“No, I don’t like to; you knock.”

But as it turned out neither of them had to knock at Mrs. Muskrat’s
door, for when they reached her house she was on the lookout for them.
She came out smiling, and looking quite friendly and pleasant in spite
of her long rat teeth.

[Illustration: The ducklings stood looking on in dismay]

“So you are the two little ducklings who didn’t laugh at me the other
day,” she said. “That’s right! That’s right! I like little animals when
they are polite and respectful. Now I have a present for you that I
think you’ll like.”

She went back into the house, and when she came out again she carried
the two little duckling dolls. “Here; these are for you,” she said, and
she gave one to Fluffy and one to Curly-Tail.

The little ducklings could hardly believe their eyes. They had never
seen anything so cunning and pretty before. “But they’re not for _us_?”
they cried. “Not really?”

“Yes they are,” said Mrs. Muskrat, smiling, and looking almost as
pleased as they.

The two little ducklings hardly knew how to thank her enough. Then they
were eager to show the dolls to their mother. They said good-bye to the
muskrat, and ran back to where Mother Duck was waiting for them, “Look,
mother! Look! Look!” they cried.

Mrs. Duck took the dolls and examined them.

“Why, yes, they are very beautiful,” she said. “Wasn’t Mrs. Muskrat
good to give you such wonderful presents. You must be very careful not
to break them.”

“Oh, yes, we will! We will!” cried the happy little ducklings.

When they got back to the tree, and the others saw the beautiful
presents Mrs. Muskrat had given them they wished they hadn’t laughed at
her either; then perhaps she would have given them dolls too. But it
was too late for wishing that now.

[Illustration: The old duck carried the chick safely over to her
mother]




VI


“I’LL race you down to the big burdock, Queek,” said Squdge one day, as
he and the others started out for the river with Mother Duck.

“All right.”

“Let’s all race,” cried Buff, who could run almost as fast as her
brothers.

“Very well,” said Queek; “only we’ll have to give Fluffy and Curly-Tail
a start, because they can’t run as fast as we can.”

So Fluffy and Curly-Tail went some distance down the path, and then
Squdge shouted “Go!” and away they all raced.

“Wait for me at the burdocks!” their mother called after them. “Don’t
go down to the river without me.” But the ducklings were racing too
hard to stop to answer her.

The little ducks all reached the burdocks at about the same time,
though Squdge was a little ahead. They were so out of breath that they
were glad to drop down in the shadow to get cooled off while they
waited for their mother.

Suddenly, as they sat there, they heard, back of the burdocks, a
curious scratching and rustling, and a something that sounded like
“Cluck! cluck! cluck!”

“What’s that, Squdge?” whispered Queek.

“I don’t know what it is.”

“I’m scared,” said Buff, “it sounds so queer. Let’s run back and find
mother.”

The ducklings jumped up, but before they could run away, around from
the other side of the burdock came a great grey, feathery creature,
with hard, bright eyes and a sharp beak. She was followed by a brood
of little, downy, yellow young ones that seemed to be her children. As
soon as the young ones saw the ducklings they stopped and stared at
them wonderingly.

[Illustration: So the two fowls said good-bye to each other and
parted]

“Cluck! cluck!” cried the mother. “What have we here? Ducklings I do
believe.” Then as Squdge seemed about to come toward her she ruffled
her feathers angrily. “Don’t you come any nearer,” she cried, “if you
do I’ll peck you. I don’t allow any strange animals to come near _my_
children.”

The ducklings were quite frightened at her angry looks. They were about
to turn and run away, when to their joy they saw their mother coming
around a bend in the path.

As soon as Mother Duck saw a stranger talking to her children she
hurried forward. Then when she came a little nearer she gave a quack of
pleasure.

“Why, Mrs. Henny Penny!” she cried. “Is that you? Wherever did you come
from?”

“Well I declare if it isn’t Mrs. Duck!” replied the hen. “I brought the
children out for a walk, and we’ve come further than we expected. I’m
sure I never thought I’d find you here.”

The two fowls were so pleased to see each other that they both began
talking at once, asking questions, and givings answers, while the
little ones listened wonderingly.

“I suppose you’re still living at the farm,” said the duck. “And these
are your little ones, are they? What fine chicks they are.”

“You have some fine children, yourself,” answered the hen, much
pleased. “How exactly they look like you.”

“They’re very good children, on the whole,” said the duck, “only
sometimes they’re rather naughty, and I have to scold them a little.
But how are all the things at the farmyard? The geese and the turkeys
and the guinea-fowls? And old Mr. Tige? Is he alive still? My, my! What
a cross dog he was.”

The hen said yes, he was. “He’s alive still, and crosser than ever. Why
the other day old Mrs. Speckeldy Hen just happened to go too near his
dog house, and he jumped right out at her and pulled out a whole
mouthful of tail feathers!”

“My!” cried the duck. “Wasn’t that awful? What did Mr. Rooster say?”

“Why he said—”

Just then the duck noticed that all the little ones were standing about
and listening with open beaks.

[Illustration: “Now, children, I am going to market,” she said]

“Now, children, don’t stand there listening,” she cried. “You know I
don’t like you to listen when older creatures are talking. Run on down
to the river, and take these nice little chicks along with you—only
don’t go in till I come. Perhaps you might catch them a tadpole or so.”

“Yes, run along,” said the hen. “We’ll be along in a minute. Be sure
you don’t get your feet wet, children.”

That seemed to the ducklings a funny thing for any one to say—“Don’t
get your feet wet,”—but they and the chicks started off together, and
ran on gaily down the path toward the river, while the older fowls
followed more slowly.

As soon as the little ones reached the river Squdge, who had taken
a great fancy to a little chicken named Bright-Eyes, ran down to a
shallow where the tadpoles lived, and caught a nice fat one, and
brought it to her in his beak. Instead of taking it, however, Bright
Eyes looked quite disgusted.

“Ugh!” she cried. “Take it way. The nasty thing!”

“Nasty!” cried Squdge with surprise. “Why it’s good. Haven’t you ever
eaten a tadpole before?”

“No, and I don’t want to eat one now, either.”

All the other chickens said the same, so Squdge ate the tadpole
himself, and very good it tasted to him, too.

“I’ll tell you what,” said Queek; “I don’t believe mother would mind if
we went in here where the water is shallow, and had a swim. It’s deep
enough if we hold up our legs.”

[Illustration: On and on they went, leaping and snatching]

“But we don’t know how to swim,” cried the chickens.

Not know how to swim! The ducklings could hardly believe it. “Why, what
do you do when you go in the water?” they asked.

“We don’t go in the water!”

The ducklings stared at them with pity and surprise. They had never
heard of such a thing as not going in the water. Then Squdge had a
bright idea. “I know!” he cried; “let’s give the chicks a ride on the
river. We’ll get a big leaf and have it for a boat, and then the chicks
can get on it, and we’ll pull it.”

The chicks did not like the idea very much. They were afraid. But the
ducklings were so eager about it that they hardly knew how to say no.

Squdge found a big leaf and he and the others nipped it off with their
sharp beaks, and pulled it down into the river. “Now get on it,” they
shouted joyously.

“But we’re afraid,” whimpered the chicks.

“Oh, come on! it won’t hurt you. You’ll just love it, it’s such fun.”

Timidly the chicks stepped onto the leaf, and huddled together in the
middle of it while the ducklings pulled it out into the stream.

“Faster, faster,” cried Squdge, holding the stem with his beak, and
swimming as hard as he could. “Here! Take it around this rock.”

The water washed over the leaf, and the chickens shrieked with fear. A
moment later the boat caught on a ledge and at once tilted over so that
the chickens were upset into the water.

“Oh! oh!” cried Buff. “Look what we’ve done.”

The ducklings hurried to the help of the chicks, and pushing and
pulling they managed to get them up on the rock where they were safe.

[Illustration: “Well, you can come along with men and I’ll show it to
you”]

The chickens were dripping wet however and so frightened they hardly
knew where they were. “Oh! oh!” they wept. “We’ll be drowned! We
want to go home. Oh! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo!”

The ducklings stood looking on in dismay, not knowing what to do or say.

At this moment a shriek sounded from the bank. “Oh, my chicks! my
chicks!”

The duck and the hen had reached the river side, and the hen had seen
her chickens far out on a rock, wet and shivering with fear. “Oh what
shall I do! What shall I do,” she shrieked. “They can never get back.”

“Yes they can, too; now don’t you be so worried,” said the duck. “I’ll
bring them back.”

“But you can’t; I know you can’t. How can you?”

“Why, easily enough. I’ll swim out to them, and they can sit on my
back, and I’ll carry them back.”

“But you’ll spill them off. I’m sure you will.”

“No I won’t either. I’ll bring one at a time. Now just you watch.”

The duck slipped off into the water, and soon reached the rock where
the chicks were standing. At first she had a great deal of trouble in
getting any one of them to climb up on her back. They were afraid of
slipping off into the water; but presently Bright-Eyes ventured to
scramble up and snuggle down against Mother Duck’s neck. As soon as she
was settled there the old duck sailed out on the water and carried the
little chick safely over to her mother.

When the other two chicks saw that Bright-Eyes was safe on shore they
were eager to clamber upon the duck’s back and have her carry them
over, too.

Oh, how thankful the hen was when she had her chicks back on dry land
again. She felt so happy and thankful that she hardly knew what to say
to the duck.

“If it hadn’t been for you they would all have been drowned,” she cried.

[Illustration: There lay old Tige in the sunshine fast asleep]

“Yes, but if it hadn’t been for my children they wouldn’t have been
out there at all,” replied the duck.

She wanted the hen to bring the chickens up to the hollow tree to rest
and get dry, but this the hen would not do. There was nothing she
wished so much now as to get her chicks safe home again. She made up
her mind that never, never would she venture away from the farmyard
again—at least until the chicks were old enough and big enough to take
care of themselves.

So the two fowls said good-bye to each other and parted, and then
Mother Duck took her children home again without allowing them to go
in for another swim. They had indeed been very naughty and disobedient
little ducklings, and Mother Duck told them that for a punishment they
would not be allowed to go down to the river again for three whole days.

That was indeed a sad thing for the little ducks. They almost cried
over it. But then it might have been worse. She might have told them
they couldn’t go back again for a week. They had been naughty enough
almost to deserve even that.

[Illustration: With a bound and a roar he was up and at the chicken]




VII


ONE day Mother Duck got up bright and early, and put on her bonnet and
her shawl, and took a market basket on her wing.

“Now, children, I’m going to market,” she said. “Don’t go out of sight
of home while I’m away, and don’t go down to the river, and don’t talk
with any stranger animals.”

And all the little ducklings answered, “No, mother.”

Then the old duck put on her bonnet and her shawl, and took her basket
on her arm and started off.

For awhile after she had gone the little ducks played about close to
the hollow tree, and then they wandered a little further off, and then
they began to see how far they could go without losing sight of home.

“I wish mother would hurry back,” said Squdge at last, “I’m getting
hungry. Wouldn’t a tadpole or some watercress taste good now!”

“Indeed it would,” said Queek. “Or even a beetle if we could find one.”

Just as Queek said that a bright long-tailed fly flew close by over
Buff’s head. “Catch it, catch it, Buff!” cried Queek.

Buff made a jump and missed it, though his beak just grazed its tail.

“Catch it!” cried Squdge, starting after it with leaps and bounds;
and—“Catch it! catch it!” cried the others, running after him as fast
as they could. Their mother’s words were all forgotten.

On and on they went, leaping and snatching, and sometimes falling
over each other in their hurry. At last their chase led them out into
a road, and then the fly rose straight up over their heads, up and
up until it was lost to sight in the sunlit air. The ducklings stood
gaping after it hungrily.

“Hey there, you young ’uns! What do you think you’re doing?” asked a
rough voice.

The ducklings started.

Before them, in the road, stood a ragged, impudent-looking, half-grown
chicken.

“What do you think you’re doing?” he asked again.

“Oh, if you please, sir, we were trying to catch a fly,” answered Queek
rather timidly.

“A fly! What did you want to catch a fly for?”

“We thought we’d eat it.”

“Eat it! Eat a fly? Haven’t you any corn or bread or things of that
kind at home?”

Queek shook his head. “We don’t know what corn is, or bread either.”

“_Don’t know what they are!_ Why, at the farmyard where I live the
farmer’s wife comes out twice a day and gives us all we can eat.
Sometimes she gives us a dish of curds, too; or a meat bone to pick.
Though mostly we have to share our meat bones with the watch-dog. He’s
a great friend of mine, old Mr. Tige is. He’d let me have his bones any
time if I wanted them.”

“Mr. Tige!” cried Squdge. “Why, that’s the name of the watch-dog at the
farm where our mother used to live. Where is your farmyard?”

“Oh, over there,” said the chicken, pointing with his wing. “Who is
your mother, anyway?”

The ducklings told him who their mother was, and where they lived, and
all about themselves.

They, in turn, asked him about the farmyard.

“I’m just sure that’s where our mother used to live,” said Buff. “Oh,
how I wish we could see it.”

“Well, you can. Come along with me, and I’ll show it to you.”

[Illustration: On and on ran the chicken, and on and on ran the
ducklings]

“All right,” cried Squdge and Queek.

The other four ducklings were afraid they oughtn’t to go, but Squdge
and Queek were so eager to, and so unwilling to turn back, that after a
while the others, too, agreed to go on to the farmyard. The ragged
chicken led the way, and they all followed.

As they went the chicken’s talk was all about himself and the farmyard.
He told them of how much the farmer’s wife thought of him, and about
his friend the turkey-cock, and about old Tige.

“Why,” he cried, “I don’t know what Tige would do if anything was to
happen to me. I guess he’d just break his chain and come out to look
for me.”

The ducklings thought the chicken must be a very important person
indeed for every one to be so fond of him.

After a while they came to a high board fence. The chicken slipped
through a hole, and the ducklings followed him, and at once they were
in the farmyard.

Once inside they looked about them wonderingly. Not far from them a hen
was busily scratching for a brood of chickens. At first they thought
it must be the hen they had met down by the river, but then they saw
that this was a larger, darker hen. A cock on the dung-hill crowed loud
and clear, and the ducklings started. “What’s that?” asked Squdge in a
frightened voice.

“That? Oh, that’s nothing. That’s just a rooster crowing. Didn’t you
ever hear one before?”

Over in a sunny corner were four great moving, breathing things, lifted
far, far up in the air on great thick legs. “And what are those?” asked
Squdge, pointing at them.

“Cows. Didn’t you ever see cows before? Oh, my! You certainly don’t
know much,” said the chicken scornfully.

The little ducklings looked at the cows with awe. Any one of those
great feet, if it happened to tread on them would crush them as easily
as though they were beetles or tadpoles.

“And where’s your friend, Mr. Tige?”

“Old Tige?” said the chicken, hesitatingly. “Well, you see he may be
asleep. If he is I wouldn’t like to waken him. He has to bark so much
in the night that sometimes he’s very tired in the day-time.”

“But can’t we just _see_ what he looks like?”

“Well—come on; maybe I can show you. He lives in that dog house over
there.”

The chicken led the way toward the dog house, and the ducklings
followed him. He walked on his tip-toes, and kept whispering to the
ducklings not to make a noise. They might almost have thought that he
was afraid of Tige if he hadn’t told them he wasn’t.

They reached the dog house and peeped around the corner of it. There,
sure enough, lay old Tige in the sunshine, fast asleep. He was a big,
fierce looking brindled dog. Now and then he twitched his ear or moved
his paw in his dreams. It frightened the ducklings even to look at him.

When the chicken saw the dog was asleep he grew much bolder. “Yes,
there he is, fast asleep, just like I told you,” he said. “Do you see
that bone there by his nose? If he was only awake I’d ask him to give
it to you. He would do it I know, if _I_ asked him.”

Just then the great dog woke and opened one eye a little, but the
chicken did not notice that, he was so busy boasting to the ducklings.

Now the dog was not really a friend of the chicken at all. In fact he
hated it. It was always creeping up and trying to steal his food. Again
and again he had tried to catch it, but always it kept just out of
reach. But now it had come so near, that it almost seemed as though,
with one bound he could grab it. Very, very quietly he drew himself
together, without the chicken’s noticing it, and then suddenly with a
bound and a roar he was up and at the chicken. He would have caught it,
too, if his chain had only been a _little_ longer. As it was his teeth
just grazed its feathers.

[Illustration: He gave them one scornful look and stalked away]

The chicken gave a wild squawk, and fled with spread wings toward the
hole in the fence. The ducklings tumbled after it, almost scared out
of their wits.

The chicken squeezed through the hole and rushed on down the road, and
the little ducks, too, squeezed through the hole and ran after it.

On and on ran the chicken, and on and on ran the ducklings. For all
they knew the dog might have broken his chain and be close at their
heels.

After a while they came to the river and could go no further. But it
was a part of the river that the ducklings had never seen before. Here
the chicken turned on them angrily.

“Why don’t you go home?” he cried. “Why do you keep following me? I
don’t want you. Go home I tell you.”

“But we don’t know how to get home,” cried the ducklings, and
Curly-Tail began to cry.

“Well, I don’t care where you go, only don’t keep following me because
I won’t have it. I’m tired of you.”

“We won’t; we won’t follow you if you’ll just tell us how to get home.”

“No, I won’t tell you. I’m going back to the farmyard. It must be
feeding time now. And don’t you dare to come too. If you do I’ll peck
you.”

The chicken was angry because the ducklings had seen him frightened,
and because they had found out he was not a friend of the dog after all.

“Oh, what shall we do! We’re lost! We’re lost!” wept the ducklings.

But the chicken paid no attention to them. He gave them one scornful
look, and then he stuck his wings in his pockets, and stalked away up
the road, leaving them alone.

And now the poor little ducklings were very miserable indeed. They all
wept bitter tears. Even Squdge began to cry. “Oh, if we could only get
home,” they wept, “we’d never, never run away again, but always be good
obedient little ducklings.”

Suddenly Queek, who had dried his eyes for a moment, looked up the
river and gave a cry of joy.

“Look! Look!” he shouted.

The ducklings stared through their tears, and then they began to clap
their wings and shout for joy. There, sailing quietly down the river,
in her shawl and bonnet, her basket on her arm, came their own dear
mother.

“Mother! Mother!” they shouted all together. “Here we are, mother! Come
quick!”

The mother looked and stared and then came sailing over toward the
bank. She could hardly believe her eyes.

“Why, children, whatever are you doing here?” she cried.

“Oh, we ran away from home, and we got lost, but if you’ll only take us
back we’ll never be naughty disobedient little ducks again.”

They had indeed been very naughty to run away when their mother had
told them not to, but they looked so frightened and sorrowful that she
had not the heart to scold them.

“Well, well! We won’t talk about it now,” she said. “Perhaps you’ve
been punished enough as it is by being so frightened. Slip down into
the river and I’ll take you home this way.”

So the ducklings slid down into the water and sailed away at their
mother’s side, and it was not long before they came within sight of
their own dear home-landing and the hollow tree beyond. Then what
thankful and happy little ducklings they were!

“Mother,” said Squdge solemnly, “I’m never, never going to be naughty
again. I’m always going to do exactly what you tell me to do.”

And all the other little ducklings said the same.

“Well, I’m glad to hear that,” said their mother. “What a happy family
we will be if I never have to scold you any more.”

[Illustration: They sailed away at their mother’s side]

But of course the little ducklings were naughty _sometimes_, even
after that; but they were good enough for their mother to feel that on
the whole her little ducklings were the dearest, sweetest, cunningest
little ducklings in all the world—to her at least.


THE END

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 42, “were” changed to “where” (where the ducklings)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIX LITTLE DUCKLINGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


