The Project Gutenberg eBook of Yosemite National Park, California
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Yosemite National Park, California

Author: United States. National Park Service

Release date: April 6, 2016 [eBook #51675]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: E-text prepared by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, CALIFORNIA ***

Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 51675-h.htm or 51675-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/51675/pg51675-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/51675/51675-h.zip)


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





United States Department of the Interior
Harold L. Ickes, Secretary

National Park Service
Arno B. Cammerer, Director


YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK CALIFORNIA


[Illustration: United States Department of the Interior Logo]

Open All Year







United States
Government Printing Office
Washington : 1935




                   WELCOME TO YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK


In bidding you welcome the National Park Service asks you to remember
that you are visiting a great playground that belongs in part to you,
and that while you are at liberty to go anywhere in the park with
perfect freedom, you owe it to yourself and to your fellow citizens not
to do anything that will injure the trees, the wild animals or birds, or
any of the natural features of the park.

The park regulations are designed for the protection of the natural
beauties and scenery as well as for the comfort and convenience of
visitors. The following synopsis is for the general guidance of
visitors, who are requested to assist the administration by observing
the rules.


                         RULES AND REGULATIONS
                               (Briefed)

Fires.—Light carefully and in designated places. Extinguish COMPLETELY
before leaving camp even for temporary absence. Do not guess your fire
is out—KNOW IT. Do not throw burning tobacco or matches on road or trail
sides.

Camps.—Register at camp entrance. Keep your camp clean. Burn all
combustible material and place all garbage in cans provided. Camp at
least 25 feet from other tents, buildings, or water hydrants.

Trash.—Do not throw paper, lunch refuse, kodak cartons or paper,
chewing-gum paper, or other trash on roads, trails, or elsewhere. Ball
up and carry until you can burn in camp or place in receptacle.

Trees, Flowers, and Animals.—The destruction, injury, or disturbance in
any way of the trees, flowers, birds, or animals is prohibited. Dead and
fallen wood, except sequoia, may be used for firewood.

Noises.—Be quiet in camp after others have gone to bed. Many people come
here for rest.

Automobiles.—Speed limit in park is 35 miles per hour. Drive carefully
at all times. Keep cut-outs closed. Obey park traffic rules. Secure
automobile permit, fee $2.

Park Rangers.—The rangers are here to help and advise you as well as to
enforce the regulations. When in doubt ask a ranger.

Warning About Bears.—Do not feed the bears from the hand; they are wild
animals and may bite, strike, or scratch you. They will not harm you if
not fed at close range. Bears will enter or break into automobiles if
food that they can smell is left inside. They will also rob your camp of
unprotected food supplies, especially in the early spring or late fall
when food is scarce. It is best to suspend food supplies in a box well
out of their reach between two trees. Bears are especially hungry in the
fall of the year and serious loss or damage may result if food is left
accessible to them.

All articles lost or found should be reported to the ranger headquarters
in the New Village, to any ranger station, or to the offices at Camp
Curry, Yosemite Lodge, or the Ahwahnee. Persons should leave their name
and address so that articles which are not claimed within 60 days may be
turned over to the finders.

Suggestions, complaints, or comments regarding any phase of park
management, including the operation of camp grounds, hotels, and
attitude of employees, should be communicated immediately to the
superintendent.

                                        C. G. Thomson, _Superintendent_.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                     PAGE
  The Yosemite Valley                                                   1
      How the Valley Was Formed                                         3
      Waterfalls                                                        3
      Altitude of Summits Inclosing Yosemite Valley                     6
      Height of Waterfalls                                              4
  Glacier Point and the Rim of Yosemite Valley                          4
  The Big Trees                                                         7
  The Wawona Basin                                                      8
  Hetch Hetchy Valley                                                   8
  Tuolumne Meadows                                                     10
  Pate Valley                                                          11
  The Northern Canyons                                                 12
  The Mountain Climax of the Sierra                                    12
  Merced and Washburn Lakes                                            13
  Climate and Seasons                                                  13
  Winter Sports                                                        14
  Trails and Hikes                                                     15
  Fishing                                                              17
  How to Reach the Park                                                20
      By Automobile                                                    20
      By Railroad and Auto Stage                                       22
      By Airplane                                                      22
  Administration                                                       23
  Information Bureau                                                   23
  Free Educational Service                                             23
      Museum                                                           24
      Yosemite Field School of Natural History                         26
      Ranger-Naturalist Outpost                                        26
  Accommodations for Visitors                                          26
      Free Public Camp Grounds                                         26
      Hotels, Lodges, Housekeeping Cabins, and Camps                   27
      Yosemite Transportation System                                   30
      Stage Trips                                                      31
      Saddle Trips                                                  31-32
      Valley Floor Rides                                               32
      Stores and News Stands                                           32
      Photographic Service                                             32
      Laundries                                                        33
      Barber Shops                                                     33
      Garage Service                                                   33
      Children’s Playground                                            34
      Postal Service                                                   34
      Express Service                                                  35
      Telephone and Telegraph Service                                  35
      Medical and Hospital Service                                     35
      Church Services                                                  35
  References                                                           36
  Publications for Sale at Museum                                      37
  Government Publications                                              40




                 IMPORTANT EVENTS IN YOSEMITE’S HISTORY


    1851.  Mariposa Battalion discovered Yosemite Valley from
           Inspiration Point, March 25. Name “Yosemite Valley” applied.
    1855.  J. M. Hutchings organized first party of sightseers to
           enter Yosemite Valley.
    1856.  “Lower Hotel”, first permanent structure, built by Walworth
           and Hite at base of Sentinel Rock.
    1858.  Cedar Cottage built; still in use.
    1864.  Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Big Trees granted to
           California as a State park.
    1868.  John Muir made his first trip to Yosemite.
    1871.  Conway started work on Four-Mile Trail to Glacier Point.
           Finished in 1872.
    1874.  Coulterville Road built to Valley floor. Big Oak Flat route
           completed to Yosemite Valley.
    1875.  Wawona Road built to floor of Yosemite Valley.
    1876.  Sentinel Hotel built.
    1881.  Tunnel cut through Wawona Tree.
    1882.  Tioga Road constructed. John Conway built Glacier Point
           Road.
    1890.  Yosemite National Park created October 1.
    1891.  Capt. A. E. Wood, first park superintendent, arrived with
           Federal troops to administer park, May 17. Headquarters at
           Wawona.
    1899.  Camp Curry established.
    1900.  Holmes Brothers, of San Jose, drove first automobile (a
           Stanley Steamer) into Yosemite over the Wawona Road.
    1906.  Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove receded to United
           States. Superintendent’s headquarters (Maj. H. C. Benson,
           superintendent) moved to Yosemite Valley.
    1907.  Yosemite Valley Railroad opened for travel to El Portal.
           Visitors, 7,102.
    1913.  Automobiles admitted to Yosemite Valley.
    1914.  Civilian employees replaced military in administration of
           park. Visitors, 15,154.
    1915.  Stephen T. Mather purchased Tioga Road; presented it to
           Federal Government.
    1916.  National Park Service Act passed August 25.
    1917.  Stephen T. Mather made Director of the National Park
           Service. Glacier Point Hotel built and opened.
    1919.  First airplane landed in Yosemite Valley, May 27, Lt. J. S.
           Krull, pilot, alone.
    1920.  Construction started on All-Year Highway up Merced Canyon.
           Visitors, 68,906.
    1923.  Hikers’ camps installed. Visitors, 130,046.
    1924.  New administration center and village developed.
    1925.  Yosemite Park & Curry Co. formed by consolidation of Curry
           Camping Co. and Yosemite National Park Co. Park visitors,
           209,166.
    1926.  All-Year Highway completed and dedicated July 31.
    1927.  Ahwahnee Hotel opened by Yosemite Park & Curry Co. The
           second largest travel year in park history—490,430 visitors.
    1930.  Reconstruction of log cabin in Mariposa Grove to house
           Museum of Big Trees. Park visitors, 458,566.
    1931.  Construction of 4,233-foot tunnel through Turtleback Dome
           for new Wawona Road.
    1932.  Wawona basin of 14 square miles added to the park. New
           Wawona Road and tunnel completed. Big Trees Lodge
           constructed. Largest travel year in park history—498,289
           visitors.




                     WHAT TO DO AND SEE IN YOSEMITE


Here are a few suggestions to help you plan your time in Yosemite to
best advantage. This is a summer schedule—in winter see special programs
posted on bulletin boards at hotels.

Do not hurry through Yosemite—take the time to at least visit all points
of interest in the Valley and do not leave the park without seeing the
Mariposa Grove of Big Trees and the wonderful panoramic view from
Glacier Point.


                                GENERAL

Visit the Yosemite Museum, located in the New Village, open 8 a. m. to 5
p. m. Interesting exhibits of the geology, Indians, early history,
trees, flowers, birds, and mammals of Yosemite. Wild-flower garden and
demonstrations of native Indian life in back of museum. Short talks on
geology of the Valley given several times each day. Library, information
desk, and headquarters for nature guide service. Maps and booklets.

Take the auto caravan tour of the Valley floor with your own car,
starting from the museum at 9:30 a. m. and 2 p. m. A ranger-naturalist
leads the caravan and explains the interesting features of Yosemite on
this free trip of about 2 hours around the Valley, every day except
Sunday and holidays.

A daily tour of the Valley in open stages is an ideal way to see the
most in a short time. Inquire at Camp Curry, Yosemite Lodge, or the
Ahwahnee for rates and schedules on stage transportation.

Visitors desiring to make an unescorted tour of the Valley should take
the Valley floor loop road, stopping at points of interest which are
signed. See detailed map of Valley. See the wonderful view of the whole
expanse of the Valley from the east portal of the 4,233-foot tunnel, a
short, easy drive of 1½ miles up the new Wawona Road, just west of
Bridalveil Fall.

Take trips afield with a ranger-naturalist. See posted daily schedules.

During July and August a naturalist leads a party once each week on a
7-day hiking trip through the spectacular high-mountain regions of the
park, stopping each night at a High Sierra camp. See bulletins posted at
hotels and camps.

Visit the fish hatchery at Happy Isles.

See the sunrise at Mirror Lake.

Camp-fire entertainments every night except Sunday in Camp 14.

Outdoor entertainments every evening at 8 o’clock at Camp Curry.

See the fire fall each night at 9 o’clock from the upper end of the
Valley or at Camp Curry.

Bears are fed every evening at 9:30 o’clock about 2 miles west of the
Old Village.

Dances every evening except Sunday at 9 o’clock at Camp Curry.

See complete programs of weekly events which are posted at camps,
hotels, and lodges.

Visit Yosemite both summer and winter—The all-year highway is open every
day of the year. Keep your Yosemite automobile permit—it is good for the
entire year. Each season has its particular charm.

In spring—booming waterfalls, rushing streams, green meadows.

In summer—ideal camping, High Sierra trips, good fishing.

In autumn—beautiful autumn coloring, ideal Indian summer weather.

In winter—a different Yosemite, with snow mantling trees and cliffs,
all-winter sports—skating, skiing, tobogganing.


                           1-DAY MOTOR TRIPS

To Glacier Point.—Thirty miles (about 1½ hours) each way. Paved highway
to Chinquapin, 14 miles, and good oiled road from there to Glacier
Point. Leave the Valley on the Wawona Road just west of Bridalveil Fall.
Visit Sentinel Dome, elevation 8,117 feet—a one-half mile drive and
short climb from the main road above Glacier Point. Wonderful panorama
of the High Sierra and the Valley. Camp ground and hotel at Glacier
Point.

To the Mariposa Grove of Big Trees.—Thirty-five miles (about 1½ hours)
each way. Paved highway. Leave the Valley just west of Bridalveil Fall;
go through the 4,233-foot tunnel; wonderful views along this road.
Hotels, camp ground, garage, golf, saddle horses at Wawona, 27 miles
from the Valley. See the oldest and largest living things in the world
and the tunnel tree through which cars may be driven. There is a new
hotel and good camp ground at the Big Trees.

To Hetch Hetchy Dam and Valley.—Thirty-eight miles (about 2 hours) each
way. Good, oiled, mountain road. Leave the Valley at El Capitan station;
one-way road for first 4 miles, and cars must leave on the even hours-6
to 6:25 a. m., 8 to 8:25 a. m., 10 to 10:25 a. m., and so on throughout
the day. See the Tuolumne Grove of Big Trees and visit the fire lookout
tower, 1½ miles west of Crane Flat.

Also Daily Stages to These Scenic Points; Inquire at Hotels.


            1-DAY HIKES FROM VALLEY—DISTANCES GIVEN ONE WAY

To Sierra Point.—Marvelous view of four waterfalls and Valley.
Three-fourths of a mile of steep trail branching off the Vernal Fall
Trail, just above Happy Isles (about 2-hour trip, not a horse trail).

To Vernal Fall.—One and six-tenths miles from start of the trail at
Happy Isles.

To Nevada Fall.—Three and four-tenths miles from start of the trail at
Happy Isles.

To Glacier Point.—Eight and three-tenths miles from start of the trail
at Happy Isles (via the long trail by Vernal and Nevada Falls, Panorama
Cliff, and Illilouette Fall).

To Glacier Point (via “Four Mile Trail”).—Four and six-tenths miles from
start of trail, 1 mile west of Old Village.

To Top of Half Dome.—Seven and seven-tenths miles from start of trail at
Happy Isles, via Vernal and Nevada Falls; 900 feet of steel cables on
climb up Dome.

To Top of Yosemite Falls.—Three and six-tenths miles from start of
trail, one-fourth mile west of Yosemite Lodge. Eagle Peak is 2.6 miles
farther on.

Saddle trips daily to most of these points. Inquire at hotels or stables
for horses.

A taxi service is available for all hikers, to and from the start of
trails in the upper half of the Valley, at 25 cents per person.
Telephones are available at base of all trails.

All hikers are warned to stay on designated trails—do not take short
cuts across zigzags; you may dislodge rocks that will injure someone
below. On the long hikes to the rim of the Valley, start early when it
is cool and get back before dark. Hikers going into isolated sections of
the park or off the regular trails should register at the chief ranger’s
office before starting.

Accurate information on roads, trails, fishing, and camping, and maps of
the park are available without charge at park headquarters, the museum,
and ranger stations.

    [Illustration: Big Trees Lodge nestled among the giant sequoias.]




                         YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK


The Yosemite National Park is much greater, both in area and beauty,
than is generally known. Nearly all Americans who have not explored it
consider it identical with the far-famed Yosemite Valley. The fact is
that the Valley is only a very small part, indeed, of this glorious
public pleasure ground. It was established October 1, 1890, but its
boundary lines have been changed several times since then. It now has an
area of 1,176.16 square miles, 752,744 acres.

This magnificent pleasure land lies on the west slope of the Sierra
Nevada about 200 miles due east of San Francisco. The crest of the range
is its eastern boundary as far south as Mount Lyell. The rivers which
water it originate in the everlasting snows. A thousand icy streams
converge to form them. They flow west through a marvelous sea of peaks,
resting by the way in hundreds of snow-bordered lakes, romping through
luxuriant valleys, rushing turbulently over rocky heights, swinging in
and out of the shadows of mighty mountains.

The Yosemite Valley occupies 8 square miles out of a total of 1,176
square miles in the Yosemite National Park. The park above the rim is
less celebrated principally because it is less known. It is less known
principally because it was not opened to the public by motor road until
1915. Now several roads and 700 miles of trail make much of the
spectacular high-mountain region of the park easily accessible.

For the rest, the park includes, in John Muir’s words, “the headwaters
of the Tuolumne and Merced Rivers, two of the most songful streams in
the world; innumerable lakes and waterfalls and smooth silky lawns; the
noblest forests, the loftiest granite domes, the deepest ice-sculptured
canyons, the brightest crystalline pavements, and snowy mountains
soaring into the sky twelve and thirteen thousand feet, arrayed in open
ranks and spiry pinnacled groups partially separated by tremendous
canyons and amphitheaters; gardens on their sunny brows, avalanches
thundering down their long white slopes, cataracts roaring gray and
foaming in the crooked, rugged gorges, and glaciers in their shadowy
recesses, working in silence, slowly completing their sculptures;
new-born lakes at their feet, blue and green, free or encumbered with
drifting icebergs like miniature Arctic Oceans, shining, sparkling, calm
as stars.”




                          THE YOSEMITE VALLEY


Little need be said of the Yosemite Valley. After these many years of
visitation and exploration it remains incomparable. It is often said
that the Sierra contains “many Yosemites,” but there is no other of its
superabundance of sheer beauty. It has been so celebrated in book and
magazine and newspaper that the Three Brothers, El Capitan, Bridalveil
Fall, Cathedral Spires, Mirror Lake, Half Dome, and Glacier Point are
old familiar friends to millions who have never seen them except in
picture.

The Yosemite Valley was discovered in 1851 as an incidental result of
the effort to settle Indian problems which had arisen in that region.
Dr. L. H. Bunnel, a member of the expedition, suggested the
appropriateness of naming it after the aborigines who dwelt there. It
rapidly became celebrated.

    [Illustration: An unusual view of Yosemite Valley from the Nevada
    Fall Trail.]

No matter what their expectation, most visitors are delightfully
astonished upon entering the Yosemite Valley. The sheer immensity of the
precipices on either side of the Valley’s peaceful floor; the loftiness
and the romantic suggestion of the numerous waterfalls; the majesty of
the granite walls; and the unreal, almost fairy quality of the
ever-varying whole cannot be successfully foretold. The Valley is 7
miles long. Its floor averages 1 mile in width, its walls rising from
3,000 to 4,000 feet.


                       HOW THE VALLEY WAS FORMED

After the visitor has recovered from his first shock of astonishment—for
it is no less—at the beauty of the Valley, inevitably he wonders how
nature made it. How did it happen that walls so enormous rise so nearly
perpendicular from the level floor of the Valley?

When the Sierra Nevada was formed by the gradual tipping of a great
block of the earth’s crust 400 miles long and 80 miles wide, streams
draining this block were pitched very definitely toward the west and
with torrential force cut deep canyons. The period of tipping and stream
erosion covered so many thousands of centuries that the Merced River was
able to wear away the sedimentary rocks several thousand feet in
thickness, which covered the granite and then in the Yosemite Valley
region to cut some 2,000 feet into this very hard granite. Meantime the
north and south flowing side streams of the Merced, such as Yosemite
Creek, not benefited by the tipping of the Sierra block, could not cut
as fast as their parent stream and so were left high up as hanging
valleys.

During the Ice Age great glaciers formed at the crest of the range and
flowed down these streams, cutting deep canyons and especially widening
them. At the maximum period the ice came within 700 feet of the top of
Half Dome. It overrode Glacier Point and extended perhaps a mile below
El Portal. Glaciers deepened Yosemite Valley 500 feet at the lower end
and 1,500 feet opposite Glacier Point; then widened it 1,000 feet at the
lower end and 3,600 feet in the upper half. The V-shaped canyon which
had resulted from stream erosion was now changed to a U-shaped trough;
the Yosemite Cataract was changed to Yosemite Fall. As the last glacier
melted back from the Valley a lake was formed, the filling in of which
by sediments has produced the practically level floor now found from El
Capitan to Half Dome.

Visitors to the park should join an auto caravan to study evidences
first hand and hear the story of the geology of Yosemite discussed by
the ranger-naturalists.


                               WATERFALLS

The depth to which the Valley was cut by streams and glaciers is
measured roughly by the extraordinary height of the waterfalls which
pour over the rim.

The Upper Yosemite Fall, for instance, drops 1,430 feet in one sheer
fall, a height equal to nine Niagara Falls piled one on top of the
other. The Lower Yosemite Fall, immediately below, has a drop of 320
feet, or two Niagaras more. Counting the series of cascades in between,
the total drop from the crest of Yosemite Fall to the Valley floor is
2,565 feet. Vernal Fall has a drop of 317 feet; Illilouette Fall, 370
feet. The Nevada Fall drops 594 feet sheer; the celebrated Bridalveil
Fall, 620 feet; while the Ribbon Fall, highest of all, drops 1,612 feet
sheer, a straight fall nearly 10 times as high as Niagara. Nowhere else
in the world may be seen a water spectacle such as this.

The falls are at their fullest in May and June while the winter snows
are melting. They are still running in July, but after that decrease
rapidly in volume, Yosemite Fall often drying up entirely by August 15
when there has been little rain or snow. But let it not be supposed that
the beauty of the falls depends upon the amount of water that pours over
their brinks. It is true that the May rush of water over the Yosemite
Fall is even a little appalling, when the ground sometimes trembles with
it half a mile away, but it is equally true that the spectacle of the
Yosemite Fall in late July, when, in specially dry seasons, much of the
water reaches the bottom of the upper fall in the form of mist,
possesses a filmy grandeur that is not comparable probably with any
other sight in the world; the one inspires by sheer bulk and power, the
other uplifts by its intangible spirit of beauty. To see the waterfalls
at their best one should visit Yosemite before July 15.


                          HEIGHT OF WATERFALLS

  Name                    Height of fall         Altitude of crest
                                              Above sea      Above pier
                                                 level    near Sentinel
                                                                  Hotel
                                _Feet_          _Feet_           _Feet_
  Yosemite Fall                  1,430           6,525            2,565
  Lower Yosemite Fall              320           4,420              460
  Nevada Fall                      594           5,907            1,947
  Vernal Fall                      317           5,044            1,084
  Illilouette Fall                 370           5,816            1,856
  Bridalveil Fall                  620           4,787              827
  Ribbon Fall                    1,612           7,008            3,048
  Widows Tears Fall              1,170           6,466            2,506




              GLACIER POINT AND THE RIM OF YOSEMITE VALLEY


Glacier Point, above the Valley rim, commands a magnificent view of the
High Sierra. Spread before one in panorama are the domes, the pinnacles,
the waterfalls, and dominating all, Half Dome, a mythical Indian turned
to stone. A few steps from the hotel one looks down into Yosemite
Valley, 3,254 feet below, where automobiles are but moving specks, tents
white dots, and the Merced River a silver tracery on green velvet. From
the little stone lookout, perched on the very rim of the gorge, by means
of high-powered binoculars installed for that purpose one may study the
detail of the High Sierra and its flanking ranges, miles distant,
through a sweep of 180°, as though they were at his very feet. A
ranger-naturalist is here in summer to assist visitors and to discuss
the geology, trees, birds, and wildlife of Yosemite.

    [Illustration: Yosemite Fall in spring.]

No visitor should leave Yosemite without seeing Glacier Point. It is the
climax of all Yosemite views. It is reached by an excellent paved road
which leaves the Valley just west of Bridalveil Fall, and then through
the 4,233-foot tunnel to Chinquapin, from which point a good oiled
mountain road leads through forests of fir and lodgepole pine to Glacier
Point. The total distance is 28 miles, or about 1½ hours drive each way.
The fire fall is a nightly feature and takes on an entirely different
aspect from the top of the cliff. A short drive of a half mile from the
main road above Glacier Point brings one to Sentinel Dome, 8,117 feet in
elevation, where an unobstructed panorama of the southern half of the
park may be had, from the coast range on the west to the snow-capped
ridge of the Sierra on the east. A hotel, cafeteria, and Government camp
ground are available at Glacier Point.


             ALTITUDE OF SUMMITS INCLOSING YOSEMITE VALLEY

  Name                          Altitude above sea   Altitude above pier
                                            level    near Sentinel Hotel
                                           _Feet_                 _Feet_
  Basket Dome                               7,602                  3,642
  Cathedral Rocks                           6,551                  2,592
  Cathedral Spires                          6,114                  2,154
  Clouds Rest                               9,930                  5,964
  Columbia Rock                             5,031                  1,071
  Eagle Peak                                7,773                  3,813
  El Capitan                                7,564                  3,604
  Glacier Point                             7,214                  3,254
  Half Dome                                 8,852                  4,892
  Leaning Tower                             5,863                  1,903
  Liberty Cap                               7,072                  3,112
  North Dome                                7,531                  3,571
  Old Inspiration Point                     6,603                  2,643
  Panorama Point                            6,224                  2,264
  Profile Cliff                             7,503                  3,543
  Pulpit Rock                               4,195                    765
  Sentinel Dome                             8,117                  4,157
  Stanford Point                            6,659                  2,699
  Taft Point                                7,503                  3,543
  Washington Column                         5,912                  1,952
  Yosemite Point                            6,935                  2,975




                             THE BIG TREES


One of the best groves of giant sequoia trees outside of the Sequoia
National Park is found in the extreme south of the Yosemite National
Park and is called the Mariposa Grove. It is reached from the Wawona
Road, which enters the park from the south. From the Yosemite Valley it
is an easy drive of 35 miles over a paved, high-gear road requiring
about 1½ hours each way. Unsurpassed views of the whole expanse of
Yosemite Valley may be had from the east portal of the new 4,233-foot
tunnel and, from the Wawona Road, an extensive outlook over the South
Fork Basin and four or five ranges of foothills of the Sierra is a sight
long to be remembered, especially at sunset when the mountain ranges
turn to many shades of purple and gray.

All visitors to the Mariposa Grove should take the side trip to Glacier
Point, a distance of 16 miles each way, the road branching off at
Chinquapin. Here one may obtain an unsurpassed panorama of the High
Sierra.

The new Big Trees Lodge in the upper grove is located in a beautiful
grove of sequoias, 20 to 30 feet in diameter, and affords excellent
accommodations, with cafeteria service available to all. The Government
provides a public camp ground near the entrance to the Big Tree Grove.
Hotels and camp grounds are also available at Wawona, 9 miles north of
the grove on the Wawona Road. Stages are run daily throughout the summer
to Glacier Point, Wawona, and Big Trees. Visitors to the grove are urged
to take plenty of time and really grasp the significance of these giant
trees, the oldest and largest living things on earth.

The Grizzly Giant is the oldest tree in the grove, with a base diameter
of 27.6 feet, girth of 96.5 feet, and height of 209 feet. There is no
accurate way of knowing the age of the Grizzly Giant but its size and
gnarled appearance indicate that it is at least 3,800 years old.

A ranger-naturalist is on duty at the Big Trees Museum and gives talks
on the trees. Near the museum is the fallen Massachusetts tree, an
immense sequoia, 280 feet long and 28 feet in diameter, that was blown
over in the winter of 1927. As the tree is broken into several sections,
it provides a fine opportunity to study the rings and the character of
the wood. By climbing the length of this fallen tree one receives a
graphic impression of the size of these monarchs. In August 1934 another
giant, the “Stable” tree fell. It is located just above the museum.
Visitors should continue up the road to the famous tunnel tree, the
Wawona, and drive through the opening 8 feet wide that was cut in 1881.
This tree is 231 feet tall and 27½ feet in diameter. A little farther up
the road a wonderful view over the Wawona Basin and South Fork Canyon
may be had at Wawona Point, elevation 6,890 feet; especially fine are
the views at sunset from this point.

There are two other groves of Big Trees in Yosemite. The Tuolumne Grove,
located on the Big Oak Flat Road, 17 miles from the Valley, contains
some 25 very fine specimens and also a huge tree 29½ feet in diameter
through which cars may be driven. The other grove, one of unusual
natural beauty in a secluded corner of the park, is the Merced Grove of
Big Trees, reached by a good dirt road. It is about 5 miles west of
Crane Flat off the Big Oak Flat Road.




                            THE WAWONA BASIN


The Wawona Basin of 14 square miles, added to the park in 1932, provides
an extensive area for recreational use. Here camping, riding, and
golfing may be enjoyed in a perfect setting along the South Fork of the
Merced River. Wawona is located in a beautiful mountain meadow on the
new Wawona Road, 27 miles south of the Valley and near the Mariposa
Grove of Big Trees. Superb views are obtainable from many points on this
road, which leaves the Valley just west of Bridalveil Fall. Saddle and
pack animals are available at popular prices for trips to the fine
fishing lakes and streams in the southern part of the park. There are
also tennis courts and swimming pools. The Wawona Hotel provides both
European and American plan service, and operates a coffee shop. Stores,
meat market, garage, gas station, and post office are available, and
along the river near Wawona is a free camp ground. An emergency airplane
landing field is located near the Wawona Hotel.




                          HETCH HETCHY VALLEY


A good oiled mountain road makes the scenic Hetch Hetchy Valley a short,
2-hour drive by car from Yosemite Valley, a distance of 38 miles each
way over the Big Oak Flat Road. This road is a 1-way control road for
the first 4 miles after it leaves the Valley near El Capitan. This
one-way section is a road of rare charm and beauty with superb views
over the Valley. It passes through fine stands of Sugar Pine and Red Fir
and the Tuolumne Grove of Big Trees. The road continues on through one
of the finest stands of sugar pine left in the world.

A fine paved road extends from Mather down to the Hetch Hetchy Dam, a
distance of 9 miles, where one may see San Francisco’s gigantic 300-foot
Hetch Hetchy Dam and water supply. The valley is similar to Yosemite,
with tumbling waterfalls and precipitous cliffs surrounding a lake 7
miles long. The San Francisco Recreation Camp is located at Mather, near
the park line.

    [Illustration: Men are dwarfed among the giant columns of the
    Mariposa Grove of Big Trees.]

Visitors using the Big Oak Flat Road are urged to see the wonderful
panorama of the High Sierra from the fire look-out tower, 1½ miles over
an oiled road just west of Crane Flat. The fire guard on duty will be
glad to explain the points of interest and show visitors how fires are
located and put under control.




                            TUOLUMNE MEADOWS


John Muir, in describing the upper Tuolumne region, writes:

  It is the heart of the High Sierra, 8,500 to 9,000 feet above the
  level of the sea. The gray picturesque Cathedral Range bounds it on
  the south; a similar range or spur, the highest peak of which is Mount
  Conness, on the north; the noble Mounts Dana, Gibbs, Mammoth, Lyell,
  Maclure, and others on the axis of the range on the east; a heavy
  billowy crowd of glacier-polished rocks and Mount Hoffmann on the
  west. Down through the open sunny meadow levels of the Valley flows
  the Tuolumne River, fresh and cool from its many glacial fountains,
  the highest of which are the glaciers that lie on the north side of
  Mount Lyell and Mount Maclure.

A store, gas station, garage, post office, camp ground, High Sierra
Camp, and Tuolumne Meadows Lodge make the Meadows an ideal high-mountain
camping place and starting point for fishing, hiking, and
mountain-climbing trips. Tuolumne Meadows is 67 miles or about a 4-hour
drive over the Big Oak Flat and Tioga Roads from Yosemite Valley. Saddle
horses are available, and many fine trips may be made to Waterwheel
Falls, Mount Lyell, Mount Conness, Glen Aulin, Muir Gorge, and hundreds
of good fishing lakes and streams. Stage service to Tuolumne Meadows,
Tioga Pass, Mono Lake, and Lake Tahoe is maintained daily throughout the
summer months.

    [Illustration: Lambert Dome and Mount Dana are conspicuous landmarks
    of Tuolumne Meadows.]

Fishing is usually very good in nearby lakes and streams. The Waterwheel
Falls, Muir Gorge, the Soda Springs, the spectacular canyon scenery,
jewel-like Tenaya Lake, and the Mount Lyell Glacier are a few of the
interesting places to visit near Tuolumne Meadows.

John Muir writes this interesting description of the Grand Canyon of the
Tuolumne and Waterwheel Falls:

  It is the cascades or sloping falls on the main river that are the
  crowning glory of the canyon, and these, in volume, extent, and
  variety, surpass those of any other canyon in the Sierra. The most
  showy and interesting of them are mostly in the upper part of the
  canyon above the point of entrance of Cathedral Creek and Hoffmann
  Creek. For miles the river is one wild, exulting, onrushing mass of
  snowy purple bloom, spreading over glacial waves of granite without
  any definite channel, gliding in magnificent silver plumes, dashing
  and foaming through huge boulder dams, leaping high in the air in
  wheel-like whirls, displaying glorious enthusiasm, tossing from side
  to side, doubling, glinting, singing in exuberance of mountain energy.

Muir’s “wheel-like whirls” undoubtedly mean the celebrated Waterwheel
Falls. Rushing down the canyon’s slanting granites under great headway,
the river encounters shelves of rock projecting from its bottom. From
these, enormous arcs of solid water are thrown high in the air. Some of
the waterwheels rise 20 feet and span 50 feet in the arc. Unfortunately,
the amount of water in the river drops with the advance of summer and
the waterwheels lose much of their forcefulness. Visitors should see
this spectacle during the period of high water from June 15 to August 1
in normal years.

The Waterwheel Falls may be reached by a good trail 5.5 miles from the
Tioga Road down the Tuolumne River Gorge to the Glen Aulin High Sierra
Camp, where meals and overnight accommodations are available, then 2.8
miles down the river to Waterwheel Falls. Saddle animals may be rented
at Tuolumne Meadows for this trip.

Below the waterwheels the Tuolumne Canyon descends abruptly, the river
plunging madly through the mile-deep gorge. Trails built a few years ago
down the canyon from the Waterwheel Falls to Pate Valley penetrate the
very heart of the gorge. The Muir Gorge, a vertical-walled cleft in the
canyon a half mile deep, is, as a result, but 2 hours below Waterwheel
Falls and the same above Pate Valley by the new trails. The entire
canyon may be traversed with ease either on horseback or on foot.




                              PATE VALLEY


A few miles farther westward the granite heights slope back more gently
and the river suddenly pauses in its tumultuous course to meander
through the pines and oaks and cedars of a meadowed flat. Pate Valley
has been known for years from the reports of venturesome knapsackers,
but now it is made accessible by one of the best trails in the park.

An unnatural smoky blackening of the overhanging cornices of the
200-foot walls almost surrounding the glade leads one to approach them,
and there, near the ground, are hundreds of Indian pictographs. These
are mysterious, fantastic, and unreadable, but the deep-red stain is as
clearly defined as on the day that the red man set down tales of his
great hunt, or of famine, or of war, or perhaps of his gods. Here, too,
obsidian chips tell the story of preparation for war and the chase, and
sharp eyes are rewarded by the sight of many a perfect spear point or
arrowhead.

Atop a huge shaded talus block are many bowl-shaped holes, a primitive
gristmill where once the squaws ground acorns for their pounded bread,
which was the staff of life for so many California tribes. Blackened
cooking rocks may be found, and numerous stone pestles lying about in
this and two or three similar places seem to point to a hurried
departure, but the “when” and “why” of this exodus still remain a
mystery.




                          THE NORTHERN CANYONS


North of the Tuolumne River is an enormous area of lakes and valleys
which are seldom visited, notwithstanding that it is penetrated by
numerous trails. It is a wilderness of wonderful charm and deserves to
harbor a thousand camps. The trout fishing in many of these waters is
unsurpassed.

Though unknown to people generally, this superb Yosemite country north
of the Valley has been the haunt for many years of the confirmed
mountain lovers of the Pacific coast. It has been the favorite resort of
the Sierra Club during many years of summer outings.




                   THE MOUNTAIN CLIMAX OF THE SIERRA


The monster mountain mass, of which Mount Lyell, 13,090 feet high, is
the chief, lies on the eastern boundary of the park. It may be reached
by trail from Tuolumne Meadows and is well worth the journey. It is the
climax of the Sierra in this neighborhood.

The traveler swings from the Tuolumne Meadows around Johnson Peak to
Lyell Fork and turns southward up its valley. Huge Kuna Crest borders
the trail’s left side for miles. At the head of the Valley, beyond
several immense granite shelves, rears the mighty group, Mount Lyell in
the center, supported on the north by Mount Maclure and on the south by
Rodgers Peak.

The way up is through a vast basin of tumbled granite, encircled at its
climax by a titanic rampart of nine sharp, glistening peaks and hundreds
of spear-like points, the whole usually cloaked in enormous sweeping
shrouds of snow. Presently the granite spurs inclose one. And directly,
beyond these, looms a mighty wall of glistening granite which apparently
forbids further approach to the mountain’s shrine. But another half hour
brings one face to face with Lyell’s rugged top and shining glacier, one
of the noblest high places in America. Mount Dana, with its glacier and
great variety of alpine flowers, can be climbed in one day from Tuolumne
Meadows and now offers a very popular hiking trip.




                       MERCED AND WASHBURN LAKES


The waters from the western slopes of Lyell and Maclure find their way,
through many streams and many lakelets of splendid beauty, into two
lakes which are the headwaters of the famous Merced River. The upper of
these is Washburn Lake, cradled in bare heights and celebrated for its
fishing. This is the formal source of the Merced. Several miles below,
the river rests again in beautiful Merced Lake.

One of the six Yosemite High Sierra camps is at the head of Merced Lake.
There is a new trail 13 miles from Yosemite Valley to Merced Lake which
crosses glacier-polished slopes. It is real wilderness, famous for its
good fishing and beautiful scenery.




                          CLIMATE AND SEASONS


This land of enchantments is a land of enchanted climate. Its summers
are warm, but not too warm; dry, but not too dry; its nights cool and
marvelously starry. Moonlight on the towering granite walls is
unsurpassed in its romantic beauty.

It is a land of sunshine. It is a land of inspiring, often sublime
scenery. It is the ideal camping-out ground. Rain seldom falls in the
Yosemite between May and October. In winter Yosemite Valley is
transformed into a snowy fairyland and all sorts of winter sports may be
enjoyed. The weather is mild and sunny most of the time. To many, winter
is the finest season in Yosemite. In addition to the toboggans, skating,
dog teams, and other winter sports available in the Valley from December
1 to March 1, unlimited areas for snow sports and skiing are now
accessible from the new Wawona Road which is open most of the winter.

Spring in Yosemite is most refreshing and exhilarating. It rarely rains
and is seldom even cloudy. The falls are at their best; the azalea
bushes, which grow to man’s height, blossom forth in flowers exquisite
as orchids. The latter part of April or the early part of May the lodges
and camps are opened, tents are pitched along the river, and before one
knows it summer has arrived.

In this season Yosemite has an irresistible appeal. There is every form
of enjoyment available. One may live in a lodge, where the honk of an
automobile is never heard and where a full day’s catch of trout is
assured from nearby lake or stream; one may live in a hotel where
mountain scenery is unsurpassed; or one may live in the Valley and enjoy
swimming, hiking, nature trips, auto caravans, evening programs, motor
trips, fishing, dancing, tennis, golf, and many other forms of
entertainment.

Autumn is intensified in the Yosemite. All is quiet. The falls are
silent and only a few people and machines are encountered. Nature is
supreme. The changing leaves of the dogwood, azaleas, and quaking aspens
form a brilliant assortment of colors.




                             WINTER SPORTS


Yosemite Valley is unusually beautiful in winter, when the fresh
snowfalls transform it into a white fairyland and sunset paints the
cliffs and domes with rosy alpine glow.

John Muir, in describing the ice cone of the Yosemite Fall, writes:

  The frozen spray (of the fall) gives rise to one of the most
  interesting winter features of the Valley—a cone of ice at the foot of
  the fall 400 or 500 feet high. * * * When the cone is in the process
  of formation, growing higher and wider in frosty weather, it looks
  like a beautiful, smooth, pure white hill.

    [Illustration: Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy unexcelled mountain
    scenery in the high country.]

The All-Year Highway is open and in good condition every day during the
winter months and the Government maintains the roads in safe condition
so that chains are not ordinarily needed. It is, however, advisable to
carry chains in case they are needed during heavy storms. Information on
snow sports and winter road conditions may be obtained at automobile
associations. It is advisable to make reservations for rooms on Saturday
nights and holidays from December 25 to February 25.

The Wawona Road to the Big Trees is open most of the winter except
during periods of unusually heavy snowfall. There are unlimited snow
fields for skiing and other snow sports along the Wawona Road,
accessible through the tunnel.

The Valley, inclosed by granite walls which shut out the winds, has a
mild and balmy winter climate. In fact, these walls really provide two
distinct winter climates on opposite sides of the Valley, the north side
being many degrees warmer than the south. On the northern side one may
motor, ride horseback, and hike in comfort, while on the southern side,
screened from the sun by the towering cliffs, all the popular winter
sports prevail. Under the auspices of the Yosemite Winter Club, ice
hockey matches, curling, fancy costume skating carnivals, snow figure
contests, ski-joring races, skating gymkhanas, figure skating
exhibitions, Eskimo dog races, and other winter sports events are held
throughout the winter season, which usually lasts from December until
March.

Competent instructors on the Yosemite Winter Club staff provide group
and individual instruction in skiing and plain and fancy skating. Winter
sports equipment and clothing may be rented reasonably in the Valley.

The National Park Service maintains a popular free snowslide for the
enjoyment of the public. It is called “Ash Can Alley”, because the trip
down the slide is made in heavy tin pans that resemble ash-can covers.

Skiing enthusiasts may enjoy excursions of several days’ duration in the
high mountain country above Yosemite Valley accompanied by a ski
instructor and guide and stopping overnight at ski lodges strategically
located at an elevation where the snow is deep throughout the winter and
in a region where the ski fields are second to none. Skiing is also
enjoyed on ski fields along Wawona Road and adjacent to Glacier Point on
the rim of the Valley, reached on foot over a 4-mile trail. The Glacier
Point Mountain House is kept open during the winter season.




                            TRAILS AND HIKES


With nearly 700 miles of well-defined trails radiating from Yosemite
Valley to all sections of the park, and with, for the most part, camps,
lodges, or hotels situated within an easy day’s walking distance from
each other, conditions in Yosemite are particularly adapted to hiking
trips. The hiker may go “light”, depending upon the hotels and lodges
for accommodations, or he may pack his entire outfit either on his back
or upon a pack animal and thereby be entirely independent. During July
and August ranger-naturalists conduct regular 7-day hikes through the
High Sierra, stopping each night at one of the High Sierra camps above
mentioned. There is no charge for this guide service, but hikers
desiring to go with these guides should register at the museum in
advance.

               [Illustration: Roads in Yosemite Valley.]




                                FISHING


The introduction of game fish into the waters of Yosemite National Park
began in 1878, 12 years before the area now confined within the park
boundaries had been set aside as a national reservation, when plants of
rainbow trout were made in some of the lakes in what is now the
northwestern corner of the park. In the following year plants of eastern
brook trout were made in the Lyell Fork of the Tuolumne River, and in
1880 plants of rainbow trout were repeated in the Lake Eleanor country.
Nothing more seems to have been done in the way of stocking any of the
waters that are now within the park until 1890, the year that the park
was created, when a general stocking of the streams and lakes was begun.
This was continued, at first intermittently, but from 1911 to 1925
plants of from 100,000 to 400,000 young fry were made annually. The
State hatchery was completed at Happy Isles in 1926 and from that year
from 500,000 to over 1,000,000 fry have been planted annually by the
rangers, with the result that today all of the principal lakes and
streams of the park contain one or more well-known species of game fish.

    [Illustration: Landing a big one from Elizabeth Lake near Tuolumne
    Meadows.]

It is in the northern canyons, however, that the greatest of all fishing
grounds in the entire park are found. Many of the waters of that great
area of 500 square miles or more north of the Tuolumne River were
stocked years ago with rainbow and eastern brook. Conditions for
continued propagation seem to have been exceedingly favorable, with the
result that practically all of the lakes and streams now teem with fish
life, and the fisherman who seeks fishing de luxe amid surroundings of
the most fascinating grandeur of high-mountain scenery will find here a
fulfillment of his most ambitious dreams and will be more than repaid
for having taken time to penetrate this portion of the park.

In Yosemite National Park few anglers, even the most inexperienced, use
bait during the summer or autumn. Of the various artificial flies the
California Royal Coachman almost always proves the best lure; gray and
brown hackles are also very good. Copper-nickel spinners of the sizes 0
to 2 are often taken in the lakes and sometimes in the streams when the
trout are not rising to flies.

The nine species of trout in the waters of the park, about in the order
of their relative abundance, are: Eastern brook trout, rainbow trout,
brown trout, Lock Leven trout, cutthroat or black-spotted trout, Tahoe
trout, steelhead trout, golden trout.

Information on the best lakes and streams for fishing may be obtained at
any ranger station or at park headquarters in the New Village. See
posted weekly bulletins.

Persons desiring to fish in the waters of Yosemite National Park must
secure a sporting fishing license, as required by the laws of
California. These laws provide that every person over the age of 18
years who obtains fish without first taking out a license is guilty of a
misdemeanor. The license fee for residents is $2; for nonresidents, $3;
and for aliens, $5. These licenses may be obtained from any county
clerk, from the State Board of Fish and Game Commissioners, Wawona, Carl
Inn, and Tuolumne Meadows, or at the general store in Yosemite Village.
All fishing must be done in conformity with the State laws regarding
open season, size of fish, and limit of catch.

    [Illustration: This spacious museum houses park exhibits.]




                         HOW TO REACH THE PARK


                             BY AUTOMOBILE

All-Year State Highway.—The main paved route to Yosemite Valley from all
California points, both north and south, is through Merced on the
Pacific Highway through the San Joaquin Valley (Route 99). From Merced
the State maintains the splendid paved All-Year Highway to El Portal
(Route 140) and from El Portal the National Park Service maintains a
similar highway to Yosemite Valley. It is 83 miles long and is the
shortest, easiest, and most popular route from Merced, a high-gear
modern highway, requiring 2½ hours to drive from Merced to Yosemite
Valley. It is open and safely traveled every day of the year.

During the winter months visitors may obtain the latest accurate
information on the snow conditions and winter sports at the automobile
association offices. Visit the quaint old town of Mariposa, center of
the gold rush in the days of ’49. See the oldest courthouse in the
State, built in 1854.

By Seasonal Mountain Roads.—There are two other main routes across the
Yosemite National Park leading into the Yosemite Valley, viz, the Wawona
Road from the south and the Big Oak Flat Road from the north. The Tioga
Road crosses the center of the park from east to west and connects with
the Big Oak Flat Road. The Wawona Road is reached from Fresno, Madera,
or Merced and points south and west of the park. The Big Oak Flat Road
may be reached from Stockton, Modesto, Oakdale, and points north and
west of the park. The Tioga Road may be reached on the east at Mono Lake
from Lake Tahoe and points north, from Tonopah, Nev., and points east,
from Bishop, Big Pine, and Mojave, and points south. On the west it
connects with the Big Oak Flat Road at Carl Inn. Motorists using these
roads will experience no serious difficulty if their cars are in good
condition. In wet weather chains are advisable.

    [Illustration: One of the many meadows in Yosemite.]

The Tioga Road.—Up the east slope of the Sierra Nevadas, through the
scenic, spectacular Leevining Canyon, and from east to west across the
mountain-top paradise winds the Tioga Road, which has a romantic
history. It was built by Chinese labor in 1881 to a gold mine east of
the park, but as the mine did not pay the expenses of getting out the
ore it was quickly abandoned and soon became impassable. In 1915 a group
of public-spirited citizens, headed by the Honorable Stephen T. Mather,
purchased it from the present owners of the old mining property and
presented it to the Government. When a young man, Mark Twain visited
Mono Lake on the Tioga Road. Following is his own inimitable description
from Roughing It:

  Mono Lake is a hundred miles in a straight line from the ocean—and
  between it and the ocean are one or two ranges of mountains—yet
  thousands of sea gulls go there every season to lay their eggs and
  rear their young. One would as soon expect to find sea gulls in
  Kansas. And in this connection let us observe another instance of
  nature’s wisdom. The islands in the lake being merely huge masses of
  lava, coated over with ashes and pumice stone, and utterly innocent of
  vegetation or anything that would burn; and sea gulls’ eggs being
  entirely useless to anyone unless they be cooked, nature has provided
  an unfailing spring of boiling water on the largest island, and you
  can put your eggs in there, and in 4 minutes you can boil them as hard
  as any statement I have made during the past 15 years. Within 10 feet
  of the boiling spring is a spring of pure, cold water, sweet and
  wholesome. So in that island you get your board and washing free of
  charge—and if nature had gone farther and furnished a nice American
  hotel clerk, who was crusty and disobliging, and didn’t know anything
  about the time-tables, or the railroad routes—or—anything—and was
  proud of it—I would not wish for a more desirable boarding house.


                       BY RAILROAD AND AUTO STAGE

Merced is the most popular railway and stage gateway to the park and is
served by the Southern Pacific Railway, the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe
Railway, and stage lines.

At Merced, direct connections are made throughout the year with daily
trains of the Yosemite Valley Railroad to El Portal, at which place
passengers are transferred to stages on the last 14 miles to Yosemite
Valley. In summer, through overnight sleeper cars from San Francisco and
Los Angeles are available for train passengers daily. For information
regarding schedules, rates, etc., visit your nearest ticket office or
write to the passenger traffic manager of the Southern Pacific Lines,
San Francisco, Calif., the Santa Fe Lines, Chicago, Ill., or the
Yosemite Valley Railroad, Merced, Calif.

Automobile stages from Merced to Yosemite Valley are operated every day
of the year. In summer, stages leave Fresno and Stockton for Yosemite
Valley, the service being available daily from about June 1 to September
1. From July 4 to September 3, stages connect Yosemite Valley and Lake
Tahoe with daily service via the Tioga Road. For information and rates,
apply to the Yosemite Transportation System, Yosemite National Park,
Calif.


                              BY AIRPLANE

For persons desiring to spend less time en route to the park, fast air
service is available to Fresno, Calif. This is furnished by the United
Air Lines on their Seattle to San Diego route, which connects with their
transcontinental planes at Oakland and those of the American Airlines
and TWA at Los Angeles.




                             ADMINISTRATION


The representative of the National Park Service in immediate charge of
Yosemite National Park is the superintendent, C. G. Thomson, whose
office is located in the Administration Building in the Yosemite New
Village and whose address is Yosemite National Park, Calif. General
information may be obtained from him, and all complaints should be
addressed to him. A staff of employees, including rangers and
ranger-naturalists, assists the superintendent in serving the public.

Exclusive jurisdiction over Yosemite National Park was ceded to the
United States by act of the California Legislature, dated April 15,
1919, and accepted by Congress by act approved June 2, 1920 (41 Stat.
731).




                           INFORMATION BUREAU


The National Park Service maintains an information bureau at the
superintendent’s office in Yosemite New Village, and the ranger in
charge will supply accurate information concerning points of interest,
trails, camping facilities, camping locations, fishing places, etc.

A branch office of the California State Automobile Association is
maintained in conjunction with the Park Service Information Bureau,
where the best road information obtainable is furnished free to
autoists.

Information can also be obtained at the museum or at any of the hotels,
camps, lodges, or garages, and at the transportation offices.




                        FREE EDUCATIONAL SERVICE


Constant improvement of the roads makes Yosemite more and more readily
accessible. Every class of accommodation is provided for the comfort of
the tourist. But the National Park Service has carried the idea of
service to a still higher point in providing a free nature-guide
service. In other words, the visitor is encouraged to avail himself of
the offices of an interpreter in the form of a trained ranger-naturalist
who can answer his questions and reveal the many fascinations of nature
which abound on every side. To enjoy fully a national-park trip, one
must learn to read the trails.

During the summer season a splendid program of lectures and nature-guide
service is offered to visitors. One should plan to take advantage of the
lectures and trips listed below which are available only during the long
summer season. During winter months the modified program consists mainly
of lectures at the hotels and the museum. The more the visitor knows
about the park and its wildlife the more he will enjoy his stay. This
service is maintained by the Government and is free to the public.

Nature walks from Camp Curry each morning (except Sunday).

Special bird walks at 8 o’clock each Wednesday morning.

Auto caravans each day at 9:30 a. m. and 2 p. m. (except Sunday) to
points of special interest on the floor of the Valley. These start from
museum, visitors using their own cars.

Each day (except Sunday) there is an all-day hike to Glacier Point,
Vernal and Nevada Falls, Eagle Peak, Tenaya Canyon, or Half Dome.

At the evening camp-fire program at Government Camp No. 14, Camp Curry,
Yosemite Lodge, and the Ahwahnee Hotel there are short talks on
wildlife.

Short talks on the geology of Yosemite Valley are given several times
each morning and afternoon in the museum.

Each week a naturalist leads a party on a 7-day hike into the
spectacular high mountain region of the park, starting from Happy Isles
at 7:30 o’clock each Monday morning. Make reservations in advance at the
museum.

A junior nature school for children is conducted during the summer.

The bears are fed every evening at 9:30 o’clock at the bear pits, and a
short talk is given on animal life of the Yosemite.

Groups or organizations may procure the services of a naturalist by
applying to the park naturalist at the museum.


                                 MUSEUM

The park museum, in New Village, a gift to the Nation from the Laura
Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, is a spacious and appropriately designed
building in which are housed a large number of exhibits loaned or
contributed by park enthusiasts.

These exhibits are appropriately displayed in rooms devoted to the
following major fields: Geology, birds and animals, Indian history,
trees, and flowers.

The museum grounds have recently been beautified by plantings of native
wild flowers and shrubs, a project made possible by a gift from Marjorie
Montgomery Ward. Flower lovers will find this garden a great aid in
identifying flowers that they have seen along the roads and trails.

An Indian exhibit is conducted back of the museum daily during the
summer by inhabitants of the local Indian village.

The museum also contains a library well supplied with scientific and
historical books and periodicals, all of which are available to
visitors.

Naturalists at the museum are at the service of the public to answer
questions and to instruct regarding the park and its wildlife.

    [Illustration: In late spring azaleas grow in profusion in Yosemite
    Valley.]


                YOSEMITE FIELD SCHOOL OF NATURAL HISTORY

A 7 weeks’ course in field study of Sierra Nevada natural history is
offered by the Yosemite educational staff to students who have completed
at least 2 years of college work. Emphasis is placed upon field methods,
and the course is designed to avoid duplication of work offered in
universities and colleges.


                       RANGER-NATURALIST OUTPOST

The development of the park areas above the rim has inevitably brought
with it the establishment of branch-museum and ranger-naturalist service
at several focal points of interest.

The Glacier Point Lookout is located on the most famed scenic point on
the rim. Powerful binoculars enable visitors to bring the Sierra’s great
peaks to their very feet. A flower show is maintained, and a
ranger-naturalist on duty conducts a service of field trips and lectures
which correlate with those offered from the Yosemite Museum.

At Mariposa Grove the old log cabin originally built by Galen Clark and
replaced by the State in 1885 has been reconstructed. This is now
equipped as a museum telling the complete story of the Big Trees. A
ranger-naturalist is stationed here to lecture, make guide trips to
famous trees, sell publications, and give accurate information.

At Tuolumne Meadows a ranger-naturalist is stationed during July and
August to conduct field trips, organize more strenuous mountain-climbing
expeditions, keep up an exhibit of local interest, and lecture at
evening camp fires.

Guide maps, and topographical maps may be obtained from the
ranger-naturalists, who will be glad to assist visitors desiring to know
more about the park.




                      ACCOMMODATIONS FOR VISITORS


Accommodations in Yosemite National Park offer a complete range from
free public camp grounds to the highest class of hotel service. At all
units except housekeeping there is a discount of 10 percent from the
basic rates for stays of 3 days or longer and an additional discount for
weekly stays.


                        FREE PUBLIC CAMP GROUNDS

The National Park Service maintains extensive camp grounds in Yosemite
Valley and at Glacier Point, Mariposa Grove, and Tuolumne Meadows, for
the use of which no charge is made. These areas are provided with
necessary sanitary conveniences and for the most part with running
water. The grounds are policed daily during the camping season and all
litter and waste removed.

A camp-fire entertainment is held each summer evening (except Sunday) at
a platform centrally located in Camp 14. Please report any talent among
the campers to the ranger at entrance to Camp 14.

The public is requested to cooperate with the park force in keeping the
camp grounds clean and presentable.

Campers must register their name, address, car make and number, length
of stay and location in camp ground (post and section number) on the
registration book at entrance to each camp ground. This is important in
case of emergency messages.


             HOTELS, LODGES, HOUSEKEEPING CABINS, AND CAMPS

The following list of accommodations is a brief summary of rooms,
cabins, and tents available in Yosemite. These are operated by the
Yosemite Park and Curry Co., which is under contract with the Government
to supply these services and accommodations in the park. For
reservations and information apply to the Yosemite Park and Curry Co.,
at Yosemite National Park, Calif., or at 39 Geary Street, San Francisco,
Calif., and 540 West Sixth Street, Los Angeles, Calif.

Important Notice.—The closing of schools in California always brings a
rush of visitors to the park immediately after June 15 and from that
date to July 25 prospective visitors to the park (except those
contemplating camping with their own outfits in the free public camping
grounds) should in all cases apply in advance for reservations. Advance
reservations for the period between December 28 and January 1 will not
be made for less than 4 days.

Rates authorized herein are subject to change without notice on approval
by the Director of the National Park Service. Authorized changes in
rates will be posted for public information in the park.

All the rates of the authorized public utilities within the park are
approved by the Government. Employees of the hotels, camps, and
transportation lines are not Government employees, they are employed by
the Yosemite Park and Curry Co.

Any suggestions regarding service furnished by these public utilities
should be made to the superintendent.

The Ahwahnee.—In Yosemite Valley. American plan. Open all year.
Commanding all major Yosemite Valley views, The Ahwahnee is one of the
most distinctive resort hotels. Complete informality prevails. All rooms
have outside view and private bath. The spacious grounds include a
native wildflower garden, a mashie golf course alongside the Merced
River, tennis courts, archery, badminton, children’s playground. Basic
rates, including meals, are $10 and $12 per person daily.

    [Illustration: The Ahwahnee offers fine living in a favored
    setting.]

Camp Curry.—In Yosemite Valley. American and European plan. Open
approximately May to September. Camp Curry is a complete community
center. Accommodations are in bungalows with bath, cabins without bath,
and completely furnished tents. The dining room seats 700 guests; the
cafeteria 350. European plan, in tents only, $1.50 to $2.50 per person
daily; American plan, $4 to $8.50 per person daily—less discounts.

Yosemite Lodge.—In Yosemite Valley. European plan. Open all year. A
colony of redwood cabins with and without bath set among pines and
cedars near the Merced River. The main building has an excellent
cafeteria. Rates, $2.25 to $5 per person daily—less discounts.

Glacier Point Hotel.—On the Valley rim. European plan. Open
approximately June to September. The main building has accommodations
for 150 guests in rooms with or without bath and meals are served in the
cafeteria. (During winter months when Glacier Point is accessible only
by trail, the Annex is available as a headquarters for skiing parties.)
Rates, $2 to $5 per person daily—less discounts.

Wawona Hotel.—Twenty-seven miles from Yosemite Valley, near the Mariposa
Grove of Big Trees. American and European plans. Open approximately May
to October. A charming vacation place with one of the finest mountain
golf courses in the West; headquarters for fishing and camping trips.
Rates, $1.25 to $4.50 per person daily, European plan; $4.25 to $9
American plan—less discounts.

Big Trees Lodge.—In the Mariposa Grove of Big Trees, 35 miles from
Yosemite Valley. European plan. Open approximately June to September. A
new building of unusual charm and comfort with accommodations for 24
guests. Four bedrooms have private bath; all have hot and cold running
water. The cafeteria has an outdoor terrace. Rates, $2.50 to $5 per
person daily—less discounts.

Tuolumne Meadows Lodge.—On Tioga Pass Road in the heart of Yosemite
Park, 68 miles from Yosemite Valley. American plan. Open approximately
July to September. A trail and fishing center and headquarters for pack
trip parties. Accommodations are in canvas cabins with lounge and dining
room in central canvas building. Rates, $5 and $6 per person daily—less
discounts.

High Sierra Camps.—An average of about 10 miles apart along High Sierra
trails. Comfortable, camp-style accommodations for saddle and hiking
parties. Open approximately July and August. Basic rates are $1 a night
and $1 a meal.

Housekeeping Cabins.—At Yosemite Lodge, open all year.

  Completely furnished               Daily, 1     Daily, 3     Per week
                                   or 2 days       or more
                                                     days
  One person in cabin                     $3        $2.25           $14
  Each additional person                   1          .75             4

Additional charge for wood is 50 cents per bundle. Cabins are furnished
with wood stoves, complete housekeeping equipment including bedding
linen, cooking utensils, and silverware. Electrically lighted cabins.

Housekeeping Cabins and Tents, partially furnished (with cots,
mattresses, tables, chairs, and stove).

  Cabins or tent with floor:          Per day
     For 1 or 2 persons                 $1.50
     For each additional person           .25
  Extra equipment:
     Blankets                             .25
     Linen and pillows                    .25
     Cooking and table                    .25
  equipment
  A charge of 50 cents per
  bundle is made for wood.

All kinds of camping equipment are available for rental to all campers;
ask for rental price list.

Yosemite Housekeeping Camp.—Open May 7 until September 5.

Regular outfits, comprising tents fully furnished except for linen
(sheets, pillow slips, and towels) are available at the following rates,
by the week only:

                                    1 person    2 persons          Each
                                                             additional
                                                                 person
  Tent with floor:
     First week                        $8.50       $11.50         $2.00
     Each succeeding week               6.00         8.50          1.50
  Tent with floor and fly:
     First week                                     12.50          2.00
     Each succeeding week                            9.00          1.50
  Linen may be rented extra.

Camp Curry Housekeeping Section.—A section of Camp Curry is devoted to
tents arranged and equipped for housekeeping. The tents are permanently
erected on frames with board floors and electric lights. A tent fly or
awning stretched in front of the sleeping tent makes a combination
outdoor living room, dining room, and kitchen.

Bed linen and one dozen assorted towels, together with laundering of the
same, is included in rental.

                                    1 person    2 persons          Each
                                                             additional
                                                                 person
  First week                          $10.50          $17         $3.50
  Each succeeding week                  8.50           15          3.00


                     YOSEMITE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM

The Yosemite Transportation System, of the Yosemite Park & Curry Co.,
operates automobile transportation service connecting with railroad and
stage lines at Merced, Fresno, Tahoe, and El Portal, and covering all
points of interest reached by automobile roads in Yosemite National
Park, and between Yosemite Valley and Lake Tahoe by way of the “Tioga
Pass route.”

For rates, time schedules, and reservations apply at Camp Curry, The
Ahwahnee, or Yosemite Lodge transportation offices.


                              STAGE TRIPS

Merced to Yosemite Valley, $7.25 one way; $10.25 round trip. Yosemite
Valley to Tuolumne Meadows, $7.50 one way. Yosemite Valley to Lake
Tahoe, $25 one way.

Mirror Lake.—A short drive to view the reflections, 50 cents.

See the Bears.—A short drive in the evening to see Yosemite’s bears
feeding under a spotlight, 50 cents.

Valley tour.—A 2-hour, 20-mile drive with lecturing escort passing all
points of interest on the Valley floor. Leaves daily, $2.

Glacier Point.—A round trip to Glacier Point on the rim of the Valley,
from which a superb panorama of the Valley and the High Sierra is
obtained (1 day), $5.

Mariposa Grove of Big Trees.—A memorable 1-day motor trip to this large
grove which has many trees whose age has been estimated at 4,000 years.
The Y. T. S. stage drives through the famous Wawona tunnel tree, $7.50.

Big Trees and Glacier Point.—Combining both the above trips with
overnight stop at comfortable Glacier Point Hotel, $11.

Hetch Hetchy Dam and Valley.—A delightful 1-day trip to San Francisco’s
gigantic water-supply project in the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne River,
via Tuolumne Grove of Big Trees and interesting High Sierra country.
Take box lunch, $7.50.


                           1-DAY SADDLE TRIPS

 Points of        Elevation   Miles,  Description (distances        Rate
 interest             above    round  are from and to foot of        per
                    Valley     trip   trails)                     person
 Glacier             3,254       13   Via Vernal and Nevada           $5
 Point                                Falls, offering superb
                                      view of Valley and High
                                      Sierra
 Eagle Peak          3,813       12   Past top of Yosemite             5
                                      Fall, through mountain
                                      meadows and interesting
                                      High Sierra country
 Half Dome           4,892       16   Via Vernal and Nevada            5
                                      Falls to most
                                      interesting peak in the
                                      Valley. The dome may be
                                      climbed. Wear tennis
                                      shoes
 Clouds’ Rest        5,964       20   The highest peak                 5
                                      visible from the Valley
                                      affords fine views
 North Dome          3,561       20   Past top of Yosemite             5
                                      Fall, Yosemite Point,
                                      Tenaya Zigzags
 Vernal Fall         1,084        5   A delightful half-day            3
 (top)                                trip
 Yosemite            1,135        4   Another favorite                 3
 Fall                                 half-day short ride to
                                      the base of the upper
                                      Fall


                       3- AND 6-DAY SADDLE TRIPS

All-expense saddle trips (including saddle animal, guide meals, lodging,
box lunches) to High Sierra camps start at $19.50. For full information,
see “High Sierra Vacations” folder.

The 6-day High Sierra all-expense saddle trip leaves Valley every Monday
morning during the season regardless of number in party and any day when
a minimum party of five secures free guide service.

Pack Trip.—Ask for rates and “High Sierra Vacations” folder. Saddle and
pack horses may be rented at Tuolumne Meadows, Mather, Wawona, and in
Yosemite Valley.


                           VALLEY FLOOR RIDES

Yosemite.—Twenty-five miles of oiled bridle paths. Guide not necessary.
Rates, half day. Forenoon, $2.50; afternoon, $2; full day, $4.

Wawona.—Trails on floor of Wawona Valley. Guide not necessary. Rates,
half day, $2; full day, $3.


                         STORES AND NEWS STANDS

A general store and meat market is operated in the old Yosemite Village
by the Yosemite Park & Curry Co. In this general store a complete line
of groceries, meats, clothing, drugs, and campers’ supplies of all kinds
is available. This company also operates a store at Wawona and at
Tuolumne Meadows, where food supplies are sold in summer.

At Camp Curry there is a grocery and provision store, where a full line
of groceries, meats, food supplies, and fishing tackle is carried during
the summer season.

Mrs. John Degnan operates a grocery store, bakery, delicatessen, lunch
room, and soda fountain in the old Yosemite Village. Soda fountains are
also operated at Yosemite Lodge, Camp Curry, and the Ahwahnee Hotel.
Refreshment stands are maintained at the general store, housekeeping
headquarters, and Happy Isles. Meals and light lunches are served during
the summer at the village store.

In all of the hotels, lodges, and camps there are newsstands at which
curios, post cards, photographs, souvenirs, newspapers, magazines,
tobacco, smokers’ supplies, etc., are available.


                          PHOTOGRAPHIC SERVICE

A wide and attractive selection of Yosemite views is to be found in the
studios of the following four park operators:

Best Studio, located in the New Village, is open the year round and
offers complete photographic developing and printing service, in
addition to a choice of Yosemite views, and a large supply of small
moving-picture film and equipment. H. C. Best is an artist of note and
welcomes visitors to his gallery to inspect his paintings of Yosemite.

Boysen Studio is situated in the New Village and is open throughout the
year. J. T. Boysen, the proprietor, is one of the pioneer photographers
of Yosemite and displays a splendid collection of park pictures, in
addition to developing and printing visitors’ films.

Foley’s Studio is located in the New Village. D. J. Foley, the
proprietor, was one of the first photographers to establish in the park.
He has an excellent selection of Yosemite views for sale, both colored
and uncolored. This studio also does developing and printing.

Yosemite Park & Curry Co. maintains studios in the New Village, Camp
Curry, Yosemite Lodge, Glacier Point, the Ahwahnee Hotel, general store,
and Big Trees Lodge. Photographic supplies can also be purchased at the
various other units of the Yosemite Park & Curry Co. Their studios also
display a choice collection of the water-color paintings of the noted
Swedish artist, Gunnar Widforss, in addition to photographic studies by
several well-known photographers. All of the Yosemite Park & Curry Co.
branches carry the small moving-picture film and the studios have a
complete supply of 16-millimeter equipment.


                               LAUNDRIES

Adequate laundry and cleaning and pressing facilities are available to
all in Yosemite. Convenient points for pick-up and delivery of laundry
are to be found at Camp Curry, Yosemite Lodge, the Ahwahnee, the general
store in the Old Village, and the Yosemite housekeeping headquarters.


                              BARBER SHOPS

Barber shops are operated in the Old Village, Camp Curry, Yosemite
Lodge, and the Ahwahnee. Beauty parlors are operated at Camp Curry,
Yosemite Lodge, and the Ahwahnee during the summer season.


                             GARAGE SERVICE

The Yosemite Park & Curry Co. operates a storage garage and a completely
equipped repair shop with modern machinery and skilled mechanics at Camp
Curry in summer and the Yosemite Transportation System garage throughout
the remainder of the year. A stock of standard automobile parts and
accessories, tires, tubes, etc., is carried at this garage.

Gasoline and oil stations are located at Camp Curry, Yosemite Lodge, at
the Yosemite Transportation System garage near the Yosemite housekeeping
headquarters, at Chinquapin and Wawona on the Wawona Road, and at Carl
Inn, Aspen Valley, White Wolf, and Tuolumne Meadows on the Tioga Road.


                         CHILDREN’S PLAYGROUND

A playground for children is maintained at Camp Curry. It is equipped
with swings, slides, sand piles, and the like, and is supervised by a
competent attendant trained in kindergarten and playground work.
Children may be left in her charge during the absence of parents on
sight-seeing trips or hikes.

    [Illustration: Deer find refuge in the park.]


                             POSTAL SERVICE

The main post office is in the Yosemite New Village and the postal
address is “Yosemite National Park, Calif.” Branch post offices are
maintained during the summer season at Camp Curry and Yosemite Lodge and
these branch post offices bear the names of these places. Mail for
guests of Camp Curry should be addressed to “Camp Curry, Calif.” Mail
for guests of hotels or lodges of the Yosemite Park & Curry Co., other
than above, should be addressed care of resort at which the guest is
staying.

During the summer season a branch post office is maintained at Wawona
and Tuolumne Meadows to handle first, second, and third class matter.
All mail for Tuolumne Meadows should be so marked and sent to Yosemite,
Calif. Mail for Wawona should be addressed to Wawona, Calif.


                            EXPRESS SERVICE

Express service is available in the general store, Old Yosemite Village,
and packages should be addressed “Care of Yosemite National Park,
Calif., via El Portal.”


                    TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH SERVICE

Local and long-distance telephone and telegraph service is maintained at
the Administration Building in the New Village and at branch offices
maintained at The Ahwahnee, Camp Curry, and Yosemite Lodge. Telephonic
communications may be had to all interior hotels, camps, and lodges, and
long-distance and telegraph messages may be sent from interior points
and delivered by telephone to such points. Money transfers are handled
at the main office in the Administration Building.


                      MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL SERVICE

The Government owns, and operates under contract, a modern hospital
building in Yosemite Valley, where medical, surgical, and dental
services are provided. A competent medical staff with attendant nurses
is in charge, and will also promptly attend patients at any place within
the park.

The hospital is well equipped with X-ray and other apparatus for
diagnosis and treatment, and an ambulance service is provided for
emergencies. Prices and character of service are regulated by the
Government.


                            CHURCH SERVICES

Both Protestant and Catholic Church services are conducted each Sunday
during the summer season. Resident representatives of both faiths
conduct the services, and speakers of State or national prominence are
often in the pulpit. Bulletins are issued giving hours and locations of
services.

An incorporation known as the Yosemite National Church, on whose board
of directors sit representatives of the Roman Catholic and Protestant
churches, has for its purpose to erect and maintain an appropriate
interdenominational chapel.




                               REFERENCES


The following list of references will be found helpful. Most of them are
available at the museum nature library.


  Badé, William F. Life and Letters of John Muir, 2 volumes. 1923 and
          1924. Houghton, Mifflin Co.
  Brewer, William H. Up and Down California in 1860-64. Yale University
          Press, 1930.
  Bunnell, Lafayette Houghton. Discovery of the Yosemite; and the Indian
          War of 1851. 349 pp. Historical and descriptive.
  Chase, J. S. Yosemite Trails; Camp and Pack Train in the Yosemite
          Region of the Sierra Nevada. 1911. 354 pp., illustrated.
  Clark, Galen. Indians of the Yosemite Valley. 1904. 110 pp.,
          illustrated.
  —— The Yosemite Valley. 1910. 108 pp. General description and notes on
          flora.
  —— The Big Trees of California. 1907. 104 pp., illustrated.
  Foley, D. J. Yosemite Souvenir and Guide. 1911. 133 pp.
  Frothingham, Robert. Trails Through the Golden West, Robert M. McBride
          & Co., New York. 272 pp.
  Gordon-Cumming, C. F. Granite Crags. 1884. 373 pp., illustrated.
  Hittell, Theo. H. The Adventures of James Capan Adams, Mountaineer and
          Grizzly Bear Hunter of California. 373 pp., illustrated. Chas.
          Scribner’s Sons.
  Hutchings, J. M. In the Heart of the Sierras. 1886. 496 pp.,
          illustrated. Historical and descriptive.
  Jepson, W. L. The Silva of California: Memoirs of the University of
          California, vol. 2, 1910. 480 pp., illustrated.
  —— The Trees of California. 1923. 240 pp., illustrated.
  Kelley, Edgemond, and Chick. Three Scout Naturalists in the National
          Parks. Brewer, Warren & Putnam. 1931.
  King, Clarence. Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada.
  Kneeland, Samuel. The Wonders of the Yosemite Valley. Boston. 1871-72.
  LeConte, Jos. A Journal of Rambling Through the High Sierra of
          California—1870. Sierra Club, 1930.
  Merriam, C. Hart. The Dawn of the World. Tales of the Mewan Indians of
          California. 273 pp., plates, map, and colored frontispiece.
          1910.
  Mills, Enos A. Your National Parks. 532 pp., illustrated. Houghton,
          Mifflin Co., 1917. Yosemite on pp. 65-98; 444-454.
  Muir, John. The Mountains of California, 1894. 382 pp., illustrated.
  —— Our National Parks. 1909. 382 pp., illustrated.        Yosemite on
          pp. 76-267; Sequoia and General Grant on pp. 268-330;
          Yellowstone on pp. 37-75; Wild Parks of the West, pp. 1-36.
  —— My First Summer in the Sierra. 1911. 354 pp. Descriptive of
          Yosemite and Tuolumne region.
  —— The Yosemite. 1912. 284 pp., illustrated.
  —— Steep Trails. Houghton, Mifflin Co., 1918.
  Sierra Club Bulletin. Published by the Sierra Club, San Francisco.
  Smith, Bertha H. Yosemite Legends. 1904. 64 pp.
  Whitney, Josiah Dwight. The Yosemite Guide Book. Published by the
          California State Geological Survey. 1869, 1870, 1872, 1874.
  Williams, John H. Yosemite and its High Sierra. 1921. 194 pp.
  Yard, Robert Sterling. The Top of the Continent. 1917. 244 pp.,
          illustrated. Yosemite on pp. 161-187.
  —— The Book of the National Parks. 1926. 444 pp., 74 illustrations, 14
          maps and diagrams. Yosemite on pp. 36-68.




                    PUBLICATIONS FOR SALE AT MUSEUM


The following publications are in such popular demand by park visitors
for reference that they have been placed on sale at the Yosemite Museum,
through the cooperation of the Yosemite Natural History Association.


  Animal Life in Yosemite, Grinnell, Joseph, and Storer, Tracy I. An
          account of the mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians in a
          cross section of the Sierra Nevada. University of California
          Press, Berkeley, Calif. 1924. Illustrated. Price, $5.
  A Yosemite Flora, 1912. Hall, H. M. and C. C. 282 pages. A descriptive
          account of the ferns and flowering plants, including the
          trees, with keys for identification. Price, $2.
  Big Trees, Fry, Walter, and White, John R. A descriptive account of
          the Big Trees of California. 1930. Illustrated. Price, $1.
  Birds of the Pacific States, Hoffmann, Ralph. Field identification of
          some 400 birds. Illustrated. 1927. Price, $5.
  Birds of Yosemite Valley. Description of 37 common nesting birds.
          Special number Yosemite Nature Notes. Price, $0.25.
  Flowers of Coast and Sierra, Clements, Edith S. With 32 plates in
          color. Descriptions of flowers and plant families for average
          nature lover. 1928. 226 pp. Price, $3.
  Forests of Yosemite, Sequoia, and General Grant National Parks, Price,
          $0.10
  Geologic History of Yosemite Valley, Matthes, Francois E.
  Geological Survey Map of Yosemite National Park. Price, 25 cents.
  Geological Survey Map of Yosemite Valley. Price, 10 cents.
  Handbook of Yosemite, Hall, Ansel F. A compendium of articles on
          history, geology, flora, fauna, etc., by scientific
          authorities. Illustrated. 1921. 347 pp. Price, $1.25.
  Lights and Shadows of Yosemite, Taylor, Katherine Ames. San Francisco.
          1926. Price, $1.50.
  National Parks Portfolio, cloth bound with more than 300 fine
          illustrations of the national parks. Price, $1.50.
  “Oh, Ranger!” Albright, Horace M., and Taylor, Frank J. A book about
          the national parks. Price, $2.
  100 Years in Yosemite, Russell, Carl P. Price, $3.50.
  Our National Parks, John Muir. 1909. 382 pp. Illustrated. Yosemite on
          pp. 76-267; Sequoia and General Grant on pp. 268-330;
          Yellowstone on pp. 37-75; Wild Parks of the West, pp. 1-36.
          Price, $3.50.
  Outdoor Heritage, Bryant, Harold Child. Covers many phases of natural
          history of California. Chapters on Yosemite. 465 pp.,
          illustrated. 1929. Price, $1.75.
  Place Names of the High Sierra, Farquhar, Francis P. A record of the
          origin and significance of names in the Yosemite region,
          especially Sierra Club. 1926. 128 pp. Price, $2.
  Rambling Through the High Sierra, LeConte, Jos. Price, $2.
  Songs of Yosemite, Symmes, Harold, with paintings by Gunnar Widforss.
          Twelve poems in unique binding. 1923. 44 pp. Price, $1.
  Yosemite Trip Book, Taylor, Frank J. 61 pp., illustrated. H. S.
          Crocker Co. (Inc.), San Francisco, 1927. Price, $0.50.
  Yosemite Valley, an Intimate Guide, Hall, Ansel F. Account of history,
          Indians, geology, tours to points of special interest. 80 pp.,
          illustrated. Price, $0.50.
  Yosemite Nature Notes, published monthly by Yosemite National Park.
          Observations and happenings in Yosemite National Park.
          Distributed monthly to members of Yosemite Natural History
          Association. Membership, $1.


             [Illustration: MAP OF YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK]




                        GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS


Glimpses of Our National Parks. An illustrated booklet of 92 pages.
Address the Director, National Park Service. Washington, D. C. Free.

Recreational Map. Shows both Federal and State reservations with
recreational opportunities throughout the United States. Brief
descriptions of principal ones. Director, National Park Service,
Washington, D. C. Free.

National Parks Portfolio. By Robert Sterling Yard. Cloth bound and
illustrated with more than 300 beautiful photographs of the national
parks. Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C. $1.50 Do not send
stamps.

Fauna of the National Parks. G. M. Wright, J. S. Dixon, and B. H.
Thompson. Survey of wildlife conditions in the national parks. 157
pages, illustrated. Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C. 20
cents.

The Secret of the Big Trees. By Ellsworth Huntington. Illustrated; 24
pages. Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C. 5 cents.

Forests of Yosemite, Sequoia, and General Grant National Parks. By C. L.
Hill. Illustrated; 40 pages. 10 cents.

Map of Yosemite National Park. 28½ by 27 inches, scale 2 miles to the
inch. U. S. Geological Survey, Washington, D. C. 25 cents.

Map of Yosemite Valley. 35 by 15½ inches, scale 2,000 feet to the inch.
U. S. Geological Survey. 10 cents.

Booklets about the national parks listed below may be obtained free of
charge by writing the Director, National Park Service, Washington, D. C.


  Acadia National Park, Maine.
  Carlsbad Caverns National Park, N. Mex.
  Crater Lake National Park, Oreg.
  General Grant National Park, Calif.
  Glacier National Park, Mont.
  Grand Canyon National Park, Ariz.
  Grand Teton National Park, Wyo.
  Great Smoky Mountains National Park, N. C.—Tenn.
  Hawaii National Park, Hawaii.
  Hot Springs National Park, Ark.
  Lassen Volcanic National Park, Calif.
  Mesa Verde National Park, Colo.
  Mount McKinley National Park, Alaska.
  Mount Rainier National Park, Wash.
  Platt National Park, Okla.
  Rocky Mountain National Park, Colo.
  Sequoia National Park, Calif.
  Wind Cave National Park, S. Dak.
  Yellowstone National Park, Wyo.—Mont.—Idaho.
  Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks, Utah.


  [Illustration: LOCATIONS OF 24 NATIONAL PARKS, 1 NATIONAL HISTORICAL
PARK, 11 NATIONAL MILITARY PARKS, 68 NATIONAL MONUMENTS, 10 BATTLEFIELD
      SITES, 11 NATIONAL CEMETERIES, AND 4 MISCELLANEOUS MEMORIALS
              ADMINISTERED BY THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE.]




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Apparent typographical errors were corrected.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, CALIFORNIA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


