The Project Gutenberg eBook of Doily Bouquet
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Doily Bouquet

Creator: American Thread Company

Release date: August 15, 2021 [eBook #66065]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: American Thread Company, 1950

Credits: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOILY BOUQUET ***

STAR BOOK No. 71




                             Doily Bouquet


                                                                10 CENTS

                            Printed in USA.
                 Copyright 1950 American Thread Company




                            _Basic Centers_


                                 For

                       Grape Doily     —Page 5
                       Violet Doily    —Page 6
                       Butterfly Doily —Page 9
                       Holly Doily     —Page 13

  Here is the very newest, the very smartest scheme for delightful table
  settings. A set of doilies with identical centers in different gay
  flower borders that will add a decorator’s touch to your luncheon
  table. We have designed the above four doilies with just that idea in
  mind. All four designs fit either of the two basic centers.

  TABLE ENSEMBLE SUGGESTIONS: Why not make the other doilies in this
  book for a service of eight, all in White and bright flower colors?


                            BASIC CENTER #1

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

With White ch 12, join to form a ring, ch 4, work 3 tr c in ring keeping
last loop of each tr c on hook, thread over and work off all loops at
one time, * ch 6, 4 d c in ring, keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
thread over and work off all loops at one time (d c cluster st), ch 6, 4
tr c in ring, keeping last loop of each tr c on hook, thread over and
work off all loops at one time (4 tr c cluster st), repeat from * twice,
ch 6, d c cluster st in ring, ch 2, tr c in 1st cluster st (this brings
thread in position for next row).

2nd Row—3 s c over tr c, * ch 7, 3 s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 3, d c in tr c.

3rd Row—* Ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around.

4th Row—Over next loop work 3 s c, * ch 3, 3 s c, repeat from * twice,
repeat from beginning all around, join.

5th Row—Ch 5, skip 1 ch 3 loop, 3-3 tr c cluster sts with ch 5 between
each cluster st in next loop, ch 5, skip 5 s c, s c in space between
next 2 s c, repeat from beginning all around in same manner ending row
after last cluster st with d tr c (3 times over needle) in joining.

6th Row—Ch 4, ** tr c in next cluster st, * ch 7, s c in next loop,
repeat from * once, ch 7, tr c in next cluster st, repeat from ** 6
times, tr c in next cluster st, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from *
once, ch 3, tr c in tr c.

7th Row—Ch 3, s c over tr c, * ch 9, s c, ch 3, s c in next loop, repeat
from * all around ending row with ch 4, tr tr c (4 times over needle) in
tr c.

8th and 9th Rows—Ch 3, s c over same loop, * ch 9, s c, ch 3, s c in
next large loop, repeat from * all around ending each row with ch 4, tr
tr c in tr tr c.

10th Row—Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around
ending row with sl st in tr tr c.

11th Row—Same as 4th row.

12th Row—Sl st to 1st ch 3, ch 4, 2 tr c cluster st in same space, * ch
10, skip 1 ch 3 loop, 1-3 tr c cluster st in each of the next 2 ch 3
loops with ch 1 between, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 10,
3 tr c cluster st in last ch 3 loop, ch 1, join in 1st cluster st.

13th Row—Ch 4, 2 tr c cluster st in same space, * ch 6, s c, ch 3, s c
in next loop, ch 6, 1-3 tr c cluster st in ch 1 between next 2 cluster
sts, repeat from * all around in same manner ending row with ch 3, tr c
in 1st cluster st.

14th Row—Work in same manner as 8th row ending row with ch 4, tr tr c in
tr c.

15th Row—Same as last row ending row with ch 4, tr tr c in tr tr c.

16th Row—Ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around ending
row with sl st in tr tr c (48 loops).


                            BASIC CENTER #2

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

With White ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 3 and work 9 d c in ring, join
in 3rd st of ch.

2nd Row—* Ch 7, s c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 2, d tr c in same space as beginning (this brings thread in
position for next row).

3rd Row—Ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c
(shell) in next loop, repeat from * all around, join.

4th Row—* Ch 5, s c in center of next shell, ch 5, s c between shells,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 2, d c in same space as
beginning.

5th Row—* Ch 5, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 2, d c in d c.

6th Row—Same as 3rd row.

7th Row—Same as 4th row.

8th and 9th Rows—Same as 5th row.

10th Row—Ch 6, d c in same space, * ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, 1 d c,
ch 3, 1 d c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 3,
s c in next loop, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

11th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * ch 4, s c in next
s c, ch 4, skip 1 loop, 3 d c in next loop, repeat from * all around
ending row with ch 4, s c in next s c, ch 4, join.

12th Row—Ch 3, d c in same space, 1 d c in next d c, 2 d c in next d c,
* ch 4, s c in next sc, ch 4, 2 d c in next d c, 1 d c in next d c, 2 d
c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 4, s c in
next s c, ch 4, join.

13th Row—Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 5, s c in next 5 c,
ch 5, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, repeat from * all around ending
row with ch 5, s c in next s c, ch 5, join.

14th Row—Sl st to center d c of group, ch 6, d c in same space, * ch 5,
cluster st in next s c (cluster st: 3 d c in same space keeping last
loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one
time), ch 5, 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c (shell) in center d c of next d c group,
repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, ch 5, join in 3rd st
of ch.

15th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 3 (counts as part of 1st cluster st)
cluster st in same space, * ch 5, 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in next cluster st,
ch 5, cluster st in center of next shell, repeat from * all around
ending row to correspond, ch 5, join.

16th Row—Ch 6, d c in same space, * ch 5, cluster st in center of next
shell, ch 5, shell in next cluster st, repeat from * all around ending
row to correspond, ch 5, join.

17th Row—Same as 15th row but working 6 chs in each loop before and
after each cluster st.

18th Row—Same as 16th row but having 6 chs in each loop before and after
each cluster st.

19th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 3, 4 d c in same space, ch 6, * s c in next
cluster st, ch 6, 5 d c in center of next shell, ch 6, repeat from * all
around ending row to correspond.

20th Row—Ch 3, d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, 2 d c
in next d c, * ch 6, sl st in next s c, ch 3, sl st in same space for
picot, ch 6, 2 d c in next d c, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, 2 d c
in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, join.




                            SPIDER WEB DOILY


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

This doily may be made with any of the American Thread Company products
listed below:

         Material                Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball White           11 Inches     Steel 12
 Article 35, Size 30 or 50
            or
 “PURITAN” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball White           13 ”               ” 7
 Article 40
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball White           13 ”               ” 7
 Article 346
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls White          9 ”               ” 13
 Article 25
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball White           11 ”              ” 12
 Article 20, Size 30 or 50
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     2 Balls White          11 ”              ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30 or 50
            or
 “STAR” Pearl Cotton       3 Balls White          13 ”               ” 7
 Article 90, Size 5
            or
 “SILLATEEN SANSIL”        2 Balls White          12 ”              ” 10
 Article 102

Ch 2, 8 s c in 2nd st from hook, join in 1st s c.

2nd Row—Ch 1 and work 2 s c in each s c (16 s c), join.

3rd Row—Working in s c increase in every other s c, join.

4th Row—Increase in every 3rd s c, join.

5th Row—Increase in every 4th s c (40 s c), join.

6th Row—Ch 5, d c in same space, * skip 1 s c, 1 d c, ch 2, 1 d c
(shell) in next s c, repeat from * all around ending row with skip 1 s
c, join in 3rd st of ch.

7th Row—Sl st into shell, ch 5, d c in same space, * 1 d c, ch 2, 1 d c
(shell) in center of next shell, repeat from * all around, join in 3rd
st of ch.

8th Row—Sl st into shell, ch 7 and work same as last row but working 1 d
c, ch 4, 1 d c in center of each shell.

9th Row—Sl st into shell, ch 8 and work same as last row but working 1 d
c, ch 5, 1 d c in center of each shell.

10th Row—* Ch 6, s c in center of next shell, ch 6, s c between next 2 d
c, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 3, d c in same space as
beginning (this brings thread in position for next row).

11th, 12th, 13th and 14th Rows—Work ch 6 loops all around ending each
row with ch 3, d c in d c (40 loops in each row).

15th Row—Ch 9, 3 s c in next loop, * ch 5, tr c in next loop, ch 5, 3 s
c in next loop, repeat from * all around, ch 5, join in 4th st of ch.

16th Row—Ch 1, s c in same space, * s c in 1st st of ch of next loop, ch
5, tr c in center s c of next s c group, ch 5, 1 s c in last st of ch of
next loop, 1 s c in tr c, repeat from * all around ending row with s c
in 1st st of ch of next loop, ch 5, tr c in center s c of next s c
group, ch 5, s c in last st of ch of next loop, join.

17th Row—Ch 1, s c in same space, 1 s c in next s c, * ch 6, tr c in
next tr c, ch 6, 1 s c in each of the next 3 s c, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 6, tr c in tr c, ch 6, s c in next s c, join
in 1st s c.

18th Row—Ch 11, * 1 s c in last st of ch of next loop, 1 sc in tr c, 1
sc in 1st st of ch of next loop, ch 7, tr c in center s c of next s c
group, ch 7, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, join in
4th st of ch.

19th Row—Ch 11, * 1 s c in each of the next 3 s c, ch 7, tr c in next tr
c, ch 7, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, join in 4th
st of ch.

20th Row—Same as 16th row but having 8 chs in each loop.

21st Row—Same as 17th row but having 8 chs in each loop.

22nd Row—Ch 12 and work same as 18th row but having 8 chs in each loop.

23rd Row—Ch 13 and work same as 19th row having 9 chs in each loop.

24th Row—Same as 16th row but having 9 chs in each loop.

25th Row—Same as 17th row but having 10 chs in each loop.

26th Row—Ch 14 and work same as 18th row but having 10 chs in each loop.

                                                   Continued from Page 7

27th Row—Ch 7, tr c in same space, * ch 10, 1 s c in each of the next 3
s c, ch 10, tr c in next tr c, ch 10, 1 s c in each of the next 3 s c,
ch 10, 1 tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next tr c, repeat from * all around
ending row with ch 10, 1 s c in each of the next 3 s c, ch 10, tr c in
next tr c, ch 10, 1 s c in each of the next 3 s c, ch 10, join in 4th st
of ch.

28th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 4, 11 tr c in same loop, * ch 8, 1 tr c in
center s c of next s c group, ch 8, s c in last st of ch of next loop, s
c in next tr c, s c in 1st st of ch of next loop, ch 8, tr c in center s
c of next s c group, ch 8, skip 1 loop, 12 tr c in next loop, repeat
from * all around ending row to correspond, join.

29th Row—Ch 4, ** tr c in next tr c, * ch 3, 1 tr c in each of the next
2 tr c, repeat from * 4 times, ch 9, tr c in next tr c, ch 9, 1 s c in
each of the next 3 s c, ch 9, tr c in next tr c, ch 9, 1 tr c in next tr
c, repeat from ** all around ending row to correspond, join.

30th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 11, s c in next loop, * ch 7, tr c in next
loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, tr c in next loop, ch 8, 1 s c in
last st of ch of next loop, s c in next tr c, s c in 1st st of ch of
next loop, ch 8, tr c in center s c of next s c group, ch 8, s c in last
st of ch of next loop, s c in next tr c, s c in 1st st of ch of next
loop, ch 8, skip 1 loop, tr c in next ch 3 loop, ch 7, s c in next loop,
repeat from * all around ending row to correspond and joining last ch 8
loop in 4th st of ch.

31st Row—Ch 1, s c in same space, 1 s c in 1st st of ch of next loop, **
ch 7, tr c in next s c, ch 7, s c in last st of ch of next loop, s c in
next tr c, s c in 1st st of ch of next loop, repeat from * once, * ch 8,
tr c in center s c of next s c group, ch 8, s c in last st of ch of next
loop, s c in next tr c, s c in 1st st of ch of next loop, repeat from *
once, repeat from ** all around in same manner ending row to correspond,
join.

32nd Row—Ch 12, * s c in last st of ch of next loop, s c in tr c, s c in
1st st of next loop, ch 8, tr c in center s c of next s c group, ch 8,
repeat from * all around ending row to correspond and joining last ch 8
in 4th st of ch 12.

33rd Row—Sl st to center of loop, * ch 9, sl st in 4th st from hook for
picot, ch s, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around, join, break
thread.




                           ROSE RUFFLE DOILY


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

This doily may be made with any of the American Thread Company products
listed below:

         Material                Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball White           9 Inches      Steel 12
 Article 35, Size 30       1 Ball Light Pink
                           1 Ball Dark Pink
                           1 Ball Nile Green
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls White          7 ”               ” 13
 Article 25                2 Balls Light Pink
                           1 Ball Dark Pink
                           1 Ball Nile Green
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball White           9 ”               ” 12
 Article 20, Size 30       1 Ball Light Pink
                           1 Ball Dark Pink
                           1 Ball Nile Green
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     2 Balls White          9 ”               ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30       2 Balls Light Pink
                           1 Ball Dark Pink
                           1 Ball Nile Green

ROSE—With Dark Pink ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 6, d c in ring, * ch
3, d c in ring, repeat from * twice, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

2nd Row—1 s c, 5 d c, 1 s c over each ch 3 loop, join.

3rd Row—* Ch 5, s c between next 2 petals in back of work, repeat from *
4 times.

4th Row—Ch 1 and over each loop work 1 s c, 7 d c, 1 s c, join.

5th Row—* Ch 6, s c in back of work between next 2 petals, repeat from *
4 times.

6th Row—Ch 1 and over each loop work 1 s c, 9 d c, 1 s c, join, break
thread.

7th Row—Attach Green in same space, * ch 7, s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s
d c in each of the next 2 sts of ch (s d c: thread over hook, insert in
st, pull through, thread over and pull through all loops at one time), 1
d c in each of the next 3 sts of ch, s c in same space between petals,
ch 6, s c in back of work between next 2 petals, repeat from * all
around (5 leaves) ch 6, join.

8th Row—Work 5 s c up side of next leaf, 3 s c in point of leaf, 5 s c
down other side of same leaf, 8 s c over next ch 6 loop, repeat from
beginning 4 times, break thread.

                                                   Continued from Page 7

9th Row—Start Petal: Attach Light Pink in 1st s c of the 8 s c group
between leaves, ch 3, d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 2 s
c, 2 d c in each of the next 2 s c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 s c, 2 d
c in next s c, ch 3, turn.

10th Row—2 d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 10 d c, 3 d c in
3rd st of ch, ch 3, turn.

11th Row—Working in d c, increase 1 d c at each end and in each of the 2
center sts, ch 3 to turn each row (20 d c).

12th Row—Increase 1 d c at beginning and end of row (22 d c).

13th Row—Same as 11th row having 26 d c in row.

14th Row—Same as 12th row (28 d c).

15th Row—Increase 1 d c at each end and increase 1 d c in each of the 2
center sts (32 d c).

16th Row—Work even.

17th Row—Increase 1 d c at beginning and end of row. Repeat the last 2
rows once, then work 2 rows even.

22nd Row—Decrease in next 2 sts (to decrease: * thread over hook, insert
in next st, pull through and work off 2 loops, repeat from * once,
thread over and pull through all loops at one time), 1 d c in each of
the next 31 d c, decrease in next 2 sts.

23rd Row—Decrease 1 d c at beginning and end of row, ch 1, turn.

24th Row—Skip 1 d c, s c in next d c, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 d c,
1 d c in each of the next 6 d c, 1 tr c in each of the next 12 d c, 1 d
c in each of the next 6 d c, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 d c, s c in
next st, break thread.

Attach thread in 1st s c of next s c group of 8th row and work another
petal in same manner, break thread. Work 3 more petals same as last
petal, break thread.

Attach Dark Pink at base of any petal and work a row of s c around each
petal working 3 s c in top of each corner of petal, break thread.

Sew petals together from the 9th through the 16th row as illustrated.

LEAF: With Green ch 19, sl st in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in each of the
next 2 sts of ch, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 d c in each of
the next 2 sts of ch, 1 tr c in each of the next 4 sts of ch, 1 d c in
each of the next 2 sts, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 s c in each
of the next 2 sts, 1 sl st in last st of ch, ch 1 and working on other
side of ch, sl st in next st, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 s d c
in each of the next 2 sts, 1 d c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 tr c in
each of the next 4 sts, 1 d c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 s d c in each
of the next 2 sts, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 sl st in next st.

2nd Row—Ch 1, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 s d c in each of the
next 3 sts, 1 d c in each of the next 8 sts, 1 s d c in each of the next
2 sts, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 sl st in next st, ch 1, 1 s c
in each of the next 2 sts, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 d c in
each of the next 8 sts, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 sts, 1 s c in each
of the next 2 sts, sl st in each of the next 2 sts, break thread leaving
an end. Work 4 more leaves in same manner and sew in space between
petals picking up back loop of sts only and sewing to the widest part of
leaf.

RUFFLE—Attach White in center of any petal, * ch 4, skip 1 st, s c in
next st, repeat from * to within 3 sts of joining, skip 1 st, d c in
next st keeping last loop of d c on hook, skip 1 st of same petal and 1
st on side of next leaf, d c in next st keeping last loop of d c on
hook, thread over and pull through all 3 loops at one time, * ch 4, skip
1 st, s c in next st, repeat from * around leaf to within 3 sts of
joining on left hand side of leaf, skip 1 st, d c in next st keeping
last loop of d c on hook, skip 1 st on leaf and 1 st on side of next
petal, d c in next st keeping last loop of d c on hook, thread over and
pull through all loops at one time, * ch 4, skip 1 st of petal, s c in
next st, repeat from * all around in same manner working between
joinings same as on 1st leaf.

2nd Row—Sl st into loop, ch 6, s c in same loop, * ch 6, s c in next
loop, ch 6, s c in next loop, ch 6, s c in same loop, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 3, d c in sl st (this brings thread in
position for next row).

3rd Row—* Ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, d c in d c. Work 6 more rows same as last row, but ending
last row with ch 6, s c in d c and having an even number of loops in
last row, break thread.

10th Row—Attach Dark Pink in any loop, ** ch 4, cluster st in next loop
(cluster st: thread over hook, insert in space, pull through and work
off 2 loops, * thread over hook, insert in same space, pull through and
work off 2 loops, repeat from * once, thread over and pull through all
loops at one time), ch 5, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 2,
cluster st in same loop, ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from ** all
around, ch 4, join, break thread.




                              GRAPE DOILY


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

These doilies may be made with any of the American Thread Company
products listed below:

  Material for each Doily        Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball Shaded          9 Inches      Steel 12
 Article 35                Lavenders
                           1 Ball White
                           1 Ball Green
            or
 “PURITAN” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball Shaded          11 ”               ” 7
 Article 40                Lavenders
                           1 Ball White
                           1 Ball Green
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball Shaded          11 ”               ” 7
 Article 346               Lavenders
                           1 Ball White
                           1 Ball Green
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls Shaded         7 ”               ” 13
 Article 25                Lavenders
                           2 Balls White
                           2 Balls Green
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball Shaded          9 ”               ” 12
 Article 20, Size 30       Lavenders
                           1 Ball White
                           1 Ball Green
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     2 Balls Shaded         9 ”               ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30       Lavenders
                           2 Balls White
                           2 Balls Green
            or
 “STAR” Pearl Cotton       3 Balls Shaded         11 ”               ” 7
 Article 90, Size 5        Lavenders
                           2 Balls White
                           3 Balls Green
            or
 “SILLATEEN SANSIL”        2 Balls Shaded         10 ”              ” 10
 Article 102               Lavenders
                           2 Balls White
                           2 Balls Green

SMALL LEAF—With Green ch 4, 3 s c in 2nd st from hook, 5 d c in next st
of ch, 3 s c in next st, ch 1 to turn all rows.

2nd Row—Working in s c work 3 s c in 1st and last s c. Work 1 row even.

4th Row—Increase 1 s c in 1st and last s c. Work 1 row even.

                                                  Continued from Page 10

6th and 7th rows—2 s c in 1st s c, 1 s c in each remaining s c.

8th row—same as 4th row.

9th Row—2 s c in 1st s c, 1 s c in each of the next 17 s c, 2 s c in
next s c.

10th Row—3 s c in 1st s c, 1 s c in each of the next 15 s c, 2 s c in
last s c.

11th and 12th Rows—Increase 2 s c in 1st s c and 1 s c in last s c.

13th Row—3 s c in 1st s c, 1 s c in each of the next 21 s c.

14th Row—Skip 1 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 15 s c, 2 s c in next s
c.

15th Row—2 s c in 1st s c, 1 s c in each of the next 13 s c, 2 s c in
next s c.

16th Row—Increase 1 s c in 1st s c.

Next 3 Rows—Decrease 1 st in 1st and last s c (to decrease: * insert
hook in next st, pull loop through, repeat from *, thread over and work
off all loops at one time).

20th Row—Skip 1 st, decrease in next 2 sts, 1 s c in each of the next 6
s c, decrease in next 2 sts.

21st Row—Skip 1 st, decrease in next 2 sts, 1 s c in each of the next 3
s c, decrease in next 2 sts. Work 1 row even.

23rd Row—* Decrease in next 2 sts, repeat from * once.

24th Row—Decrease in 1st 2 sts, break thread. Work 3 more leaves in same
manner.

LARGE LEAF: With Green work same as 1st 19 rows of small leaf.

20th Row—Work even.

21st Row—Decrease 1 st at the beginning and end of row.

Repeat the last 2 rows twice.

26th Row—Decrease in 1st 2 sts.

27th Row—Decrease in last 2 sts. Repeat the last 2 rows.

30th Row—Decrease in 1st 2 sts, break thread. Work 3 more leaves in same
manner.

GRAPE: With Shaded Lavenders ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 8
s c in ring, join.

2nd Row—Ch 1, 2 s c in each s c. Do not join or turn this or following
rows.

3rd Row—1 s c in 1st s c, 2 s c in next s c, repeat from beginning all
around.

4th Row—Increase in every 3rd st (32 s c), join, break thread.

Work 13 more grapes in same manner always increasing and joining in last
row as illustrated. Work 3 more bunches of grapes in same manner.


IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC DOILY No. 1 SHOWN ON Page 2—With White 5 s c in
next loop, ch 1, join to 6th s c of 4th grape to right of 2nd joining
(to join: sl loop off hook, insert in st, pull loop through) ch 1, 4 s c
in same loop, * 5 s c in next loop, ch 1, join to center s c between
joinings of next grape, ch 1, 4 s c in same space, repeat from * once, 6
s c in next loop, ch 1, join to 5th s c from left of joining of next
grape, ch 1, 3 s c in same loop, 2 s c in next loop, ch 1, skip 4 s c of
same grape, join in next st, ch 1, 7 s c in same loop, 9 s c in next
loop, 7 s c in next loop, ch 1, join to 1st point on side of large leaf
as illustrated, ch 1, 2 s c in same loop, 7 s c in next loop, ch 1, join
to next point, ch 1, 2 s c in same loop, 9 s c in next loop, 7 s c in
next loop, ch 1, with 2 large points on side of small leaf to the right,
join to last st of 1st row, ch 1, 2 s c in same loop, 4 s c in next
loop, ch 1, join to last st of 3rd row, ch 1, 5 s c in same loop, 9 s c
in next loop, repeat from beginning all around, join, break thread. Sew
point of small leaf to center st of large leaf and opposite point of
same leaf to grape, sew top of large leaf to grape as illustrated.

Stem—Attach Green in same space as 1st point of large leaf, ch 2, s c in
2nd st from hook, * ch 1, s c in s c, repeat from * 8 times or until
stem is long enough to reach to 7th st to left of joining of center
grape at end, join, break thread. Attach Green in 5th st of 1st large
point of next large leaf and work a stem of 8 s c or long enough to
reach the 6th st to left of joining of center grape at end, join, break
thread. Work 2 more stems in same manner.


IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC CENTER No. 2 SHOWN ON Page 2—Work 19 rows of
basic center, ch 4, * join to 10th s c to left of 2nd joining of 4th
grape, ch 1, d c in same space on center, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d
c, ch 1, join to 5th s c to left of joining of next grape, ch 1, d c in
same space on center, ch 6, sl st in next s c, ch 3, sl st in same space
for picot, ch 6, d c in next d c, ch 1, join to 5th s c of next grape to
right of joining, ch 1, d c in same space on center, 1 d c in each of
the next 4 d c, ch 1, join to 5th s c to left of joining of next grape,
ch 1, d c in same space on center, ch 6, sl st in next s c, ch 3, sl st
in same space for picot, ch 6, 2 d c in next d c, 1 d c in each of the
next 2 d c, join to 1st large point on side of large leaf as
illustrated, d c in next d c on center, 2 d c in next d c, join to next
point of same leaf, ch 6, sl st in next s c, ch 3 picot, ch 6, 2 d c in
next d c, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, 2 d c in next d c, with 2
large points of small leaf to the left, join to 1st st of 1st row, ch 6,
sl st in next s c, ch 3 picot, ch 6, d c in next d c, ch 1, join to last
st of 4th row of same leaf, ch 1, d c in same space on center, 1 d c in
each of the next 3 d c, 2 d c in next d c, ch 6, sl st in next s c, ch 3
picot, ch 6, d c in next d c, ch 1, repeat from * all around, join,
break thread.

Sew top of large leaf to grape, sew large point of small leaf to center
st of large leaf, sew large point on opposite side of leaf to grape as
illustrated.

Stem—Attach Green in 3rd st of 1st point of large leaf, ch 2, s c in 2nd
st from hook, * ch 1, s c in s c, repeat from * 6 times, join to 3rd st
from joining of center grape, as illustrated, break thread. Work 3 more
stems.




                             VIOLET DOILIES


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

These doilies may be made with any of the American Thread Company
products listed below:

  Material for each Doily        Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball Shaded          9 inches      Steel 12
 Article 35, Size 30       Lavenders
                           1 Ball Yellow
                           1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball White
            or
 “PURITAN” Crochet Cotton  ”                      11 ”               ” 7
 Article 40
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  ”                      11 ”               ” 7
 Article 346
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     ”                      9 ”               ” 12
 Article 20, Size 30
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     ”                      9 ”               ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30
            or
 “SILLATEEN SANSIL”        ”                      10 ”              ” 10
 Article 102
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls Shaded         7 ”               ” 13
 Article 25                Lavenders
                           2 Balls White
                           1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Yellow
            or
 “STAR” Pearl Cotton       ”                      11 ”               ” 7
 Article 90, Size 5

VIOLET: With Yellow ch 6, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 10 s c in
ring, join, break thread.

2nd Row—Attach Shaded Lavenders, * 2 s c in each of the next 2 s c of
1st row, ch 1 to turn all rows.

3rd Row—1 s c in each s c.

4th Row—Increase 1 s c at beginning and end of row (6 s c). Work 1 row
even.

6th and 7th Rows—Decrease 1 s c at beginning of each row, ch 2, turn.

8th Row—1 d c in each of the next 3 s c leaving last loop of each d c on
hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time, ch 3, sl st in
base of same row, sl st in each row down side of petal, repeat from *
until there are 5 petals, join in base of 1st petal, break thread. Work
2nd violet in same manner joining tip of 1 petal to tip of any petal of
1st violet. To join: ch 2, sl st in tip of previous violet, ch 2, sl st
in same space on violet being made. Work 16 more violets joining to
petal of previous violet leaving 1 petal free at lower edge and 2 petals
free at top between joinings.

IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC CENTER No. 1 SHOWN ON Page 2—With White work a
row of 9 ch loops all around increasing in every 8th loop on center (54
loops).

Attach Green in loop, 4 s c over same loop, ch 1 and with the single
petals next to center, s c in single free petal of violet, ch 1, 4 s c
over same loop on center, * 3 s c over next loop, ch 5, sl st in 7th row
on left hand side of same petal, ch 1, skip 1 st of ch, 1 s c in each of
the next 4 sts of ch, 2 s c in same loop on center, ch 7, sl st in 7th
row of next petal of same flower to right of joining, ch 1, skip 1 st of
ch, 1 s c in each of the next 6 sts, 3 s c over same loop on center, 3 s
c over next loop, ch 7, sl st in 7th row to left of joining of next
violet, ch 1, skip 1 st of ch, 1 s c in each of the next 6 sts, 2 s c
over same loop on center, ch 5, sl st in 7th row on right hand side of
next petal of same flower, ch 1, skip 1 st of ch, 1 s c in each of the
next 4 sts, 4 s c over same loop, 4 s c over next loop, ch 1, s c in tip
of same petal, ch 1, 4 s c over same loop on center, repeat from * in
same manner until all flowers are joined.

IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC CENTER No. 2 SHOWN ON Page 2—Work violets same
as for Basic Center No. 1 but working 5 groups of 3 violets each and
using ch 1 between joinings.

Attach Green in 1st d c of any d c group on center, s c in same space, 1
s c in each of the next 3 d c, ch 4, sl st in last s c for picot, 1 s c
in each of the next 3 d c, holding violets with 2 free petals next to
center, ** ch 1, sl st in tip of 1st free petal of 1st violet of any 3
violet group, ch 1, sl st in same s c on center, ch 5, thread over hook
twice, insert in 5th st from hook, pull through, thread over and work
off 2 loops twice, thread over hook twice, insert in same space, pull
through, thread over and work off 2 loops twice, thread over and pull
through remaining loops at one time (a rice st), ch 4, sl st in top of
rice st for picot, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, s c in 1st d c of
next d c group, ch 1, sl st in tip of next free petal of same flower, ch
1, sl st in same s c on center, * 1 s c in each of the next 3 d c,
picot, 1 s c in each of the next 3 d c, ch 1, sl st in 1st free petal of
next flower of same group, ch 1, sl st in same s c on center, ch 5, rice
st in 5th st from hook, picot, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, s c in
1st d c of next d c group on center, ch 1, sl st in tip of next free
petal of same flower, ch 1, sl st in same s c on center, repeat from *
once, 1 s c in each of the next 3 d c on center, picot, 1 s c in each of
the next 4 d c, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, cluster st in next
picot on center, (cluster st: 3 tr c in same space keeping last loop of
each tr c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time)
picot, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, s c in 1st d c of next d c
group, 1 s c in each of the next 3 d c, picot, 1 s c in each of the next
3 d c, repeat from ** until all flowers are joined.




                             FLOWER BOUQUET


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

This doily may be made with any of the American Thread Company products
listed below:

         Material                Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball Tinted          9 inches      Steel 12
 Article 35, Size 30       Lavender and Yellow
                           1 Ball Shaded
                           Lavenders
                           1 Ball Shaded Yellows
                           1 Ball White
                           1 Ball Blue
                           1 Ball Pink
                           1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Yellow
            or
 “PURITAN” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball Tinted          11 ”               ” 7
 Article 40                Lavender and Yellow
                           1 Ball Shaded
                           Lavenders
                           1 Ball Shaded Yellows
                           1 Ball White
                           1 Ball Blue
                           1 Ball Pink
                           1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Yellow
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  Same Colors as in      11 ”               ” 7
 Article 346               “GEM” Crochet Cotton
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     ”                      9 ”               ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls Tinted         7 ”               ” 13
 Article 25                Lavender and Yellow
                           2 Balls Shaded
                           Lavenders
                           2 Balls Shaded
                           Yellows
                           2 Balls White
                           2 Balls Blue
                           2 Balls Pink
                           2 Balls Green
                           2 Balls Yellow

DAISY: With Yellow ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 3 and work 17 d c in
ring, join, break thread.

                                                  Continued from Page 10

PETAL: With White ch 14, insert hook in any d c, pull loop through, ch
1, 1 s c in next st of ch, 1 s d c in each of the next 3 sts (s d c:
thread over hook, insert in st, pull loop through, thread over and work
off all loops at one time), 1 d c in each of the next 9 sts, 6 s d c in
end st, working on opposite side of ch, 1 d c in each of the next 9 sts,
1 s d c in each of the next 3 sts, 1 s c in next st, sl st in same d c,
break thread. Skip 1 d c, work another petal in next d c. Continue
working in same manner all around. Work a 2nd daisy same as 1st daisy,
joining it to 1st daisy as illustrated.

FORGET-ME-NOT: With Yellow ch 2, 8 s c in 2nd st from hook, join, break
thread. Attach Color, * ch 4, 3 tr c in same space, ch 4, sl st in same
space, skip 1 s c, sl st in next s c, repeat from * 3 times, break
thread. Work all remaining forget-me-nots in same manner, always joining
in center tr c of petals.

PANSY: All pansies are worked in same manner, ch 7, join to form a ring,
ch 3 (counts as 1 d c), 2 d c in ring, * ch 7, 3 d c in ring, repeat
from * 3 times, ch 7, join.

2nd Row—Sl st to loop, ch 3, 12 d c in loop, * 1 s c in center d c of
next d c group, 13 d c in next loop, repeat from * once, * s c in center
d c of next d c group, ch 4 and work 8 d tr c, 2 tr c, 2 d c with ch 1
between each st in next loop, s c in center d c of next d c group, 2 d
c, 2 tr c, 8 d tr c with ch 1 between each st in next loop, ch 4, s c in
center d c of next d c group, join, break thread.

LEAF: All leaves are worked with Green in same manner. Ch 25, s c in 2nd
st from hook, 1 s c in next st of ch, 1 s d c in each of the next 2 sts,
1 d c in each of the next 3 sts, 1 tr c in each of the next 8 sts, 1 tr
c, 1 d c in next st, 1 d c in each of the next 4 sts, 1 s d c in each of
the next 2 sts, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, break thread.

Starting with the large group of Blue forget-me-nots, work 6
forget-me-nots, join as illustrated, joining 3, to petals of daisies.
Work 2 Pink forget-me-nots, join to Blue forget-me-nots as illustrated.
Work a Shaded Lavender pansy, join to Blue forget-me-not. Work a Tinted
Lavender and Yellow pansy, join to Pink and 1 Blue forget-me-not. Work a
Lavender pansy, join to Pink forget-me-not. Work a Lavender pansy, join
to pansy just made, same Pink forget-me-not and daisy. Work a Blue
forget-me-not, join to 2 Lavender pansies. Work a group of 3 Pink
forget-me-nots, join to Lavender pansy and daisy. Work a Blue
forget-me-not, join to group of Pink forget-me-nots. Work a Lavender
pansy, join to Blue forget-me-not just made and daisy. Work a Yellow
pansy, join to Lavender pansy just made and daisy. Work 3 Blue
forget-me-nots, joining as illustrated and join to Yellow pansy and
daisy. Work 1 Blue forget-me-not, join to Yellow pansy. Work a Lavender
pansy, join to forget-me-not just made and to 2 Blue forget-me-nots.
Work 3 Pink forget-me-nots joining as illustrated and join 1 to Lavender
pansy. Work a Tinted Lavender and Yellow pansy, join to daisy. Work a
Blue forget-me-not, join to pansy just made. Work a Lavender pansy, join
to flower just made and daisy. Work a Yellow pansy, join to pansy just
made and daisy. Work a Pink forget-me-not, join to Lavender pansy and
Yellow pansy. Work a Blue forget-me-not, join to flower just made and
Yellow pansy. Work a Lavender pansy, join to flower just made, to Yellow
pansy and to Blue forget-me-not of 1st group made.

Work 5 leaves joining to flowers as illustrated.

Edge—Attach White in free petal of Pink forget-me-not to right of Blue
forget-me-not, work a ch long enough to reach next Blue forget-me-not, s
c in free petal of flower, work a ch long enough to reach to next pansy,
s c (if necessary a d c in order to keep edge round) in 1st petal of
flower, continue all around until all flowers are worked. Then work a
row of ch 5 loops over ch, ending row with ch 1, d c in joining (110
loops in row).

3rd, 4th and 5th Rows: Ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all
around ending each row with ch 2, d c in d c.

6th Row: * Ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ** ch 5, skip 1
loop, 2 d c with ch 4 between in next loop, ch 5, skip 1 loop, s c in
next loop, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * 5 times, repeat from
** all around in same manner ending row with ch 2, d c in d c.

7th Row: * Ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ** ch 6, skip 1
loop, 3 cluster sts with ch 3 between each cluster st in ch 4 loop
(cluster st: work 3 tr c in loop keeping last loop of each st on hook,
thread over and work off all loops at one time), ch 6, skip 1 loop, s c
in next loop, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, repeat
from ** all around in same manner ending row with ch 2, d c in d c.

8th Row: * Ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ** ch 6, skip 1
loop, 2 cluster sts with ch 5 between in next loop, ch 5, 2 cluster sts
with ch 5 between in next loop, ch 6, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, *
ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, repeat from ** all around
in same manner ending row with ch 2, d c in d c.

9th Row: * Ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 6, skip 1
loop, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in next loop, ch 3, 3 cluster sts
with ch 3 between each cluster st in next loop, ch 3, 2 clusters sts
with ch 3 between in next loop, ch 6, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop,
repeat from beginning all around ending row to correspond.

10th Row: Sl st to 2nd st of loop, ** ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook
(rice st: work 2 tr c in st, keeping last loop of each st on hook,
thread over and work off all loops at one time), d c in next loop, ch 3,
sl st in d c for picot, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, s c in next
loop, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, ch 3, sl st in rice st for
picot, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, s c in next cluster st, * ch
5, rice st in 5th st from hook, d c in next cluster st, picot, ch 5,
rice st in 5th st from hook, s c in next cluster st, repeat from *
twice, ch 5, rice st in 5th st from hook, picot, ch 5, rice st in 5th st
from hook, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, repeat from ** all around,
join, break thread.




                            BUTTERFLY DOILY


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

These doilies may be made with any of the American Thread Company
products listed below:

  Material for each Dolly        Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball White           9½ inches     Steel 12
 Article 35                1 Ball any Shaded
                           color Shown
            or
 “PURITAN” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball White           11½ ”              ” 7
 Article 40                1 Ball any Shaded
                           Color Shown
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball White           11½ ”              ” 7
 Article 346               1 Ball any Shaded
                           Color Shown
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls White          7½ ”              ” 13
 Article 25                2 Balls any Shaded
                           Color Shown
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball White           9½ ”              ” 12
 Article 20, Size 30       1 Ball any Shaded
                           Color Shown
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball White           9½ ”              ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30       2 Balls any Shaded
                           Color Shown
            or
 “STAR” Pearl Cotton       2 Balls White          11½ ”              ” 7
 Article 90, Size 5        3 Balls any Shaded
                           Color Shown
            or
 “SILLATEEN SANSIL”        1 Ball White           10½               ” 10
 Article 102               2 Balls any Shaded
                           Color Shown

BODY: Top of Head—With Shaded color ch 4, sl st in 4th st from hook
(feeler), ch 25, s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in each of the next 19
sts of ch, ch 1, turn.

2nd Row—1 s c in 1st s c, sl st in next s c, 1 s c in each of the next
17 s c, sl st in last st, break thread.

LARGE RIGHT WING: Ch 4, 2 d c in 4th st from hook, ch 1, turn.

2nd Row—2 s c in 1st d c, 1 s c in next d c, 2 s c in next st, ch 1,
turn.

3rd and 4th Rows—1 s c in each s c, ch 1, turn.

5th Row—1 s c in 1st s c, 1 d c in each of the next 3 s c, 1 s c in next
s c, ch 5 and without turning and working down long side, d c in next
row, ch 2, d c in next row, repeat from * twice, ch 2, 1 d c, ch 2, 1 d
c in point (lower edge of wing), working up opposite side, * ch 2 d c in
next row, repeat from * 4 times, ch 2, d c in same space, * ch 2, tr c
in next d c, repeat from * twice, ch 2, d c in same space with 1st ch 5,
ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

                                                  Continued from page 11

Next Row—Sl st into loop, * ch 4, sl st in next loop, repeat from * all
around, break thread.

SMALL RIGHT WING: Ch 4, 2 d c in 4th st from hook, ch 1, turn.

2nd Row—1 s c in 1st d c, 2 s c in next d c, 1 s c in next st, ch 1,
turn.

3rd Row—1 s c in each s c, ch 1, turn.

4th Row—1 s c in 1st s c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 s c, 1 s c in next
s c, (top of wing), do not turn.

5th Row—Working down long side, ch 5, 1 d c in next row, * ch 2, d c in
next row, repeat from * once, ch 2, 1 d c, ch 2, 1 d c in point, working
up opposite side, * ch 2, d c in next row, repeat from * 3 times, ch 2,
d c in same space, ch 2, tr c in next d c, ch 2, tr c in next d c, ch 2,
d c in same space with ch 5, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

Next Row—Start to join wings. Sl st into loop, ch 2, sl st in 3rd loop
to right of center from lower edge of large wing, ch 2, sl st in next
loop of small wing, * ch 2, sl st in next loop towards lower edge of
large wing, ch 2, sl st in next loop of small wing, repeat from * once,
* ch 4, sl st in next loop of small wing, repeat from * around remainder
of small wing, break thread. Work 2 left wings in same manner as right
wing to the joining.

For joining work 4 loops on small wing, then join next 3 loops to
corresponding loops on left side of large wing and finish same as other
small wing.

To join wings to body, ch 4, sl st in 4th st from hook for other feeler,
ch 4, sl st in 1st s c of 2nd row of body (top of head), 1 sl st in each
of the next 2 sts, ch 2, sl st in 3rd free loop to right of joining of
large left wing, ch 2, skip 1 st on body, sl st in next st, ch 2, sl st
in next free loop of same wing, ch 2, skip 1 s c of body, sl st in next
s c, ch 2, sl st in next free loop of same wing, ch 2, skip 2 s c of
body, sl st in next st, ch 2, sl st in 1st free loop of small wing, ch
2, skip 2 s c of body, sl st in next s c, * ch 2, sl st in next loop of
small wing, ch 2, skip 1 s c of body, sl st in next st, repeat from *
once, sl st down remainder of body to point, work 3 s c in point then sl
st in each of the next 3 sts up opposite side, ch 2, sl st in 3rd loop
of small right wing to right of joining and join the 2 left wings same
as opposite 2 wings, break thread.

Work 6 more butterflies in same manner.


IF YOU ARE MAKING SMALL CENTER (3½ INCHES) SHOWN ABOVE: With White ch 8,
join to form a ring, ch 3, 13 d c in ring, join in 3rd st of ch.

2nd Row—* Ch 4, s c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 1, d c in same space as beginning (this brings thread in
position for next row).

3rd Row—* Ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 1, d c in d c (14 loops).

4th Row—Ch 3, 2 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
thread over and pull through all loops at one time, * ch 5, cluster st
in next loop (cluster st: 3 d c in next loop keeping last loop of each d
c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time), repeat
from * all around, ch 5, join to 1st cluster st.

5th Row—Ch 3, 4 d c in same space, 5 d c in next cluster st, repeat from
* all around, join.

6th Row—Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 2, 1 d c in each of
the next 5 d c, repeat from * all around, ch 2, join.

7th Row—Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 2, d c in next loop,
ch 2, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, repeat from * all around ending
row with ch 2, d c in next loop, ch 2, join.

8th Row—Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 3, s c in next d c,
ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, repeat from * all around ending
row with ch 3, s c in next d c, ch 3, join.

9th Row—Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c keeping last loop of each
d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time, * ch 4,
1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in next s c, ch 4, 5 d c cluster st over next 5 d c,
repeat from * all around ending row to correspond.

10th Row—* Ch 5, skip 1 loop, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in next loop, ch 5, s c
in next 5 d c cluster st, repeat from * all around.

11th Row—* Ch 6, skip 1 loop, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c (shell) in next loop,
ch 6, s c in next s c, repeat from * all around.

                                                  Continued from Page 14

12th Row—Sl st to center of shell, ch 3, d c in same space, ch 1, sl st
in 2nd free loop from body of lower right wing of any butterfly, * ch 1,
2 d c in same space of center, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st in
lower edge of body of same butterfly, ch 3, s c in next loop of center,
ch 3, 2 d c in center of next shell, ch 1, sl st in 2nd free loop from
body of lower left wing of same butterfly, ch 1, 2 d c in same space on
center, ch 3, s c in next loop of center, ch 3, cluster st in next s c
of center, ch 3, skip 1 loop of same wing of butterfly, sl st in next
loop, ch 3, sl st in 4th free loop from body of lower right wing of next
butterfly, ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st just made on center, ch 3, s
c in next loop of center, ch 3, 2 d c in center of next shell, ch 1,
skip 1 loop of butterfly, sl st in next loop of same wing (2nd loop from
body), repeat from * until all butterflies are joined completing the
joining of 1st butterfly.

Joining Motif between Butterflies—With White ch 6, join to form a ring,
ch 1, s c in ring, d tr c (3 times over hook) in 3rd free loop of top
wing on right hand side of butterfly, s c in ring, skip 1 loop of same
wing, d tr c in next loop, s c in ring, d tr c in 1st free loop of lower
wing of same butterfly, s c in ring, working up opposite side of next
butterfly, d tr c in 1st free loop of lower wing next to the joining of
wings, s c in ring, d tr c in 1st free loop of top wing, s c in ring,
skip 1 loop, d tr c in next loop of same wing, s c in ring, join, break
thread.


IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC DOILY No. 1 SHOWN ON Page 2—Work 12 butterflies
as above.

Attach White in any loop and work 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in same loop, * ch
1, s c in 2nd loop from body of lower right hand wing of butterfly, ch
1, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in same loop of center, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in next
loop on center, ch 1, s c in end of body of same butterfly, ch 1, 2 s c,
ch 3, 2 s c in same loop on center, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in next loop on
center, ch 1, s c in 2nd free loop from body of lower left wing of same
butterfly, ch 1, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in same loop on center, 2 s c in
next loop on center, ch 1, skip 1 loop of same wing of butterfly, s c in
next loop, ch 1, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in same loop on center, ch 1, s c in
4th free loop of lower right wing of next butterfly, ch 1, 2 s c in same
loop on center, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in next loop on center, repeat from *
until all butterflies are joined, break thread.


IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC DOILY No. 2 SHOWN ON Page 2—Work 10 butterflies.

Attach White in 1st d c of any d c group, s c in same space, * 1 d c in
each of the next 3 d c, ch 1, sl st in 2nd free loop from body of lower
right ring, ch 1, sl st in top of d c just made on center to complete
picot, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c on center, s c in next d c, ch 5,
cluster st in next picot, ch 1, sl st in end of body, ch 1, sl st in top
of cluster st, ch 5, 1 s c in next d c, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c,
ch 1, sl st in 2nd free loop from body of lower left wing, ch 1,
complete picot, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, s c in next d c, ch 5,
cluster st in next picot on center, ch 3, skip 1 loop of same wing of
butterfly, sl st in next loop, ch 5, 2 d c in 4th st from hook leaving
last loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at
one time, ch 1, sl st in 4th free loop from body of lower right wing of
next butterfly, ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st on center, ch 5, 1 s c
in next d c, repeat from * all around until all butterflies are joined,
break thread.

Work the joining motifs between butterflies same as on Small Center.




                            CAMEO GIRL DOILY


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

This doily may be made with any of the American Thread Company products
listed below:

         Material                Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball Cream           5 inches      Steel 12
 Article 35, Size 30       1 Ball Iridescent
                           1 Ball Pink
                           1 Ball Fuchsia
                           1 Ball Tinted Pink
                           and Yellow
                           1 Ball White
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     1 Ball Iridescent      7 ”               ” 13
 Article 25                1 Ball Pink
                           1 Ball Fuchsia
                           1 Ball Tinted Pink
                           and Yellow
                           2 Balls White
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball Cream           11 ”               ” 7
 Article 346               1 Ball Iridescent
                           1 Ball Pink
                           1 Ball Rose
                           1 Ball Tinted Pink
                           and Yellow
                           1 Ball White

With Cream ch 4, s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in each st of ch, ch 1,
turn.

2nd and 3rd Rows—1 s c in each s c, ch 1 to turn each row.

4th and 5th Rows—Working in s c increase 1 s c at the beginning and end
of each row.

6th Row—Increase 2 s c at the beginning and end of row. Work 1 row even,
break thread.

8th Row—Attach Fuchsia (substitute Rose for Fuchsia if “De Luxe” Crochet
Cotton is used) and work 1 s c in each s c, break thread, do not turn.

9th Row—Attach Tinted Pink and Yellow, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in same
space, skip 1 s c, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c (shell) in next s c, * skip 2 s c,
shell in next s c, repeat from * once, skip 1 s c, shell in next s c,
break thread, do not turn.

10th Row—Attach Fuchsia, s c in same space, 1 s c in next d c, * 3 s c
in next loop, 1 s c in each of the next 4 d c, repeat from * 3 times, 3
s c in next loop, 1 s c in each of the next 2 d c, break thread, do not
turn.

11th Row—Skip 8 s c, attach Fuchsia in next s c, working in back loop of
st, s c in same space, * skip 3 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 4 s c,
repeat from * once, skip 3 s c, 1 s c in next s c. Work 1 row even in s
c working in both loops.

13th Row—Decrease 1 s c at the beginning and end of row (to decrease:
insert hook in st, pull loop through, insert in next st, pull through
thread over and work off all loops at one time). Work 1 row even. Repeat
the last 2 rows once, then work one more row even, break thread. Do not
turn work.

                                                  Continued from page 14

18th Row—Attach Pink, ch 5, s c in same space, * ch 5, s c in next s c,
repeat from * 4 times, ch 5, s c in same space (7 loops), ch 7, turn.

19th Row—S c in next loop, * ch 5, s c in next loop, repeat from * 5
times, ch 3, d c in 2nd st from end of last loop, ch 7, turn (8 loops).

Continue working same as last row always having 1 more loop in each row
until there are 13 loops.

25th Row—S c over ch 3, * ch 5, s c in next loop, repeat from * across
row, turn.

26th Row—Ch 9, s c in next loop, * ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from *
across row, turn.

Repeat last row twice.

29th Row—Ch 10, s c in next loop, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from
* across row, turn.

Repeat 29th row 3 times, ending last row with ch 6, tr c in last loop,
ch 5, turn.

33rd Row—S c over ch 6, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice,
ch 3, s c in same loop, repeat from 1st * twice, * ch 7, s c in next
loop, repeat from * twice, ch 5, s c in same space, break thread. Work 3
more dresses in same manner.

Right Sleeve—With right side of work toward you, attach Tinted Pink and
Yellow in 7th s c from end of 10th row, working in back loop of st, * ch
3, s c in next s c, repeat from * twice, * ch 5, s c in next s c, repeat
from * once, ch 7, turn.

2nd Row—S c in next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, * ch 3, s c in next
loop, repeat from * twice, turn.

3rd Row—* Ch 3, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, * ch 5, s c in
next loop, repeat from * once, ch 5, turn.

4th Row—Same as 2nd row.

5th Row—* Ch 3, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 1, turn.

6th Row—* S c in next loop, repeat from * twice, break thread. Work 3
more right sleeves in same manner.

Left Sleeve—With wrong side of work toward you and working in front loop
of st, work sleeve in same manner to 3rd row ending last row with ch 3.

4th Row—Join to 4th st of corresponding loop of right sleeve of 1st
dress, ch 1, s c in next loop of sleeve of 2nd dress, complete sleeve
same as right sleeve. Continue working sleeves on remaining dresses,
joining in same manner.

With right side of work toward you, attach Fuchsia in 1st s c of sleeve,
s c in same space, 1 s c in each of the next 2 s c, break thread.

Right Arm—With right side of work toward you, attach Cream in 1st s c of
sleeve edge, working in back loop of st, s c in same space, 1 s c in
each of the next 2 s c, ch 1 to turn all rows.

Next Row—Working in both loops, 1 s c in each s c.

3rd Row—2 s c in 1st s c, skip 1 s c, sl st in next st.

4th Row—Sl st in sl st, skip 1 s c, 2 s c in next s c.

Repeat the last 2 rows once, then repeat the 3rd row. Work 1 row even.

9th Row—Decrease in 1st 2 sts, s c in next s c. Work 2 rows even, break
thread.

Left Arm—With wrong side of work toward you, attach Cream in 1st s c of
left sleeve, working 1st row in front loop of st, then work same as
right arm. Sew 2 inner sts of last row of arms together.

Joining Motif—With wrong side of work toward you and arms facing upward,
attach White in 1st s c of 1st arm, ch 9, s c in last s c of 2nd arm, ch
5, turn.

2nd Row—S c in loop, ch 6, s c in same space, ch 7, s c in same space,
ch 6, s c in same space, ch 2, d c in same space with starting ch, ch 3,
turn.

3rd Row—2 d c over ch 2, ch 5, 3 d c in next loop, ch 7, 3 tr c in next
loop, ch 7, 3 tr c in same space, ch 7, 3 d c in next loop, ch 5, 3 d c
in next loop, ch 3, turn.

4th Row—1 d c in each of the next 2 d c keeping last loop of each st on
hook, thread over and work off all loops at one time, ch 5, sl st in top
of st just made for picot, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, 1 d c in each
of the next 3 d c keeping last loop of each st on hook, thread over and
work off all loops at one time (d c cluster st), ch 7, s c in next loop,
ch 7, 1 tr c cluster st over next 3 tr c, ch 7, 1-3 tr c cluster st over
next loop, ch 7, 1 tr c cluster st over next 3 tr c, ch 7, s c in next
loop, ch 7, d c cluster st over next 3 d c, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch
5, d c cluster st over next 3 d c, ch 5, turn.

5th Row—Sl st in top of st just made, ch 5, s c in next loop, repeat
from * once, ch 6, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 11, s c
in next loop, ch 13, s c in next loop, ch 11, s c in next loop, ch 7, s
c in next loop, ch 6, s c in next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 2, d
c in cluster st, turn.

6th Row—Ch 3, join to 4th st from beginning of 4th large loop from lower
edge on side of skirt, ch 3, s c in next loop of motif, ch 3, s c in 4th
st of next loop of skirt, ch 3, s c in next loop of motif, ch 3, s c in
4th st of next loop of skirt, ch 4, s c in next loop of motif, ch 7,
skip 1 loop of skirt, s c in 1st st of small loop of skirt, ch 11, s c
in next loop of motif, ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 9, s c in next loop,
ch 11, join to 1st st of small loop of next skirt, ch 7, s c in next
loop of motif, ch 4, skip 1 loop of skirt, s c in 4th st from end of
next loop of skirt, ch 3, s c in next loop of motif, * ch 3, s c in 4th
st of next loop of skirt, ch 3, s c in next loop of motif, repeat from *
once, break thread.

EDGE—Attach White in 1st small loop of skirt, 3 s c in same space, * 7 s
c in each of the next 3 loops, 3 s c in next loop, repeat from * 3
times, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 7, 3 s c in
next loop, repeat from 1st * all around, ending row to correspond, join.

2nd Row—Sl st to next s c, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * ch
3, s c in center st of next loop, ch 5, 2 tr c, ch 3, 2 tr c in center
st of next loop (tr c shell), ch 5, s c in center st of next loop, ch 3,
d c shell in center st of next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, s c in
next loop, * ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, d c
shell in center st of next loop, repeat from 1st * all around ending row
to correspond, join.

3rd Row—* 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in next loop, skip 2 d c, 3 s c in next
loop, 5 s c in next loop, skip 2 tr c, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in next loop,
skip 2 tr c, 5 s c in next loop, 3 s c in next loop, skip 2 d c, repeat
from * 3 times, 2 s c, ch 3, 2 s c in next loop, skip 2 d c, 3 s c in
next loop, 7 s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st in last s c for picot, 5 s c
in next loop, 2 tr c in next s c, ch 3, sl st in last tr c for picot, 1
tr c in same space, 5 s c in next loop, 1 s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st
in s c for picot, 6 s c in same loop, 3 s c in next loop, skip 2 d c,
repeat from beginning all around ending row to correspond, join, break
thread.

Bouquet—With Iridescent, ch 2, 6 s c in 2nd st from hook, join.

2nd Row—* Ch 5, sl st in same space (picot loop), ch 2, sl st in next s
c, repeat from * all around.

3rd Row—* Ch 5, sl st in same space, ch 2, sl st in next ch 2 loop,
repeat from * all around keeping ch 2 in back of picot loop.

4th Row—Work in same manner as last row having ch 3 between each picot
loop, join, break thread.

Work three more bouquets in same manner. Sew in position as illustrated.

Hat—With Tinted Pink and Yellow, ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 3 and
work 12 d c in ring, join.

2nd Row—Ch 1, working in back loop of st, work 2 s c in each s c, join,
break thread.

3rd Row—Attach Fuchsia, s c in same space, 1 s c in each of the next 2 s
c, 2 s d c in next s c, 2 s d c in next s c, 1 s d c in next s c, 1 d c
in next s c, 2 d c in next s c, 1 d c in next s c, * 1 t r c in next s
c, 2 tr c in next s c, repeat from * once, * 2 tr c in next s c, 1 tr c
in next s c, repeat from * once, 1 d c in next s c, 2 d c in next s c, 1
d c in next s c, 1 s d c in next sc, 2 s d c in next s c, 2 s d c in
next s c, 1 s c in each of the next 3 s c, join, break thread leaving an
end long enough to sew to top of head.

Work another hat in the same manner working to 3rd tr c of last row,
join to corresponding tr c on side of hat, complete row. Work 3rd hat
joining in same manner. Work 4th hat, joining hat on both sides.

Sew hats to neck as illustrated.




                           HOLLY WREATH DOILY


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

These doilies may be made with any of the American Thread Company
products listed below:

  Material for each Doily        Quantity         Approx. Size  Size of
                                                    of Doily     Needle

 “GEM” Crochet Cotton      1 Ball White           9 inches      Steel 12
 Article 35, Size 30       1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “PURITAN” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball White           11 ”               ” 7
 Article 40                1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “DE LUXE” Crochet Cotton  1 Ball White           11 ”               ” 7
 Article 346               1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “STAR” Tatting Cotton     2 Balls White          7 ”               ” 13
 Article 25                2 Balls Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball White           9 ”               ” 12
 Article 20, Size 30       1 Ball Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “STAR” Crochet Cotton     1 Ball White           9 ”               ” 12
 Article 30, Size 30       2 Balls Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “STAR” Pearl Cotton       2 Balls White          11 ”               ” 7
 Article 90, Size 5        2 Balls Green
                           1 Ball Red
            or
 “SILLATEEN SANSIL”        1 Ball White           10 ”              ” 10
 Article 102               2 Balls Green
                           1 Ball Red

Leaf: With Green starting at lower edge, ch 3, 2 d c in 3rd st from
hook, ch 3, turn.

2nd Row—D c in same space, 1 d c in next d c, 2 d c in next st, ch 3,
turn.

3rd Row—2 d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, 3 d c in
end st, ch 3, turn.

4th Row—1 s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in next st of ch, 1 d c in each
of the next 8 d c, 3 d c in next st, ch 1, turn.

5th Row—Sl st in each of the next 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in next d c, 1 d c
in each of the next 7 d c, 3 d c in next d c, ch 3, turn.

6th Row—2 d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 11 d c, 2 d c in
next st, ch 3, turn.

7th Row—1 s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in next st of ch, 1 d c in each
of the next 11 d c, 3 d c in next d c, ch 3, turn.

8th Row—Same as 6th row.

9th Row—2 d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 11 d c, 3 d c in
next d c, ch 3, turn.

                                                  Continued from Page 14

10th row—1 s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in next st of ch, 1 d c in
each of the next 17 sts, ch 1, turn.

11th Row—1 sl st in each of next 3 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in each of next 13 d
c, ch 3, turn.

12th Row—Same as 9th row.

13th Row—1 s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in next st of ch, 1 d c in
each of next 14 d c, ch 1, turn.

14th Row—Sl st in each of the next 2 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in each of next 10
d c, ch 1, turn.

15th Row—Sl st in each of next 3 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in each of next 6 d c,
ch 1, turn.

16th Row—Sl st in each of next 3 d c, ch 2, 1 d c in each of next 3 d c
keeping last loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all
loops at one time, break thread. Work 11 more leaves in same manner.


IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC CENTER No. 1 SHOWN ON Page 2—Attach White in any
s c of last row of center, ch 4, 2 tr c in same space keeping last loop
of each tr c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one
time, ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for picot, ch 4, s c in next
loop, ch 1 and with 5 point side of leaf towards center, sl st in 1st
point of leaf from lower edge, ch 1, sl st in same s c on center, * ch
4, tr c cluster st in next s c on center, (tr c cluster st: 3 tr c in
same space keeping last loop of each tr c on hook, thread over and pull
through all loops at one time), ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for
picot, ch 4, s c in next loop on center, ch 1, sl st in next point of
same leaf, ch 1, sl st in same s c on center, repeat from * once, ch 4,
tr c cluster st in next s c on center, picot, ch 4, s c in next loop,
picot, ch 4, tr c cluster st in next s c, picot, ch 4, s c in next loop,
ch 1, sl st in 1st point from lower edge of next leaf, ch 1, sl st in
same s c on center, repeat from 1st * until all leaves are joined, break
thread.

BERRY: With Red ch 2, 8 s c in 2nd st from hook, without joining rows,
work 2 s c in each s c.

3rd and 4th Rows—1 s c in each s c.

5th Row—1 s c in next s c, decrease in next 2 sts (to decrease: * insert
hook in next st, pull loop through, repeat from *, thread over and pull
through all loops at one time), repeat from beginning all around. Fill
with cotton or Red yarn, then decrease every other st until 3 sts
remain, draw together, break thread leaving an end. Work 11 more berries
in same manner and sew in position as illustrated.


IF YOU ARE MAKING BASIC CENTER No. 2 SHOWN ON Page 2—Work 10 leaves same
as for basic center No. 1 joining to center as follows: attach White in
1st d c of any d c group, ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, ch 1,
join in 1st point from lower edge of leaf always having the 5 point side
of leaf next to center, * ch 1, d c in same space on center, 1 d c in
each of the next 3 d c, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st in next
point of same leaf, ch 3, s c in next loop on center, ch 3, 1 d c in
each of the next 4 d c, ch 1, sl st in next point of same leaf, ch 1, d
c in same space on center, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, ch 3, s c in
next loop, ch 7, sl st in 4th st from hook for picot, ch 3, s c in next
loop, ch 3, 1 s c in each of the next 4 d c, ch 1, sl st in 1st point
from lower edge of next leaf, repeat from * until all leaves are joined,
break thread. Work 20 berries same as for Basic Center No. 1 and sew in
position between leaves as illustrated catching the lower edge of leaf
and next free point of previous leaf when sewing.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                               TRADE MARK
                        AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                 260 West Broadway · New York 13, N. Y.

    [Illustration: Back cover]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Relocated material “continued on remote page” for more
  conveniently-flowing text; all of page 18 was relocated.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOILY BOUQUET ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


