The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Yellow Holly
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Yellow Holly

Author: Fergus Hume

Release date: June 25, 2017 [eBook #54979]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charles Bowen from page images provided by
        Google Books (the University of Wisconsin-Madison)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW HOLLY ***

Transcriber's Notes:
   1. Page Scan Source: Google Books
      https://books.google.com/books?id=oILQAAAAMAAJ
      (the University of Wisconsin-Madison)






[Illustration: Cover]







POPULAR NOVELS BY FERGUS HUME
=============================
A COIN OF EDWARD VII.

_The Philadelphia Item_ says: "This book is quite up to the level of
the high standard which Mr. Hume has set for himself in 'The Mystery
of a Hansom Cab' and 'The Rainbow Feather.' It is a brilliant,
stirring adventure, showing the author's prodigious inventiveness, his
well of imagination never running dry."

12mo, Cloth bound, $1.25


THE PAGAN'S CUP

_The Nashville American_ says: "The plot is intricate with mystery and
probability neatly dovetailed and the solution is a series of
surprises skillfully retarded to whet the interest of the reader. It
is excellently written and the denouement so skillfully concealed that
one's interest and curiosity are kept on edge till the very last. It
will certainly be a popular book with a very large class of readers."

12mo, Cloth bound, $1.25
Paper covers, 50cts.


THE RAINBOW FEATHER

_The Boston Ideas_ says "The plot is worked out very effectively and
each character serves the author's purpose very forcibly. The
narration is brisk and experienceful, and renders the tale thoroughly
enjoyable. It is strongly written, and excellently colored in all its
features."

12mo, Cloth bound, $1.25
Paper covers, 50cts.


CLAUDE DUVAL OF
NINETY-FIVE

_The Philadelphia Item_ says: "It is a very clever story, which runs
on smoothly from start to finish, holding the reader's interest--as do
every solitary one of the Hume stories, to the very last sentence.
Everybody who likes good detective fiction or who has read Mr. Hume
before should not miss this excellent story."

Paper cover, 50cts.


========================

G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY
PUBLISHERS NEW YORK






[Illustration: Lola pulled a white packet from her breast and ran with
it to the fire. George shot past her, snatched them out before they
could catch alight, and thrust them into his pocket.--(_Page 296_.)]






THE
YELLOW HOLLY



BY
FERGUS HUME
AUTHOR OF
"THE MYSTERY OF A HANSOM CAB," "THE RAINBOW FEATHER,"
"A COIN OF EDWARD VII.," "THE PAGAN'S CUP,"
"CLAUDE DUVAL OF NINETY-FIVE,"
ETC.



G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY
PUBLISHERS NEW YORK






Copyright, 1903, by
G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY

_Issued October 1, 1908_






CONTENTS

CHAPTER

      I. "MRS. JERSEY RECEIVES"
     II. BRENDON'S STORY
    III. THE NEXT MORNING
     IV. A NINE-DAYS' WONDER
      V. A LOVERS' MEETING
     VI. WHAT MR. IRELAND KNEW
    VII. THE RED MAN
   VIII. A BACCHANTE
     IX. CLEVER MRS. WARD
      X. DIPLOMACY
     XI. MR. BAWDSEY AT HOME
    XII. A FIRESIDE TYRANT
   XIII. A WOMAN SCORNED
    XIV. MRS. WARD'S TRUMP CARD
     XV. A RECOGNITION
    XVI. THE PIPE OF PEACE
   XVII. LORD DERRINGTON EXPLAINS
  XVIII. MISS BULL'S STORY
    XIX. THE INQUIRY AGENT
     XX. THE TROUBLE OF LOLA
    XXI. THE CONFESSION OF A JEALOUS WOMAN
   XXII. WHO BAWDSEY WAS
  XXIII. THE TURNING OF THE LANE
   XXIV. A STARTLING SURPRISE
    XXV. THE TRUTH






THE YELLOW HOLLY






CHAPTER I

"MRS. JERSEY RECEIVES"


She did not put the sacramental phrase on her cards, as no invitations
were sent out. These were delivered verbally by boarders desirous of
seeing their friends present on Friday evening. Mrs. Jersey dignified
her gatherings with the name of "At Homes," but in truth the term was
too majestic for the very mild entertainment she provided weekly.

It was really a scratch party of nobodies, and they assembled as usual
in the drawing-room on this especial evening, to play and not to work.
Mrs. Taine laid aside her eternal knitting; Miss Bull dispensed with
her game of "Patience;" Mr. Granger sang his one song of the early
Victorian Epoch--sometimes twice when singers were scarce; and Mr.
Harmer wore his antiquated dress-suit. On these festive occasions it
was tacitly understood that all were to be more or less "dressy," as
Mrs. Jersey put it, and her appearance in "the diamonds" signalized
the need of unusual adornment. These jewels were the smallest and most
inferior of stones; but diamonds they undeniably were, and the
boarders alluded to them as they would have done to the Kohinoor.

In her black silk gown, her lace cap, and "the diamonds" Mrs. Jersey
looked--so they assured her--quite the lady.

Was she a lady? No one ever asked that leading question, as it would
have provoked an untruth or a most unpleasant reply. She admitted in
expansive moments to having seen "better days," but what her actual
past had been--and from her looks she had one--none ever discovered.
The usual story, produced by an extra glass of negus, varied so
greatly in the telling that the most innocent boarder doubted. But
Mrs. Jersey was always treated with respect, and the boarders called
her "Madame" in quite a French way. Why they should do so, no one ever
knew, and Mrs. Jersey herself could not have explained. But the term
had become traditional, and in that conservative mansion tradition was
all-powerful.

Few friends presented themselves on this particular Friday evening,
for it was extremely foggy, and none of them could afford cabs. Even
those who patronized the nearest bus line, had some distance to walk
before they knocked at the Jersey door, and thus ran a chance of
losing their way. Either in light or darkness the house was hard to
find, for it occupied the corner of a particularly private square far
removed from the Oxford Street traffic. As a kind of haven or
back-water, it received into its peace those who found the current of
the River of Life running too strong. Decayed ladies, disappointed
spinsters, superannuated clerks, retired army officers, bankrupt
dreamers--these were the derelicts which had drifted hither. Mrs.
Jersey called these social and commercial failures "paying guests,"
which flattered their pride and cost nothing. She was something of a
humbug, and always ready with the small change of politeness.

It was quite an asylum for old age. None of the guests were under
fifty, save a newcomer who had arrived the previous week, and they
wondered why he came amongst them. He was young, though plain-looking;
he was fashionably dressed, though stout, and he chatted a West-End
jargon, curiously flippant when contrasted with their prim
conversation. This was the first time he had been present at Madame's
reception, and he was explaining his reasons for coming to Bloomsbury.
Mrs. Jersey introduced him as "Leonard Train, the distinguished
novelist," although he had published only one book at his own cost,
and even that production was unknown to the boarders. They read
_Thackeray_ and his contemporaries, and manifested a proper scorn for
the up-to-date novelist and his analytical methods.

Mr. Train, with a complacency which showed that he entertained the
highest opinion of his own powers, stood on the hearth-rug, and
delivered himself of his errand to Bloomsbury.

"Fashionable novelists," said he, in a still, small voice, which
contrasted curiously with his massive proportions, "have overdone the
business of society and epigrams. We must revert to the Dickens style.
I have therefore taken up my residence here for a brief period to
study Old-World types." Here he looked round with a beaming smile. "I
am glad to find so rich a field to glean."

This doubtful compliment provoked weak smiles. The boarders did not
wish to be rude, but they felt it was impossible to approve of the
young man. Not being sufficiently modern to court notoriety, one and
all disliked the idea of being "put in a book." Mrs. Taine, conscious
of her weak grammar, looked uneasily at Miss Bull, who smiled grimly
and then glared at Train. Granger drew himself up and pulled his gray
mustache; he was the buck of the establishment, and Harmer nodded,
saying, "Well, well!" his usual remark when he did not understand what
was going on. Only Madame spoke. Train had taken a sitting-room as
well as a bedroom, therefore he must be rich, and as he had not
haggled over terms it was necessary that he should be flattered. Mrs.
Jersey saw a chance of making money out of him.

"How delightful," she said in her motherly manner; "I hope you will
say nice things about us, Mr. Train."

"I shall tell the truth, Madame. The truth does not flatter."

Mrs. Jersey became still more motherly and paid a compliment. "That
depends, Mr. Train. If the truth were spoken about you, for instance."

It was really a very nice compliment; but Miss Bull, with malice
aforethought, spoilt it in the utterance by laughing pointedly. Train,
who had already set his face for a smile, grew red, and Madame darted
a look at Miss Bull quite out of keeping with her motherly manner.
More than this, she spoke her mind. "I hope, Mr. Train, that you will
speak the whole truth of _some_ of us."

Miss Bull shrugged her thin shoulders, and in direct contradiction to
the traditions of the evening produced her pack of cards. She played a
complicated game called "The Demon," and never went to bed until she
had achieved success at least thrice. Even when driven from the
drawing-room she would finish the game in her bedroom, and sometimes
sat up half the night when her luck was bad. To abstain on this
society evening always annoyed her, and since Madame had been rude
Miss Bull seized the opportunity to show her indifference, and enjoy,
by doing so, her favorite pastime. She was a small, thin, dry old
maid, with a pallid face and bright black eyes. Her mouth was hard,
and smiled treacherously. No one liked her save Margery, the niece of
Mrs. Jersey. But Margery was supposed to be queer, so her approval of
Miss Bull mattered little.

"Perhaps Mr. Granger will oblige us with a song," suggested Madame,
smoothing her face, but still inwardly furious.

Mr. Granger, who had been waiting for this moment, was only too happy.
He knew but one song, and had sung it dozens of times in that very
room. It was natural to suppose that he knew it by heart. All the same
he produced his music, and read the words as he sang. Margery played
his accompaniment without looking at the notes. She was as familiar
with them as she was with the moment when Mr. Granger's voice would
crack. This night he cracked as usual, apologized as usual, and his
hearers accepted the apology as usual, so it was all very pleasant.
"'The Death of Nelson,'" said Granger, "is a difficult song to sing
when the singer is not in voice. The fog, you know----"

"Quite so," murmured Train, politely. "Do you know 'Will-o-the-Wisp,'
Mr. Granger?"

Mr. Granger did not, much to his regret, and Mr. Harmer joined in the
conversation. "Now there's a song," said he--"'Will-o-the-Wisp.' I
knew a man who could bring the roof down with that song. Such lungs!"

"I don't love that loud shouting, myself," said Mrs. Taine in her fat
voice. "Give me something soft and low, like 'My Pretty Jane!'"

"Ah! you should have heard Sims Reeves sing it," said Harmer.

"I have heard him," said Leonard, to whom the remark was addressed.

Harmer was annoyed. "Perhaps you have heard Grisi and Mario also?"

"No, sir. But my grandfather did."

"Probably," said Harmer, glancing at his fresh face and bald head in a
near mirror. "I was a mere child myself when I heard them. Do you know
much about music, Mr. Train?"

"I have heard it a good deal talked about," replied Leonard, with the
air of saying something clever.

"And great rubbish they talk," put in Mrs. Taine, smoothing one hand
over the other. "In my young days we talked of Wagner and Weber. Now
it is all Vagner and Veber--such affectation."

"Ah! manners are not what they used to be," sighed another old lady,
who prided herself on her straight back and clear eyesight.

"Nor singers," said Mr. Granger. "There are no voices nowadays, none."

"What about Calve and Melba?" asked Leonard.

"Those are foreigners," said Mr. Granger, getting out of the
difficulty. "I speak of our native talent, sir."

"Melba comes from Australia."

"She is not English--a foreigner, I tell you. Don't talk to me, sir."

Mr. Granger was becoming restive at being thus contradicted, and
privately thought Leonard an impertinent young man. Madame, seeing
that the old gentleman was ruffled, hastily intervened. "If Mrs. Taine
will play us the 'Canary Bird Quadrilles' how pleased we shall be."

Mrs. Taine obliged, and Harmer hung over the piano, quite enraptured
at these airs which recalled his hot youth. Afterward he begged for
the "Mabel Waltz." Meantime Margery was sitting in the corner with
Miss Bull, and both were engrossed with "Patience." Madame, under
cover of the music, talked with Train.

"You mustn't mind the guests," she said; "they are old and require to
be humored."

"It's most amusing, Madame. I shall stop here three weeks to pick up
types."

"Oh! you must stay longer than that," said Madame, smiling and patting
his hand, still in a motherly way; "now, that you have found us out,
we cannot lose you. By the way--" here Mrs. Jersey's eyes became very
searching--"how did you find us out?"

"It was a friend of mine, Madame. He knew that I wanted to get
into the Dickens world, and suggested this house. I am not
disappointed--oh, not at all--" and Leonard glanced at Margery, who
was fat, dull and stupid in her looks. She certainly resembled one of
Dickens's characters, but he could not recollect which at the moment.

"Do I know the gentleman?" asked Madame, who seemed anxious.

"I don't think so. But he is coming to see me to-night."

"You must ask him in here and introduce him. I should like to thank
him for having recommended my house."

"We were going to have a conversation in my room," said Train,
dubiously; "he's such a shy fellow that I don't think he'll come in."

"Oh! but, he must; I love young people." Madame looked round and
shrugged. "It is rather dreary here at times, Mr. Train."

"I can quite believe that," replied Leonard, who already was beginning
to find the Dickens types rather boring. "Who is that tall old man
with the long hair?"

"Hush! He may hear you. His name is Rasper. A great inventor, a most
distinguished man."

"What has he invented?"

"Oh, all sorts of things," replied Mrs. Jersey, vaguely. "His name is
quite a household word in Clapham. See, he's inventing something now."
Mr. Rasper, who had rather a haggard appearance, as though he used his
brains too much, was glooming over the back of an envelope and the
stump of a pencil. He frowned as he chewed this latter, and seemed
bent upon working out an abstruse problem. "But it will really will
not do, Mr. Train," said Madame, shaking her head till "the diamonds"
twinkled; "this is our evening of relaxation. But Miss Bull, against
all precedent, is playing 'Patience,' and here is Mr. Rasper
inventing." She rose to interrupt Mr. Rasper, but remained to ask
Leonard if his friend was stopping the night.

"He will if he comes at all," replied Leonard, looking at his watch;
"but if the fog is very thick I don't know if he'll turn up. It is now
nine o'clock."

"We usually disperse at eleven," said Madame, "but on this night I
must break up at ten, as I have--" she hesitated--"I have business to
do."

"I won't trouble you, Madame," said Train; "my friend and I can have
supper in my room."

"That's just it," said Madame, and her voice became rather hard. "I
beg, Mr. Train, that you and your friend will not sit up late."

"Why not? We both wish to smoke and talk."

"You can do that in the daytime, Mr. Train. But my house is most
respectable, and I hope you will be in bed before eleven."

Leonard would have protested, as he objected to this sort of maternal
government, but Mrs. Jersey rustled away, and he was left to make the
best of it. Before he could collect his wits a message came that he
was wanted. "By Jove! it's George," he said and hurried out of the
room. Mrs. Jersey overheard the name.

"I suppose his friend is called George," she thought, and frowned. Her
recollections of that name were not pleasant. However, she thought no
more about the matter, but rebuked Mr. Rasper for his inattention to
the 'Mabel Waltz.' "It is so sweet of Mrs. Taine to play it."

"I beg pardon--beg pardon," stuttered Rasper, putting away his
envelope and looking up with a dreamy eye. "I was inventing a new
bootjack. I hope to make my fortune out of it."

Madame smiled pityingly. She had heard that prophecy before, but poor
Rasper's inventions had never succeeded in getting him the house in
Park Lane he was always dreaming about. But she patted his shoulder
and then sailed across to Miss Bull. "The music doesn't please you,
Miss Bull," she said in rather an acid tone.

"It's very nice," replied the old maid, dealing the cards, "but I have
heard the 'Mabel Waltz' before."

"You may not have the chance of hearing it again," said Madame.

Miss Bull shrugged her shoulders to signify that it did not matter.

"I suppose that means Mrs. Taine is about to leave us, she said.

"There may be changes in the establishment soon, Miss Bull."

"It's a world of change," replied Miss Bull, in her sharp voice.
"Margery, was that a heart?"

Margery pointed a fat finger to the card in question, and Miss Bull
muttered something about her eyesight getting worse. Madame knew that
this was just done to annoy her, as Miss Bull's sight was excellent.
To revenge herself she took Margery away. "Go and tell the servants to
send up the negus and sandwiches," she said sharply.

Margery rose heavily. She was a huge girl of twenty years of age, and
apparently very stupid. Why sharp little Miss Bull, who loved no one,
had taken to her no one knew; but the two were inseparable. Seeing
this, Madame usually kept Margery hard at work in other quarters so as
to part her from the old maid. But with the cunning of an animal--and
Margery was very much of that type--the girl managed to see a great
deal of her one friend. Madame had an idea of the reason for this, but
at the present moment did not think it was necessary to interfere. She
was quite capable of crushing Miss Bull when the need arose. Meantime
she vented her temper by sending Margery away. The girl departed with
a scowl and an angry look at her aunt. But Miss Bull never raised her
eyes, though she was well aware of what was going on.

Madame was not to be beaten. "I tell you what, dear Miss Bull," she
said, smiling graciously, "since you have broken through our rule, and
have produced the cards, you shall tell all our fortunes."

"Yours?" asked Miss Bull, looking up for the first time.

Madame shook her head. "I know mine. Tell Mr. Rasper if his invention
will succeed. Or, perhaps, Mr. Granger?"

"I am at Miss Bull's service," said the polite old gentleman bowing.

Miss Bull swept the cards into a heap. "I'm quite willing," she said
in a voice almost pleasant for her. "Anything to oblige dear Madame."

Mrs. Jersey smiled still more graciously and sailed away to send Mr.
Harmer to the cards. But she wondered inwardly why Miss Bull had given
way so suddenly. There was some reason for it, as Miss Bull never did
anything without a reason. But Mrs. Jersey kept her own counsel, and
still continued to smile. She had quite made up her mind how to act.

"Ladies and gentlemen," she said, standing in the middle of the
drawing-room, "we must disperse to-night at ten. I have some business
to attend to, so I request you will all retire at that hour. In the
mean time, Miss Bull has kindly consented to tell your fortunes."

It was extraordinary to see how those withered old people crowded
round the table. Their several fates had long since been settled, so
what they could expect the cards to tell them, save that they would
one and all die soon, it is difficult to say. Yet so ineradicable is
the wish to know the future in the human breast that they were as
eager as youth to hear what would befall them. And Miss Bull, wholly
unmoved by their senile excitement, dealt the cards with the air of a
sphinx.

Madame meantime retired to her throne, and saw that the servants
arranged the tray properly. She had a gigantic chair, which was
jokingly called her throne, and here she received strangers in quite a
majestic way. It was a sort of Lady Blessington reception on a small
scale, as Mr. Harmer assured her, and, as he had been to Gore House in
his youth, he knew what he was talking about. Knowing his courtly
manners, and being greedy of compliments, Mrs. Jersey always tried to
make him say that she resembled Lady Blessington. But this Mr. Harmer
refused to do. Not that Mrs. Jersey was bad-looking. She had a
fresh-colored face, bright black eyes, and plenty of white hair like
spun silk. Her figure was stout, but she yet retained a certain
comeliness which showed that she must have been a handsome woman in
her youth. Her manners were motherly, but she showed a stern face
toward Margery, and did not treat the girl so kindly as she might have
done. As a rule, she had great self-command, but sometimes gave way to
paroxysms of passion, which were really terrifying. But Margery alone
had been witness of these, and Mrs. Jersey passed for a dear, gentle
old lady.

"Mr. Harmer is to be married," announced Mrs. Taine, leaving the
circle round the card-table; "how extraordinary!"

"So extraordinary that it can't possibly be true," said Mr. Harmer,
dryly; "unless Madame will accept me," he added, bowing.

"I should recommend Miss Bull," replied Madame very sweetly, but with
a venomous note in her voice. She might as well have thought to rouse
the dead, for Miss Bull paid not the slightest attention. In many ways
the self-composed old maid was a match for Madame.

At this moment Train entered, and after him came a tall young man,
fair-haired and stalwart. He was handsome, but seemed to be ill at
ease, and pulled his yellow mustache nervously as Train led him to the
throne.

"This is my friend," said Leonard, presenting him. "He just managed to
get here, for the fog is so thick----"

Here he was interrupted. "Madame!" cried Mrs. Taine, "what is the
matter? Mr. Harmer, the water--wine--quick."

There was need of it. Mrs. Jersey had fallen back on the throne with a
white face and twitching lips. She appeared as though about to faint,
but restraining herself with a powerful effort she waved her hand to
intimate that she needed nothing. At the same time her eyes were
fastened, not so much on the face of the stranger as on a piece of
yellow holly he wore in his coat. "I am perfectly well," said Mrs.
Jersey. "This is only one of my turns. I am glad to see you, Mr.----"

"Brendon," said the stranger, who seemed astonished at this reception.

"George Brendan," interpolated Train, who was alive with curiosity;
"have you seen him before, Madame?"

Mrs. Jersey laughed artificially. "Certainly not," she replied calmly,
"and yours is not a face I should forget, Mr.----Brendon."

She uttered the name with a certain amount of hesitation as though she
was not sure it was the right one. George nodded.

"My name is Brendan," he said rather unnecessarily, and Mrs. Jersey
nodded in her most gracious manner.

"I bid you welcome sir; any friend of Mr. Train's is also my friend.
If there is anything to amuse you here?" She waved her hand. "We are
simple people. Fortune-telling--a little music and the company of my
guests. Mrs. Taine, Mr. Harmer!" She introduced them, but every now
and then her eyes were on the yellow holly. Brendan remarked it.

"You are noticing my flower, Mrs. Jersey," he said. "It is rather
rare."

"Most extraordinary," replied Mrs. Jersey, coolly. "I have seen holly
with red berries before, but this yellow----"

"There was a great bush of it in my father's garden," said Mr. Harmer,
"but I have not seen any for years."

"Perhaps you would like it, Mrs. Jersey," said Brendan, taking it from
his coat.

She hastily waved her hand. "No! no! I am too old for flowers. Keep
it, Mr. Brendan. It suits better with your youth," she looked at his
face keenly. "I have seen a face like yours before."

Brendan laughed. "I am of a commonplace type, I fear," he said.

"No; not so very common. Fair hair and dark eyes do not usually go
together. Perhaps I have met your father?"

"Perhaps," replied George, phlegmatically.

"Or your mother," persisted Mrs. Jersey.

"I dare say!" Then he turned the conversation. "What a delightful old
house you have here!"

Mrs. Jersey bit her lip on finding her inquiries thus baffled, but
taking her cue expanded on the subject of the house. "It was a
fashionable mansion in the time of the Georges," she said. "Some of
the ceilings are wonderfully painted, and there are all kinds of queer
rooms and cupboards and corners in it. And so quiet. I dare say," she
went on, "this room was filled with beaux and belles in powder and
patches. What a sight, Mr. Brendon--what a sight! Will you have some
negus? Port-wine negus, Mr. Brendan."

She was evidently talking at random, and offered him a glass of negus
with a trembling hand. Brendan; evidently more and more astonished at
her manner, drank off the wine. He made few remarks, being a man who
spoke little in general company. Train had long ago gone to hear Miss
Bull tell fortunes and, from the laughter, it was evident that his
future was being prophesied.

"No! no!" cried Train, "I shall never marry. A literary man should
keep himself away from the fascinations of female society."

"Do you agree with that, Mr. Brendan?" asked Mrs. Jersey, curiously.

He shook his head and laughed. "I am not a hermit, Mrs. Jersey."

"Then Miss Bull must prophesy about your marriage. Come!"

At first Brendon was unwilling to go, but after some persuasion he
submitted to be led to the table. Miss Bull was quite willing to do
what was asked of her, and spread out the cards. Brendon waited beside
Mrs. Jersey with a most indifferent air. She was far more anxious to
hear the fortune than he was.

"You are in trouble," announced Miss Bull in a sepulchral tone, "and
the trouble will grow worse. But in the end all will be well. She will
aid you to get free and will bestow her hand on you."

"She?" asked Brendon, looking puzzled.

Miss Bull did not raise her eyes. "The lady you are thinking of."

Brendon was rather taken aback, but seeing Mrs. Jersey's curious look
he crushed down his emotion. "At my age we are always thinking of
ladies," he said, laughing.

Train touched his arm. "It is----" he began, but Brendon frowned, and
Leonard was quick enough to take the hint. Miss Bull went on telling
the fortune. There were the usual dark and fair people, the widow, the
journey, the money, and all the rest of the general events and
happenings which are usually foretold. But there was always trouble,
trouble, and again trouble. "But you will come out right in the end,"
said Miss Bull. "Keep a brave heart."

"I am sure Mr. Brendon will do that," said Madame, graciously.

While George bowed to the compliment, Miss Bull again shuffled the
cards and fastened her keen black eyes on Madame. "Will you have your
fortune told?" she asked coldly.

"Oh, certainly!" said Mrs. Jersey in a most gushing manner; "anything
to amuse. But my fortune has been told so often, and has never come
true--never," and she sighed in an effective manner.

Miss Bull continued her mystic counting. She told Madame a lot of
things about the house which were known to most present. Mrs. Jersey
laughed and sneered. Suddenly Miss Bull turned up a black card, "You
will meet with a violent death," she said, and every one shuddered.




CHAPTER II

BRENDON'S STORY


If Miss Bull wished to make Madame uncomfortable she certainly
succeeded. From being voluble, Mrs. Jersey became silent, the fresh
color died out of her face, and her lips moved nervously. Twice did
she make an effort to overcome her emotion, but each time failed.
Afterward she took a seat by the fire, and stared into the flames with
an anxious look, as though she saw therein a fulfillment of the dismal
prophecy. Her depression communicated itself to the rest of the
company, and shortly before ten the friends took their departure. The
idea of being alone seemed to cheer Mrs. Jersey, and she accompanied
her departing guests to the front door.

It was a comparatively thick fog, yet not so bad but that the visitors
might hope to reach their homes. For some time Mrs. Jersey stood in
the doorway at the top of the steps, and shook hands with those who
were going. The boarders, who were old and chilly, were too wise to
venture outside on such a dreary night, so Mrs. Jersey had the
door-step all to herself. "If you lose your ways," she called out to
the visitors "come back. You can tell the house by the red light." She
pointed to the fanlight of crimson glass behind which gas was burning.
"I will keep that alight for another hour."

The voices of thanks came back muffled by the fog, but Leonard and
George waited to hear no more. They walked upstairs to Train's
sitting-room, which was on the first floor. The windows looked out on
to a back garden, wherein grew a few scrubby trees, so that the
prospect was not cheering. But on this night the faded crimson
curtains were drawn, the fire was lighted, and a round table in the
middle of the apartment was spread for supper. On one side a door led
to Leonard's bedroom, on the other side was the room wherein George
was to sleep. As the fire-light played on the old-fashioned furniture
and on the mellow colors of curtains and carpet, Leonard rubbed his
hands. "It is rather quaint," he said cheerfully, and lighted the
lamp.

"Not such a palace as your diggings in Duke Street," said Brendon,
stretching his long legs on the chintz-covered sofa.

"One must suffer in the cause of art," said Train, putting the shade
on the lamp. "I am picking up excellent types here. What do you
think?"

"There's plenty of material," growled Brendon, getting out his pipe.

"Don't smoke yet, George," interposed Train, glancing at the clock.
"We must have supper first. After that, we can smoke till eleven, and
then we must go to bed."

"You keep early hours here, Leonard."

"I don't. Mrs. Jersey asked me particularly to be in bed at eleven."

"Why?" Brendon started, and looked hard at his friend.

"I don't know, but she did."

"Is it an understood thing that you retire at that hour?"

Train shook his head and drew in his chair. "By no means. I have sat
up till two before now. But on this night Mrs. Jersey wants the house
to be considered respectable, and therefore asked me to retire early.
Perhaps it's on account of you, old man." Here he smiled in an amused
manner. "She hopes to get you as a boarder."

"I wouldn't come here for the world," retorted Brendon, with quite
unnecessary violence.

"Why not? Have some tongue!"

"Thanks," responded George, passing his plate. "Because I don't like
the house, and I don't care for Mrs. Jersey."

"Why did you advise me to come here, then?" asked Train, pouring out a
glass of claret.

"Well, you wanted something in the style of Dickens, and this was the
only place I knew."

"How did you know about it?"

George deliberated for a moment, and then fastened his eyes on his
plate. "I lived here once," he said in a low voice.

"Dear me," gasped Train, "what an extraordinary thing."

"Why so? One must live somewhere."

"But you didn't like Mrs. Jersey."

"She was not here then."

"Who was here?"

"My grandfather on the mother's side. That's fifteen years ago."

Leonard looked at the handsome, moody face of his friend, musingly. "I
never knew you had a grandfather," he said at last.

"Do you know anything at all about me?" asked Brendon.

"No. Now I come to think of it, I don't. I met you three years ago at
Mrs. Ward's house, and we have been friends ever since."

"Acquaintances, rather. Men are not friends until they become
confidential with one another. Well, Train," George pushed back his
chair and wiped his mouth, "to-night I intend to turn you from a mere
acquaintance into a friend."

"I shall be delighted," said Train, rather bewildered. "Won't you have
more supper?"

Brendon shook his head, lighted his pipe, and again stretched himself
on the sofa. Train, being curious to know what he had to say, was on
the point of joining him. But he was yet hungry, so could not bring
himself to leave the table. He therefore continued his supper, and, as
Brendon seemed disinclined to talk, held his peace.

Train's parents were dead, and had left him a snug little income of
five thousand a year. Not being very strong-minded, and being more
than a trifle conceited as to his literary abilities, his money
speedily attracted round him a number of needy hangers-on, who
flattered him to the top of his bent. They praised him to his face,
sneered at him behind his back; ate his meat, borrowed his money, and
kept him in a fools' paradise regarding human nature. Poor Leonard
thought that all women were angels, and all men good fellows with a
harmless tendency to borrow. Such a Simple Simon could not but be the
prey of every scoundrel in London, and it said much for his moral
nature that he touched all this pitch without being defiled. He was
called a fool by those he fed, but none could call him a rogue.

It was this simplicity which inspired Brendon with a pitying
friendship; and Brendon had done much to save him from the harpies who
preyed on this innocent. In several cases he had opened Train's eyes,
at the cost of quarreling with those who lost by the opening. But
George was well able to hold his own, and none could say that he
benefited pecuniarily by the trust and confidence which Leonard
reposed in him. To avert all suspicion of this sort he had refused to
become Train's secretary and companion at an excellent salary. Brendon
was poor and wanted that salary; but he valued his independence, and
so preferred to fight for his own hand. However, he continued his
services to Leonard as a kind of unofficial mentor.

Now that Train came to think of it, Brendon was rather a mysterious
person. He lived by writing articles for the papers, and was always
well dressed. His rooms were in Kensington, and he seemed to know many
people whom he did not cultivate. Train would have given his ears to
enter the houses at which Brendon was a welcome guest. But for the
most part George preferred to live alone with his pipe and his books.
He was writing a novel, and hoped to make a successful career as a
literary man. But as he was barely thirty years of age, and had been
settled only five years in London, his scheme of life was rather in
embryo. He appeared to have some secret trouble, but what it was Train
never knew, as Brendon was a particularly reticent man. Why he should
propose to be frank on this especial night Leonard could not
understand. After supper he put the question to him.

"Well," said Brendon, without moving or taking his eyes from the fire,
"it's this way, Train. I know you are a kind-hearted man, and although
you talk very freely about your own affairs, yet I know you can keep
the secret of a friend."

"You can depend upon that, George. Anything you tell me will never be
repeated."

Brendon nodded his thanks. "Also," he continued, "I wish you to lend
me three hundred pounds."

"A thousand if you will."

"Three hundred will be sufficient. I'll repay you when I come into my
property."

Train opened his eyes. "Are you coming into money?" he asked.

"That I can't say. It all depends! Do you know why I suggested this
house to you, Leonard?" he asked suddenly.

"To help me in my literary work."

"That was one reason certainly, but I had another and more selfish
one, connected--" George sat up to finish the sentence--"connected
with Mrs. Jersey," he said quietly.

This remark was so unexpected that Leonard did not know what to say
for the moment. "I thought you did not know her," he gasped out.

"Nor do I."

"Does she know you?"

"Not as George Brendon, or as I am now."

"What do you mean?" Train was more puzzled than ever.

"It's a long story. I don't know that I can tell you the whole."

Train looked annoyed. "Trust me----"

"All in all, or not at all," finished Brendon; "quite so." He paused
and drew hard at his pipe. "Since I want money I must trust you."

"Is it only for that reason that you consider me worthy of your
confidence?" asked Leonard, much mortified.

George leaned forward and patted him on the knee. "No, old man. I wish
you to help me also."

"In what way?"

"With Dorothy Ward," replied George, looking closely at his pipe.

"Was she in your mind to-night when that old maid was telling the
cards?" asked Train, sitting up with a look of interest.

Brendon nodded. "But I do not wish you to mention her name. That was
why----"

"I know. I was foolish. Well, she's a pretty girl, and as good as she
is pretty."

"Which is marvelous," said Brendon, "considering the fashionable
mother she has."

Train smiled. "Mrs. Ward is certainly a leader of fashion."

"And as heartless as any woman I know," observed Brendon. He glanced
affectionately at the yellow holly. "Dorothy gave me this to-night."

"Did you see her before you came here?"

"Yes. I went to afternoon tea. We--" Brendon examined his pipe
again--"we understand one another," he said.

Leonard sprang to his feet. "My dear chap, I congratulate you."

"Thanks! but it's too early for congratulation as yet. Mrs. Ward wants
her daughter to make a good marriage. George Brendon will not be the
husband of her choice, but Lord Derrington!"

"Does she want her daughter to marry that old thing?"

"You don't understand, Leonard. I mean that if I become Lord
Derrington when the old man dies Mrs. Ward will consent."

Train sat down helplessly and stared. "I don't understand," he said.

"I'll put the thing in a nutshell," explained Brendon. "Lord
Derrington is my grandfather."

"Your--but he never lived here?"

"No. The grandfather who lived here, and with whom I stayed, was my
mother's father. He was called Lockwood. Derrington is my father's
father. Now do you understand?"

"Not quite! How can you become Lord Derrington when he has a
grandson--that young rip Walter Vane!"

"Walter Vane is the son of my father's brother, and my father was the
elder and the heir to the title."

"Then, if Lord Derrington dies you become----"

"Exactly. But the difficulty is that I have to establish my birth."

Leonard jumped up and clutched his hair. "Here's a mystery," he said,
staring at his friend. "What does it all mean?"

"Sit down and I'll tell you!"

Leonard resumed his seat and glanced at the clock. "We have a quarter
of an hour," he said, "but I think we'll defy Mrs. Jersey and sit up
this night."

"No," said Brendon, hastily; "we may as well do what she wants. I wish
to conciliate her. She is the only person who can help to prove my
mother's marriage."

"Humph! I thought there was something queer about her. Who was she?"

"My mother's maid! But I had better tell you from the beginning."

Train sat down and produced a cigarette. "Go on," he said; "no, wait!
I want to know before you begin why Mrs. Jersey was so struck with
that yellow holly?"

This time it was Brendon who looked puzzled. "I can't say, Leonard."

"Do you think she connected it with some disaster?" asked Train.

"From her looks, when she set eyes on it, I should think so!"

"Does Miss Ward know Mrs. Jersey?"

"No. She knows nothing about her."

"And it was Miss Ward who gave you the yellow holly?"

"Yes. When I was at afternoon tea."

"Then I can't see why Mrs. Jersey should have made such a spectacle of
herself," said Leonard, lighting his cigarette. "Tell your story."

"I'll do so as concisely as possible," said Brendon, staring into the
fire. "My mother was the daughter of Anthony Lockwood, who was a
teacher of singing, and lived here. She--I am talking of my
mother--was very beautiful, and also became famous as a singer at
concerts. The son of Lord Derrington, Percy Vane, saw her and loved
her. He subsequently eloped with her. She died in Paris two years
later, shortly after I was born."

"And you came to live here?"

"Not immediately. I was but an infant in arms, but my father would
not part with me. He kept Mrs. Jersey--she was my mother's maid,
remember--as my nurse, and we went to Monte Carlo. I am afraid my poor
father was a bit of a scamp. He was at all events a gambler, and lost
all his money at the tables. He became poor, and his father, Lord
Derrington, refused to help him."

"He was angry at the marriage, I suppose?"

"That's the point. Was there a marriage? But to make things clear I
had better go on as I started. My father went to San Remo, and from
that place he sent me home to my grandfather Lockwood."

"With Mrs. Jersey?"

"No. By that time Mrs. Jersey had left; I had another nurse, and it
was she who took me to this house. My grandfather was delighted to
have me, as he always insisted that there was a marriage. I grew up
here, and went to school, afterward to college. My grandfather died,
but there was just enough money to finish my education. The house was
sold, and by a curious coincidence Mrs. Jersey took it as a boarding
establishment. Where she got the money I don't know. But I passed out
of her life as a mere infant, and I don't suppose she thought anything
more about me. Perhaps she recognized me to-night from my likeness to
my father, as she mentioned that she had seen my face before. But I
can't say."

"What became of your father?"

"That is the tragic part of the story. He was murdered at a masked
ball at San Remo. The assassin was never discovered, but it was
supposed to be some passionate Italian lover. My grandfather Lockwood
was so angry at the way in which his daughter had been treated that he
never stood up for my rights. I would not do so, either, but that I
love Miss Ward. Now, it is my intention to see Mrs. Jersey to-morrow
and get the truth out of her."

"What does she know?"

"She knows where the marriage was celebrated, and can prove that my
birth is legitimate. That is why I came here, Leonard."

"Why did you not speak to her to-night?"

"I think it is better she should be in a quieter frame of mind," said
Brendon. "She has never seen me since I was a small child, and my name
of Brendon is quite unknown to her."

"Why do you call yourself Brendon?" asked Train.

George began to pace up and down the room. "Pride made me do that," he
declared. "When my father was murdered at San Remo, Lord Derrington
denied the marriage, and refused to do anything for me. My grandfather
Lockwood gave me his own name, and I was called George Lockwood for
many a long day. At the age of fifteen Mr. Lockwood died, and then a
note came to my guardian saying that Lord Derrington proposed to allow
me a small income."

"For what reason?"

"I can't say. Perhaps it was remorse."

Train shook his head. "I have met Lord Derrington, and if such an old
Tartar feels remorse, then there is a chance that pigs may fly."

"That's an elegant illustration, Leonard," observed George, with a
smile; "but to continue (as I see it is nearly eleven), even as a boy
I felt the indignity put upon me. I refused, with the permission of my
guardian, the offered sum, and continued at school. When I left to go
to college I changed my name so that Lord Derrington should not have
the chance of insulting me further or of knowing who I was. My
guardian suggested Brendon, so as that was as good a name as another I
took it. Hence Mrs. Jersey can't possibly know me, or why I came to
see her. She will be wiser in the morning," added Brendon grimly.

"But she evidently saw in you some likeness to your father."

"Evidently. From all I have heard Mrs. Jersey was in love with my
father, even though she was only a lady's maid. But I know very little
about her. My business here is to learn.

"But why has she kept silent all these years?"

Brendon shrugged his shoulders. "She has had no inducement to speak
out," he said; "that is why I wish you to lend me three hundred
pounds, Leonard. She will require a bribe."

"And a larger one than that, George. A woman like Mrs. Jersey would
not part with such a secret for so small a sum."

"Oh, I can pay her what she demands when in possession of the estates.
But at present she will want to see the color of my money."

Train stared into the fire meditating on this queer story, which was
quite a romance. Then he saw an obstacle. "George," he said, "even if
you prove that you are the heir you won't get any money. Lord
Derrington is still living."

"Yes, and from all accounts he means to go on living like the
truculent old tyrant he is. But the estates are entailed, and must
come to me when he dies, and, of course, the title is mine, too, when
he is done with it. If Mrs. Jersey learns these facts, she will come
to terms, on a promise of money when I inherit."

"Then you will speak to her in the morning?"

"Yes. She is the only person who can right me. But I mean to be the
husband of Dorothy Ward, and my only chance to get round the mother is
to prove my legitimacy."

"I don't think Miss Ward cares much for her mother."

"Who could?" asked Brendon, cynically. "She is a worthless little
canary-bird. But I tell you, Leonard, that frivolous as Mrs. Ward
appears to be, she is a most determined woman, with an iron will. She
will make her daughter do as she is bid, and will sell her to the
highest bidder. As Lord Derrington's grandson and acknowledged heir, I
have a good chance. As George Brendon--" he stopped as the clock
struck eleven--"as George Brendon I am going to bed."

Train rose to light the candles which stood on a side-table, yawning
as he did so. He was much interested in Brendon's story, but the
telling of it had tired him. "I shall sleep like a top to-night."

"Well, get to bed. I'll put out the lamp," said George, and did so.

"No," said Leonard, taking a candlestick in either hand. "I'll see you
to your virtuous couch," and he preceded him into the bedroom.

It was a quaint apartment, with heavy mahogany furniture and a Turkey
carpet. Entering from the sitting-room, George saw that the bed was
directly opposite the door. "It's been moved since my time."

"What?" cried Leonard, setting down the candles, "Is the furniture the
same your grandfather had?"

"Yes. Mrs. Jersey bought the house and its contents. They are
old-fashioned enough in all conscience. Look at that ugly wardrobe."
He pointed to one against the inner wall and opposite the window. "The
mirror in that used to frighten me as a little chap. It looked so
ghostly in the moonlight. Humph! it's years and years since I slept in
my old bed," said Brendon, taking off his coat. "I should dream the
dreams of childhood now that I am back again. But you needn't say
anything of this, Leonard."

"Of course not," replied the other. "And you need not smash your
yellow holly by leaving it in your coat all night. Put it in water."

"No." George stopped the too officious Leonard. "Dorothy put it into
my coat, and there it shall remain. The berries are firm and won't fall.
I'll see to that. Hush!"

"What's the matter?" asked Train, startled.

For answer, Brendon quickly extinguished both candles, and pointed to
the door of the sitting-room, which stood half open. "Not a word," he
murmured to Train, grasping his wrist to enforce attention. "I heard a
footstep."

The two men stood in the darkness, silent and with beating hearts. A
glimmer of light came from the fire and struck across into the
bedroom. Leonard listened with all his ears. He distinctly heard
stealthy footsteps coming along the passage, which was on the other
side of the wall against which stood the wardrobe. The footsteps
paused at the sitting-room door. They heard this open, and scarcely
dared to breathe. Some one entered the room, and waited for a moment
or so, evidently listening. Then the door was opened and closed again,
and the footsteps died away. Even then Brendon stopped Leonard from
lighting the candles.

"Go to bed in the dark," he said softly.

"Was it Mrs. Jersey?" asked Leonard.

"Of course it was. She came to see if you were in bed."

"But why should she?"

"I can't say. There's something queer about that old woman. Get to
bed, Leonard. You can light your candle in your own room. I shall not
light mine."

Train was bursting with indignation. "But it's absurd to be treated
like a couple of schoolboys," he said, taking his candlestick.

"There's more in it than that," said Brendon, pushing him to the door.
"Get to bed, and make no noise. We can talk in the morning."

Train darted across the sitting-room, and retired. Brendon closed his
door softly, and listened again. There was no return of the footsteps,
so he slipped into bed without relighting the candle. The clock in the
sitting-room chimed a quarter past eleven.




CHAPTER III

THE NEXT MORNING


"Fogs and smokes and chokes," said the fat cook, her elbows on the
table, and a saucer of tea at her lips. "I wish I were back in Essex,
that I do."

"The fogs come from there," cried Jarvey, who was page-boy in the
Jersey mansion, and knew more than was good for him. "If they drained
them marshes, fogs wouldn't come here. Old Rasper says so, and knows a
lot, he does."

"He don't know Essex," grunted the cook. "A lovely county----"

"For frogs," sniggered Jarvey, devouring his slice of bread.

The housemaid joined in and declared for Devon, whence she came. The
Swiss manservant talked of his native mountains, and was sneered at by
the company generally as a foreigner. Jarvey was particularly
insolent, and poor Fritz was reduced to swearing in his own language,
whereupon they laughed the more. It was a most inspiriting beginning
to the day's work.

The kitchen in the basement was a large stone apartment, and even on
the brightest of days not very well lighted. On this particular
morning the gas was burning, and was likely to continue alight during
the day, as the fog was as thick as ever. The servants collected round
the table were having an early cup of tea. To assist the progress of
digestion they conversed as above, and gradually drifted into talking
of their mistress and of the boarders. Miss Bull in particular seemed
to be disliked.

"She's a sly cat, with that white face of hers," said the cook. "Twice
she said the soup was burnt. I never liked her."

"Madame don't, either," said Jarvey, ruffling his short hair. "They've
been quarreling awful. I shouldn't wonder if Madame gave her notice."

"Ah! Miss Margery will have something to say to that," chimed in the
housemaid; "she likes Miss Bull."

"'Cause Miss Bull makes much of her, and no one else does."

"Well, for my part," said the cook, "I'm always civil to Miss Bull,
though she is a cat. If the mistress died, Miss Margery would govern
the house, and Miss Bull governs her. I don't want to lose no good
situation through bad manners."

"Madame ain't likely to die," said Jarvey; "she's as healthy as a
stray dog, and as sharp. I don't care for old Miss Bull, or for
stopping here, as I'm a-going to get a place as waiter at a club."

"Ach, leetle boy, you will be no vaiter," said Fritz.

"Shut your mouth, froggy," snapped Jarvey, and produced a cigarette.

"Don't you smoke here, you brat," shrieked the cook, and, snatching it
from his mouth, flung it into the fire. "Here's Madame's tea. Take it
to her sitting-room. She's sure to be up and waiting."

Jarvey showed fight at first, but as the cook had a strong arm he
thought discretion the better part of valor, and went grumbling up the
stairs. Mrs. Jersey was an early riser, and usually had a cup of tea
in her sitting-room at seven o'clock. After this refresher she gave
audience to the cook, looked over her tradesmen's books, and
complained generally that the servants were not doing their duty.
Madame was not at her best in the morning, and Jarvey went up most
unwillingly. The housemaid should have gone, but when she could she
sent Jarvey, and when he refused to go Fritz was dispatched to bear
the brunt of Madame's anger. She usually scolded Fritz in French.

When the boy went the servants continued chatting and eating. It was
just on seven, and they were reluctantly rising to begin their duties,
when a crash was heard and then a clatter of boots, "There," cried the
cook, "that brat's been and smashed the tray. Won't Madame give it to
him? Mercy! mercy!"--her voice leaped an octave--"he's mad!"

This was because Jarvey, with his hair on end and his face perfectly
white, tore into the kitchen. He raced round and round the table, his
eyes starting from his head. The servants huddled together in fear,
and the cook seized the toasting-fork. They all agreed with her that
the page was mad. Suddenly Jarvey tumbled in a heap, and began to
moan, with his face on the floor. "Oh! the blood--the blood!"

"What's he saying about blood?" asked the scared cook.

Jarvey leaped to his feet. "She's dead--she's murdered!" he shrieked.
"I see her all covered with blood. Oh--mother--oh, I want my mother!"
and down he dropped on the floor again, kicking and screaming.

The boy was scared out of his life, and Fritz laid hold of him, while
the other servants, headed by the valiant cook, ran up the stairs and
burst into Madame's sitting-room, which was on the ground floor, and
no great distance from the front door. The next moment they were out
again, all shrieking murder and calling loudly for the police. The
sleeping boarders took the alarm, and in the lightest of attire
appeared on the stairs with white faces. The terrible word shrieked by
a dozen voices through the silent house curdled the blood in their
aged veins. What with the early hour, the fog, the gas, and the crying
of the servants, it was like a nightmare.

An hour later the police were in the house, summoned by Miss Bull, who
alone of the boarders retained her head. As Margery, who was next in
command after her aunt, could not be brought to do anything, Miss Bull
took charge. It was Miss Bull who first ventured into the sitting-room
where Madame, huddled up in a chair drawn to the table, lay face
downward in such a position as to reveal a gaping wound in her neck.
And it was Miss Bull who sent the servants back to the kitchen, who
closed the door of the death-chamber, and who told Jarvey to fetch the
nearest policeman. Consequently it was Miss Bull whom the inspector
addressed, as she seemed to be the sole person in authority. Mrs.
Taine retreated to her bedroom with a prayer-book, Mr. Granger went
for a walk in the fog, Margery sat in a stupor, her eyes dull and her
slack mouth awry. The little old maid, from being a nonentity, became
a person of first-class importance. She displayed perfect tact and
self-control in dealing with the terrified old men and women, and no
one would have given her credit for such generalship. But the hour had
come for Miss Bull to assert herself, and she proved to be equal to
the occasion.

"Now, then," said the inspector, when he had posted his men and was
alone with Miss Bull in the drawing-room, "what do you know of this?"

Miss Bull, her face white and drawn, her eyes sharper than ever, and
her manner perfectly composed, shook her head. "I know absolutely
nothing," she said in her monotonous voice. "Last night we had our
usual reception, but it broke up at ten o'clock. Madame dismissed the
guests at that hour, and stood in the doorway to do so. I retired to
my bedroom with Madame's niece, and after a game of 'Patience' I went
to bed."

"Does Mrs. Jersey's niece sleep with you?"

"Margery? No! She sleeps in a room above. It was a few minutes to
eleven when she left me. I was in bed shortly after the clock struck
the hour. I am sure Margery had nothing to do with it. She was quite
devoted to her aunt, and as the poor girl has no money, I don't know
how she will live now that Madame is dead."

The inspector thought for a moment. He was a tall, thin man, rather
military in appearance, and with a wooden, expressionless face, which
he found of great service in hiding his thoughts when examining those
he suspected. He certainly did not suspect Miss Bull, and seemed
inclined to make her his coadjutor. In proof of this he made her
accompany him to the room wherein Mrs. Jersey lay dead.

"It's not far from the front door," mused Inspector Quex. "Could any
one have entered?"

"No, I am sure of that," put in Miss Bull, emphatically. "Madame
always locked the front door every night herself and kept the key. It
could not be opened in the morning until she chose."

"Who opened it this morning?"

"I did. I knew that the key would be in Madame's pocket."

"And it was?"

"Yes. She must have locked the door as usual, and then have gone to
put the light out in her sitting-room before going upstairs."

"Was that before eleven?"

"I can't say. I did not leave my room after ten. But Margery may have
seen some one as she went up to her bedroom when she left me."

"I'll question the girl," said Quex, and entered the sitting-room.

It was of no great size, with one window, which looked out onto the
square. This was locked, and, even if it had not been, no one could
have climbed in, as Quex saw that the area was below. "And Madame
chained the area gate every night with her own hands," explained Miss
Bull, who was watching him.

The inspector turned suddenly toward her. "It seems to me that the
deceased was over-cautious. Was she afraid?"

"I think she was," admitted Miss Bull. "She had a habit of looking
over her shoulder, and, as I have stated, was particular as to bolts
and bars. But she was a secretive woman, and never said anything to me
about her fears, if she had any."

"Were you great friends?"

"No," replied the old maid, bluntly, "we were not. Madame behaved in
an extremely rude manner, and had she lived I should have given her
notice. I never liked her," added Miss Bull, with feminine spite.

"You'll be all the more likely to speak the truth then," said Quex,
cynically, and turned to examine the body.

Madame was still in the black-silk dress which she wore on the
previous night. Seated at the round center-table, she had evidently
been struck from behind, and killed before she had time to cry out.
Her arms were on the table, and her head had fallen forward. The
furniture of the room was not in disorder, the red table-cloth was not
even ruffled. The murder had been committed without haste or noise, as
Quex pointed out to Miss Bull.

"Whosoever murdered her must have been a friend," said he.

"It doesn't seem a friendly act to kill a defenseless woman," said
Miss Bull, looking coldly on the limp figure.

"You don't quite understand. What I mean is that Mrs. Jersey knew the
person who killed her."

Miss Bull shook her head. "I don't agree with you," she observed, and
Quex was astonished that she should dare to contradict. "She was
struck from behind, before she had time to turn her head."

"Quite so. But the assassin must have entered the room, and unless the
deceased was deaf----"

"Madame had particularly sharp ears."

"Then that makes it all the more certain. Had any one unexpected
entered she would have been on the alert; there would have been a
struggle. Now we see that the furniture is not disturbed, therefore we
can argue from this that Mrs. Jersey was in friendly conversation with
the assassin. She was seated at the table, and the assassin was at her
back, which shows a certain amount of trust. In fact, Miss Bull, the
person who committed this murder was the last person Mrs. Jersey
expected to hurt her in any way."

"She had no enemies that I knew of."

"I talk rather of friends," said Quex, coolly. "You have not been
listening to my argument."

"Oh, I quite understand. But I don't fancy that Madame had any friends
either. She was a woman who kept very much to herself."

"Do you know anything of her past?"

"Absolutely nothing. She took this house some fourteen or fifteen
years ago, I believe. I have been here ten, and was very comfortable,
save that Madame and I disagreed on many points. She was always rude
to me, and I don't think she was a lady." Miss Bull drew herself up.
"My father was a general," she declared proudly.

But Quex was too busy examining the room to attend to Miss Bull's
family history. He searched for the weapon with which the crime had
been committed, but could find none. There was no blood on the
furniture, although some had trickled down from the wound onto the
table-cloth. The blow must have been struck strongly and surely, and
with the power of a deadly hatred. It was at this moment that the
doctor arrived, and, turning the body over to him, Quex conducted Miss
Bull back to the drawing-room, where he examined all who were in the
house. "Has any one left this morning?" he asked. Jarvey had seen Mr.
Granger go out, and said so. Even while he was speaking Mr. Granger
returned, and, filled with suspicion, Quex examined him first.

Granger, when he saw what the inspector was bent upon, expressed the
greatest indignation. "How dare you accuse a gentleman of such a
thing?" he cried. "I went out to compose my nerves."

"Into the fog?" asked Quex, doubtfully.

"Yes, sir, and I should have gone out into snow and hail if I had
desired. There was no intimation that none were to leave the house.
Had a notice been given to that effect I should have remained."

"I beg your pardon," said Quex, seeing that the old gentleman was
fuming, and seeing also that such a senile creature, with so sheeplike
a face, was innocent enough, "but it is my duty to be suspicious."

"But not to accuse innocent people of a crime, sir."

"No. But, for the sake of an example, will you tell me what you did
with yourself since leaving the drawing-room last night at ten?"

"Certainly. I have no reason to conceal my doings, officer," said Mr.
Granger, angrily. "I retired to my bedroom at ten and to bed. The last
I saw of Madame she was standing on the door-step bidding farewell to
her guests. In the morning I was awakened by the news of the murder,
and went out to walk off the horror produced by the sight of that poor
woman."

"Did you see the body?"

"We all saw the body, till Miss Bull----"

"I turned them out and locked the door," put in Miss Bull, sharply.

"It was as well that nothing should be disturbed in the room till the
police arrived. That was my argument."

"And a very good one," said Quex, approvingly. "You have a head on
your shoulders, Miss."

"My father was a general," replied the old maid, nodding, "and I
inherit his talent for organization."

The next witness examined was Margery, and she refused to open her
mouth unless she sat by Miss Bull. The old maid held Margery's hand
and coaxed her into answering when she proved recalcitrant. Quex could
not but admire the way in which Miss Bull managed the lumpish
creature.

"You left the drawing-room with this lady?" he asked, indicating Miss
Bull, and speaking in a persuasive tone.

"Yes. We played 'Patience' in Miss Bull's bedroom. I did it twice."

"At what time did you leave?"

"About eleven--just before it."

"Did the clock strike the hour when you were in your own bedroom?"

"No," said Margery, trying to collect her wits, "when I was in the
passage."

"What were you doing in the passage? It would only take you a few
minutes to get to your room, would it not?"

"Yes," put in Miss Bull. "My bedroom is on the second floor, and
Margery's is on the fourth, right above my head. You could easily have
got to your room before the clock struck, Margery.

"I did try to," admitted the girl, "but my aunt kept me talking."

Quex sat up. "Did you speak to your aunt at that hour?"

"Yes. She met me walking up to my room, and scolded me for being out
of bed at that hour. I said I had been with Miss Bull, and----"

"And Madame made polite remarks about me," said the old maid, grimly.
"Oh, I can well understand what she said. But it would seem, Mr.
Inspector, that Margery was the last person to see Madame alive."

"We'll see," said Quex, who was not going to be taught his business
even by so clever a person as Miss Bull. "Was there any one else
about?" he asked Margery.

"No. My aunt said that every one was in bed but me, and that she would
not have it. The clock struck eleven, and she called me names. She
then took me by the arm and pushed me into my room and locked the
door. Yes, she did," nodded Margery, vindictively; "she locked the
door."

"Why did she do that?" asked Quex staring.

"I don't know. I wasn't doing anything," grumbled Margery, "but she
said she wouldn't have me wandering about the house at all hours of
the night and locked me in. I couldn't get out this morning till Miss
Bull let me out."

"Margery usually brings me my cup of tea," explained Miss Bull, "and
as she did not come this morning as usual I was anxious. When the
alarm came I went to look for Margery in her room. The key was in the
door, but the door was locked. I released Margery."

"Oh, the key was in the door," mused Quex. "It would seem, then, that
the deceased simply turned the key and left it. Humph! I wonder why
she locked the girl in?"

Miss Bull shrugged her thin shoulders. "It was spite on her part," she
said. "Madame never cared to see Margery with me."

"Because I love you so," said the girl with an adoring look, and Miss
Bull patted her hand fondly. It was strange, thought the inspector,
that so clever and refined a woman should love so stupid and
coarse-looking a girl. But like does not always draw to like.

While Quex was thus examining the witnesses, Train and Brendon were
seated in the sitting-room of the former, discussing the crime.
Brendon was gloomy, for in the unexpected death of Mrs. Jersey he saw
the downfall of his hopes of proving his legitimacy. "There's no
chance of my marrying Dorothy now," he said with a sigh. "I'll remain
plain George Brendon to the end of my days, and a bachelor at that."

"It's awful!" gasped Leonard, who was white and haggard. "I never
expected that my search for types would lead me into the neighborhood
of a tragedy. Who could have killed her?"

"I can't say."

"I wonder if her death has anything to do with your affairs?"

Brendon looked up suddenly and with a stern, flushed face. "Train," he
said sharply, "whatever you do, say nothing about what I told you last
night."

"Yes. But what you told me might lead to the discovery of the
assassin."

"I don't care if it does," said Brendon, angrily, and rising to his
feet to emphasize his determination, "you are to keep my confidence."

"Oh, I shan't say anything. But do you think----"

"I think nothing. But I am sure that my affairs have nothing to do
with this death. I came to see Mrs. Jersey, and this morning I should
have had the truth out of her. But she is dead, and so all my projects
go to the four winds. But I don't want them spoken of."

"You can depend upon me," said Leonard, dominated by the strong will
of his friend. "But who could have----"

"I tell you I don't know," cried George, restlessly. "How you do harp
on that subject."

"It is the subject of the hour," retorted Train. "And a most
unpleasant one. Here I shall have to remain until that police-officer
questions me."

"What story will you tell?"

"Any story but the one I told to you," retorted Brendon.

"Well," said Leonard, after a pause, "you can rely upon me. I shall
not say anything to get you into trouble."

Brendon laughed, but not pleasantly. "My good fellow, I have done
nothing wrong. Even if my tale were told I could not be accused of
having to do anything with this murder."

"Oh, I didn't mean that for one moment," protested Train, uneasily.

"I know you didn't. Nevertheless, if this police inspector knew that I
told you he might get it into his stupid head that--well." Brendon
broke off abruptly. "I don't know what he mightn't think. However, I
shall answer his questions as to my visit here and then go away."

"I'll go also," said Train with a shudder. "I can't stop here after
what has occurred. It's terrible. To think of that poor woman
murdered. How lucky I locked my door last night!"

Brendon stopped in his walk and looked sharply at the young man. "Why
did you lock your door?" he asked surprised.

"Well, you see, after Mrs. Jersey came into the sitting-room I didn't
like to think of her prowling about. One is so helpless when one is
asleep," and Train shuddered.

"Did you expect her to murder you?" asked Brendon, derisively.

"I didn't expect anything," retorted Leonard, rather nettled, "but I
didn't want her to come into my rooms, so I got out of bed and locked
the sitting-room door."

"Not your bedroom door?"

"No, the sitting-room door; so both you and I were quite safe from her
prying."

Brendon looked steadily at Train and gave a short laugh. "Yes. As you
locked the sitting-room door she could as little enter as you or I
could go out. Leonard--" he paused and pinched his lip--"I do not
think it will be wise for you to tell the inspector this."

"Why not? You and I are innocent."

"That goes without the saying," answered George, sharply; "but the
less we have to do with this unpleasant matter the better. I suppose
we in common with every one else here, will be called to give evidence
at the inquest. Once that is done and Mrs. Jersey is safely buried I
wash my hands of the whole affair."

Train shuddered. "So do I," said he; "I am the last man in the world
to wish to pursue the subject. But who can be guilty? It must be some
one in the house!"

"I suppose so," replied Brendon, "unless Mrs. Jersey had a visitor
last night."

"till have had," said Leonard. "When I locked the sitting-room
door, and that was about half-past eleven I think, I heard the closing
of the front door."

"The deuce you did."

"Yes, I put my head out and listened to see if all was quiet. I
distinctly heard the front door close."

"She must have had a visitor," said Brendon, thoughtfully; "yet as she
alone could have let that visitor out, and as she must have been alive
to do so, the visitor cannot be the assassin."

"The visitor might have killed her and then have closed the door
himself."

"Himself? How do you know the visitor was a man? It might have been a
woman. Besides, Miss Bull told me that the door was locked as usual,
and that she took the key this morning to open it from Mrs. Jersey's
pocket. No, Train, the person who killed Mrs. Jersey is in the house.
But were I you I should say as little as possible to the inspector
about this."

Leonard took this advice, and, when questioned, simply stated that he
had retired to bed at eleven and had heard nothing. Brendon made a
similar statement, and Quex saw no reason to doubt their evidence.

He questioned all the boarders and all the servants, but could learn
nothing likely to throw any light on the darkness which concealed the
crime. No one had heard a noise in the night, no one had heard a
scream, and it was conclusively proved that every one in the house was
in bed by eleven o'clock; the majority, indeed, before that hour.
Jarvey had been the last to retire, at half-past ten o'clock, and then
he had left Madame in her sitting-room with a book and a glass of
negus. She sent him off in a hurry and with, as he expressed it, "a
flea in his ear"--being somewhat out of temper. It was thus apparent
that Margery, who saw Madame at the striking of the hour, was the last
person to see her alive. Mrs. Jersey went to her own sitting-room and
there had been struck down.

"It was about twelve o'clock that she was stabbed," said the doctor,
after he had made his examination; "but I can go only by the condition
of the body. I should say a little before or after twelve. She was
stabbed in the neck with a sharp instrument."

"With a knife?" said the inspector.

"No," rejoined the doctor, decisively, "it was with a dagger--by a
kind of stiletto. It was not by an ordinary knife that the wound was
inflicted," and then the doctor who loved to hear himself talk, went
into technical details about the death. He proved beyond doubt that
Mrs. Jersey must have died almost immediately with hardly a groan. For
some reason Quex took one and all into the chamber of death and showed
them the corpse. Perhaps he expected that the sight would shake the
nerves of the murderer, supposing the murderer was among those who saw
the body. But no one flinched in the way he expected. Mrs. Jersey was
as dead as a door-nail, but no one knew and no one could prove who had
struck the blow.




CHAPTER IV

A NINE-DAYS' WONDER


On account of its mystery the murder of Mrs. Jersey made a great
sensation. The season was dull, and there was nothing of interest in
the newspapers, therefore the mysterious crime was a godsend to the
reporters. They flocked in shoals to Amelia Square and haunted the
Jersey mansion like unquiet ghosts. Whenever any boarder went out for
a walk he or she would be questioned by eager gentlemen of the press.
Idle sightseers of a morbid turn of mind came to look at the place
where the crime had been committed, and pictures of the house appeared
in several papers. From being a peaceful neighborhood, Amelia Square
became quite lively.

The boarders found all this most unpleasant. This rude awakening from
their sleepy life was too much for them, and the majority made
preparations to leave as soon as the inquest was over. Until then they
were under police surveillance and could not leave the neighborhood, a
restriction which in itself was sufficiently unpleasant. Brendon found
it particularly so, as he was anxious to get back to his own rooms at
Kensington and to his work. But even when he told Inspector Quex that
he was merely a visitor and knew nothing about the matter, that
zealous officer objected to his going. Perhaps, had Brendon insisted,
he might have gained his point, but he did not think it was worth
while to make the fact of his stay in the Jersey mansion too public,
and therefore held his peace. He stopped with Leonard as usual, but
the two men were not such friends as they had been.

Why Train had changed toward him Brendon could not understand. But
ever since Leonard had been submitted to the ordeal of seeing the
corpse he had been an altered man. From being gay he was now dull;
instead of talking volubly, as he usually did, he was silent for hours
at a stretch, and he appeared to shun Brendon's company. George knew
that Train was impressionable and sensitive, and thought that the
sight of the dead and the ordeal of the examination had been too much
for his weak nerves. This might have been the case, but Leonard never
gave him the satisfaction of knowing if his diagnosis was correct.
After a time George ceased to ply him with questions, and contented
himself with the usual courtesies of life. But in his heart he felt
the change deeply. Fool as Train was, Brendon liked him sufficiently
to resent his altered demeanor.

At the inquest nothing was discovered likely to elucidate the mystery.
The boarders all gave the same evidence they had already given to
Quex. Certainly it came out that Miss Bull had prophesied that Madame
would die a violent death, but when questioned on this point she
merely said that she had done so because the death card had been
turned up. Taken in conjunction with another card, according to the
reading employed by fortune-tellers, a violent death was assuredly
prophesied. But, as Miss Bull said, no one was more astonished than
herself at the speedy fulfillment of the prediction. "I told the
fortunes on that night for amusement only," she said, "as I do not
believe there is any sense in such things. It was mere chance, nothing
more. I am not a believer in cards as prophets."

But the coincidence was so extraordinary that several of the
newspapers hinted that the old maid knew more than she chose to tell.
Miss Bull was up in arms at once, and, after consulting her solicitor,
threatened actions for libel until such statements were withdrawn. And
certainly, on the face of it, the accusation was absurd. The majority
of people who did believe in fortune-telling by the cards insisted
that Miss Bull was quite an adept. Several urged her to set up in
business, promising her their patronage, but the little old maid drew
herself up, and, mentioning that her father had been a general,
refused to entertain the idea.

Beyond this episode there was little interest to be found in the
details of the inquest. It appeared that every one was in bed by
eleven, that every one had slept soundly more or less, and that all
were astonished and shocked when the tragedy came to light next
morning. Train could have created a sensation by stating that he had
heard the front door open after eleven; but, true to his promise to
George, he said nothing about this. Miss Bull, on the other hand,
declared that the front door was locked as usual, and that she had
taken the key from the dead woman's pocket to open it when the police
entered. It would appear that Mrs. Jersey had been murdered by some
one in the house. Yet not one scrap of evidence could be found to show
that any one in the house could possibly be guilty. The boarders were
all old, the servants all ordinary human beings, and no motive could
be assigned to any one person for the committal of so cruel a crime.
Moreover, the fact that the instrument used was a stiletto (and the
doctor held to that) showed that the crime must have been committed by
a foreigner. The only foreign person in the house on the night in
question was Fritz, the Swiss waiter. But he would not have killed a
fly, and, moreover, exculpated himself entirely with the aid of
Jarvey, in whose room he slept. The jury brought in a verdict of
murder against some person or persons unknown, and that was all that
could be done toward the elucidation of the Amelia Square crime.

"There's only one thing that wasn't spoken of," said Quex, when he saw
the boarders in the drawing-room for the last time; "it seems that
Mrs. Jersey always put out the light above the door at eleven, or when
the guests departed. On this occasion it burned all night, and, as it
shines behind crimson glass, such a red window might be a guide to any
one who did not know the house, but who had been given that sign
whereby to distinguish it."

"I can explain that," said Granger, who was present. "When Madame was
bidding farewell to her guests she thought that some of them might be
lost in the fog. Therefore she called out after them that she would
let the light burn later so that any might be able to retrace their
steps."

"Well," said Quex, scratching his head, "that explanation is clear."

"And there is no use for it," put in Miss Bull, "since the front door
was locked and no one entered the house on that night."

"That's just it," said the inspector, sagaciously. "As all you ladies
and gentlemen are clearly innocent the crime must have been committed
by some one from outside. Now, is there any one to whom Madame gave a
latch-key?"

"None of us had latch-keys," said Harmer. "Madame would not allow such
a thing."

"Oh, I don't mean you, or those like you, Mr. Harmer. At your age a
latch-key is not necessary. But Mrs. Jersey may have given one to a
friend of hers who came to see her on that night. Had she any friend
in whom she would place such confidence?"

"No," said Miss Bull, decisively. "She trusted no one that far. And I
don't think she had a single friend outside this house."

"And very few in it," muttered Mrs. Taine, who on various occasions
had suffered from Madame's tongue.

"In that case," said Quex, rising to take his leave, "there is nothing
more to be discussed. Who killed Mrs. Jersey, or why she was killed,
will probably never be known. Ladies and gentlemen, good-day," and the
inspector bowed himself stiffly out of the room, with the air of a man
who washed his hands of the whole concern.

And, after all, what could he do? There was no proof likely to
indicate any one as the assassin, and since Leonard kept silent on the
point of the front door having been opened after eleven, it was
impossible to say that the criminal had entered the house. Had Mr.
Inspector known of this he might have made further inquiries; but he
knew nothing and departed extremely perplexed. The Amelia Square crime
was one of those mysterious murders which would have to be relegated
to obscurity for sheer want of evidence.

"When are you going back to Duke Street?" asked Brendon as he took his
leave of Train.

"This very day," replied the young man, gloomily. "I don't want to
stop a moment longer than I can help in this awful house."

"I expect many of the others are of your way of thinking, Train. But,
so far as I can see, there is no hope of learning who killed the
woman."

"If you had only allowed me to tell Quex about the door being opened
he might have traced the assassin."

"I don't think so." Brendon shook his head. "It was a foggy night, and
whosoever entered would be able to slink away without being seen."

"I am not so sure of that. There is only one outlet to the square, and
there stands a policeman on guard."

"The policeman would not be there all the time," argued Brendon, "to
say nothing of the fog, which would hide any one desirous of evading
recognition, as the assassin assuredly must have wished."

"All the same, I wish I had told Quex."

"Well, then, tell him if you like," said George, vexed with this
pertinacity.

"But you asked me not to."

"Only because I fear, with your weak nature, that one question will
lead to another, until the whole of my private affairs will come to
light. I don't want those to be known at Scotland Yard, let alone the
chance that I might be accused of the crime."

"Oh, that's ridiculous! You could not have left the sitting-room
unless I had let you out, and there is no door from your bedroom."

"That is true enough," answered Brendon, with an ironical smile, the
significance of which was lost on Train. "But if the whole of my story
came to light you might be accused of helping me to get rid of the
woman."

"I?" Leonard's hair almost rose on end. "How could I be mixed up in
it?"

"Well, see here," argued Brendon, who thought it just as well to make
Train's own safety depend upon the discretion of too free a tongue. "I
tell you about this house, and on my recommendation you come here. I
come to stop with you and reveal my reasons for coming. These have to
do with the possession of a secret by the murdered woman. All that, to
a policeman, would be suspicious. What would be easier than for me to
go down the stairs and, when the woman refused to confess as to my
legitimacy, to stab her? Then I could return to my bed, and you could
prove an alibi on my behalf by your tale of having locked the
sitting-room door."

Train shuddered. "I see how easily we can get into trouble. I shall
say nothing. I wish I had not come here. I shall go abroad until all
blows over."

"Why," said Brendon, in scorn, "what is there to blow over? No more
will be heard of this matter if you hold your tongue. The inquest is
at an end, the woman will be buried shortly, and you will be back
leading your own life. So far as I am concerned you know that I am not
guilty, and that I could not have left my room since you locked that
special door. Then, as to hearing the front door open, that may have
been a hallucination on your part."

"No. I am sure it wasn't. I heard distinctly."

"Well--" Brendon shrugged his shoulders, but seemed uncomfortable--"I
dare say the assassin came and went in that way. But if he, or she,
did, the door was found fast locked in the morning, unless Miss Bull
is telling a lie."

"She might be."

"I don't see what she has to gain. But there's no use talking any
further. The matter is ended so far as I am concerned."

"What will you do now?"

"I am going to see Dorothy," said Brendon, "and tell her that there is
no chance of our marriage. Nor is there, for I cannot see my way to
prove my legitimacy. We must part, and I shall probably go down the
country for six months or so, to finish my novel and to get rid of my
heartache."

Train remained silent, looking at the ground. Then he glanced at his
friend in a doubtful way. "What has become of your yellow holly?"

Brendon produced it from his pocket. "It withered, so I took it out of
my coat and put it into this envelope."

"Do you know if Miss Ward gave any one else a piece of yellow holly?"

Brendon stared at this strange question. "Not to my knowledge. Why do
you ask?"

Train shuffled his feet and looked down again. "It is an exceptionally
rare sort of thing," he said uneasily, "and its effect on Mrs. Jersey
was so strange that I wondered if she connected it with any trouble or
disaster."

"You made the same remark before," said Brendon, dryly, "and we could
arrive at no conclusion. But in any case I don't see that Miss Ward
giving me the holly has anything to do with Mrs. Jersey's alarm--if
indeed she was alarmed."

"I think she was," said Train, decisively, "and if I were you I would
ask Miss Ward why she gave you the yellow holly."

"What would be the sense in that?"

"You might learn why Mrs. Jersey was startled."

Brendon laughed and shrugged his shoulders. "Your active brain is
building up a perfect romance," he declared. "There can be no
connection between Dorothy and Mrs. Jersey."

"Did she know you were coming to stop here on that night?"

"Yes. I told her so when I met her in the Park in the morning. It was
then that she asked me to afternoon tea."

"And at the afternoon tea she gave you the holly?"

"Yes. You seem to think she did it on purpose that Mrs. Jersey----"

Train interrupted him quickly. "It is you who are building up a
romance now," he said. "I never thought anything of the sort. But I do
say that the coincidence is strange."

"What coincidence?"

"That you should have in your coat a flower--I suppose one can call
berried holly a flower--which awakens unpleasant recollections in Mrs.
Jersey's breast."

"In a word, Train, you fancy that an inquiry into the circumstances of
the yellow holly may lead to a detection of the assassin."

"I don't go so far as that. But I should not be surprised if something
of that sort did eventuate."

"Then you do go so far as that," said Brendon with a shrug. "However,
there is nothing more to be said. My advice to you is to hold your
tongue lest we should both get into trouble."

"I am absolutely innocent."

"So am I if it comes to that. All the same, the less said the better."

Train shook hands with more cordiality than he had hitherto displayed.
"I'll be silent for my own sake as well as for yours," he said, and
the two parted, Leonard to pack up, and Brendon to journey with his
bag for Kensington. Both men were conscious of a relief when they took
leave of each other.

"I wish he hadn't come here," said Train when Brendon departed.

"I wish I had held my tongue," muttered George when he was in his cab.
"That fool seems to think I know something about this matter."

Of course the economy of the mansion was disordered when the crime was
committed. But, thanks to the firm handling of Miss Bull, who now took
the reins which had fallen from the hands of Madame, a few days put a
different complexion on affairs. Margery knew where her aunt kept the
money, and Miss Bull made several of the boarders behindhand pay up.
Thus there was enough money to go on with, and Miss Bull decided to
wait until after the funeral, before deciding what she intended to do
herself. When Mrs. Jersey was buried her lawyer made his appearance
with the will. It was read to Margery, and Miss Bull stopped beside
the poor girl as the only friend she had in the world. The will was
short and concise, as it seemed that there was very little to leave.
The lawyer read it and then looked at Margery to hear what she had to
say. The girl simply stared at him blankly, as though not
comprehending his meaning, and Miss Bull touched her elbow.

"Do you hear what he says?" she asked rebukingly.

"Yes," replied Margery, "but I don't understand. Haven't I any money?"

The lawyer would have read the will again, but Miss Bull held up her
hand.

"She is stunned with grief," said Miss Bull, "and is not capable of
attending to business. Go and lie down, Margery, and I will speak to
this gentleman."

"You do exactly what you like, dear Miss Bull," said Margery, rising,
and then turned to the lawyer. "Let Miss Bull do exactly as she likes.
I leave all in her hands."

"The most sensible thing you can do," said the legal adviser under his
breath, and when Margery had left the room he turned to the old maid.
"Is she an idiot?"

"By no means. But she is not very clever. I have taken a great
interest in her, as, to tell you the truth, Mr. James, she was badly
treated by her aunt. If you will explain the will to me I will see
what can be done to put things straight. I am sorry for the girl and
she is devoted to me."

"It is lucky she has such a friend," said Mr. James, heartily. He did
not care much for Miss Bull, whose very presence seemed to inspire
mistrust, but she was acting very well on this occasion. Moreover, as
Margery was not likely to prove a lucrative client, Mr. James was
anxious to shuffle the business onto Miss Bull's shoulders and get out
of it as fast as he could. "What is it you wish to know?" he asked.

"About this will," said Miss Bull, laying one thin finger on the
document. "Madame leaves to Margery Watson, her niece, the money in
the green box in her sitting-room, and also the jewels, which I
presume mean the diamonds."

"Yes. Also, if you will recollect, the clothes of the deceased lady.

"Is there nothing else?" asked Miss Bull, raising her black eyes
inquiringly. "What of the lease of this house?"

"That is the property of Lord Derrington, and he only let the house to
Mrs. Jersey by the year."

"Is not that rather strange?"

"Very strange. But the whole connection of Lord Derrington with my
late client is strange. I know that she received from him an annuity
of five hundred a year and the lease of this house--by the year,
remember--from December to December. Now she is dead the annuity
lapses, and the lease naturally will not be renewed after next month."

"It is now the end of November," said Miss Bull, quite composed. "I
understand you to say that the lease expires when December----"

"It ends on the 31st of December," explained James, "and as Mrs.
Jersey is dead it will not be renewed. Lord Derrington, so far as I
know, has no interest in Miss Margery Watson."

"What interest had he in Mrs. Jersey?" asked Miss Bull, scenting a
scandal, and her eyes brightening.

"I can't tell you that, and if I could I would not."

"Quite right. I beg your pardon for asking, but you see in the
interests of that poor girl I wish to know exactly how matters stand."

"They stand as I tell you," said James, and rose to go. "I have
nothing more to do in the matter and my connection with the late Mrs.
Jersey ceases here."

"One moment," said Miss Bull, quietly. "What of the furniture?"

"That is also the property of Lord Derrington. He bought the house as
it stood from the executor of the last owner, Mr. Anthony Lockwood,
fifteen years ago. Mrs. Jersey wished to set up a boarding-house, so
Lord Derrington placed her in here. Every stick in the place belongs
to him. Should Miss Watson leave she goes with the jewels, the money
in the green box, and with her deceased aunt's clothes."

"A very poor outfit to start life on at her age," said Miss Bull,
rising in her prim manner. "By the way, Mr. James, what is the name of
the late Mr. Lockwood's executor?"

"Roger Ireland," replied the lawyer, looking rather surprised. "Why do
you ask?"

"For my own satisfaction, Mr. James. If no one else will assist this
poor girl I shall do so. Good-day."

James departed with a better opinion of Miss Bull, although at any
time he had no reason to have a bad one. But her manner inspired
mistrust, and, kindly as she appeared to be acting towards Margery, he
could not help thinking that there was more in her action than mere
philanthropy. "You're a deep one," thought James. "I shouldn't wonder
if we heard more of you."

But so far as James was personally concerned he heard no more of the
little woman. Miss Bull collected the boarders in the drawing-room
after dinner and made a speech. She said that it was Margery Watson's
intention to keep on the house, and that the terms would be as before.
If any chose to stop they would be welcome, but those who decided to
go could have their bills made out at once. Having thus acted as
the mouthpiece of Margery, Miss Bull took the girl away to the
sitting-room of the late Mrs. Jersey, the very one in which the
tragedy had taken place. Margery was unwilling to enter, much less
hold a conversation there, but Miss Bull, who had no nerves to speak
of and a very strong will, laughed her out of this folly.

"Now my dear Margery," she said, when the girl was seated, "I want you
to pay the greatest attention to what I am about to say, and to repeat
nothing of my conversation."

"You are my best friend," said Margery, looking at the peaked white
face with adoring eyes. "I shall do whatever you say."

"Good child," said Miss Bull, patting the hand that was laid
confidingly on her lap. "Listen, child. Lord Derrington is the owner
of this house, and he leased it to your aunt by the year--a very
strange arrangement, for which there ought to be some explanation. I
am going to seek it from Lord Derrington."

"But he won't tell you anything, Miss Bull."

The old maid tightened her thin lips. "I think he will," she said in a
rather ominous manner; "at all events, there is no harm in my trying.
With regard to the annuity----"

"What annuity?"

"I forgot--you don't know about that. Well, there is no need that you
should. But it seems that Lord Derrington allowed your late aunt an
annuity of five hundred a year. I don't know the reason why he did so,
and as such reason is not pertinent to matters in hand I do not wish
to know, but the annuity must lapse. It is not likely that Lord
Derrington will continue it to you." She paused and looked at the
girl. "Your parents are dead, I believe, Margery?"

"Yes. For many years I have been with my aunt. She was my only
relative, dear Miss Bull."

"All the better. I don't want other people interfering," said Miss
Bull in her icy way. "Well, Margery, I shall see if I can get Lord
Derrington to renew the lease to you, and I shall be your security.
With the money in hand--I have counted it, and with that in the bank
it amounts to two hundred pounds--we can continue the boarding-house.
A few of the boarders will go, but many will remain, as they will not
get anywhere so cheap a place. You will be the nominal head of the
house, but in reality I shall manage. Do you agree?"

"I am your slave," cried Margery with melodramatic intensity.

"You are my friend," said Miss Bull, her thin lips relaxing. "I am a
lonely woman, Margery, though I still have a surviving sister--" her
lips tightened again as she said this--"and I love you, my dear, for
your goodness. Well, we shall keep on the boarding-house, and you,
poor child, will be preserved from the terrible life which would
otherwise be your portion."

"How good you are--how good you are!"

"A little selfish also," said Miss Bull, kissing the girl. "I do not
wish to leave this place or lose you. I am growing old, and a change
would break my heart."

She said this as though she really believed that she possessed such an
organ. Mrs. Jersey always said that a heart was lacking in Miss Bull's
maiden breast: but certainly the way in which the old woman was
treating the helpless girl showed that she was better than she looked.
And perhaps--as Mr. James considered--Miss Bull had an ax to grind on
her own account.

However this might be, from that moment Miss Bull was in charge of the
Amelia Square establishment. Whatever means she used to induce Lord
Derrington to consent, she certainly managed to get the lease renewed
in Margery's name. Some of the boarders went; but others came in their
place, and these being younger added to the gayety of the house. So
all was settled, and Miss Bull became a person of importance. She was
the power behind the throne, and ruled judiciously. In this way did
she do away with the reputation of the house as a place where a crime
had been committed. In a year all was forgotten.




CHAPTER V

A LOVERS' MEETING


Every one who was any one knew the Honorable Mrs. Ward. She was a
fluffy-haired kitten of a woman, more like a Dresden china shepherdess
than a mere human being. Nothing could be prettier than her face and
figure, and nothing more engaging than her manners. With her yellow
hair, her charming face, and her melting blue eyes, she managed to
hold her own against younger women. The late Mr. Ward, Lord Ransome's
son, had been a fast young man, devoted to the turf and to his pretty
wife. But he was killed when riding in a steeplechase two years
after his marriage, and left his widow alone in the world with one
daughter for consolation in her affliction. Mrs. Ward being in want of
money--for her deceased father had been a general with nothing but his
pay--played her cards so well with regard to her father-in-law, that
he allowed her a good income and thought she was the most perfect of
women. But Lord Ransome was the only one of the family who thought so,
for the other relatives fought rather shy of the pretty, pleading
widow.

Not that Mrs. Ward minded. She characterized the women as frumps and
the men as fools, and, having enough to live on comfortably, set up a
house in Curzon Street. It was thought that she would marry again; and
probably she would have done so had a sufficiently rich husband with a
title been forthcoming. But somehow no one worth capturing ever came
Mrs. Ward's way, and as time went on she chose to assume the role of a
devoted mother, and--as she phrased it--to live again in her daughter.
This was quite wrong, as Dorothy Ward was a slim, serious-minded girl
of nineteen, not given to gayety, and was one who was anxious to marry
a husband with mind rather than with money. How frivolous little Mrs.
Ward came to have such a Puritan daughter no one ever could make out.
She resembled her mother neither in face, nor in manner, nor in
tastes. Mrs. Ward openly lamented that Dorothy was such a difficult
girl to manage, which meant that Dorothy had refused several good
matches, and had declined to be guided entirely by her mother's
opinion. When the Earl of Summerslea proposed and was not accepted,
Mrs. Ward was furious, but Dorothy said steadily that she would never
marry a brute with a title.

"You'll marry any one I choose," said Mrs. Ward when the two were
discussing the matter.

"Certainly not Lord Summerslea," rejoined Dorothy, steadily.

"And certainly not that penniless George Brendon," retorted her
mother. "You shall not throw yourself away on him."

"He is a good man and a clever man, and a man whom any woman might be
proud of winning, mother."

"And a man with no money and no position. Who is he? What is his
family? No one ever heard of him."

"They will one day, when he becomes famous."

"Oh, as a writing-person. As though any one cared two pins about that
sort of thing. I want to see you a countess."

"You shall never see me the Countess of Summerslea. I know all about
that man. He is bad and dissipated."

"O Lord! as if that mattered," cried Mrs. Ward with supreme contempt.
"Your father was the same, yet we got on all right."

"I am sure you did," said Dorothy, with bitter meaning, upon which
Mrs. Ward showed her claws. Her friends called her a kitten, but she
was a cat in reality and could scratch on occasions. But all her
scratching could not make Dorothy Lady Summerslea.

Hating Brendon, and knowing that her daughter liked him, it was
supposed by Mrs. Ward's friends that the young man would be sent to
the right-about, and that Dorothy would be kept out of his way. But
Mrs. Ward knew her daughter too well to take such a disastrous course.

"My dear," she said to an intimate friend, "if I did that, Dorothy is
just the kind of annoying girl to run away with him and live in a
garret. If I let them meet they will not think of marriage, and I dare
say Dorothy will get tired of Brendon. He is so shabby in his dress,
and so poor, that after a time she will cease to like him. No! No!
I'll let him follow her wherever he likes, and meet her on all
occasions. They will grow sick of one another."

In an ordinary case this recipe might have answered. But Dorothy
respected as well as loved George Brendon, and, every time she met
him, grew to admire and love him more. Mrs. Ward became quite
exasperated, and redoubled her efforts to sicken Dorothy of the
"creature," as she called Brendon. She took to praising him on all
occasions, and sometimes asked him to dinner. At the same time she
constantly abused young Walter Vane, who was Lord Derrington's
grandson and heir. He was the man she wished Dorothy to marry, as one
day he would have a title and fifteen thousand a year. But in spite of
this Machiavellian policy Dorothy still continued to love George, and
expressed a hearty dislike for Walter Vane, whom she characterized as
a "weakling."

"If he had only the grit of his grandfather I might respect him."

Mrs. Ward turned pale under her rouge when she heard this. "Oh, no,
no! Lord Derrington is a terrible old man. Were Walter such as he is,
I should not ask you to marry him."

"You would marry me to the Prince of Darkness himself if it suited
your purpose," said her daughter, calmly, from which speech it will be
seen that Miss Ward had small respect for her fascinating mother.

The two did not assimilate, as their dispositions were so different.
Mrs. Ward complained that Dorothy was too religious, and Dorothy found
the frivolous world in which her mother moved dull beyond words. It so
happened that Dorothy stayed mostly at home or went out with one of
her aunts, who was something of her type, while Mrs. Ward enjoyed
herself at Hurlingham and Monte Carlo. The little woman always managed
to keep on the right side, as she had no notion of losing her position
in society, or the income which Lord Ransome allowed her; but within
limits she was extremely fast. She generally had a number of young men
at her heels, and made use of them in betting and in getting boxes for
the theaters, for suppers at the Cecil, and gloves, when nothing else
was to be had. But she managed all these things so discreetly that no
one had a word to say, and the general impression was that she was a
dear little woman with a stiff daughter--quite a trial. And if some
old frumps did praise up Dorothy and condemn the mother, they were in
the minority.

Things were in this position when the murder of Mrs. Jersey took
place. Dorothy read about it in the papers, and knowing that George
had gone to stop in the house with Train, was extremely anxious to
hear particulars. She wrote to his Kensington address asking him to
call, but received no reply. Then she saw that he gave evidence at the
inquest, and two days later George made his appearance at the Curzon
Street house. Mrs. Ward, who had been voluble in her expressions
regarding Brendon's "love for low company," so she put it, sailed
toward him with open hands. She always welcomed Brendon in this
bright, girlish, kittenish way, as it was part of her scheme. She
thought so serious a man would never relish a frivolous mother-in-law,
and hoped to get rid of him in this way. But Brendon was too much in
love with Dorothy to mind the vagaries of her fashionable parent.

"My dear Mr. Brendon," cried Mrs. Ward in her usual gushing manner, "I
am so glad to see you. The murder, you know. I saw your name in the
papers. How exciting! how romantic! Tell us all about it."

"There is nothing to tell, Mrs. Ward," said George, glancing round the
room and seeing that Dorothy was absent. "All I know is set forth in
the papers."

Mrs. Ward arranged herself on the sofa and laughed joyously. "Quite
exciting it is," she said. "I wonder who killed the poor woman, and
how did you come to be there on the very night she died?"

This last question was asked sharply, and with a keen glance. George
was rather taken aback, but not thinking she had any intention in what
she said, answered, soberly enough: "I went to see a friend, Mrs.
Ward. It was unfortunate that I chose that night."

"Well, of course you didn't know," said Mrs. Ward, artlessly. "But
fancy knowing any one living in an out-of-the-way place like that. But
you do know such queer people."

George thought he knew none queerer than Mrs. Ward herself, but he
suppressed this speech as impolite. "My friend is Mr. Leonard Train."

"Really! I think I have met him. His father made a fortune out of
mustard, or coke, or something horrid. What was he doing there?"

"Looking for characters for a book."

"Oh!" Mrs. Ward opened her eyes. "Did he find any?"

"I believe so. But he has left the house now."

"I should think every one would leave it after the murder," said Mrs.
Ward. "Dorothy will be down soon, but meantime tell me the whole thing
from your own clever point of view."

She was so pertinacious that Brendon had reluctantly to yield. He
detailed events as they had been reported by the press, but concerning
the confidence of Leonard he kept silent. Mrs. Ward expressed her
disappointment when he finished. "You tell me nothing new."

"I warned you that I would not," replied Brendon, wondering at her
petulant speech.

"But surely you can throw some light on the matter?" said Mrs. Ward.

Brendon shook his head. "I fear not. I went to bed at eleven and slept
soundly until I was awakened by the clamor."

Mrs. Ward thought for a moment. "Does Mr. Train know anything?"

"Nothing more than I have told you," declared Brendon, uncomfortably.
He disliked deviating from the truth even in the smallest particular,
but he dare not risk the story of his birth becoming public property.
It was strange, he thought, that Mrs. Ward should take such a profound
interest in this case. He had never before heard her talk on such a
subject. To add to his perplexity, he saw that, in spite of her rouge,
in spite of the shaded windows, she looked haggard. Yet it was
impossible that she could be connected with the matter in any way. He
ventured a leading question. "Why are you so anxious to know about
this case?"

Mrs. Ward's reply rather astonished him. "I am not blind," she said
quietly, "and I know well enough that you admire my daughter. You are
poor, you are unknown, and should Dorothy marry you she would make a
very bad match."

"I am aware of that," began George, "but----"

"Wait," cried Mrs. Ward, raising her hand, "I have not yet done.
Notwithstanding all these disadvantages, I made up my mind to place no
bar to your union with my daughter, as she seems to like you----"

"She loves me, Mrs. Ward."

"Nonsense. Dorothy is too young to know the meaning of the word. I say
she likes you, so we can let it stand at that. But in spite of your
poverty and obscurity--" Brendon winced, for Mrs. Ward's tone was
insolent in the extreme--"I am not willing that you should marry
Dorothy, unless----" She hesitated.

"Unless?" queried George, looking steadily at her. "Now we come to the
point. Unless your character is above suspicion."

"What do you mean?"

"You know well enough. Here you go to a low house, and while you are
there the mistress of it is murdered."

George rose with some indignation. "Good heavens, Mrs. Ward, you don't
suspect me!" he cried.

"Oh, dear, no. But it would be unpleasant for my daughter to have a
husband mixed up with such a shady affair."

"I am not mixed up with it, Mrs. Ward."

"It's unpleasant," said Mrs. Ward, willfully holding to her opinion.
"I don't like it. Find out who killed that woman and I say nothing.
But until you do find out, and until the assassin is brought to
justice, I must ask you to discontinue your visits to Dorothy."

Brendon saw that she was simply making an excuse to rid herself of his
presence so as to leave the way clear for Walter Vane. But he was too
strong a man to be foiled in this way, and speedily made up his mind
how to act. "Shall we leave the matter to Miss Ward?"

"That means you wish to see her," said the mother cleverly. "Oh, well,
there is no reason why you should not. But it will be for the last
time, remember. Your character must bear inspection."

"I think it does," cried George, rather nettled.

Mrs. Ward, who by this time was nearly at the door, turned lightly and
replied, in her most kittenish way, "Ah, my dear Mr. Brendon, I know
more than you think. Lola Velez----"

"Lola Velez." George looked and felt uneasy.

"You change color. Oh, I have heard all about you and that dancer."

"I assure you that my connection with that lady is perfectly
innocent."

Mrs. Ward scoffed. "Lady!" she said, sneering. "What next? However, I
do not wish to hear the particulars. Such creatures are nothing to me.
And if you clear yourself of this very shady business in Amelia Square
by discovering the true assassin, I shall overlook Lola Velez."

"There is no need to overlook her or me."

"I think there is," said Mrs. Ward, frigidly, and with a wave of her
slim hand. "There is no more to be said, Mr. Brendon. You know my
decision, and as Dorothy's mother I have some power, I hope. Now I
will send her to you, and you can say what you like--in fact, you can
communicate to her the state of my feelings. But," added Mrs. Ward,
shooting a Parthian arrow, "I should not mention Lola Velez if I were
you. Good-by, I shall not see you for many a long day, I expect."

"And hope," said Brendon, much mortified.

"And hope," replied Mrs. Ward, coolly. "You are the last man in the
world I should like for my son-in-law. Marry that dancer," and with a
shrill, unpleasant laugh Mrs. Ward vanished.

Brendon paced the room, waiting for Dorothy. How Mrs. Ward had learned
of his connection with Lola Velez he could not understand. Brendon was
perfectly innocent, and what he had done for the dancer was dictated
by pure kindness. But even if he explained the whole circumstances of
his meeting and of his philanthropy to Dorothy, she was a woman, when
all was said and done, and might not believe him. On the whole, he
decided to take Mrs. Ward's advice and hold his tongue on the subject
of the dancer. On some future occasion he might be able to explain,
and at the present moment he had the satisfaction of knowing that his
conscience was clear. He had just arrived at this decision when
Dorothy entered the room. The next moment she was in his arms, and the
two entered Paradise at once.

"My dearest, I am so glad to see you," said Dorothy in her soft voice
as they sat down. "I wrote, but you did not come."

"I was engaged, darling."

Dorothy nodded. "I know, at the inquest which was held on that poor
creature."

"Why do you take an interest in the case, Dorothy?"

"Oh, because you went to stop at the house, and it was so strange that
she should have died on that very night."

"So your mother says," said George, uncomfortably. "I really think she
believes that I have something to do with the matter."

"Oh, that's nonsense," said Dorothy, serenely; "but mother does not
like you very much, George, and----"

"She hates me you mean."

"Well," responded Miss Ward, candidly, "if you ask me to tell the
truth, I think she does. But you know what my mother is. I--no, if I
cannot say good of her, let me at least say nothing bad. But I love
you, George, you know that."

"My own heart," and Brendon took her in his strong arms, thanking God
for the gift of so steadfast a heart. For a few minutes silence
reigned, and the lovers looked at one another with fond affection.

Dorothy was tall and slim and dark, with a Spanish face of that
delicate, high-bred cast which is seen to perfection among the women
of Andalusia. Judging by her large black eyes, and the serious
expression of her lips, Dorothy Ward might have had Moorish blood in
her veins. Perhaps she had, as one of her father's ancestors, when
ambassador to Madrid in the reign of the first James, had brought back
with him a Spanish wife. And Dorothy inherited all the Iberian beauty
of that lady. She should have been called Inez, or Paquita, for the
purely English name of Dorothy suited her badly. That is a milkmaid's
name, and Miss Ward was more of the court than of the pasture.

Her dark beauty contrasted well with the fair comeliness of George
Brendon, and seated side by side on the sofa they looked an extremely
handsome couple. Certainly they might have appeared happier, for
Dorothy was downcast, and in Brendon's blue eyes there lurked a
worried look. He was wondering how he could communicate Mrs. Ward's
decision to the girl. Dorothy looked at him and smiled.

"A penny for your thoughts, George," she said, taking his hand.

"I'll sell them as bankrupt stock," said Brendon, drawing her closer,
and then he took his courage in both hands for the necessary
confession. "This may be my last visit, Dorothy," he said.

She looked at him in surprise. "Why do you say that?"

"Your mother----"

"Oh, never mind my mother," broke in the girl, petulantly. "I know she
objects to our marriage, so----"

"On the contrary, she told me that she would not object if I could
clear myself of complicity in this crime."

"George! Did she accuse you of----"

"Not in so many words," interrupted the lover, "but I saw very plainly
what she meant. The fact that I slept in that house on the night Mrs.
Jersey was murdered is to her mind a proof that I have something to do
with the matter."

"But you can prove conclusively that you have not," insisted Dorothy.

"Certainly. Mr. Train, with whom I was stopping, can prove that I did
not leave my room. The key of the sitting-room door was in his
possession, and to get out I should have had to make use of him."
George paused and thought for a moment. "But there is one thing----"

"What is it?" asked Dorothy, seeing that he hesitated.

"I don't know if I ought to tell you."

"Whatever concerns you concerns me," she said, pressing his hand to
her heart. "You know that I love you as dearly as you love me, and
nothing you tell me shall ever part us."

"Oh, I don't think what I am about to say will have that effect," was
Brendon's reply, "but I have a confession to make about my--my birth."

Dorothy looked at him in amazement. "About your birth?" she repeated.

"Yes. You may as well know all, and I know you will not betray me,
even to your mother."

"To her least of all," said Dorothy, vehemently. "Tell me quick."

Encouraged by her faith, and by the tender clasp of her hand, George
related to her the story of his birth and of his connection with Lord
Derrington. Also he detailed how he had gone to seek Mrs. Jersey, and
how she had been murdered before he could get the truth out of her.
"Or even see her," finished George. "And now you know, dearest, why I
do not wish you to repeat this story. If your mother knew it she might
think--think--well, she certainly would not let you marry me."

"She has made her mind up already so far as that is concerned," said
Dorothy, quickly. "It is Mr. Vane whom she wishes me to marry."

"My cousin, although he does not know it," said George, quietly; "but
I want your advice, Dorothy, and will be guided by it. What shall I
do? You see, now that Mrs. Jersey is dead there is no chance of
getting at the truth."

"Why not advertise?"

"I have tried that for some months in every country paper in the
kingdom, but there has been no response. My father and mother must
have been married in some out-of-the-way village, in some lonely
church. The parson and those who know about the marriage may be dead.
In fact, it is extremely probable that they are. Mrs. Jersey was
present as my mother's maid, and she might have been able to tell me
where the church is. I only want to find the register of the marriage
and get the certificate. Then I shall see Lord Derrington and insist
on my rights being recognized. He can't leave either the title or the
money away from me."

"Have you seen him at all yet?"

"Not to speak to. But he was pointed out to me. I hear he is an old
tyrant."

Dorothy shuddered. "A most terrible old man. He always reminds me of
one of those Italian despots. There is nothing he would not do
provided that the law could not touch him."

"And I dare say, from your description, the things he desires to do
are of the kind that the law would make him answerable for."

"George," said Dorothy, after a pause, "do you think he has anything
to do with this murder?"

Brendon turned slightly pale and set his lips firmly. "No, dearest,"
was his reply, but delivered with some uncertainty. "He does not
know--at all events from me--that I am seeking for a restitution of my
rights, and therefore would have no reason to rid himself of this
woman. Besides, I don't know if he is aware of her existence."

It will be seen that Brendon was ignorant that Lord Derrington was the
owner of the Jersey mansion and had allowed Madame an annuity. Had he
known this much he might have been able to shape his course better;
but, being in the dark, he had to do the best he could with Dorothy's
assistance. He had asked for her advice and she gave it.

"George, I should get back my birthright if I were you."

"But I may be dragged into this murder case."

"No. Mr. Train can save you from being accused of that. It is only
right that you should take your proper position in society. You know I
would marry you as you are, and defy my mother and the world. But you
owe it to your dead mother and to yourself to show that you have the
right to your father's name."

"In that case I shall do what you advise," cried George, taking heart
from her firm tone; "and the first thing I shall do will be to see Mr.
Ireland.

"Who is he, George?"

"My guardian. He took charge of me after my grandfather Lockwood died,
and it was by his advice that I changed my name to baffle the
inquiries of Lord Derrington. He will know all about the marriage, and
may be able to indicate where my parents went when they eloped. I have
never asked him for a detailed statement, but I shall do so now. Once
I find a clew, I shall not rest until I prove my legitimacy. For your
sake, my dear--for your sake," and he kissed her.

"And for your own," said Dorothy, as they rose. "I shall say nothing
to my mother or to any one, George. But tell me all that you do."

"I shall make a regular report," replied Brendon, "but we will
probably have to meet elsewhere, as your mother has asked me to
discontinue my visits here."

"I shall speak to her," said Dorothy, angrily.

"No. Do not do that. She will only grow angry and make things harder
for you, my own heart. Good-by, and God bless you."

They kissed and parted at the door. Brendon was just stepping out into
the hall when a thought occurred to him. He re-entered and closed the
door. "Dorothy," he asked, in a low whisper, "why did you give me the
yellow holly on that night?"

She looked surprised. "It was to please you," she said softly; "and to
tell you the truth, George, I thought that the holly was a proof that
my mother was relenting toward you."

"How do you mean, Dorothy?"

"It was my mother who gave me the holly," she explained. "I came from
the Park and told her you were going to stop with Mr. Train, and that
she could set her mind at rest, as I should not see you for a few
days. She seemed pleased, and taking the yellow holly from a vase in
her boudoir she gave me a sprig, saying that I could give it to you
for consolation."

"Did you tell her that you had fastened it in my coat?"

"Yes. But she only laughed, and said it would please you. Why do you
ask me this, George?"

"There is no reason for my asking," he replied, suppressing the truth,
"but yellow holly is rare."

"Very rare. I don't know where my mother got the sprig."

After this they parted, and Brendon walked thoughtfully away. Mrs.
Jersey had been startled by the sight of the holly. Mrs. Ward had
given the sprig to Dorothy, who had presented it to him. He asked
himself if there was a reason for Mrs. Ward's action.




CHAPTER VI

WHAT MR. IRELAND KNEW


After his disagreeable experience in the Bloomsbury district, Brendon
was not very anxious to go there again, but it was necessary that he
should do so if he wanted to see his guardian. From force of habit he
still continued to call him so, although Mr. Ireland had long since
ceased to act in that capacity. George had a sincere respect for him,
and frequently paid him a visit. Usually it was one of ceremony or of
enjoyment, but on this occasion the young man went in search of
knowledge.

Ireland was an eccentric character who collected (of all things)
bill-posters. Most collectors turn their attention to stamps, to
snuff-boxes, to autographs, and such-like trifles; but Mr. Ireland
hunted for those gigantic and gaudy pictures which make gay the
thoroughfares of the city. When George entered the dull old house, in
an equally dull Bloomsbury street, he found the hall decorated with an
immense advertisement of Bovril. Proceeding upstairs he was met on the
landing by the famous cats who serve to draw attention to Nestle's
Milk, and finally entered a large room on the first floor, where Mr.
Ireland sat at his desk surrounded by a perfect art-gallery. Here was
Fry's Chocolate; there the Magic Carpet of Cook, and the wall opposite
to the three windows looking out onto the street was plastered with
theatrical advertisements, more or less crude in color and out of
drawing. These were not modern, but had been acquired by Ireland in
the dark ages when street art was in its infancy. The effect of the
whole was bizarre and striking, but George was too used to the
spectacle to pay much attention to the gallery.

The room was very bare, so as to give space for the collection. Mr.
Ireland sat at a mahogany desk in the center, which was placed on a
square of carpet. Beside this desk stood a chair, and in one corner of
the room was a safe painted green. Other furniture there was none, and
what with the huge pictures, the bare floor, and the want of curtains
to the windows the effect was comfortless and dreary, but Mr. Ireland
did not seem to mind in the least.

He was a tall old man with rather long white hair and a clean-shaven,
benign face. His unusual height did away with the impression of his
excessive stoutness, for he appeared to be as fat as Daniel Lambert.
George often wondered at his size, considering that the man ate
comparatively little. Mr. Ireland was dressed in glossy broadcloth
scrupulously brushed, and wore an old-fashioned Gladstone collar. He
had mild blue eyes, rather watery, and a large mouth with full red
lips. This hint of sensuality was contradicted by the serenity and
pallor of his face, and by his life, which was as correct as his dress
and as methodical as his hours.

Never was there so methodical a man. He lived by the clock, and with
him one day exactly resembled another. He rose at a certain hour and
retired precisely when the hand on the clock indicated another. His
meals were always regular, and he had stated hours for walking, when
he went out, whether it was wet or fine, sunny or foggy. The man was
like a machine, and George, when living with him in his early days,
had often found these restrictions irksome. It was one o'clock when
Brendon called, and Mr. Ireland had just finished his luncheon. At two
precisely he would leave the house for his one hour's constitutional.
Brendon was aware of this, and had timed his visit accordingly.
Nevertheless, Ireland looked at his watch and mentioned the fact.

"I can only give you an hour, George," he said. "You know my habits."

"An hour will be sufficient," replied Brendon, taking the one chair.
"You are not looking very well, sir," he added, noting the fagged air
of the old man.

"I have not been sleeping so soundly as usual," rejoined Ireland,
producing a box of cigars and passing them. "At my age, and I am now
seventy-five, I can't be expected to enjoy my bed so much as a young
person. Take a cigar."

"The old brand," said Brendon, selecting one.

"I never vary," replied his guardian, gravely. "Pass that matchbox,
George. Have you a light? Good. Now we can talk for the next
fifty-five minutes. What is it?"

As time was short, and Mr. Ireland would be sure to terminate the
interview exactly at the stated hour, George plunged immediately into
the business which had brought him hither. "I wish to hear the story
of my parents," he said deliberately.

The cigar fell from the fat fingers of Ireland, and he stared in
amazement at the young man. "It is rather late in the day for that, is
it not?" he asked, picking up the cigar and recovering himself.

"Better late than never," quoted George, puffing a cloud of smoke.

"A proverb is no answer," said Ireland, testily.

"Then, if you wish to know, sir, I am in love."

"That is no answer, either."

"It will lead to a very explicit answer," rejoined the young man,
coolly. "Love leads to marriage, and in my case marriage cannot take
place unless I know that I am legitimate."

"Of course you are. I have always maintained that you are."

"What proof have you?" asked George, eagerly.

Ireland hesitated and wiped his mouth in quite an unnecessary manner
with a red silk handkerchief. "Your father always declared that Miss
Lockwood was his lawful wife, and treated her with every respect."

"Did my father ever tell you where the marriage was celebrated?"

"No; I never asked, nor did your grandfather Lockwood. It was not till
after your mother's death that Lord Derrington denied the marriage.
Then Mr. Vane was in Italy and never troubled about the matter."

"He should have done so, for my sake," said George, indignantly.

"Certainly, and I urged him to do so," said Mr. Ireland, heavily. "I
was in Italy at the time, and you were only an infant in arms."

"Who was my nurse then?"

"Jane Fraser--the Scotch nurse who afterward brought you to your
grandfather Lockwood when Mr. Vane was murdered."

"Do you remember the other nurse--the first one I had?"

Mr. Ireland grew indignant, and puffed angrily at his cigar. "I do,
indeed," he said wrathfully, "a vulgar, forward hussy. She was not
bad-looking, either, and set up for being a lady." Here he began to
laugh. "Would you believe it, George, my boy, she was in love with
your father, and showed it so plainly that he was obliged to get rid
of her?"

"What was her name?"

"Eliza Stokes. And she was handsome in a bouncing way."

"What became of her?"

"I can't tell you," said Ireland, with sudden reserve.

"Did you see her after she was dismissed?"

Ireland turned his cigar slowly and did not look at George when he
replied. "Yes, I did. When and where it does not matter."

"But it does matter--to me!" cried Brendon, anxiously. "It is to know
about her that I came here to see you to-day."

"I thought you came about your birth," said Ireland, sharply.

"That among other things."

The old man looked down again and appeared to be in deep thought. He
was turning over in his own mind how much or how little he should tell
George. And the young man looked at him anxiously. Much depended upon
the speech of Mr. Ireland. At last the silence was broken, and by a
most unexpected remark. "I loved your mother," said Ireland.

"I never knew that," said Brendon, softly, for he saw that the man was
moved at the recollection of some early romance.

"I never spoke of it before," was the reply, and Ireland laid down his
cigar to speak the more freely. "Yes, I loved Rosina Lockwood with all
my heart and soul. I was not bad-looking in those days, George, and I
had a good income, but she preferred that scamp," and he struck his
hand heavily on the table, with glowing eyes.

"You are talking of my father, sir," said Brendon, stiffly.

"I ask your pardon. But if you wish me to tell the story of that most
unfortunate affair you cannot hope that I shall keep my temper. I was
very badly treated by--well--" with a glance at George, Ireland
nodded--"let the dead rest in peace."

"I think it will be as well," said Brendon, coldly.

Ireland again struck the table. His pallid skin became a deep crimson,
and his eyes flashed. George rose in alarm, for the old man struggled
to speak with such an obvious effort that he thought an apoplectic fit
would end the conversation. He hastily poured out a glass of water and
begged Ireland to loosen his neckcloth. But the man shook his head,
and going to one of the windows opened it. For a few moments he
inhaled the air, and returned to his seat more composed. "I beg your
pardon, George," he gasped, when he recovered his voice, "but if you
wish me to tell you anything you must not speak to me like that. I
have a bad temper."

"I never knew that," said Brendon, in a soothing tone. "You were
always kind to me."

"I have a superlatively bad temper," repeated Ireland, "but you were
her child. How could I be angry with her child? Wait! Wait, I shall
tell you all I can. Give me a few moments."

He was so moved with emotion, and with the recollection of the past,
that he buried his head in his arms, which were resting on the table.
Brendon, respecting this feeling, walked to the end of the room and
stared at a picture which represented a star of the ballet. But he did
not see the saucy face, the twirling skirts. He was thinking how
strange it was that Ireland should never have confessed this love
before. Certainly he had never displayed such emotion. A change had
come over the man, whereby he more plainly revealed his feelings than
he was wont to do. George put this down to old age, and to less
self-control consequent on the same. Shortly he heard Ireland calling
to him, and returned to his seat to find the old man smoking quietly
and rather ashamed of his outbreak. "But you shall see no more of
that," he said.

"I am sorry to be obliged to ask you for a story of the past," said
Brendon, apologetically, "but it means so much to me."

"I'll tell you all I can," said Ireland, taking no notice of the
apology, but looking at the ash on his cigar. He paused for a moment
to collect his thoughts, and then began abruptly. "I first met your
mother at her father's house in Amelia Square, where I went to take
lessons in singing. Lockwood was famous for his method in those days,
and his fame was increased by the appearance of your mother, Rosina,
at many concerts. She was a most beautiful creature, and was as much
admired for her beauty as for her voice. Ah! what a voice. It was like
the trill of a lark, flexible and silvery, and with an immense range.
She was quite the rage for a season, and was called the English Jenny
Lind. Many offers were made to her for the operatic stage. I dare say
she would have accepted in the end had she not met with Percy Vane,
and he----" Ireland's hand clenched.

"My father," said George, willfully disregarding this sign of temper,
"how did he meet her?"

"He saw her at a concert and fell in love with her. Then he came to
take singing-lessons, with the voice of a frog. Bah! it was a mere
blind. It was Rosina Lockwood he was after. I saw it--oh, yes! The
eyes of love are keen, and, although Rosina would not waste a look on
me, I watched her every action. Many a night have I paced Amelia
Square watching her window. When she sang I was entranced, when she
smiled----" Here the old man shook his head and made an effort to
recover himself.

Brendon saw that the recital was painful to him, and but that he was
so anxious to get at the proofs of his birth would have asked him to
desist. But there was too much at stake for such consideration to be
shown. "Go on," he said softly, and Ireland resumed.

"Percy Vane was a handsome man, and rich. I warned Lockwood that he
was in love with Rosina, but the old man would not heed. He was
flattered by the attention Rosina received. All through that season
Vane was in attendance on Rosina. At the end of it he eloped with
her--yes. He met her outside St. James's Hall and they eloped."

"Where did they go to?" asked Brendan, eagerly.

"That I cannot say. Rosina wrote three weeks afterward from Paris,
signing herself Vane, and stating that she was the wife of Percy."

"Was my grandfather angry?"

"Yes and no. He was angry that he should have lost her, for she was of
use to him as an advertisement of his method of singing, and also she
earned a great deal of money. The house in Amelia Square was large and
required a good deal to keep it up. Besides, Anthony Lockwood was
extravagant. That was why you were left so badly off."

Brendon shrugged his shoulders. "It was good of my grandfather to
leave me anything," he said, "but in what way was my--Mr. Lockwood,
pleased? You hinted that he was not quite angry."

"Well," said Ireland, slowly twirling the cigar in his fingers, "you
see he was flattered that his daughter should have married into the
aristocracy."

"Then there was no question of the marriage, then?"

"No. Lord Derrington said nothing till your mother was dead, and even
then he said very little. It was when Vane was murdered at San Remo
that he first decisively asserted that no marriage had taken place. He
did so because Lockwood insisted that Derrington should acknowledge
you as the heir. He refused to do so, and said that his second son was
the heir."

"That is Walter Vane's father?"

"Exactly. And now the father is dead, Walter Vane stands in your
shoes. I wish you could prove the marriage, my boy," said Ireland,
shaking his head, "but it will be a difficult task."

"I don't care how difficult it is," replied Brendon, resolutely. "I am
determined to learn the truth."

"Who is the lady?" asked Ireland.

"Miss Dorothy Ward. You don't know anything of her."

Ireland shook his head. "I left the adoration of the aristocracy to
Lockwood," he said, with something like a sneer, "but that's neither
here nor there, my boy. To make a long story short, I met your mother
in Paris, and shortly afterward she died, giving birth to you. Eliza
Stokes was with her when she died, and you were given into the charge
of that woman. Your mother was buried in Père la Chaise. Vane put up a
stone to her--oh! he behaved very well, I don't deny that," added
Ireland, but with a dark face; "he was really fond of her. And I
suppose there was a marriage."

"Did my mother ever say anything about it?"

"Never. You asked me that before. It was an accepted fact. After the
death of Rosina her husband went to Italy. I was there, too, and it
was at Milan that the episode occurred which led to the dismissal of
Eliza Stokes."

"What was that?"

"Why, there was a young English waiter, quite a boy he was, who fell
in love with Eliza when she was taking charge of you at the Hôtel de
Ville. She refused to marry him and hinted that she loved your father.
Vane heard of this and taxed her with impertinence. The end of it was
that Eliza said too much and was dismissed. And Jane Fraser was sent
from England by Vane's mother to nurse you. That looks as though Lady
Derrington believed in the marriage."

"It does," admitted Brendon, hopefully. "She would not have sent a
nurse had anything been wrong. On the other hand, if she had been
quite certain about the marriage she might have offered to take charge
of me."

"She did, I believe, but your father was so fond of you--for your
mother's sake--that he could scarcely bear you out of his sight.
However, Eliza went, and Jane came, and then your father went to San
Remo. You were then two years of age."

"Did not my father return to England during all that time?"

"No. When he left England with your mother he never returned. She died
in Paris, and, with you in charge of a nurse, Vane wandered about the
Continent. I was twice in Italy and saw him--the second time it was at
San Remo."

"If you disliked my father so much, why did you seek him out?"

"To see you, George. You were her child, and I loved Rosina so
dearly." Ireland stopped, gulped down his emotion, and proceeded more
calmly: "Yes, I was at San Remo when your father was murdered."

"You never told me that before," said Brendon.

"I never told you anything before," replied Ireland, dryly. "And I
should not tell you now, but that my health is getting so bad that I
may not live long. I have an incurable disease, which will sooner or
later carry me off--no, I don't want sympathy. Let me finish the story
and then we need not refer to it again. I had intended to leave a
written statement behind me for you, George, but this is better, as
you can ask me questions about what you do not understand."

"I understand all so far," said George, thoughtfully. "But about this
murder, Mr. Ireland? Who killed my father?"

"That was never discovered. He went to a masked ball and was seen
leaving the room in the company of a blue domino. His body was found
on the stones of the beach early next morning. He had been stabbed to
the heart."

"With a stiletto?" asked Brendon, recollecting the manner of Mrs.
Jersey's death.

"Yes. Hence it was supposed that he had been stabbed by some jealous
Italian, who had followed him and the lady. But the truth was never
known. I think myself that Vane was murdered on the parade and that
his body was thrown over onto the beach. The man who killed him must
then have taken away the lady."

"Who was the lady--the blue domino?"

"No one ever learned. She was cloaked and masked. Your father was a
gay man, George, and it was rumored that he was in love with the wife
of a certain officer. It might be that the husband--but of course I
cannot say. The blue domino may not have been the woman in question.
The whole thing is a mystery. Your father's body was taken to England,
and as Lord Derrington refused to acknowledge the marriage, Lockwood
took charge of you."

"I remember, and Jane Fraser was my nurse for many years. She was at
San Remo when the murder took place?"

"Yes, and so was Eliza Stokes."

"What was she doing there?"

"Well, this waiter--by the way, his name was George also, although you
were called after Lockwood's father--well, George Rates, seeing that
Eliza was dismissed, got her a situation at a hotel in San Remo. He
came there also during the season, and I believe the two married. But
Eliza Stokes never came near your father."

"What became of her afterward?"

Ireland hesitated. "I can't say," he said.

"But I can," observed George, coolly. "She was murdered the other day
at the Amelia Square house as Mrs. Jersey."

"I heard of that crime. But how do you identify Eliza Stokes with Mrs.
Jersey?"

"My old nurse, Jane Fraser, told me. When I began these inquiries I
looked up Jane, who now lives in a little Essex village. She told me
all she could, which was not much. But she stated that when here one
day, on a visit to you, she had met Eliza Stokes and in spite of her
age and gray hairs she had recognized her. Eliza told her that she was
called Mrs. Jersey and had taken a boarding-house in Amelia Square. I
then determined to speak to Mrs. Jersey, whom I thought might have
been present at the marriage, or at all events might know where it had
been celebrated."

"It is probable she did," said Ireland, "as she was with your mother
as maid when the elopement took place. Did you see Mrs. Jersey, or
Eliza Stokes as I still regard her?"

"I saw her, but she was murdered before I could manage to speak to her
on the subject. Did you know----"

"I know that Eliza Stokes had changed her name to Mrs. Jersey and was
in Amelia Square," said Ireland, "but I only learned this the other
day."

"Who told you?"

"A woman called Miss Bull," said Ireland.

"Miss Bull," repeated George. "I remember, that was the boarder who
foretold a violent death to Mrs. Jersey. But you read about that in
the papers."

Ireland nodded. "I did," he said; "and I also saw that you were in the
house when Mrs. Jersey was murdered. You were a witness."

"I can tell you about that. I----"

"There is no need to tell me. I have not the time." Ireland looked at
his watch. "In ten minutes I leave for my walk."

George remonstrated. "But this is so important."

"Not so important as my health. I can give you only the ten minutes,
George. This Miss Bull called to ask me about the lease of the house
to Mrs. Jersey. I knew nothing about that. When Lockwood died I sold
the house to Lord Derrington----"

"What--to my grandfather?"

"Yes. But had I known he was the purchaser I should not have let
him have it. He bought it through an agent. Since then I heard
nothing more about the house. I did not even know it was a
boarding-establishment until it appeared as such in the papers the
other day. I wondered what you were doing at the inquest----"

"I can explain."

Ireland held up his hand. "I need no explanation. I know that Mrs.
Jersey was really Eliza Stokes. I gathered that from the description
given by Miss Bull in the course of our conversation. My suspicions
were aroused by the fact that Lord Derrington had leased the Amelia
Square house to Mrs. Jersey."

"Why did he do that?" George spoke more to himself than to Ireland.

"Well," said the old man rising, "it is my belief that Lord Derrington
knows there was a marriage, and assisted Mrs. Jersey so that she
should hold her tongue. Now there is no more time. I must go out," and
Ireland walked to the door.

George followed, knowing it was vain to attempt to turn him from his
purpose, as the old man was most obstinate. "One moment," he said, on
the door-step; "this blue domino connected with my father's
murder--was she never traced?"

"No. There was no means of tracing her. Except that she wore a piece
of holly she carried no distinguishing mark."

"Holly!" cried George, astounded. "Yellow holly?"

"Yes. I don't know how you come to mention it, but the holly worn by
the blue domino with whom your father went away had yellow berries."




CHAPTER VII

THE RED MAN


As Brendon was in the neighborhood of Amelia Square he paid a visit to
the boarding-house. Having learned from Ireland that Miss Bull had
informed him how Lord Derrington was connected with the late Mrs.
Jersey, George thought it just as well that she should be questioned.
Certainly Miss Bull, who appeared to be a dour and secretive sort of
person, might not speak. On the other hand, if he could induce her to
be frank he might learn from her--presuming she knew--the reason why
Lord Derrington had leased the Amelia Square house to Mrs. Jersey. It
was a forlorn hope, but Brendon was so eager to learn the truth that
he clutched even at this straw. Therefore, on leaving Ireland, he
turned his steps in the direction of the boarding-house. Much as he
disliked entering it again, it was necessary that he should do so.

On his way Brendon meditated on Ireland's remarks about the holly. He
remembered the agitation of Mrs. Jersey when she saw the sprig in his
coat. She had been at San Remo when his father was stabbed, and
Ireland had mentioned that the woman with whom the deceased man had
left the ballroom wore a sprig of yellow holly. Had the berries been
red, George might not have thought so much of the matter; but yellow
holly is comparatively rare, and evidently Mrs. Jersey's alarm had
been caused by her recollection of the murder. The sight of the holly
had revived her memory.

"I wonder if she had anything to do with the murder," mused George as
he turned into Amelia Square. "Could she have been the woman in the
blue domino? Certainly she was a servant and my father would have had
nothing to do with her. But at the ball she would wear a domino and be
closely masked. But even so, by what means could she have induced my
father to leave the room with her? I don't suppose she murdered him
herself, for she had no reason to do so, unless it was jealousy, which
for a woman in her position was absurd. Bah! I am making a mountain
out of a mole-hill. Eliza Stokes probably never went to the ball and
had nothing to do with the blue domino or with the matter of the
crime. From what Ireland says, however, a piece of yellow holly was
mentioned in connection with the murder, and Mrs. Jersey, then Eliza
Stokes, probably heard of it. That was why she shivered and turned
pale when she saw the sprig in my coat."

Having thus decided the question, though not in a very satisfactory
way, George rang the bell and was admitted into the house by Jarvey.
The boy welcomed him with a grin, as George had given him half-a-crown
when he left the mansion after the inquest. "Miss Bull, sir, yes,
sir," said Jarvey, "step this way," and he introduced Mr. Brendon into
the sitting-room in which the murder had taken place. It was empty,
but Jarvey departed immediately to fetch Miss Bull.

George knew the room well. It had been used by his grandfather as a
breakfast-room, and many a meal had he enjoyed at that very table. As
the furniture had been sold to Lord Derrington, together with the
house, the table was the very article of furniture at which Mrs.
Jersey had been stabbed when seated. Brendon looked from the table to
the door, and wondered if the assassin had entered stealthily, with a
bared weapon, and had stabbed the wretched woman before she had time
to turn her head. But on second thoughts he was inclined to think that
the assassin had been in friendly conversation with Mrs. Jersey before
inflicting the fatal stroke. Even in the short distance between table
and door Mrs. Jersey would have had time to spring to her feet and
give the alarm. "No," thought George, as he seated himself, "what I
said to Train is correct. The assassin engaged Mrs. Jersey in friendly
conversation, and then watched for an opportunity to strike from
behind."

He would have continued trying to puzzle out the circumstances of the
crime but that Miss Bull entered, accompanied by Margery. The little
old maid looked whiter and more haggard than ever, but her eyes
gleamed brightly, and she seemed to be in perfect health. Margery, now
being the nominal head of the house, appeared more important, but she
kept her eyes on Miss Bull's face, and in all things took her orders
from this superior being. Miss Bull was a despot, although kindly
enough, and Margery was her slave.

"How are you, Mr. Brendon?" said Miss Bull, smiling in her prim way,
but without offering her hand. "I did not expect to see you again."

"Why not?" asked George, quickly.

Miss Bull shrugged her thin shoulders and fastened her beady eyes on
his face. "Many of the boarders left on account of Madame's murder, so
I thought you had done the same."

"I was only a visitor, Miss Bull. Had I been a boarder I should not
have left. The murder did not scare me."

"No," replied Miss Bull, indifferently, "I don't suppose it did. I
only talked for the sake of talking."

Brendon knew this was untrue, as Miss Bull was not a woman to waste
words. Besides, the old maid's eyes were fixed with a certain amount
of curiosity on his face, and he could not conceive why this was so.
He was rather embarrassed how to begin the conversation, especially as
Margery was present. Something of this showed itself in his manner,
for Miss Bull drew Margery's hand within her own and nodded affably.
"Miss Watson is the head of the house," she said. "Do you come to see
her or me, Mr. Brendon?"

"I come to see you," said George, hoping she would send the
inconvenient third away. But she did nothing of the sort.

"In that case Margery can stop as my friend, Mr. Brendon. Anything you
say before her will go no further. She keeps my secrets."

"Always! always!" cried Margery, her eyes on the old maid. "I would
rather die than reveal your secrets, Miss Bull."

"Rather tragic, my dear, rather tragic," replied the elder, patting
the hand she held. "I have really no secrets worth revealing. A lonely
old woman, Mr. Brendon, solaced by the friendship and devotion of this
lonely girl."

Margery, who had flushed at the rebuke, stopped and kissed the old
maid's hand. Miss Bull patted her head and turned cheerfully to her
visitor. "Yes, Mr. Brendon?" she said in an interrogative manner.
Again George felt awkward, but judged it best to plunge into the
middle of the matter and get it over as soon as possible. "You called
to see a certain Mr. Ireland," he said, "about the lease of this
house. I have to come to ask you why you did so."

Miss Bull stopped patting Margery's hand and her lips tightened. "I
don't see what business that is of yours," she said tartly.

"On the face of it, Miss Bull, I admit that the question sounds
impertinent. But I am anxious to learn something about Mrs. Jersey's
early life, and since you know something----"

"I know nothing," interrupted Miss Bull, quickly, "absolutely nothing.
I came here as a boarder many years ago, and, as is my custom, I kept
myself to myself. Madame and I did not get on well together. She was
not a lady."

"Do you know what she was?" asked Brendon, shrewdly.

"I have already said that I know nothing," replied Miss Bull, coldly.

Evidently it was impossible to learn anything from so secretive a
woman. Nevertheless, George tried another tack. "Do you know if Mrs.
Jersey left any writings behind her?"

He asked this because it struck him that Mrs. Jersey might have been
tempted to write out her relations with the Vane family. It was
apparent that Lord Derrington had given her a lease of the house to
silence her about the possible marriage, so for the sake of her niece
Mrs. Jersey might have left some confession which would secure its
renewal. And that the lease had been renewed was evident from the fact
that the boarding-house was still being carried on in the old way, and
by the niece.

Miss Bull did not reply to this question herself. "That is not my
business," she said; "Miss Watson took possession of her aunt's
papers."

"They were in a green box," said Margery, artlessly.

"What did they consist of?" asked Brendon.

"You need not answer that question, Margery," said Miss Bull, quickly,
and from that moment, Margery preserved a lumpish silence. George rose
in despair.

"You will not help me," he said, taking up his hat.

"So far as I can see there is no reason why we should help you," was
Miss Bull's reply, and she rose in her turn.

Brendon saw nothing for it but to go, yet he hesitated to abandon the
chance of learning something from Miss Bull. He stared at her pinched,
white face and wondered if it would be any good appealing to that love
of romance which is inherent in the heart of every woman. Old and
withered as Miss Bull was, she might soften under the influence of a
love-tale. Brendon disliked telling his business to strangers,
especially anything regarding Dorothy, whom he looked upon as a sacred
vestal not to be lightly mentioned. However, so much was at stake that
he determined to speak openly, on the bare chance of Miss Bull
yielding. But he could not speak in the presence of the girl Margery.
She was such a sullen animal that to mention his love in her presence
would be like casting pearls before swine. He therefore turned to Miss
Bull, who stood with folded hands, eyeing him frigidly. "If I could
see you alone," said Brendon.

Miss Bull cast a shrewd glance at him, rapidly made up her mind and
told Margery to go. The girl looked at him tigerishly, as she was
evidently jealous, and sulkily withdrew. When the door was closed
Brendon resumed his seat, but Miss Bull remained standing. This was
not a good sign; but George was now committed to a certain course and
had to follow it.

"Miss Bull," he said deliberately, "what I am about to tell you, being
my own private business, I must ask you to keep to yourself."

"I don't want to hear it," said Miss Bull. "I never care for other
people's secrets."

"This is not a secret, Miss Bull. It is merely that I am engaged to be
married."

"Indeed, and what interest can that have for me, Mr. Brendon?"

"This much. You are a woman and must feel interested to a certain
extent in a love romance. I am aware that I am appealing to you in a
way which you may regard as foolish, but I am so anxious for certain
information, and, from what Mr. Ireland said, you alone can give it.
To put the thing in a nutshell--I am in love, and you can forward my
marriage if you will."

Miss Bull heard him in silence, but as he talked a faint crimson
flushed her face and a softer light shone in her hard eyes. She put
her hand to her heart, as though she felt a cruel pain, and sank into
a chair. Alarmed by her pallor, which had now returned, George would
have called for assistance, but she stopped him. "I shall be all right
shortly," she muttered in faint tones. "Marriage, love, what have I to
do with such things?" She paused, and then continued, her voice
gathering strength as she proceeded, "Who is the bride, Mr. Brendon?"

"She is not a bride yet; she never may be," replied the young man,
gloomily, "for if she does not become my wife she will accept no one
else. I can trust her implicitly. Her name is Dorothy Ward."

Miss Bull rose with an ejaculation and her face grew red. "Is her
mother the Honorable Mrs. Ward who married Lord Ransome's son?"

"Yes. Do you know her?" asked George, surprised at her emotion.

"I have heard of her," replied Miss Bull, resuming her seat with
feigned indifference, but with barely concealed agitation. "Dorothy
Ward. A handsome girl. I have seen her in the Park."

"She is as good as she is beautiful," cried Brendon, enthusiastically.

"I'll take your word for that," said Miss Bull in a softer tone. "Mr.
Brendon, I will help you. Don't ask me why. Perhaps it is on account
of your romance; perhaps because--because--" her hand clenched itself
and she fought down an outburst--"no matter. I will do what I can to
forward the marriage. What do you wish to know?"

"About Mrs. Jersey."

"In relation to Lord Derrington?"

"Yes. He was the landlord of this house, I believe."

"He was and is. It was leased to Mrs. Jersey, furniture and all, by
the year."

"By the year," said Brendon, surprised. "Why not a seven-years' lease
in the ordinary way?"

"I cannot say. I am only telling you what Mrs. Jersey's lawyer told
me. Lord Derrington bought this house from Mr. Ireland with the
furniture as it stood, and as it stood he gave it to Mrs. Jersey. She
turned it into a boarding-house some fifteen years ago. I don't think
she added or took away any furniture. It is in the same condition as
when it left Mr. Ireland's hands. And he, I believe, sold it on
account of the last owner."

"He did," admitted George. "The last owner was Mr. Anthony Lockwood;
he was----" George had it in his mind to state that Lockwood was his
father. But the time was not yet ripe for such a disclosure, and he
said nothing at the moment. "He was a singing-master," he finished
rather lamely. "Mr. Ireland told me all about him."

"That is all correct, so far as I know, Mr. Brendon. I dare say you
wish to know why I saw Mr. Ireland. I did so on behalf of Margery
Watson, as I wanted the girl to continue the boarding-house. I like
the poor creature, and when her aunt died she was left very badly
off."

"Didn't Mrs. Jersey leave any money?"

"No. She lived principally on an annuity from Lord Derrington."

"Ah!" said Brendon, his suspicions becoming more and more confirmed,
"so he allowed her an annuity. Why?"

"I can't tell you that. But with the death of Mrs. Jersey the annuity
naturally ceased. I asked Mr. Ireland about the lease, and then sought
out Lord Derrington. I represented to him the position of Margery
Watson, and he was good enough to renew the lease in her name, on my
security."

"Still by the year?" asked George.

"Still by the year. So now the poor girl can live."

"You are a good woman, Miss Bull, to help her in this way."

"I am not good," cried Miss Bull, vehemently. "God knows I have enough
sins to repent of. Don't call me good, Mr. Brendon. I am only a
desolate old woman who has had a hard life. I should have been married
and settled, but--but"---- She shook her head and the tears came into
her hard eyes. "God help me, I have had sorrows, and will have them
till I die."

"That shows you have a good heart," said George, alluding not to her
sorrows, but to her actions toward Margery. "Well, Miss Bull--" he
rose--"you have told me what I want to know. I hope to make use of it.
In return for your confidence I should tell you----"

"Tell me nothing," cried the old maid, quickly. "I don't wish to hear
your secrets. The less said the soonest mended. When Miss Ward becomes
Mrs. Brendon," she added with a dry smile, "you can send me a piece of
wedding cake."

"She will not become Mrs. Brendon," said George, shaking his head. "I
will be frank with you, Miss Bull. My name is not Brendon."

She rose from her seat and looked at him steadily, perusing every line
in his face. "I thought I had seen some one like you before. I see
now--now--don't tell me your name is--is--but it's impossible."

"My real name is George Vane. I am Lord Derrington's grandson."

The little woman looked at him wildly for a moment and then quietly
slipped to the ground. She had fainted in real earnest, and George
rang the bell for assistance. Margery, who had evidently been lurking
outside, rushed in. When she saw her friend extended pale and lifeless
on the carpet she turned on George with a furious face.

"What have you been doing to the poor darling?" she demanded,
"you--you." She raised her hand to strike, but Brendon caught her by
the wrist.

"I have been doing nothing," he declared, quelling the rage of the
she-bear by the power of his glance. "Miss Bull fainted unexpectedly.
Thank goodness here is some one."

It was one of the servants, but Margery waved her off. "No one but
me--no one but me!" she cried, and took the slender form of her friend
up in her arms. "Wait here," she added to George. "I'll be down soon."

When she left the room George looked at the servant, who was a quiet,
respectable old woman. "Is that girl mad?" he  asked.

"She's queer, poor soul, sir," replied the woman, "and entirely
devoted to Miss Bull. And well she may be for it is Miss Bull who
manages the house. The girl is a natural, sir."

"She looks like it," replied George, sitting down. "You can go. I
shall wait here until Miss Bull recovers."

"Yes, sir," replied the woman, and departed. But as she closed the
door George heard her muttering something to herself about the danger
of Margery's claws scratching him.

Brendon did not feel very comfortable on this point himself. He saw
that Margery was a kind of untamed animal who had been brought into
subjection by Miss Bull. No other person could manage her, and should
she return, still in a passion, Brendon feared lest she should use
physical violence. Still he held his ground, as he was anxious to
learn how the old maid was feeling, and still more anxious to find
out, if possible, why she had fainted on hearing his name. "I wonder
if Mrs. Jersey told her anything," muttered George as he looked out of
the window; "but that's impossible. Mrs. Jersey would keep her own
secret so as to terrorize over Derrington. Besides, Miss Bull declared
that she recognized my face. I wonder if she knew my father, and if
she can throw any light on the murder. It is strange that she should
be connected with the matter and live in the same house as Mrs.
Jersey. Upon my word," said George, in disgust, "it seems as though
there were a gang of shady people here connected with my affairs. And
she was moved by the mention of Dorothy's name. I wonder what that
meant?"

But whatever it did mean he did not learn that day. Margery returned
and stated that Miss Bull was better, but was too faint to resume the
conversation. She begged Mr. Brendon to call another day. Margery gave
this message in quite a friendly way, and nodded smilingly to the
astonished George. "You are better disposed toward me," he said,
taking up his hat.

"Miss Bull told me to be kind to you," she declared, still smiling;
and then, with a burst of good nature, "I will be kind. Do you want to
know about the papers?"

"If you choose to tell me," said George, artfully, but rejoicing at
the opportunity this offered of learning something.

"Yes, I do choose," said Margery. "She asked me to be kind to you."

"Well, then, tell me," replied George, humoring her.

"There was a lease in the green box, and many bills," said Margery, "a
few photographs, and that was all. I couldn't see the story."

"What story, Miss Watson?"

Margery nodded with a cunning smile, and answered, in a whisper, as
though her aunt was still alive and within hearing. "She told me it
was a story she was writing. Oh, such a long story! Sheets and sheets
of a story--foolscap sheets. She kept them in a long blue envelope and
would not let me see them."

George reflected that evidently Mrs. Jersey had been writing out an
account of her early life, and Margery's next words put the matter
beyond a doubt. "My aunt said that she would let me have the story to
read after she died. But I could not find it in the green box."

"Perhaps you did not look thoroughly," suggested George.

"Yes, I did, and I looked in all other places. But I could not find
it. The story was Italian," went on Margery, staring at him, "for when
my aunt wasn't looking I peeped. San Remo is in Italy, isn't it?"

"I believe so," replied George, more and more convinced that Mrs.
Jersey had left a confession behind her. "Did you tell Miss Bull?"

Margery nodded. "She said I wasn't to say a word about it. But she
will not be angry at my telling you. She likes you, and says you are
like some one she once knew and loved."

Brendon did not pursue the conversation. He was afraid lest Margery
might say too much and Miss Bull might be angry. And it was necessary
that he should keep on good terms with Miss Bull. Evidently she had
known his father; she may even have loved him. But George had heard so
much that day that his brain was quite bewildered, and he wanted to be
alone to think the matter out. Only one last request he made of
Margery. "Will you show me the photographs which were in the green
box?" he asked persuasively.

"I can't," she replied, drawing down her lip like a child; "Miss Bull
has them. But she'll show them to you," brightening, "for she likes
you. I like you too. You are so handsome."

With a laugh and a blush at this naïve compliment George left the
house, promising to call again. With his head filled with many
thoughts consequent on his two interviews, he emerged from Amelia
Square and walked down to Oxford Street. A shout aroused him from his
day-dreams as he reached the corner. He saw a tall, red-headed man
crossing the road, and a cab was bearing down on him. The man stood
paralyzed in the center, and it was apparent that the horse would soon
be on him. George, almost without thinking, dashed into the street,
and, seizing the animal, reined it back on its haunches with a
powerful hand. There was a shout of admiration from the throng on the
footpath, a few oaths from the driver of the hansom, and the next
minute the red-headed man was thanking his preserver on the pavement
and shaking his hand violently.

"Don't you think I'll forget it, sir," he said with rather an American
accent. "You have saved Bawdsey, and Bawdsey can help you at a pinch."

Brendon was too bewildered by this extraordinary address to take it
all in. Besides, the admiring crowd pressed around. Seeing this,
Bawdsey took him by the arm and ran him round the corner into a quiet
street. George recovered and looked at the man he had saved.

He was a tall man with a thin face, though his body was rather stout.
His hair was red, his eyes were blue, and he had an alert manner about
him which made Brendon wonder how such a sharp person ever came to
place himself in the position of being run over. But Bawdsey gave him
no time to think. "What is your name?" he asked.

"George Brendon."

Bawdsey stepped back, and a look of genuine surprise overspread his
freckled face. And he was apparently more astonished than he showed,
as Brendon guessed by the trembling of his hands. "I have lived over
fifty years in the world," said Bawdsey, "and this is the queerest
thing I ever dropped across. And I drop across many queer things,
stranger."

"Well, Mr. Bawdsey, if that is your name," said George,
good-humoredly, "it is a good thing I have saved your life. But you
seem as though you could--"

"I can--I can," interrupted Bawdsey, anticipating the remark. "But
have you ever heard of that disease--fear of open spaces?"

"No," replied Brendon, "what is it?"

"I shan't give you the medical name," said Bawdsey, "as you would not
understand. But it is a dread to cross any open space. At times it
takes me unexpectedly, and I get a sort of paralysis of the will and
cannot move. That was why I stopped in the middle of the road. I
should have been killed but for you."

"Perhaps I had better see you home, then," said Brendon.

"No. I shall take a cab. It is only now and then that the thing takes
me. It can't be cured and maybe it will get worse. At present it does
not prevent me attending to my work. Come home with me and I'll tell
you more. I live in No. 43 Amelia Square."

"What, in that house?" cried George, for this was the number of the
Jersey mansion.

"Yes. What do you know of it?"

"Nothing."

"Oh, yes, you do; but you won't trust me. However, I'll see you again,
and I'll trust you. Take care of Lola Velez. She means you harm."

The next moment he was gone, and George was staring after him.




CHAPTER VIII

A BACCHANTE


Lola Velez was the rage for a season. She sprang into fame in a single
night, and thenceforth held an undisputed position as the favorite of
the London public. She was not exceptionally handsome, nor was her
dancing distinguished by any special grace; but about her there was
something weird and original, which appealed to her audience. Such an
extraordinary dancer had never been seen on the stage. She capered
like one in a frenzy, with mad leaps and bounds, and throughout her
orgiastic performance behaved as one possessed. It was not so much the
poetry of motion as the madness of movement. George Brendon had been
instrumental in introducing her to the public, and she owed her
position as much to his kindness as to her own genius.

It was a snowy winter's night when Brendon found her. He had just
entered Pembroke Square, where he had lodgings, when he heard a moan.
Turning aside into the shadow of a wall he found a woman lying there,
exhausted with cold and hunger. Always anxious to do good, he brought
the poor creature to his rooms. Under the influence of food and wine
and warmth she revived sufficiently to tell her story.

Her name, she stated, was Lola Velez. She was Spanish by birth, but
had lived many years in Italy. Trained as a dancer, she had appeared
at several of the best theaters with more or less success; but owing
to her violent temper she had lost all chance of gaining a permanent
position. But that Lola was rendered weak by privations she would not
have told George the exact truth; but she confessed to her temper, to
a certain episode connected with the stabbing of a woman of whom she
was jealous, and to the many quarrels which had resulted in her being
thrown out of employment. Finding Italy too hot to hold her, she had
danced her way to Paris through various small towns, but here, as
elsewhere, her temper proved her ruin. Then she had crossed the
Channel, only to find that the market was overstocked with dancers.
Unable to obtain employment, and having very little money, the
unfortunate woman had fallen lower and lower, until she was reduced to
begging in the streets. Finally she was turned out of her poor
lodgings and had expended her last sixpence on food. It was shortly
after this that Brendon found her.

He acted the part of a good Samaritan. Giving her a sovereign; he sent
her away, restored in a measure to her right mind. The next day he saw
the proprietor of a music-hall, with whom he was acquainted, and
procured her an engagement in a ballet. It was a Dresden china piece,
and the violent dancing of Lola was by no means suited to the Watteau
costumes and stately dances of the powder and patches type. But the
manager--a shrewd Jew called Kowlaski--saw in his new recruit the
possibilities of success. He staged a ballet adapted from "The
Bacchanals" of Euripides, and Lola danced the part of Agave, the
mother of Pentheus, who is rendered insane by Bacchus.

Her success was immediate. She enacted the part with a reckless
abandon and a wild frenzy which thrilled the house. For the moment
Lola was not herself, but the wild Theban Queen raging in the orgies
of the Wine-god. All London came to see the frantic revels over which
Lola presided, and night after night the little music-hall was filled
to overflowing. Lola made good use of her fame. She insisted that her
salary should be raised, took modest lodgings in Bloomsbury, and, for
a time, saved her money as a provision against old age and poverty. On
the stage she was a dancing demon, but at home no one could have been
more modest. There was not a breath of scandal against her, in spite
of Mrs. Ward's hint to Brendon.

This change in the formerly reckless woman was caused by love and
gratitude to George. He had saved her from starvation, from death, he
had procured her the engagement which had led to her success and
present ease, and, figuratively speaking, she cast herself and all she
had at his feet. Brendon found this excessive gratitude rather trying.
Even then he was in love with Dorothy, whom he had met twice or
thrice, and he was not disposed to accept the wild passion which Lola
so freely offered to him. He tried to make her see reason, to look
upon him as a friend and not as a lover, but in her insane way she
resolutely refused to regard him as other than the man she intended to
marry. In spite of her tempers and her wild career Lola had never
erred, and so far Brendon could well have made her his wife. But he
did not love her, and hardly relished the idea of taking this wild
creature to his heart and home.

Lola could not understand this coldness. She was accustomed to see men
at her feet and to spurn them. Now that she was willing to surrender
her liberty and to give her love, it exasperated her to think that the
one man she had chosen would have none of her. As yet she knew nothing
of Brendon's love for Dorothy, but with the instinct of a jealous
woman guessed that some such passion engrossed the mind of the man she
desired to marry. Again and again she deluged George with questions,
which he always refused to answer, so she could learn nothing. Wearied
of her persistency, Brendon stopped away, and for a few weeks Lola did
not see him. She followed him to his rooms, but found him absent. Then
she saw his name in the papers connected with the Amelia Square
tragedy, and wrote to him. He accepted her invitation and came to
supper, less because of her desire than because he wished to speak to
her about Bawdsey. The name of Lola Velez on the lips of the red man
had startled Brendon almost as much as the fact that Bawdsey appeared
to be acquainted with him. George could not recall meeting the man,
and as he was not yet sufficiently famous for his name to be on the
lips of the public, he wondered how it came about that Bawdsey knew of
his existence. Anxious to know who the man was, he sent a note, marked
private, to Miss Bull, and received a reply stating that Mr. Bawdsey
was a new boarder, and, so far as she knew, a gentleman who lived on
his income. But this did not satisfy Brendon, as it did not account
for Bawdsey's knowledge. There remained Lola to question, and to Lola
George went a night or two after the rescue of the red man. George
made up his mind, and a strong mind it was, that he would not leave
Lola until he knew positively how her name came to be mentioned by
Bawdsey.

At eleven o'clock Lola was anxiously awaiting his arrival, and when he
entered her little sitting-room she flew to kiss his hand, her usual
extravagant form of greeting. George, like all Englishmen, hated
scenes, and these Lola was always making. In vain had he tried to
break her of these melodramatic tendencies. Her hot Southern blood
would not cool, and she overwhelmed him with protestations of more
than friendship. Of these he took no notice, and as it takes two to
make love as well as to make a quarrel, Lola was yet far from gaining
her heart's desire. This was a formal offer of marriage.

Having just returned from the music-hall, Lola wore a loose tea-gown
of scarlet trimmed with glittering jet. It was a bizarre garment, but
the vivid color suited her dark face and Southern looks. She was
rather tall, very slender, and she moved with the dangerous grace of a
pantheress. Her face was oval, sallow and thin, with ever-changing
expressions. She was never two minutes the same, but her prevailing
mood was one of fierce intensity. The smoldering fire in her great
black eyes blazed into passionate love as she swept forward to greet
her visitor.

"My deliverer, my adored!" she cried in moderately good English, and
kissed his hand with burning lips.

George snatched it away. "Don't, Lola. You know I hate that sort of
thing!" And so saying he threw down his coat and hat on the sofa at
the far end of the room.

Lola shrugged her shoulders and coiled up a tress of her black hair
which had come loose. Putting it in its place, she glanced into the
mirror over the fireplace to see that her comb was at the right angle.
She wore a diamond comb in the Spanish fashion. So fond was she of
jewels that George sometimes fancied she must have Jewish blood in her
veins. All her savings went in jewels--diamonds for choice. "They are
pretty," Lola would say when Brendon remonstrated with her, "and when
I am poor they can be changed into money. Oh, yes, why not?"

"Ah, but you are a cold blood, you English man," she said in allusion
to Brendon's action. "But what would you--it is the fogs and cold
snows. Come, my friend, to the table--to the table."

She clapped her hands, and seizing George by the arm forced him into a
seat. The supper looked very tempting. Lola had an eye for the
beautiful, and arranged the table herself. A tall silver lamp with a
pink shade shed a roseate light on the white cloth, the glittering
crystal, and the quaint silver spoons and forks. Lola had picked up
these things at odd times and displayed very good taste in her
selection. In the center of the table was an oval silver dish filled
with pink roses. "What extravagance!" said George.

"Ah, bah! I got them from San Remo--from a friend of mine," said Lola,
removing a dish-cover; "they cost me not one sou. George, my dear
friend, the Chianti is in the flask there, and this macaroni? Eh?"
George passed his plate. The viands were cooked in the Italian
fashion, and there was a foreign air about the supper which was
grateful after a long course of English cooking. What with the foreign
dishes, the pink-shaded lamp, and the candles likewise in pink shades
on mantelpiece and sideboard, George felt as though he were in a Soho
restaurant. The night was cold, he was hungry, and the supper, with
its surroundings, was novel. He therefore made a good meal. Lola
watched him eat with satisfaction.

"Ah, you like my housekeepers," she said, meaning housekeeping; "it is
to your mind. Yes? Eh, my friend, I could feed you as fat as pigs if
you would but allow me."

"I don't want to be fat," retorted George, reaching for the Chianti.
"Give me a cigarette, Lola."

She produced her own case, and not only supplied him with one, but
insisted on placing it between his lips and on lighting it. George
wriggled uncomfortably, but it was no use objecting to Lola's ways.
She would indulge her whims at any price. And he did not wish to leave
until he had accomplished his mission.

"There, little friend," cried Lola, when he was seated comfortably by
the fire and she was puffing also at a cigarette, "now we must talk.
Why have you not been? Oh! you wicked young boy!"

"I have been engaged," replied George, secretly admiring the careless
grace with which she was half lying, half sitting in the armchair
opposite. She showed a dainty foot encased in a red stocking and a red
shoe. Lola was all in crimson from head to foot, save for the jet and
her dark face and hair. She looked like some sorceress bent upon
unholy conjurations.

"Engaged!" she repeated with a flash of her wonderful eyes. "That is
words for 'I don't want to come.'"

George laughed, shook his head, and changed the subject. Her remark
about having a friend in San Remo ran in his mind. "Have you ever been
there?" he asked, naming the town.

"Ah, bah! have I been anywhere? All Italy I know--all--all."

"You know it better than Spain. Yet you are Spanish."

"I am whatever you desire, my George. Yes, I am of Spain--of Cadiz,
where my parents sold oil to their ruin. They came to Italy, to Milan
and made money to live from wine. I was trained to the dance--they
died, and I, my friend----"

"You told me all this before," interrupted Brendon, ruthlessly. "I ask
if you have ever been to San Remo?"

"Why, yes, assuredly, and why not?" She looked at him with narrowing
eyes as she put the question, blinking like a cat.

"There is no reason, only I was thinking----" He paused.

"Eh, you think--of what?"

"Oh, something which does not concern you, Lola."

"All that is of you is to me," she responded. "I love you."

"Lola, be reasonable."

"Pschutt! I mock myself of your reason," she cried, snapping her
fingers and speaking in quite a French way. "I leave reasons to your
chilly English ladies. I--eh, but you know I am of the South. To
you--to you, my adored preserver, do I give myself."

George grew angry. "If you talk like this, Lola, I shall go away."

"Ah, then good-night to you. Let it be adieu and never come back."

"Not at all. Be a reasonable woman and sit down. Give me some more
wine and a cigarette. I want to ask you a question."

Lola poured out the wine and tossed him a cigarette, but she refused
to sit down or to compose herself. In a flaming temper she whirled
about the room, talking all the time. "Ah, yes, but it is so always! I
am a fool to love you, cold one--pig of an Englishman."

"That's grateful," said George, quietly, and she was at his feet.

"Ah, but no! I am a bad womans. I am entirely all wicked. You are an
angel of the good God. Dearest--my own----" She stretched adoring
hands, and her eyes glittered like stars.

George reasoned with her. "Lola, do you wish me to be pleased with
you?"

"Assuredly, and why not?"

"Then sit down in your chair like a Christian and talk sensibly."

She sat down, or rather flung herself into the chair with a whirl of
scarlet draperies. "Decidedly I am a Christian. I go to mass, I
confess--yes, I confess to the priest how I love you."

"Do you really love me, Lola? I was told that you wished me harm."

She started from her chair with a passionate gesture.

"Who says it is liars of the worst. Tell me who speak, that I may tear
and scratch."

"No! no! I don't want a scandal."

"For her sakes, oh, yes!" She subsided sulkily. "I am nothings."

"For whose sake?" asked Brendon, rather alarmed, for he did not wish
this tigress to know about Dorothy.

"The other woman's. Oh, yes, there is some one else. I know. You are
mine all, and would be but for the other womans. Imbecile that I am to
think of you who kick me hard--hard. And I can learn nothing--nothing.
If I did--if I knew, I----" She stopped and breathed hard.

"I wonder you don't have me watched," said George, thoroughly angry at
her unreasonable attitude. Lola tossed her head, and her expression
changed to one of alarm. Brendon saw the change and guessed its
meaning. "You did have me watched."

"And what if I did?" she demanded defiantly. "You are mine."

"I am not yours," he retorted angrily. "I have given you no cause to
think that I would marry you."

Lola burst into tears. "You took me from the stones and snows," she
wept with extravagant grief. "Why did I not die? You fed me with
foods and made me shine in this London; you win my heart, and
then--then--pschutt!" she snapped her fingers, "you toss it aside."

"Why did you have me watched?" asked George, sternly.

"I want to know of the other woman," she replied sullenly.

"There is no----" He broke off. "It has nothing to do with you."

Lola sprang to her feet with fierce eyes. "Then there is
another--another--oh, you cruel! Name of names, but I shall find her.
I shall tell her----"

"You shall tell her nothing--you shall not see her."

"But I will. Eh; yes. You do not know me." This with a stamp.

"I know you cannot behave decently, Lola. If you have me watched
again, if you dare to--to--bah!" George stamped in his turn. "I have
had enough of this. Behave, or I go and will not return."

She flung herself at his feet with a wail. "Ah, but no," she sobbed,
"I do love you so dearly--I will die if you love me not."

George drew himself roughly away, and taking her by the hands placed
her in a chair, where she hid her face and sobbed. "Who was it you got
to watch me--you hired to watch me?" George advisedly used the word
"hired" as he thought she might have engaged one of her friends to do
the dirty work, instead of engaging a professional. Yet he knew she
was quite capable of going to a private inquiry office.

"I shall not tell you," said Lola, sitting up with a hard expression
on her mouth and in her eyes.

"Did you pay him much?" asked Brendon, dexterously.

"I paid him what I chose," retorted Lola, falling into the trap.

"Ah! Then it was a professional detective you engaged. You have been
to one of those inquiry offices."

"That is my business," said Lola, who, seeing she had made a slip,
became more obstinate than ever. More to show her calmness, she
lighted a fresh cigarette and smoked it defiantly.

George shrugged his shoulders. He was not going to argue with her.
Remembering that Bawdsey had mentioned her name, and that Bawdsey
appeared to know all about himself, he began to put two and two
together. Certainly he might be wrong, and Bawdsey might have nothing
to do with the matter. Still it was worth while trying to startle Lola
into a confession by the use of his name. His rescue of Bawdsey hinted
that the long arm of coincidence might be at work. "Well, I don't know
where he comes from----" began George.

Lola snapped him up. "Ah, yes, and you think it is a man. Bah! why not
a woman, my dear?" she sneered.

"Oh, you may have half-a-dozen at work--male and female both," said
George, taking his seat, "but I should have thought that the red man
was clever enough to----"

She threw away her cigarette and rose to her feet with such manifest
alarm that George knew his guess was correct. "You talk foolish."

George looked at her angry face serenely. "Did Bawdsey when he said
you wished me harm?"

"What?" She flung up her hands, with blazing eyes. "Did he say I do
wish you harm? Was it--that--that cow--pig----"

"Don't call names, Lola, and don't distress yourself. It was Bawdsey."

Lola saw that she had gone too far, and had, vulgarly speaking, given
herself away. She tried to recover lost ground. "I do not know his
names," she said sullenly; then burst out, "but I wish you no harm.
Eh, will you believe that, my preserver?"

"I'll believe nothing if you will not tell me the truth," said
Brendon, a little cruelly. "Come, Lola, admit that you paid Bawdsey to
watch me."

"I did not pay--no, not one sou. He did it for love."

"Oh, indeed! So Bawdsey is in love with you?"

Lola threw back her head defiantly. "Yes, he is, and I care not one,
two, three little trifles for him. Chup! He is old--he is red--he is
one big fool, that I can twist and twist----"

"And you apparently have done so. Well, then, Lola, did you get him
from a private inquiry office?"

"No, I did not so. He loved me, and sent me flowers--oh, many, many
flowers--those roses." She pointed to the silver dish.

"So you can't tell the truth even in that," said George, deliberately.
"What of the friend in San Remo?"

"It is his friend. He had flowers from his friend. He told that."

Brendon sat up with an eager look in his eyes. So Bawdsey knew some
one in San Remo. Probably he had been there, and Bawdsey was
acquainted with his name. Brendon began to think that there was some
meaning in all these things and plied Lola with questions. She was
sulky at first and would not answer. But Brendon knew how to manage
her, and before the conclusion of the conversation he got the whole
truth out of her. This was accomplished by using what the Americans
call "bluff."

"So Bawdsey knows San Remo, and he is fifty, or over fifty, years of
age. H'm! He knows all the history of the place, I suppose."

"I know not--nothing do I know."

"Ah, that's a pity! Bawdsey could tell you some nice tales." He fixed
a keen glance on her. "About some yellow holly, for instance."

Lola winced, for the shot had gone home. But she still held to her
declaration of ignorance. "I know nothings--absolutely."

"But apparently this man knows a great deal. He is in love with you,
and must have told you much. Did he inform you of a certain murder
which took place at San Remo?"

"Ah, bah! Why should he? I knew of all already."

"You! How did you know?"

"My father and my mothers, they lived in San Remo when--oh, they did
tell me all of that Englishman."

"Did they know who murdered him?" asked George, marveling at this
unexpected discovery.

"No. No one know anythings."

"Was there no suspicion?"

"Not one suspicions. I know nothings," she repeated doggedly.

"It strikes me that you do. How did you and Bawdsey come to be talking
of this matter?"

"We did not talk." Lola looked down at her foot as she told the lie
and moved it restlessly.

George rose and took up his hat. Throwing his coat over his arm, he
moved toward the door. "Good-night, mademoiselle."

She sprang to her feet and flew after him. "No! no!" she cried in
lively alarm. "You must not go, my dearest dear."

"What is the use of my stopping when you will not show your gratitude
toward me by telling the truth?" George hated to make such a speech as
this, but it was the only way in which he could move her.

"I will tell! I will tell. Sit down. The coat--you shall not go. I
will say all. Ask what you will. Sit, my little cabbage--a wine in the
glass--ah, yes!--and a cigarette. Come, be good. Am I mademoiselle?"

"No," said George, smiling on her pleading face, "you are my friend
Lola now that you are sensible."

"Ah, only friend!" she said sadly. "But I speak. Yes?"

George began at once to question her, lest the yielding mood should
pass away. "You made the acquaintance of Bawdsey at the hall?"

Lola nodded. "He loved me; he sent me flowers; he was made a
presentation to me by Kowlaski. I learn that he looks after people,
what you call a--a--_un mouchard_----"

"A spy--yes, go on."

"And I made him watch you. I told him your name."

"Did he know my name?" asked Brendon, quickly.

"He knew everything--oh, yes--all--all!"

Brendon was taken aback. "All--all what?" he asked amazed.

"Why--" Lola twirled her fingers--"all what you would not tell to me,
my dear. That your names is Vane, and milor----"

"Derrington! Did Bawdsey mention Lord Derrington?"

"Yes. Oh, many times he speaks of milor. I speaks of San Remo.
This--this Bawdsey ask me of the blue domino--of the holly----"

"Of the murder, in fact."

"It is quite so, my friend. Of the murder of your father."

"What?" George started from his seat. "Did he know that the man who
was murdered at San Remo was my father?"

"Yes, and that it was difficult about the marriages."

"That also. He appears to know the whole story. And he mentioned Lord
Derrington. That is how he comes to be acquainted with these facts. A
spy--Derrington is employing him. And the man is boarding in Amelia
Square." George struck his hands together. "By Jove, it's a
conspiracy, and I never knew anything!"

"I do not wish you to have the marriages right, George," said Lola,
with a pout. "If you are as what you are, then you will marry me. She
will not be madame."

"She? Who?"

"The woman you--you--love." Lola got out the word with difficulty and
burst into extravagant rage. "But she will not have you. No, you are
mine. You will be Brendons--as I know you, and not Vane--never milor.
I will not let it. If you are milor you marry her."

"Did Bawdsey tell you the name of the lady?"

"No. But he will tell. But she is a well-born one, and I am of the
gutter. But I love you--ah, yes I love you!" She threw her arms round
him. "Be still Brendons, and not milor, and I am yours."

"No! no!" George took her arms from his neck and spoke more soberly.
"Lola, hold your tongue about what you have told me, and I'll see you
again. If you speak, I see you no more."

"I will be silent," she said as Brendon put on his coat. "But you are
cruel, wicked. You shall never be milor, never!"

"How do you know?" asked George, contemptuously.

Lola's eyes blazed. "I know. I know. You will never be milor."




CHAPTER IX

CLEVER MRS. WARD


"An invitation--an invitation to dinner. By Jove, I never thought I'd
get that far. The Honorable Mrs. Ward, too. Hurrah!"

Leonard Train made these remarks over a letter which had come by the
morning post. It was a delicate perfumed friendly note, begging dear
Mr. Train to come to dinner the next evening without ceremony. "I have
just learned that your dear mother was at school with me," wrote Mrs.
Ward in her most gushing style. "So you will see why I write
informally. Do come." The "Do" was underlined, and Leonard could
hardly contain himself for joy at this proof that a member of the
aristocracy was disposed to be friendly. "A woman of the highest
fashion, too," chuckled Leonard.

To account for Train's exuberant joy, which seemed out of all
proportion to its reason, it must be explained that, notwithstanding
his money, and what he regarded as his talents, he had never managed
to enter the fashionable world. As he was as vain as a peacock, and
anxious to shine and be admired among people worth knowing, this was a
great grief to him. George took him to several houses, but Leonard did
not seem to be a success, for after one visit he was never asked
again, although he left cards assiduously. This invitation of Mrs.
Ward's was purely voluntary, as she had met him only once and had
snubbed him when she did meet him. At the time he had thought her a
horrid woman, but now he was prepared to bow down and worship.

Leonard's father had been in trade, and the nice little income he
inherited had been made out of a patent medicine, most drastic in its
effects, that claimed to cure all diseases. Train senior, a shrewd
innkeeper, had bought it from one of his customers--a drunken doctor
meant for better things, but who had fallen on evil days. By judicious
advertisement, and with the aid of many bought testimonials from
penniless members of the aristocracy, Train managed to make the drug a
success. Train's Trump Pill was seen on every boarding, and Mr.
Ireland possessed one of the original posters.

Soon Train senior became rich, very rich, and, having improved his
manners and suppressed his parents, he was taken up by people of good
position who needed ready money. He bought his way into the fringe of
the fashionable world, and finally married a rather elderly lady, who
had blue blood, extravagant tastes, and no money. She presented him
with Leonard, and then, thinking she had done her duty, arranged to
enjoy herself. Mrs. Train spent the proceeds of the Trump Pill
recklessly, and before her husband died she managed to get through the
greater part of his wealth. Train settled an income of five thousand a
year on his son, and let Mrs. Train do what she liked with the rest.
Then he died, and Mrs. Train sent Leonard to Eton, afterward to
college. When he was thus off her hands she enjoyed herself amazingly,
and finally died in Paris, after spending every penny of the principal
and interest of the large fortune left by her husband. Leonard mourned
his mother, although he had seen very little of her. Then he settled
in London on his five thousand a year and posed as a literary man. But
the desire of his life was to be fashionable. Hence his delight at the
letter.

"Of course I'll go," soliloquized Leonard, when calmer. "I wonder if
George will be there. He loves that Ward girl, so he might. Mrs. Ward
does not approve of the match, so he might not. I wonder if there is a
regular engagement. If not, I might have a shot myself. The Honorable
Mrs. Train--no, that would be the mother."

It will be seen that Leonard was not very faithful to his absent
friend; but the fact is that Train was less devoted to Brendon than he
had been. The episode of Amelia Square made him fight rather shy of
George. The story of the marriage was shady, and in some way--Leonard
couldn't exactly explain how--seemed to be connected with the murder
of Mrs. Jersey. Moreover, Leonard knew something which he had not
mentioned to Brendon, and would not have mentioned it for the
fashionable world. However, he had said nothing about George's
history, and so far had kept faith. But Brendon saw that Leonard was
no longer so pleased to see him as formerly. He therefore avoided the
fat young man, and Leonard did not seem to mind the avoidance. Indeed,
he appeared to be rather relieved than otherwise. Brendon never asked
himself the reason of this behavior, as he thought it best to let
sleeping dogs lie. That Leonard would speak never entered his head.

And Leonard never intended to speak, being weak, but honorable in his
own foolish way. But when Mrs. Ward's invitation came he walked
blindfolded into a trap set by that clever little woman. She asked
Train to dinner, not because she had known his mother--although that
was true enough--but for the simple reason that she wished to hear
what he knew about the Amelia Square tragedy. Brendon had told her
much, but it was probable that Train, being a weak idiot in the hands
of a pretty woman like herself, would tell her more. Mrs. Ward was by
no means reconciled to the possibility of Brendon marrying her
daughter, and wished to find some scandal smirching George, that she
might induce Dorothy to break the engagement. She would have utilized
the tales about Lola and Brendon, but that she was not sure of her
ground in this particular direction, and, moreover, having seen the
Spanish dancer, feared lest so passionate a woman should make an open
scandal. It was the aim of Mrs. Ward's life to do wrong things, and to
avoid troubles arising from them. Therefore, she, for the time being,
put Lola on the shelf and arranged in her own scheming mind to make
use of Leonard. "I can work him like a lump of putty," said Mrs. Ward,
contemptuously. A vulgar illustration, but a true one. Besides, she
said it in the solitude of her own room when she was dressing for
dinner, so no one heard its vulgarity or its truth.

When Leonard entered the drawing-room he was welcomed by Dorothy, who
told him that Mrs. Ward would be down shortly. "It is only a small
dinner, Mr. Train," she said. "Mr. Vane is coming; no one else."

"I expected to find my friend Brendon here," said Leonard, thinking
how beautiful she looked.

"No! Mr. Brendon is very busy at the present time with his book. He
would have come otherwise."

"All things should give way where a lady is concerned," said Train,
gallantly.

Miss Ward laughed. She had heard much of Train from Brendon, and
thought him a kindly, but foolish young man. "I am not a woman of that
sort, Mr. Train. I have no desire that a man should neglect his work
for frivolity. You are a great friend of Mr. Brendon?"

"The greatest he has."

"And he was stopping with you in the house where that tragedy took
place. He told me about it."

Train secretly wished that George had held his tongue on this
particular point, as he had his own reasons for not wishing to be
questioned. With the very best intentions as to holding his tongue, he
knew his weakness for babbling well enough, and found it easier to
abstain from talking altogether than to be temperate in speech.
"Brendon certainly stopped with me," he said reservedly, "but we were
sound asleep when the murder took place. Neither of us heard anything.
After the inquest we both returned to the West End."

"It was a most unpleasant experience," said Dorothy, thoughtfully.

"Very," assented Train, wiping his face. "I shall never go in search
of types again."

"You can find amusing types in the West End," remarked Dorothy, in a
low voice. "Here is one."

The young man who entered the room was a small, attenuated, precise
atom of a creature, immaculately dressed and with a rather shrill
voice. He answered to the name of the Hon. Walter Vane, and was the
cousin of Brendon, although he did not know of the relationship. But
Dorothy and Train both knew, and compared Vane's physique
disadvantageously with that of Brendon. The one man was a splendid
specimen of humanity, the other a peevish hypochondriac. Walter Vane
had been "fast" in his time, and although he was not yet thirty he was
now suffering from the consequences of his rapid ways. He was in the
twenties, yet he was bald. He was as nervous as an old woman and
finicky as an elderly spinster. Lord Derrington, who was a bluff old
giant of the country squire type, sneered at his degenerate
descendant. All the same, he would not replace him by George, who was
a man in looks and tastes after the old lord's own heart.

"Beastly night," lisped Vane, greeting Dorothy and taking no notice of
Leonard. "I think there will be snow. I hope I won't get a bad cold. I
am so subject to cold."

"Mr. Train--Mr. Vane," said Dorothy, introducing the two.

Vane stared and muttered something about "pleasure." Leonard caught no
other word. He then continued his conversation with Miss Ward. "I
sneezed twice at the Merry Music Hall the other night."

"That is where Velez dances," said Leonard, determined to speak.

Vane stared again, and it was Dorothy who answered. "My mother went to
see her, and says she is a most extraordinary dancer."

"Oh, clever in a sort of mad way, and a regular bad one," chuckled the
little man. Dorothy turned away. She did not like this conversation,
as it offended her taste. But the next words of Vane made her pause.
"I saw your friend Brendon at the hall, Miss Ward--the writing man,
you know. A fine-looking chap, but sulky."

"The best man in the world," said Leonard, whereupon Dorothy gave him
an approving look. She wondered what Vane would say did he know that
the man he criticised so freely was his cousin and the legitimate heir
to the Derrington title if he had his rights.

"Well, he has his larks like every one else. They say he is sweet on
the dancer."

"Mr. Vane!" cried Dorothy, the blood rushing to her face.

The little man became confused, conscious that he had transgressed the
bounds of good breeding. He knew that Brendon admired Dorothy, and
that Dorothy took pleasure in his society, but he was unaware that any
deeper feeling existed. Mrs. Ward had kept that sort of thing from
him, as she did not want Vane to leave the coast clear for Brendon.
And Vane was so egotistical that he never for one moment dreamed that
George was his rival. Even if he had, he would have laughed the idea
to scorn. In his eyes Brendon was merely a writing fellow and not to
be named in the same breath with his noble, attenuated, rickety self.

"Well, good people," cried Mrs. Ward, entering the room at this very
opportune moment, "are you all here? Mr. Vane, I am pleased. Mr.
Train, how good of you to come. Ah," Mrs. Ward sighed, "you have your
dear mother's eyes, and lovely eyes they were."

Having slipped in this compliment to put Leonard at his ease and throw
him off his guard, Mrs. Ward delivered him to Dorothy and took Vane
into a shady corner. "Dinner will be ready soon," she said, fanning
herself although it was a cold winter's night. "I hope you are hungry,
Mr. Vane."

"I was," admitted her guest, "but I have to nurse my appetite
carefully, you know, Mrs. Ward, and I am rather put out."

"Not by Mr. Train, I hope. He is a nice fellow, really, very nice,
with money made out of pigs or whisky or something," said Mrs. Ward,
vaguely, for she was not certain. "What did he say?"

"He said nothing, but Miss Ward did."

Mrs. Ward shrugged. "Oh, well, you know, dear Dorothy has such odd
ideas, and all that sort of thing. I suppose it was something about
books, or philosophies, or grammar, or something. Enough to spoil any
one's appetite, I'm sure."

"No. But I mentioned that Brendon--you know the writing
fellow----"

"Yes, I know," said Mrs. Ward, viciously, and at once on the alert.

"Well, I said that it was rumored he was sweet on Lola Velez, and Miss
Ward fired up. Is she so great a friend of his as all that?"

"Oh, by no means," responded Mrs. Ward, vivaciously. "A mere
acquaintance, you know. They talk books, I believe, and how moths
get wings like those animals before the flood. She thinks he is
goody-goody. I'm sure he's dull enough. Lola Velez! oh, a perfect
dear. How she can kick! So Mr. Brendon is in--well, I never should
have thought it of him; but these quiet men are always the worst."

So Mrs. Ward rattled on in her incoherent manner, but perfectly clear
in her own mind as to the good Vane's injudicious observation would
do. If Dorothy once got it into her brain that George was an admirer
of Lola, then there would be a chance of breaking the engagement.
Before Vane could make any more remarks the gong thundered. Mrs. Ward
rose at once, rather glad of the stoppage of conversation. She liked a
lively man, and Vane was a fool. But for all that she was quite
prepared to give him Dorothy, as she would have given her to a prize
idiot provided the idiot was sufficiently rich. "You take in Dorothy,"
she said to Vane, thus getting him off her shoulders, but not hoping
to find Leonard a pleasant change. "I will take Mr. Train under my
wing."

In this order they entered the dining-room, Mrs. Ward trying to stifle
a yawn and wondering how she would get through such a dull evening.
Luckily, Vane mentioned that his grandfather had expressed his
intention of looking in during the course of the evening, "If you will
not mind, Mrs. Ward," he said politely.

"Oh, I'm rather glad," replied the little woman, drawing off her
gloves. "Such a delightful old gentleman! His anecdotes are quite in
the best style."

"He told one to a bishop the other day," said Vane, laughing.

"Really, how amusing! And what did the bishop say?"

"He said nothing, but he looked sermons."

"Ah," sighed Mrs. Ward, "bishops are so particular."

"I find them delightful," said Dorothy, filling in the pause.

"Of course, my dear, because they talk of Renan and missionaries and
those sort of dry things. I remember the Bishop of Timbuctoo, or
Central Africa, or some of those places one never heard of, telling me
how his old curate was eaten alive by blacks and mosquitoes. I quite
forget which; but he was eaten."

"I trust the blacks and mosquitoes didn't find the curate tough."

"I'm sure I don't know. He was just thirty, I believe, and bald."

"You said he was an old curate."

"Oh, dear me, Dorothy how can you expect me to explain what I
mean?--at dinner, too. I mean he was young in years and old in
saintliness. Do try this dish, Mr. Train? It is so good."

Leonard did try it, and did full justice to the merits of Mrs. Ward's
cook. She kept a particularly good chef, as she knew the value of good
cooking. "People like nice things to eat," she explained to Leonard,
while Dorothy labored to entertain Vane. "It makes one so popular if
one's chef can always be relied upon. I have known a woman's position
ruined by inattention to the kitchen. One can break all the ten
commandments if only one feeds the men." Then, thinking she had said
too much, she added sweetly, "But of course I am only joking, Mr.
Train, as one must be good and all that sort of thing."

"I'm sure you are all that is good and kind, Mrs. Ward."

"Now, that's really very nice of you. Mr. Brendon would never say a
really nice thing like that. Of course he's a great friend of yours,
isn't he? and he stopped with you when that poor woman----"

Leonard uttered an ejaculation. It seemed to him that he was pursued
by the Amelia Square tragedy. First Dorothy, and now her mother. Was
there no other topic of conversation? He would have answered an
ordinary person rudely, being wearied of being questioned, but Mrs.
Ward, having the key of the door which led into the fashionable world,
was to be conciliated. He replied to her almost in the same words as
he had used to Dorothy. "Mr. Brendon did stop with me," he said, "but
we were asleep when the murder took place."

"How extraordinary!" said Mrs. Ward, languidly, yet with a keen eye on
the change in Leonard's face. "I wonder who killed her?"

"No one knows," replied Train, shortly.

"Does no one suspect any one?"

"I believe not. The police are quite at fault."

"Oh, the police!" said Mrs. Ward, in a proper tone of contempt. "They
never do anything except make love to cooks. Do you suspect any one?"

Leonard flushed. "I, Mrs. Ward? Why should I suspect any one?"

"Oh, I don't know. You have a clever face. Just the kind of a face
that one would think a brilliant detective would have. You must have
some suspicions?" Again her eyes searched his face.

"No," he protested. "I was asleep. I know nothing about the matter."

"How stupid of you!" said Mrs. Ward, beginning to think that her
condescension in asking Leonard to dinner was wasted. "But you men are
always so blind, poor dears! What kind of a woman was Mrs. Jersey?"

"A nice motherly old creature."

"I know--like a monthly nurse. Was Mr. Brendon introduced to her?"

"Yes. I took him into the drawing-room."

"Really. Have they drawing-rooms in Bloomsbury? How nice and
civilized! Well, did Mrs. Jersey and Mr. Brendon get on well together?
I want to know because you see, Mr. Train, he admires Dorothy, and it
is such a sign of a man's good-nature if he gets on well with
strangers. I suppose Mrs. Jersey liked him?"

"I think she did," replied Leonard, on whose weak head the claret was
beginning to take effect, "but she was rather startled when she saw
him first."

Mrs. Ward's eyes flashed so brightly that Leonard would have been
warned of his indiscretion had he not been looking at his plate. "Oh,
how very interesting! But she never saw him before. Why should she be
startled?"

"It wasn't at him exactly," said Leonard, "but at a piece of yellow
holly he wore in his coat."

"Yellow holly," repeated Mrs. Ward, with feigned surprise. "Why, of
course Mr. Brendon wore a sprig. My daughter gave it to him."

"So he told me, Mrs. Ward."

"And I gave it to Dorothy," continued Mrs. Ward, who for some reason
wished to make an explicit statement. "It is very rare, you know, and
a man who lives in Devonshire sent me a bunch. Dorothy mentioned that
Mr. Brendon had begged for a piece. Yes! he would naturally wear it on
that night, as he had just left my house. But why was this unfortunate
woman surprised?"

"I can't say; but she was," answered Train; "she turned white, and we
all thought she was about to faint."

"Did she give any explanation?"

"No. In a few moments she recovered, and nothing more was said."

"Oh!" Mrs. Ward seemed disappointed. "Was that all?"

"Why--" Leonard turned his dull eyes on her flushed face--"what else
did you expect to hear, Mrs. Ward?"

"Nothing! Nothing," she said hurriedly, for she did not wish to make
him suspicious, "but it seems so odd. Dorothy giving the holly, you
know, and that Mrs. Jersey should be upset. We must continue this
conversation, Mr. Train. It is really most interesting. But you
literary men are quite fascinating. After dinner in the drawing-room,
Mr. Train. Dorothy!" She signaled with her fan, and her daughter
arose. "Don't be too long over your wine," said Mrs. Ward, as she left
the room. "We can't spare you, Mr. Train."

Leonard believed that all this attention was due to his own
fascinations. His head was still heated with the wine he had drunk,
yet he began to regret that he had said anything about the yellow
holly. Certainly he had not promised George to be silent on this
especial point; but he nevertheless thought it wiser to hold his
tongue about all that had taken place in Amelia Square on the night of
the murder. Warned in this way by his mother sense, Train took no more
wine, but after a rather dull conversation with Vane he went into the
drawing-room. Dorothy was at the piano and thither repaired Vane; but
Mrs. Ward, seated near the fire, called Leonard to her side. "I must
introduce you: Lord Derrington--Mr. Train."

The grandfather of George was a huge man, burly, red-faced,
white-haired, and with a rather truculent expression. He was over
seventy, yet carried his years like a boy. Under his bushy white
eyebrows he shot a quick glance at Leonard from a pair of keen gray
eyes and summed him up at once as a fool. But Lord Derrington had been
a diplomatist many years before, and knew that even fools are
sometimes useful. Moreover, he had learned from Mrs. Ward's aimless
chatter that Train was a great friend of Brendon's, and he knew more
about George than George thought. However, Derrington, after that one
glance of contempt, was very civil to Leonard.

"I am glad to meet you," he said, with a nod. "You go in for books, I
understand from Mrs. Ward."

He had a deep, raucous voice like that of an early starling, and spoke
in an abrupt staccato kind of way. Train, who stood before him like a
rabbit before a snake, compared him in his own mind with Becky Sharp's
friend, the Marquis of Steyne. Derrington was quite as wicked and
savage and unscrupulous as that celebrated nobleman.

"I do write a little," said Leonard, nervously.

"I believe in action rather than in writing," said Derrington. "There
are far too many books written. Dreamers, all of you."

"Dreams may come true."

"And when they do come true, what is the use of them? Bah! In my young
days we lived. Now people dream."

"I'm sure there's no dreaming about society nowadays," said Mrs. Ward,
laughing. "Every one is as sharp as a needle to get the better of his
or her neighbor."

"Mutual Deception Society," said Derrington.
"You-give-me-so-much-and-I'll-let-you-go-so-far. That's the sort of
thing."

"But there is a great deal of philanthropy nowadays."

"And what good does philanthropy do, Mr. Train?" said Derrington;
"only makes people lazy. People are too sentimental. I would give half
these paupers the cat if I had my way."

Train was quite sure that he would, for, with his red face and heavy
jowl and savage air of command, he looked the picture of a Roman
emperor. Derrington had the instincts of a despot, and Leonard could
imagine him slaying and burning and doing all manner of evil things.
He wondered how Brendon ever came to have such a villainous
grandfather. It was on the tip of his tongue to say something about
Brendon, just to observe the effect on Derrington. But his courage
failed him and he held his peace. And at that moment Fate intervened.
The drawing-room door opened, and a servant announced, "Mr. Brendon!"

The next moment George came face to face with his grandfather.




CHAPTER X

DIPLOMACY


It was a most awkward meeting. Dorothy, Train, and Brendon knew the
truth, but Mrs. Ward and Vane were ignorant. As to Lord Derrington
himself, George was not sure. After his conversation with Lola he had
a vague idea that since Bawdsey was connected in some way with his
grandfather, Lord Derrington must have somehow learned that Brendon
was the name his grandson had taken. There was no other way of
accounting for the mention of Derrington's name by the private inquiry
agent.

However this might be, Lord Derrington was too clever a man to betray
himself. George felt that the old man knew who he was, but he could
not be sure, for Derrington welcomed him with a well-bred air, as he
would have done a stranger. Mrs. Ward watched the meeting curiously,
and Brendon noticed her inquiring gaze. But he put this down to his
knowledge that Derrington knew he was a suitor for Dorothy's hand and
wished the girl to marry Vane. Leonard was the only person in the room
who displayed any visible disturbance. He grew red and restless.
Brendon was perfectly calm.

"How delightful of you to come, Mr. Brendon," said Mrs. Ward, rising
and apparently forgetting that she had forbidden him the house. "I
must introduce you: Lord Derrington--Mr. Brendon; and you know Mr.
Train."

"We are old friends," said George, calmly. "Miss Ward"--he bowed to
Dorothy, who emulated his serenity although she felt anxious. But when
she saw her lover's composure she knew that nothing disagreeable would
occur, and her apprehensions were relieved.

There ensued a general conversation relative to the weather, to the
doings of a certain politician, and to sundry other subjects more or
less vague. George talked excellently, and was conscious that
Derrington was listening with approval. Again and again he wondered if
the old man really knew who he was, and again and again he failed to
arrive at any conclusion. After a time Leonard went with Dorothy to
the piano, where she played for his delectation, and Mrs. Ward seized
the opportunity to show Vane some new photographs of herself.
Derrington and Brendon were practically alone, and the old lord
appeared anxious to make himself agreeable. George was watchful for
the cloven hoof, but it did not peep out. Truculent tyrant as
Derrington was, yet he could play the part of a highly bred, polished
gentleman of the old school to perfection. He did so on this occasion.

"I have heard of you from Mrs. Ward," he said in his harsh tones,
which no amount of politeness could render agreeable, "but I do not
think we have met before."

"No. I cannot recall any meeting," replied George, wondering if the
other was about to hint that he had seen some one resembling him. "I
have seen you in the distance, however."

"Distance lends enchantment to the view in my case."

"You are pleased to say so, Lord Derrington."

"I generally do say what I please," responded the old man, shooting a
sharp glance at George.

"Are you related to the Brendons of Shropshire?"

"No. I have not that privilege."

Derrington chuckled at this reply. He thought George had a good deal
of the man in him when he answered thus fearlessly. "I have seen your
name somewhere lately," he observed, "but I can't recall where or in
what connection."

Brendon laughed, quite at his ease, although he did not know if this
was an attempt to make him speak out. However, he did speak out, with
the idea of seeing what would happen. "I can supply the connection,"
said he, lightly, but keenly observant of the old man's face. "My name
appeared as a witness at an inquest a week or so back."

"Ah, now I remember, Mr. Brendon. Quite so. It was that Amelia Square
murder."

"You have a good memory, Lord Derrington."

"In this case you flatter me, Mr. Brendon. There is no difficulty in
my remembering the especial case, as Mrs. Jersey was a tenant of
mine."

George was not supposed to know this and displayed suitable surprise.

"Indeed," he said; "then you have lost a good tenant."

"Possibly," replied Derrington, rather grimly. "She always paid her
rent regularly. You saw her?"

"Yes. My friend, Mr. Train, was stopping in the house----"

"That young man." Derrington cast a look in Leonard's direction. "I
did not know he was there on that night."

"He was a witness also," said Brendon, significantly.

"I can't remember all the names sir. Well?"

"I stopped for the night with Mr. Train, and during the night Mrs.
Jersey was murdered."

"You heard nothing--you saw nothing?"

"I was sound asleep the whole time," said Brendon, calmly.

"Humph!" Derrington pulled at his gray mustache in the very same way
as George did when he was reflective. "What a pity. You might have
discovered the assassin."

"I don't think the assassin will ever be discovered."

"That's luck for the assassin," rejoined the old lord, cynically. "You
appear to be very certain, Mr. Brendon."

George shrugged his shoulders. "No more certain than the police are,"
he replied. "They examined every one in the house, and no one could be
accused--there was absolutely no evidence. And the assassin could not
have entered the house, as the door was locked, and the key was in the
pocket of the murdered woman."

Derrington, for some reason, appeared to be rather relieved. "I read
all that in the papers," he said roughly. "You are telling me nothing
new. But there, you didn't say you would. By the way, you stopped at
that house. Do you know a Miss Bull?"

George nodded. "She told my fortune," he said.

"She told Mrs. Jersey's fortune also, and a very true fortune did she
tell," said Derrington, grimly. "What did she prophesy about you?"

"The usual thing," said Brendon, curtly.

"Trouble, I suppose. These card-people generally prophesy trouble, as
it is certain to occur."

"There was trouble and enemies, and the promise that I should get my
wish," said Brendon, with a quick look.

Derrington laughed. "What is your wish?"

"If I tell it I won't get it," replied George, also laughing; "but I
don't believe in fortune-telling. It is rubbish."

"It wasn't in Mrs. Jersey's case," said the other, who appeared to be
a trifle superstitious.

"Oh, that was a mere coincidence. But you asked me about Miss Bull,
sir! Do you know her?"

Derrington nodded. "She came to me on behalf of Mrs. Jersey's niece
and wished the lease renewed. I heard her story and consented. I dare
say the niece will be quite as good a tenant as the aunt."

This conversation was all very well, but there was nothing to be
learned from it on either side. Brendon could not discover if his
grandfather knew to whom he was speaking, and Derrington found it
impossible to learn if George could tell him anything of the case
which had not been reported in the papers. For some reason Derrington
wished to know what had transpired, and Brendon felt convinced that
this anxiety was more than that of a landlord for the loss of a good
tenant. He wondered if Derrington knew that Mrs. Jersey had written
out a confession and that it was missing. He would had liked to find
out, but since he could not reveal himself as Derrington's grandson
there was no chance of getting this information. Besides, Derrington
appeared to grow weary of discussing the murder. "It is worn
threadbare," he said. "All the papers have been talking about it. I
agree with you, Mr. Brendon, that the assassin will never be
discovered."

"Never!" said George, looking full at the determined face of the old
man. "Are you quite sure?

"I am sure of nothing in this world, save that you said so yourself,
Mr. Brendon. However, there are pleasanter subjects to talk of. What
about yourself--your aims, your ambitions, your chances of success?"

"Are those pleasant subjects?" laughed Brendon.

"To an old man such as I am," nodded the other. "I like to hear of the
castles in the air which youth builds."

"I am afraid my castles will never turn to bricks and mortar," said
Brendon with a sigh.

However, he was not averse to showing his grandfather that he was no
fool, but a man with a head on his shoulders. George had a quick brain
and a strong will and a considerable fund of information. He had taken
a good degree at Oxford, and his literary articles always received
praise from the public, and from his brethren of the press. Moreover,
George was fond of politics, and could converse excellently on that
fascinating subject. He laid himself out to please Derrington, knowing
that the old tyrant was disappointed in the languid Vane, who was
chattering commonplace to Mrs. Ward. In a short time Brendon and
Derrington were engaged in a discussion about Ireland and Irish Home
Rule, and the old lord approved, highly of Brendon's sentiments.

"You ought to be in the House, Mr. Brendon," he said.

"I have no one to help me to such a goal."

Derrington was about to speak, and fastened his little eyes on the
keen, handsome face of the younger man. But he suddenly changed his
mind and turned away to talk to Mrs. Ward. Brendon knew that he had
succeeded in pleasing the old gentleman, and was glad that so much was
accomplished. If Derrington found that he was clever and presentable,
and likely to add luster to the family name, it was not improbable
that he would recognize the marriage. But by this time George had it
in his mind that Derrington knew who he was, and had been talking
advisedly under the cover of pretended ignorance, so as to see what
manner of man his unacknowledged grandson was. "Well," thought
Brendon, "he has learned that I am no fool, at all events."

Mrs. Ward came across to George and left Derrington talking to
Dorothy, for whom he professed a great admiration. He knew that
Dorothy liked Brendon, as Mrs. Ward had told him so, and he frankly
acknowledged to her that Brendon was a clever man. "I wish my grandson
had his brains," said Derrington, regretfully.

"I am pleased you like him," responded Dorothy, who could not tell him
that Brendon was his grandson, and hardly knew what to say. "He is as
good as he is clever."

This remark did not please Derrington. "Humph! I don't like good young
men. They generally become bad old scamps."

"Were you a good young man, Lord Derrington?" asked Dorothy, demurely.

He appreciated the joke. "One of the best," he said, with a twinkle in
his eyes, "consequently I have gone to the other extreme for many
years."

"They say one always returns to his first loves," said Dorothy,
smiling, "so you may revert to your godly youth."

Derrington shook his wicked old head. "My first loves are all dead and
buried, my dear. But this Brendon--you like him?"

Dorothy did not see why see should conceal her feelings. "I love him,"
she said quietly and firmly.

"Ha!" replied Derrington, showing no surprise. "Mrs. Ward hinted at
something of that sort, but I thought that Walter----"

"Please say no more, Lord Derrington."

"Well, then, I won't." Derrington's eyes rested wrathfully on the
withered young man he called grandson. "I don't wonder at your choice,
my dear. What Walter requires is a nurse."

"That is a profession I have not taken up," said Dorothy, laughing.
She was very anxious to say something good about George to Derrington,
on the chance that it might soften his hard old heart. But after all,
George had spoken for himself and was his own best advocate. If she
interfered, seeing that she was supposed to know nothing of the
relationship, she might make mischief. Therefore she held her tongue
on the subject nearest to her heart and talked in the most general
manner. Derrington said no more about Brendon, but Dorothy noticed
that his eyes were rarely off the face of her lover. George had
certainly made an impression.

Meantime, Vane joined Mrs. Ward, and Dorothy, seeing that Leonard was
alone, beckoned him to approach. Derrington was not particularly
pleased at having his conversation with a pretty girl interrupted, but
he was polite, and, on learning that Train knew Brendon intimately, he
began to ask him about his friend. Train, to please Dorothy, and
because he really admired George, spoke most enthusiastically. Dorothy
listened in silence, well pleased. From Derrington's curiosity and
persistent questioning she began to think he knew something of the
relationship.

"But really, you know, she is a great artist," Mrs. Ward was saying to
Brendon; "there is something so original about her."

They were speaking of Lola Velez, and it was Vane who had introduced
the subject. As Mrs. Ward was a married woman, and knew the seamy side
of social life, Vane had no hesitation in speaking about the dancer to
her. George, to whom the subject was distasteful, tried to avoid the
discussion; but Mrs. Ward, on the alert for information, would return
again and again to the topic.

"They say you know her very well," she declared.

"They? Who?" asked Brendon, lifting his eyebrows.

"I do, for one," said Vane in his weak voice; "a fellow told me that
she owed her success to you."

"I am not sorry to put you right on that point," replied Brendon, his
eyes hardening; "many false rumors are about--to one of which you
alluded the other day, Mrs. Ward. This is another. What I know of
Senora Velez, and how I know her, can be put in a nutshell," and
George quietly related his rescue of the dancer.

"Then you did make her the success she is!" cried Mrs. Ward, when he
ended. "Oh, yes, it's no use denying it. You picked a jewel out of the
gutter and gave it a chance of shining."

"Perhaps I did that much. But she made a success by her genius."

"I hope she is grateful," murmured Vane, with a malicious smile.

Brendon turned on him sharply. "I don't know what you mean by
gratitude," he said deliberately.

"Well," drawled the little dandy, "she is pretty and----"

"She is not at all pretty, Mr. Vane, and were she as lovely as
Cleopatra it would not matter to me. My connection with her ceased
when she made her success." George quite forgot the presence of Mrs.
Ward and spoke vehemently. "Can't you understand that a man may do a
kind action without being biased by the beauty of a woman?"

"Some men can," said Mrs. Ward, politely, "and I am sure you are one,
Mr. Brendon. But suppose the woman----"

"I don't suppose anything, Mrs. Ward. I know. Senora Velez was poor. I
helped her to attain to the position she now holds because I endeavor
to follow the preaching of Christ, and she is to me a grateful friend.
There is no more and no less to be said," and, a trifle ruffled,
George turned on his heel to join Dorothy.

"Well, I'm sure," murmured Mrs. Ward, "and in my own house, too."

Vane sniggered. "There must be something in it," he said.

"And the profane language he used. Of course I don't believe a word he
says."

"Neither do I. She's too pretty."

So these two scandal-mongers talked on, and George had only made
matters worse by his explanation. However, he believed that he had
nipped the scandal in the bud, and strolled into the next room with
Dorothy to quiet his mind. Behind them they left Derrington talking to
Train and rather enjoying himself.

The room in which they found themselves was a pretty little apartment
hung with amber silk, and illuminated with lights in yellow shades.
The furniture was also yellow, and the carpet of a primrose hue. Mrs.
Ward only introduced her most intimate friends into this boudoir, as
it was her own special sanctum; and if its walls could have spoken
they could have supplied all the existing society papers with gossip
enough to last a century.

"Do you think Lord Derrington knows who you are?" asked Dorothy as
they seated themselves on a kind of divan.

"I am not sure," replied George, who did not want to tell her what he
knew, lest he should have to introduce the name of Lola Velez. "I have
an idea that he does."

Dorothy shook her head. "I don't think so. If he knows you he must be
aware that you know him, and about the relationship, and would not
speak so freely. I think he is taken with you, George."

"Well, he has been putting me through my paces. I only hope that our
chance meeting of to-night may bear fruit. What is Train doing here?
Your mother only had him in her house once before, and she does not
like him."

"I can't make out why she asked him," said Dorothy; "he is a dull
young man, though harmless enough. But my mother made a point of
asking him to dinner."

"Humph! I wonder what that's for," said Brendon, wrinkling his brows,
for he knew well that Mrs. Ward did nothing without expecting an
equivalent return. Then he recollected her questions about the crime,
and wondered if she had invited Leonard so as to pump him. It was just
what Mrs. Ward did intend to do, but George could not think she had
sufficient interest in the crime to justify such a course of action.
Besides, he felt that he could trust Leonard to hold his tongue, in
spite of the man's weakness. But in this he reckoned without Mrs.
Ward, who could have wiled an anchorite to chatter, had she been so
minded.

And that is what she was doing at the very moment. Almost as soon as
the lovers had disappeared into the yellow boudoir Lord Derrington had
taken his departure. He insisted that Vane should come also, and would
not allow the little dandy to take leave of Dorothy, nor would he take
leave himself. This was done to punish Vane. "Miss Ward is quite happy
in there," he said to Mrs. Ward at the door of the drawing-room. "I
won't have her disturbed."

"Oh, but really," cried Mrs. Ward, who did not want Vane to go away
with a bad impression, "Dorothy is simply bored with him."

"If she is bored with such a brilliant fellow she would not enjoy the
company of Shakespeare himself."

"I'm sure I shouldn't," murmured Mrs. Ward. "Shakespeare must have
been an awful bore. But do say good-by, Lord Derrington. Dorothy will
be so disappointed."

"No, she won't," snarled Derrington, who was enjoying himself at thus
thwarting Mrs. Ward's schemes. "Come along, Walter. Take me home and
tell me your latest ailment. Good-night, Mrs. Ward," and he went.

Derrington was chuckling, and Vane looked very sulky, so Mrs. Ward saw
that the old man had done this thing to spite her. "Horrid creature!"
she pouted; "he ought to be dead and buried. It isn't respectable
being alive at his time of life. He'll make Walter Vane angry with me,
and I'm sure----" Here she caught, sight of Leonard's astonished face,
and became aware she was divulging secrets. At once she smoothed her
brow and began to smile. This was an excellent opportunity to find out
what she wanted. Taking Leonard's arm she led him to a chair some
distance from the door of the boudoir.

"Now let us have a nice long talk, dear Mr. Train," she said, settling
herself amiably. "Mr. Brendon and Dorothy are no doubt talking
tadpoles or frogs or something nasty. They won't be out for a long
time, so we can renew our pleasant conversation."

"I don't think it was very pleasant," said Train, unwillingly.

"What an ungallant thing to say!"

"I mean to talk about crime----"

"Is most amusing--I mean instructive. Oh, yes, I have read many of
those novels--what do they call them?--detective novels."

"A very low form of literature," said the superior Leonard.

"Oh, they are amusing and interesting, and send one to sleep when one
can't in spite of drops and morphia!" babbled Mrs. Ward in her
childish manner. "And I have often thought how nice it would be if one
could really try and find out who killed a person. Now in this case,
Mr. Train, I am sure you heard something or saw something----"

"Upon my word I neither saw nor heard," protested Leonard. "I was in
bed all the time."

"Didn't you hear a scream?"

"No."

"Then you must have heard the fall of the body, or the shutting of the
door as the--ah!" Mrs. Ward saw from the expression of Leonard's face
that she had touched upon something. "You did hear----"

"No! no!" he stammered, wondering how he was to get out of confessing
about the opening of the front door without appearing rude.

"Nonsense. Confess! Confess, you silly man!"

But Leonard was too loyal. To lead her away from the point he asked a
question. "Mrs. Ward, that yellow holly?"

"Yes. What about it?" She leaned forward eagerly.

"Did you give a sprig of it to any one else?"

"No. I only gave a bit to my daughter, and she----"

"She gave it to Brendon. Yes, I know. But did Miss Ward give any of it
to a third person?"

"Certainly not. To do so she would have had to get it from me. But
beyond the sprig that was given, and which Mr. Brendon had, no holly
went out of this house."

"It is very rare, is it not?"

"I believe so. I dare say there wasn't another bunch in London on that
particular night. Of course there might have been, still--but why do
you ask all this?"

"Well," said Leonard, "it seems to me that the yellow holly has
something to do with the crime."

Mrs. Ward drew a long breath but said no word. He was speaking half to
himself, and she did not wish to interrupt his train of thought. But
she listened with all her ears. Leonard continued: "I found a berry in
the room where she was killed. Yes. They took us in to see the body,
and a horrid sight it was. I turned my eyes to the floor, and there I
saw--just by the table--a kind of amber bead. I dropped my
handkerchief so that Quex might not suspect, and I picked it up. When
in my own room I examined it. It was one of the yellow holly berries."

Mrs. Ward threw herself back with a kind of unholy triumph. "Do you
know what you are saying, Mr. Train?" she said in a half whisper. "You
are accusing Mr. Brendon----"

"No! no!" Train started to his feet. Mrs. Ward pulled him down again
and pointed with her fan toward the boudoir.

"Hush! He might come out," she whispered. "But can't you see? Brendon
wore the sprig in his coat on that night. He must have been in the
room and have dropped the berry. What was he doing there if it was not
to----"

"No," said Train, hoarsely. "I half thought of that myself, but it is
quite impossible, I tell you. He could not have got out of his room
unless he had come to me."

"How do you mean?"

"I locked the door of the sitting-room, which was between his bedroom
and mine. There was no exit from his bedroom, and to get out and down
the stairs he would have had to open the sitting-room door. Now the
key was under my pillow and the door was locked in the morning. No,
Mrs. Ward, Brendon is innocent."

"He might have stolen the key while you slept." Train shook his head.
"Impossible. I sleep very lightly, and on that night I hardly slept at
all."

"Why. Was anything wrong?"

"I can't tell you that, Mrs. Ward, without violating the confidence of
my friend. Indeed, I have said too much. Promise me you will not speak
of what I have told you."

"I promise, but I am quite sure that the holly berry was dropped by
George Brendon, and that he was in Mrs. Jersey's sitting-room on that
night. He is the criminal."

"I tell you he is not, Mrs. Ward."

"Don't excite yourself, Mr. Train. Here is Mr. Brendon and Dorothy."
She sailed toward them with open hands. "Finished your talk. We must
say good-night." And to herself she murmured, while smiling, "I've got
you at last--I've got you at last." And Brendon shook hands with
Madame Judas, quite unconscious of her premeditated treachery.




CHAPTER XI

MR. BAWDSEY AT HOME


Under the rule of Miss Bull--for Margery was a mere figure-head--the
house in Amelia Square was much more lively. Most of the old boarders
had departed, as their nerves would not permit them to stop in a
dwelling wherein a crime had been committed. Mrs. Taine carried her
knitting to her sister's house at Clapham, Mr. Granger took the "Death
of Nelson" to a boarding-house on Highgate Hill, and Harmer went to
rejuvenate his antiquity at some German baths. In place of these
ancient creatures came bright young men and girls who were up to date
in every way. None of them minded about the crime. The house was
cheap, it was now bright, and in a few months the tragedy was almost
forgotten. No one would have recognized the changed atmosphere of the
place, save for Miss Bull, who still sat nightly playing Patience in
her favorite corner.

So little did she mind the horror of the murder that she took up her
abode in Madame's sitting-room, where it had happened. She still
retained her own bedroom, and Margery kept hers; but the sitting-room
Miss Bull found very pleasant, for she could ask her friends into it
for afternoon tea without having to mix with the too-lively boarders
in the drawing-room. And the majority of them were extremely lively;
so much so that Miss Bull sent several away and checked the exuberant
spirits of the others. The girls played ping-pong, the men sang
music-hall ditties, and in conjunction they tried to gamble. But Miss
Bull soon put a stop to that. She had no notion that the house should
get a bad name after her difficulty in obtaining the lease from Lord
Derrington.

Of course, in spite of the fast air which certainly pervaded the
house, all things were very proper. Miss Bull was a lady and saw that
things were kept decent. The boarders feared her bright black eyes and
her sharp tongue, and were always glad when she retired to her
sitting-room. When they waxed too noisy, the little old maid would
appear like an unquiet ghost, and the clamor would die away. But Miss
Bull was also liked, as she was a very affable hostess.

She was thoroughly happy now, as she had what she most desired--power;
and thought, like Satan, that it was better to rule in a certain place
than to serve in the higher spheres. Margery was now, as ever, her
docile slave, and Miss Bull governed with a rod of iron. She dismissed
some of the servants, among them Jarvey, who had bettered himself by
becoming a page-boy in a West-End mansion.

Among the new boarders Miss Bull took most notice of Bawdsey, who
occupied the rooms formerly inhabited by Train. On his arrival he had
asked particularly for these rooms, saying that he had once lived in
them when he stopped with Mrs. Jersey many years before. After some
thought Miss Bull remembered the man. He had boarded in the house, and
had been a great favorite with Madame, but had later gone to America,
and for some time had remained away. He expressed the greatest sorrow
for the death of the old lady, but declared that he was very pleased
with the house as managed by Miss Bull. The little woman liked him, as
his conversation was amusing and he was most polite. But had she known
that he was a private inquiry agent she might not have approved of him
so much. Miss Bull was a lady and drew the line at spies.

What Bawdsey was she never inquired, as she was the least curious of
women. His habits were certainly eccentric, for sometimes he would
remain away for a week, and at other times would stop constantly in
the house. He often remained in bed for the day and had his meals
brought to him. This he called his bed-cure, and stated that he
suffered from nerves. He told Miss Bull quite gratuitously that he had
a small income and supplemented it by taking photographs of scenery
and selling them to London firms. But he declared that he was not a
professional photographer. He simply traveled here and there, and
photographed any scenery which struck him as pretty. The London
photographers gave him good prices for these, but he stated that he
merely did such artistic work for the sake of an occupation. "I am
simple in my tastes," said Mr. Bawdsey, "and what I have keeps me in
luxury. But a man, even of my age, must be up and doing. Better to
wear out than rust out."

Miss Bull assented. For the greater part of her life she had been
rusting, and now that she had taken command of the house found that
wearing out gave her an interest in things and prevented her from
being bored. She liked to hear Bawdsey tell of his travels, and
frequently asked him into her sitting-room for that purpose. He seemed
to have been everywhere and to have seen everything. It appeared from
his own confession that he began his travels at the early age of
seventeen, when he went to Milan. And the man talked freely about
himself--so freely that Miss Bull, in spite of her suspicious nature,
never dreamed that all this chatter was for the purpose of throwing
dust in her sharp eyes.

A week after the little dinner at Mrs. Ward's, Bawdsey sent a note to
Brendon asking him to call on a certain afternoon, and when George,
anxious to continue the acquaintance, and curious to know how Bawdsey
had procured his address, arrived, he was shown up to the well-known
room. Bawdsey welcomed him with enthusiasm, and much in the same style
as Lola did, but in a less theatrical manner.

"My preserver," said Bawdsey, shaking hands vigorously, and George
laughed.

"You put me in mind of a lady I know," he said; "she uses the same
term--quite unnecessarily, as it happens."

"I don't agree with you," answered Bawdsey, to the astonishment of his
visitor. "When a woman is rescued from starvation she has a right to
call her good Samaritan the best of names."

"Oh," said Brendon, taking a seat, "so Lola has told you."

Bawdsey nodded. "I guess so," said he, with a pronounced American
twang--somewhat too pronounced, George thought. "She told me all about
your visit the other night."

"Did she never speak of me before?"

"Why, of course she spoke. I tell you, sir, that the girl is just
bubbling over with gratitude. And you're a good man, Mr. Brendon. Yes,
sir, some. You saved her and you saved me, and I sha'n't forget, and
neither will she."

"Yet you said, when last we met, that she meant me harm."

"Jealousy, Mr. Brendon, sheer jealousy. I heard her talking of you,
and wishing to marry you, so you can guess----"

"That you wish to put me against her."

"Not exactly that," responded Bawdsey, coolly. "I wish to choke you
off. You see, Mr. Brendon, I love her."

"So she told me."

"Quite so, and she informed me that she had informed you. Well, I was
a trifle jealous, as I'd lay down my life to make that lady Mrs.
Bawdsey. But when I learned that you admired and were almost engaged
to Miss Ward----"

"How the devil did you find that out?" asked George.

"Without the use of the word devil," said Bawdsey, dryly. "That is a
long story, Mr. Brendon."

"You seem to know a great deal about me," said Brendon, nettled.

"I made it my business to find out, sir."

"Don't you think that is rather impertinent?"

"Well," drawled Bawdsey, combing his fingers through his ruddy locks,
"you might put it that way if you like. A fortnight ago I should not
have minded whether you thought me impertinent or not. But now that
you saved my life I don't mind telling you that I wish to gain and
retain your good opinion."

"Why?" asked George, more and more puzzled.

"Because I'm that rare animal--a grateful man. You have had a bad time
all your life, Mr. Brendon, but now you shall have a good one, and I
am the man who is going to help you right along."

George looked at him helplessly. He found it difficult to understand
what all this meant. "Of course I know, from what Lola said, that you
are a private inquiry agent," he remarked with hesitation.

"Vidocq & Co.," said Bawdsey, briskly, "23 Augusta Street, Strand.
That's me Mr. Brendon, but you needn't mention it in this shanty."

"Are you an American, Mr. Bawdsey?"

"I am anything that suits. I can talk all languages, and try to tell
the truth in every one. And the best day's work you ever did for
yourself, Mr. Brendon, was in dragging me from under the feet of that
horse. Yes, sir, I'm in line with you forever."

"This is all amusing, but a trifle confusing," said Brendon, feeling
that he must get to the bottom of this chatter. "Will you answer a few
questions, Mr. Bawdsey?"

"Yes. Fire ahead. Wait! Will you take whisky?"

"No, thanks. Yes, I'll take a cigar."

"Henry Clay," said Bawdsey, passing along a box; "and the questions?"

"You are a private inquiry agent?" asked George, when the cigar was
well alight and Bawdsey had subsided into a chair.

"That's so. Vidocq & Company--an attractive title, I guess."

"And you were employed by Lola to watch me?"

"I was. Love will do anything for the object of its affections."

"Humph! there are different ways of looking at that. But you were also
engaged by Lord Derrington to watch me?"

Bawdsey did not display the least surprise. "That's very creditable to
your observation, Mr. Brendon. It's true."

"How did Lord Derrington find out that I was passing under the name of
George Brendon?"

"Well, sir, if you will shove advertisements into the paper asking
about the celebration of the marriage of Percy Vane and Miss Rosina
Lockwood you must expect to be dropped upon."

"Oh, that was the way you found out!"

"That was the way," nodded Bawdsey. "You had the answers----"

"I had no answers," said Brendon, quickly.

"I am quite sure of that," replied the detective, coolly. "We should
have heard of you in a court of law had you been successful. But what
I mean to say is that you asked for the answers to be sent to G. B.,
Pembroke Square, Kensington. Derrington spotted that, and seeing that
the marriage referred to was that of his son to----"

George waved his hand impatiently. "I see! I see! He hired you, and
you looked me up."

"Quite so. I have had you under observation for the last six months."

"Confound it," cried Brendon, uncomfortably, "and I never knew."

Bawdsey winked. "I know my business," he said. "You don't find me
sending myself up on any occasion. Any more questions, sir?"

"Only one," replied George. "Will you tell me exactly what you are
doing in this galley?"

"Certainly. You shall have the whole story, Mr. Brendon. But in the
first place I shall ask you a question in my turn. Do you know why I
asked you to come and see me to-day?"

Brendon shook his head. "I have not the least idea," he confessed.

"I'll enlighten you," was the other man's reply; "to warn you that you
are in danger of arrest."

"I in danger of arrest?" George jumped up. "What do you mean?"

"Oh, my meaning is clear enough. There is a chance that you may be
accused of having murdered Mrs. Jersey."

George dropped back into his chair with a white face. "You must be mad
to say such a thing. Who accuses me?"

"Lord Derrington."

"On what grounds?"

"On certain information he obtained from Mrs. Ward."

"What? Is she in it, too?"

"Very much in it. She is your bitter enemy. You see, Mr. Brendon, it
is not her game that you should marry the daughter. Mrs. Ward knows
that you are a clever man with a will of your own, and that she will
not be able to twist you around her finger, which is what she wishes
to do with any son-in-law who may come her way. That young fool Vane
is the man she wants. He will inherit the title and a good income.
Mrs. Ward, should he marry the girl, will benefit. If the title and
income came your way she would make very little out of the business.
Consequently she will stick at nothing to get you out of the way."

"But she doesn't know that I claim to be Lord Derrington's grandson?"

"Indeed, she does," replied Bawdsey, quickly. "Derrington told her all
about it."

"Why?"

"Now that," said Bawdsey, shaking his head and looking puzzled, "is
one of the things I can't make out."

George thought for a moment. "I was at Mrs. Ward's the other evening,"
he said slowly. "Lord Derrington was there. Did he know then that I
was his grandson?"

"He did. He has known ever since you put the advertisement in the
paper and I looked you up."

"Humph! Then he was putting me through my paces," said Brendon to
himself. "What a clever man he is in concealing his thoughts. And Mrs.
Ward knew also who I was?"

Bawdsey nodded. "Yes. And after that evening she came to see Lord
Derrington to suggest how you should be got rid of."

"Ah!" George was now perfectly cool as he saw that Bawdsey, being so
frank, was ready to be his friend. "And how did she propose to do
that, Mr. Bawdsey? By having me arrested----"

"With the alternative that you should give up all attempts to prove
your birth and go to Australia."

"And surrender my claim to Miss Ward's hand, I suppose?"

"Of course. But that would go without speaking if you went to
Australia. It's a case of threatening, Mr. Brendon."

"Was Lord Derrington agreeable to this suggestion?"

"Yes. He hates you, and told me to see you and put the matter to you.
You have a week to think over it, and at the end of that time, Mr.
Brendon, if you don't leave England you will be arrested."

"No," replied Brendon, calmly, "I will not be arrested. Setting aside
the fact that there is no evidence which implicates me in the crime,
Lord Derrington, for his own sake, will not have his grandson arrested
and his dirty linen washed in public. Whether there was a marriage or
not I am his flesh and blood. Why does he hate me?"

"I can't say, sir. He never explained. But he does hate you."

"Humph! I see no reason--a man can't help his birth, and I am quite as
presentable as Walter Vane."

"Much more so," said Bawdsey, quickly. "He is a fool and a miserable
little beast. He sent a bracelet to Miss Velez."

"Oh! and naturally you think the worst of him. Well, it is no use my
conjecturing the reason of Lord Derrington's dislike. But I can well
understand why Mrs. Ward wishes me out of the way. On what grounds
does she accuse me of being concerned in this crime?"

"On the strength of a story related by a friend of yours, who----"

"I knew it," interrupted Brendon, starting up and beginning to pace
the room. "That was why she asked Leonard Train to dinner."

"That's the man," said Bawdsey, coolly. "He occupied these rooms, I
believe, and on the night of the murder you stopped with him."

"I did. In yonder bedroom. So he betrayed me?"

"My dear sir, I don't think he could help himself. Mrs. Ward is as
clever as the devil, and as unscrupulous. She got out of him that you
had been in the sitting-room of Mrs. Jersey at midnight."

"That is untrue----" began George, violently, when Bawdsey stopped
him.

"So it is, to Mrs. Ward, to Lord Derrington, and to the public. But so
far as I am concerned, Mr. Brendon, it is a fact. You were in Mrs.
Jersey's room about the time she was murdered."

"How can you prove that?" asked George, quickly and very pale.

"Oh, I can prove it easily enough, and I will soon. But confess."

"That I killed the woman? No, I never laid a finger on her."

"I believe that," said Bawdsey. "If I thought you were guilty I
should--no--not even then. You saved my life, and I'm grateful."

"I believe you are my friend," said George, gloomily, sitting down.

"You would have been arrested by now were I not, Mr. Brendon."

"No. I tell you neither Mrs. Ward nor Lord Derrington will go so far.
They will try and intimidate me. But they won't succeed."

"You'll fight them?"

George set his face. "While there is breath in my body."

"I knew you were a plucky 'un," said Bawdsey, admiringly, "but you
must be aware that your position is perilous."

"How so? Mr. Train can prove that he locked the sitting-room
door--that one there," and George pointed. "The key was under his
pillow, and in the morning the door was still fast. How could I have
got out to visit Mrs. Jersey's room without his knowledge?"

"That is what puzzles Train and Mrs. Ward and Lord Derrington," was
Bawdsey's reply. "They asked me what I thought. Well----"

"One moment," interrupted Brendon. "Why does Train believe that I was
in Mrs. Jersey's room?"

"He found beside the table a yellow holly berry, and you wore----"

George started. "I did--I did," he muttered; "it must have been
brushed off the sprig when I stooped to touch her."

"Ah!" said Bawdsey, in a voice of triumph, "then you admit you were in
the room?"

"Yes, to you, but to no one else."

"I'm glad you trust me so far," said Bawdsey, genuinely pleased; "your
confidence is not misplaced, Mr. Brendon. And you saw Mrs. Jersey?"

"I saw her body. She was dead."

"At what time was that?"

"About twelve o'clock."

"Why did you not give the alarm?"

"What?" George smiled derisively. "You think I should have put the
rope round my neck?"

"No. But--well, no matter. We can talk of that later. But as to
getting out of this room When the door was locked?"

"I didn't get out of this room, Mr. Bawdsey. I----"

"Wait a bit. Come into the room you slept in," said the detective,
leading the way. "I have made a discovery."

The bedroom was in the same condition as when Brendon had last seen
it, with the exception that the wardrobe was moved to one side. The
wall at the back, which divided the room from the passage, appeared a
blank, but on touching a spring a masked door opened. Shelves were
revealed and it was evident that this door formed the back of a
cupboard that was in the passage--a cupboard used by the housemaid, as
was apparent from the dust-shovel and brooms lying within it. For a
moment Bawdsey left the door open and looked at Brendon with quiet
triumph. Then he snapped the door to and the wall appeared in its
former blank condition. No one, without making a close examination,
would have suspected the presence of that secret door. "A housemaid
might open the cupboard door in the passage at any time," explained
Mr. Bawdsey, accounting for his action, "and it would never do for her
to look through the back of the shelves into this room. She might
talk, Mr. Brendon, and then there would be trouble. Yes," Bawdsey
rubbed his nose and looked at the astonished George, "I am sure there
would be great trouble."

"I congratulate you on your cleverness, Mr. Bawdsey," said Brendon
when he had somewhat recovered. "You have discovered my secret. I
should like to know how you discovered it."

"Well," said Bawdsey, pushing the wardrobe back to its place with an
effort, "you see when I learned through the advertisement that George
Brendon was the grandson of Lord Derrington I told him of it. He
related your history."

"Including the murder of my father?"

"Yes, including that," replied Bawdsey with a queer expression; "but
that has nothing to do with the matter in hand, Mr. Brendon."

"I'm not so sure," retorted George. "I should not be at all surprised
to find that Mrs. Jersey was murdered to keep her quiet on that
point."

"How do you make that out?"

"Well, she was in San Remo at the time my father was murdered. She
loved him, and I dare say, in spite of having been discharged, watched
him. She might know who the lady in blue--but I forgot, you are
ignorant of all these things."

"Not at all. Don't I tell you that Lord Derrington told me the whole
story? I see what you mean. You think that Mrs. Jersey might know who
killed your father, and for the sake of shutting her up the assassin
committed the second murder."

"That is my idea," said George, coolly.

"It's ingenious, but it won't hold water. However, we can talk of that
on another occasion. In the mean time I wish to tell you how I
discovered the secret door."

"There's no need to. Derrington told you that I knew this house, as my
grandfather had brought me up in it. When you knew through Mrs. Ward
that I had passed a night here, and learned through her, by means of
Train, that the yellow holly berry had been found in the woman's
sitting-room, you set to work to find out how I escaped from this
room. You knew that Train had locked the door."

"Yes," answered Bawdsey, "he told Mrs. Ward that."

"He seems to have told her everything. However, to make a long story
short, you hunted for an exit and you found it."

"That's so," replied Bawdsey, quietly, "and now we had better return
to the sitting-room and talk over the matter quietly."

"One moment," said George. "Have you told Lord Derrington or Mrs. Ward
of this discovery?"

"No, and I won't tell them, either. I wish to get you out of trouble,
Mr. Brendon. They haven't the least idea that you could leave the
room, and the impression with them is that Train is screening you."
Bawdsey shrugged his shoulders with contempt and passed George another
cigar. "Just as though the man would incriminate himself if that were
so."

George did not light his cigar. "Well, as you have told me so much,
Mr. Bawdsey, I may as well confess."

"If I am to help you I must know all."

"Then you shall know--whatever I can tell you." George hesitated,
and Bawdsey guessed that he was not going to be so frank as was
necessary. However, he made no remark, and Brendon continued: "I came
to this house to see Mrs. Jersey and get the truth out of her. It was
my intention to speak to her the next morning. However, in the
drawing-room she stated that she wished the company to disperse at ten
o'clock as she had business to attend to. Also she came up to this
room to see if I and my friend were in bed at eleven. I guessed that
she intended to see some one, and wondering if the expected person had
anything to do with my business I determined to see her on that night.
When Train was asleep I locked my bedroom door and made use of the
cupboard."

"How did you know of its existence?"

"I lived here, as you know. This is a queer old house, full of these
sort of things. I expect that door was made by some scamp so that he
might be able to lead a double life."

Bawdsey nodded. "I know. Fair to the world and black to the heart."

"As a boy I discovered the cupboard," replied Brendon, not taking
notice of this interruption, "and I am ashamed to say that I sometimes
made use of it in my teens to go to the theater unbeknown to my
grandfather. On that night I used it again, and went to the
sitting-room of Mrs. Jersey. It was about twelve o'clock. The door of
the room was closed. I opened it, and saw her sitting at the table,
dead, as she was discovered in the morning. In stooping over her to
see if she still breathed, the berry must have fallen. It says a great
deal for Train's acuteness that he suspected me on such evidence. I
now see why he was so different to me when we parted, and why he has
been so stiff of late."

"What did you do after you found that the woman was dead?"

"I returned to my bedroom and said nothing about it. You see, since I
wanted something from Mrs. Jersey, and that desire might have come out
in the evidence, there was every chance that I would be accused of
having murdered her. There was certainly motive enough."

"I don't agree with you," replied Bawdsey; "however, I quite
understand that under the circumstances you lost your nerve. You
returned to your room, and expressed suitable surprise the next
morning."

George nodded. "Quite so; and then Train's having locked this door
made me think that all was safe. Had he not told----"

"Oh, he has told very little," rejoined Bawdsey. "After all, nothing
can be done if I hold my tongue."

"Nothing will be done in any case," said George, grimly, "but I thank
you for warning me, Mr. Bawdsey. What are your plans?"

"I have none at present. Lord Derrington asked me to watch you."

"That you certainly have done, and if you choose you can go on
watching me. But why do you stop in this house?"

"Oh, I knew Mrs. Jersey some years ago, and returned here for old
times' sake."

George shrugged his shoulders. He felt convinced that Bawdsey was not
speaking openly. But then Brendon, on his part, had held something
back. Neither man was sufficiently sure of the other to be perfectly
frank. But the main thing was that Bawdsey, being friendly, was
content to let matters stand as they were. That is, so far as regarded
George himself, for Brendon felt that the detective's presence in that
house had something to do with the murder. He rose to go.

"Well, how do we stand?" asked Bawdsey.

"Much as we did before," replied George, "save that I know you will
hold your tongue and not get me into trouble."

"I shall certainly do that. But remember Mrs. Ward."

"Lord Derrington can stop her mouth."

"Ah, but will he?" asked Bawdsey, dubiously.

"I shall call on Lord Derrington and see," answered Brendon, and with
a nod left the room.

"He's a plucked 'un," said Bawdsey.




CHAPTER XII

A FIRESIDE TYRANT


Lord Derrington should have been born Emperor of Ancient Rome or of
Modern Russia. He would have made an admirable despot, as he was
fairly good-humored when all about him were on their knees serving
him. Even then his temper was none of the best. Those who held their
own he hated, while the many who gave in to his domineering will
received unmerited contempt as their reward. Even at seventy-five the
old man's temper had not cooled, and the majority of people avoided
him as they would the plague.

Originally he had started life with a sufficiently imperious will,
and, thanks to his position as a titled and wealthy orphan, he had
been enabled to exercise it at a very early age. The habit of seeing
every one terrified of his mere glance grew upon him, and he became
unbearable, not only to live with, but even to meet. His wife, after
presenting him with two sons, had died gladly, seeing no other way of
escaping her tyrant, and the report went that he had browbeaten her
out of existence. Derrington would have married again for the sake of
his boys, but like Henry VIII., whom he greatly resembled, he could
find no one willing to endure his yoke. Consequently he became
something of a woman-hater, and entered the political world. In this
he met with a certain amount of opposition, which did him good, and
might have been trained into a moderately decent member of society but
that his reformation was cut short by his being appointed ambassador
to a prominent European power. Here his temper had full swing, and he
bullied everybody for three years. At the end of that time he nearly
caused a war and was recalled. There was some talk of his being
appointed Viceroy for India, but those in power had sufficient pity on
the country not to send him. Derrington, in India, would have been on
"his native heath" for tyrannizing.

Failing, from his reputation, to get another appointment, Derrington
took to quarreling with his sons. Percy, the elder, had a spice of the
paternal temper and refused to submit. Consequently he was forbidden
the house, and crowned his iniquities in the old man's eyes by
marrying Rosina Lockwood. This was a severe blow to Derrington, who
had the pride as well as the temper of Lucifer. He refused to hold any
communication with Percy, and thus the son remained abroad, living on
an income inherited from his mother until he was murdered at San Remo.
As his income ceased on his death (for it reverted to his mother's
relatives), George, the boy, was left dependent on the charity of his
two grandfathers. Derrington denied the marriage and refused to
acknowledge the infant. Lockwood took the child to his home and
brought him up. Then the lad disappeared when Lockwood died, and
reappeared under the name of Brendon. Derrington had discovered his
grandson's identity in the way described by Bawdsey. The younger Vane
was a fool, meek as Moses, and completely cowed by his terrible
father. He married an equally meek lady, and the two were crushed by
the old tyrant. Finally, both died, as gladly as the late Lady
Derrington had done, and left Walter Vane to carry on the title. The
old lord detested Walter as a milksop, but he refused to acknowledge
George, preferring the fool to the clever man, from sheer hatred of
Brendon's father.

Derrington House, in St. Giles Square, was an immense palatial mansion
which cost no end of money to keep up, and as its lord was not
over-rich he would have done better to remove to a more modest
residence. But Derrington's pride would not permit him to scrimp his
living, and he dwelt alone in the big house. When Walter's parents
were alive they had occupied a corner, so that Derrington could bully
them at his leisure, and now Walter himself remained as a whipping-boy.
But he was cunning enough to keep out of his grandfather's way,
and contrived to be more independent than his parents had been.
Perhaps Derrington was too old to carry on an active war, but he
certainly gave Walter more license than he had ever accorded to any
human being. A good deal of contempt for the weak little dandy had to
do with this permitting him to act as he pleased. There is no
excitement in whipping a sheep.

The meeting with George at Mrs. Ward's had touched the old man nearly.
He had never set eyes on Percy's son before, and had no idea that the
young fellow was so handsome and clever. Derrington felt that he could
take some pride in George, as a man who would not permit himself to be
bullied. He had as strong a will as his grandfather, and the older man
respected him. Moreover, George's refusal to accept an income when he
took a feigned name, and his determined fight for his birthright,
pleased the despot. But for his pride and hatred of the father,
Derrington might have acknowledged the marriage. He knew in his own
mind that such a marriage had taken place, and that George was
legitimate, but he did not know where the ceremony had been
celebrated. The sole evidence he possessed was a letter, written by
Percy from Paris, stating that he had married Rosina Lockwood.
Derrington at the time accepted the fact, and had never thought of
inquiring about details from his son, and of course when Percy died it
was too late. Mrs. Jersey knew, and Mrs. Jersey had made use of her
knowledge, but she never told Derrington anything. Had she done so,
her hold over him might have waxed feeble, although, owing to her
knowledge, and to the old man's determination not to acknowledge
George, it could not be done away with altogether.

The library in Derrington House was a vast and splendid apartment with
a magnificent collection of books. Its owner, driven back on himself
by his misanthropic detestation of his species, and the dislike his
fellow-men had for him, read a great deal. Sometimes he wrote articles
for the quarterlies, principally on political questions. He went out
into society in spite of his age, out of sheer contrariety and not
because he enjoyed himself. Like Vespasian, he was determined to
die standing, and showed himself at several great houses, at
race-meetings, at Hurlingham, and sometimes in the House. His
movements were carefully chronicled in the _Morning Post_, and he took
care to let his friends know that he was still alive. For the rest, he
sat in his library reading, or writing his memoirs. These he had
arranged to have published after his death, and there were many
families who would have given much money to have seen them behind the
fire. Derrington had known every one worth knowing for the last
half-century, and had as bitter a pen as he had a tongue. Also, he
knew many secrets of diplomacy. So it may be guessed that many great
families did not look forward to the publication of these memoirs with
particular pleasure. Derrington knew this, and chuckled grimly, much
as Heine did in the like case.

One afternoon he was adding a chapter to the book, when a card was
brought to him. Derrington nearly jumped from his seat when he read
the name of George Brendon. At first he was inclined to tear up the
card and send the pieces out to the insolent young man who thus dared
to trespass on his privacy. But on second thoughts he decided to
accord him an interview. He knew that by this time Mr. Bawdsey must
have informed George that his grandfather knew him as Brendon, and the
old autocrat wished to see if George would behave as pluckily at their
second interview as he had done at the first. Moreover, he could not
forget the good looks and clever conversation of the young man. It
would be absurd to say that Derrington's heart yearned over this
unacknowledged twig of the family tree, for according to common report
he had no heart. But he certainly felt an unwonted emotion when
Brendon, tall and handsome, composed and ready for battle, stepped
into the room. Derrington knew that the young man was ready for
battle, for he saw the light of war in his eyes.

When the door was closed and the two were alone, Derrington took his
station on the hearth-rug with an impassive expression of countenance.
He waited for George to open the war of words, and after a polite
greeting he waited in silence. George was not at all embarrassed. He
knew perfectly well that he had a difficult task before him, and did
not choose to shirk it. With the family obstinacy he was determined on
obtaining his birthright, and if he set all London alight with scandal
he was bent upon gaining his end. The two men stared coolly at one
another like two fencers, but at the outset the buttons were off the
foils.

"I am sure you are not surprised to see me, Lord Derrington," said
Brendon with his eyes fixed on the old man's grim face.

"Not half so surprised as you were at seeing Bawdsey," said
Derrington, not to be outdone in coolness.

George smiled. "I was not at all surprised at seeing the man," he said
calmly. "It was my happy lot to rescue him from an accident, and it
was my intention to call on him."

"For what reason?" asked Derrington, who could not help betraying
astonishment, in spite of his self-control.

"You must excuse my not answering that question."

"Oh, certainly," replied Lord Derrington, with ironical politeness;
"but you are not so diplomatic as I thought."

"Because I decline a reply?"

"Because you allow me to see that you are on good terms with the man I
employ. A clever diplomatist would have allowed me to think that
Bawdsey was hostile and so have used the man against me."

"There is no need for me to stoop to such crooked ways," said Brendon,
with some scorn, "and I always find the truth tells in the long run."

"Ah! You've never been an ambassador."

"When I am, I shall still tell the truth."

Derrington smiled grimly. "Oh, then, it is your intention to enter
political life?"

"I think we discussed that fully the other evening."

Derrington sat down and leaned his elbows on the table. His temper was
rising, as he was not accustomed to be treated in this off-hand way.
"Come, sir, let us understand one another. State the situation so as
to clear the ground for a proper argument."

"Certainly," said George, with frigid politeness. "You know who I am,
I understand."

"No, I don't. So far as I know you are George Brendon. I met you at
Mrs. Ward's, and----"

"And were good enough to hold a long conversation with me," finished
George, smartly. "I see, sir, it is necessary for me to be explicit."

"It's the best course," rejoined Derrington, looking at him with hard
eyes and secretly admiring his self-control.

"Then I have to state that my name is George Vane, and that I am the
son of Percy Vane and Rosina Lockwood."

"Indeed! What proof have you of this?"

"The evidence of my nurse, Jane Fraser, who attended to me when my
father, your eldest son, was alive. The testimony of my former
guardian, Mr. Ireland, who took charge of me after the death of my
mother's father. Finally, my certificate of birth, which I will show
you whenever you choose."

Derrington was confounded by this calm answer. He would have
blustered, but George's politeness gave him no chance of losing his
temper, and without fuel it would not blaze up. "You seem to be well
provided with proofs," said he, grimly. "Let us admit, for the sake of
argument, that you are my grandson. But the marriage----"

"Ah, that is the difficult point! And it is unpleasant for me to talk
of the subject. In justice to the memory of my mother I hold that
there was a marriage."

"And in justice to my family I hold that there was none."

"In that case, Lord Derrington, we join issue."

"You are quite a lawyer, sir," sneered the old man.

"I thought of studying for the bar at one time."

"Indeed, and why did you not?"

"I had no money to pay my fees," said George, coldly.

The old lord winced. He could not but admire his pluck, and, aware
that the young fellow was his own flesh and blood, regretted that he
should lack any chance of embarking on what promised to be a brilliant
career. "You could have had money had you chosen," said he, roughly.

"I know. For that reason I changed my name to Brendon."

"Well," said Derrington, irritably, "let us come to the point. You say
you are my grandson. I admit that, as I am aware of what evidence you
can bring forward. But I decline to admit that you are my heir. The
onus of proof lies with you."

"I am prepared to discover the proof if your lordship will behave in
an honorable manner."

"What!" roared Derrington, rising with a fierce look. "Do you mean to
say, you jackanapes, that I am behaving dishonorably?"

"Extremely so," said Brendon, coldly. "You have had me watched by a
detective; you threaten, through him, to have me arrested for a crime
of which I am innocent, if I do not give up my attempts to gain my
birthright and--" here George leaned forward--"Dorothy Ward. Do you
call these actions honorable?"

"How dare you?--how dare you?" was all that Derrington could say.

"You should know how I dare, sir, considering I am your grandson."

"I'll have you thrown out of the house."

George rose. "I am willing to leave you, sir, if that is the tone you
take. But as to being thrown out, that is quite another question."

"Do you know who I am?" questioned the other, blustering.

"Very well. You are the man who is keeping me out of my rights."

"I am not!"

"I say you are."

The two faced one another without blenching. Derrington tried to cow
George, and George refused to be cowed. It was the old lord's eyes
which fell first. Brendon had youth as well as will on his side, and
these dominated Derrington. For the first time in his tyrannical life
he gave way.

"There is no need for you to go yet," he grunted, flinging himself
into a seat. "I am willing to hear what you have to say."

Brendon sat down also. "I don't think I have any more to say."

"Then why did you come here?"

"To ask you if you consider it honorable to threaten me. I have
already done so. There is no more to be said on my part."

Derrington dug a pen viciously into the blotting-pad. He did not know
very well what to say. Had George sworn and blustered he might have
been able to talk him down and to bully him into giving way. But
Brendon was perfectly calm and polite. He was not to be intimidated in
any way, and the ordinary methods would not do in this case.
Derrington was reduced to reason. "What is it you wish?"

"I wish you to recognize my mother's marriage and to state that I am
your heir."

"Anything else?" sneered Derrington.

"Yes. You will publicly recognize me; you will allow me an income
sufficient to maintain the dignity of my real name of George Vane, and
you will order Mrs. Ward to keep silent."

"Mrs. Ward? What have I to do with her?"

"A great deal, apparently. You told her my story, and as she does not
want me to marry her daughter she will move heaven and earth to ruin
me by using her knowledge."

"How can she ruin you?"

"I think you understand, sir. The story told by my friend Train----"

"Friend! Judas, rather."

"No. He is only a weak man who is as wax in the hands of a clever and
pretty woman. But Mrs. Ward got sufficient out of him to place me in a
somewhat perilous position."

"Were you in the room where the woman was murdered? Speak plainly."

"I came on here purposely to speak plainly," rejoined Brendon, dryly,
"for your safety as well as for my own."

"Safety, sir!" Derrington grew crimson. "What the devil do you mean?"

"I mean that I can speak freely to you, as I know perfectly well that
for the honor of our family----"

"Our family--confound you!"

"Our family," repeated George, "of which some day I hope to be the
head. For its honor, I say, you will not take these matters into
court. I was in the room of Mrs. Jersey. I saw her dead!"

"And you know who killed her?"

"No. I can't say that for certain." George looked keenly at his
grandfather. The old man appeared uneasy. Suddenly Brendon spoke. "I
should like to know what you were doing in Mrs. Jersey's house on the
night she was murdered?"

Derrington dashed down his pen furiously and rose. "You go too far,
sir; you go too far!" he roared.

"Not any further than you intended to go. If you threaten me I have a
right to protect myself."

"In what way?"

"By telling you that if I am in a perilous position, you are also."

"Do you mean to say that I murdered the woman?"

"By no means," said Brendon, quickly. "I should not think of doing
such a thing. But I do say you were in that house after eleven."

"I was not," panted the old nobleman, savagely, and glared at his
grandson with bloodshot eyes.

"You were," insisted Brendon; "there is no need to tell you how I got
out of my bedroom unbeknown to Train, but I did. I came downstairs to
see Mrs. Jersey at half-past eleven or thereabouts. I crept down the
stairs and saw you standing in the light of the hall lamp. You had on
a fur coat, and I recognized you by your unusual height. Also by the
color of your coat. Some months before you wore that coat--it is a
claret-colored one trimmed with sable--at a race-meeting. You were
pointed out to me, and it was the first time I had set eyes on you. It
was you in the hall."

"Did you see my face?" asked Derrington.

"No. But the coat and the height, and my knowledge that you were
connected with Mrs. Jersey----"

"I wasn't connected with the jade," flashed out Derrington. "She came
to me years ago and said she could prove the marriage. I tried to get
out of her the name of the church where it took place. She refused to
give it, and said if I did not pension her off she would go to your
guardian, Ireland, and get him to help her to prove that you were
legitimate. I hated your father, sir, and as to your mother----"

"No," cried Brendon, rising, "not a word against my mother."

"Only this, that she was not well-born. The daughter of a
music-master. Not the wife for my son."

"She was his wife, however. Leave my mother's name out of it and go
on, sir. You say that Mrs. Jersey could have proved the marriage."

"Yes," growled Derrington, rather cowed by Brendon's manner. "I did
not wish her to do so, for the reasons I have stated."

"Very unworthy reasons," said George, coldly.

"You know nothing about it, sir," flamed out the old man, slapping his
hand on the table. "My family is as old as the Conquest."

"As the future head of it I am glad to hear that."

Derrington looked as though he could have struck George, who simply
made the remark to punish him for his insolence. "Never mind that,"
said he, controlling his temper. "I bought that house from your
mother's father--the music-master," he sneered, "and gave it to Mrs.
Jersey rent free. I also allowed her an annuity. She held her tongue
for many years. Then she saw that confounded advertisement in the
papers and threatened to tell you the truth on the chance of getting
more money out of you when I was dead. I refused, and she then told me
that she had written out a confession----"

"I thought as much," interrupted George. "But that has been stolen."

"By whom?"

"By the assassin."

"And who is the assassin?"

"I can't say. But if use is made of that confession either you or I
will learn who killed Mrs. Jersey."

"Why you or I?"

"Because we alone can make use of the confession and pay money for it.
The thing would be no use to any one else. But I now understand Mrs.
Jersey's possession of the house. Were you in it on that night?"

Derrington looked at Brendon and hesitated. Then in strange
contradiction to his usual manner, he turned away his face. "I decline
to answer that question," he growled.

"But I saw you," insisted George.

"You saw--there is nothing more to be said. Hold your tongue."

"Willingly," said George, politely, "if you will silence Mrs. Ward."

"I have no influence with the woman."

"Oh, I think so. She wishes Dorothy to marry my cousin."

"Your cousin!"

"Can you deny the relationship?"

Derrington shirked the question by assenting to Brendon's request. "I
may be able to make Mrs. Ward hold her tongue," he growled.

"I am quite sure she will do anything you tell her, in the hope that
you will approve of a match between my cousin and her daughter."

"And you wish me to approve?" sneered the old man.

"As to that, it matters little. Mrs. Ward wishes Dorothy to be Lady
Derrington and to have your very excellent income. Whether she marries
me or Vane it comes to the same thing. I can't understand Mrs. Ward's
dislike and mischief-making since that is the case."

"I can," snapped Derrington. "You are too clever for her, and Walter
is a fool."

"Perhaps so. However, as I shall marry Dorothy it doesn't much
matter."

"How can you marry her situated as you are?"

"I shall be George Vane some day, sir, and then Dorothy will be my
wife."

"I believe she will," muttered Derrington, looking at the firm face of
the young man. "Humph! So you intend to look for the certificate of
marriage?"

"No, for the confession of Mrs. Jersey; afterward for the church which
will be mentioned in that confession. The register will prove the
marriage without the necessity of the certificate. I shouldn't wonder,
though," added Brendon, "if Mrs. Jersey had stolen that from my mother
when she died."

"Mrs. Jersey was jade enough for anything," said Derrington.

"Well, she is dead, and there is no use saying bad about her."

"How will you set to work to get that certificate?"

George wrinkled his brows. "There is only one way, sir. I must find
out who killed Mrs. Jersey. If you can help me----"

"I can't. I know no more who murdered the woman than you do."

"Yet you were in the house on that night."

Derrington grew wrathful. "Don't talk rubbish, sir. If I was, I should
not mind admitting the fact. As it is----" He broke off, gnawing his
lip and avoiding Brendon's eyes.

That the old man knew something vital to the case Brendon was certain;
that he would never confess what it was George felt perfectly sure. He
abandoned the point, as he did not wish to make Lord Derrington
incriminate himself, and he might do so. Brendon was satisfied that he
had seen him in the house on the night when Mrs. Jersey was murdered.

"There is no more to be said," he remarked, taking up his hat.

"No. Except that I'll give you a fair chance of finding the church.
Bawdsey shall watch you no more."

"Thank you. And Mrs. Ward?"

"She shall be made to hold her tongue."

George bowed. "I am obliged to you, sir. I now see that you intend to
fight fairly. Good-day," and he departed.

Derrington stood where he was, in deep thought. Suddenly he struck a
mighty blow on the desk. "By Heaven, he's a man after my own heart!"
said the old scamp. "He shall be my heir, he shall marry that girl;
but to exercise his wits he shall fight every inch of the way to
attain his ambition."




CHAPTER XIII

A WOMAN SCORNED


Dorothy was by no means of a jealous disposition. Moreover, her love
for George was so deep and pure that she trusted him entirely.
Nevertheless, having learned from the few words dropped by Vane, that
Brendon knew Lola, she felt desirous of seeing the woman. That Lola
was her rival she never for one moment believed, as she knew Vane's
malicious nature and evil tongue. But the fact remained that Brendon's
name was coupled with that of the dancer, and this incipient scandal
annoyed Miss Ward.

There was no need for her to ask George why such a report should
prevail, for she knew that he would be able to explain in a
satisfactory manner, and, trusting him already, it was useless to
demand details. Her feelings would remain the same after the telling
of his story as they were now, therefore she avoided the disagreeable
subject. Nevertheless, she was woman enough to desire a sight of Lola,
and induced her mother to take her to the music-hall. Mrs. Ward was
very pleased to do so, but she was too clever to hint that she guessed
Dorothy's reason for making this request.

"Certainly, my dear," she said briskly. "I am very glad that you are
coming out of your shell. Men hate a woman who can't talk of
everything, and nothing is talked about but Lola."

"I must educate myself to please men, then," said Dorothy, dryly, "so
I may as well begin with the dancer. On what night can we go?"

"Oh, Friday will do. Mr. Vane has invited us to dine at the Cecil, so
I'll ask him to get us a box."

Dorothy would rather have gone with any one than with Mr. Vane, as she
disliked his feeble attempts at lovemaking. However, there was nothing
for it but to accept, since she had brought it on herself. With a
smile which encouraged her mother to think she would behave sensibly
toward Vane, she agreed to the proposed dinner-party and
companionship, and Mrs. Ward wrote a note at once.

"I hope when she sees Lola, and hears the stories about that Brendon
man, that she may refuse to have anything more to do with him," was
Mrs. Ward's remark as she sealed her note. "I don't want to get the
Brendon man into trouble by having him arrested for the murder. And I
don't think Derrington would let me if I did wish it."

Her last speech was prophetic, for the next day Lord Derrington paid a
visit to Curzon Street and had a short interview with Mrs. Ward, the
gist of which was that she must hold her tongue.

"Brendon called to see me the other day," explained Derrington,
looking grim, "and he showed me plainly that he had nothing to do with
the matter."

"But how about the holly berry?"

"That is easily explained," replied Derrington, who, anticipating the
question, had prepared an answer. "Brendon was one of the first to
see the body, and in touching it the berry fell from the sprig.
Afterward--mind you, afterward--Mr. Train found the berry, and, not
knowing that Brendon had seen the body that morning, thought he had
been in the room on the previous night."

"I'm sure he was," insisted Mrs. Ward.

"You are sure of nothing of the sort. Brendon could not have got
downstairs without the connivance of Train, and you heard what Train
said."

"He is such a fool!"

"The more likely to tell the truth," said Derrington. Then he asked,
after a pause, "Why did you tell Dorothy to give the sprig of holly to
Brendon on that night?"

Mrs. Ward shrugged her shoulders and looked down nervously. "Oh, it
was the merest kindness on my part," she said, trying to speak
quietly. Derrington contradicted her at once.

"It was nothing of the sort," he declared with roughness. "You wished
him to have the yellow holly in his coat when he saw Mrs. Jersey, so
that the woman might betray herself."

"I knew nothing about Mrs. Jersey at the time."

"Oh, but you did! With regard to the holly, you knew from me how it
was used in connection with the death of my son at San Remo; and what
I did not tell you, you learned from other people."

Mrs. Ward looked defiant. "Well, I did. I am sure every one knew about
the murder at the time," she said, "and I met some old frumps who gave
me all details."

"I quite understand that; but how did you know about Mrs. Jersey?"

"That's my business," cried Mrs. Ward, becoming imprudent. "You are
right about the holly; I sent to Devonshire expressly to get some. It
was my intention to inclose a sprig in a letter to Mrs. Jersey so as
to frighten her----"

"What good would that have done?"

"My business again," snapped Mrs. Ward, becoming bolder. "I had my
reason for wishing to recall your son's death to her mind, and I knew
that the yellow holly would do so most successfully. When Dorothy came
from the Park and told me that Brendon was to stop with his friend at
Mrs. Jersey's boarding-house, I thought that it would be better to let
George wear the sprig. And I managed it in such a way that neither
Dorothy nor George guessed how I planned the business. And I
succeeded. Mrs. Jersey saw the sprig and nearly fainted. I knew then
that----" Here she stopped.

Derrington saw that it was useless to question her further. She would
only lie, and had been telling lies, for all he knew. Moreover, he did
not think she could tell him anything pertinent to the case.

"I shall ask you nothing more," he said, rising to take his leave.
"You have some reason for all this intrigue, I have no doubt. What
your intentions are, matters little to me. I came merely to warn you
that Brendon is to be left alone."

"You won't have him arrested?"

"No. And what is more, I won't have him spoken about in connection
with that crime."

Mrs. Ward forgot her desire to conciliate Derrington, forgot her
desire to marry Vane to Dorothy, forgot everything in a sudden access
of rage. "I shall do what I choose!" she cried.

"No," said Derrington, quietly, and looking her full in the face, "you
will obey me."

"Obey you, Lord Derrington?"

"Yes. I have tried to conduct this interview quietly, Mrs. Ward, and
to hint that your wiser plan is to be silent, but----"

"I don't want hints. I wish for plain speaking," raged the little
woman. "How dare you address me like this?"

The old gentleman leaned forward suddenly and whispered a short
sentence in her ear. Mrs. Ward's face turned pearly white and she
tottered to a chair, closing her eyes as she fell into it. Derrington
surveyed her with a pitiless expression.

"You will be silent about Brendon?" he asked.

"Yes," moaned Mrs. Ward. "I will say nothing."

When Derrington departed Mrs. Ward retired to bed after canceling her
engagements for the evening. For twenty-four hours she stopped there,
explaining to Dorothy that she was taking a rest cure. It apparently
did her good, for on the evening of the day appointed for the meeting
at the Cecil she arose looking bright and quite herself again. She had
quite got over the fright given to her by Derrington, and, when she
saw him later, treated him quite in her old manner. On his side the
old gentleman made no difference, but he wondered how she was carrying
herself so boldly. At once it occurred to his suspicious mind that
there was some reason for this defiant behavior, and he determined to
watch her. For this purpose he joined the party.

"It is the first time I have been to a music-hall for years," he
explained to Dorothy; "but Walter has been talking so much about this
new dancer that I felt I must see her."

"Why did you not dine with us at the Cecil?" asked Dorothy.

"I always prefer to dine at home, my dear young lady. Besides, it does
not do for an old man to wag his gray beard uninvited among the
young."

Meantime Mrs. Ward was chatting amicably to Vane and to a vapid
War-Office clerk, who had formed a fourth at the Cecil dinner-party.
He was a titled clerk, and heir to great estates, so Mrs. Ward made
much of him. She was very diplomatic, and never neglected younger
sons. "One never knows but what they may be rich some day," said Mrs.
Ward in explanation of her wisdom.

The box was large and easily held the party. Mrs. Ward had a position
directly in front, where she could see and be seen; but Dorothy kept
herself behind the curtains. She could see the stage excellently, but
did not wish to be recognized by any chance acquaintance. In an
opposite box sat a red-haired man in immaculate evening-dress.
Derrington recognized him as Bawdsey, but did not think it necessary
to show his recognition. He sat at the back of the box between Vane
and the War-Office clerk, and kept a watchful eye on Mrs. Ward.

That little woman sparkled like a diamond. She criticised the house,
admired the decorations, and applauded the comic songs. It might have
been that this indifferent attitude was one of defiance, as she must
have known that Derrington was watching her. But she acted her part
consummately, and he could not help admiring her coolness. "What an
admirable actress," thought the old lord, "and what a dangerous
woman!"

The ballet of "The Bacchanals" came at the end of the first part of
the programme. When the curtain rose Dorothy was so anxious to behold
Lola that she leaned forward so as to show her face to the whole
house. Bawdsey saw her and put his glass to his eyes. He smiled
slightly, and Derrington wondered why he did so. But at that moment,
and while the stage was filling with dancers, he arose to receive some
newcomers. These were none other than Miss Bull and Margery, for whom
Bawdsey had procured the box. The little old maid was whiter than ever
and wore her usual gray dress. Margery was smartly gowned in green,
and with her light hair and stupid red face looked anything but
beautiful. She placed herself in the best position, being evidently
directed to do so by Miss Bull, for that lady preferred the shade. At
all events, she secluded herself behind a curtain and kept her beady
black eyes persistently on the stage. On seeing that the two were
comfortable, Bawdsey disappeared, and did not return till the end of
the ballet. Derrington saw all this, but no one else in Mrs. Ward's
box took any notice. And why should they? Bawdsey and his party were
quite unknown to them.

The ballet was modeled closely on the lines laid down by Euripides in
his tragedy. The opening scene was the market-place of Thebes, and the
stage was filled mostly with men. Pentheus, the King, is informed that
the whole female population of the city, together with his mother,
Agave, have gone to the mountains to worship a stranger. The seer,
Tiresias, knows by his psychic powers that the stranger is none other
than Bacchus, the god of wine, and implores Pentheus not to provoke
his enmity. The King spurns this advice and gives orders that the
so-called god shall be arrested. It was at this moment that Agavé
appears. Dorothy looked at her eagerly.

Agavé has not yet assumed her Bacchanalian garb. She is still in the
quiet dress of a Grecian matron, but her gestures are wild, and she is
rapid in her movements. In the dance which followed she is interrupted
by Pentheus, who strives to calm her frenzy. But Agavé, knowing the
god of wine is at hand, becomes as one possessed. Bacchus appears and
is arrested by Pentheus. He is chained and hurried into the palace.
Agavé warns the King against the impiety he is committing. Pentheus
defies the gods. There is a peal of thunder, and the palace of
Pentheus sinks into ruins. At the back appears the ruins of the city
walls, which have also fallen, and on the summit of the heaped stones
stands Bacchus, the god confest. At a wave of his wand vines begin to
clamber over the ruins, and the cries of the Bacchanalians are heard.
Pentheus tries to seize the god again, and darkness covers the stage.
The last thing seen was Lola dancing in a wild red light, with
extravagant gestures.

Dorothy could not say that Lola was handsome, but she had about her a
wild grace which was very fascinating. When dancing she seemed to
think of nothing but the revels in which she was engaged. She never
cast a look at the house, and Dorothy noticed this. She was therefore
somewhat surprised when, during the second scene, she saw Lola
deliberately look in the direction of the box and stare at her
piercingly for quite a moment or two. Rather confused by this sudden
regard, the girl drew back. Lola noticed her no more, but continued to
dance.

The second scene was the camp of the Bacchanals, where Pentheus, as a
follower of the god, comes to see the orgies. It was a mountainous
scene with a lurid red sky broken by masses of black clouds. There is
no need to describe the ballet in detail. The frenzied dancers of the
Bacchanals seemed to send the audience wild. There was something
fierce and murderous about these orgiastic movements. And through the
wild throng darted Lola, in leopard-skin and garlands, bearing a cup
of wine, and flinging herself about in wild madness. She appeared to
be a devil, and Dorothy shrank back at the sight of her wild face. The
music also was terrible, and excited the dancers to further efforts of
madness. It was a feast of witches, a Walpurgis night, a revel of the
earth-powers. There was nothing spiritual about this riot of the
flesh; the audience shuddered at the fierce rapture of the dancers, at
the alluring pain of the music, at the reckless abandon of Lola Velez.

"It's too awful!" murmured Dorothy, moving to the back of the box,
beside Derrington; "that woman is a demon."

"Yet your friend Mr. Brendon helped her to this, position," said the
old man, grimly.

"I am sure he cannot approve of this dancing," shuddered the girl, who
was very pale.

"There is nothing improper about it," said Derrington.

"No. Everything is right in that way; but it is maddening, and unholy,
and altogether terrible. The music is something like that in
Tannhäuser--cruel, evil, voluptuous."

"Ah, your poor spiritual nature shrinks from that sort of thing! But
Mrs. Ward seems to enjoy it."

She certainly did. Craning forward so as to get a full view of the
stage, Mrs. Ward's eyes were alight. She would have enjoyed being in
the throng herself, and would have danced as madly as the worst of
them. And queerly enough Miss Bull appeared also spellbound. Her face
was flushed, her eyes glittered, and her breath came and went in quick
pants. "It's wonderful, Margery," she said, leaning out of the box and
fixing her eyes intently on the whirling mass.

"It's very pretty," said Margery, stupidly. Her dull brain could not
understand the wild madness of the scene, and she was as unmoved as
though she had been listening to a sermon.

"Dorothy! Dorothy!" whispered Mrs. Ward, "come back to your seat. Lola
juggles the head of Pentheus. It is the great dance."

"No," answered Dorothy, and clung to Derrington's arm. "I will stop
here. It is too terrible."

The old man understood, and in the darkness of the box he slipped his
arm round her. In that kind embrace Dorothy felt safe. If she looked
upon that madness again she felt that she must cry out. Derrington
quite appreciated her feelings. It was the repulsion experienced by
the spiritual against the material.

The action of the ballet proceeded rapidly. Pentheus climbed a tree,
the Bacchanalians surrounded it and dragged him down. Lola emerged
from a frantic crowd bearing his head. Then began the dance, slowly at
first with solemn pacings and stately gestures. The limelights, red
and blue and green and yellow, were flashed on the swaying form of
Lola as she eyed the head with terrible glances. Then the music
flashed out into a wild galop. The scene became pandemonium. Lightning
flashed, thunder rolled, the violins shrieked in the orchestra, the
dancers spun, whirled, plunged, and sprang and bounded, and
frantically rushed about the stage. Everywhere at unexpected moments
Lola appeared, tossing, smiting, and caressing the head of Pentheus,
whirling out and in as the rainbow lights played upon her restless
figure. Finally, when the orgy was at its height, came a flash of
lightning, a crash of thunder, the riot died away, the Bacchanalians
sprang from the stage. Darkness descended, the music sank to lulling
tones, and quiet, silvery moonlight flooded the stage. There alone, in
the center, sat Agavé, restored to her right mind, weeping over the
head of her son. And on this scene of sorrow the curtain fell slowly
to the strains of sweet music. The audience drew long breaths and felt
as though a nightmare were at an end.

"Let us go now," said Dorothy, standing up and still clinging to
Derrington's arm. "I wish I had not come."

She was interrupted by an ejaculation from her mother. Mrs. Ward also
was standing up, but her eyes were fixed on Miss Bull. The little old
maid, as though feeling the influence of that glance, slowly looked in
Mrs. Ward's direction. The eyes of the two women met. From those of
Miss Bull flashed a look of hate, and she withdrew behind the curtain
of the box. Mrs. Ward was white and shaking. Clutching Vane's arm she
requested to be taken to her carriage. "It is too much for me," she
said, alluding to the ballet.

Derrington stood on the pavement when the brougham rolled away bearing
the mother and daughter, both silent, both pale. He was alone, as Vane
and the War-Office clerk were back again in the hall. "Humph!" said
Derrington, his eyes fixed on the retreating carriage. "So you know
that little woman who called to see me about the lease. I wonder how
that comes about. Miss Bull knew Mrs. Jersey, and you, Mrs. Ward, sent
that yellow holly. I wonder----" The old man stopped; he could not
quite understand what Mrs. Ward was doing, but he repeated his former
observation. "A dangerous woman," said he. "I shall speak to Bawdsey
about her;" and making up his mind to this he went in search of the
detective.

All that night Dorothy was haunted by strange dreams, in which
the figure of Lola played a prominent part. Usually calm and
self-possessed, Dorothy slept like a child, but the fierce music, the
mad dancing, the knowledge that George knew this terrible woman--for
so she appeared to the girl--caused her to sleep brokenly. She was up
early, and after a breakfast that was a mere farce she took her way to
the Park. It was her usual custom to walk in a lonely part about eight
o'clock in the morning but on this occasion she was at her usual spot
by half-past seven. This was a seat under a spreading tree in the
center of a wide lawn. Few people came there at so early an hour, and
Dorothy often read for an hour before returning home. In a mechanical
manner she took a book out of her pocket--it was the "Meditations" of
Marcus Aurelius--and tried to fasten her attention on the soothing
words of the stoic Emperor. But it was impossible. Before her inner
vision passed the wild, flushed face of Lola Velez, and Dorothy could
not drive it away. While endeavoring to do so some one came to sit on
the seat. Dorothy, rather surprised, looked up. She saw Lola staring
at her intently.

The dancer looked pale and worn. About her there was none of the
unholy influence of the previous night. As the morning was cold she
wore a sealskin coat and toque with a scarf of red silk twisted round
her throat. This touch of color was all that was about her likely to
suggest her foreign origin. With her pale face and piteous mouth and
appealing eyes she looked like a broken-hearted woman. Dorothy's first
movement was to go away; but when she saw the sorrow on that wild face
she remained where she was. The two gazed at one another for a time,
and the thought in the mind of each was the same. Both thought of
George Brendon.

Lola began to speak without any preamble. "Mr. Bawdsey pointed you to
me at the last night," she said in her imperfect English. "He declared
you did walk early, and I have been with my eye on your mansion since
six hours--what you call o'clock. I see you come, I follow you, I am
here, Mees Vard, I am here."

"What do you want?" asked Dorothy, calmly, her nerves much more under
control than Lola's were. Yet both were agitated.

"Ah," cried the foreign woman, throwing back her head, "give him to
me! I love him--I worship him. Give him to me."

"Of whom do you speak, mademoiselle?"

"Ah, mademoiselle, so he speaks when angry. But I am no French. I am
Señora--I am Spanish. I have warm blood here in my heart." She struck
her breast fiercely. "And if you take him from me I will kill you.
Yes, I will give you the death--quick, sure, sudden."

Her face drew near to Dorothy's as she spoke, and the girl could feel
her hot breath on her cheek. But Dorothy had a brave heart of her own
and did not flinch. For all she knew, Lola might intend to stab her at
the very minute. The Park keeper was some distance away, and it was
useless to create a scandal by calling him to her assistance. Lola was
just the kind of mad creature to make a scene. Retaining control of
herself, though her heart was beating rapidly, Dorothy fixed her eyes
firmly on those of Lola. "Sit a little further away," she said, "and
we will talk calmly."

"Are you not afraid?" asked Lola, surprised. She had always found the
savage attitude so effective.

Dorothy laughed. "I was never afraid of anything or of any one in my
life," she said coolly. "And I am not going to begin now. What do you
want, mademoiselle? Why do you threaten me?"

"Bah!" cried the other, but moving back a little as requested, "you
know, you blond white cat, you. It is George."

"What about George?"

"He is mine. He loves me. You would take him from me."

"If you are speaking of George Brendon----"

"Of who else should I speak? You know--ah, you know!"

"Yes. I know. I heard some rumors as to how he helped you. But I do
not believe for one moment that he loves you."

"He does. You dare ask that he loves."

"I shall do nothing of the sort. We may as well understand one
another, as you have no right to thrust yourself upon me."

"I do do what I do please," said Lola, sullenly.

"These sorts of things are not allowed in England, I am sorry for you,
and so I speak. Otherwise, I should call the Park keeper."

"I want not any sorrow. I do want my own George."

"Mr. Brendon is engaged to marry me," said Dorothy, deliberately.

Lola sprang to her feet with flashing eyes. "It will not be," she
almost shouted. "I love him."

"Sit down," said Dorothy, much in the same tone as she would have used
to a fractious child, and Lola resumed her seat immediately. The woman
was a creature of impulse. Had Dorothy raged also, she would have
gained the ascendancy. But this calmness, to use a nautical simile,
"took the wind out of her sails." She could only do as she was told.

"But I will have my George," she muttered.

"Listen to me," said Dorothy, quietly. "I have no right to answer your
questions. But I am sorry for you. I will speak to Mr. Brendon."

"No--" Lola looked up in terror--"you must not do that. He will be
very angry--oh, much--much enraged."

"Then that shows me you have been speaking untruths. Mr. Brendon does
not love you----"

"But I say yes--yes--yes!" Lola sprang to her feet again and poured
forth her wrath. "Ah, you think he will be milord and that you will
marry him, but----"

"What do you know about that?" asked Dorothy, rising indignantly.

"Oh, I do know much--much," Lola snapped her fingers. "Yes, I know
that which I do know. I can stop him from being milord, and that I
will--I will. If he is milord he will marry--you--you. But as my own
George he will make me--me--" she struck her breast again--"me, Lola
Velez, madame his wife."

"You are talking nonsense," said Dorothy, coolly, though she felt
annoyed and puzzled. "What can you know?"

"That which I do know. Wait--oh, wait a day--one day, two day, three
day, and then--" She snapped her fingers. "You see--yes--you see how
clever I am. I go, I go, you white cat. I go to get my George."

Lola darted away at a run, which slackened to a rapid walk as she
neared the Park gates. Dorothy sat down again, too amazed to follow.




CHAPTER XIV

MRS. WARD'S TRUMP CARD


Kowlaski was a large, fat, good-natured blackguard of a man, quite
without principle. He came from some remote village in the Balkans and
was of Jewish birth. In his early days he arrived in London penniless
and strove to make a living by selling toys in the street. Then he
turned scene-shifter at a music-hall, and while thus engaged educated
himself to write and read and to speak English with wonderful fluency.
Also he saved money and speculated in a small way, having the
marvelous Hebrew instinct of picking out lucrative ventures. Shortly
he became stage manager. Then he found a clever woman who sang badly
and acted wonderfully. Kowlaski advertised her into a success and she
proved grateful. There is no need to trace his steady rise; but one
thing led to another until he became proprietor of the very music-hall
which had witnessed his humble beginning.

When he first set eyes on Lola he had guessed that it would pay to
invest money in her. The success of the ballet proved that Kowlaski
was right as usual, and he smiled his oily smile when he saw the
crowded houses and looked over the receipts. The ballet would run for
more than a year. He was sure of that, and set about some other
business now that the music-hall was flourishing. It was at this point
that Lola demanded a week's holiday. Kowlaski whimpered. He usually
did so to make people think he was weak. But under his apparent
weakness he was possessed of an iron strength.

Having great experience of women he thought to control Lola, but she,
being gifted with a superlative temper, laughed in his face. All his
cleverness could not make her swerve from the point. "I want a week to
myself," she said doggedly. They were talking in French, as Kowlaski
could swear more easily in that tongue and wanted freedom of speech.

"But, my dear child--" Kowlaski was always paternal--"it will not do.
You are the draw, and if you go out of the bill the people will not
come to my house."

"I don't care. I want a week, and a week I will have."

"Why do you wish for this week?"

"That's my business."

Kowlaski tried temper. "If you go, you leave my theater once and for
all the time."

"Pschutt!" said Lola, snapping her fingers in his dismayed face. "I
draw, and you are in no hurry to get rid of me."

Kowlaski tried reproaches. "If you were a grateful woman----"

"Ah, bah! What of gratitude? You wanted me or would you have seen me
die in the gutter."

Kowlaski began to whimper. "You will ruin me, my dear!"

"It would serve you right if I did. You have ruined others in your
time. Don't you think I know you? Come--" she rapped on the table--"I
want the week. To-morrow and till next Wednesday I'm out of the bill."

"But it cannot be done."

"It must be. I want it to be done."

Kowlaski tried bribing. "I will raise your salary if you stay!"

"Oh, la, la, la, la! I am quite pleased with what I get. If I wished
my salary raised I should have it raised. I go for a week."

In the face of this obstinacy Kowlaski gave in. But first of all he
tried threats, and Lola threatened to throw a chair at him. He finally
agreed that she should have her week, and Lola walked out of the
office without thanking him. That was the last he saw of her for seven
days.

He made the most of her absence, declaring that she had been called
away to nurse a dying mother and would reappear with a broken heart to
keep her engagements with the public. Bawdsey saw this notice.

It was the first he had heard of Lola's escapade, and he went at once
to her rooms in Bloomsbury to ask where she was going. Lola had
already gone, and, according to the landlady, had left no information
as to her whereabouts.

"Did she take a box?" asked Bawdsey.

"A small box. She went away in a cab."

"Where did she tell the cabman to drive to?"

"To Oxford Street."

Bawdsey was disappointed. He saw that Lola had taken every precaution
to hide her trail, and that there was not much chance of finding her.
However, he went to see Kowlaski. The manager began to talk of the
dying mother, and Bawdsey shut him up.

"Rubbish! That's for the public. I want to know where she is.

"My dear, I do not know," said Kowlaski, and for the first time in his
wicked old life he told the truth.

Not to be beaten, Bawdsey sought out George Brendon. But George was as
ignorant as the manager and the landlady. "I haven't the slightest
idea," he said, when Bawdsey asked; "and, to tell you the truth, I
don't see why you should try to find out."

"I want to know."

"That is apparent on the face of it. But you are not engaged to marry
her, are you, Mr. Bawdsey?"

"No such luck," replied the detective, with a dismal face.

"Then I don't see what right you have to control her movements."

"Did she write and tell you where she was going?"

"No, and if she had done so I should not tell you," replied George,
annoyed by the man's persistence.

"You may as well be civil to me, Mr. Brendon; you know that I am your
friend."

"Oh, I've heard all that before! But people who talk much of
friendship and gratitude are generally humbugs."

"I am not," said Bawdsey, quietly. "See here, Mr. Brendon, Lola is in
love with you----"

"That's my business. Leave it alone."

Bawdsey took up his hat. "Oh, very well! If you will not be civil I
cannot help you to learn who killed your father."

"What!" George sprang from the table at which he was writing and
seized the man's arm. "Do you know that?"

"Gently, Mr. Brendon. No, I do not know, but----"

"Then what do you mean by saying----"

"We had better have a chat," said Bawdsey, and sat down. "But I wish
to know where I stand. Lola loves you. Do you love her?"

"No," said Brendon, seeing that he would have to humor the man. "I am
engaged to marry Miss Ward."

"Will you help me to marry Lola?"

"Willingly--though, to tell you the truth, I know very little about
you, and to make that girl marry you----"

"Oh, Lola can look after herself, Mr. Brendon. If she becomes my wife
she will have the upper hand. But I am so deeply in love with her that
I am willing to play second fiddle. Can't you dispossess her of this
infatuation for you?"

George shook his head and groaned. "No. She won't listen to reason."

"Well," drawled Bawdsey, recurring to his American accent, "I don't
blame her for that. She is in love, and love listens to no one and
nothing. I wouldn't listen to reason, either, if it entailed giving up
Lola."

"See here, Bawdsey, if you can persuade this woman to get over her
liking for me, and to marry you, I shall be delighted. I do not know
where she is just now, but it is my impression that she has gone away
because she is afraid of me."

"Afraid of you? Oh, that's absurd!"

"No, it isn't. The other morning she saw Miss Ward, and there was a
scene in the Park."

Bawdsey hung his red head. "I fear that is my fault," he confessed. "I
pointed out Miss Ward to Lola, and----"

"And it was I who foolishly mentioned that Miss Ward sometimes took a
walk in the morning--in the Park."

"Oh," said Bawdsey, "I mentioned that also."

"Did you wish Lola to see Miss Ward?" asked George, angrily.

"No. Nor did I intend to say anything about the walking in the early
morning. I simply pointed her out in the box to Lola, so that Lola
might see there was no chance of your marrying her."

"As if any woman would accept such an excuse," said Brendon,
contemptuously. "Then she questioned you about the walk?"

"Yes. She mentioned something about what you had told her, and I was
rather free with my tongue. I am not usually," said Bawdsey,
penitently, "but there's something about Lola that makes me behave
like a child. I'm wax in her hands. So she saw Miss Ward?"

"Yes. And she knows that I am angry. Of course Miss Ward sent to tell
me at once, and I called on Lola to give her a talking to, but she was
gone when I arrived."

"Would you have spoken harshly to her?"

"Certainly. She had no right to trouble Miss Ward. But now you know
why I think she has left town. In a week she will come back thinking
my anger is at an end."

"And will it be?" asked Bawdsey, doubtfully.

"It is at an end now. I am quite content not to see Lola again so long
as she leaves Miss Ward alone."

"I will try and keep her away," said the detective, "but I have very
little influence with her."

"Tell her I am angry and will be still more angry if she does not keep
away from Curzon Street. Well, we have discussed this matter. I now
want to hear what you meant by your reference to my father. Do you
know who killed him?"

Bawdsey shook his head. "I can't say for certain, but I can tell you
who might know."

"Who is that?"

"Mr. Roger Ireland."

George looked astonished. "But that is ridiculous," he said. "Mr.
Ireland told me that he did not know."

"Oh, I don't say that he knows for certain. But he is better
acquainted with the matter than you think."

"How did you come to know Mr. Ireland?"

"He called to see Miss Bull, and I dropped across him."

"How did you get talking of the case?"

"Well, you see," said Bawdsey, easily, "we naturally talked of Mrs.
Jersey, and one thing led to another until I discovered that Ireland
had been in San Remo when your father was murdered. I wished to find
out who killed him, so I questioned Mr. Ireland."

"Why do you wish to know who killed my father?" asked George.

"Because I think that the murder of Mrs. Jersey is connected with that
crime. See here--" Bawdsey cleared his throat--"Mrs. Jersey was in San
Remo at the time of the death----"

"How do you know that?"

"Don't I tell you I questioned Mr. Ireland?"

George looked sharply at the detective. "What magic did you use to
make him talk? Mr. Ireland knows how to hold his tongue."

"Well, when he found that I was looking after the case of Mrs. Jersey
(and I made no secret of that) he was good enough to tell me all he
knew. He thought, as I did, that the murder in San Remo was connected
with the crime of Amelia Square."

"Oh!" George wasn't at all satisfied, as he could not conceive how
Bawdsey had induced Ireland to talk. However, he thought it wise to
say no more, as he did not wish to make Bawdsey angry and thus run a
chance of losing his explanation. "Go on."

"There is nothing more to say," said Bawdsey, rising. "Mr. Ireland
declined to tell me who he thought was guilty, but he hinted that he
had seen the lady in the blue domino unmasked."

"Did he recognize her?"

"I think he did, but he assured me that he could not be sure, and that
he had not seen the lady again."

"Then he did know the face?"

Bawdsey's face assumed an impenetrable expression. "I can only refer
you to Mr. Ireland," he said; "and as to Lola----"

"Oh, she'll turn up again," said Brendon, irritably. "Don't worry me
about Lola. I wish you would marry her and take her back to your
native land."

"What land am I native of, Mr. Brendon?" asked Bawdsey, calmly.

"America, I understand. You hinted as much when we met."

Bawdsey shook his head. "I am as English as you are," he declared.

"Well," said Brendon, with a shrug, "I thought as much. Your accent
fails at times. You are not a good actor, Bawdsey."

"I may be a better actor than you think, Mr. Brendon."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Never you mind, sir. I can hold my tongue when it suits me, and on
this occasion it does suit me. But remember, Mr. Brendon, that
whatever happens you have a friend in me."

"What is going to happen?"

Bawdsey shook his head solemnly. "One never knows. We are not out of
the wood yet, Mr. Brendon."

"Are you referring to my father's murder?"

"And to Mrs. Jersey's. I have my suspicions, and--well, there's
nothing more to be said. When I am certain I shall let you know."

"You have your suspicions, then?"

"Yes. But I shall not impart them to any one--not even to you."

"One moment, Bawdsey," said Brendon, as the man had his hand on the
door. "Do you suspect Miss Bull?"

"Why should I suspect her?" asked the detective, in surprise.

"Because she was not on good terms with Mrs. Jersey, and you have
taken up your abode in the house----"

"To watch her, you would say. Well, maybe," rejoined the man,
composedly. "I know what I know, and when I am more certain of what I
know, sir----" He nodded. "Good-day," he said, and went abruptly.

It struck George that Bawdsey was a most mysterious person and knew
far more about the San Remo murder than Derrington could have told
him. Still, it was possible that Derrington had unbosomed himself to
Bawdsey, and it was necessary to do so if he wanted the murder of Mrs.
Jersey cleared up. And Derrington, from his refusal to admit that he
was at the house on the night and about the time the crime was
committed, seemed to knew something that might lead to the detection
of the assassin.

"Humph," said George to himself when alone, "I have a great mind to go
round and see that old man. It seems to me that Bawdsey is trying to
serve two masters. It is impossible that my grandfather can know
the truth. Yet, going by his height and figure, and that sable
claret-colored coat, he was certainly in the house on the night in
question. But it's none of my business."

He sat down again to his work and tried to interest himself in the
chapter he was writing. But it was all in vain. Bawdsey's speech and
Bawdsey's manner, and a conviction that the man was playing his
grandfather false, kept recurring to his mind. After an hour's futile
work he threw down the pen in despair and went out to call on
Derrington.

On arriving at St. Giles Square he saw a carriage at the door of the
mansion. On asking for Lord Derrington, George was informed that his
lordship was engaged with Mrs. Ward and could see no one. Brendon
turned away, wondering that he had not recognized the carriage, and he
was still more vexed with himself when Dorothy put her head out of the
brougham and called to him.

"My dearest," he said softly, so that the coachman and footman might
not hear, "this is an unexpected pleasure. Why are you not inside?"

"My mother wished to see Lord Derrington alone," replied Dorothy. "I
am waiting till she comes out. She has been with him for half an hour.
I don't know what they are talking about."

It was at this moment that a message was brought out of the house from
Mrs. Ward saying that her daughter could drive home as she would not
be disengaged for another hour. Dorothy looked puzzled. "I can't
understand," she said; "there is something wrong with my mother. Lord
Derrington came to see her one day and she has been upset ever since."

George shook his head. He suspected Mrs. Ward of knowing more than she
chose to confess, and based his suspicions on the fact of the yellow
holly which she had given to Dorothy to present to him. She had made
her daughter a cat's-paw, but why she should wish to startle Mrs.
Jersey with a reminder of the San Remo murder was a thing George could
not understand. Meanwhile, he kept these suspicions to himself and
made some excuse. "Oh, Mrs. Ward and my grandfather are probably
talking over my iniquities," he said easily. "But I don't see why I
should not take advantage of this chance."

"What do you mean, George?" asked Dorothy with a becoming blush.

"Well, here is the brougham, and here you are. Why shouldn't we drive
around the Park before you go home?"

"My mother will be angry," said Dorothy, hesitating. Then she blushed
again. "But I shall brave her anger. We have much to talk about, as I
wish to speak of Lola Velez."

"Dorothy, you surely do not think----"

"No, no! But I want to ask you a few questions. I believe she is mad,
George. Get in and we will drive round the Park."

The order was given, George seated himself beside his divinity, and
they drove away for a pleasant hour. "You see Fate plays into our
hands," said George, taking those of Dorothy in his own. And then the
conversation became quite private and very, very confidential.

Meantime, Mrs. Ward was seated in a chair facing Lord Derrington. The
old gentleman looked savage, but Mrs. Ward was quite at her ease. They
had been having a war of words, and Mrs. Ward so far had come off
best. The conversation had been in reference to the sentence whispered
in the little woman's ear when he had made her promise to hold her
tongue about George.

"Of course I do think it is the meanest thing a man can do," said Mrs.
Ward, bitterly. "What if I did cheat at cards? Every woman does that,
and I was losing no end of money."

"I don't think your friends would take that view," said Derrington,
grimly. "I came to hear of the matter quite by chance, and it is plain
that you won over a hundred pounds by cheating."

"It's that horrid Mrs. Wayflete who told you----"

"No. If Mrs. Wayflete knows, she has held her tongue. I learned it
from a source of which you are ignorant. But the fact remains, you
cheated, and if your friends knew it you would be ostracized by all of
them."

"As if they did not do these things themselves," retorted Mrs. Ward;
"but since you have been so nasty, I intend to be nasty, too."

"I shouldn't advise you to be nasty to me, Mrs. Ward. I have a large
reserve fund of strength."

"You'll need it all to hold your own against me." Lord Derrington
nodded. "I quite admit that you are a dangerous woman," he said
quietly.

"Well, and in what way have you made up your mind to be nasty?"

Mrs. Ward laughed. "You needn't repeat my adjectives," she said in her
most frivolous manner. "If you want to know the way in which I intend
to protect myself----"

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean this," cried the little woman, growing angry all at once. "I
am not going to be threatened about that unfortunate episode connected
with the cards--it was that horrid Mrs. Wayflete who told you, so
don't deny it--I am not going to be threatened without holding my own.
Besides, I want Dorothy to marry your grandson."

"Which one?" asked Derrington, coolly.

"You have only Walter Vane."

"Excuse me, George Brendon, whether there is a marriage or not, is
equally my grandson."

"I believe you admire him."

"Very much, and it is in my mind to acknowledge him as my heir."

"I thought as much after your sticking up for him the other day," said
Mrs. Ward, furiously. "Now, look here, Lord Derrington. If Dorothy
marries that Brendon creature I won't be able to do a thing with
her--you know quite well I won't."

"That means you won't be able to handle my money through George after
I am dead," said Derrington, grimly.

"You can put it that way if you like. But Walter shall be Dorothy's
husband, I have made up my mind."

"Because he's a fool and putty in your hands."

"I shouldn't be vulgar if I were you," said Mrs. Ward, in a dignified
manner, and quite forgetting that she had once used the same
illustration herself in connection with Brendon. "But so long as
George leaves Dorothy alone I shall say nothing."

"That's really very good of you, Mrs. Ward."

"Your being nasty won't make me change my mind. But you quite
understand the situation, Lord Derrington. Walter is to marry my
daughter, and George is to be kept away."

"I don't see how he is to be kept away. I assure you Brendon is a
strong man, and his will is quite equal to mine."

"Nonsense, you have the strongest will in London."

"And you come here to try and break it."

"Life is a game," said Mrs. Ward, leaning back, with a pretty air of
philosophy. "And at present I hold the trump card."

"What is it?" asked Derrington, wondering by what means she hoped to
make him consent to her demands.

"I'll tell you presently," said Mrs. Ward, in a most masterful tone,
which amused Derrington. "But you understand that if George Brendon
doesn't keep away I shall give information to the police and have him
arrested in connection with that murder."

"Oh, no, you won't," said Derrington, good-humoredly.

"Oh, yes, I shall. As to your accusation about my having cheated, you
shall say nothing about that."

"Indeed, I shall do so if you trouble Brendon."

"Think of Dorothy."

"I do think of Dorothy, and I'm very sorry she has such a mother."

"You dare to insult me," began Mrs. Ward, when Derrington, who was
losing patience, cut her short.

"I've had enough of this," he said sharply. "You shall hold your
tongue about Brendon or I'll tell what I know."

"Then I'll do the same."

Derrington bowed politely. "By all means," he said. "My reputation is
already so bad that a word or two from you can scarcely make it
worse."

"Oh, it's more than that," said Mrs. Ward, quietly, and she spoke in
so positive a manner that Derrington began to recollect his worst
sins. "Do you remember the night you came home here at one o'clock and
found me in this very room?"

"Yes. You came with the amiable intention of telling me that George
Brendon was going to pass the night at Mrs. Jersey's, and that you
suspected that he was up to mischief."

"I took the trouble to come from a party for that very purpose," was
Mrs. Ward's plaintive reply, "and how was I received?"

"I told you to mind your own business, if I remember."

"And you swore at me," said the little woman; "as if a man who calls
himself a gentleman----"

"Mrs. Ward, I am getting tired of this circumlocution. What is it you
have to say?"

"Well, on that night you were in a fir coat."

"My usual coat in winter."

"It was the night when Mrs. Jersey was killed."

"Was it, indeed? I never noticed the coincidence."

"No. But you knew about it," said Mrs. Ward; "you threw your coat on
yonder sofa. I seated myself near it by chance. There was something
hard in the pocket of the coat. When you were out of the room I took
the something out. There it is," and she laid an Italian stiletto on
the table.

"What is that?" asked Derrington, calmly, but with an anxious face.

"That," said Mrs. Ward, touching it daintily with her finger, "is the
weapon with which Mrs. Jersey was stabbed."




CHAPTER XV

A RECOGNITION


If Mrs. Ward expected to startle Derrington into a confession she was
never more mistaken in her calculations. Lord Derrington had not moved
in diplomatic circles all his life without knowing how to guard
against the display of emotion. With an utterly expressionless face he
looked at the stiletto. It was a slender steel blade with a silver
handle of Renaissance workmanship, evidently a valuable and curious
relic of the Middle Ages. It might have been made by Cellini himself
and have been worn by Cesare Borgia. But Derrington stared at it as
though he knew nothing about it.

"Well," said Mrs. Ward, sharply, and rather disappointed he did not
grovel on the instant, "what do you say?"

Derrington looked at her in rather a humorous manner. "What do you
want me to say?" he asked. "Confess that I killed Mrs. Jersey and then
brought this weapon carefully home in my pocket for you to discover
and use against me?"

"That is a subterfuge," said Mrs. Ward. "You did not expect to find me
waiting for you, and you never meant that dagger to be discovered,
Lord Derrington."

"I certainly never did," he assented heartily. "I cannot imagine how
you came to know more than I did."

"What do you mean?" asked the little woman, sharply.

"Well, you see," said Lord Derrington, quietly, "this is a very clever
bit of business on your part, but so far as I am concerned it has
nothing to do with me. I never saw that weapon before."

"Oh, that's rubbish!" said Mrs. Ward with a mirthless laugh. "I found
it in the pocket of your fur coat on the very----"

"You say you found it there," said Derrington, meaningly.

"Do you deny that it was in the pocket?"

"Certainly. Had it been in the pocket I should have known it was
there. But it was not in the pocket."

Mrs. Ward stared. "You are very brazen," she said; "you knew it was
there all the time."

"In the pocket?" asked Derrington, politely and perfectly calm.

Mrs. Ward hesitated. Then she faced him defiantly. "I am so sure of my
ground," she declared, "that I don't mind saying it wasn't exactly in
the pocket. There was a hole in the pocket and the dagger had slipped
down into the lining between the inside fur and the outer cloth. It
lay sideways, and what with its position and the heavy fur----"

"I could not have known it was there," finished Derrington, balancing
a paper-cutter on his forefinger. "You have found a mare's nest, my
dear Mrs. Ward, and if this is your trump card I am sorry to say it
won't take the trick you wish to secure. I did not know that this--"
he touched the stiletto--"was in the lining of my fur coat."

"Then it was, and Mrs. Jersey was stabbed with it."

"Isn't that taking a great deal for granted?" said Derrington, with
raised brows. "Mrs. Jersey, according to the doctor, if I recall the
report of the inquest rightly, was certainly stabbed with a weapon
similar to this. But why do you say this is the one?"

"Because I believe you were in the house on that night."

"Which house? Be explicit, please."

Mrs. Ward was growing angry at this calm defiance. "In the house in
Amelia Square. You went there to prevent that Brendon creature from
making Mrs. Jersey confess."

Lord Derrington laughed. "You would not make a good lawyer," said he.
"By your own showing I did not know that Brendon was to be at Mrs.
Jersey's on that night."

"I certainly came to tell you," said Mrs. Ward, feeling that she had
missed a point, "but you could easily have heard it elsewhere."

"Who from? Brendon did not advertise in the papers that he was
stopping with Mrs. Jersey on the night in question."

"Then Mr. Train----"

"I met Mr. Train for the first time at your house the other night."

"Dorothy told you," said Mrs. Ward, determined not to surrender any
advantage she might have gained.

"You can ask your daughter and she will tell you that I had not seen
her all that week. Is there any one else, Mrs. Ward?"

The little woman rose to her feet with an artificial laugh and shook
out perfume from her silken skirts. "You are very clever and
obstinate, Lord Derrington, but how will you explain this--" she
pointed to the stiletto--"to the authorities?"

"There will be no need for me to do that," said Derrington, and took
up the weapon. Mrs. Ward stretched out her hand.

"My property, if you please, Lord Derrington."

The old gentleman opened a drawer, dropped the weapon into it, and
closed the drawer with a snap. "It's locked now," he said coolly. "I
shall take charge of this."

"How dare you? I insist----"

"Oh, dear, no! You insist on nothing." Lord Derrington rose, looking
like a giant as he towered over the little woman. "My dear Mrs. Ward,"
said he, quietly, but in his deepest tones, "I have been very patient
with you, but this thing must end. You must promise to hold your
tongue about Brendon and----"

"And about you, I suppose," she sneered.

"About me?" Derrington's tone expressed surprise. "What have you to
hold your tongue about as regards me?"

Mrs. Ward stamped, though as a rule she was not given to betraying
violent emotion. "Oh, it's too ridiculous!" she said furiously. "I can
say to the police how I found the stiletto in your coat, I suppose."

"I should advise you not to talk to any one about a thing which exists
only in your imagination."

"The stiletto----"

"What are you talking of, Mrs. Ward?"

"It's in that drawer." She pointed to the table.

"Oh, dear, no, it isn't," said Derrington, blandly; "there is no
stiletto, there never was one. We have had a nice talk--shall we say
about chiffons?" In spite of her rage at being outwitted Mrs. Ward
gave a hollow laugh at the thought of Lord Derrington discussing
chiffons. "A nice talk, I say, and now we must part."

"Not before I have had my say," said Mrs. Ward, savagely. "I see
perfectly well that I have been foolish to let that stiletto get into
your hands. But I thought I was dealing with a man of honor."

"Ah, Mrs. Ward, few of us can aspire to your high principles!"

The sneer infuriated her. "You can deny the stiletto if you like to
the public, but you dare not do so to me."

"Why not? For the sake of argument we will admit the existence of the
weapon. You come here with it in your hand and state that you found it
in my coat--in the lining of the coat."

"And I did--I did--you know I did."

"Indeed, I know nothing of the sort. I deny that the stiletto was ever
in pocket or in lining. I did not see you take it out."

"I waited till you were out of the room before I examined the coat."

"Of course, but by doing so you have defeated your own object. Had you
produced the weapon from the coat and showed it to me at the very
moment, your accusation might have held water. As it is, the thing is
simply ridiculous. You come here, you accuse me of a crime----"

"I did not accuse you," said Mrs. Ward, beginning to find that
Derrington was too much even for her. "I believe Brendon killed the
woman--oh, yes! You went to the house and you saw him. He and Mrs.
Jersey had words, as she would not confess, and Brendon killed her
with the stiletto. Then you came in, and to save him you put the
dagger into your pocket, sent him up to bed, and promised to hold your
tongue, and----"

Derrington laughed. "You have a most vivid imagination, Mrs. Ward," he
said, with a shrug; "but, as it happens, you are talking nonsense. I
was not at Amelia Square that evening, but at my club, as any member
then present can assure you. I can prove what is called an alibi, Mrs.
Ward, which means that I can account for every moment of my time, from
the minute I left this house to the minute I returned to find you
here. As to the stiletto you say you took out of my pocket, that is
rubbish. On the whole, I think you had better hold your tongue."

"If I go to the police they will open that drawer."

"Oh, no! An Englishman's house is his castle, you know, and a man in
my position cannot be treated in the way you suggest with impunity.
Moreover, Mrs. Ward, there is ample time to destroy the stiletto."

"Which you will do," she said, recovering her composure, now that she
found it was useless to protest.

"No. I wouldn't even mind showing it to the police and saying how you
brought it here with an accusation. If the police can prove that this
is the weapon with which Mrs. Jersey was stabbed, and if you and the
police can prove that the stiletto was in my pocket on the night of
the murder, then you and the police--" Derrington made an ironical
bow--"are extremely clever."

"Oh, very well," said Mrs. Ward, realizing her defeat, "I shall say
nothing about you. But Brendon----"

"You will hold your tongue about him also. I quite understand how you
proposed to hold this stiletto, and the tale of its being discovered
in my pocket, over me. If I did not consent to the marriage of Miss
Ward and Walter--eh?"

"I must do the best for my child."

"Even going so far as threats. Well, I have too high a respect for
Miss Ward to ask her to marry such a worm as Walter. She would do
better to take Brendon."

"She shan't marry him."

"Why do you hate the man so?" asked Derrington, looking into her eyes.
"I know he is a strong man, and for the money's sake you do not want
him to be your son-in-law. But even this does not account for your
hatred. Why do you hate him?"

"I have nothing to say," retorted Mrs. Ward, who had flushed and paled
alternately during this speech. "Please see me to the door."

Derrington walked to the door and opened it with a bow. "Willingly. I
think we understand one another."

"I think we do," said Mrs. Ward, with an artificial laugh. "You do
credit to your reputation, Lord Derrington."

"Praise from Mrs. Ward is praise, indeed," said the ironical old
gentleman as he descended the stairs side by side with the woman who
could have found it in her heart to kill him. "I am sorry to ask you
to leave me so soon, as our conversation was most enjoyable. But I
have to see a certain Mr. Ireland----"

"Is that Brendon's guardian?" asked Mrs. Ward, coming to a sudden stop
in the hall.

"His former guardian," corrected Derrington. "How do you come to know
of him, Mrs. Ward?"

"I think Dorothy mentioned the name," she said in rather a faltering
tone. "Dear me, how my face burns! I wish I had a veil."

"I am sorry, Mrs. Ward, but the late Lady Derrington's veils are not
modern enough for you."

"What nonsense!" said Mrs. Ward, who appeared flurried. "Please tell
your man to call a cab. I sent away the carriage."

"Let me send you home in mine."

"No! No, I want to go at once," and she approached the door quickly.
"When did you say Mr. Ireland was coming?"

Derrington glanced at his watch. "He is due now," he said, and looked
at her, wondering why she asked the question.

Mrs. Ward's face was turned away. She was dressed in furs and carried
a muff. When the door was opened by the footman a gentleman appeared
on the threshold. Mrs. Ward lifted her muff to her face, but not
before the stranger had caught sight of her face and had uttered an
ejaculation of surprise. "You!" he said, stepping forward.

"What do you mean?" said Mrs. Ward, with her face still hidden. "Lord
Derrington, this friend of yours is making a mistake. Tell that man to
be quick calling a cab." And she moved past the stranger.

"Pardon," he said politely, "but I wish to speak with you."

Derrington bent his bushy brows. "Let the lady pass," he said; "who
are you, sir, to stop the egress of my guests?"

"My name is Rodger Ireland," said the stranger, quietly, "and I have
been looking for that lady for over thirty years."

"What does the man mean?" asked Mrs. Ward, haughtily, but looking
disturbed.

"Lord Derrington," said Ireland, "I think if you will permit this lady
and me to have a talk----"

"There seems to be some mistake," said Derrington. "Mrs. Ward, will
you not wait until we rectify it?"

"No. The man is mad. Let me pass, sir. There is the cab."

She would have stepped out but Ireland again placed his bulky form in
her way. It was all done so tactfully that the footman on the pavement
did not notice anything unusual. The man was waiting by the cab to
assist Mrs. Ward in. But Ireland would not let her pass.

"Lord Derrington," he said softly, lest the footman should overhear,
"this is the lady who was with your son when he was murdered."

Derrington was not easily startled, but he turned suddenly white. Mrs.
Ward shrank back into the hall. Now that the truth was told she seemed
to recover from her fears and to regain all her tact. "I shall not
want the cab at present," she said to the footman. "Tell the man to
wait. Lord Derrington, if you do not wish these private affairs to be
discussed in the presence of the servants we had better return to the
library."

Lord Derrington could only stare, being confounded at her coolness. He
was much moved by the unexpected mention of his dead son, and without
a word went up the stairs again, while Mrs. Ward followed, and Ireland
came at her heels. She looked as though she were a prisoner between
two guards.

When they found themselves in the library Derrington closed the door
and went to his seat. He looked much older, having aged in a most
extraordinary manner under the shock of Ireland's information. Mrs.
Ward was perfectly cool, and resumed her former seat. As to Ireland,
he let himself carefully down into the most capacious armchair he
could find. Mrs. Ward opened the conversation at once.

"You say you saw me at San Remo?" she asked.

"I did," replied Ireland, in his heavy voice. "I was there at the time
Mr. Percy Vane was murdered--" Derrington groaned--"and I was at the
masked ball where----"

"The Veglioni," said Mrs. Ward. "Well, you were there. You say you saw
me?"

"In a blue domino."

"There were plenty of blue dominoes at that ball--at least I should
think there were."

"Yes, but you wore a sprig of yellow holly. That was why I recognized
you when you were masked."

"How did you know it was I?"

"Because early in the evening you went into a box. I was there talking
to the Marchesa Beltrami, to whom the box belonged. You removed your
mask and I had ample opportunity to observe you."

"What reason had you to observe me?" asked Mrs. Ward, just as though
she were counsel examining a witness.

"Well," said Ireland, smoothing his face, "you see I knew Mr. Vane
very well. He married a woman of whom I was fond." Derrington shifted
restlessly in his chair. "Do not be afraid, Lord Derrington, I do not
intend to talk of Rosina Lockwood----"

"You are talking to me at present," said Mrs. Ward, sharply. "You can
talk to Lord Derrington later."

"I rather think, ma'am," said Ireland, "that Lord Derrington will want
to talk to you."

"At present I say nothing," was his lordship's reply, and he watched
the two faces before him with close attention.

"You saw me unmask in a certain box," said Mrs. Ward, quickly. "Do you
mean to say that after all these years--over thirty years--that you
recognize me again? I was a girl then; I am a--a----" She was about to
say old woman, as being more emphatic with the adjective, but her
vanity made her swallow the word. "I am a woman now."

"Quite so. But you have a mole on your forehead just above the left
eyebrow. I knew you by that; and then I have a splendid memory for
faces, and yours--" Ireland bowed gallantly--"is too beautiful to
forget easily."

Mrs. Ward shrugged her shoulders. She did not want compliments, but
she wished very much to get out of the trouble in which she found
herself involved. "It's a most remarkable memory," she said.

"It is, madam," assented Ireland; "my memory was always considered
remarkable. And the fact is that I was thinking of the murder almost
at the moment I entered the hall. Consequently your face was in my
mind's eye. That made the chance of recognizing you more sure. Had I
not been thinking of old days I might not have guessed so readily who
you were."

"Why were you thinking of the murder, then?" asked Derrington.

"Well, my lord, you sent for me to speak with me about George--" Mrs.
Ward gave a short laugh, and Derrington smiled--"so I was naturally
thinking of George; such a thought led to my thinking of his parents,
and finally I remembered the circumstance of your son's death, as I
thought you might wish to talk of it, and therefore desired to get my
memory in order. In this way did I recognize the lady."

"This is all very well," said Mrs. Ward. "You say you recognize me,
Mr. Ireland. Is that your name?"

"It is, but your memory is not so good as mine. We met only once."
Derrington was not so sure if Mrs. Ward's memory was not good, for he
remembered how she had tried to get away before the arrival of
Ireland. "Go on! Go on!" he said irritably. "I wish to know the
worst."

"The worst is that I am supposed to have killed Percy Vane," said Mrs.
Ward, coolly. "So you accuse me of that?" she asked Ireland.

"By no means. But you were at that ball----"

"I was. In a blue domino with a sprig of holly at my breast."

"And you were with Mr. Vane?"

"No, I was not!"

"You went out with Mr. Vane."

"I did not. It was my sister."

"Your sister!" said Derrington. "Hah!" and he relapsed into silence.
Mrs. Ward shot a suspicious look at him, but his inscrutable face
betrayed nothing.

"I remember," said Ireland, in a slow, prosy way, "that there were two
Miss Howards at San Remo--at the Hotel d'Angleterre. They were with
their father, General Howard. I never met them, but Mr. Vane went
frequently to call at the house."

"He did," said Mrs. Ward, "if by house you mean the hotel. The fact
is, my sister Jenny was in love with Captain Vane----"

"I heard it was you," said Ireland, distrustfully.

"It was my sister," said Mrs. Ward, coldly. "We thought Mr. Vane would
marry her, but he certainly showed no signs of proposing. I suppose he
was too fond of his dead wife," and she shot a sneering look at Lord
Derrington, who winced.

"Don't say a word against Rosina Lockwood," said Ireland, quickly.

"You see what he calls her," said Mrs. Ward to Derrington. "There was
no marriage."

"Ma'am!" cried Ireland, rising.

"Oh, never mind," replied Mrs. Ward, waving her hand. "There is no
need for you to lose your temper, my good man. I am not going to speak
of the woman----"

"She was an angel."

"And a woman--that's the generic name for the sex. However, it was my
sister Jenny who loved Percy Vane. She would go to the ball, and
persuaded me to go with her. We slipped out of the hotel and went
without a chaperon. Our father would have been shocked had he known,
but it was merely the escapade of two schoolgirls. I went with a
friend, and Jenny looked about for Mr. Vane. We agreed to meet after
an hour and go home. As there were other blue dominoes at the ball we
each wore--" and Mrs. Ward repeated the word to emphasize the
fact--"_each_ a sprig of yellow holly. I went to a box to have supper
with a certain cousin of mine and my sister then departed with Mr.
Vane."

"Why did she leave the ballroom?" asked Derrington.

"Because Mr. Vane was shocked. He recognized her voice and made her
unmask. He insisted on taking her home first, and then intended to
return for me, as he could not find me at the moment. They went out
together, Mr. Ireland, and that is the last I saw of Mr. Vane."

"What was the last your sister saw of him?"

"She was at the hotel and in our bedroom when I returned, which I did
after looking vainly for her. She said that Mr. Vane had escorted her
to the hotel and had left her at the gate at her earnest request, as
Jenny was so afraid lest my father should hear of our escapade. She
said good-night to Mr. Vane and then went to her room. When we heard
of the murder next morning she became very ill and my father took her
away. But she always declared to me that she did not know who murdered
Percy Vane."

"Did your father ever know that she was in Vane's company on that
night?" asked Ireland.

"Never! We kept our folly a profound secret from him."

"Did any one else know?"

"You did," said Mrs. Ward sharply; "and Mr. Vane did, and a servant at
the hotel--an English servant who attended to us. In fact, it was she
who procured the yellow holly by which Jenny and I were to identify
one another."

"What was her name?" asked Derrington, quickly, and raising himself in
his chair with eagerness to hear the answer.

"Eliza Stokes."

"Ah! I thought so. Mrs. Jersey?"

"Yes, Mrs. Jersey. And now, Lord Derrington, you know how I come to
take such an interest in the death of that woman."

"Yes. But I cannot understand how you came to know that Mrs. Jersey
was Eliza Stokes."

"That's my business," flashed out Mrs. Ward. "Or why," pursued
Derrington, unmoved, "why you sent her the yellow holly?"

"Because I was not quite positive if she really was Eliza Stokes. I
thought that the yellow holly, being connected in her mind with the
death of Mr. Vane, would make her betray herself."

"It did in a way--but to Brendon. He would not have told you."

"He would doubtless have told Dorothy, and she would have told me."

Ireland, in his thoughtful, ponderous way, turned this matter over in
his own mind. "Where is your sister now?" he asked.

Mrs. Ward replied with some reserve. "I can't tell you that. She went
out of her mind for a time after the murder of Mr. Vane, and after she
came out of the asylum we were all afraid to live with her. My father
put her under some one's charge, and when he died she was allowed an
annuity. Her guardian died and my sister vanished. We made no attempt
to find her, and it was supposed that she had put an end to herself."

Ireland looked at Derrington. "Did you ever meet Miss Jenny Howard, my
lord?" he asked.

"No," said Derrington, "but I have known Mrs. Ward for many, many
years."

"Quite twenty," said Mrs. Ward, with an artificial laugh. "We grow
old. No, Mr. Ireland, Lord Derrington never met my sister. Why you ask
I cannot conceive!"

"Because Lord Derrington is under a wrong impression. He has met your
sister, and in this very room."

"I beg your pardon," began Derrington. "I----"

Ireland cut him short. "She called to see you here about the renewal
of the Amelia Square lease."

"Miss Bull?" said his lordship. "I thought there was something
familiar about her face. So Miss Bull is Mrs. Ward's sister?"

"She told me so herself," was Ireland's reply.




CHAPTER XVI

THE PIPE OF PEACE


Brendon was much astonished a day or two later to receive an
invitation to dine with his grandfather. After the somewhat stormy
interview he had participated in with the old tyrant, George certainly
never expected to be treated well by the man whose path he had
crossed. He had heard many tales of Derrington's pride, and of his
relentless pursuit of those whom he conceived had done him wrong. As
George had fought the old man with his own weapons, and had come off
victor, he did not expect to be pardoned.

But in this he was wrong. Derrington, sickened with Walter's
milk-and-water ways, saw in Brendon a worthy successor who would be
able to hold his own in will and word, and would shed fresh luster on
the house. Had George been polite, and what the old lord sneeringly
called cringing, he would never have received the invitation. As it
was, Derrington took him to his hard old heart. He chuckled to think
of Walter's dismay when he heard that he had an elder cousin and would
not be likely to inherit the title or the money.

However astonished, Brendon was too much a man-of-the-world to reveal
his feelings. On the evening in question he presented himself at the
mansion in St. Giles Square, scrupulously groomed and brushed.
Derrington looked approvingly on his dress, which set off a handsome
figure to advantage.

Also the haughty bearing of Brendon pleased him, and he unbent so far
as to advance to George with outstretched hand.

"We had rather a rough interview, George," he said, "so I have invited
you to smoke the pipe of peace."

Brendon shook the old man's hand quietly, but without much enthusiasm.
He could not conjecture what Derrington meant by behaving in a way
so different to that he usually adopted. His host felt the slack
hand-clasp, and winced on seeing the want of response in Brendon's
face. Queerly enough Derrington, contrary to accepted opinion, had a
heart, and was so much taken with George that he wished to draw him to
himself. Still, he could not but admit that seeing how he had treated
the young fellow in the past it was not to be expected that Brendon
would act the part of an affectionate relative immediately. Derrington
rather admired George for his uncompromising attitude.

"Dinner will be ready soon," said the old lord, waving Brendon to a
seat; "only our two selves. I wish to consult you."

"Consult me?" George could not keep the astonishment out of his face.

"It's rather late in the day, is it not?" remarked Derrington, dryly,
"but you see I am old, George, and have not much time to spare. Yes, I
wish you to consult with me after dinner about--but that can come in
the course of our conversation. Meantime, let us talk of anything you
like."

"The weather, sir?"

"No, confound you," snapped Derrington, with a flash of his old
irritable self; "talk of wine, wit, and women if you like, but spare
me platitudes."

Brendon stared at his shoes and smiled under his mustache. "I do not
think I can say anything very original about the subjects you
mention," he said quietly.

"Talk of Miss Ward, then. You can be original on that point."

Brendon would rather not have mentioned Dorothy, but he was quite
determined to show his grandfather that he fully intended to marry his
lady-love, and that he was not afraid to speak his mind. "I do not
fancy that there is anything particularly original in a love-story. I
met Miss Ward some three years before, I have loved her ever since,
and we will marry when----"

"There, there," interrupted Derrington, waving his hand, "let us not
get on to that subject as yet. We can talk of it after dinner. In
fact, you may as well know that I asked you here to discuss your
position. We must have an understanding."

"I think you must intend it to be a pleasant one," said Brendon, "as
you have asked me to dinner."

"And to smoke the pipe of peace. There's the gong. Heigh-ho!"--he rose
rather sluggishly--"gout is stiffening my limbs."

It struck Brendon that his grandfather looked old and very haggard. He
had lost his fresh color, his eyes were sunken, and the defiant curl
was out of his enormous mustache. He moved slowly toward the door, and
George felt sorry to see him so lonely. He knew that Derrington hated
all his relatives, and that his relatives cordially hated him, so
there was none to comfort the old man in his declining years. Walter
Vane was less than nothing, as his mere presence served to irritate
his grandfather.

Moved by a sudden impulse, George made no remark, but moved to the
elder man's side and offered his arm. The footman was holding the door
open, and Derrington could not express, even by a look, the
satisfaction he felt. With a surly grunt he took Brendon's arm, but
George guessed by the warm pressure that Derrington was pleased. That
simple, kindly movement served to draw the two men closer together,
and they sat down to an excellent dinner in good spirits.

It was quite a banquet, for Derrington lived in a most expensive
manner, and in spite of a sadly diminished income he would never abate
the splendor of the style in which he had lived all his life. The
table was a round one, laid with exquisite taste, and was placed under
a kind of velvet tent, which shut off the rest of the room and made
the meal particularly cosy. George, who had a taste for art, admired
the finish of the silver, the beauty of the Crown Derby service, the
glitter of the cut glass, which was unusually massive, and the
adornments of the table. It was a perfect little banquet, and after
the somewhat stale food of his lodgings, George enjoyed the meal
greatly. Derrington himself did not eat much, but he took great
pleasure in seeing George enjoy his viands.

"I had a fine appetite myself once," he observed; "you have inherited
it from me. Never be ashamed to eat, George--it means good work. The
man who starves himself, starves his public."

"You mean in the quality of his work, sir?"

"Of course. Poor living means poor thoughts."

"Well," said Brendon, with a smile, "I don't think rich living means
rich thoughts."

"Certainly not. Whoever said it did? Remember the saying of the
Greeks, and, egad, they were the only people who ever knew how to
live."

"What saying is that?" asked George.

"Moderation is the corner-stone of dissipation."

"Ah, that's good, sir. But were the Greeks ever dissipated?"

"No, because they followed the advice of that epigram. George, if you
expect me to explain epigrams I shall lose my respect for you."

"Have you any, sir?"

"You wouldn't be here if I had not," said Derrington, pulling his huge
mustache. "There's your Cousin Walter----"

"My cousin, sir?"

"Of course. You know that." George thought it wiser, to say nothing,
although it was strange that Derrington should mention the
relationship himself. The old man gave him a quick glance and
continued: "As I say, there is your Cousin Walter. I wouldn't ask him
to dinner on any account. He's a fool, sir."

"He means well."

"If there is one class of people I hate more than another it is that
Pharisaic lot who mean well. They make all the mischief."

"With the best intentions," put in Brendon, taking some wine.

"Best intentions are fatal. How many plans have come to naught because
of best intentions? Take some of that port."

"No more, thank you, sir."

"I insist. There are walnuts."

"I don't mind the nuts, but the port----" George shook his head.

Derrington, at his own table, was too polite to press the matter, but
he scored up another victory to Brendon's strong will. More, he passed
off the matter with a laugh. "You have the hereditary gout, I see,
George, when you are afraid of a glass of port."

"It's not that, sir, but I drink very little. I work on milk."

"Bah!" Derrington made a wry face. "Then your work----"

"Is all the better for it. Those who drink beer think beer."

"And those who drink milk think cows, I should say."

"Your knowledge on that point prevents contradiction on mine."

Derrington chuckled. This was just the kind of epigrammatic reply he
relished. "You must enter the Diplomatic Service sir," said he,
looking approvingly from under his bushy brows.

"Don't you think I'm rather old?"

"Brains are never old, sir. And you have 'em. It's what the Diplomatic
Service in this country requires and what it never gets. I was in the
Service myself at one time."

"So I have heard," said Brendon, cracking nuts composedly.

"Eh! What did you hear?"

"You must excuse me at your own table, sir."

"Pooh, if you want to say anything disagreeable my own table is the
safest place you can say it at. I can't throw things at you."

"Still, a guest must be polite," argued George.

"I like my guests to be truthful."

"Very well, sir, if you will have it--and I feel that it would be bad
manners to refuse your request--it is said that you nearly set Europe
by the ears when you were ambassador."

Derrington roared. "I did--I did, and I wish I had brought about the
war I wanted. It would have done no end of good."

"Does war ever do good?" asked Brendon, doubtfully.

"Certainly. It stirs up things, and teaches men how to use their hands
and brains. Without war there is too much wrapping up in cotton-wool.
Don't tell me, George, that you aren't a soldier at heart, for nearly
all your ancestors fought for their country.

"And fought their country also, I believe."

"When they didn't get their rights," said Derrington, grimly. "I have
been a fighter myself all my life, and I've held my own."

"So they say, sir, and I admire you for it."

"Hah! Very good of you, I'm sure," said Derrington, ironically, "but
in my old age I can't hold my own, so I have to call in you."

George looked surprised. "Do you intend to do me the honor to ask for
my advice, sir?"

"Bless my soul, are you also without understanding, sir? Didn't I say
so when you first came?"

"Of course. I forgot."

"You shouldn't forget, though it's useful at times to do so."

"In what cases, sir?"

"Forget a woman's age, forget to talk about yourself, and forget your
relations if you can. Come," he added, seeing George laughing, "the
wine and food have thawed you. There's coffee in the library, and we
can talk over our cigars. Up I get. George, your arm."

He not only asked for it, but took it with marked pleasure. The
footman in attendance returned to the servants' hall to state that the
Old Devil (the domestic name for Derrington) had quite taken to the
new young gentleman. Had the servants known who George was, they would
have had a long gossip. As it was, they simply said that the Old Devil
was always taking fancies and soon grew tired.

Meanwhile, Brendon was seated in a comfortable chair, enjoying one of
the best cigars he had ever placed between his lips. At his elbow
smoked a cup of Mocha, and in the chair on the other side of a roaring
fire of sea-timber smiled Lord Derrington. He looked a grim and
determined old gentleman as he bent his shaggy brows on his grandson.
He was becoming more and more delighted with the young man. "I shall
have a prop for my old age at last," he thought. "Damme, he's a fine
fellow! Ah, youth! youth!"

George was very comfortable, and also felt grateful for the kindness
which his grandfather was showing him. At the same time he felt as
though he were acting wrongly in hobnobbing with a man who
persistently blackened his mother's memory. But Brendon thought he saw
signs of repentance in Derrington, and wished to improve the situation
if he could. It was difficult for him to quite forgive the old rascal,
but he was sorry for his loneliness and haggard looks. Besides, George
was a Christian in more than merely going to church on Sunday.

"I suppose you wondered when you received my invitation," said
Derrington, in his hardest tone.

"I did, sir. I wondered very much."

"And you felt inclined to refuse."

"I had almost made up my mind to."

"Why did you change your mind?"

George pondered, and looked again at his neat shoes. "Well, sir," said
he, after a pause, "I thought that after a dinner we might come to
understand each other better, and I am anxious for peace."

"And for recognition of your birth."

"Naturally. The one included the other."

"Does that mean you will fight till you get what you want?"

"Yes," said George curtly, and then closed his lips with a firm
determination to give battle if necessary. At the same time he felt it
was rather awkward after eating Derrington's food. A sudden impulse
made him rise.

"What's the matter now?" asked Derrington, not moving.

"Well, sir," burst out Brendon with a candor unusual in him, "I have a
feeling that we are going to quarrel, and in your own house, and after
that very excellent dinner I don't want to behave rudely. It will be
better to postpone this talk to some other time."

"Not a bit of it," said Derrington, quietly; "we are relatives, and
quarrels between relatives do not count. Sit down. I have something
important to say to you."

George sat down and prepared for the worst. "We'll leave the question
of your birth alone for the present," said the elder in a hard tone.
"At this moment I wish to talk of Mrs. Jersey's death."

"Yes;" said Brendon, looking down.

"Also about your father's death."

"What has that to do with this, sir?"

"I believe the one is connected with the other."

George remembered what Bawdsey had said. "I've heard that remark
before," he observed.

"Of course. That detective I employed to watch you made it."

"He did. I think you trust that man too much, sir," said Brendon,
after a pause.

"Do you? I thought he was a friend of yours?"

"Oh--" George shrugged his shoulders--"I saved his life, but that does
not constitute friendship."

"I would fight a man who saved my life," said Derrington, grimly.

"Well, sir, I don't think Bawdsey is worthy of your confidence."

"I know he isn't. But you see I can't help myself."

George looked up quickly. "Blackmail?"

"Something of that sort. I intend to trust my own flesh and
blood--that is, I intend to tell you all I know connected with the
Jersey case, and ask you to help me to get the better of Bawdsey."

"I shall do my best, sir."

"Willingly?"

"Assuredly, sir."

Derrington was rather moved. "I have not behaved well, George."

"That's true enough, sir," said George, who was not going to be weak,
"but you can make amends by acknowledging that my mother was an honest
woman."

"I believe she was, George, for none but an honest woman could have
borne a son like you. But you see I know no more than you do where the
marriage took place."

"Do you acknowledge that there was a marriage?" said George, starting
to his feet. Derrington rose also, and the tall men faced one another.
Then the elder placed his hands on the shoulders of the younger, with
a look on his face which Brendon had never seen before. And certainly
the look was new to Derrington.

"My boy," said he, "I am sure there was a marriage. I am sure that you
are my legitimate heir, and, by Heavens! I intend to acknowledge you
as such before the week's out."

Brendon was so moved by this sudden recognition of all he longed for
that a sudden weakness seized him, and he sat down, covering his face
with his hand. Derrington thought the young man did so to conceal his
tears, but in reality George was putting up a short thanksgiving for
this wonderful and bloodless victory. His grandfather again touched
his shoulder. "My boy," he said again, and his voice was broken with
emotion, "I have behaved badly. I ask your pardon."

George put out his hand blindly and grasped that of his grandfather.
When it was once in the old man's grip he raised his grandson with a
jerk and made him look him in the face. "You forgive me?" he asked.

"With all my heart and soul," said Brendon, quietly, and after another
handshake they resumed their seats. The scene which both had dreaded
was over, and now they sat like two friends who had known each other
for years. George felt that as Derrington had done justice to the
memory of his mother, and Derrington was pleased to feel that he now
had a grandson and heir worthy of his name.

"I can marry Dorothy now," said Brendon, with a contented sigh.

"If my influence can help you--yes." Derrington paused and shook his
head. "But there is a lioness in the path, George."

"Mrs. Ward?"

"Exactly. She will move heaven and earth to prevent the marriage."

George looked puzzled. "I see no reason why she should oppose it, if I
am acknowledged as your heir."

"Nor do I. I thought myself that it was simply the money she wanted,
and if you were the son-in-law she would not get her claws on the
gold. But there is more in it than that. She seeks revenge."

"On me? I have never harmed her."

"It's a vicarious revenge. I believed that woman loved your father,
George, and that he slighted her; that is why she wants to visit his
sin--as with a vindictive spirit she may regard it--on you."

"Did Mrs. Ward know my father, sir?" asked George, quickly.

"Yes. She met him at San Remo."

"Then she knew he was murdered?"

"Of course. I saw Mrs. Ward the other day, George. She came here to
force me to harm you and to consent to Walter marrying Dorothy."

"Oh! You never agreed to that."

"I have answered her challenge by asking you to dinner and will
acknowledge you my heir. Mrs. Ward will then try and make mischief."

"Can she do so?"

"Yes. She knows that I was in Mrs. Jersey's house on that night."

"And you were, sir?"

Derrington made a most unexpected reply. "No, I was not."




CHAPTER XVII

LORD DERRINGTON EXPLAINS


George was rather puzzled to reconcile the apparent contradiction in
Derrington's speech. The old gentleman saw his bewilderment, and
before the young man could speak he anticipated his question.

"You are perplexed," he said quietly. "I thought you would be. To
explain myself clearly it will be better to tell you the whole story
from the beginning."

"What story?"

"The story of your mother's marriage and of my quarrel with your
father. Do not be afraid, I shall say nothing to hurt your pride."

George nodded. "I am sure of that. We are friends now."

Derrington was much gratified by this speech. But he merely
acknowledged it with a grunt and began his family history at once.

"Your father and I never got on well," he said frankly, "and I fear it
was my fault. I wanted Percy to obey me implicitly, and as he was of
an age to judge for himself he objected. You would have done the like
in his case."

"I certainly should, sir. Every man should judge for himself."

"If he has brains to do so. But I fear Percy was not overburdened with
brains. He was gay and thoughtless and thriftless. Your talents,
George, come from your mother. She must have been a remarkable woman."

"So Mr. Ireland says."

"Pooh! he was in love with her, and a man in love is incapable of
giving an opinion. However, I saw your mother several times when she
sang, although I never met her to speak to. She was very beautiful and
had an intellectual face. Yes, George, it is from her that you inherit
your brain. From my side of the family you inherit a strong will and a
propensity to fight. There is Irish blood in our veins," said
Derrington, grimly.

"Was my father a fighter?"

"In a way, yes. But he had not a strong will, save in resisting me."

George smiled and said nothing, but he privately thought that if Mr.
Percy Vane could hold his own against Derrington he must have had a
stronger will than the old gentleman gave him credit for.

"However, to continue," pursued Derrington, pushing away his empty
cup. "Percy saw Miss Lockwood, he fell in love with her, and finally
he eloped. I wrote him a letter saying he was to return or I would
never see him again. He declined to return, and remained on the
Continent with his wife. I never did see him again," added Derrington,
quietly, "for three years later he was murdered at San Remo."

"In his letter to you did my father say he was married?"

"He did; but at the time, as he did not say where the marriage was
celebrated, I thought he mentioned it out of obstinacy."

George colored. "I don't see why you should have so misjudged my
mother," he said hotly. "Admitting that she was not born in the
purple, she was in a good position and had no reason to run away with
my father."

"She was in love with him, I believe."

"Even then she would not have eloped, unless it was to be married."

Derrington nodded. "You are perfectly right," he said; "I tried to
disbelieve in the marriage, but in my own heart I knew there was one.
I have behaved very badly, George."

"You have, sir. But as we are now reconciled the less said about the
thing the better. You are quite sure you do not know where the
marriage was celebrated?"

"No, George, I do not. After the death of your father I tried to find
out, but it was impossible. Had I really seen the register of the
marriage I should have acknowledged you as my heir. As a matter of
fact," added Derrington, with a burst of candor, "I did not trouble
much to search, as I feared lest the marriage should be verified."

George wriggled in his seat. "Let us say no more," he said.

"Very good. I have confessed my sins and I have received absolution
from you. At the present moment we will leave the murder of your
father at San Remo alone, and come to the appearance of Mrs. Jersey in
my life. You were with your grandfather Lockwood in Amelia Square. I
had constituted my second son my heir, and I had relegated to
obscurity the escapade of my son Percy. All was nicely settled, in my
humble opinion, when Mrs. Jersey appeared to make trouble. That was
eight years after your father's death."

"Where was she in the mean time?"

"I cannot say. She told me nothing of her history, but from a word or
two which she let slip I believe she must have been in the United
States. Why she went there from San Remo, or for what reason, I cannot
say. She came here to see me--we had an interview in this very
room--to demand money."

"What threat did she make?"

"That she would tell where the marriage took place,"

"And you bribed her to keep silence?"

Derrington winced at the scorn in his grandson's voice and took a turn
up and down the room. "I am no saint, I admit," he said, "and at the
time, George, I did not know that you would turn out such a fine
fellow. I dreaded a scandal, and there was your uncle to be
considered. I had made him my heir."

"And what about me, sir? Were the sins of my father to be placed on my
shoulders?"

"I have admitted that I was in the wrong," said Derrington,
impatiently, "spare me further sermons."

"I beg your pardon," said George, quietly. "But please touch as
lightly as possible on these matters. We will admit that you acted
according to your lights."

"False lights," said his grandfather, sadly. "However, we need speak
no more on that particular point. Mrs. Jersey said that she knew where
the marriage was celebrated, adding that if I did not give her an
annuity she would go to Lockwood and help him to prove that you were
my legitimate grandson and heir."

"Did she say if the marriage was celebrated in England or abroad?"

"No, sir; Mrs. Jersey was a remarkably clever woman, and if my son
Percy had married her she would have made a man of him."

"Then she really was in love with my father?"

"Very deeply in love--as she told me herself. But she did not regard
his memory with such veneration as to desire to aid his son. She was
content that you should lose your rights, provided that I paid her an
annuity. I tried in vain to learn from her where the marriage had been
celebrated. She refused to open her mouth, so I allowed her an annuity
of five hundred a year----"

"That was a large sum," interposed George.

Derrington shrugged his shoulders. "Much larger than I could afford,
my good sir," he said, "but Mrs. Jersey dictated her own terms. I
arranged that the money should be paid through my lawyers, and she
vanished."

"Where to?"

"I can't say. She might have gone to rejoin Mr. Jersey if there ever
was such a person. She sent a messenger regularly to the office of my
lawyers for the money, but did not trouble me in any way. Her next
appearance was shortly after the death of your grandfather."

"What did she want this time?"

"To set up a boarding-house in Amelia Square. She said that her life
was lonely--a remark which made me think Mr. Jersey was a myth--and
that she wanted company. I expect she learned in some way that I was
buying old Lockwood's house."

"Why did you buy it?"

"I have a lot of property in that district, and I wanted to round it
off with this house. Ireland, in his rage at me for my treatment of
your mother, would not have sold it to me. I bought the house through
an agent; Mrs. Jersey must have heard of the purchase, for it was then
that she came to me and asked me to set her up in the house as a
landlady."

"I wonder why she did that," said George, thoughtfully.

"She was lonely, I understand."

George looked at his shoes. "As Eliza Stokes she lived in that house
along with my mother previous to the elopement. I expect she had a
kind a affection for it."

"Well, whatever her reason was, I did what she asked. She agreed to
pay me a rent, and her money was as good as any one else's. Besides, I
felt that as my tenant I could keep her under my own eye. When she was
away I never knew but what she might die and part with the secret to
some one else, who might come on me for blackmail, also. I thought it
best Mrs. Jersey should have the house so she went into it and used
the old furniture. I don't deny but what she was a good business woman
and made the house pay. At all events she was never behindhand with
her rent."

"I wonder she paid you any at all."

"Oh, she had her annuity and was afraid of pressing me too hard. I
refused to let her the house on a seven years' lease. She only had it
from year to year, and in that way I kept a check on her. She knew if
I once lost my temper that I would throw her over and acknowledge you
as my heir."

"I wish you had done so," said Brendon, moodily; "it would have saved
a lot of trouble."

"I do so now," replied Derrington, testily; "better late than never.
Well, Mrs. Jersey lived and flourished for fifteen years. I tried to
find you out, George, lest she should get at you----"

"Oh, was that why you offered to make me an allowance?"

"It was. I intended to give you a yearly income on condition that you
went to Australia; then I could be sure that Mrs. Jersey would not
seek you out. But you refused my offer and disappeared."

"I went to college under the name of Brendon," observed George.

"And that is why Mrs. Jersey never found you, and why I could not come
across you until you put those advertisements about the marriage into
the papers. It was that which----"

"Yes, so Bawdsey told me. You had me watched."

"I did," said Derrington, "and in that way I found out that you were
going to stop in Mrs. Jersey's house."

"How did you learn that, sir?" asked George in surprise. "I never told
any one."

"Oh, yes, you told Lola."

"So I did," said Brendon, quickly; "she bothered me to come and see
her, and I said that I was going to stop in the neighborhood of Amelia
Square with a friend and would call on her the next day. I expect she
told this to Bawdsey.

"Exactly, and Bawdsey told me. I was afraid lest you should make Mrs.
Jersey confess. I wrote to her and asked her to see me. She refused to
come to my house, so I made up my mind to seek her out in Amelia
Square. I arranged by letter with her to call about eleven o'clock at
her place and see her secretly."

"Why secretly, and why at night?"

"Can't you see, George? My height and figure make me so conspicuous
that I knew I would be recognized if I went in the daytime, and then
people would ask themselves why Lord Derrington went to see a
lodging-house keeper."

"You could have put it down to her being a tenant."

"Ah," said Derrington, grimly, "I never thought of that. I received a
note from Mrs. Jersey saying she would wait for me on Friday evening
at eleven o'clock in her sitting-room; it was a foggy night, if you
remember."

"Very foggy. I suppose you traced the house by means of the red light
over the door."

"I did not trace the house at all," said Derrington, quietly. "I did
not go near the house."

"But I saw you," insisted George.

"You saw my coat and a man with my tall figure, and having my
association with yourself in your head you jumped to the conclusion
that the figure was me."

"Then if not you, who was the man?"

"Bawdsey!" said Derrington, curtly.

George stared. "In your coat?" he said incredulously.

"It seems strange," said Derrington, "but the fact is that Bawdsey is
one of the few who have got the better of me in my life. It was in
this way that he prevented me from seeing Mrs. Jersey. On that night I
visited him at his rooms, which then were in Bloomsbury. I desired to
tell him that I intended to see Mrs. Jersey and to warn her against
revealing anything. I don't suppose the warning was needed, as she
knew when she was well off. But the fact is, Mrs. Jersey was not in
good health and was feeling compunction about keeping you out of your
rights. I learned from Bawdsey that Mrs. Jersey had written out a
confession of the whole matter and that she intended to leave this to
her niece, Margery Watson, so that I might be forced to continue the
lease of the house."

George uttered an ejaculation. "I thought from what Margery said that
there was some such confession," he remarked, "but it is missing; it
was not found among her papers after her death. Unless Miss Bull took
it and forced you to----"

"No," interrupted Derrington, vigorously, "she came here quietly and
put the case of the poor girl to me. She also undertook that the rent
would be paid regularly, and that through Miss Watson she would manage
the house. I was quite satisfied with the existing arrangements, and,
moreover, thought that, if such a confession were found, out of
gratitude Miss Watson might bring it to me."

"If Miss Bull had told her to she would have done so but not
otherwise," said George; "she is under Miss Bull's thumb."

"The best place she could be, George. The girl is a born idiot from
what I saw of her. However, you know why I renewed the year-by-year
lease. Where the confession is I have no idea; but the person who
holds it will certainly make use of it some day to extort money, and
then we will learn who killed Mrs. Jersey."

"I dare say. The assassin must have taken the papers. Well?"

Derrington proceeded with his account of his doings on that night. "As
I said, I went to see Bawdsey at his rooms. I took a cab, and as the
fog was thick I had considerable difficulty in finding the place. The
rain and fog chilled me, for I am not so young as I was, and when I
arrived I was shivering. But I was too anxious to tell Bawdsey about
Mrs. Jersey, to trouble. He heated some water to give me a glass of
hot whisky. While the water was boiling I told him, I was going to see
Mrs. Jersey. He asked me how I could get into the house without being
admitted by one of the servants and thus run a chance of my visit
being known."

"Did it never strike him that Mrs. Jersey expected you and would admit
you when you rang?"

"Yes, it did strike him; but he knew that I didn't want any one to
know that she had a visitor so late at night."

"I don't know why you took all these precautions, sir."

Derrington smiled dryly. "Perhaps they were rather unnecessary, but I
thought it best to be on the safe side. As a matter of fact, I had a
latch-key."

"I thought that Mrs. Jersey never allowed latch-keys."

"This one came to me when I bought the house, and was given to me by
the agent. I told Mrs. Jersey I had it and that I would let myself in.
She expected me at eleven."

"I know she did," said George, "for on that night she asked the
boarders to be in bed by eleven, and broke up her party at ten. I
wondered if she was having any one to meet her then."

"She was expecting me. It was after ten when I told Bawdsey, and I
explained to him that I had a latch-key. He gave me the whisky, and,
being chilled, I drank it. Then I fell asleep."

George looked up suddenly. "The whisky was drugged," he guessed.

"It was," assented Derrington, "and while I was insensible Bawdsey
took the latch-key out of my pocket and put on my coat. He is rather
my height, so with that and the fur coat I expect he passed himself
off as me to Mrs. Jersey until she saw his face."

"When she did, she would have nothing to do with him. Although," added
George, "he was an old boarder in the house."

"Wait till I tell you the rest," said Derrington, "and then you can
give an opinion. When I woke it was after twelve. I never suspected
that the whisky had been drugged, and thought that it was some sort of
illness. Bawdsey was in the room when I awoke. He did not tell me that
he had been to Mrs. Jersey, and I now saw that it was too late to go.
He advised me to see her on the morrow, saying that it was doubtful if
you would speak to her on that night."

"I intended to wait till the next day, but, as a matter of fact, I
became anxious to see if any one was with her, and I went down the
stairs."

"By means of that secret door. Bawdsey told me."

"Well, I crept downstairs, and saw--as I thought--you. It was, of
course, Bawdsey. He was standing at the door of the sitting-room. I
was afraid lest you--as I thought it was--should see me, so I went
upstairs again."

"And Bawdsey left the house. However, I never suspected him. I went
home and found Mrs. Ward waiting for me. She came to tell me that she
had heard from Dorothy that you purposed to stop with Train at Mrs.
Jersey's house, and came to warn me."

"How good of Mrs. Ward!"

"She is a dangerous woman, George. I threw my coat on yonder sofa, and
she sat near it. Feeling something in the pocket, her curiosity led
her to take out the something when I was absent from the room. It was
a stiletto."

George started from his seat. "A stiletto?"

"Yes." Derrington opened the drawer in his desk and took out the
weapon which Mrs. Ward had brought. "This was between the fur and the
lining of the coat. What with the weight of the coat and the position
of this weapon lying along the bottom of the coat, I never suspected
it. I brought it home quite unconsciously. Mrs. Ward found it, took it
away with her, and came the other day to accuse me of having murdered
Mrs. Jersey."

"How dare she do such a thing?"

"Oh, Mrs. Ward is capable of all things! However you can see from what
I tell you what happened. Bawdsey put the stiletto in my coat and
either forgot to take it out or left it there so that I might be
incriminated."

"Did he tell you this?"

"He told me, when I rebuked him too sharply, that he could get me into
trouble, and explained how he had been in the house. He also referred
to the stiletto. I denied that I had seen it, and it was only when
Mrs. Ward brought it the other day that I saw that this part of
Bawdsey's story was true."

"What did you do?"

"I accused him of having killed the woman."

"What did he say?"

"He denied that he had done so. He declared that he went to Mrs.
Jersey's sitting-room door close upon twelve, having let himself in
noiselessly by the front door. He discovered Mrs. Jersey lying dead,
as she was found in the morning. On the floor was the stiletto.
Fearing lest he should be accused of the crime, Bawdsey left the house
quickly, but took the stiletto with him so that he might find out who
had done the deed. He changed his mind or left it by mistake in my fur
coat."

"Did he ask money?"

"No. He has not done so yet. But he told me very plainly that no one
could prove that he had been in the house on that night, and that if
he had been seen, the coat would make people think it was I."

"Exactly what I did think," said George.

"Well, I had to hold my tongue for you see I was in a most awkward
position and I could prove nothing. I bluffed Mrs. Ward, but if the
matter came into court things would look extremely unpleasant for me."

"I can see that," said Brendon, "but Bawdsey----"

"He has made himself secure, as no one can prove that he was in the
house on that night. Even you thought it was I. I can't say for
certain if Bawdsey committed the murder, or if he really did find the
woman dead as he said, but he swears to his innocence. As yet he has
not made any use of his power, but I am quite sure that he will try
and get money out of me, so I have asked you here to advise me about
the matter."

"Do you think Bawdsey has the confession?"

"He may have. If so, he knows where the marriage was celebrated!"

Brendon mused for a time. "I think it best to do nothing at the
present moment," he said. "Bawdsey is friendly to me, as I saved him
from being run over. If he thought I knew this he might turn crusty
and make trouble. Better wait."

"For what?" asked Derrington, restlessly.

"To see what he will do. If he does blackmail you, call me in."

Derrington drew a long breath. "Yes. I think you are right," he said.
"We will wait. But I don't trust that man."

"He's a scoundrel," said George, "but I know how to conquer him."




CHAPTER XVIII

MISS BULL'S STORY


Miss Bull was alone in the sitting-room of the late Mrs. Jersey.
Margery had gone out shopping, and the old maid, left to her own
resources, amused herself, as usual, with playing Patience. With the
exception of a few old ladies in the drawing-room the house was empty,
and Miss Bull found the quiet very soothing. After a time she grew
weary of the game and seated herself in an armchair to meditate.

Her thoughts were sad. Here she was, an old spinster dragging out a
miserable old age in a London lodging-house, while her sister lived
and fared sumptuously in accordance with her position. Miss Bull
looked back on all the trials she had passed through, and wondered how
she had been able to stand them. For a moment a revolt took place in
her breast at the cruel fate she had endured, but the feeling died
away, and she relapsed into the patient misery which was her usual
frame of mind. "It can't last much longer," said Miss Bull, with a
sigh. "I am getting old, and the end is coming. The sooner the
better."

As she gave vent to this dreary sentence there was a ring at the door.
Miss Bull paid little attention to it, as she never had any visitors.
But this day proved to be an exception, for George was admitted into
the room. He advanced cordially toward Miss Bull.

"I have come to see you again, you see," said Brendon.

Miss Bull gave him her hand with a great deal of pleasure, and invited
him to be seated. Now that she had thawed towards George she treated
him kindly, and her face wore a less stony look. As the sun melts the
frost, so did the reserved nature of the old maid melt when in the
sunshine of Brendon's presence. More than that, Miss Bull actually
congratulated herself on Margery's absence, as it gave her a chance of
having the company of George all to herself.

"I am very glad to see you, Mr. Brendon," she said, ringing the bell.
"You will have some tea?"

"Thank you," replied Brendon, who thought she might thaw still more
under the influence of the tea-urn. "I suppose you wonder why I have
come again so soon?"

Miss Bull smiled in her calm way. "You have come to make further
inquiries likely to forward your fight for your birthright?"

George laughed. "There's no need for that, thank God," said he; "my
grandfather has agreed to acknowledge me."

"Then there was a marriage?"

"I cannot be certain of that yet. How do you know about that?"

Miss Bull answered quietly: "You told me last time you were here that
you were Lord Derrington's grandson, and I heard that there was some
doubt about the legitimacy."

"I know it was common talk at one time," replied Brendon, satisfied
with this explanation. "Did Mrs. Jersey ever speak about it?"

"No. She never did. What did she know about it?"

"I think you can best answer that question, Miss Bull."

George looked hard at her, and a faint tinge of color crept into her
face. Before she could reply with a counter-question the servant
brought in the tea. Miss Bull waited to supply George with a cup
before she spoke. By that time the servant had left the room, and the
door, as Miss Bull assured herself, was closed.

"I don't know to what you allude, Mr. Brendon."

"Perhaps if I allude to your life in San Remo you----"

Miss Bull started to her feet and the cup she held fell on the carpet.
"San Remo," she muttered.

"Yes, Miss Howard," said Brendon, using her real name purposely.

The little old maid put one thin hand to her head. "Miss Howard!"

"The daughter of the late General Howard!" said George.

"My father was a general."

"He was. General Howard. You are Miss Jenny Howard."

Miss Bull started and then sat down. Her face expressed pain. "He used
to call me Jenny. Jenny Howard. Yes, there was a happy girl of that
name, but she--she died."

"Not at all," said Brendon, briskly, to arouse her from this dreamy
state. "She lived and changed her name to Bull."

The woman pushed back her white hair and made an effort to be calm.
But her lip quivered. "Why have you come here to awaken these painful
memories?" she asked.

"Because I wish to know how my father came by his death."

"I do not know--indeed, I do not know," moaned Miss Bull, putting out
her hand as though to ward off the thought.

"You may not know for certain, but you have some idea. Your sister,
Mrs. Ward----"

Miss Bull's face flushed crimson, and she drew a deep breath. "Oh,
it's Violet's work, is it?" she said, and her eyes grew hard. "And
pray, Mr. Brendon, has she sent you to cross-question me?"

"No. I come on my own behalf. You knew my father?"

"Percy Vane. Yes, I knew him. He loved me---ah, indeed he did! That
night he asked me to be his wife, and had he not been murdered----"

"Did he ask you when he was taking you home?" asked George, wondering
how Miss Bull would have behaved as his stepmother.

"Taking me home? He never did that on the night of the ball."

"Your sister, Mrs. Ward----"

"I have no sister. I disown Violet. She is a wicked woman!"

George was quite of this opinion, yet for the sake of Dorothy he
dissented. "She has her good points, Miss Bull.

"No! no! She has no good points. She is selfish, vain, cruel, and
deceitful. A child of the devil. How do you know that I am her sister?
and how did you come to learn my name?"

"Lord Derrington told me, and it was told to him by Mr. Ireland."

"Your guardian." Miss Bull tapped her hand on the woodwork of her
chair. "He recognized me when I called to see him on that day about
the lease. But he promised to hold his tongue."

"He would have done so had he not been startled by meeting Mrs. Ward
and recognizing in her the woman who had left the ball with my
father."

"And Violet admitted this?"

"No. She said that you had left the ball with my father. It was you
who wore the blue domino and the holly sprig."

"Liar! Liar!" muttered Miss Bull; "but she is always the same. When I
saw her at the music-hall the other night her face wore the same false
smile. Oh, that I could see her punished as she deserves!"

"God will punish her, Miss Bull."

"He has delayed long," said the old maid with a bitter smile. "My
sister has enjoyed the good things of this life. She has had money,
position, praise, and all that a woman desires. As for myself--" She
looked round the room and burst into a bitter laugh. "Yet Jenny Howard
was always considered the prettier sister of the two."

"Then it really was Mrs. Ward who left the ball."

"It was. She lays the blame on my shoulders--" Miss Bull paused, and
her mouth worked nervously. "Does she accuse me of the crime?"

"No. She says that you left Mr. Vane at the gate of the hotel."

"Oh," muttered Miss Bull, "Percy came as far as that with her, did he?
And she said he left her at the door of the room where the ball was
being held. Liar! Liar! She always was. She always will be. Can the
leopard change his spots?"

By this time the ice in Miss Bull's nature had melted under the heat
of her indignation. She walked hurriedly up and down the room, her
eyes bright and her cheeks flushed. George was pleased to see this, as
he thought she was the more likely to tell the truth when thus moved
by emotion than if she had remained calm. Miss Bull was so angered by
the memory of her wrongs that she struck her hand against the
mantelpiece so as to inflict pain. The shock seemed to nerve her, for
she drew a long breath and returned to her seat. With her eyes fixed,
on George she began abruptly.

"Violet has told her story," she said, "now I will tell you mine. I
want to know, however, exactly what she said, in the exact words if
you can remember them."

"I did not hear her speak," confessed George; "it was my grandfather
and Mr. Ireland to whom she told the story."

"Story! Fable! Lie! Romance!" said Miss Bull, vehemently. "Well, tell
me what you can remember!"

This George did as concisely as possible, for he feared lest Margery
should interrupt the interview. Miss Bull listened with a downcast
face and pursed-up lips. Not a word did she say, but when George ended
she looked up with a bitter smile.

"She has simply put herself in my place," she said. "Wait!"

For a moment or so she tried to compose herself. Then she raised her
head and looked her visitor squarely in the eyes. "I am going to tell
the truth," said Miss Bull, bravely, "therefore I have no need to shun
your gaze. Mr. Brendon, I loved your father."

"So Mrs. Ward said."

"And Violet loved him also."

"He must have been a singularly attractive man," remarked Brendon,
wondering at this revelation. "My mother eloped with him; her maid was
in love with him, and now you and Mrs. Ward----"

"Oh, Violet really did not love him. It was simply a desire to take
him from me that made her behave as she did. Violet never loved any
one in her life, save the person she sees in the mirror every day. A
selfish woman, Mr. Brendon, and a wicked one."

This was no news to George, so he strove to coax her to tell him that
which he wished to know. "I don't quite understand, but if you will
relate the story----"

"I shall do so at once. You may as well know all, and know also what a
bad woman I have for a sister. If she was dying," cried Miss Bull,
vehemently, "I wouldn't raise a finger to save her life."

"We should forgive our enemies," hinted George.

"I can't forgive her. I never will forgive her. She ruined my life,
George Brendon, she ruined my life."

Brendon said nothing, and in a few moments Miss Bull composed herself
sufficiently to tell what she knew. "My father was General Howard,"
she said quietly, "and Violet was my only sister. We never got on
well together. Violet was jealous of admiration, and as I was said to
be prettier than she was she hated me intensely. Whenever any one
liked me Violet would do her best to take him away from me."

"I can quite believe that," said George, recalling Mrs. Ward's arts.

"She did not always succeed, however," continued Miss Bull, with a
flush. "I had my admirers also, and some I could keep. But when Violet
could manage it, she always took them away."

"You hinted that she took my father away," said Brendon.

"She did--at least she tried to. But if he had not been murdered I
should have been Mrs. Vane in spite of Violet's arts."

"Well, tell me how you came to San Remo and met my father."

"Oh, I knew him before that. We were six months at Como and saw your
father frequently then. He and the General used to talk politics. Mr.
Vane was always bringing us books and magazines, and we used to climb
Mount Bisbino. What a delightful summer that was! I remember you
then," she added, looking at George with interest. "You were scarcely
two years old--a dear, good, fair little fellow. I met you and the
nurse sometimes, and often carried you.

"Was the nurse's name Eliza Stokes?"

"No. It was--let me see, some Scotch name--Jane Fraser, I think."

"Ah! Then Eliza Stokes was not at Como?"

"I never saw her. Mr. Vane told me that you had had another nurse, but
that he had to dismiss her at Milan for impertinence."

George saw that Miss Bull was not keeping strictly to the truth, and
corrected her at once, "You knew Eliza Stokes at San Remo?"

"So I did, I quite forgot." Miss Bull put her hand to her head with a
puzzled air. "But since my illness I have forgotten so much. It is all
a blank to me. Tell me, Mr. Brendon, have you ever felt as though you
were a ghost?"

"No," replied George, keeping his countenance with difficulty. "I
don't think I ever experienced that feeling."

Miss Bull looked vaguely at the window. "It is a strange feeling,"
after which remark she lapsed into silence, still staring.

Brendon remembered that she had been in an asylum, and thought that
her mind was still weak. It might be that after all she had not told
an untruth, but had quite forgotten Eliza Stokes. George was confirmed
in his supposition by her next remark.

"Eliza Stokes. I remember. Mrs. Jersey."

"You knew she was Mrs. Jersey?"

"Yes. That was why I came to this house."

"Did you like her then?"

Miss Bull's eyes flashed. "She was another Violet. I hated her, oh,
how I hated her! I found her through my sister mentioning that Lord
Derrington had given her this house, so I came here to board."

"But your sister knows nothing about you. She says you ran away and
that it was supposed you were dead."

Miss Bull laughed bitterly. "My sister knows perfectly well that I
live here, but it suits her to disown the relationship. It is my wish
also, and for that reason I changed my name. No one would recognize
pretty Jenny Howard in poor Miss Bull." She paused for a moment and
then continued: "Yes. I knew that Eliza Stokes had become Mrs. Jersey,
and that is why I came here."

"But if you hated her----"

"I did--I did, but she was the only person who could talk about Mr.
Vane. She loved him also, but not as I did, and we have talked for
hours in this very room. We quarreled, certainly, but at times she was
very nice. I miss our talks greatly."

It really seemed as though Miss Bull was weak in the head. She
admitted to hating Mrs. Jersey, and yet she came to stop with her. It
might be that Mrs. Jersey looked after her as a kind of keeper and
that she acted the tyrant. At that moment, as though answering his
thought, Miss Bull made a sudden observation. "Mrs. Jersey knew that I
had been in an asylum. She would have sent me back if she could, the
vile woman! But I was never afraid of her, never. And she always
talked to me of Mr. Vane," concluded Miss Bull in a softer tone.

"Did she know who killed him?"

Miss Bull shook her head. "No. She never knew. No one ever knew. I
sometimes thought that Violet--but she declared that he left her at
the door of the ballroom."

"Miss Bull," said George, growing impatient of this disconnected
recital, "will you go on with your story?"

"Story--yes, it is a story--a sad romance." She passed her hand again
over her forehead as though wearied, and resumed with an effort. "Mr.
Vane left Como and came to Milan; afterward he went on to San Remo. My
father, who liked his society, joined him there. We stopped at the
Hotel d'Angleterre. Eliza Stokes was a housemaid there, and it was
while attending to our bedroom that she told me she had been your
nurse. She was a large, stout girl with red cheeks. As Mrs. Jersey she
was vastly improved, but as a girl----" Miss Bull shuddered in a prim
way and continued: "Yet, she had her admirers. A waiter, called George
Rates, wished to marry her. She had accepted him, but while within
sight of Mr. Vane she could not love him."

"How do you mean?"

"Well, Eliza used to spy on Mr. Vane and follow him in his walks. She
was quite insane about him. I told Mr. Vane, and he kept away from the
hotel. And George Rates was jealous of Eliza's love for Mr. Vane. But
he never loved her, nor Violet--he loved no one but me."

"And he told you so at the masked ball?"

"Yes. There was to be a masked ball, and both Violet and I were
anxious to go. We made a friend of Eliza and she got us two blue
dominoes. That we might recognize one another we each wore a sprig of
yellow holly. My father was supposed to know nothing about the matter,
but we told a young Oxford cousin of ours. He met us at the ball, and
afterward took Violet away. I found Mr. Vane, and we danced together.
He did not know me at first, but afterward, when we went into a quiet
room, I unmasked. He was vexed at first that I and Violet should come
to the ball unattended, as he said my father would be so angry, which
was quite true. Then he told me that he loved me, and asked me to
become his wife. I accepted, and he kissed me." Miss Bull paused,
moved by an emotion too deep for words. "I was fond of you as a baby,
George, and he--your father, knew I would be a good mother to you."

"Did he speak of his first wife--of my mother?"

"Yes. He told me how dearly he had loved her."

"Did he say where the marriage was celebrated?"

"No. I never thought to ask him. I always thought there was a
marriage--why should I not?--until I later heard that Lord Derrington
denied that such had taken place. But that was after I came out of the
asylum," added Miss Bull with a troubled air, "so it might be my
fancy."

"No. It is true. Lord Derrington did deny the marriage; but he now
recognizes that it took place. We wish to find where."

"I cannot help you, Mr. Brendon. Mr. Vane never mentioned it to me. He
told me that he loved me. Then he went away to get me an ice, and said
he would take me home and return for Violet. I waited, but as he did
not appear I went to look for him. He was gone----"

"With your sister?"

"Yes," said Miss Bull, clenching her fists. "Violet overheard a part
of our conversation. She had just come down from the box of the
Marchesa Beltrami----"

"That was where she unmasked and Mr. Ireland recognized her."

"She must have seen me with Mr. Vane," continued Miss Bull, taking no
notice of this interruption, "so she stole behind us and heard what we
were to one another. Then she slipped on her mask and followed Mr.
Vane. She said she did not want an ice, but that she desired to go
home at once. Mr. Vane wanted to wait for her----"

"For Violet?"

"Yes. He thought that I had run after him, and as Violet wore a blue
domino with the sprig of holly he fancied she was me."

"I understand. So he took her home."

"She said he left her at the door, and then came back to look for--for
Violet," said Miss Bull, contemptuously; "she disguised her voice and
he quite thought she was myself. But from what Mr. Ireland said Mr.
Vane saw Violet home to the gates of the hotel. I waited for a time,
and as your father did not come back I ran home alone. Violet was in
our bedroom and said that Mr. Vane had left her at the door of the
ballroom and had gone back for me. Then the next morning we heard of
the murder. I never knew, until you told me, how Violet had managed to
get Mr. Vane away from me."

"She tricked you," said George, sympathizingly.

"She tricked every one. When I heard of your father's death I fell
very ill. The world became a blank to me. When I came to myself I was
in an asylum. Then I grew better and was let out. My father died, and
an annuity was allowed to me. I heard about Mrs. Jersey taking this
house, and wishing for some one to talk to about your father I came
here, and here I have been ever since. A lonely woman, Mr. Brendon,
but I find Margery a great comfort."

"Then you do not know who killed my father?"

"No." Miss Bull shook her head. "He was struck down on the parade when
returning to the ballroom. It must have been after he saw my sister
home."

"Do you think Mrs. Ward knows the truth?"

"She might. Perhaps some one followed, and Violet might have been
mistaken for some person. I know there was a married woman in San Remo
deeply in love with Mr. Vane----"

"What an attractive man he must have been!"

"Oh, he was the handsomest man in the world," cried Miss Bull, with
genuine enthusiasm, "and so kind. No wonder Eliza Stokes loved him.
But he loved no one but me--no one but me."

"What did Eliza Stokes say when she heard of his death?"

"Oh, she almost went out of her mind! I did altogether," said poor
Miss Bull, with a wan smile; "and as they found her a nuisance in the
hotel she went away. George Rates went also."

"Did she marry him?"

"No. I asked her when I met her here as Mrs. Jersey. She said that she
returned to England and that Rates had been run over and killed in the
street. She then went to America and married Mr. Jersey. He died and
left her some money. Then she set up this house."

"So she said nothing of the annuity from Lord Derrington?"

"No. It wasn't to her interest to do so. She could hold her tongue
when she liked. We very often quarreled, but on the whole we were as
good friends as two women well could be who had loved the same man."

George rose to go. "Thank you for telling me so much, Miss Bull," he
said. "What was the name of the woman who loved my father?"

"Oh, she was a common woman who kept a shop. Velez was the name."

"Velez," cried George; and added to himself: "So that is how Lola
knows."




CHAPTER XIX

THE INQUIRY AGENT


As George stepped out of the front door he came face to face with
Bawdsey, who was mounting the steps. The man seemed excited, and
carried a carelessly folded newspaper which he had apparently been
reading. He did not seemed pleased to meet Brendon, and looked at him
in a suspicious manner.

"I didn't expect to see you here!" he said, with a certain degree of
roughness.

"I did not know that this house was interdicted to me," replied
Brendon, sharply. He liked neither the tone nor the peremptory manner
of Bawdsey, and, moreover, was not prepossessed in his favor by the
report which Lord Derrington had made of the man's duplicity. "I am
glad to meet you, however," continued George, "as I wish to have a few
words."

"I am too busy to give you any time," retorted Bawdsey, and tried to
enter the house.

"Nevertheless, you will give me a quarter of an hour," said George,
blocking the doorway with his stalwart form. "What I have to say
cannot be left until a more convenient period."

"I tell you I am busy, Mr. Brendon."

"And I tell you that I intend to have this interview," rejoined
Brewton, imperiously. "You talk a great deal about gratitude, Bawdsey,
yet you are unwilling to put yourself out for me in the least degree."

Bawdsey became penitent at once. "It is true, Mr. Brendon. But I am
very worried." He cast a glance at the newspaper in his hand.
"However, you have first call upon my time, so we will go to my room."

"That's as it should be."

No more words passed. Bawdsey mounted the stairs and led George into
the well-remembered room. Brendon took a chair, and Bawdsey, with an
anxious look, threw himself into another. The man's face was flushed,
his red hair was in disorder, and his eyes were bright. As a rule he
was calm and self-controlled, so George conjectured that something
particularly important must have occurred to upset him. However,
Bawdsey's troubles were none of his business, and he began talking at
once of his reason for seeking the interview. "I had a conversation
with Lord Derrington the other evening," he said deliberately, "and we
talked of you."

"Then you heard no good of me," replied Bawdsey, with a sneer. "Lord
Derrington does not like me."

"That matters little. No liking can exist between a man in Lord
Derrington's position and his paid servant."

"Oh, you call me that, do you, sir?"

"What else are you? Lord Derrington engaged you as his agent to watch
me, and that you have done."

"Not lately. I have given you a free hand."

"In any case I have a free hand," said George, loftily. "You were
grateful enough for my service in saving your life to release me from
your espionage, but had you not done so I should have taken means to
put a stop to your dogging my footsteps."

"You would not have known had I not told you, Mr. Brendon."

"Oh, yes, I should. In any case, I should have seen my grandfather,
and he would have told me."

"No, sir. He is your enemy."

"That is where you are wrong, Bawdsey. He is my friend."

The detective looked astonished. "Do you mean to say that Lord
Derrington has climbed down?" he demanded incredulously.

"It is strange, is it not," said George, in a bantering tone, "but, as
a matter of fact, after a long conversation, Lord Derrington and
myself came to understand one another. He intends to recognize me as
his heir."

"Has he then learnt where the marriage took place?" asked Bawdsey,
starting from his seat, and again glancing anxiously at the newspaper
which lay on a small table at his elbow.

"No. We have yet to find that out. But he is quite satisfied from the
hints of the late Mrs. Jersey that a marriage did take place, and he
wishes to make amends to me for his unjust conduct as regards my
mother's memory and myself."

"Whew! What means did you take to force him to recognize you?"

"I used no force at all," responded Brendon, very dryly.

"Lord Derrington would not climb down unless he were made to."

"As a matter of fact he did. The olive branch was held out by him. All
this is none of your business, Mr. Bawdsey, and I only tell it to you
to clear the ground for what I am about to say."

"It's something disagreeable, I bet," said Bawdsey, scanning the set
face of his visitor.

"Your penetration does you credit, sir. It is disagreeable."

Bawdsey settled himself comfortably in his chair. "Then the sooner we
grasp the nettle the sooner will the pain be over," he said, with
quite an Eastern wealth of parable. "But first, Mr. Brendon, I should
like to know your exact position."

"Oh, that is easily explained, and there is no reason why you should
not know what all London will know soon. Lord Derrington will join
with me in searching for the register of marriage, and meanwhile will
recognize me as his grandson and the heir to his estates."

"Not a very large income for a future peer," murmured Bawdsey.

George took no notice of this. "In a fortnight I leave my Kensington
rooms and take up my residence with Lord Derrington in St. Giles
Square. Then I shall assume my real name of George Vane."

"And you will marry Miss Ward, I suppose."

"That is entirely my business," said George, placidly. "You will gain
nothing by insolence, Bawdsey."

The man rose with a wounded air. "Upon my word, Mr. Vane," he said,
giving George his correct name to show that he recognized his new
position, "I have not the slightest intention of being insolent. I am
glad for your sake that things are as they are, and pleased for my
own, since Lola may now give up thoughts of you and turn to me."

"That's all very well, Bawdsey," said Brendon quietly. "You profess a
great friendship for me, but how can I trust you?"

"I have never deceived you yet."

"I have not given you the chance of doing so; but if the opportunity
offered, and it was convenient to you, I am quite sure you would sell
me--as the saying goes--to the highest bidder."

"Why should you doubt me?" asked Bawdsey, still wounded.

"I can only judge the future by the past, and since you are quite
ready to play Lord Derrington false----"

"Who says that?" cried the man, sitting down, but looking defiant.

"I say so. Lord Derrington has told me all."

"All what?" demanded Bawdsey, willfully ignorant.

"All that took place on the night when you came to this house to
impersonate him."

Bawdsey laughed, and his face cleared. "If that is your disagreeable
business, sir, I can easily put that to rights."

"Can you explain why you drugged him, why you threatened him?"

"I did not threaten him."

"Lord Derrington informed me that you threatened to get him into
trouble. That was why he consulted me, and that is why I have come to
tell you that if you fight Lord Derrington you will fight me also.
Lord Derrington is old, but I am young, and I am quite equal to
dealing with you."

"I never denied that," said Bawdsey, calmly. "I quite recognize that
you are a strong man, Mr. Vane, although it is not to my interest to
admit as much."

"That's your business," rejoined George, coolly. "I play with all my
cards on the table. What those are which you have concealed I do not
know, but I am quite prepared to play the game. And at the present
moment you need not call me by my father's name. I have not yet
assumed my position. When I do, George Vane will have nothing to do
with you."

"But George Brendon has," said Bawdsey, with a flash of his eyes.
"Don't press too hard, Mr. Brendon. I am willing to do you a service,
and you are misjudging me."

"I am sorry you should think so. Let us cease this bickering. I am
willing to hear what you have to say."

"If you are satisfied with my explanation, will you endeavor to get
Lola to marry me?"

"That has nothing to do with me."

"But you have influence with her."

"It shall not be used to make her miserable. I know nothing about you
save what my grandfather told me, and his report does not bias me in
your favor. For all I know you might make poor Lola the worst husband
in the world."

Bawdsey shrugged his shoulders. "Lola is well able to look after
herself," he said. "I think I mentioned that before. But if you are
satisfied with what I am about to tell you, will you help me?"

"I'll do my best," said George, impatiently. "Lola is sure to lose
this engagement sooner or later through her vile temper. I do not want
to see her on the streets again, and she may as well be supported by
you in a respectable manner as by any one else. Besides, as you truly
say, she can take care of her own skin. But I shall not advise her to
marry you unless you prove to me that you did not intend to blackmail
Lord Derrington."

"Nothing was further from my thoughts," said Bawdsey, earnestly; "it
was to my interest that your grandfather should hold his tongue about
my having been to this house----"

"He would not have known had you not told him voluntarily."

"Oh, yes, he would have discovered in some way. I thought it best to
be on the right side by confessing voluntarily what I had done. I said
I could get him into trouble--and I admit that I did threaten him so
far--simply to make him hold his tongue."

"You were afraid lest you should be accused of the crime?"

Bawdsey looked at George in surprise. "That possibility never crossed
my mind," he replied calmly. "I certainly did not kill the woman. Do
you think I did, Mr. Brendon?"

George shrugged his shoulders. "Going by circumstantial evidence----"

"Oh!" Bawdsey flipped away that objection with a snap of his fingers,
"that's all right; I will explain. No, Mr. Brendon; why I wished Lord
Derrington to be silent was that I might carry out my plans so as to
learn who killed Mrs. Jersey."

"Then you are looking after the case?"

"On behalf of Lord Derrington. He has an idea that the assassin became
possessed of a confession which Mrs. Jersey left behind her----"

"How do you know she left it?"

"Because I knew Mrs. Jersey very well, and, as I told you long since,
I was once a boarder here. One day she let slip that she had some one
in her power, and would leave the evidence of that power behind her so
that her niece might benefit. I told this to Lord Derrington. He
insisted that I should try and discover the assassin so as to get that
confession, which compromises him, back again. To spur me on he has
promised me a reward of a thousand pounds should I obtain the
confession and the conviction of the assassin. As I want money to
marry Lola, I am doing my best. I came to live here for that purpose.
Lord Derrington talking of my visit to the house on the night of the
crime would have jeopardized my plans therefore I was obliged--as you
say--to threaten him so as to make him keep silent. So far, do you
blame me, Mr. Brendon?"

"No," replied George, after some thought, "the end justifies the
means. But you might have adopted less rascally means."

"I have not adopted any. I have not asked Lord Derrington for money,
so I am not a blackmailer; nor do I intend to claim from him anything
but what is justly mine."

"And what is justly yours, if you please?"

"The reward of one thousand pounds for the discovery of the assassin."

"Oh! Have you learned who killed her?"

"Not yet, but I may learn. At present I confess I am in fault."

George pondered a little. So far Bawdsey spoke frankly enough; but he
could not help mistrusting him. However, since the man was in the
telling vein, he thought it best to betray no doubts lest Bawdsey
should turn rusty. "Well, the discovery is in your own hands," he
said, "and I sincerely trust you will gain that thousand pounds. I am
as unwilling as my grandfather that Mrs. Jersey's connection with this
unfortunate business should become public. I am perfectly convinced
that the person who took that confession stabbed the unfortunate
woman."

"Do you think so?" asked Bawdsey, stealing a glance at the newspaper.

George nodded. "The confession was written. I learned that much from
Margery. Mrs. Jersey told her it was a story. Well, as the confession
was not found among Mrs. Jersey's papers when she died, it must have
been taken by someone. But I can't think what interest such a thing
can have had for any one unless----"

"Unless what, Mr. Brendon?"

"Unless it contained the name of the person who assassinated my
father."

"How could Mrs. Jersey know that?"

"She was at San Remo when my father was killed; she loved him and she
used to follow him. How I learned these things, Bawdsey, does not
matter. But it is just possible that Mrs. Jersey--or Eliza Stokes as
she was then--might have some knowledge of who committed the crime. If
that was set down in her confession (as is highly probable), I can
quite understand that the original assassin killed her to gain a
dangerous document such as it undoubtedly was."

"Then you think that the assassin of your father was also the assassin
of Mrs. Jersey?"

"I fancy so, as I can explain the disappearance of the confession in
no other way. And if I remember rightly, Bawdsey, it was you who said
that the San Remo crime was connected with the one committed in this
house."

"I did say so," replied Bawdsey, thoughtfully. He pondered for a few
minutes and then looked up briskly. "Well, Mr. Brendon, that point
cannot be settled without proof, and there is no use our wasting time
in indulging in vain speculations. Let me tell you about the night I
went to see Mrs. Jersey."

"Go on," said Brendon, crossing his legs. "I am all attention."

"I knew before your grandfather came to see me that you were about to
pass the night here. Lola told me."

"Yes, I was foolish enough to tell her; though, to be sure, I had no
great reason to conceal my visit to Train. I never knew that a murder
would take place. So Lola told you?"

Bawdsey nodded. "She did. But I never intended to bother about the
matter, as I did not think there was anything in your visit. But Lord
Derrington came and put a different complexion on the affair. It was
his belief that you intended to force Mrs. Jersey into confessing
about the marriage."

"I came to appeal to her," said Brendon, dryly. "There was no thought
of forcing in my mind."

"Lord Derrington judged you by himself and thought there might be. I
rather agreed with him. Then, knowing his temper, I fancied if he went
to see Mrs. Jersey there would be a row and a scandal, and I did not
want that to happen. I was making a very good thing out of Lord
Derrington," admitted Bawdsey, frankly, "and if a scandal had taken
place my occupation would have been gone. I therefore determined to
drug him and to go myself."

"But why in his coat?"

"I thought that Mrs. Jersey might not admit me."

George pounced upon him at once. "There was no need that she should do
so. You took the latch-key my grandfather carried."

"Oh, you know that, do you?" said Bawdsey, composedly. "Then I may as
well be absolutely frank."

"It is your best course."

"Oh, I'm not on my trial, Mr. Brendon. It is only my friendship for
you that is making me speak out."

"I accept that excuse. Go on."

Bawdsey shrugged his shoulders to show his annoyance at the
uncompromising attitude of his visitor. "I feared lest Mrs. Jersey
should order me out of the house unless I could gain time by being
mistaken for Lord Derrington. I drugged the old gentleman, and then,
taking his coat and the latch-key, I went to see Mrs. Jersey."

"At what time were you there?"

"Some time before twelve. I cannot say for certain. Well, Mr. Brendon,
I let myself in with the latch-key, and I found the house by the red
light over the door. In former years it had been my custom to guide
myself in that way. I told Lola so."

"Why did you tell her that?"

"Oh, she knew that you were going late to the house and made a fuss
about the chance of your being lost in the fog. I said that probably
Train would tell you of the red light, and that you could guide
yourself by that."

"Humph. Lola was always unnecessarily kind," said George. "Well?"

"Well, I closed the door softly and went into the sitting-room."

"You knew where that was?"

"Of course. Don't I tell you I once lived in this house? I entered the
sitting-room. The lamp was burning, and Mrs. Jersey was seated at the
table." Bawdsey shuddered. "There is no need to tell you more. I left
the room at once, for the sight horrified me."

"Why did you pause in the hall?"

"I thought I heard a footstep on the stairs, and the shock gave me one
of my fits--the fear of open spaces, you know. How did you come to
learn that I paused in the hall?"

"Because I had come down the stairs to see who was with Mrs. Jersey."

"Ah! Then it must have been your footstep I heard," said the
detective. "Well, I soon recovered, and left the house."

"What about the stiletto?"

"It was lying on the floor near the table. I saw it glittering in the
lamplight. As there was blood on it and I saw the wound, I knew that
Mrs. Jersey had been killed by it. I slipped it into my pocket with a
vague idea that thereby I might trace the assassin."

"Did you leave it purposely in the coat?"

"No," said Bawdsey, frankly. "I did not. I was so moved and--as a
woman would say--flustered by the death, that I forgot all about it.
Lord Derrington woke up and went home. I said nothing about the murder
to him at the time. I had not the nerve. It was only after he departed
that I remembered the stiletto. I thought he might make a row and
accuse me of the crime. But he said nothing, and I judged it wise to
let sleeping dogs lie. So that is all I can tell you, Mr. Brendon, and
you will see that I am not such a bad man as you try to make out."

"Oh, you have spoken clearly enough," said George. Then after a pause,
"Yes, I think you are honest, so far as I can judge. I trust you."

Bawdsey looked delighted. "Will you have a glass of wine with me to
show that?" he asked rising.

"On the Arab principle of bread and salt?" said Brendon. "Certainly."

Bawdsey nodded in a pleased manner, and went to his sideboard at the
end of the room. George mechanically took up the newspaper. His eyes
were caught by a cross-heading--"Strange Affair in an Essex Church,"
and by the words "destruction of the registers." Just as he was about
to glance over the article, never thinking what it meant to him,
Bawdsey returned with the wine and two glasses. He uttered an
exclamation of dismay when he saw the paper in George's hand.

"Hang it, I never meant you to see that!" he said.

"Why not?" replied George. "Is it this news about a lady trying to
tear the registers?" He started and looked at Bawdsey, who was uneasy
and pale. "It's Lola!" said George.

"No, and yet--why should you not know? I believe it is Lola, though no
name is mentioned."

George picked up the paper again and read rapidly. No name was
mentioned, as it was said that the strange lady who had been arrested
refused to give any name. It seemed that she went to Wargrove Church
and asked to see the registers for a certain year--the registers of
marriage. The sexton took the fee and showed the books. Then it
appeared that the strange lady searched for an hour. The sexton left
the vestry for a few minutes. When he returned he saw that she had
torn a page out of the book. Being taken by surprise she had tried to
conceal her theft, but the sexton seized her, rescued the torn page,
and called for assistance. The end of it was that the strange
lady--who was described as having a foreign air--was arrested and
placed in prison. "It is Lola," said George, breathlessly.

"Yes," assented Bawdsey, also pale. "She evidently tried to destroy
the evidence of your mother's marriage."

George gave a cry. "Wargrove," he said, "Wargrove in Essex. It
was in the parish church that the marriage took place. And Lola
knew--Lola----" he paused. The eyes of the two men met.




CHAPTER XX

THE TROUBLE OF LOLA


It was four o'clock when George left Bawdsey. The two had spoken
little of the newspaper paragraph which informed them of Lola's
escapade. Although her name was not mentioned there was no doubt in
the mind of Brendon that she was the culprit. The newspaper gave the
year of the book when the sheet was torn, and that corresponded to the
year when Percy Vane married--or had been supposed to marry--Rosina
Lockwood. And this was the explanation of Lola's absence from town.
She had not fled from the rebuke of Brendon, but had gone to do him an
injury by destroying the evidence of his parents' marriage. This
finally was the meaning of her wild threat to Dorothy. By preventing
George from proving his legitimacy, Lola hoped to put a final end to
his chance of making Miss Ward his wife.

Bawdsey was much upset over the news. He would have flown immediately
to Wargrove, but some special business kept him in town. However, he
purposed to go the next morning by the first train. Bawdsey did not
think that Brendon had sufficient interest in Lola to go down to
Wargrove at once. But George was going that very day, all the same.
Lola could not have known that his parents had been married at
Wargrove without having seen Mrs. Jersey's confession wherein the fact
was probably mentioned.. Therefore she must have obtained the
confession in some way. How she achieved this, George could not
conjecture. Then he thought of Lola's hot Spanish blood, of the
stiletto--a peculiarly foreign weapon--and shuddered. It occurred to
him that Lola herself must have stabbed the woman.

However, he put this thought aside for the moment and set about
getting to Wargrove. On consulting an A. B. C. he found that a train
left Liverpool Street Station for Southend at ten minutes past five,
and that Wargrove was a tiny rural town which could be reached in an
hour. Ever quick and expeditious in his movements, George had entered
a Strand shop to buy the railway guide, and, having ascertained about
the train, he simply stepped into his cab and ordered the man to drive
to Liverpool Street. At the appointed time he was on his way down the
country.

This precipitancy of action was due to a dread lest Bawdsey should
change his mind and see Lola, first. Certainly the detective had
spoken frankly, and his conduct appeared to be dictated by sentiments
of honor. Nevertheless, George felt that Bawdsey was playing a part
and that this apparent honesty was not his real character. It behooved
him to be on his guard against him; and to know as much about the
death of Mrs. Jersey as Bawdsey did, so as to able to counterplot him
if necessary. From the fact that she was in Wargrove, Lola evidently
had possession of the confession. If Bawdsey saw her he would
doubtless try and get it from her, to learn the name of Percy Vane's
assassin. George wished therefore to forestall Bawdsey, and to make
Lola surrender the confession--always presuming she had it--to
himself. For this reason he departed quickly for Wargrove. At the
Liverpool Street Station he examined all the passengers as they
entered the train. Bawdsey did not put in an appearance, and as the
next train would not depart for another two hours George felt that he
had stolen a march on the detective. Bawdsey would never think that he
had acted with such promptitude.

It was a dull journey, as Brendon was worried by a commercial traveler
who would talk politics. George put him off as civilly as possible,
and finally turned his prattle--for it was little else--to his own
advantage by asking for the whereabouts of Wargrove. It seemed that
the new town of Wargrove was the place where the train stopped, but
Old Wargrove was three miles distant, and it was there that the parish
church was situated. The commercial traveler followed up this
information with many details concerning the manners and customs of
the natives, which bored George to distraction. However, he listened
quietly, and paid as little attention as was consistent with
politeness. His officious companion watched for the station, and
roared out the name when the train stopped. George thanked him and
alighted, glad to be relieved of such a weary talker. And till the
train was moving the man leaned out of the window shouting directions
as to the best way to reach Old Wargrove.

As it proved there was no necessity for George to go there. Lola was
stopping in the policeman's house prior to her removal to the prison
at Chelmsford. Her attempt at robbery had been committed on the
previous day, and Brendon thought she would have already been removed.
However, he was informed that there was some delay owing to the
illness of the Chelmsford inspector, and therefore Lola would have to
remain in Wargrove for another twelve hours. Brendon was glad to hear
this, as it would save him a long journey. He thanked the policeman
who had explained, and was directed by the man to the house of his
superior officer, which was on the outskirts of the town. George soon
found a semi-detached house with a notice on it, and on knocking at
the door explained his errand to a brisk little woman. She pursed up
her lips, looked inquisitively at him with bright eyes, and called her
husband. The policeman was a burly, slow-witted, fat man who seemed
nervous on being asked for a sight of the prisoner, for such Lola was
to all intents and purposes. He did not want to exceed his duty.
George produced a sovereign, but the official, although his eyes
twinkled, hesitated to take the bribe. It was then that Mrs. Policeman
came to Brendon's assistance.

"Nonsense, Jeremiah," she said briskly. "Let the young gentleman see
his young lady. She's dying to have a sight of him."

"How do you know that she is my young lady?" asked George.

Mrs. Policeman nodded with her arms akimbo. "Why she's been crying out
in that foreign way of hers for George--George----"

"That is my name certainly."

"And you are her gentleman. She told me what you were like, and cried
all the time, poor soul. Tall, fair, with eyes of blue."

"It's all very well," grumbled Jeremiah. "But 'tis against the law."

"You can be present at our interview if you like."

"There, Jeremiah, you can't have the gentleman saying fairer than
that." Here the sharp little woman nudged her husband's arms. This was
a hint for him to swallow his scruples and take the sovereign.
Jeremiah agreed, and shortly the sovereign was in his pocket and he
was leading George to a back upstairs room.

"We'd have put her in the best parlor," he said, "as I always like to
make 'em comfortable. But she'd have run away, so we was obliged to
keep her in the room with the bars on the window."

"Poor Lola," thought George, as he conjured up the small stuffy room
and the barred window.

But the room was not so comfortless as Jeremiah stated, thanks to Mrs.
Policeman. It was small, certainly, but it was neatly furnished as a
bed-sitting-room. The window was certainly barred, but there was no
other sign that it was a prison cell. Before introducing George to
this abode, it struck Jeremiah that the prisoner had been inquired for
as "the young lady." He stopped Brendon at the door. "Might you know
her name, sir?"

"Of course I know it," replied George, promptly. "Don't you?"

"Now I do," said Jeremiah, with a heavy nod, "but it was a rare time
afore she'd speak. My missus got it out of her. Loler Veal it is, she
says, and she's by way of being on the stage."

"She is the most celebrated dancer in London, and her name is Lola
Velez," said George. "I don't suppose she'll be punished much for
this. She's mad at times."

"Oh, if she's mad she'll get off lightly, but them parish register to
be torn--it's bad work that. My father were a sexton," explained
Jeremiah, soberly.

"And naturally you think Mademoiselle Velez has committed the most
atrocious of crimes. But don't stand chattering here, my good fellow.
I have to return by the nine train."

"I'll wait outside," said Jeremiah, on whom Brendon's generosity and
peremptory manner had made an impression, "but you won't give her
poison, or knives, or that, sir?"

George laughed. "No. She is the last person to use them if I did
supply her with such articles."

"She's a lively young woman," said the policeman, and slowly unlocked
the door. George was admitted, and then Jeremiah, so as to give the
lovers--as he thought them--an opportunity of meeting unobserved,
retired, locking the door after him. Lola and George were together.

She was seated by the window staring out into the darkness. On the
table was a small lamp, and a fire burned in the grate. Lola started
up when the door closed again. "Who is--who is?" she asked in her
rapid way, and came toward him.

"Lola," began George, but he got no further. She ran forward and flung
herself with tears at his feet, clutching his legs and wailing:

"Oh, my dear one, hast thou come in anger? Trample me, make me as
earth, beloved, but be not enraged--ah, no--ah, no!"

"Lola. Get up and don't be a fool," said Brendon, speaking roughly to
brace her nerves.

She rose, sobbing, and crept to a chair in a slinking manner, quite
unlike her usual free grace. She did not raise her eyes, and George
was pained to see the change. Badly as she had acted, he felt sorry at
beholding her depressed, and like a sick beast in confinement.

"Lola," he said, taking a chair near her, "I have come as your
friend."

"Not in anger--ah, but yes, in anger."

"I am not angry. I am very sorry."

"Ah, but in your eyes--they sparkle. I see Mees Vards. I do try to
steal the church books. You are furiously enraged."

"Look at me and see."

But Lola would not, so George took her chin and made her gaze directly
into his eyes. Lola's were filled with tears, but after a time she
began to smile. "Ah, you are not enraged, it was for you I did it. I
wish my dear George to myself--all--all."

"You know that is impossible."

"But it is not. I will have you."

"Not at all," said George, deliberately. "You will marry Bawdsey."

"That pig--cow, horrible and miserable. _Non. Ah, non!_" She sprang
to her feet. "_Jamais. Ah grand jamais!_ I do swear," and producing a
small black crucifix from her dress she kissed it vehemently.

She was a most impossible person to deal with, being as wild as a
tigress and as impulsive as a child. George made her resume her seat,
and drew his chair close to her. Much delighted, Lola took his hand
within her own and looked at him affectionately. Brendon did not like
the position at all, but it was necessary to humor Lola if he wished
to arrive at the truth. He spoke to her very directly.

"Now, Lola, I wish you to tell me the truth."

"Ah, but I will. When you are kindness I tell you all."

"Do you know that you have done a wrong thing?"

"Pschutt," she said contemptuously. "I give that old mans knocks on
the heads, but he is alive. Oh, yes, I did not kill him.

"I don't mean the assault, though that is bad enough. But your trying
to destroy the register of the marriage.

"It is your fault," cried Lola, impetuously. "For loves of my George I
did so. I wish you not to marry any but me."

"We can talk of that later, Lola. Answer me a few questions, and make
no remarks."

"I will do what you say, my friend," said Lola, nodding. George
thought for a moment. "How did you learn that Wargrove was the place
where my parents were married?"

"I tell not that--indeed, I will not. It is my businesses."

"Mine also. You must tell."

"But I will not."

"For my sake, Lola."

"Ah, you want to know all, and then trick me. I will not tell."

"Then I will explain to you."

"Aha, you cannots--you know nothings at all. Pah! La, la, la, la."

George spoke sternly. "Lola, I know more than you give me credit for.
I have seen the dagger."

This time he struck home, for she started. "What dagger?"

"The stiletto you left in Mrs. Jersey's room."

"I did nothings. I was not there."

"Yes you were. For all I know you may have killed the woman."

"But it is foolish you talk, George. I did not. She was
frightened--oh, very much afraid."

"So much that she gave you the confession you asked for?"

"Ah, yes--yes--yes," cried Lola, then seeing she had betrayed herself,
she began to be alarmed. "Ah, you will say nothing. I would not tell
anys but my George. He loves me. He will not see me dead."

"Good heavens, Lola, did you kill the woman?"

"That fat ladys in black silk? Ah, no, I did not. But she was so
afraid of the knife."

"You left her alive on that night?"

"Why, yes, my George. We part--oh, such good friends." Lola blew a
kiss from her finger-tips. "She quite pleased, immense!"

"Well, Lola, as you have told so much, you must tell me all."

"There is nothing to say," she replied, turning sullen.

George rose. "Then I shall go away," he declared. "I came here to be
your friend, Lola, and to save you from getting into further trouble.
But if you will not be candid--" He moved to the door.

"What is candids? I know not, George." She sprang to her feet. "Ah, my
heart, do not go. Soul of my soul, leave me not. I will do anythings
what you ask of me."

"Then tell me the whole story of your visit to Mrs. Jersey."

"But you will marry Mees Vard!"

"I do that in any case. See here, Lola," he added artfully, "this
marriage register which you wish to destroy does not matter now. My
grandfather has acknowledged me as his heir."

She looked at him with wide eyes and pale cheeks. "And you will be
milor--you will marry Mees Vard--you will--you will--" Her mouth began
to work piteously like a child being reproved.

"I will always be your friend, Lola!"

"You will marry Mees Vard?" she persisted.

"Lola," he took her hand, "if we married we would never be happy. I
and you are different people. Do you wish to see me happy?"

"Ah, yes--if I die I would have you happy," she sobbed.

"Then allow me to marry Miss Ward, and give me up."

"Ah, but it is asking much--always too much."

"Well," said George, a trifle cruelly, "you offered to die for me just
now, yet to see me happy you won't deny yourself anything."

"Yes--yes--but it is all so quick, my dear. Give times--oh, give times
till I become used." She sobbed for a moment, then dried her eyes and
sat down briskly. "I am ready, my George. You shall be happy, but you
must not forget poor Lola--ah, no!"

"Of course not," replied George, patting her hand. "Now tell me the
story. Wait. Was it you mother who told you of my father's death?"

"Yes," assented Lola. "She often talked of your fathers,"

"I heard she was in love with him," said George, slowly.

Lola shrugged her shapely shoulders. "That I know not. My dear mother
was handsome--oh, yes, and dark, and fond of gayness. She might have
loved--eh--it is not impossibles."

"Did she ever hint who killed my father?"

Lola shook her head. "No. Never did she say anythings. He was found
dead--stabbed--" she made a gesture, "that was all--all!"

Evidently she could tell him nothing, so George reverted to more
immediate matters. "How about that night? You knew that I was going to
Mrs. Jersey's on that night?"

"Ah, but yes. You did tell me."

"Then what made you come also? Was it to see me?"

Lola put her finger in her mouth and looked down. "No, my George. I
did want that confessions of the fat old lady, to stop you being
milor, and then I thought you would marry only poor Lola."

"How did you know about the confession?"

"That pig-man told me."

"Bawdsey? Why did he tell you?"

"Pschutt!" said Lola, contemptuously. "He loves me so, I can twist and
twist him so," she made a rapid motion with her fingers. "We did talk
of the death of your fathers. I lamented that my poor mother did loves
your fathers unhappily, as I did love you. And I was enraged to think
that your fathers had died. I did ask Bawdsey who made the stab--gave
the death?--eh, it is, so I asked," she added, nodding. "He could not
say, but he declares that Mrs.--what you call her--eh, but my friend,
Mrs.----"

"Mrs. Jersey. Bawdsey declared that she knew?" Lola nodded. "It was
so," she assented. "Mrs.--what you call that fat ladys--she write out
all she know,--of your father's death and of his marriages. I say to
myself that I would get that confession and learn where the marriage
was made. Then I would burn the book that no one might learn. After I
would say to you, that I could tell who killed your father if you made
me madame your wife."

"That's a very pretty plot," said Brendon, not knowing whether to be
angry with her wrong-doing or touched by a love that to gain him would
not hesitate to commit a crime. "So far you have carried it out. You
have the confession----"

Lola put her hand on her breast. "He is here," she said, nodding. "I
carries him always--always!"

"Give it to me, Lola."

Her eyes opened in wide alarm. "Ah, no, you will not ask me. I keep
him to myself all."

George saw that the moment was not propitious. But he was determined
to get the confession before he left her. However, he begged her to
continue her story. "How did you know the house?" he asked.

"It was the scarlet windows----"

"I remember. Bawdsey gave you that for guide."

"Bah! He knew not I was going," said Lola with a shrug. "I got out of
him the fool-man all that I did want. I thought I would get to the fat
ladys on the night you were with her, that I might have you for helps
if she was enraged."

"It seems to me that you protected yourself very well."

"With the daggers--oh, yes. I said to myself that if my George did not
come for the fogs, that Mrs.--what you say--Jarsey, oh, yes, would be
enraged, and I would have trouble. I took the stiletto to save
myself."

"How did you get into the house?"

"Wait, ah, wait! I did not dance all that night. I said I was ill and
I came aways. I took the daggers and a cloak, and I went to the
Square--it is not far from my houses----"

"No. You just turn the corner of the street," said Brendon. "Well?"

"I walked by the walls. It was after ten o'clocks. I walk round and
round the Squares, and I then see a red lights. The door open--it was
open, and many people came out of the houses. The fat lady was on the
steps waving her hands--so--" Lola waved her hand. "A crowd was
around. I came into the crowd, and when the fat lady was down shaking
with the handshake, I did slip into the house."

"That was clever of you," said George, wondering at the dexterity with
which Lola had managed to enter without exciting suspicion. "And then
what did you do? Did you meet any one?"

"Ah, but no. I ran into a place; there was a room with a light, and
that I did go into----"

"Mrs. Jersey's sitting-room," murmured George. "Yes?"

"I was afraid to be thrown out, my dear, and I hided behind a curtain
of the window. The fat lady she did come in and close the door. She
talked to herself of Lord Derrington coming, and did seem enraged at
him wishing to come--you understand?"

"Yes. What then?"

"A leetle boy did come in with wine and cakes. She did send him away,
being angry, and did close the door. She took from a box----"

"A green box, Lola?"

"Yes, a green box--she did take a blue--what you, call--paper."

"A blue envelope?"

"Ah, yes, it is so, and she looked at a paper--a white paper she took
from the envelope. She laughed, and said that milor would love to have
this. I say to myself behind the curtains: It is the confessions, I
will have it. Then she did put it in the envelopes and leave it on the
tables. It was near me. I could steal----"

"And you did!" said George, impatiently.

"But no, my George. I did try, and madame she saw my arm. With a cry
she leap to the doors. I come out and, say that I wish to talk of the
deaths of Monsieur Vanes. She turns most white, and did not cry no
more. Then she ask me what I want----"

"You needn't tell all in detail, Lola. Be as short as possible."

"Oh, well--but yes, assuredly. I told madame I was of San Remo, and
did talk of my dear mother, and of her love for Monsieur Vane. But
this pig-womans insult my mother. I become enraged, I bring my dagger
and wave it so--" again Lola made a dramatic gesture. "I say that I
kill her. She fall on her knees and hide her face. Then I did take the
confessions out of the blue envelopes and hide it----"

"That was very clever of you, Lola. Did Mrs. Jersey see?"

"Ah, but no she did not. I take it when she was with the eyes covered.
Then having all what I was desired, and seeing her so afraid, I had
the contempt look you. I say, 'There, there,' and I throw the dagger
at her feets. Then I go to the door and say I would depart. She beg me
to stop. I did stop, and we talk of San Remo, and of my mother. I say
that you were my love, and that Monsieur Vane was the father of
you----"

"Then she knew who I was on that night?"

"Ah, yes, but she did. I say you wish to see her the next day. She
say, 'I will tell him nothing, and now go, for I have to see a great
gentlemans.' I was quite happy."

"Did she not miss the confession?"

"No! I said nothing of wanting that. It was in my pocket. The blue
envelope was on the table. She never thought but what it was within,
Then she ask me to say nothing to any one about San Remo, and we part
quite happy. She allowed me out of the door, and closed it again, oh,
so softly. I saw her no more."

"You left the dagger behind?"

"It was on the floors where I threw it. I wished to get away with the
confessions, lest she should call me thieves. I did not wait for to
take the dagger. I departed. That is all."

"Humph!" said George. The story seemed likely enough. After letting
Lola out of the house, Mrs. Jersey then came to see if he and Train
were in bed. Expecting Lord Derrington, and knowing from Lola who he
was, she no doubt expected George to interrupt the interview. But
finding him--as she thought in bed--she departed satisfied. Then she
met Margery, and after locking her in her room, went down to meet her
death. It was eleven when all this happened, and Bawdsey in the coat
of Lord Derrington arrived close upon twelve. Therefore, as Lola left
Mrs. Jersey alive and Bawdsey found her dead, she must have been
killed in the interval, and whomsoever had done this had used the
dagger left by Lola.

However, George had learned all he wished to know in the mean time,
and it only remained to get the confession from Lola. She refused to
give it up. George entreated, cajoled, stormed, insisted, she still
held out. "No, I will not, I will not," she kept saying.

Finally he hit on a solution of the difficulty. "If you do not give it
to me it will be taken from you when you go to prison."

"Ah, but will it?" cried Lola, wide-eyed with alarm.

"Certainly, and will probably be published in the papers. Keep it if
you like, Lola, but don't blame me if you get into trouble over it. I
assure you if you keep it they will take it."

Lola pulled a white packet from her breast, and ran with it to the
fire. "They will not have it. I burn--I burn," and she threw the
papers on the fire. George shot past her, snatched them out before
they could catch alight, and thrust them into his pocket. Lola turned
on him like a tigress, and he thought she would strike him. She seemed
inclined to do so. Then unexpectedly she threw up her arms and fell
into a chair weeping. "It is the end--you love me no more--we part--we
part. The confessions will part us, all--all, alas!"




CHAPTER XXI

THE CONFESSION OF A JEALOUS WOMAN


George returned to town with the confession of Mrs. Jersey in his
pocket. On arriving at the Liverpool Street Station he wrote a note to
Kowlaski telling him of Lola's plight, and advising him to engage
counsel for her defense. He added that he would come around the next
day to see Kowlaski and discuss what could be done toward extricating
Lola from the mess she had involved herself in. Having thus done what
he could, Brendon took the underground railway to Kensington, and
alighted at the High Street Station. In another half-hour he was in
his rooms.

After making a good meal, for he felt the need of food to sustain him,
he ordered coffee, and sat down to read the manuscript of Mrs. Jersey.
The coffee was brought, George lighted his pipe, and having poked the
fire into a blaze, made himself comfortable.

The confession of the wretched woman who had come to so tragic an end,
was written on several sheets of foolscap loosely pinned together. Her
caligraphy was vile, and George had great difficulty in making out
some of the words. Also the English was not faultless, but good
grammar and fine writing were scarcely to be expected from a woman in
the position of Eliza Stokes.

But she wrote in a most cold-blooded way, and seemingly exulting in
her wickedness. All through her confession ran a venomous strain of
deadly hatred toward George's mother, and indeed against any woman who
paid attention to Vane. Jenny Howard was not spared, and the woman
Velez, "who kept an oil-shop," sneered Mrs. Jersey, was mentioned.
When Brendon discovered that Mrs. Jersey had Italian blood in her
veins he saw perfectly well whence she got her savage nature and
undisciplined affections. She was like a wild beast let loose among
more civilized animals, and the wonder was that with such a nature she
had not committed more crimes than those she confessed to. The woman
was a dangerous creature, and Brendon when he laid down the manuscript
thought it just as well that she had been removed even by the violent
means which Providence permitted.

"My parents were of humble station," began Mrs. Jersey, abruptly. "I
believe my mother was a lady's maid. She married my supposed father,
who was a butler. I say 'my supposed father' as I have reason to
believe that I was the daughter of a certain Italian count who had
loved and betrayed my mother. In her moments of rage my mother would
taunt my supposed father with this, but when calm she always denied
that there was any truth. When I grew old enough to understand she
rebuked me for asking about the matter. 'You are my daughter,' she
said abruptly, 'and the daughter of Samuel Stokes, who is the biggest
fool and the greatest craven I know.'

"It will be seen that there was no love lost between my parents. My
father Stokes--as I may call him, though I believe the count was my
real sire--was always very kind to me, and shielded me from my
mother's rage. She treated me very cruelly, and when fifteen I was
glad to go out as a scullery-maid so as to escape her persecution.
Shortly after I took up life on my own account she died in a fit of
violent rage, during which she broke a blood-vessel. I think Stokes
was glad when she died. She made his life a misery when she lived, and
tormented every one around her. If I have faults, it is not to be
expected that I could inherit a decent nature from such a mother. I
never loved her, and when she died I did not shed a single tear. I
remember singing at my work on the day I received the news. One of my
fellow-servants asked me why I was so gay? I replied that I had heard
of my mother's death. After that they hated me, and I had to leave my
situation. But had any one of them possessed such a mother, any one of
them would have been as gay and relieved as I was. So much for my
mother.

"As for my presumed father Stokes, I saw very little of him. He
retired from business and bought a public-house. Then he married
again, and was not inclined to see much of me. I did not mind, as I
never loved him in spite of his kindness. I dare say I should have
returned his affection, but my mother had beaten all love out of me.

"It is needless to give my early life in detail. I rose from
scullery-maid to housemaid. Then I became parlor-maid in a suburban
villa, where the wages were poor and the food was bad. I took charge
of children when not doing housework, and managed to get on. But I was
ambitious. I wished to get among the servants of the aristocracy. A
friend of mine who was maid to the Duchess of--taught me her duties,
and I procured a situation. I pleased my mistress, and she promised to
do much for me. However, she died, and I was thrown on the world. I
saw an advertisement for a lady's maid, and got the situation. It was
in this way that I became the servant of that woman whom I hated so
deeply.

"She was called Rosina Lockwood, and was no better born than myself.
Her father was a low man who taught singing, and she appeared herself
on the stage. I never thought she was beautiful, myself. She had good
hair, and her complexion was passable, but her figure was bad, and she
had no brains. An inane, silly, foolish woman. How Percy Vane could
have eloped with her beats me. But men are such fools. He would not
look at me, yet I was ten times as lovely as this singing-woman, and
quite as well born. Oh, how I hated her!

"At first I rather liked Miss Lockwood. She was kind to me in her
silly way, and the gentlemen who were in love with her gave me plenty
of money to deliver notes and other things. There was one gentleman
who was the best of them all--and the biggest fool over her blue eyes
and fair hair. His name was Ireland, and he had plenty of money. He
came to learn singing from old Lockwood simply to be near her, and
proposed three times, to my knowledge. But she would have nothing to
do with him, which was foolish, as he had money, and she could have
twisted him round her finger. Why he loved her so and what he saw in
her I can't say. She had nothing attractive about her, so far as I
could see.

"I was a handsome girl in those days, though I say it myself. But if a
woman is good-looking, why shouldn't she say so? I had a perfect
figure, and a complexion like cream and roses. My hair was as black as
night, and my eyes were sparkling and large. I taught myself to read
and write, and I learned French. Also I learned to play the piano, and
to conduct myself like a lady, as I always was. I often dreamed that I
would marry a gentleman, and I could have done so but that my foolish
heart was captured by the only man who would have nothing to do with
it, or with me.

"I never loved till I set eyes on him. There was a footman who wanted
to marry me; to join our savings and set up in a public-house. But I
told him I was born for better things. Then a coachman asked me to be
his wife, but I hated a man who had to do with horses. Oh, I had
plenty of offers, as a handsome girl should. But I knew my own value,
and looked about for the gentleman who would give me my rightful
position as a lady. From my Italian father I inherited aristocratic
tastes, and I was not going to remain a low, vulgar common servant all
my life, not me.

"Then he came to the house. Oh, my adored one, my idol, my angel, how
magnificent and beautiful thou wast. Percy was his dear name, and his
blood was very blue. Lord Derrington was his father, a most
aristocratic nobleman, who was an old brute, from my experience of
him. But he was of high rank I don't deny, and Percy had the blood of
heroes in his veins. He came to take lessons in singing. But after a
time I saw that he was in love with my mistress. Afterward I found out
that he had seen her at a concert and had fallen in love with her. I
don't believe it. Who could have loved that bad figure and that silly
brain? Now a woman like myself--but he never cared for me, although I
adored him from the first time I set eyes on his manly form. It was
her arts that captured him, else he would have turned from her to me.
But he never did.

"How handsome and fascinating was my hero Percy Vane. Fair hair and
blue eyes, and the figure of a Life-Guardsman--just the kind of man I
liked. He was kind to me--for her sake, I suppose--and gave me money
and presents. She said she loved him, and used to make me sick with
talking of him. I let her think I was her dear friend, as if she had
known my true feelings she would have sent me away, and then I would
never have seen my hero again. I made the best of my position, for at
least I saw him as often as she did, and that was something. They both
looked on me as their friend. Had they only known how I hated her, and
loved him!

"Lord Derrington was angry with Percy for loving my mistress, and I
don't wonder at it, a low singing-woman. Percy had some money of his
own, inherited from his mother, and he proposed an elopement. He said
that Lord Derrington could not leave the estates away from him, and
that some day he would come in for the title. She never lived to be
Lady Derrington. I was glad of that. I should have killed her had she
reached that pitch of splendor. Her position should have been mine.
But it never was.

"Well, they eloped. After singing at a concert in St. James's Hall, he
met her outside, and took her to Liverpool Street Station. I was
waiting there with the luggage. We went down to a place called
Wargrove, in Essex, and the very next day they were married in the
church of that parish. I was furious, but what could I do? Had I told
Lord Derrington, he might have stopped the marriage, but Percy would
never have forgiven me, and I did not wish to lose sight of him. As
Mrs. Vane's maid, I had chances of seeing him daily, and of basking in
the light of his eyes. It was weak of me, but I loved him so dearly
that I would have done anything simply to be in his presence. But I
wish now that I had prevented the marriage. Since I could not get him,
I didn't see why she should bear off the prize. But I was a girl then,
and sentimental and foolish. And she was a cat, as she always was.

"Afterward we went to Paris, and from that place Percy wrote to tell
his grandfather that he was married. I know he did not mention the
place, for the letter was given to me to post, and I opened it. I
never gave it a thought at the moment, but afterward Percy's mistake
in not telling where the marriage had taken place did me a lot of
good. I should not now be writing in this house, but for that lucky
omission. Lord Derrington would have nothing to do with his son, and
there was trouble with Mr. Lockwood.

"But I don't think they minded much. Percy was wrapped up in the
creature, and she loved him in her silly simpering way. I pretended to
be quite happy, but I inwardly was raging all the time. For his sake I
put up with the unpleasant position, and I never received my reward,
never, never, never. Oh, how some women's hearts are broken by the
cruelty and neglect of men.

"I lived with the two of them during their married life. A son was
born, and she died. I was glad when she died, and I was sorry she left
the boy. Percy was wrapped up in the child, and gave him to me to
nurse. Mrs. Vane was buried in Père la Chaise, and then Percy, with
myself and the baby, went to Monte Carlo. He gambled there in order to
forget his grief--though I don't see what he had to moan over, seeing
what a silly fool his late wife was. Percy lost money, and wrote to
his father, who declined to help him. Then he went to Italy and
wandered about. Now that he was free I hoped to marry him. When not
nursing that horrid child--he was called George after his maternal
grandfather, and was a scrubby little beast. Some said he was a fine
child. I could not see it, myself. He was her child, and that was
enough to make me hate him as I did. But as I say, when not nursing
him, I devoted myself to study so as to be worthy of the time when
Percy would marry me. I knew that the future Lady Derrington would
hold a high rank, and I qualified myself to fill the position
gracefully. I did work. I learned arithmetic, and could write
beautifully. I talked Italian and French like a native. I got an old
artist to teach me to paint in water-colors, and I bought a book which
taught the manners of good society. Also I tried to dress well, and do
my hair becomingly. Percy saw the change in me, and congratulated me
on the improvement which had taken place in me since leaving England.
Had he only known that it was for his sake I had improved!

"As to that child, I should have liked to drown it, or to have given
it to gypsies. As Lady Derrington, I did not wish to be troubled with
her brat. Besides, Percy loved the boy so, that he used to make me
envious the way he nursed him. But had I got rid of the child--and I
thought of a thousand safe ways I could have done so--I should only
have been sent away, and then some woman would have got hold of him. I
thought it best to bear with my aching pain and put up with the child
so that I might be near to watch over Percy.

"The end of it came in Milan. We were stopping at the Hôtel de Ville,
and there was a waiter who fell in love with me. He was an English
boy, called George Rates--a horrid, scrubby, red-haired, nasty,
pale-faced creature, who worried me to death. Besides, he was younger
than I was, and I wished for a husband to protect me. I should have
had to look after George Rates, whereas Percy, in the days to come,
would look after me. Besides, I felt that it was an impertinence for a
low waiter to expect me to marry him--me, who had done so much to
improve myself, and who looked forward to taking proud rank among the
British aristocracy.

"At first I laughed at him, but he became such a nuisance that I told
him plainly that I would have nothing to do with him. He then accused
me of being in love with my master. I acknowledged it proudly. Why
should I not? A woman should glory in her love. I did! I told George
Rates that I worshiped the very ground Percy walked on; I gave my
passionate feelings full vent, and bore him to the ground under the
storm of my indignation. He told the other servants, and they insulted
me, especially the English ones, as there were two or three in the
hotel. I was persecuted, but I bore all for his dear sake. Then it
came to his ears. Percy heard what I had said to George Rates. He
called me in: he accused me of making him ridiculous, of being out of
my mind, of a thousand and one cruel things. I lost my head. I told
him how I loved him. I knelt at his feet. I implored that he would
reward my love--my long, long sufferings. He laughed in my tearful
face. At that moment I hated him, but not for long. My life was bound
up in his. When he dismissed me, I thought that my heart was broken.

"I was dismissed. He procured a new nurse from England--a Scotch
hussy, as ugly as she was silly. I saw her often in Milan after my
dismissal. Oh, that time--oh, those weary days! I wept. I prayed. I
moaned. I was a wreck. With what money I had I went to a convent near
Milan, and stopped there for a month. But I could not remain away from
him. I came out. He was gone. I went to inquire at the hotel. He had
gone to Rome. Afterward a message came that all letters were to be
sent to San Remo. I determined to go to San Remo, and to be near him.
I would have died else. George Rates, who was still in love with me,
proved a willing tool. I could not get to San Remo without money. He
offered to advance me the railway fare, and he got me a situation in
the Hôtel d'Angleterre as housemaid. He also was going there for the
season as a waiter. I said that if he took me to San Remo I would
marry him. He did so, and I--but that comes later. Sufficient it is to
say that George believed in my promise, and that I found myself again
in the presence--the heavenly presence--of my adored Percy.

"But I had only come to submit myself to fresh anguish. He saw me, but
took no notice of me. I was afraid to follow him too closely lest he
should ask the police to interfere. George Rates was jealous, too, and
I had to consider him, as, failing Percy rewarding my love I could
fall back on George. He was always useful to supply the money for me
to get back to England, where I was certain of a situation. I handled
the situation in a masterly manner, and contrived to see Percy without
his seeing me, and without exciting too openly the jealousy of George
Rates.

"But it was the horrid girl that caused me pain. She was one of the
daughters of General Howard, whom Percy had met at Como. The two girls
both laid themselves out to catch my darling. But their arts did not
succeed at Como. Jenny was the one who tried hardest to get him, but
Violet took her chance also. When they came to San Remo they stopped
at the Hôtel d'Angleterre. I looked after their room, and, knowing
what they were, I made myself their friend. They knew me as the former
nurse of Percy's horrid, little son, and wondered how I came to be a
housemaid. I told some story which satisfied them. I forget what it
was. They believed in me thoroughly, and they found out that I loved
Percy. Then they were amused, and I hated them for it. They told Percy
that I was watching him, and he came to the hotel no more. But I still
pretended to be their friend, for my own ends. There was a masked ball
coming off, and the Miss Howards wished to go unbeknown to their
father. I entered into the spirit of the joke. I procured them two
blue dominoes and each a sprig of yellow holly, so that they might
know one another. They went to the ball thus disguised.

"I went also--in the same dress. I had got a third blue domino and I
also wore a sprig of holly. In my pocket I took a stiletto. Why did I
do that? Because I was determined to kill any one who tried to make
love to my Percy. I knew that Jenny Howard, the little cat, would try
and get him to love her, and I would have killed her with pleasure had
she become Percy's bride. As I was masked, I had no fear of being
discovered should I stab any one, and, moreover, were there trouble,
the Miss Howards, being dressed as I was, even to the sprig of yellow
holly, might be accused of any crime that might happen. Moreover, even
if I killed Jenny I knew that the two sisters quarreled, and that on
the evidence of the holly and the domino Violet might be charged with
the crime. Oh, I made myself quite safe! I am a clever woman.

"About the stiletto. I received that from a low shopkeeper called
Velez, who was in love with Percy. She and her husband kept an oil-shop,
and her husband was very jealous of her. She was madly in love
with Percy, as I found out when buying something at her shop, and I
got to know her intimately, so that I could make use of her if the
occasion arose. I did make use of her, by getting the stiletto, and I
took it to the ball.

"I heard Percy propose to marry Jenny, and I was minded then to kill
her. I drew the stiletto from my breast, and would have rushed
forward, hoping to escape in the confusion when I killed her. But my
heart failed me; even when she was left alone my heart failed me.
Jenny took off her mask, and I left her sitting waiting for Percy's
return. Then I followed Percy and saw Violet join him. I knew it was
Violet, owing to the unmasking of Jenny, and, moreover, I had seen
Violet listening, as I was. She loved him also--the cat! However, I
saw that she wanted to get Percy out of the place by making him think
she was Jenny. She did. I followed. He took her home to the gates of
the hotel and left her there. When he was coming back to the ball I
stopped him at the bottom of the parade. There was no one in sight, it
was late, and a clear moon was shining.

"Percy thought I was Violet, whom he mistook for her sister. He
addressed me in such endearing tones as Jenny, and remonstrated so
gently about what he called the rashness of following him from the
hotel, that I lost my temper. I snatched off the mask and poured
out my wrath. Percy burst out laughing when he recognized me. He
said--never mind what he said--but it was an insult, and my Italian
blood boiled in my veins. I drew the stiletto and rushed on him. At
that moment my hand was caught from behind, and I fell. It was that
man Ireland, who was then at San Remo, and a great friend of Percy's.
He had wrenched the stiletto out of my hand. For a moment no one said
anything, and I arose to my feet. Ireland addressed me as Miss
Howard--Miss Violet Howard. Percy laughed again and corrected his
mistake, saying that I was a love-sick nursemaid whom he had
discharged. Then I lost my temper.

"Stop! I must say exactly how it happened. Percy was leaning against
the parapet of the parade in a careless attitude. He did not even move
when I rushed on him with the stiletto, and had Ireland not caught my
arm, I should have killed him. Ireland said that he had followed
me--thinking I was Violet Howard--to ask me to return to the hotel. He
talked some rubbish about a gentle-born English girl being out at
night; but when he found that I was only a servant there was no more
of that talk. Poor Eliza Stokes could have been out till dawn for all
these gentlemen cared. They laughed at me, Percy leaning against the
parapet, Ireland beside me, holding the stiletto carelessly in his
hand. As I said, I lost my temper, and I told Percy what I thought of
that fool Rosina Lockwood. He lost his temper also, but that only made
me more angry. At last he dashed forward, and I believe he would have
struck me but that Mr. Ireland intervened. I don't know exactly how it
happened, but, in moving, Mr. Ireland evidently forgot how he held the
stiletto, and put out his hand with the weapon pointing outward. In
rushing on me, Percy came against it, and it ran right into his heart.
With a choking cry he fell dead. I was terrified, and began to wring
my hands. Ireland knelt down and found that Percy was dead. He seized
my wrist and told me to hold my tongue lest I should be accused of the
death. I said it was his fault. He replied it was an accident. But I
had got the stiletto, I had tried to kill Percy, and Ireland declared
that if I said anything that he would denounce me as the criminal. I
was terrified as I saw the danger in which I was placed. Ireland
suggested that we should throw the body over the parapet on to the
beach, and that it would be thought robbers had killed Percy. I
agreed, and we threw the body of my darling over. Oh, how my heart
ached when I heard it fall on the cruel, cruel stones.

"With Ireland I arranged to hold my tongue, and on his part he
promised he would say nothing. The next day the news of the discovery
of the body came. I was nearly out of my mind. Señora Velez, from whom
I had borrowed the stiletto, knowing of my love for Percy, and being
in love with him herself, accused me of the crime. I denied it, and
said that if she did not hold her tongue I would tell her husband how
she had loved Percy. She was afraid of her husband, who was a jealous
brute, so she remained quiet. I gave her back the stiletto, which I
had obtained from Ireland. We were both safe, but I was so ill that I
left the hotel and returned to England. George Rates, who never
suspected my share in the death, followed----"

It was at this point that George ceased reading. He now knew the
worst. His father had died by accident, and Ireland had been the
unwitting cause of his death. Brendon wondered how the old man could
have carried the knowledge all these years without speaking. He
determined to have an interview with him. But at last he knew the
truth about the death in San Remo. It inculpated no one, and he could
not see how--according to Bawdsey--it could be connected with the
murder of Mrs. Jersey.




CHAPTER XXII

WHO BAWDSEY WAS


George read the remainder of Mrs. Jersey's confession and then put it
away. Even when he got to the end he could not connect the San Remo
crime with that of Amelia Square. It was in his mind to see his
grandfather and tell the story to him, backed by the production of the
confession. But on second thought he decided to see Bawdsey first. He
wired for an appointment, and received a reply stating that Bawdsey
was going out of town at three o'clock that day, but would be in his
rooms till then. George lost no time. He called a cab, and within an
hour of receiving the answer to his request he was on his way to
Bloomsbury.

On arriving he found that the detective expected him, and went to his
room. Bawdsey was still in a disturbed state, as he was most anxious
to get down the country and to help Lola out of her difficulty. He
received Brendon irritably and in silence. George saw that the man was
all nerves, and did not resent his sharp greeting. He sat down and
opened the conversation.

"You are going down to see Lola?" he asked.

"Of course. I am much worried over her. She may get into serious
trouble over this freak."

"Well, why not tell the judge she is insane at times? Then she will
get off lightly."

"Would that be true?" asked the detective, struck by the idea.

"As true as most things. She really is not accountable for her
actions when she gets into these frenzies, and in such a one she must
have been to attempt the burglary."

"Poor soul, I wonder how she is now?"

"Oh, she is not troubled much. Her spirits are as good as usual. She
hardly seems to realize the enormity of her offense."

"How do you know?" asked Bawdsey with a stare.

"Because I saw her last night."

"You saw her?"

"I did. After I left you I took the train to Wargrove and had an
interview with her."

"You might have told me, Mr. Brendon," said Bawdsey, in a wounded
tone.

"Where would have been the use of that? I can manage my own business,
I hope."

"Considering how I love her, it is my business also."

George shrugged his shoulders. "Well, you see, Bawdsey, it was your
intention to see Lola first. I guessed as much, so I stole a march on
you."

Bawdsey fenced. "I don't see how you can say that."

"I can. You know that Lola was in this house on the night the woman
died."

"I presume so, since she got the confession, and she must have secured
it to know where your parents were married."

"Well, then, knowing that, you wished to get that confession."

"Yes, I did," said the detective, "and why not? I desired to know if
Mrs. Jersey said anything about the San Remo crime in it."

"I can tell you that. She did. I have the confession."

Bawdsey bounded from his chair. "Where is it?" he asked.

"In my rooms, locked away."

"I do call that a shame," grumbled Bawdsey. "You might have trusted
me, Mr. Brendon?"

"Might I? Would you have trusted me?"

"I do; you know I do."

"To such an extent as suits yourself. But would you have shown me that
confession had it come into your possession?"

"You are not showing it to me," said Bawdsey, evasively.

"That is not an answer. But I'll show you the confession whenever you
like. Come, now, would you have shown it to me?"

"Since you have read it, why ask me that question?" snapped the
detective. "You know----"

"Yes, I know that you would have burnt the confession. I know that to
have a paper in existence which sets forth that Mr. Bawdsey's true
name is George Rates is not to your liking."

"I never did anything to disgrace that name, Mr. Brendon."

"That is between yourself and your conscience," replied George,
coolly, "and has nothing to do with me. You are George Rates?"

Bawdsey shrugged his shoulders. "There is no use denying it," he said;
"you have my wife's handwriting."

"Was Mrs. Jersey really your wife?"

"She was. We married soon after we left San Remo. She was hard up or
she would not have married me."

"And you went to the States?"

"We did. There I took the name of Jersey, and tried a variety of
things, none of which came to any good. Then I left Eliza."

"Why did you do that?"

"Because she was a devil," said Bawdsey, his face lighting up. "I
tried all the means in my power to make her happy, but she was always
quarreling and nagging, and lamenting that she had not married that
Vane--your father, Mr. Brendon."

"Did she tell you about the murder?"

"It wasn't a murder," protested Bawdsey. "No, she did not tell me, but
from a hint or two she dropped about getting money from Mr. Ireland I
guessed that he had something to do with it. I came across to England
and I saw him. He told me the whole story."

"Did you get money from him?"

"I did not. I am an honest man, although you do not seem to think so.
I left all that blackmailing to my wife. She came over to get money
out of Ireland. He simply said that he would tell the whole truth and
would call the woman Velez as a witness about the dagger."

"But that woman is dead?"

"Oh, no, she isn't," said Bawdsey, coolly. "Lola told me that she was
alive and still in San Remo. She could have made things very hot for
my wife. But failing Ireland, my wife--Mrs. Jersey we will call
her--had another string to her bow. She heard how Lord Derrington
denied the marriage, and how you were living with your grandfather
Lockwood. She went to Derrington and----"

"I know the rest. And you came to live in this house."

"Not at the time. I went back to the States, but as I could do nothing
there I returned to England. Then I took up the private-inquiry
business and called myself Bawdsey. I came to see my wife. She would
not let me call myself her husband, and, as I had no great liking for
her, I agreed. I was in this house for a few weeks and then I got my
own diggings. I saw as little of Mrs. Jersey as was possible."

"Why was that?"

"Well, sir," replied Bawdsey, frankly, "I didn't hold with the annuity
she was getting."

"In a word, you disapproved of the blackmail?"

"That's a good, useful word, sir," said Bawdsey, easily. "Yes, I did.
I never would take a penny from her, and when I lived here during the
few weeks I paid my board. Yes, sir, I'm an honest man."

George stretched out his hand and shook that of Bawdsey heartily. "I
am convinced you are, Bawdsey, and I apologize for my suspicions. But
in some ways--eh?"

"I didn't act very straight, you mean. Well, sir, when one deals with
a criminal case one can't be too careful. I have had to tell lies,
sir. And I say, Mr. Brendon," cried the detective, with a burst of
confidence, "I would not have shown you that agreement. I guessed that
Eliza would state who I was, and I didn't wish you to think that I was
connected with her."

"Why not?"

"Well, sir, I fancied, seeing what you know, that you might suspect me
of killing her."

"No, Bawdsey. As you have acted so fairly all through, I am convinced
that you are innocent on that score. But why did you say that the San
Remo crime was connected with the death of Mrs. Jersey?"

Bawdsey opened his eyes. "Can't you see, sir? The stiletto."

"Oh, you mean that the weapon used by Lola was the same one as my
father was killed with?"

"Certainly, Mr. Brendon. It belonged to Señora Velez, the mother. She
gave it to Lola, for I saw it in her rooms, before the death of Mrs.
Jersey, and I recognized it from the description given by my wife."

"But there are dozens of stilettoes like that one. Lord Derrington
showed it to me."

"Yes, that's true enough. But you see, from what my wife told me, I
knew that she had got the dagger from the woman Velez. It wasn't hard
to see, when I dropped across a similar weapon in the room of a woman
also called Velez, that it was the same. Now you see how it is that
Lola knew so much about the death of your father, and how she and I
came to talk of the matter."

"How did you drop on the subject in the first place?"

"The name was enough for me. I saw Lola, and I fell in love with her,
as you know. Then I remembered the name Velez and got an introduction
to her. One thing led to another until I knew the whole story, and she
admitted that the stiletto was the one with which Mr. Vane had been
killed."

George thought for a few minutes. "Tell me, Bawdsey," he said at
length, "did you suspect Lola of committing the crime?"

"Yes, I did," admitted Bawdsey, frankly; "you see she has a devil of a
temper. I never knew that she had gone to see Mrs. Jersey on that
night, although I might have guessed it because of the way she tried
to learn the whereabouts of the house."

"You mean the crimson light? Her excuse was foolish I thought the
other day when you stated it," said George. "But when did you first
suspect her?"

"When I picked up the stiletto. I recognized it at once. It was my
intention to take it round to her, so that she should not be
incriminated, but I was so upset--as I said the other day--that I
forgot all about the matter. When I did think, it was too late, for
Derrington woke up and put on his coat. I wondered whether he would
mention the stiletto to me. But he never did."

"Because he knew nothing about it," said George. "Mrs. Ward stole it,
as I told you."

"Oh, I see how it is now. But I really did suspect Lola. I asked her
if she was in the house. She said that she had been, although she
denied it at first."

"That's Lola's way," said George; "she always begins by denial. How
did you bring her to confess?"

"I threatened to identify the stiletto. Then she told the truth--if it
was the truth," said Bawdsey, doubtfully.

"Oh, I think so. I don't believe she killed the woman."

"But you know her temper?"

"Yes, I do, but since she has got what she wanted--the
confession--there was no sense in her committing a murder. No, I quite
believe that she threw the dagger at Mrs. Jersey's feet, as she said.
It is just like one of Lola's impulsive actions."

Bawdsey scratched his head. "I wonder who did kill Eliza," he
muttered, "if Lola is innocent and I am innocent?" He looked at
Brendon.

"I can't help you," replied George, rising; "the thing is quite beyond
me. It must have been some one in the house."

"No," replied Bawdsey, positively; "remember, Mr. Train heard a door
close--the front door--some time about half-past eleven."

"That was you, was it not?"

"No sir. I did not arrive till close on twelve, and Mrs. Jersey was
already dead. The door must have been opened and closed by the
murderer, and he left just before I arrived."

"But how could he have entered? You alone had the latch-key. As to
Lola, she slipped in while Mrs. Jersey was dismissing her guests."

Bawdsey shook his head. "I can't understand it, sir. Of course there
was another gentleman who had the house for a short time." He looked
meaningly at Brendon.

George looked puzzled. "What do you mean?" he asked.

"Well, sir," began Bawdsey, with his invariable formula, "I don't like
to mention names, and I am sure what I say will go no further, but
there is Mr. Ireland----"

Brendon started to his feet with an agitated face. "Ireland! Oh, no,
that is impossible," he declared, "quite impossible! Why should he
have a latch-key?"

"After your grandfather's death he was in possession of the house for
a time, and the keys would be with him. In handing them to Lord
Derrington's agent he might have forgotten one."

"It's improbable!"

"I don't think so. It was a chance, I think, at first, but when he
knew that Mrs. Jersey occupied the house he might have found the
latch-key useful to see her when he felt inclined. I dare say she
tried to get money out of him again."

"But he refused her."

"He did--once," said Bawdsey, meaningly, "but Mr. Ireland was not so
young as he had been, and dreaded lest his--accident should be known."

"It was an accident," said George. "Much as I deplore the death of my
father, yet I acquit Ireland of all blame. But he didn't know she
lived here until Miss Bull told him."

"Oh, yes, he did. I'm sure Mrs. Jersey would let him know that she was
just round the corner. She always kept in touch with useful friends."

"But why should he kill her so suddenly?"

"Well, he might have heard that she had written out a confession, or
even about Lord Derrington's visit. And then he would come round to
ask her if she had incriminated him in her confession. He would ask
her for a sight of it. Not having it, for she found the blue envelope
empty after Lola left, she would deny that she had it. The stiletto
left by Lola would be on the table. What was more natural than for
Ireland to pick it up and kill her in a sudden access of dread?
Remember, Mrs. Jersey could accuse him of the crime, as it was known
that Ireland was jealous of your mother's marriage to Vane. Oh, there
was plenty of motive. As to his having refused her before, he was
getting old, and thinking he might be brought to justice by her
confession, for he never knew when she would die or into whose hands
it would fall, he might have lost his nerve."

"It strikes me that if he struck the blow he had a great deal of
nerve," said George, dryly; "but you go on a lot of suppositions. You
suppose that Ireland retained a latch-key of this house, that he knew
Mrs. Jersey had written out a confession, that he knew my grandfather
was coming on that night--in fact, that's all theory, Bawdsey. I do
not believe Mr. Ireland had anything to do with the matter."

"Then who had?" asked the detective.

"What would you say to Margery?"

"What, the niece--that half-witted girl?"

"Exactly. Half-witted. She is more like an animal than anything human.
She gets these sudden fits of rage. When Miss Bull fainted Margery
rushed in and threatened me with her fists. Seeing what an
uncontrollable temper she had, it occurred to me that she might have
killed her aunt."

"But Miss Bull says that the aunt locked the girl in her room."

"Of course, but Miss Bull may know the truth, and may be shielding
Margery--she seems to have a strange affection for the girl. What if
Mrs. Jersey--to vary the story--found Margery down the stairs after
Lola was gone, and instead of rebuking her as Miss Bull said in the
passage----"

"At eleven o'clock, mind."

"Later, I think," said George, quickly. "You did not arrive till
nearly twelve, and the woman was just dead."

"I don't think a few minutes would make much difference," said
Bawdsey, quietly, "but go on, sir. Let me hear your theory."

"Well, I fancy that Mrs. Jersey caught Margery down the stairs, and
took her into her own room to rebuke her quietly, so that the rest of
the house might not hear. Also she would be anxious to learn if the
girl had overheard her conversation with Lola. If Margery had, she
would assuredly have told Miss Bull. Mrs. Jersey would be afraid of
that, and I dare say she stormed at Margery to make her speak."

"But there could have been no row, sir. No one heard a disturbance."

"Oh, the boarders are old and sleep lightly. But I am bound to say I
did not hear a disturbance myself," said George, reflectively. "Mrs.
Jersey may have argued quietly. Then, as you say, the stiletto was on
the table. Margery, goaded into action, might, with the sudden rage of
a dumb animal, might have----"

"Well, it's not impossible. But about the door closing?"

"When Margery saw what she had done," pursued George, still trying to
guess what had taken place, "her first impulse would be to run away.
She would steal out and open the door. I am pretty sure Miss Bull was
on the watch and saw her. She would draw the girl back and close the
door--at half-past eleven, as Train heard. Then she would pacify
Margery and lock her in her bedroom, after previously instructing her
what to say next morning. That is what I believe, Bawdsey."

"It's a very pretty case," murmured the detective, "and things might
have happened as you say. But if it is the case, there is not much
chance of learning the truth. Both Margery and Miss Bull will be
silent. And after all, my theory regarding Ireland is just as good,
Mr. Brendon."

George rose to go. "Stick to your theory and I'll stick to mine," he
said, smiling. "But what about Lola?"

"Well, sir, I'll go down with Kowlaski and see her. We will do
whatever we can to get her out of her trouble. And you, sir----"

"Oh, I shall have nothing more to do with Lola. Take her away to the
States as your wife, Bawdsey, and I will get my grandfather to give
you the thousand pounds to start life on."

"It's very good of you, sir," said Bawdsey, gratefully. "And you will
try and persuade her to marry me?"

"Yes. She knows--as I told her--that, register or no register, my
grandfather intends to recognize me as his heir. Therefore she is
certain--as she may well be--that I shall marry Miss Ward. She will
gradually get over her fancy for me and will be quite content to take
you."

Bawdsey sighed. "I hope so. I love that woman, sir."

"Yet she is a violent woman--almost as violent as your first wife."

"Yes," assented Bawdsey, rather dolefully, "it seems as though I was
always to fall into the hands of violent women. What do you intend to
do now, sir?"

"Leave matters alone, Bawdsey. I don't want to learn who killed Mrs.
Jersey. Now I know about my father's marriage I shall change my name,
take my rightful one, and have done with all this crime and mystery.
The Yellow Holly can go hang, for me."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE TURNING OF THE LANE


The proverb says that "Good luck comes to those who know how to wait."
It had certainly come to George Brendon, or, as he was now called,
George Vane. Lord Derrington could not make enough of him. After the
interview with Bawdsey the young man called at St. Giles Square and
related to his grandfather all he had learned. The old man was much
astonished.

"I don't think Ireland was to blame," he said, "not even in holding
his tongue. After all, the thing was an accident, although undoubtedly
that woman was the cause. Have you seen Ireland?"

"Not yet, but I will soon."

"Then tell him from me that I don't consider he was responsible, and
that I quite believe from what I know of Mrs. Jersey that he has told
the entire truth."

"I will, sir," answered George. "I suppose you mean that if he really
committed the crime with malice aforethought Mrs. Jersey would have
blackmailed him."

Lord Derrington nodded approvingly. "You are what the Scotch call
'quick in the uptake,' George. That is what I mean. Mrs. Jersey must
have been afraid for herself or she would never have kept her claws
off Ireland's money. She had plenty of mine," added the old gentleman,
grimly. "Bad lot, George!"

"I quite agree with you, sir. Poor Bawdsey was honest, however."

"Well--" Lord Derrington did not assent immediately to this--"if
Bawdsey had been really honest he would have asked me to be silent on
the matter, and need not have used threats, however unwilling he was
to carry them out. No, George, Bawdsey is like the serpent in the
bamboo, straight so long as it is kept in check. I suppose he will
marry the girl?"

"I think so. He is madly in love with her. I promised that you would
give him a thousand pounds if he went to America."

"The deuce you did!" said Derrington, wrathfully.

"Why not, sir?" rejoined Brendon, calmly. "We want him out of our
lives. He knows too much. Better send him abroad, so that he may not
make any remark about this unpleasant family history."

Lord Derrington winced. George certainly had rather an unpleasant way
of putting things. However, the old man silently acknowledged the
justice of the speech. "You are right," he said. "But Bawdsey ought to
do something for his money."

"You mean that he ought to discover the assassin?"

"Yes, I do. Whosoever killed that woman should be brought to justice,
George."

Brendon looked down. "I think it will be best to let sleeping dogs
lie, sir," he said significantly.

"Because of some scandal," said Derrington, looking hard at him. "Are
you alluding to the possibility of Mrs. Ward having killed her?"

At this supposition George laughed right out. "No, sir. I don't think
Mrs. Ward would go so far as that."

"She would, were there no law to restrain her."

"I dare say. She has the instincts of a female despot. But as there is
a law she would not jeopardize her neck. No, I mean Ireland."

Derrington sat up. "Nonsense! Do you mean to say he is guilty?"

"I don't think so, but Bawdsey has an idea," and George related the
theory of the detective. Derrington grunted in a disgusted manner.

"The man's a born idiot," he said. "Why should Ireland run the risk of
getting his neck into a noose for a second crime? If he thought that
she would leave a confession behind inculpating him, he would have
waited to make certain. I don't believe there is a word of truth in
the matter. However, when you see him, you can question him about his
doings on that night."

"I shall certainly do that," replied Brendon, quietly, "but failing
Ireland (and his guilt is presumed by Bawdsey) there remains Margery."

"That idiot of a girl! Yes?"

George detailed his reasons for believing in Margery's guilt. Again
Derrington sniffed. "It's all supposition. If the girl came into the
room, if the stiletto were on the table, if Mrs. Jersey scolded her
into a fury. Pah! I don't believe it."

"And you really wish to find the assassin?"

"I should like to know, out of mere curiosity. But if it is your
opinion that things should be left as they are, why, Bawdsey can take
his thousand pounds and sail for America whenever he chooses. But I
grudge setting the rascal up in business," added Derrington who was
still sore about the way in which he had been threatened.

After this conversation George took his leave. Dorothy was out of
town, so he could not visit her. After the interview with Ireland in
Derrington's library, Mrs. Ward had found it convenient to go down the
country. She felt that she was in an unpleasant position. Not that
there was any danger of her being accused of murdering Vane. But if
the police got hold of the story they might make inquiries--in fact,
they certainly would make inquiries--and then the disagreeable fact
would come out that Miss Bull was her sister. Mrs. Ward knew that she
had not behaved well to Jenny, and that if the truth were known her
friends would blame her.

As Mrs. Ward did not like blame, and disliked to have her actions
criticised, she went down the country, saying to Dorothy she desired a
change of air. Lord Derrington wrote a note to Mrs. Ward after George
had departed.

"I'll ask her to come up," said Derrington, grimly, as he sealed the
letter. "George will return in three days with the copy of the
marriage certificate and with news of how that case has been disposed
of. Mrs. Ward shall apologize to him and formally consent to the
marriage. Dorothy shall come also. And Walter"--Derrington rubbed his
hands, chuckling. He was rather anxious to see Walter's face when he
heard that he was no longer the heir.

Meantime George went with Kowlaski and Bawdsey to Chelmsford to see
after Lola. Kowlaski was in despair, as if Lola received a term of
imprisonment his ballet would be brought to an untimely end. Now that
Lola was out of the bill, the hall was not so full as usual, and
Kowlaski foresaw that if Lola did not come back he would lose money.
He therefore went down prepared to spend a large sum to set her free.

But there was no need for fear. Lola was brought up before the
magistrates, and evidence was given as to her excitable nature. The
old sexton produced the torn register and detailed how he had been
assaulted. He thought the lady was queer, himself. Kowlaski went into
the box, also Bawdsey and George. The result of their evidence as to
Lola's foreign ways was that the magistrate admonished her and
inflicted a small fine. This was triumphantly paid by Kowlaski, who
returned to town with his principal dancer under his jealous eye.

More than that, Kowlaski made quite a story out of the events. It was
known in London that Lola Velez had been arrested, as all the London
papers copied the account of the trial which had appeared in the
country press. Kowlaski put it about that Lola had gone off her head
owing to grief for her dying mother. Few people believed this, but the
public was so pleased to see the favorite again that she was saluted
with cheers. In a few days every one forgot about the matter, which,
after all, did not amount to much.

Luckily it was not stated why Lola had wished to destroy the register.
There were several marriage entries on the page, and no one could say
which of these she wished obliterated. Besides, Brendon got the
magistrate to suppress the book, and not let the press report the
matter. He accomplished this by telling the magistrate exactly how the
matter stood. So the judicial authority used his power, and the fourth
estate quailed. Everything was settled in a most satisfactory manner.

Later on Brendon had copies made of the marriage entry of Percy Vane,
Bachelor, and Rosina Lockwood, Spinster, and brought them to his
grandfather. The old man read them carefully, then laid down the paper
with a sigh of relief.

"I never thought I would be pleased to see that in black and white,"
he said.

"And are you pleased now?"

"Of course I am. You are to revive the glories of the Derrington Vane
family. They have faded of late, but you, sir----" He clapped his
grandson on the back, and George laughed at the old man's enthusiasm.

"There is one strange thing," he said after a pause. "Seeing that my
parents were married so near London I cannot understand how the
marriage was not discovered before."

Derrington looked thoughtful also. "It is strange," he admitted, "but
you remember the tale of Poe's Purloined Letter. People always look in
the most unlikely places first, and because the church was so near to
town and nobody had replied to the advertisement, they--the searchers,
I mean--must have thought that the marriage took place in some
moorland parish where people never looked at the journals. It was the
very closeness of Wargrove church to London, George, that prevented
the certificate being discovered sooner."

"I suppose you are right," said Brendon, "but it does seem strange."

"Everything in life is strange," said Derrington, "and not the least
strange thing is that I kick out Walter to make room for you. By the
way, George, he will be here soon."

"Have you told him?"

"Yes, and he wants to see you about the matter. I said that he could
in my presence. What he has to say I don't know. There is another
reason for your remaining, George. Mrs. Ward and her daughter are
coming here."

"She won't be pleased to see me," said Brendon.

"Oh, I think she will. After Ireland put her in a corner she grew
afraid, and now she would like to see the matter settled at any price.
When she is your mother-in-law, George, keep her out of your house or
there will be trouble."

"You must stand sentinel, sir. She won't come near me then."

"Egad, that's true. She is afraid of me. I hold that stiletto, you
see, and I know about her doings at San Remo. The minx!" said
Derrington with great vigor. "I wonder that her daughter is so
charming."

"So good, you mean," said George, fondly, whereat Derrington gave a
sigh.

"Oh, love--love, and again--love," said he. "It seems I am going to
have a most sentimental time with you two."

"Be at rest, sir. Neither Dorothy nor I am sentimental. We are too
serious for that."

"That's worse. I hate serious lovers."

"Then we will be gay," said George, with a laugh.

"Don't overdo it," replied Derrington, with a kindly smile; "be as you
are, both of you, and I shall not complain. Ah, here is Walter! Well,
my boy, have you come to see your new cousin?"

Walter Vane entered the library with an injured air. He looked neater
and more fragile than ever, and wonderfully old, considering his
years. Derrington looked from him to the fine figure of George, with a
queer look in his eyes. "No one would ever take you for relatives," he
said.

"Why, they say we are like one another," said Walter. "Mrs. Ward
remarked on the likeness when we dined with her. I wondered why we
should resemble one another, but it is explained now," and Walter cast
a not unkindly look in his cousin's direction.

Derrington snarled. "George is like me, and you take after your
father, Walter, who was a shrimp if ever there was one."

George hastened to the rescue of his cousin. "It seems to me that the
conversation is getting somewhat personal," he remarked. "Walter, I
hope you bear me no grudge for stepping into your shoes."

Walter took the hand in his own limp grasp. "Well, of course it is
hard on a fellow," he answered in a rather whining manner, "but you
and I got on well together, so I would rather it was you than another
fellow. That Train friend of yours, for instance. He's such a cad!"

"But a very good fellow for all that," said Brendon, dryly.

"Oh, people always say that of a fellow who has nothing to recommend
him," retorted Walter; "but as you are to be the head of the family I
am glad you are not a bounder."

"That's very kind of you," said George, dryly.

"And very silly of Walter," growled the grandfather. "What do you
mean, sir, by talking rubbish? Is it likely that any one of my blood
would be what you call a bounder?"

"No," said Walter, pacifying the old man. "I only mean----"

"Never mind what you mean. It's sure to be something foolish. This,"
said Derrington, pointing with his cane to George, "is the future head
of our family. Pay him all respect."

"We'll get on capitally," said George, clapping Walter on the back.

"And what about my income?" asked Walter.

"You will have what you have now," said Derrington; "don't bother me
about the matter. You and George can settle it between you."

Considering how he had been ousted, Walter really took things very
calmly. But he had not enough vigor to protest. He sighed. His
grandfather had cowed him, and Walter profoundly admired his newly
found cousin, who did not hesitate to stand up to the despot. He began
to think it was a good thing that George had come into the family. He
would at least save him--Walter--from constant bullying. This
interesting family council was interrupted by the entrance of Mrs.
Ward, as pert and pretty as ever. She had quite recovered her spirits,
and knowing that Derrington would say nothing about the card-cheating
or about the San Remo matter, she was prepared to be as insolent as
she dared. But she was quite determined not to cross swords again with
the old man. Like a burnt child she dreaded the fire. Derrington was
altogether too much, even for her.

As it was, she came sailing in with the prettiest air in the world,
and held out both hands, her head on one side like a sick canary. "My
dear Lord Derrington, how well you are looking! How"--here her
astonished eyes fell on George. "You!" said Mrs. Ward, aghast. "Mr.
Brendon! and here!"

"Not Mr. Brendon," said Derrington enjoying her confusion, "but my
grandson, George Vane."

Dorothy, who had remained below to give some instructions to the
footman, entered the room just in time to hear this announcement. She
flew to her lover. "My dearest George, I am glad, glad, so glad," and
before them all she kissed him. Mrs. Ward screamed:

"Dorothy! What manners!"

"Very good manners," said Derrington, coolly, "seeing that they are
natural. Well, Mrs. Ward, George--my grandson, and heir," added the
old man with emphasis, "has something to say to you."

"Really. I shall be most happy to hear it."

George took his cue. "I have to ask you for the hand of your daughter
Dorothy," he said, looking very proud and manly as he stood with the
girl's hand within his own.

"Really," said Mrs. Ward again, "I don't know. I fancied that Walter,
you see----" And she cast her eyes on the neat little man.

"Oh, I scratch," said Walter, in his elegant way. "There's no fighting
against George. He has all the luck."

"You call him George?"

"Why shouldn't I? He's my cousin; the head of the house----"

"When I go to my long home," finished Derrington. "Well, Mrs. Ward, do
you consent to the match?"

"Do, mother," said Dorothy, imploringly.

Mrs. Ward sank into a chair and pretended to be overcome by emotion.
In fact, she did this merely to gain time, as she did not wish to
answer too quickly. It was plain that Walter, whom she had wished
Dorothy to marry, took, in her own phraseology, "a back seat." George
was promoted _vice_ Walter resigned. George would be Lord Derrington and
would have the money. He was an obstinate man, certainly, and would be
difficult to manage.

Still, she might be able to get the better of him. She could always
work him through Dorothy, if Dorothy would only get over her absurd
notions of religion and all that sort of thing. On the whole Mrs. Ward
thought it was best to agree. Knowing what Derrington knew, and how
obstinate both lovers were, she did not see very well what else she
could do. However, she made the most of her compulsory surrender.
After a few sighs, and having squeezed a few tears, she cried to her
daughter, in a muffled voice, expressive of deep emotion, "Dorothy, my
dear child."

Dorothy, with a look at George, went and knelt down by her mother's
chair. She was not the dupe of this play-acting, but, knowing that her
mother would insist on making an effective scene, wished to get it
over as speedily as possible.

Mrs. Ward put her hand on Dorothy's shoulder in a maternal manner. "Do
you love George?" she asked.

"Yes," said Dorothy, simply, "you know I love him."

"George, do you love my child?"

"I do," replied George, curtly, while Derrington surveyed this
touching scene with a grim smile. He always loved to watch the antics
of Mrs. Ward. She believed in them so thoroughly herself, and they
deceived no one gifted with ordinary intelligence.

"It is hard," said Mrs. Ward with a deep sigh, "to see a child leave
its parent. But you love her, you have won her;" here she rose, and
raising Dorothy from her knees gave her to George. "Take her, George,
and with her take a mother's blessing."

The idea of Mrs. Ward's blessing was too much for Walter, and he went
off into a shriek of laughter, which ended in his leaving the room.
George was quite unmoved. He thanked Mrs. Ward and kissed Dorothy.
Then he took her to a distant seat near the window, where they could
talk sensibly. Lord Derrington was left to console the afflicted
mother. This he proceeded to do immediately.

"Egad, you did it well!" he said, looking at the pretty woman. "I
don't believe Miss Terry or Mrs. Siddons could have done it better."

Mrs. Ward flushed a little, but still kept up the pose. "Nature spoke,
my dear Lord Derrington. I am aware that you consider Nature vulgar."

"I was not aware that I did. I see so little of it, that your scene
touched me--positively touched me."

Mrs. Ward saw that it was useless to hide the truth from this
keen-eyed old man any longer. "Oh, don't be nasty," she said
plaintively, and rustled up to him. "Of course, I wanted Dorothy to
marry Walter, but George does just as well."

"I don't think she has made a bad exchange, Mrs. Ward."

"He's good-looking enough," said the little woman, "but so serious and
dull. Of course, I suppose you'll allow him an income."

"He shall have all that is necessary to keep up his position as my
heir," said Derrington dryly. "I hope he and Dorothy will live here.
The house is big enough."

"And they won't have to pay any rent, which is always a consideration,
isn't it? Oh, I hope dear Dorothy will be happy. I shall see much of
her--much of my darling child."

"No," said Derrington, thinking it just as well to nip these plans in
the bud, "you care very little about Dorothy, and you don't like
George. When they are married you must stop away as much as is
consistent with your feelings."

"I'll do what I like," said Mrs. Ward, beginning to tap her foot.

"No, I don't think you will. You threatened me in this room."

"I was only playing a game," protested Mrs. Ward.

"Well, I can play a game also. Mrs. Jersey has left behind her a
confession in which she details how you managed to cheat your sister,
Miss Bull. If you don't leave that couple severely alone I shall show
the confession to Dorothy."

"You would never be so cruel."

"Oh, yes, I would," replied Derrington, who had not the slightest
intention of fulfilling his threat.

"I never did anything to my sister. Mrs. Jersey tells lies----"

Derrington made a gesture of disgust. "There--there," he said, "what
is the use of talking further? Things are settled. When Dorothy and
George are married I'll see what I can do for you."

Mrs. Ward's face became wreathed with smiles. She was such a
frivolous, heartless little woman that she could change from one mood
to another with wonderful rapidity. "Oh, thank you, dear Lord
Derrington," she said artlessly, and pressing his arm. "I know you are
the most generous of men. But I really can't stop talking here all
day." She rustled over to Dorothy. "My darling, I must go and do some
shopping. No, you can stay here. I will call again in an hour.
George," she presented her cheek, "you can kiss your mother-in-law."

George did so, delicately, so as not to spoil the tint of the cheek.

Mrs. Ward departed. "He's like a block of wood," she said to herself;
"never did a man kiss me so coldly before. Ugh! The bear!"




CHAPTER XXIV

A STARTLING SURPRISE


Having thus settled matters in a satisfactory manner with Mrs. Ward
and Dorothy, George sought out Ireland the next day. He passed a
delicious hour with Dorothy, and they renewed the vows they had made
when there was little chance of a bright future. Now the future was
altogether bright, and the two built castles in the air. George was to
marry Dorothy, they were to take up their residence with Lord
Derrington, and George was to enter Parliament on the first
opportunity.

"But you must not neglect your literary work," said Dorothy; "the
novel must be finished."

"I hope that many novels will be finished," said George, laughing. "I
will be like Beaconsfield, and write novels between whiles of
politics--it will be an amusement."

"Which will be the amusement?" asked Dorothy.

"Both. Politics is an amusing game, and when one has time to write
what one pleases, and at the pace one pleases, that is amusing also.
You will be my inspiration--my Egeria."

"That is very like Beaconsfield," replied Miss Ward; "he always called
some unknown woman his Egeria."

"I am more lucky. I know who my Egeria is."

More talk of this light and fanciful kind passed. It would have
sounded foolish to sensible people, but George and his beloved were so
happy that they talked nonsense out of sheer lightness of heart. At
the end of the hour Mrs. Ward carried off Dorothy, and George took
leave of his grandfather.

It was the next day that he went to see Ireland. At the door he was
informed that Ireland had been very ill with his heart, and that the
doctor had been called in. Nevertheless, Ireland would not obey the
advice of his physician and stop in bed. He was up and dressed as
usual and in his study.

George entered the large bare room, papered with the gaudy
advertisements, and saw his former guardian seated at his desk as
usual. The man looked very ill. His large, placid face was extremely
pale, there were dark circles under his eyes, and he even seemed to
have grown lean. His clothes hung loosely on him, and he did not rise
when George entered. The young man knew that Ireland must be ill to
fail in this courtesy, as he was extremely punctilious.

"Excuse me, George," he said, with an attempt at cheerfulness, "but I
am not so well as I might be."

"You are looking ill--very ill," said George, taking his seat.

Ireland nodded. "I can't live long," he remarked in his heavy voice.
"So the doctor informs me. My heart is extremely weak. I may die at
any moment."

George was shocked. "It's not so bad as that, I hope," he said.

"It's as bad as it well can be. For the last few days I have deviated
sadly from my usual habits. I have not taken a walk, and my system of
life is quite upset. It's the beginning of the end." He paused and
sighed. "You are looking well, George."

"I have every reason to. Mrs. Ward has consented to my marriage."

"With her daughter? How is that?"

"Well, the church where my parents were married has been discovered."

Ireland looked interested. "That is good news. Where were they
married?"

"In Wargrove Church. It is a parish in Essex, an hour's journey from
town. Quite a small place."

Ireland made the same remark that George himself had made. "Strange,"
he said, "that being so near town the place was not discovered before.
I have no doubt that your advertisement set many people hunting. Well,
I'm glad that the marriage has been proved at last, both for your sake
and in justice to the woman I loved--to her dear memory. She was
Rosina Vane after all."

"That has been proved beyond a doubt. My grandfather has seen the copy
of the certificate and now holds it."

"Is he pleased?"

"Very pleased. He is now as friendly toward me as he has been hitherto
hostile."

Ireland nodded, breathing heavily. "I thought he would be. He and I
had a long talk about you on the day I called. That was when I saw
Mrs. Ward and----"

"You can go on," said George, seeing his hesitation. "I know the whole
story."

"What story?" asked Ireland, suspiciously.

"The story of what happened at San Remo. Mrs. Ward I know was Violet
Howard, and her sister Jenny is Miss Bull."

"Yes. Poor Jenny, she was the better of the two, and now she drags out
a miserable life in a London lodging-house. While Violet, who is a bad
woman----"

"And the mother of Dorothy," interrupted George, imperiously. "Say no
more, sir."

"You are quite right. As I can't say good of the woman let me say no
bad. Well, you know how she loved your father."

"I think she flirted with him, but it was Jenny who really loved."

"And look at her reward!" said Ireland, with a deep sigh. "Those who
try to do their best always come off worst. I loved your mother,
George, and I have been a lonely man all my life."

It was a sad case. George wished to get at the truth, but he was so
sorry for Ireland, who had passed so many miserable years, that he did
not like to inflict more pain. Nevertheless, it was necessary to learn
if Ireland had really visited Mrs. Jersey on that night, so as to set
Bawdsey's mind at rest. If George did not learn the truth, Bawdsey
might attempt the discovery, and he would handle the old man in a much
worse manner than George was likely to do. While pondering how he
could set about his unpleasant task, George was saved from making the
first step, always the most difficult, by an observation from Ireland,
which paved the way to an explanation.

"How did you discover the church?" he asked idly.

"In rather a queer way. Lola Velez----"

Ireland opened his eyes, which had been closed, and looked up. "Who is
Lola Velez?" he asked anxiously.

"She is a dancer whom I helped--oh, quite in a proper way, Mr.
Ireland. You know the name?"

Ireland, contrary to George's expectation, nodded. "There was a woman
in San Remo about the time of your father's death. She was called
Velez, and was in love with him."

"He seems to have been a fascinating man," said George, smiling, to
set Ireland at his ease. "But this Lola is the daughter of the woman
you mention. It was she who found the church."

By this time Ireland was quite awake, and keenly anxious for details.
"How did she learn its name?" he demanded quickly.

"She found it in the confession of Mrs. Jersey."

Ireland snapped the paper-cutter he was holding, and, leaning back in
his chair, looked anxiously at George. "What do you mean?"

"Well," replied the young man, keeping his eyes fixed on Ireland's
face, "it seems that Mrs. Jersey left a confession behind her as to
what took place at San Remo."

"Who has that confession?"

"I have! I got it from Lola!"

"And how did she manage to obtain it?"

For answer George related how Lola had called to see Mrs. Jersey, and
how she had managed to steal the confession. "It was from reading it,"
finished George, "that she learned of the church in which my parents
were married. Desiring that I should marry her, and thinking I would
not do as were my birth proved, she went to the church to destroy the
registers. She was caught with the torn leaves, and arrested."

"Arrested?"

"Yes. I wonder you did not see the case reported in the papers."

"I have been too ill to read the papers lately," said Ireland, looking
round the room in rather a helpless way, "and none of my servants told
me. What happened?"

"Oh, Lola was let off with a small fine. She is now back dancing at
her music-hall. She gave the confession to me."

"Did any one else see it--the authorities?"

"No. You can set your mind at rest, Mr. Ireland. I got it from Lola
before she was taken to prison. No one had seen it but myself and Lord
Derrington."

Ireland drew a long breath of relief. "You made a strange remark just
now, George," he said, not looking at the young man. "You told me to
set my mind at rest. Why did you say that?"

"I have read the confession," said George, quietly.

Mr. Ireland rose from his chair and began to pace the room. He seemed
so weak that George wished him to return, but the old man waved his
hand impatiently. "It's all right--it's all right," he said, then
stopped opposite to George. "Then you know?"

"I know that my father's death was due to an accident."

"What! Did that wretched woman tell the truth?"

"She told the truth."

"And she did not accuse me of having murdered your father?"

"No. She did not. I suppose she thought it was as well to go to her
long home with as few sins as possible on her conscience. But she
certainly exonerated you."

"Thank God for that," said Ireland, and returned to his seat. Then he
looked at his visitor in a piteous manner. "George," he said in
faltering tones, "I have suffered greatly on account of that most
unhappy accident----"

"I am sure you must have, sir. But don't let it worry you any more. It
was an accident, and both Lord Derrington and I heartily forgive you
for having been the unconscious cause of my father's death."

Ireland nodded. "Thank God again," he said solemnly. "Your father and
I were not very good friends, as I found it difficult to forgive him
for having taken from me the woman I loved. But at San Remo we got on
better together. I stifled my resentment so that I might see as much
of you as possible, George. Knowing that I was not on good terms with
Vane, I thought that Mrs. Jersey might have accused me of the crime.
She did try to get money out of me."

"So Bawdsey told me."

"Bawdsey. Who is he?"

"I forget you don't know. He is a private-inquiry agent who has been
looking after the case on behalf of Lord Derrington. I learn from the
confession of Mrs. Jersey that he is her husband."

"George Rates. I remember. She told me she married him and went to
America. It was after her return from America that she tried to get
money out of me. I refused; not that I did not realize the danger to
which she could expose me, but I knew that if I once yielded I would
be in her power. Besides, I had a defense, as she got the stiletto
from the woman Velez."

"And it was with that same stiletto that Mrs. Jersey was killed."

"By whom?" asked Ireland. "Did her husband----"

"No. We do not know who killed her. Perhaps you may know?"

"I!" Ireland looked genuinely surprised. "No; how should I know?"

"Well," said George, rather awkwardly, "it seems that Bawdsey has got
it into his head that you knew about this confession."

"I did not!"

"That you were afraid it would be published after her death, and that
you went to the house on that night to get it."

"I did not. How could I have entered the house?"

"Bawdsey thinks you had a latch-key."

"No. All the keys were handed to Lord Derrington's agent
when the house was sold. In plain in words, George, this man
Bawdsey--Rates--whatever he calls himself; accuses me of the murder."

"He doesn't exactly accuse you, but----"

"I don't know what else you would call his statements but
accusations," retorted Ireland with some heat, "but I never was near
the house. I certainly thought that Mrs. Jersey might leave some such
confession, but I never asked her about it. I never thought that such
a healthy woman would die before me, and I knew that sooner or later
my bad heart would carry me off in spite of the regularity of my
life."

"Then you cannot guess who killed her?"

"No. I was never near the house. I was in bed and asleep. My servants
will tell you so."

"I need not ask them," said George, quickly. "I never thought you were
guilty, and I only came to receive your assurance, so that I might
tell Bawdsey and prevent him troubling you."

"If Bawdsey comes here I'll soon make short work of him," said
Ireland, sharply. "I am not afraid."

"You need not be. Mrs. Jersey's own confession exonerates you."

"I don't mind even that. I would have faced the worst had it to be
faced. I never was a coward--except in one thing." He paused and
looked timidly at George. "I shrank from telling you how I was the
unhappy cause of your father's death."

"You were not the cause, in my opinion. Mrs. Jersey was the cause."

"Well, I thought you would shrink from me did you know all."

"I do know all, and I do not shrink from you," replied George, leaning
across the desk to shake Ireland's hand. "It was a pure accident, and
has been related by your enemy."

"I am so glad the truth is known to you at last," faltered the old
man, "and that you see how unconsciously I caused the death. You are
her son, George, the son of the only woman I ever loved--of the woman
for whose sake I have remained lonely all these years. Had you
condemned me----" His emotion prevented him from saying more.

George grew alarmed by his pallor. "Please think no more of the
matter, Mr. Ireland," he said; "you are ill. Go and lie down!"

"Yes, I'll lie down." Ireland leaned heavily, on George's arm. "I
shall lie down for ever. But I am glad you know. I am glad you are not
angered."

"We are the best of friends, Mr. Ireland. You have always been kind to
me. And I am sure my dead mother blesses you for all your goodness to
her orphan boy."

"Rosina! Rosina!" murmured Ireland, "how I loved her. You have her
eyes, George, and her kind nature. Come, let me get to bed. Soon the
curtain will drop."

"I am afraid my visit has been too much for you."

"No. I am glad you came. I am glad you spoke out. I always intended to
do so, but I feared lest you should blame me."

By this time they were ascending the stairs. George conducted the old
man to his room and sent for the doctor. Ireland undressed and got to
bed. Then he insisted on George leaving him.

"But you are ill," protested the young man.

"I am dying, but what of that? I am glad to die. I shall meet Rosina
again after long, long years of sorrow. Go, George. We understand one
another, and you have forgiven me. There is no more to be said."

"There is nothing to forgive," replied George, softly; then, to humor
his old guardian, he departed. A strong grip of the hand was exchanged
between them. George left the room and saw Ireland lying as still as
any corpse. Only his lips moved, and they murmured continuously,
"Rosina! Rosina!" He was true to the woman he loved to the very end.

George left the house, as there was nothing he could do, but he
intended to call in again. Meanwhile he repaired to Amelia Square to
see Bawdsey. Derrington wished him to tell the detective to stop
looking after the case and discharge him from his employment. In his
pocket George had a check for one thousand pounds, and when this was
paid the whole case was to be relegated to obscurity. Now that
Derrington was reconciled to his grandson he was anxious, for obvious
reasons, that the sordid tragedy of Mrs. Jersey's death should not
come to light. He had not played a very respectable part in it
himself, and, moreover, he did not wish that confession published. It
would only be a case of washing the family linen in public, and both
George and he agreed that this was undesirable. The sooner Bawdsey
married Lola and went to America the better, Derrington thought. And
for his own sake Bawdsey would hold his tongue, seeing what a close
connection he was of the dead woman.

Bawdsey was at home and saw George at once. He looked rather excited,
and could hardly keep his seat. "Well, Mr. Brendon," he asked, "what
is it?"

"I should rather ask you that;" said George; "you seem excited."

"Not very. Only I have been fortunate in some business, and----"

"What is the business?"

"I'll tell you that later. What is yours?"

"A pleasant one," rejoined George. "Here is the check for one thousand
pounds which my grandfather promised you. Marry Lola and go to the
States, and stop searching for the assassin of Mrs. Jersey."

"Thank you," replied Bawdsey, taking the check eagerly, "your
grandfather is a prince, Mr. Brendon. As to the case, why should I
stop searching?"

"You will never find the assassin."

"Pardon me," said Bawdsey, in high glee. "I have found the assassin.
Yes!" as George uttered an ejaculation. "Miss Bull killed Mrs.
Jersey."




CHAPTER XXV

THE TRUTH


George stared at the triumphant detective in surprise. It seemed
impossible that what he stated could be true. Miss Bull was the very
last person whom Brendon would have accused. No one had been more
candid than she had been, and no one at the time of the discovery of
the crime had done more to help the detectives.

"You must mean Margery," said George after a time.

"No, I don't," replied Bawdsey, in a determined voice. "I mean that
little white old woman with the black eyes--Miss Bull, or, as you know
her, Miss Jenny Howard."

"But what reason----"

"Ah, that's a long story! She shall tell you herself."

"Have you had her arrested?"

"Not yet. But she will be arrested before the end of the day. I have
already communicated with Scotland Yard."

George rose and walked to the window. He felt irritable and upset now
that the truth had come to light. He wished that Bawdsey had not been
so confoundedly interfering, and the detective's next words annoyed
him still further.

"It was your idea about Margery that put me on the scent," he said
with great complacency; "though, to be sure, I had my suspicions
before. It was to watch Miss Bull that I came here."

"What made you think that she was guilty?"

"She has confessed--in the calmest manner, too--that----"

"I mean before. Why did you suspect her?"

"Well, it seemed to me that she was the only person who could have
killed Eliza. She and Eliza hated one another because of their mutual
love for your father."

George groaned. What a lot of trouble his father had caused with his
handsome looks and charming manners. Even after his death the fatal
attraction he exercised seemed to bring about disaster. "She did not
kill Mrs. Jersey on that account," he said.

"Wait till you hear. She will tell you. In fact, she asked me to send
for you, as she wishes to speak."

"Where is she now?"

"In the famous sitting-room playing Patience."

"Doesn't she realize the peril of her position?"

"In a way she does. But she seems quite ready to face the worst."

"Poor woman," said George, thinking of the sad life which the old maid
had led; "if she has sinned, she has suffered."

"If people will use knives in that way they must be punished," was the
rather harsh retort of Bawdsey.

"Don't talk stuff, Bawdsey. You have your own sins to think of."

"I never committed murder."

"No one said you had, but you may do so before you die."

Bawdsey shuddered. "I hope not, Mr. Vane," he said. "I don't know why
you should say such a thing. I am an honest man."

"You say that so often that I shall begin to disbelieve it," replied
Brendon, rather cynically; "but if you marry Lola, either you will
kill her or she will kill you."

"I'll take my chance of that. And if you----"

George made an impatient gesture with his hand and returned to his
seat. "Never mind further chatter. Let me hear how you came to learn
that this poor creature struck the blow."

"If you talk that way of a criminal, Mr. Vane, what will you say of a
good woman?"

"My good man, there is more joy over a sinner that repenteth----"

"But Miss Bull doesn't repent," said Bawdsey.

"I'll hear the story before I give an opinion on that point. You say
that it was some remark I made which----"

"Yes, it was," said Bawdsey, eagerly, and throwing himself into a
seat. "Your remark that Margery might be guilty----"

"One moment," interrupted George, in his turn. "I may tell you that I
have seen Mr. Ireland, and he declares that he never was near the
house on that night, that he knew nothing of the confession, and that
he had no latch-key. He is innocent."

"Now that I have heard Miss Bull I know that, sir. She's the one."

"Well, and how did you find out?"

Bawdsey cleared his throat and began, with a most important air: "I
rather agreed with your idea that Margery might be guilty," he said,
"and when I turned it over in my own mind I thought it more and more
probable. I therefore determined to get Margery alone and work on her
fears."

"Pah!" said Brendon, with disgust.

"Well, sir," retorted Bawdsey, shrugging his shoulders. "I had to get
at the truth somehow, and detective's work is not all so honorable as
novelists make out. I got Margery alone."

"And how did you set to work?"

"Well, it was this morning in the sitting-room. Miss Bull had gone out
and had left Margery to make up some accounts. The girl was laboring
away at them and getting into a hopeless mess. I came to speak with
her, and offered to do them. I soon put the accounts to rights and
then began to talk of Miss Bull."

"Why of Miss Bull?"

"Why--" Bawdsey pinched his lip--"I thought at the time that Margery
was guilty, and that if in talking to her I laid the blame on Miss
Bull that the girl would speak out."

"You traded on the poor wretch's friendship. Bawdsey, I'm ashamed of
you."

"I'm ashamed of myself," replied the detective, penitently; "but Lord
bless you! Mr. Vane, one gets used to this sort of thing. In our
business the means justifies the ends far more than in religion."

"I certainly don't think it justifies any end in religion," said
George, sharply. "Well, you accused Miss Bull of the crime?"

"In a way I did. Margery denied it."

"What did you say?"

"That she might as well confess. I declared that I had evidence to
prove Miss Bull's guilt, and that she would be arrested when she came
back. I declare, Mr. Vane, I thought that girl would strike me. She
was like a wild-cat."

"I wish she had," growled George, whose generous spirit was revolted
by the use Bawdsey had put Margery to.

"She said if I arrested Miss Bull she would kill me. I said, 'As you
killed your aunt.' She up and said: 'Yes, I did kill her. Miss Bull is
innocent, and you know she is.' Of course, when she admitted the fact
I at once began to suspect Miss Bull."

"Why did you do that?"

"Because if Margery had been guilty she would not have owned up. But
if Miss Bull was guilty, Margery would certainly take the guilt on
herself."

"Poor girl!" murmured George "there is something noble in that dull
soul."

Bawdsey could not see this, and mentally disagreed with it. However,
he did not want to argue down Brendon's too tender conscience, so he
went on with his recital. "While Margery was threatening me and taking
the guilt on herself, Miss Bull came in. That stupid girl ran to her
and fell at her feet, crying that I knew all, but that she would die
for her dear Miss Bull."

"And what did the woman say?"

"She asked me if I knew. I said I did. She demanded how I found out. I
told her that that was my business. She began to smell a rat and
suspected that I was bluffing. She would have held her tongue, but
Margery was in such terror for her friend that she came out with the
whole story. Miss Bull tried to stop her, but Margery kept repeating
that she would die for her dear Miss Bull, and so let the cat out of
the bag."

"The girl is half-witted--all this may not be true."

"Oh, yes, it is. When Miss Bull saw that the game was up she sat down
and admitted that she had killed Mrs. Jersey. She also said that she
was glad the truth had come to light, that she wished to die, and so
on."

"She was raving," said George, incredulously, not thinking any one
would incriminate himself or herself so freely.

"No, she wasn't. She told me the whole story in the calmest manner,
just as though she were asking me to have a cup of tea. Then she asked
me to send for you and sat down to play Patience."

"I wonder you are not having her watched," said George, with scorn.

"Oh, she won't run away," replied Bawdsey, easily, and not perceiving
the irony of the remark. "Come along, Mr. Vane, we'll go down and see
her. She is desperately anxious to see you."

"Do any of the boarders know?"

"Not yet, but they will when she is arrested."

George shuddered and followed Bawdsey down the stairs. It seemed
terrible to him that such a fragile little creature as Miss Bull
should be subjected to this disgrace. He did not condone her crime.
She had acted wrongly and must take the consequences. But he could not
forget that she was Dorothy's aunt, and he wished he could see some
way of rescuing her from this dreadful position.

Miss Bull was--as Bawdsey had stated--playing Patience. Seated at the
very table where her victim had sat, she dealt the cards, and seemed
quite interested in the game. Margery was seated in a chair near at
hand, looking with tearful eyes into the face of her friend. Beyond
the fact that Miss Bull was whiter than usual, she showed no signs of
emotion.

"You have come, George," she said, addressing him by his name. "I am
glad to see you. Mr. Bawdsey, you may go."

The detective was taken aback and would have remonstrated, but Margery
rose and approached him. "You have done your worst," she said, her
eyes flashing. "Go, or I'll twist your neck."

Bawdsey shrugged his shoulders, and with a glance at George went out.
After all, he had heard the story before and did not particularly care
to hear it again. Besides, Bawdsey was a kindly man, and he felt sorry
that he had proceeded to such extremities.

Miss Bull shuffled her pack of cards and laid them away in a box. "I
shall play that game no more," she said. "I have been playing Patience
all my life, but the end has come, and I am glad it has come. Hush,
Margery," for the girl had burst into tears, "I will see that you are
left well off and looked after, my dear."

"I don't want that. I want you," sobbed the girl. She slipped to the
floor and laid her head on Miss Bull's knee like a faithful dog. Miss
Bull patted her head and allowed her to remain in this position while
she spoke to George. Margery sobbed for a time, and then remained
quiet, listening to every word, and quite content to feel the gentle
hand of the old maid smoothing her hair.

"I suppose you were astonished when Mr. Bawdsey told you?" said Miss
Bull, looking with piercing eyes at Brendon.

"I was. I never thought that you--you----"

"That I would kill Mrs. Jersey," finished the woman, quietly. "Why
not? She was a bad, wicked creature, and caused the death of your
father. She boasted of it."

"Where? When?" asked the astonished young man.

"In this very room, in my presence. But to make you understand, I had
better tell you all."

"One moment, Miss Bull. When you told the fortunes on that night, did
you intend to kill Mrs. Jersey?"

"No. The death card did turn up. That was a strange coincidence,
George. When I came down the stairs I had no more idea than you of
killing the wretched woman."

"What made you do it?"

"I am telling you," replied Miss Bull, folding her hands on her lap.
"Wait and hear. Mrs. Jersey was very rude to me on that night. I
intended to remonstrate with her. She added insult to injury by
locking Margery in her bedroom, so as to keep her from me. I heard her
scolding Margery in the passage, and when all was quiet, and Mrs.
Jersey had gone down the stairs, I went up to Margery's room and
unlocked the door. Mrs. Jersey had struck the poor child, and she was
sobbing on her bed. I then determined to go down for the second time
and see Mrs. Jersey."

"For the second time? Were you down before?"

"I was," replied Miss Bull, calmly. "I wondered who Mrs. Jersey had
coming to see her, particularly after she had lost her courage when
she saw the yellow holly in your coat."

"You noticed that?"

"Yes, and I noticed the holly also. I wondered why you wore it. The
sight of it put into my mind that fatal night when he--" Miss Bull
brushed aside her thoughts--"but no matter. I thought I would see if
Mrs. Jersey was seeing any one, and also I wished to talk about the
yellow holly."

"But why should you trouble about her seeing any one?"

Miss Bull looked down and then looked up abruptly. "Mrs. Jersey would
have sent me back to the asylum if she could, and I was always afraid
lest she should see some one secretly about the matter. I crept down
the stairs, leaving Margery in my room playing at Patience. Mrs.
Jersey's door was closed. I heard the murmur of voices and I put my
ear to the keyhole. I heard that dancer--afterward I learned that it
was the dancer--I heard her accuse Mrs. Jersey of having killed Percy
Vane."

"On what grounds did Lola base that accusation?"

"She said her mother told her."

"I remember," muttered George. "The mother, on receiving back the
stiletto, certainly might have thought so. And what did Mrs. Jersey
say?" he asked aloud.

"She denied it, and made some sort of excuse. I remained to hear no
more. I knew then that Mrs. Jersey had killed my Percy."

"But she did not; it was an accident."

"I know. She explained. But she was the cause. I was right to kill
her. But for her Percy would have been alive, I would have been his
wife, and you, George, would have been my step-son."

"What did you do next?"

"I went up to my room and resumed my game of Patience. I intended to
have a talk with Mrs. Jersey the next morning, but when I found that
she had struck Margery I came down at once---"

"That was after eleven?"

"About a quarter past. Mrs. Jersey was in her room. We talked, and I
told her what I had heard. She denied it. I pointed to the stiletto
which was on the table as a proof that the girl had been here. Mrs.
Jersey said that it was the same stiletto with which Percy had been
killed, as Lola had received it from her mother. That put the thought
into my head that God intended Mrs. Jersey should be slain with the
same weapon with which my darling had been stabbed."

"A terrible thought. You should have put it away."

"I did, but it came again. I accused Mrs. Jersey of having killed
Percy. She gloried in the fact that it was through her he had died.
She declared that if Ireland had not held her hand she would have laid
him dead at her feet. She exulted that the accident had fulfilled her
intention, and taunted me with the fact that I never became his wife.
I was very quiet," added Miss Bull, her eyes glittering, "but my blood
was boiling. Mrs. Jersey turned her back on me with an insolent laugh
and sat down. The stiletto was on the table, her head was turned away.
I softly took the dagger, and----"

"No! no!" cried Margery, wailing, "you never did it--you never did it,
dear Miss Bull. It was I who----"

"Don't be a fool, child! I did it, and I would do it again." Miss Bull
rose. "George, you now know all, go--no, do not shake hands. I have
avenged your father, and I expect I will be hanged."

Margery burst out into renewed weeping, and Miss Bull soothed her,
talking to George the while. "Tell my sister," she said, "that the
name of Howard will not be mentioned. I will die under my false name.
No disgrace will be brought on her. As to Dorothy--" here Miss Bull's
eyes grew tender--"no disgrace will befall her. Marry her, George,
love her, make her a good husband, and--take this kiss to her from a
sorely tried woman."

Before the astonished George knew what she was about, he felt a pair
of cold lips pressed to his own. The next moment she had pushed him
out of the room and had locked the door. That was the last George saw
of her.

Whether Margery had agreed to die with her, or whether Miss Bull,
knowing what a miserable life the girl would lead after her death,
compelled her to take the poison, it will never be known. But when the
door was burst open the two women were found on the floor in one
another's arms. On the table was an empty glass, and it was
ascertained that Miss Bull and Margery had taken prussic acid. Bawdsey
entered the room an hour after the death, alarmed by the silence. He
found that his prey had escaped. Miss Bull was buried under her false
name, and Margery was buried with her. Nothing of Miss Bull's sad past
or of her killing of Mrs. Jersey came to light. She passed away with
her only friend, and her story was told.

Six months later George Vane was seated in the library of the mansion
in St. Giles Square. It was after dinner, and Lord Derrington occupied
his usual chair. The old man looked brighter and happier than he had
looked for many years. Daily George grew a greater favorite with him,
and on the morrow George was to be married. Lord Derrington had
insisted that as it was his last night as a bachelor George should
dine alone with him, and would not admit even Walter. "It's the last
time I'll have you all to myself, George," said the old man,
piteously; "after to-morrow Dorothy will possess you."

"Not at all," replied George, "you will have us both. We will come
back from the honeymoon in a month, and then we will live here."

"That's all been arranged," said Derrington, testily, "but we won't be
two independent bachelors."

"All the better," replied his grandson, cheerily; "a lady in the house
will make a lot of difference. You won't know this place when Dorothy
is flitting about."

"Don't! Her mother is the kind of woman who flits, and I won't have
her doing the butterfly business in that way."

"Oh, I don't think we'll be troubled much with Mrs. Ward. Since the
shock inflicted by her sister's sad death she has become religious."

"Bah! That's only a phrase. Poor Miss Bull," said Derrington. "I like
to think of her under that name. She had a sad life. I don't wonder
she killed herself. Do you think she was mad, George?"

"No. But I think the memory of her wrongs, which were all caused by
Mrs. Jersey, was too much for her. She was mad for the moment, but she
told me the terrible story in the calmest manner."

"And who came in at the front door that night?" asked Derrington.

"No one. After the murder Miss Bull opened it to fly--panic-struck, I
expect--but Margery came downstairs and stopped her. Miss Bull closed
the door and remained to face the worst."

"Well, she is dead and buried, and the scandal is laid at rest. Unless
that Bawdsey revives it."

"Oh, you can trust Bawdsey," said George, smiling; "he and Lola are
quite happy, and she has almost forgotten me. I got a letter from
Bawdsey the other day. He is acting as his wife's agent, and they are
making a lot of money."

"All the better. He won't talk about that business. By the way, I
forgot to ask you about Ireland's money?"

"The money he left to me? I have settled that on Dorothy. How suddenly
he died," said George, reflectively; "just an hour after I left the
house. I hope his end was peace. I think it was, as he felt relieved
that you and I had forgiven him."

"There was nothing to forgive. It was an accident, and if any blame is
due it is to that Jersey woman."

"Well, she is dead, and the woman who killed her is dead, so let them
all rest in peace. But it was good of Ireland leaving me his money."

"I don't see who else he had to leave it to. And five thousand a year
is not to be despised. Have you settled it all on Dorothy?"

"Every penny. Don't you approve?"

"Oh, yes, so long as Mrs. Ward doesn't get it."

"She's a reformed character. Why, the other day she told me that she
considered Dorothy irreligious."

"Pah! New brooms. She'll soon grow weary of that pose. When the effect
of poor Jenny Howard's death wears off she will be as gay and silly as
before. Don't have her in this house, that's all."

"You can depend upon that, sir. But Dorothy will be here--Dorothy,
whom I shall see to-morrow crowned with orange-blossoms, and----"

Derrington laughed, but not unkindly. "Well, well. Better
orange-blossoms than yellow holly."

George nodded. "I hope never to see yellow holly again," he said, and
Derrington agreed. So their conversation ended on the threshold of
George's new life with that last reference to the old.



THE END










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW HOLLY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


