The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Racer boys on the prairies
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Racer boys on the prairies
        The treasure of Golden Peak

Author: Clarence Young

Release date: February 17, 2025 [eBook #75395]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Cupples & Leon Company, 1913

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RACER BOYS ON THE PRAIRIES ***





                    THE RACER BOYS ON THE PRAIRIES

                                  Or

                      The Treasure of Golden Peak

                           BY CLARENCE YOUNG

            AUTHOR OF "THE RACER BOYS," "THE RACER BOYS AT
              BOARDING SCHOOL," "THE MOTOR BOYS SERIES,"
                    "THE JACK RANGER SERIES," ETC.

                               NEW YORK
                        CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

                         Copyrighted 1913, by
                        CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

                    THE RACER BOYS ON THE PRAIRIES




                               CONTENTS


                         I. "WHAT IS HE AFRAID OF?"

                        II. PLANNING THE HAZING

                       III. A NEEDLESS ALARM

                        IV. A MYSTERIOUS MAN

                         V. A STRANGE ATTACK

                        VI. BILLY TELLS SOMETHING

                       VII. NEWS FROM THE WEST

                      VIII. A THRILLING RESCUE

                        IX. THE INVITATION

                         X. OFF FOR THE WEST

                        XI. A RAILROAD SMASH

                       XII. THE MAN WHO LIMPED

                      XIII. THE RELIEF TRAIN

                       XIV. FORWARD AGAIN

                        XV. ON THE PRAIRIES

                       XVI. "WE ARE BEING FOLLOWED!"

                      XVII. AT THE RANCH

                     XVIII. MR. THORNTON IS WORRIED

                       XIX. WARNED AWAY

                        XX. THE BLACK CLOUD

                       XXI. THE INJURED MAN

                      XXII. THE MISSING PAPER

                     XXIII. THE CHASE

                      XXIV. OFF TO GOLDEN PEAK

                       XXV. CAMPING OUT

                      XXVI. THE CLOUDBURST

                     XXVII. GETTING OUT THE GOLD

                    XXVIII. THE RISING WATER

                      XXIX. MAROONED

                       XXX. THE END OF GOLDEN PEAK




                    THE RACER BOYS ON THE PRAIRIES




                               CHAPTER I

                        "WHAT IS HE AFRAID OF?"


"Say, there are the Racer boys back!"

"That's great! Now the fun will start!"

"It sure will. I was afraid they weren't coming here this term."

"Say, Riverview Hall wouldn't know how to get along without 'em."

"Guess you're right."

"Hello, Andy!"

"Hi, there, Frank!"

A group of students who had been skylarking about the boarding school
campus, made a rush for the two lads who were slowly advancing across
the green stretch.

It was early in the year, and the weather, which had been wet and
rather cold, was now turning into balmy spring, with the feeling of
baseball in the air. The Easter vacation was over, and the new term
at Riverview Hall would open in a few days. Some of the students had
already arrived, and more were coming. Among those who had made their
appearance were Andy and Frank Racer, whose advent caused such delight
to their chums.

"Now we'll have some baseball!" exclaimed Ward Platt, who could not
seem to get along without some form of athletics. "Andy and Frank will
just make up enough so we can have two nines," he added.

"And we'll do something else besides play ball," declared Jack
Sanderson.

"What?" asked John North.

"We've got to turn in, and get up some new kind of hazing for the
Freshmen. There'll be a lot of 'em here this term, I understand."

"Good! The more the merrier!" exclaimed Duke Yardly.

"Well, come on and see what news Andy and Frank have," suggested Donald
Burgess. "They're always doing something different, and there's no
telling what it will be this time."

"That's right," agreed his chums, and they soon surrounded the two lads
whose coming seemed to so liven up matters at Riverview Hall.

"How about you, Frank?" asked Ward Platt, as he grasped the elder of
the two brothers by the hand.

"Fine," was the rather quiet answer. "And how about you and the other
fellows?"

"Slick as axle grease," was the jolly answer.

"What have you been doing with yourself, Andy?" inquired Jack
Sanderson, as he clapped the younger Racer lad on the back with such
force that Andy gave forth a sound like a small bass drum.

"Prac-practicing!" gasped Andy, as soon as he could get his breath.
"Just--practicing, Jack."

"Practicing what, you old mush-eater?" demanded the other. "Have you
some new kind of baseball dope, or is it some place to go camping up at
the North Pole?"

"Just practicing," replied Andy, who seemed to be trying to get in a
certain position in regard to Jack. "Practicing this, old man!" he
suddenly exclaimed, and with a quick push, a motion of his foot, and a
shove, he sent Jack sprawling backward in the grass.

"That's one for you, Jack!" exclaimed Ward.

"Now will you be good?" demanded Donald Burgess.

"Did you say you wanted gravy on your eggs?" innocently inquired John
North.

There was a general laugh as Jack slowly arose, looking rather dazed,
for his fall had been a sudden one. He glanced sharply at Andy Racer.

"What did you say you had been doing?" he asked.

"Practicing," replied Andy, with just the suspicion of a grin on his
face, that was still tanned from much out-of-door life. "Practicing
that trip-up. It's a form of Japanese wrestling, and a fellow back
home showed it to me. I've been practicing up on it during the Easter
vacation, and I wanted to see if I could work it."

"Oh, you can work it all right!" exclaimed Jack, carefully feeling his
elbow. "Let's see how it's done."

"All right," agreed Andy with a readiness that was all too apparent.
"Stand up just as you did before, and----"

"Not on your life!" exclaimed Jack, backing away. "No you don't! Once
in a day is enough. I meant just show me the motions."

"It's impossible to demonstrate it without a subject to work on,"
replied the younger Racer lad, while his brother and some of his chums
were quietly laughing off to one side. "Come on; I won't throw you
hard."

"No, you don't!" went on Jack, still backing away. "Try it on someone
else for a change."

"All right," readily agreed Andy. "This is how it's done," and before
John North was aware of what was about to happen, Andy turned on him
suddenly, and, in an instant, though he tried to save himself by
grappling with Andy, John, too, went down.

"Say, that's a dandy trip, all right!" exclaimed Henry Walker. "Come
on now, Andy, show us how it's done without sending us head over heels."

"No, the price of admission is one fall!" insisted Andy, who was quite
proud of his accomplishment.

"Up to his old tricks; isn't he?" asked Jack of Frank, who was quietly
regarding his younger brother.

"Yes, I'm afraid he'll never get over 'em. Andy sees a joke in
everything, or, if it isn't there, he'll make it."

"Oh, that's all right. It's a good thing. What's the use of being
gloomy? I'm going to get him to show me how it's done."

"Why are you so anxious to learn?"

"Oh, it'll come in mighty useful when we start hazing some of the
Freshmen. There are some husky ones here this term, and we'll have our
hands full making them walk the chalk line."

"Many here yet?" asked Frank.

"Yes, quite a few, and more are coming."

"Any nice fellows?"

"Yes, lots; to judge by the looks. Since the school has been renovated,
thanks to you and Andy, we get a better class of fellows. Yes, there
are some nice chaps here, and one fellow who seems to have something of
a mystery about him."

"A mystery?" asked Frank, wonderingly.

"Yes, he acts just as if he----"

But Jack suddenly interrupted himself by exclaiming:

"There, Andy's showing how he does that tripping act. I must get next
to how it's done. Come on--though I suppose you know," and he started
away from Frank.

"No, I don't know the secret of it," admitted the elder Racer lad.
"Andy fooled me with it once or twice until I invented a new way to
stand him on his head, and then he quit."

"I see!" laughed Jack. "But come on over," and he led the way toward
where Andy stood, surrounded by a group of admiring lads.

"But you started to say something about a mysterious Freshman,"
suggested Frank, who liked to follow up matters.

"Tell you about it later," promised Jack, and he pushed his way into
the throng about Andy. "I want to see this first."

Andy was demonstrating his famous
"double-hammer-grip-half-Nelson-three-quarter-leg-lock-hold-trip," as
it was afterward christened.

"You just put up your right arm so," said Andy to John North, "and
then you stick out your left foot, and then you take hold of the other
fellow's left hand. Then you take a long breath, lean against him,
draw back your other foot and--there you are!"

As Andy spoke John was forced to execute a twist, and found himself
sitting on the grass, looking at his companions with such a strange
expression that they couldn't help laughing.

"That's how it's done," said Andy, with just a trace of a laugh.

"So--so I see," grunted John, as he arose.

"Oh, rats!" exclaimed Jack. "I thought you were going to do it slow, so
we could see the different motions."

"That's the trouble with it," went on Andy. "It has to be done quickly,
or it won't work, proving to you that I have nothing up my sleeves," he
went on, in the tone of a professional magician; "and that the hand is
quicker than the eye. Ahem!"

"Oh, cut it out!" yelled several.

"Yes, show us how it's done. We're all friends of yours," went on Jack.
"We may need it in our business when it comes to hazing the Freshmen."

"All right, I'll show you," and with that Andy proceeded to demonstrate
slowly, and with much explanation, how the trick fall was brought
about. It was really a knack of making the other lad trip himself, by
pulling him forward, and then suddenly compelling him to change his
center of gravity; and Andy had it down to perfection.

"Say, that's all to the fried eggs!" exclaimed John North, admiringly,
when the explanation was completed.

"It sure is," agreed Jack. "I wonder if I can do it?"

He tried, but was not very successful, and then some of the others
began imitating it, with Andy standing by and giving words of advice.

"Say, haven't you had enough of this?" asked Frank Racer after a while.
"Come on, Andy; we've got to see about our room, and get our things in
shape. I want the trunks brought up from the station."

"All right, I'm coming," replied his brother. "No, that's not the way
to put out your foot, Jack," and he started toward his chum.

"No, you don't!" exclaimed the latter, backing away. As he did so
he glanced across the campus, and at the sight of a solitary figure
advancing toward one of the dormitories he uttered an exclamation. Then
Jack glided to the side of Frank Racer and whispered to him:

"There he is!"

"Who?"

"That strange Freshman I was telling you about. Just watch him, and see
how queer he acts."

The two watched while Andy once more went through his little wrestling
lesson. The lad to whom Jack had pointed was about the build of Frank
Racer, though slightly larger, and he seemed to be of athletic mould.
Yet there was a curious air about him, and, as he walked on, he glanced
over his shoulder from time to time, as though to make sure that he was
not being followed.

"That's queer," commented Frank.

"It sure is," agreed Jack.

"Does he do that often?"

"All the while since he's been here."

"And how long is that?"

"Three days now. He arrived the day after I came. How does he strike
you?"

"Why, just as if he was looking for someone to come up behind him, and
hit him with a brick," said Frank.

"That's it, exactly."

"And yet, what is he afraid of?" went on the elder Racer lad. "What's
going to happen to him here, I'd like to know?"

"And I don't know. That's the mystery of it. Ever since he's been here
he's acted as though he was afraid of something going to happen, or as
if someone was going to attack him. I've been watching him, trying to
find out what it means, but I can't."

"What sort of a fellow is he otherwise?"

"Oh, good enough."

"What's his name, and where does he come from?"

"Chase--William Chase. I s'pose we'll call him Bill when we get to know
him better. But at present it's William. And he comes from some place
out west--I don't just know where--on the prairies, I fancy, from one
or two remarks he's made."

By this time the strange lad had reached the dormitory. As he entered
the doorway he wheeled about quickly as if to make sure that no one was
following him, and, even at that distance, Frank and Jack could see a
look of fear on his face.

"That _is_ mighty queer," murmured Frank. "What is he afraid of? We'll
have to look into this."




                              CHAPTER II

                          PLANNING THE HAZING


"What's your object?" asked Jack, as he linked his arm in that of his
chum, and the two strolled over the campus.

"Object in what?" inquired Frank Racer.

"In looking into the mystery that seems to be hanging about this
William Chase."

"Oh, I don't know as I have any particular object, except that I always
like to solve a mystery--if I can. And again, I don't like to see any
Riverview Hall lad act as this fellow does. It isn't a good sign. So,
if it's all the same to you, Jack, we'll see what we can do toward
getting at the bottom of this."

"Sure, I'm with you. And Andy will be in it, of course."

"He will if he can stop fooling long enough," rejoined Frank, glancing
over to where his brother was still surrounded by a group of lads
intent on learning the trick of the fall.

"Oh, Andy can settle down when he wants to," remarked Jack. "But let's
go up and see what sort of a room you're going to have. Ward and I
picked out ours, and there's one next to us that----"

"Say no more!" exclaimed Frank. "Andy and I will take that one. Hi,
Andy!" he called in a tone of voice that his brother knew would allow
of no further trifling.

"Coming!" yelled Andy, and with a last push that sent a would-be
masterer of the art of tripping sprawling to the grass, the younger
Racer ran to join his brother and Jack.

Frank looked toward the dormitory which the strange new lad had
entered. He was no longer in sight, and as the elder Racer lad thought
of his queer actions he wondered more and more.

"Here's something that needs looking into the first day we get back to
school," he mused, as, surrounded by his chums, all talking at once, he
walked toward the dormitory where he had roomed with his brother during
the last term.

And now, if you will grant me a few minutes, I will tell you, as
briefly as I can, something more about the Racer boys, and the affairs
in which they have figured as set down in the previous books of this
series.

The first volume was called "The Racer Boys," and in that I detailed
how the two were at their summer home in Harbor View, and how they
solved the mystery of the identity of a lad in a wrecked motor boat.

Andy and Frank Racer were the only sons of Mr. and Mrs. Richard Racer,
of New York. Mr. Racer was a wealthy silk merchant. Andy was about a
year younger than Frank, and of a fun-loving nature, always ready for a
trick or a frolic, and generally so impetuous that he acted first and
thought afterward. Frank was inclined to be the opposite, in that he
was filled with determination, and he usually carefully thought out his
plan of action before venturing to do an important thing.

Still, Frank liked fun, and was not a second behind his brother when it
came to having a good time. He was fond of athletics, as indeed they
both were, and they had made good showings on track and field.

How they had a battle with a whale, and how they brought the lad ashore
from his wrecked boat; how they got on the track of the unscrupulous
man who sought to harm him, and how they finally learned who "Paul
Gale" was--all these are told in the first book.

In the second volume, entitled "The Racer Boys at Boarding School,"
our heroes found themselves in a different atmosphere. Their parents
decided to send them to some institution of learning after their summer
of activity at the shore, and for this purpose Riverview Hall was
picked out. Almost at the start there was trouble. On the boat going to
the school Frank and Andy defended a girl from the rude talk of a man
who turned out to be Professor Thorndyke Callum, one of the teachers at
Riverview Hall. Naturally Mr. Callum "had it in" for the two lads.

"Oh, what a punk school!" Andy Racer had exclaimed on reaching
Riverview Hall. And indeed, though his language might not have been
polite, it was very descriptive.

Riverview Hall was afflicted with "dry rot." It had fallen upon evil
days, the trustees had no money to hire good instructors, and, indeed,
there was hardly enough cash to keep the institution going. Dr. Wesley
Doolittle, the head master, was doing his best, but he was more of a
scholar than a financier.

In consequence the buildings were almost in ruins, there was hardly a
decent bed in any dormitory, the football gridiron and the baseball
diamond were overgrown with weeds, the rowing shells were wrecks, and
the few lads at the place were dispirited.

Shortly after the advent of the Racer boys all this was changed.
Frank and Andy were at first much discouraged at the poor condition
of the school, but they agreed to "stick it out," and they did. They
reorganized the football eleven, put the grounds into shape, fixed
up a racing shell, got the baseball nine in running order, and soon
Riverview Hall was again among the champions.

Then a millionaire, seeing a great football game in which our two
heroes played, and learning how much they had done for the school,
invested a large sum in it. So that Riverview Hall came into its own
again, and among the improvements was the withdrawal of Professor
Callum.

But before all the projected improvements could be made something else
happened, as you will find related in detail in the third volume of
this series, entitled "The Racer Boys to the Rescue."

Because of the failure of the heating system of the school there came
an enforced vacation in the winter. The school had to close for repairs
and the students went to their several homes.

Frank and Andy Racer took advantage of the unexpected vacation to go to
the Maine woods on a hunting trip. Their uncle was a lumberman in that
cold region, and the boys planned to go to one of his camps. They did
go, taking Jack Sanderson and Ward Platt with them.

But, before they left they heard bad news from Tom Crawford, a student
at Waterside Hall, a rival school of that attended by our heroes. Tom's
little brother, Len, who was an invalid, had been at a sanitarium in
Maine, and had wandered off in the woods. Then he was captured by some
unscrupulous lumbermen, who held him for a ransom until the Racer boys
got on the trail, and went to the rescue.

After their fun and adventures in camp the Racer boys and their chums
returned to school, for the improvements were so far under way that it
was more comfortable. The winter term passed, and the spring one came,
with the Easter vacation. Then once more, the students went to their
homes, and now, the start of the term that would end in the beginning
of summer found our friends back again at Riverview Hall.

The school had not formally opened as yet, though many of the boys,
including our heroes, had arrived to take possession of their rooms and
get their belongings in shape. When Frank and Andy got there they found
many of their chums to greet them, and the manner of that greeting I
have already indicated.

"Well, fellows, what are we going to do?" asked Ward Platt, as he sat
on Andy's bed, and tried to kick over a pile of clean clothes on the
floor. Andy had taken them from his trunk and was about to put them in
the bureau drawers. "Let's think of something flossy."

"Yes, it'll be flossy all right if _you_ think of it," rejoined Andy.

"Oh, it will, eh?" and with that Ward succeeded in reaching, with
the toe of his foot, the pile of collars, cuffs and other things. In
another second they were scattered about the room.

"Here! what did you do that for?" yelled Andy.

"To show you that I could do something flossy," was the answer, and,
with a quick motion, Ward took a back somersault over the bed, landing
between it and the wall, where Andy could not reach him.

"I'll punch your nose!" went on Andy, as he saw his scattered garments.
"I'll----"

"You'll cool down," advised his brother, in a quiet voice. "If you
don't you'll have Flopps in here to help Mrs. Stone keep order."

"That's right," added Jack. "I saw Flopps just now spading up a flower
bed, and he's right close."

"Oh, get out!" rejoined Andy. "Look at my clean collars and----"

"No business to call names," mocked Ward, from his place of vantage
behind the bed. "Beg my pardon, and I'll call it square."

"I will--like pie!" exclaimed Andy. "The next time I catch you
alone----"

"Now, now," came soothingly from Jack. "Go easy, boys. Don't get to
scrapping so soon. We've got to stick together this term. There are
lots of Freshmen--a big class--and they'll have it in for us, most
likely. I was just wondering what we could do to 'em."

"Haze 'em," suggested Frank. "They'll have to have it sooner or later."

"Then the sooner the better," chimed in Andy. "Say, fellows, I've got
a great scheme!" and in his eagerness to impart a joke he forgot his
enmity against Ward, who ventured to come from behind the bed.

"Out with it," commanded Jack.

"Yes, we'll never have any peace until he does," commented Frank.

"And maybe not much afterward," added Ward. "That's the worst of Andy's
jokes--there's always a come-back to them."

"Oh, you get out!" exclaimed the younger Racer lad. "I can think up
just as good jokes as any of you fellows."

"Yes, but the trouble is that you get caught at 'em," added Ward, who
seemed bound to pick at Andy.

"Let's hear what this one is," suggested Jack, who scented trouble
between the two chums unless the dispute was quelled. "Go ahead, Andy.
We'll all listen. Land knows we need something to wake us up. I've been
here three days now, and not a thing has happened. We've been waiting
for you two brothers to come and start something."

"Oh, I'll start it all right," declared Andy. "Now I've just thought of
something in regard to this hazing. It'll be great!"

He went to the door, opened it softly and looked out; then closing and
locking it, rejoined his companions. They had gathered in the room
Frank and Andy had picked out--a room next to that occupied by Ward and
Jack.

"Why all this gum-shoe business?" inquired Frank.

"Some of the Freshmen might be listening," replied his brother. "I saw
one or two looking at us rather sharp as we came up here. We can't be
too careful. Now for my plan."

His voice dropped to a whisper, as his companions drew more closely to
him, and in a low voice Andy imparted his plan, pausing now and then
to listen at the door. But, as far as he could tell, no one tried to
listen at the portal.

"What do you think of it?" demanded Andy, at the conclusion of his talk.

"Great!" exclaimed Jack.

"I'll take back all I said about you," added Ward.

"If we can get the things it will be sport," declared Frank.

"Oh, we can get 'em in town all right," asserted Andy. "And I've got
the cash, too."

"You ought to have--the first of the term," commented his brother, with
a laugh.

"And now let the black work begin!" hissed Jack, after the manner of a
stage villain. "Them is hard words, Kate!"

"You must give me them papers, villain!" exclaimed Frank, with mock
heroics.

"Aw, cut out the fooling and get down to business, fellows," pleaded
Andy. "There's lots to be done if we want to go at this hazing proper."

"All right, we're with you," assented Ward.

A little later four figures were seen strolling across the campus in
the direction of a trolley line that ran to the town of Riverview. The
boys were gone for some time, and there were many whisperings among
them, as they came back, almost late to supper, for which Mrs. Stone,
the matron, cautioned them.

A little later darkness covered Riverview Hall. That is the proper way
to begin to tell this part of the story. Deep, dark, black darkness. In
fact, as Andy remarked, you could easily tell that it was night.

From their rooms stole four figures.

"Are you all right, fellows?" whispered a voice.

"Of course, Andy," answered Frank. "Don't ask so many questions.
Someone will hear you."

"Well, I don't want any slip-up," declared the younger Racer lad. "Is
everything all right?"

"These whiskers tickle my face," complained Ward.

"A pity about you," snapped Andy. "Cheese it! Here comes someone!"

The four lads, who had reached the basement of the dormitory, crouched
behind some packing cases, and waited in tense silence for what was to
come next.




                              CHAPTER III

                           A NEEDLESS ALARM


"It's only Flopps!" exclaimed Jack, after a pause--made painful from
the fact that the conspirators had to assume uncomfortable attitudes
because of the sudden alarm.

"That's right, so it is," agreed Ward, looking over the top of a
packing case, and seeing the gardener putting away some of the
implements he had used that day. "He's all right."

"Hold on!" exclaimed Andy in a whisper, as he saw the others about to
leave their place of concealment, to proceed with the hazing operations
that were under way.

"What's the matter now?" demanded Frank.

"If he sees the way we're togged up he'll raise a row sure," explained
Andy. "He won't know us, and he'll think we're black-handers or
something like that. He'll bring every professor and monitor out on the
run. Lay low for another minute and he'll go out."

"I guess that's right," admitted Frank. "Andy is getting sense in his
old age."

Once more the four crouched behind the cases, and watched the gardener
in the dimly-lighted basement. Having put away the rake, spade and hoe,
Flopps proceeded to put out the gas he had lighted, and left.

"Clear coast," announced Andy, after an observation. "Now to make the
Freshmen know what's what. You notified the other fellows, didn't you?"
he inquired of his brother and chums.

"Sure," asserted Frank. "They'll meet us outside."

The four proceeded cautiously until they had emerged from the lower
part of the dormitory. They found some of their friends waiting for
them, they, too, having eluded the vigilance of monitors and suspicious
professors.

"Let's see," remarked Andy, in a low voice. "There are eight of us
here."

"Six are coming from the West dormitory," volunteered John North.

"And ten from Bradley Hall," added Duke Yardly, referring to a new
dormitory where some of the older students had rooms.

"Then we'll have enough for a start," commented Andy. As he spoke he
advanced into a stray beam of light from a school window.

"For cats' sake, what have you on your face?" gasped Duke.

"That's our disguise," explained the younger Racer lad. "We're going to
treat the Freshies to a new kind of hazing--a surprise, and we want you
fellows to join in. Now I'll explain," and he did, at some length.

"Say! That's great!" exclaimed Donald Burgess. "How'd you think of
that, Andy?"

"Oh, Andy's think-tank is always working," asserted his brother--"at
least it is when it comes to such things as this. Now if it was a
geometry proposition, or a Latin construction----"

"Oh, I'm as good at boning as you are," retorted Andy. "Here come the
other fellows. Now I've got to tell them how to behave. You see the
game is this," he went on. "You chaps will start in on the regular
hazing stunts--making 'em eat salt, doing a dance, standing on their
heads, and all that. Then in the midst of it we four will come bursting
in, and--well, we'll see what will happen."

"That's right!" cried Tom Bennett, admiringly. "This will make a
sensation all right!"

A number of luckless Freshmen had gathered for common communion and
consolation in the large hall of the dormitory set aside for their
special use. They were commiserating one with the other, wondering what
sort of hazing would be meted out to them--for it had been rumored that
the ordeal would start that night. Shortly after ten o'clock into the
place burst a crowd of Sophomores and Juniors.

"Up, boys, and at 'em!" came the cry, and then began the struggle
between the two forces. The Freshmen were taken at a disadvantage, and
were soon overpowered. Then, too, the first-term lads did not like to
put up too much of a fight.

For, be it known, hazing, as practiced at Riverview, was a sort of
ancient and honorable institution, not very severe, and the lad who
put up too much of a protest against "taking his medicine," had life
made miserable for him the rest of his time at school. So there was
more or less submission, though there were one or two rather strenuous
encounters.

The Freshmen were being put through their "stunts," and being made to
do all sorts of ridiculous things, when the door of the room, that was
being guarded by a committee of the hazers, suddenly flew open, and a
quartette of masked and bewhiskered figures rushed in.

"Hands up!" came the sharp command, and objects that glittered
menacingly in the light were held forward. "Hands up!"

Instantly there was confusion, the hazers uttering louder cries of
amazement than did the Freshmen.

"Go through 'em, boys!" came the command from the foremost figure, who
seemed to be the leader. "See if they've got any coin. Take only gold
watches, though; we can't use the dollar kind. Lively!"

"Oh, they're burglars!" yelled one of the hazers.

"That's what!" snapped one of the masked figures. "Hands up, and keep
'em up!" came the sharp command.

"What right have you in here?" demanded Duke Yardly, in threatening
tones. "This is a private school, and----"

"Nothing's private when we come in!" said the leader. "Go through 'em,
boys. We two will keep 'em covered!"

While two of the masked and bewhiskered individuals held the glittering
objects pointed toward the crowd of startled students, the other two
began a quick but systematic search of their pockets. Loose change and
bills were abstracted, together with several gold watches.

"Oh, please don't take that!" begged one Freshman, as a gold match box
was brought to light. "My best--my mother gave me that."

"Best girl, you mean!" snapped the taller of the masked figures. "Take
it, boys."

"This is a high-handed proceeding!" declared John North.

"If you can get your hands any higher, lift 'em," said one of the
hold-up individuals, sarcastically.

"All present are accounted for," reported one of the searchers,
as he advanced toward the two guards, holding a hat filled with a
miscellaneous collection of treasures.

"Very good. Back to the cave. And if you fellows have any regard
for your own welfare you won't follow," the taller looter added
significantly. "You'll stay here five minutes without giving the alarm
or----" He did not finish, but looked suggestively at the object in his
hand.

Backing to the door, the four hold-up individuals slipped quickly out
of it, and locked it after them, making the group of Freshmen and
hazers prisoners. At once there burst out a riot of talk in the room,
succeeded by chuckles of mirth from the quartette.

"Say, it went off like apple pie," said one of the masked figures.

"Couldn't have been better," added another.

"Someone's coming!" was the sudden warning.

All but one of the figures swung out of sight around the corner of
the corridor. This figure, still holding the object that had cowed
the students, was in full view of a hall light as someone advanced.
Then, seeing that the newcomer was a pupil, the masked figure, making a
threatening gesture, commanded:

"Hands up!"

The effect of the order was startling. The student with a quick motion
fairly leaped at the masked figure, knocking the shining object to one
side, at the same time exclaiming:

"Ha! So you thought you'd catch me off my guard, eh? You thought you
could sneak in here and get it? Well, I've fooled you. I've been
looking for you the last three days. I expected you'd come East after
me. But it won't do you any good. Now I'm going to give the alarm!"

There was so much of menace and threat in the voice and action of the
student that the masked figure gasped. There was a fierce struggle, and
as the new student took a long breath in readiness to sound the cry of
alarm, the masked one called out:

"Hold on, old man! It's only a joke. We're doing a hazing stunt. No
harm intended. Let go my shoulder. You're needlessly alarmed. It's only
a joke, I tell you."

For a moment the two stood confronting one another, locked in a fierce
grip. Then, as the student seemed to believe the assurance given him,
he asked:

"Then you're not after--not after my----"

"We're not after anything," was the answer. "It's a joke, I tell you,"
and, tearing off his mask, the pretended hold-up man revealed himself
as Frank Racer.




                              CHAPTER IV

                           A MYSTERIOUS MAN


"Say, it went off all right; didn't it?"

"And we sure had 'em going!"

"None of 'em suspected anything until after you fellows went out, and
then we heard a laugh in the hall."

"That gave the thing away."

"Oh, but it was all right anyhow."

"And I guess they can sort out their own stuff."

"But what happened after you four left?"

These questions, comments, surmises and exclamations of admiration
followed swiftly, one on the heels of the other, as Frank and Andy
Racer, and several of their chums, gathered in the room of our heroes
after the hazing.

Of course my readers know that the four "hold-up men" who entered while
the hazing was in progress were Frank, Andy, Jack and Ward. They had
disguised themselves with false beards and masks, and the game was to
enter at the height of the hazing, pretending to be real burglars, and
to take a few objects of value away from their own friends and many
from the Freshmen.

The plan worked well, and few of the Freshmen suspected anything but
that some real criminals, taking advantage of the fun at the school,
had selected that opportunity to make a "haul."

"But what happened when you fellows went outside?" asked Donald
Burgess. "There we were--Sophomores and Juniors--holding up our hands
just like the Freshmen, and pretending to be more scared, all the while
bemoaning the loss of our coin and jewelry. But something happened
outside in the hall; didn't it?"

"There did," admitted Frank, and he told of meeting the lone student,
and pretending to hold him up.

"I never saw a fellow act so queer," put in Andy. "We were keeping
back, and letting Frank have his fun. Why, the fellow really thought he
was up against a regular second-story man, I guess. He didn't show the
white feather, though, and----"

"Who was he?" interrupted John North.

"Billy Chase," answered Frank. "I knew him the minute I saw him, and I
thought I'd have some fun. But he didn't know me until I took off my
mask."

"Billy Chase," murmured Jack, and it might be worthy of note that the
formal "William" was dropped, and the more comradely name of "Billy"
adopted. It was Billy Chase from then on, I might explain.

"Yes, Billy Chase," repeated Frank Racer. "The lad you spoke to me
about--the lad who seems afraid of his own shadow."

"He wasn't afraid of a shadow to-night," commented Ward Platt, with a
chuckle. "He went right at you, Frank."

"He sure did, and he's got a grip, too, let me tell you. Of course that
was only a toy pistol I had, but he must have thought it was a real
one. He got a hold on me and bent my arm back in regular Western style,
so that, in case it had been a real gun, I couldn't have done anything.
Oh, he's up to snuff all right, believe me!"

"And yet he seemed afraid you'd get something from him," commented Andy.

"Yes. That's the queer part of it. He must carry something valuable
around with him, that he doesn't want someone to get."

"What happened after you told him who you were?" asked Ward.

"Oh, he seemed to wilt, and be sort of dazed. But I can't blame him.
He had me 'buffaloed' for a while. It was a case of horse and horse.
That Billy Chase is an all-right lad, I think, even if I did play
a low-down trick on him. I think he'll make good, even if he is a
Freshman."

"But what happened after we got out of the room?" asked Andy, in whose
fertile brain the whole hazing joke had originated.

"Oh, we just stayed there, with our hands up in the air," explained
John North. "Then some of the Freshmen began to get wise, and they soon
saw some of us snickering. Then it was all up."

"We left their stuff on the big table in the lower hall," explained
Andy. "It's all piled up there."

"And what about our stuff?" asked Duke Yardly quickly. "Did you mix it
all up together there?"

"Sure we did," said Jack. "We didn't have time to separate it. Besides,
we couldn't show favors. We robbed Freshmen and all you fellows alike.
You can sort it out."

"Yes, we can!" exclaimed Duke in deep disgust. "It'll be just like
those Freshman to hold on to our stuff, now that they're wise to the
joke. Say, this didn't turn out the way I thought it would."

"That's always the way with Andy's jokes," remarked Herbert Waldron.

"Aw, let's see you get up a better one," challenged Andy, trying to get
some of the glue from the false beard off his chin. "It was a peach, I
think."

"Oh, it wasn't so bad," admitted Jack. "But it sure is queer about
Billy Chase. I wonder what he's got back of him, anyhow?"

"Give it up," came from Andy. "Ouch! That pulled!" he exclaimed, as he
removed a patch of the false hair.

Frank Racer said nothing, but there was a determined look on his face
that spoke more than words. He had been much puzzled by the strange
actions of the Freshman, and he made up his mind that he would find out
more about him.

There came a knock on the door of the room where the chums were
gathered. It produced instant silence.

"Come--come----" began Andy.

"Cheese it!" whispered Duke, hoarsely. "It's after hours and you've got
lights!"

Then came another voice saying:

"Better cut for it, fellows; the proctor is on the job. Some of the
Freshman have complained to him."

Andy Racer never moved more quickly than he did a moment later when he
"doused the glim," to use Jack Sanderson's expression for putting out
the light. Then in silence and darkness the guests of the Racer boys
filed out into the hall, and sought their own rooms. The fun of the
night was over.

"Well, how about you?" asked Andy of Frank, as they were about to turn
in. The proctor had just knocked on their door to inquire if they were
in bed. They had answered that they were--with their clothes on--but
they did not mention the latter fact.

"Oh, I guess we might as well go to bed," remarked Frank, as he
stretched out on the mattress. "We've had a strenuous day, and there
are more ahead of us."

"Of course," assented Andy. "We didn't half finish with the hazing."

"And I haven't half finished thinking about the queer way Billy Chase
acted," went on his brother. "There's something strange going on here,
Andy, and it's up to us to find it out."

"How do you mean?"

"Why, I mean that this lad is evidently carrying something valuable
about with him, and he's afraid of being robbed. That's what he thought
I was after. He seems like a nice chap, and I want to help him, if I
can."

"So do--I," murmured Andy sleepily.

"Get out!" exclaimed Frank. "You'll play a joke on him first chance you
get."

"Sure I will--why not? Goo' ni'----" and Andy was too sleepy to finish.

The hazing and the subsequent advent of the masked figures, who were at
first taken for thieves, was the talk of the school the next day. The
joke was on the Freshmen, of course, and they were a long time hearing
the last of it.

But, in a measure, they succeeded in "getting back" at their
traditional enemies, for, after Frank, Andy, Jack and Ward had left the
money and watches in an indiscriminate heap, the Freshmen hid that part
of the spoils belonging to the other students, and it was some time
before each lad found his own.

But the affair was taken in the right spirit, and Andy received proper
credit for originating it. More new students arrived at Riverview, and
several of the former friends of our heroes came back. The next few
days were full of activity at the school.

"We've just got to get out on the diamond!" exclaimed Ward, one warm
afternoon. "Come on, fellows, let's get up two scrub nines and have a
game."

"I'm with you!" cried Andy.

"Sure thing!" added Frank.

"Let the Racer boys be the captains," came from Ward.

"Sure!" was the general assent, and soon Frank and Andy were choosing
sides.

"Want to come in?" asked Frank, of Billy Chase, who sauntered up when
almost the last player had been picked.

"Well, I'm not very good at it, but I'd like to get in the game."

"All right then. I'll put you out in the field. By the way, no hard
feelings about the other night, I hope?"

"Not at all," laughed Billy. "I sure did take you for a hold-up man,
though. And as I'm carrying about with me some valuable----" He seemed
to recollect himself suddenly, and stopped with a jerk. "Oh, no hard
feelings at all," he said presently. "I can take a joke."

"Glad of it," spoke Frank. "Well, let's play ball."

The impromptu game began. The playing was rather ragged, for it was the
first real contest of the season, and none of the lads was in form. But
it was lots of fun for all that.

Andy was at the bat, and Frank's side was in the field. Andy knocked
what ought to have been a three-bagger, out in center field, seemingly
away over the player's head, and beyond him. But, by a phenomenal run,
and a quick jump, Billy Chase gathered in the ball, retiring the side.

"Good catch!"

"Pretty play, old man!"

These and many other cries greeted his performance.

"And he said he could only play a _little_," mused Frank. "I guess it's
Billy for the main nine, all right."

Frank's side came to bat. Quite a fringe of student spectators had
gathered to watch the game, and there were also some town lads and men
from Riverview, for the gates to the ball field were not closed, and
anyone might come in.

Billy Chase went to bat first. As he took his place the opposing
catcher signalled that he wanted a few practice balls. Billy stepped
away from the plate.

A moment later he started violently, and Frank, who saw him, looked to
note the cause.

On the outer edge of the crowd of spectators Frank saw a man standing
regarding Billy with an earnest gaze. He was a man of powerful build--a
"Westerner" if such a description is permissible--a man with a very
black beard. As Frank looked at him he thought of the false black
beards he and his chums had worn the night of the hazing. This man's
beard was exactly like them, and yet it was obviously not false.

[Illustration: FRANK SAW A MAN REGARDING BILLY WITH AN EARNEST GAZE.]

As the man gazed at Billy, the student suddenly threw down his bat and,
approaching Frank said:

"Put some one else in my place. I can't play."

"Why not?"

"Well, I don't want to. I--er--I've forgotten something I've got to do.
Sorry, old man, but I can't play."

"All right. It's too bad, but it's only for fun anyhow. I'll get a
substitute. Come out to-morrow."

"I will," promised Billy, and, as he mingled with the throng of
spectators, Frank saw the man with the black beard edge up so as to get
close to the student.

Suddenly Billy turned and looked the man full in the face. The latter
seemed taken by surprise, and shifted quickly to one side. A moment
later he turned away, and as he walked off Frank saw that he was lame,
walking with a slight limp.

"Humph!" exclaimed the Racer boy. "That's strange. He's as mysterious
as Billy himself. I wonder what all this means?"




                               CHAPTER V

                           A STRANGE ATTACK


Puzzled as to what the strange action of his team-mate might portend,
Frank Racer looked over the other lads to select one to fill Billy's
place.

"Here, Jim," he called, "play ball here; will you?"

"Sure," replied the invited one, "glad to. What's the matter with
Chase; cold feet?"

"Something like that, I guess. Go on, play ball. Line out a pretty one!"

"Say, you can't do that," objected Andy, as he saw his brother making a
change in his batting order.

"Can't do what?"

"Make a shift like that at this time."

"Sure I can," insisted Frank. "We're not playing league rules, or even
interscholastic ones. Don't make such a fuss. This is only for fun. Go
on, Jim, swat it!"

There was a dispute, but it ended in favor of Frank, the majority
deciding that, under the circumstances, it was permissible. As the
game went on Frank looked across the campus. He saw the mysterious man
strolling along, without any special object as far as he could see,
while Billy Chase hurried in the direction of the dormitory.

"He's hustling just as if somebody was after him," mused Frank. "What
could he have forgotten that wouldn't keep until after the game? I
guess that was only an excuse. I'm going to keep on the lookout. That
fellow with the limp will be easy to remember. I wonder if his beard is
false? But no, it looked too real for that. Well, maybe, after all, it
isn't any of my affair, but I'm going to get at the bottom of it if I
can."

Whack! That was the bat of Jim finding the ball, and a moment later
Frank, in watching the flight of the horsehide, forgot all about the
mystery that seemed to enshroud Billy Chase.

"That's the stuff!"

"Go it, old man!"

"A three-bagger!"

"Make it a home run!"

"Come on! Come on, old man!" This last was yelled by Frank, who was
hopping up and down at home plate, thus trying to encourage Jim Bland
to greater speed as he rounded the bases following his fine hit. The
other cries of delight and encouragement came from the members of
Frank's nine.

Jim reached third just as the center fielder, who had to run back some
distance to get the ball, threw it in.

"Come on home! Come on home!" cried John North, who was playing coach
at third.

"No, hold it!" ordered Frank, and it was well that Jim did, for the
ball was accurately thrown and he would have been caught at home, if
not nipped on the last bag, had he tried to leave it.

But it was a good hit, and served to encourage Frank's team. To such
advantage did they play that they won the game and the elder Racer lad
had the satisfaction of crowing over his brother.

"Well, you wouldn't have won if you hadn't slipped in a cracker-jack
batter on me," complained Andy.

"Get out! I would so. Why, Jim isn't any better than Billy Chase."

"That shows how much you know about it. Jim is one of the best in the
school, and it's a pity he wasn't on the main team last year. He will
be this season. Billy is a good player, but he can't bat. What made him
chase off that way?"

"I don't know," answered Frank. "And did you see that lame man, with
the black beard?"

"I sure did. He looked like the villain in some Western drama. Did he
speak to Billy?"

"No, but Billy seemed to move off as soon as he laid eyes on the
fellow."

The two brothers conversed as they walked off the diamond, speculating
as to what the mystery might be concerning the Freshman. Following the
game the players went to the gymnasium for a shower bath. Neither Billy
Chase nor the lame man were in sight when Frank and Andy came out.

The Racer boys gave an impromptu spread in their room that night,
and there was a gathering of happy lads who talked baseball from all
standpoints. It was agreed that the chances for Riverview Hall to win
the pennant that season were very good.

"But we've got to have lots of practice," insisted Andy. "We ought to
have the regular team about picked by this time."

"There's a meeting next week," said Jack Sanderson. "I guess things
will hum from then on."

"Good!" exclaimed Andy. "I say, let's do something. It's early yet.
Let's go out and haze a couple of Freshmen."

"Oh, cut that out!" advised Frank. "Haven't we hazed about all of 'em?"

"There are some new fellows that came in the other day," went on the
younger Racer lad. "They haven't had their share of the medicine yet."

"I'm with you," agreed Jack, who was always ready for mischief.

"I'll take a chance," said John North. "It'll be fun."

"Better not," advised Frank. "You may get caught."

"Oh, come on, you old croaker," exclaimed his brother, but Frank could
not be persuaded, and remained behind. Some of the others, following
the lead of the impetuous Andy, went looking for luckless Freshmen on
whom to play their tricks.

They found some, and for a time the excitement waxed high, but, as it
happened, one of the professors, returning from a lecture in town,
caught the group of students. He realized what was going on, and
ordered the crowd back to their rooms, with instructions to report to
the proctor in the morning. To insure compliance with this he took the
names of all the lads.

"Well, what did I tell you?" asked Frank, when his brother came in a
little later, looking quite woebegone.

"Oh, dry up!" commanded Andy, in no gentle voice. "Don't be an 'I told
you so!'"

"Well, you would go out," retorted Frank.

"Yes, and we had a good time, even if we did get caught," said Andy.
"Anyhow, it's too early in the term for the proc. to lay it on very
heavy. Besides, we had to haze those Freshmen, and we did it good and
proper."

Andy was right in guessing that the proctor would not make the
punishment heavy. A light sentence was passed on all the culprits save
the first-year students, and, by virtue of their having been taken from
their quarters against their wills, they were let off with a warning to
be more watchful in the future.

Thus the first weeks of the new term passed. Hazing became a thing of
the past, and the cap-rush, which was won by the Freshmen, entitling
them to wear the insignia of the school on their head-gear, ended
hostilities between the class bodies for the time being.

Frank's endeavor to fathom what seemed to be a mystery concerning Billy
Chase and the bearded lame man amounted to nothing. The man seemed to
have disappeared, and as Billy did not speak of him, Frank forbore to
ask any questions.

Billy became quite friendly with the Racer boys and their chums. He was
a fine chap, fond of all sports, and modest in his accomplishments.
He had the broad, free spirit of the boundless West, and easily made
friends.

"But he doesn't get over that peculiarity I noticed first," remarked
Jack Sanderson. "He always seems to fear he is going to be attacked
from behind."

"Maybe it's nervousness," suggested Andy.

"Nonsense! He hasn't an excess nerve in his make-up. It's something
else, I tell you," insisted Jack. "Why, only to-day he----"

But Jack was interrupted by a knock on the door of Frank and Andy's
room, and the opening of the portal disclosed "Old" Wallace, the coach,
who came in to talk baseball. He had been away for some time, and had
recently returned. Then, for a time, Billy Chase and his affairs were
forgotten.

The regular baseball nine was being whipped into shape, and the time
for the first match game of the season was approaching. The weather
had come off warm quite suddenly, and the diamond was in fine shape.
Practice was going well, and the Racer boys and their chums felt that
they had a winning team.

It was one or two nights before the game with Waterside Hall, the
ancient enemy of Riverview, that Frank and Andy obtained permission
to go into town. Frank wanted to get a new glove, and Andy had some
shopping to do concerning baseball matters.

"Well, let's take in a 'shiftin' picture show,' as the Scotchman called
the movies," suggested Andy, when their errands were done.

"Will we have time?" asked Frank, always more or less cautious.

"Of course we will."

So they went to the moving picture entertainment. As they entered
several persons were coming out, having seen the first "round" of
films, and, at the sight of one of the audience, Frank started.

"What's the matter?" asked Andy, who was walking next to him. "See a
ghost?"

"No, but I saw that lame man, who was hanging around the ball field the
other day--the fellow Billy Chase seemed so afraid of."

"Well, what of it? He isn't looking for us, and I guess he won't find
Billy. I saw him boning away for further orders as we came out. Here
are a couple of good seats. They're going to have illustrated songs,
too. There's that pretty girl who was in here the other night."

"Oh, you and your girls!" exclaimed Frank.

"She isn't mine--wish she was," rejoined Andy. "She and the fellow who
bangs the piano are chummy. No chance for me. Oh, for cats' sake! We've
struck one of those western Indian dramas, acted over in Hoboken."

But if the first picture was not to the liking of the Racer boys, the
other films were, and they remained for the whole show. On their way
toward school from the trolley they took a short cut through a rather
dark lane, for, though they did not much mind getting in after the hour
prescribed by the proctor, still they did not want to take too many
chances.

As Frank and Andy passed under one of the few lights that helped
dispel the gloom of the seldom-used thoroughfare, they saw someone
approaching. It was someone in a hurry, too, judging by the footsteps.

A moment later a man fairly rushed by the boys, and, at the sight of
him as he disappeared in the darkness behind them, Frank uttered a cry.

"That fellow!" he exclaimed. "He's the lame man with the black
beard--the one we saw in the show earlier to-night, and the one who was
at the ball practice."

"Well, what of it?" asked Andy. "You're getting him on the brain, I
guess."

"Hark!" exclaimed the younger lad.

They came to a halt. Then, above the rustle of the wind through the
tree branches, both heard a faint moaning sound.

"Someone's hurt!" exclaimed Frank.

"Over here!" cried Andy. "I can see something! Over here, Frank!"

Andy sprang to the left, and struck a match. The glow disclosed a
huddled-up body lying in the ditch of the lane. Andy bent over it.

"It's a young fellow," he reported to Frank. "And he's been hit on the
head. He's bleeding."

"By Jove!" cried Frank, as he ran up. "It's Billy Chase!"




                              CHAPTER VI

                         BILLY TELLS SOMETHING


Frank and Andy bent over the prostrate form of their fellow student,
hardly knowing what to do. Then Andy uttered an exclamation, and the
scene was in sudden darkness.

"What's the matter?" asked Frank.

"The match burned my fingers. I forgot I was holding it."

"Oh, forget it," advised his brother. "We've got other work cut out for
us. I wonder if he's badly hurt?"

"I saw a cut on his head," said Andy. "It's so dark----"

"Light another match," advised Frank. "I can't find my box."

In the darkness Billy moaned faintly, and stirred as he lay on the damp
ground.

"Lift him up," advised Andy, as he once more struck a match. "We've got
to carry him to some place. A thief must have held him up, and, when he
resisted, struck him. Say, this is fierce!"

"What makes you think it was a thief?" asked Frank.

"Because, who else would do it?"

"I was thinking of the man we passed a minute ago. He----"

"That's so!" exclaimed the impetuous Andy. "I believe it was that
fellow! Say, that's a bad cut all right."

Frank had raised Billy's head from the ground, and, as he did so, while
Andy stood by, with a ready supply of matches, the injured lad opened
his eyes, and tried to struggle to his feet.

"Where is it?" he cried. "Did he get it? He attacked me, and then--I
wonder if I have it safe? If it is gone my uncle will have to--Oh, if
he has taken it----"

He ceased talking and began feebly to search in an inner pocket,
meanwhile struggling to get out of Frank's arms.

"Let me go! Let me go!" he cried fiercely, but he was so weak, or dazed
from the blow, that Frank easily held him, though Billy was no weakling
in muscle.

"Steady now, old man," said Frank, in a soothing voice. "It's all
right. We're friends of yours. We'll take care of you. Don't you know
me?" and he bent closer over the lad, looking into his face by the
light of the match.

"You must not take it--I won't let you have it! Oh--it's
you--Frank--the Racer boys!" suddenly exclaimed Billy, and then the
brothers knew that his mind had been wandering, but that now he was
himself again.

"Are you much hurt, old man?" asked Frank. "How did it happen? Who
struck you? Have you been robbed?"

Billy did not answer at once. His hand, that had been fumbling with
the buttons of his vest, now opened that garment, and sought an inner
pocket. His face, that had shown terror and despair, now reflected
hope. A breath of relief came from his lips.

"I--I'm all right," he faltered. "I guess I can stand up." He proved
it by doing so, though Frank stood near to catch him in case he fell.
Then the moon, which had been hidden behind clouds, came out, making
it light enough to see, so that Andy had no further need of striking
matches.

"How did it happen?" asked Frank. "Who attacked you?"

"I--I don't know," said Billy, in stronger tones. "I had been in town
to mail an important letter, and I was hurrying back, for, though I had
permission to be out, I didn't want to be too late in getting back. I
took this short cut, and just as I got here someone jumped on me from
behind, and tried to get----"

"He was after your watch and money, I guess," interrupted Andy, for
he had seen the valuable gold timepiece Billy carried, and it was well
known that the western lad was wealthy, and usually had a fairly large
sum with him.

"No, it wasn't that," came the answer. "My watch and money are safe."

"Then what did the rascal want?" asked Frank, as he thought of the man
who had passed him and his brother a short time before they discovered
Billy. "If it wasn't your valuables, what did the footpad want, Billy?"

"He wasn't a footpad, and he--he----"

Billy's voice trailed off weakly. The lad swayed on his feet, put his
hands to his head, and with a moan sank back. He would have fallen to
the ground, only that Frank, who had been expecting something like
this, caught him just in time.

"He's worse hurt than he thought," exclaimed Andy.

"Guess you're right," admitted Frank. "We'll have to have help. If
there was only some water near here----"

"There is. I know where there's a spring," interrupted his brother.
"I'll bring some."

He dashed off, to return presently with his cap full. Some of the
fluid was sprinkled on the pale face of the unconscious lad, on whose
forehead there was a deep gash. Then Frank managed to get a few drops
from his cupped hand between Billy's lips.

"I--I guess I'll be all right now," murmured the injured one. "Did
I--did I faint?"

"That's what," answered Frank, as Billy struggled to a sitting
position. "Now take it easy. We can get a carriage and take you to a
doctor."

"I don't need one. I feel much better now. That water did the business.
So I fainted? That's queer. I never did such a girl's trick before.
Guess he must have given me a harder whack than I thought at first." He
put his hand to his head, bringing the palm away covered with blood.

"It's only a cut, I guess," volunteered Frank. "We'll wash it for you,
and then----"

"If you give me a good drink of water I can walk back to the school,"
said Billy. "I'm all right now."

He was much stronger, as was proved by his voice, and the manner in
which he stepped about. Andy got more water, and the cut was bathed.
Then, after a copious drink, Billy announced that he was almost himself
again.

"All but for a bad headache," he added. "But I don't mind that, as long
as the fellow didn't get anything."

"And are you sure he wasn't a highwayman?" asked Frank.

"Yes, I am, though I didn't see him, as he came up back of me. He must
have been following. I've been expecting this, but not so soon. If he
had gotten it, he wouldn't have been much better off, for I've got to
get the other signatures. I guess I'll----"

Billy did not finish. He seemed to be talking to himself, and, as he
did not offer to take the Racer boys into his confidence, they did not
feel like asking questions. But Frank could not help mentioning one
thing.

As Billy stood there, his hand in the inner pocket of his vest, as if
to make sure that something of value was not missing, the elder Racer
lad said:

"I believe we passed the man who attacked you."

"You did?" cried Billy. "Who was he?"

"The lame man with the black beard!"

"I thought so! He hasn't given up yet! I must wire my uncle at once.
Come on back to town with me."

Billy turned, and would have started toward Riverview, but Frank caught
his arm.

"Look here!" exclaimed the elder Racer lad, "you're in no condition to
go back to town. You'll faint on the way, or something. You need to see
a doctor. We'll help you back to school."

"But this is important!" insisted the Western youth. "I must warn my
uncle that this plot against him is deeper than he thinks. I've got to
telegraph to him."

"Then do it from Riverview Hall," suggested Andy. "You can telephone
the telegram in from there."

"That's right," added Frank.

"Then that's what I'll do," decided Billy, after a moment's thought.
"Glad you mentioned it, for I must send a warning."

"Hadn't we better chase after that man we passed?" asked Andy eagerly.
"The scoundrel ought to be arrested. Come on! I believe we can catch
him. He's lame, and can't go very fast," and he wheeled about as though
to take up the pursuit.

"No, don't!" cried Billy. "He's a dangerous man. Don't go near him if
you can help it. He would as soon strike you down as look at you. Let
him go. I can get on his trail later."

"Yes, don't go," put in Frank. "You could never find him in the
darkness, and, besides, it might not be safe. And we've got to help
Billy back."

"Oh, I might manage to go the distance," said the Western lad, with a
wan smile; "but I'd rather have you with me. I can find that man later,
if I want to. But I hope he leaves this neighborhood. I'm not safe
while he's around."

"Then why don't you complain to the police and have him locked up?"
asked Frank.

"It would do no good. That wouldn't stop their work. You don't
understand, and I can't explain much, but I'll say this," and Billy,
leaning heavily on Frank's arm, continued:

"My uncle is a wealthy ranch owner out West, and he has many business
ventures. Now one of them is likely to fall through because of the
activities of certain men, of whom the fellow who attacked me to-night
is one. But he failed. You see, I'm helping my uncle--negotiating the
Eastern end of a big deal for him, while I'm here at school. That's one
of the reasons why I came East. This is all I can tell you now.

"I can't thank you enough for helping me, and, later, I may be able to
tell you more details. It's a queer story, and there is quite a mystery
to it. Some of it I don't even know myself. But it sure is lucky that
you found me."

"We're glad we did," put in Andy. "Now let's get on to school, or we'll
be locked out."

As they started off, one of the Racer boys on either side of Billy,
Frank suddenly exclaimed:

"Hark! I think someone is following us!"




                              CHAPTER VII

                          NEWS FROM THE WEST


The boys stiffened into attention, listening intently for the faintest
sound. At first they could hear nothing more than the whisper of the
wind in the trees, and then, so faintly as to be almost inaudible, they
did catch a rustling in the grass, that told of the approach of someone.

"That man--he's coming back!" said Frank softly.

"Let me attend to him!" exclaimed Andy, and, before his brother could
stop him, the younger lad had run back over the course they had come.

"Stop!" called Frank aloud.

A moment later there was the sound of someone running away, and it was
not the footsteps of Andy that made the noise.

"I see him! I see him!" cried the younger Racer lad. "It's the man with
the limp!"

"You come back here!" ordered Frank, and his voice was such that Andy
did not think it wise to disobey. He came back panting from his run.

"I could have caught him if you'd let me alone," he said, protestingly.

"You never mind that," went on Frank. "There's been enough trouble
to-night. Now come on, and don't delay. That fellow won't follow us
again."

"I guess not," declared Andy. "He was running hard when I saw him. I
guess he thought he could sneak up and finish the mean work he began,
but he didn't count on our being here."

"That's right," agreed Billy. "When he attacked me we struggled and
I rolled to one side of the lane. Then he must have hit me with a
black-jack or a sand-bag, and made me unconscious."

"It must have been some sharp instrument, to cut your head," declared
Frank. "He probably heard us coming, and ran away. Then, thinking
perhaps we hadn't seen you, he decided to come back for a second try."

"Well, I guess he's gone for good--to-night, at least," remarked Andy;
and a little later the boys reached Riverview Hall. The proctor was
waiting for them, with anger in his eyes for their being out so late,
but he calmed down when told of the cause.

"Attacked, eh?" he exclaimed. "That is bad business, boys. Are you much
hurt, Chase?"

"No, not much."

"Highwaymen, I expect. I did not dream they would be so bold. Footpads
so near the school! The police must be notified at once," and the
proctor proceeded to call up the authorities on the telephone. Billy,
with a wink at his two chums not to say anything of that which he
had told them, allowed the school official to think that an ordinary
criminal had made the attack.

After the alarm had been given, bringing an answer to the effect that
policemen and detectives would be on the lookout for any desperate
characters, Billy sent in his telegram.

If Frank or Andy had hoped to gather, from overhearing the wording of
the message, any intimation as to what it was the lame man had tried to
get from the Western lad, they were disappointed, for the telegram was
in code words, meaningless to all but to those holding the key. And, to
do them credit, Andy and his brother were curious only from a desire to
help Billy, whom they had grown to like very much.

"My uncle and I always use a code, or cipher, in sending messages,"
explained Billy, when he had finished telephoning. "It saves many a
big cattle deal from falling through sometimes, for my uncle has many
competitors who would do anything to learn his plans."

"You had better let the doctor attend to that cut on your head,"
suggested the proctor, and presently the school physician was called in
to dress the wound.

"A nasty cut, but that's all," was his opinion. "No bones broken.
You'll probably have a worse headache in the morning than you have now."

He proved a true prophet, and for three days Billy was laid up in bed,
being delirious part of the time. Andy and Frank went in to see him,
and during a lucid moment he begged them not to say anything about the
lame man.

"Let everybody think it was just an ordinary thief who attacked me,"
said Billy. "I can best serve my uncle that way, and I have the papers
he tried to get safely put away now. So don't say anything."

They promised, though wondering much, and so the attack on the Freshman
passed as a bold, though ordinary, case of a criminal trying to rob a
lone traveler after dark. The police could get no trace of him, which
did not greatly surprise the Racer boys and their new chum.

Meanwhile the first ball game of the season was played and--lost by
Riverview. The score was five to two.

"It was because Billy Chase wasn't in center field," declared Frank
after the game, for Billy had been unable to play on account of the
injury to his head. "If he'd been there the flies that Reynolds muffed
would have been caught, and we could have stopped their winning
streak."

"Well, we didn't play very hard ourselves, when it came to making
runs," declared Jack Sanderson.

"No, we've got to do better," added Ward Platt, and the next practice
was sharp, and full of vim, under the watchful eyes of the coach and
captain.

It was about two days after Billy had gotten out of bed, following the
attack on him, that he sought out Frank and Andy in their room.

"I've got a message from my uncle," said the Western lad, as he held
out a telegram. "It's in the code, and I've just translated it. By the
way, I believe I forgot to mention that my uncle's name is Richfield
Thornton, and that his place is near Sageville, Kansas."

"We've never been very far West," volunteered Andy, "so we never heard
of that place."

"What does your uncle say?" asked Frank, for it was evident that Billy
had come to tell some news.

"Oh, he says he's sorry I was hurt, but he's glad that that man didn't
get hold of the papers that I carried. He says he is having his own
troubles out there, for the men opposed to him are making it hard to do
business. It seems they have divided up their forces and attack. Some
of them are in the East here, trying to get the best of me, and others
are working the game from the Western end. I don't know what to do.
The deal is far from being completed, and anything may happen at any
time to spoil it. I wish my uncle would come on and tell me what to do."

"Maybe we can help you," suggested Frank. "Our father is in business
in New York, and I know he has had lots of law-suits about different
matters. Maybe he could advise you----"

"No, thank you," said Billy, with a shake of his head. "The trouble is,
I can't give you the details of my uncle's business for two reasons.
One is that I don't know all the ins and outs of it myself, and the
other is that it has to be kept secret for a certain length of time.
And to get intelligent advice I'd have to give all the details."

"That's so," agreed Frank.

"But I tell you what we can do," exclaimed Andy. "We can stick close to
you, Billy, and if there are any more attacks there'll be three of us
to dispose of instead of one."

"That's right!" cried Frank. "Billy, we're with you from this on!" And
he held out his hand, which the Western lad took in a hearty clasp.
"You hang out with us, Billy," went on the elder Racer lad, "and we'll
see what happens."

"Fine!" cried Andy, who loved excitement. "Maybe they'll attack you
again."

"I hope not," murmured Billy, as he felt of the lump that was still on
his head. "My uncle wants me to come back out West," he added; "but I
don't want to unless I have to. I like it here. It's a great school."

"You ought to have seen it when the Racer boys first came," spoke Jack
Sanderson, entering in time to hear Billy's last remark. "It sure was
fierce!"

"That's right," agreed Frank.

"And they did everything to get it in shape," went on Jack.

"Oh, get out! Everyone helped!" declared Andy, who, like his brother,
was modest under praise. Nothing more was said for the present about
the news from the West, but later that day Billy remarked:

"If I do have to go back to the ranch, I hope you fellows will come and
visit me during vacation."

"We'll be glad to!" exclaimed Frank, his eyes sparkling in anticipation
of the delights of the prairies.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                          A THRILLING RESCUE


"Where are you going, Frank?"

"Oh, out for a walk. Want to come along, Andy?"

"Sure; there's no fun sitting here, and it's too hot to study. What do
you say to a row on the river?"

"I'm with you. Let's get some of the other fellows."

"Most of our crowd have gone over to the golf game at Fuller Academy,"
said Andy, for that amusement had suddenly come into vogue at one of
the institutions of learning near Riverview, though the lads at the
latter place had not taken it up.

Still, many of them liked to see golf played, and as there was a match
on at Fuller, a number of the closer chums of our heroes had gone to
it. Frank and Andy had a late lecture which they could not "cut," and
so could not attend. Now, however, their study period had arrived, and
they were free to do as they liked.

"Let's see if Billy Chase is in his room," suggested Andy, as they
passed the dormitory where the Freshmen roomed. But Billy was out, as
his fellow-lodger informed the callers.

"Then we'll have to go rowing by ourselves," said Frank.

"I wonder what we'll do this summer?" ventured Andy, when they had
pulled some distance up stream. They generally did this, so they could
come back with the current, which was strong in the Spring of the year.

"Oh, I guess we'll have to wait and see what dad and mother plan," came
from Frank. "They'll likely go to Harbor View again."

"I'm a bit tired of the shore," remarked Andy. "I like clams and
lobsters as well as anyone, but I'd prefer a change this summer. That
time we spent in the Maine woods just suited me."

"The same here, only we don't want to go to a lumber camp in the
summer--in fact, I guess there isn't much doing there at that time of
year."

"No, I expect not; but still I vote we don't go to the shore."

"We won't if we can help it. But at the same time we had good fun at
Harbor View."

"We sure did," chimed in Andy. "Do you remember when the whale rushed
at us?"

"Yes, and what a job we had, with Bob Trent, in getting it ashore."

"And how those fishermen tried to claim it?"

"Yes, and then the time we had finding out who Paul Gale was."

"That was great," agreed the younger lad. "I was hoping we'd have some
excitement here, after that mysterious man attacked Billy, but it seems
to have died out."

"Yes," agreed Frank. "I haven't seen anything more of him. Guess he's
vamoosed."

"Has Billy said anything more to you about his uncle's business?"

"No. I reckon he told us all he could. He sure is a nice fellow--Billy,
I mean. I like him better every day."

"So do I," added the other brother, and for some time they rowed on,
talking of their chums, and the various happenings at school and
elsewhere.

As they rounded a bend in the stream, Andy, casting a look over his
shoulder to get the proper course, uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked Frank. "Is the current too much for you? It
is stronger than I've known it in some time."

"No, it wasn't that, but there's a fellow sitting out on the dead limb
of that old, rotten sycamore tree, fishing right over that swift eddy."

"So he is," agreed Frank, looking toward the place where the school
lads often went to catch fine fish.

The fishing hole was generally a good spot to pull out the finny
prizes, but now the river was swollen with the Spring rains and the
water was deep, swirling about in a dangerous pool where the stream
backed up around a cut in the bank to make an eddy.

"That fellow'd better look out," went on Andy. "That limb is half
cracked through. I know, for I went out on it for a dive last year, and
it almost gave way with me. I told the fellows about it, and they've
since kept off. He'd better look out."

"Call to him, and warn him," suggested Frank.

"I will," said his brother, and he was just about to raise his voice in
a shout when he cried:

"Why, it's Billy Chase!"

"So it is," came from Frank. "He's got an old suit on, and I didn't
recognize him. Hi, Billy!" he yelled. "You'd better get off that----"

But that was as far as Frank got. For Billy, looking up, had recognized
his friends in the boat. He waved a welcome to them, and the next
instant the rotten limb, astride of which he sat over the deep eddy,
gave way with a crack, letting him fall into the river with a mighty
splash.

"There he goes!" cried Frank.

"Pull! Pull!" yelled Andy. "Maybe he can't swim, and if he gets tangled
in the branches he'll drown!"

"Oh, sure he can swim," declared Frank; "but we'll pull up to him, just
the same."

"We're coming!" shouted Andy, and he looked over his shoulder, but he
could not see his friend. "He's gone under!" yelled the younger Racer
lad.

"By Jove! So he has!" gasped Frank. "But he'll come up again! Pull for
all you're worth, Andy!"

The brothers bent to the oars and soon they had swept from the current
of the river into the quieter waters of the eddy. But even there,
because of the swollen stream, it was no easy pulling.

"There's the broken limb!" cried Andy, as it swirled up into view,
having been sucked down under the surface.

"And there are Billy's legs!" added Frank. "Look! his trousers are
caught on a sharp, broken limb, and he's being held head down!"

"Sure enough!" cried Andy.

"Lively!" yelled his brother. "We've got to get him up quick, or he'll
be drowned! You manage the boat, Andy, and I'll see what I can do."

Frank unshipped his oars, and Andy bent his strength against that of
the current, to hold the boat near the drifting branch, around which
the luckless lad's legs were tangled.

"Cut him loose! Cut him loose! Use your knife!" cried Andy, as he saw
his brother vainly endeavoring to disentangle the hem of the trousers
from the sharp projection.

"Right, oh!" cried Frank, as he whipped out his keen-bladed knife. In
another instant he had cut the cloth. Instantly Billy's feet and legs
disappeared beneath the surface of the eddy.

"He--he's gone!" faltered Andy.

"He had to put his legs down to get his head up," said Frank. "Look out
for him when----"

He did not have time to say more, for, at that instant, the body of
Billy shot up head foremost, floating clear of the entangling branch.

"Grab him!" yelled Andy, but his brother did not need the advice.
Leaning over, he caught the half-conscious form of the Western lad,
just as Billy was sinking again.

"Can you pull him in alone?" cried Andy, who was still laboring at the
oars.

"Yes, you keep the boat steady. I don't want an upset," responded his
brother, and he got a firmer grip on his chum's wet clothing. Then with
a mighty heave, pulling him over the bow of the craft, Frank got the
half-drowned lad out of the water.




                              CHAPTER IX

                            THE INVITATION


"Is he dead, Frank? Is he breathing? Did we get him out in time?" cried
Andy, highly excited, as he dropped the oars and began to make his way
forward to where his brother was holding Billy. "Do you think we can
bring him around?"

"Say, don't ask so many questions," snapped Frank, not because he was
cross, but because he realized that seconds counted and he wanted to
do all he could for the half-drowned lad. "Get back to your oars," he
added. "First thing you know we'll be stuck in the mud bank, or upset
in the current. Hold the boat steady, and get over there where it's
quieter. Then we'll see what we can do."

Andy obeyed, and while Frank made the now unconscious lad more
comfortable, the young Racer boy pulled with all his strength toward a
quieter place in the eddy. Soon the boat was floating easily.

"Lively now!" commanded Frank. "Help me turn him over to drain some
of the water out of his lungs. Then we'll make a sort of pillow of our
coats and rest him, face down, on that."

Frank talked while he worked, and soon Billy's lungs were drained of
the water that kept the air from entering them. Next he was placed with
his stomach on an upraised roll of coats, across one of the seats, and
a little later Frank began using artificial respiration, by working
Billy's arms up and down over his head, while Andy pressed on the lower
portion of his chest to compress it. The boys had studied first-aid
work, and knew the method to be used in restoring half-drowned persons.

Their success was soon apparent, for, after a few seconds, Billy opened
his eyes, and looked up at his rescuers.

"Wha--what happened?" he asked feebly.

"You fell in," replied Frank. "But don't talk now. You must be too
weak."

"Oh, I'm all right," said Billy, in a stronger voice. "I remember it
all now. The limb broke with me, just as I was waving to you fellows. I
held my breath, as soon as I struck the water, but I couldn't seem to
get to the top."

"No wonder," put in Andy. "Your trousers were caught on a tree branch."

"Oh, that's what it was," went on Billy. "Well, when I couldn't hold
my breath any longer, and found that I couldn't get right side up, I
thought I was a goner. How did you manage to get me loose?"

Frank told how he had cut the trousers from the entangling limb, and
how he had dragged Billy into the boat just in time. The Western boy
was gaining strength every moment, and in a short while he had fully
recovered from his impromptu bath, save that he was still wet.

"Let's row ashore," proposed Andy, "and get some of the water out of
your clothes. Then you won't be so likely to catch cold. What possessed
you to go out on that limb?"

"I thought it was a good place to fish," replied Billy. "I could easily
throw my line in from the limb, and I never noticed that it was cracked
half way through."

"And it was rotten in the bargain," added Frank. "It ought to have been
chopped off long ago, or a warning sign put up. Most of our fellows
knew about it, though."

"I wish I had," said Billy ruefully. "But I do now. I'm glad I had on
an old suit."

By this time Andy had the boat near shore, and a little later the two
brothers were helping Billy wring the water from his heaviest garments.
It was no easy task to get them on again, and Frank insisted that his
own coat be used in place of the wet one of his chum.

"You'll need it yourself," insisted Billy. "It's quite cool to-day."

"No, I can keep warm rowing," declared Frank, passing over his garment.

"Then if that's warming work, me for an oar!" exclaimed Billy, who was
shivering in spite of the fact that it was late Spring.

With Billy and Frank pulling at the oars, the craft shot down the river
toward the boarding school, aided by the swift current. In a short time
Riverview Hall loomed in sight and a crowd of students could be seen
gathered on the dock near the boathouse.

"Huh! Great rowers you fellows are!" cried Jack Sanderson, when he saw
the water in the bottom of the craft, where it had dripped from Billy,
and noticed the damp figure of the Freshman.

"What did you do--upset?" asked Ward Platt.

"No, they've been inventing a new kind of submarine," chimed in John
North.

But when the students learned what had happened they offered their
congratulations to the rescued lad, and to the Racer boys who had so
pluckily pulled him out in the nick of time.

"Run up and get some dry duds on," suggested Frank. "Are you sure
you're all right, and don't need a doctor to look you over?"

"Oh, sure I'm all right," insisted Billy. "What do you think I am--a
chronic doctor's patient? First I get a whack over the head that lays
me out, and then I'm nearly drowned. I wonder when this 'hoodoo' is
going to let up?"

"That's right, you have had more than your share," admitted Andy, with
a grin.

Billy ran on toward his dormitory, while Andy and Frank remained behind
to tell further details of the rescue. Later they joined their new
chum in his room, where they found him drinking hot lemonade which the
motherly matron, Mrs. Stone, had sent up to him when she heard about
the accident.

"Oh, say, that smells good!" exclaimed Frank, sniffing the air.

"Have some," invited Billy, but when Andy tasted it he made a wry face,
for the matron had not made it any too sweet, and she had put some
ginger in it to further aid in warding off a possible cold.

"Talk about your ice cream sodas!" exclaimed Andy. "Got anything to
take the taste of that out of my mouth, Billy?"

"There's a box of crackers on that shelf," replied the host. "They
belong to Ray Bentley, my roommate, but go ahead and help yourself. He
won't mind. We use each other's things anyhow. I've got some of his
clothes on now. He took my best suit--gone to see some girl, I guess."

"Very likely--at the golf match," remarked Frank, while Andy helped
himself to the crackers. "But most of the fellows are back from there."

"Oh, Ray'll stay until the last cow comes home when there's a girl in
the offing," said Billy, as he took another glass of the hot lemonade.
"There, I feel better," he said. "I'm warmed through. Say, I can't
thank you fellows enough for pulling me out of the wetness, but----"

"Oh, forget it!" exclaimed Frank. "It was just by luck that we happened
to be there."

"By the way, did you get any fish?" asked Andy.

"Not a one," replied Billy. "I had had a few nibbles when you came
along, and I was just thinking I was going to have great luck, when----"

"When you had some _bad_ luck," interrupted Frank. "Well, never mind.
We'll all go fishing some day, and----"

There came a knock on the door, and the two visitors looked
questioningly at Billy.

"I guess it's all right," he said, in a whisper. "It isn't past
visiting time, and we haven't broken any rules. Come in!" he called.

The portal opened, disclosing one of the school messengers with a
letter in his hand.

"Special delivery for you," he announced to Billy, and the host, with
a murmured apology for reading the missive, tore open the envelope.
Rapidly he scanned the few lines. Then he uttered an exclamation of
surprise and delight.

"Say, fellows" he cried. "This is great! Listen to it. My uncle says
his affairs are getting all tangled up, and he wants me to come back
West at once and help him. He says to let things here slide for the
present, and hustle right out to the ranch. It seems that his rivals
are making all sorts of trouble for him."

"And can you help him?" asked Frank.

"Well, I'm going to try. You see I've done quite a lot of business for
him, and I know something of the ins and outs of his affairs. I guess
I'll have to go."

"And leave school?" asked Andy, dubiously.

"With the term only half over," added Frank, "and the best of the
baseball games to come. Oh, that's too bad!"

"Can't help it," replied Billy, still looking over the letter. "I won't
have to go for a few weeks, though, as I'll have to close matters up
here as best I can. But I've got to go, and--Oh say! here's something
else. I didn't read down that far before. Say, this is the best ever!"

"What?" asked Frank and Andy in a chorus.

"My uncle says he wants you two fellows to come out West with me. Out
on the ranch."

"Wants _us_?" came in another chorus.

"Yes, I wrote and told him how you helped me, and how you've been a
sort of bodyguard since that attack, and he thinks that's great. You've
got to come; will you? Come out on the prairies and I'll show you a
life worth living. Can't you come?"

He looked appealingly at Andy and Frank. They said nothing for a few
seconds. Then Billy added:

"You can help me, fellows. I'd rather have you with me than anyone I
know of. Besides, maybe we three can find the treasure of Golden Peak!"




                               CHAPTER X

                           OFF FOR THE WEST


Frank looked quickly at his brother, and Andy, in turn, turned a rather
startled gaze on Frank.

"What's that you said?" asked the younger Racer lad.

"The treasure of Golden Peak," murmured Frank. "Is that a joke, or just
a pleasant little way you Westerners have of making conversation?"

Billy laughed and said:

"Well, boys, I'm afraid, after all, that it may be only a joke. But
for all that there is a place out near my uncle's ranch on the Kansas
prairies that is known as 'Golden Peak.' It's a sort of big hill."

"And is there treasure in it?" asked Andy, eagerly. Frank, too, in
spite of the fact that he was slower to enthuse than was his brother,
looked much interested. "Is there gold out there, Billy?"

"I don't know," was the frank answer. "I'll tell you all I can about
it, and you can judge for yourselves. But first let me say that,
treasure or no treasure, I hope both of you can come West with me, and
help me and my uncle get ahead of the men who are trying to spoil his
business. He says he thinks, from what I have told him about you, that
you'd be just the kind of fellows to do it."

"Many thanks!" exclaimed Frank, making an exaggerated bow.

"Oh, but I mean it!" insisted Billy, quickly; "and I know my uncle
does, too. As I told you before, his name is Richfield Thornton, and
his place--which is a big one--is near Sageville, in Kansas. I have
lived with my uncle nearly all my life--ever since my father and mother
died when I was a small chap. I never had any brothers or sisters, and
my uncle took care of me--he and his wife.

"When I grew old enough I used to help him with his business, after
he found out that he couldn't trust several men whom he had made his
confidential secretaries. That's why he gave me this work to do for him
in the East. I came on to school, but I'm afraid I'm more interested in
my uncle's affairs than in lessons. Though after I clear this mystery
up I'm going to buckle down to study."

"But what is the mystery?" asked Frank.

"It has to do with a big irrigation scheme my uncle wants to carry
out," replied the Western lad. "You see, in addition to raising cattle
my uncle has a big tract of grain and other crops, and he's in a region
where it doesn't often rain. Not far from his place is a small stream,
and a lake, and he figured that by building a dam across a valley he
could make a larger lake, and have water stored for irrigation purposes
whenever he wanted it. He would also have water to sell to other ranch
owners.

"He started to get possession of the necessary land, and I helped him.
We found that a certain parcel, that was much needed, was owned by a
small corporation out East, and I came to get their signatures to the
papers, allowing us to buy and flood their property. I did get their
consent, and then the trouble about Golden Peak cropped out. That's
what we're up against now, and it looks as if we were going to have a
hard time."

"But what is Golden Peak?" asked Andy.

"As I said, it's a big hill that would come about in the middle of the
lake my uncle intends creating by the building of a dam. This hill is
covered with a lot of yellowish rocks, and I think that's how it got
its name. But there are certain men, or rather one man in particular,
who seems to think that there is a real treasure of gold in the peak,
and he's doing his best to prevent us from surrounding it with water."

"Who is this man?" asked Frank.

"His name is Sam Shackmiller, and he's the lame man who I believe
attacked me," answered Billy, quietly.

"What! the black-bearded man who was hanging around here a while ago?"
cried Andy.

"That's the one," admitted Billy. "I had been warned to be on the
lookout for him, and it was well that I was. He is a dangerous man."

"Was that why you acted so strangely?" inquired Frank.

"Yes. I couldn't tell when he might sneak up on me."

"What did he want?" came from Andy.

"Certain valuable papers which I had secured from the corporation,
giving us the right to flood their land. Among them was the final
document we needed to allow us to go ahead with our work, and it
included a court order. It is very valuable, for one of the signatures
on it is that of a man who has since disappeared. If I lost the
document, or if it was taken from me, we would have no authority for
going ahead with the scheme until we could find the missing man to get
him to sign a new paper. And he might not do it. So you see I have to
be on my guard."

"But what about this Sam Shackmiller?" Frank wanted to know.

"Well, while he and some others with him, whom I have not been able to
locate, claim Golden Peak, they really have no right to it. But they
have certain papers, which seem to prove their title to it, and the
courts have recognized that right. My uncle claims that their documents
are forged--at least the name of one man is--the same man who has
disappeared, and if we can prove that his signature is not genuine it
would invalidate their claim to Golden Peak."

"Then you could go ahead with the irrigation scheme?" suggested Andy.

"Yes, but I think my uncle is going ahead anyhow," said Billy. "He is
relying on being able to prove later that Shackmiller and his crowd
have no legal claim to Golden Peak, and so he is going to take a chance.

"In fact the dam is almost built, and soon the waters of the stream
will begin to back up, making the irrigation lake. Then Golden Peak
will be under water."

"Treasure and all?" exclaimed Frank.

"Yes, if there _is_ a treasure there," laughed Billy. "I don't believe
there is. Lots of people have had a try for it, but they never found
anything.

"It seems that some years ago an old prospector came into town, saying
he had struck it rich. He said he had discovered a treasure on Golden
Peak; but whether it was gold, silver, or precious stones, no one
ever found out, for, before he could tell he went crazy. For years he
wandered about trying to relocate the treasure, if there was any, but
that was all, except for the queer stories he told. So you see the
thing simmers down to this:

"My uncle has a good title to every bit of land in the irrigation
valley save Golden Peak. He owns all around it. The title to Golden
Peak is in dispute and my uncle is sure that he has a moral if not
a legal claim to that. If he can prove this one signature a forgery
he will be all right. And he may be without that. But, at the same
time, there is a certain document, of which, if the other fellows got
possession, they could use against us, and stop the work."

"And who's got this document?" asked Andy.

"I have," said Billy quietly. "Here it is," and going to a tattered
Latin dictionary he pulled from between the pages a folded paper.

"Great Scott!" exclaimed Frank. "I shouldn't think that was a very safe
place to keep it, with that dangerous man about."

"The simplest place is the best," declared the Western lad. "I carried
it about with me, and was nearly robbed of it. Then I decided to hide
it here."

"Good idea," said Andy. "Nobody would think of looking in a Latin
dictionary unless he had to."

"You wouldn't, anyhow," chimed in his brother.

"Oh, I'm as fond of study as you are," came the quick retort.

"But now the question is: Will you come West with me?" went on Billy.
"If uncle is going to put the finishing touches on his dam, and flood
the valley, he'll need my help. There may be a fight--or trouble--at
the last minute. I do wish you'd come and help me. I want you--my uncle
wants you. Come on!"

"And have a try for the treasure!" exclaimed Andy. "Shall we go, Frank?"

"Why, I'd like to--first rate," was the answer; "but I don't see how we
are going to leave school before the term is ended. Dad and mother----"

"Oh, they'll let us go, I'm sure of it!" broke in Andy. "I'm going
to telegraph to them and find out. Think of it, Frank! Out on the
prairies! At the ranch--helping build a big dam--keeping off fellows
who may want to dynamite it--finding the treasure of Golden Peak!"

"Oh, I know it would be great," admitted Frank. "But can we leave?"

"There isn't much more to this term," said Billy. "You could easily,
during vacation, make up the work you miss."

"Perhaps," agreed Frank. "Go ahead, Andy, and wire the folks."

So it came about a little later that Mr. and Mrs. Racer received a long
and expensive telegram--for Andy sent it collect--explaining matters,
and asking permission to go out West.

"Those boys!" exclaimed their mother. "We never can allow it!"

"Oh, I don't know," said Mr. Racer, thoughtfully. "I happen to know of
this Mr. Thornton, and he's a fine man. I never met his nephew, but our
boys seem to like him. I'm almost persuaded to let them go. It will be
a good experience for them. And I have always wanted them to see the
West."

"Oh, but their schooling!"

"Well, as they say, they can make it up. Besides, there is not much of
the term left--hardly half--and all education isn't in books, you know."

"Oh, I just know something will happen to them," sighed Mrs. Racer.

"Nonsense!" exclaimed her husband. "I guess I'll wire them they can
go." And just to get even with his sons in a joking way he sent a much
longer message than was necessary, and he sent it _collect_.

"They've got too much pocket money anyhow," he chuckled; "and they
made me pay for the one they sent me."

But Andy and Frank never grumbled when they had to pay the telegraph
toll. The importance of the message drove everything else out of their
minds.

"Hurray!" they cried, bursting into Billy's room. "We can go!"

"Good!" exclaimed the Western lad. "Off for the prairies! That's the
only place to live!"




                              CHAPTER XI

                           A RAILROAD SMASH


"Say, this is great; isn't it?"

"All to the choo-choo!"

"And we've got nearly fifteen hundred miles of it before we get to the
western part of Kansas!"

These were the comments and exclamations of Frank and Andy Racer, and
their new chum Billy Chase, as they sat in a parlor car of a fast
train, speeding westward. They were on their way to the Double X ranch,
owned by Mr. Richfield Thornton, and they hoped not only to get the
better of the men who were opposing Billy's uncle, but also to solve
the mystery of Golden Peak. No wonder they were elated.

"And to think that last week we were boning away at Latin and Greek at
Riverview Hall!" exclaimed Andy.

"Precious little boning _you_ did," commented his brother, dryly.

"Get out, you. I did as much as any of the fellows. Didn't Doctor
Doolittle say I was well up in my studies when he wrote to dad, after
we thought of coming away? And didn't he say I could get back at 'em in
the fall without losing any ground? I guess that's good evidence that
I'm not at the foot of the class, little one!"

"Pooh! Doctor Doolittle would have said that about any one whom he
wanted to have come back to school next term," rejoined Frank.

"Particularly after what you fellows did for the institution," put in
Billy. "But I guess you won't miss much by quitting before the end of
the term."

"No," assented Frank. "I'm glad we did decide to come, but I can hardly
realize it yet."

Indeed the change had come about so quickly that they could hardly
comprehend it. Once they had asked their father's permission to depart
for the prairie land, and had received his consent, matters had moved
swiftly.

They had arranged with Doctor Doolittle not to lose their places in
class, and to be given the proper examinations later so as to gain
their promotion in the Fall. Then they had begun to pack, and Billy had
wired his uncle that he and his friends were coming.

But there was despair in the hearts of the chums whom Frank and Andy
left behind.

"Oh, say, what do you want to desert for?" wailed Jack Sanderson.

"Just when the baseball season is at its best, too," added Ward. "I
know we'll funk in most of the big games we play now."

"Nonsense!" laughed Frank. "You'll do all the better."

"We will not!" insisted John North, but Frank and Andy had gone too far
now to turn back, and their preparations went on apace.

"Well, there's one thing about it," said Duke Yardly, a day or so
before the time set for Frank and Andy to leave. "We'll have to give
'em a bang-up farewell spread."

"That's what!" agreed the others, and a "bang-up" spread it was, too,
especially when some one insisted on setting off a "flower pot" of red
fire without removing the cover. There was an explosion that brought
every professor out on the run, but no damage was done, save that Jack
Sanderson had his eyebrows singed.

"But it only adds to your manly beauty," laughed Frank.

And so the feast went on, and the Racer boys were toasted again and
again in everything mild, from ginger ale to strawberry pop.

"And you'll be sure to come back in the Fall, won't you, fellows?"
asked Ward Platt, when the time came to say good-bye.

"Sure," promised Andy. "We'll come back millionaires--maybe."

"And maybe--not," added his brother, significantly.

"Oh, well, we'll have a good time, and lots of excitement, anyhow,"
declared the younger lad.

Neither he nor his brother realized, however, what kind of excitement
nor what manner of fun they were to have on the prairies.

Then came a trip to New York, where the brothers further outfitted
themselves for their trip. Billy Chase went with them, being their
guest at the Racer mansion for several days.

Mrs. Racer renewed her protest about the boys going off on what seemed
such a dangerous mission, but they laughed at her fears, and said they
could take care of themselves.

"And I believe they can," Mr. Racer said. "They've got to see life, and
I want them to see the good clean side of it, such as they will meet
with out West. I like that young Chase, too. He's got a thinking head
on his shoulders, even if he is only the age of our boys. He'll make
his mark, some day."

"But think of the danger they may be in," said Mrs. Racer.

"Nothing unusual," insisted her husband. "Travel is very safe now. I
almost wish I were going with them," and with a sigh he started for his
office, where a tangle of affairs needed his attention; for, though
he was a wealthy merchant, he devoted much personal attention to his
business.

And so it came about that Andy, Frank and Billy were in the parlor car,
speeding westward. They would be several days on the journey, for they
had elected to go by a route that would afford them a glimpse of some
fine scenery.

"Might as well have a good time while we're going," said Frank.

"Especially as we're not in much of a hurry," added Andy.

Billy said nothing, but when the train had pulled out of the station
he had looked around apprehensively, and had breathed more freely when
they were well started.

"Do you think that lame man will try to follow you?" asked Frank.

"I think he's equal to it," was the answer. "He and his crowd would do
anything to prevent my uncle from carrying out his plan of making the
irrigation lake. But I don't see anything of Shackmiller."

"I think we've given him the slip," decided Frank.

"Then let's enjoy ourselves," proposed Andy. "I've just thought of
something."

"A trick, I'll wager," spoke Frank.

"Well, sort of," admitted the younger lad. "Do you see that fussy old
gentleman over there?" and he pointed to one who had kept the porter
busy waiting on him ever since the train started.

"Sure we see him," admitted Frank. "We'd be blind if we didn't. Are you
going to pull his chair out from under him, or merely toss him off the
train?"

"Neither one," declared Andy stoutly. "I guess you think I don't know
how to work tricks."

"I've seen you pull off one or two that you wished you hadn't tried,"
commented his brother, dryly.

"Not this time," said Andy. "What I'm going to do is this: Right across
the aisle from the fussy man is an old maid. I'm going to change their
valises, for they're just alike, and I'll put the man's where the
lady's is, and _terra firma_."

"_Terra firma?_" repeated Billy, much mystified.

"Yes, that's Latin for opposite," said Andy, innocently.

"Oh, you mean _vice versa_," laughed Frank. "You're going to switch
their bags; eh?"

"Sure thing. And when the fussy little old man opens the one he thinks
is his, and finds a set of false curls and a box of face powder, he'll
go up in the air; and as for the old maid, when she sees the man's
things--Oh, well, she won't have a fit I guess! Oh, no!"

"How are you going to do it?" asked Frank.

"Oh, I'll work it somehow. You just watch me."

Frank and Billy laughed and then proceeded to admire the scenery, while
Andy began planning how he might carry out his trick.

"I have it!" he finally announced. "I'll stroll past the old maid,
and ask her if she doesn't want a drink of water. I've noticed her
fidgeting for the last ten minutes, and I'm sure she's dry, and too
bashful to ask the porter for a drink, or get it herself. Then I'll be
near enough to switch the bags."

"Go ahead. You'll get caught, sure," declared Frank.

Andy only laughed recklessly, and started down the aisle of the swaying
car intending to approach the maiden lady.

"Would you like a drink?" he asked her politely.

"Thank you, I would," she answered, with a smile. "I cannot walk in
these swaying cars very well, and I'm afraid I don't know how to get
water from those patent faucets."

"I'll get you one," said Andy, with as innocent a face as if he had
never played a practical joke in his life. He accepted a collapsible
cup, which the elderly lady held out to him, and, as he took it, he
winked at his companions, farther down the aisle, and with a sly motion
of his foot put the valise where he could easily reach it. At the same
time he swayed over toward the old gentleman, as though the lurch of
the train had tossed him off his balance.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" gasped Andy. "I--er----"

"All right," growled the crusty old man. "Be more careful next time."

"I will," said Andy, and with another wink at his friends, he shoved
the man's bag across the aisle so that it was beside that of the maiden
lady.

It did not take Andy long to return with the water. As he was about to
hand it to the lady, he made another quick motion with his foot, and
the transfer of the bags was accomplished.

Andy was in the act of winking at his chums, to indicate that he had
carried out his trick, when there was a sudden lurch of the train. The
brakes went on with a quickness that almost made Andy turn a somersault.

The cup of water flew out of his hand, straight for the old gentleman,
who was showered.

"What does that mean?" he fairly roared. "Some more of your
carelessness. I'll report you to the conductor!"

"I didn't mean----" began Andy. But that was as far as he got.

The next instant the train stopped with a crash and a shock that threw
nearly everyone from his or her seat, sliding them along the aisle of
the car.

Andy shot along, colliding with Frank and Billy. The old maid found
herself under a chair, two seats away, and the old gentleman who wore a
wig that slipped down over his face, was catapulted across the aisle.
Then came a silence, while several voices cried:

"It's a wreck! We've smashed into something!"




                              CHAPTER XII

                          THE MAN WHO LIMPED


Instantly the car was in confusion. Men and women, struggling to their
feet from where they had been thrown by the impact of the blow, began
rushing about hardly knowing what they were doing. One young lady
raised a small hand bag, and was about to smash it through a window.

"Don't do that!" yelled Frank, racing toward her.

"But I must! I must!" she cried. "I want to get out! The place is on
fire!"

"There is no fire!" shouted Frank. "You are in no danger in this car,
but if you smash the glass you'll cut yourself!"

Even then the girl did not seem to comprehend. She looked at Frank with
fear in her eyes, and once more raised the bag. Not until he grasped
her wrist, and gently took the small satchel from her, did she seem to
comprehend. Then he led her to a seat, for the chairs, strongly bolted
to the floor of the car, had not torn loose.

"This car is not damaged a bit," went on Frank, in as calm tones as
were possible under the circumstances. "You can see that both doors are
in place, and you can get out that way, if you wish."

"Oh, indeed I do!" cried the girl. "Please take me out of here! Oh,
what a wreck! But I'm glad you didn't let me break the glass."

"You would have been hurt if you had," said Frank. "As it is, you do
not seem to be injured."

He looked her over critically. She was quite a pretty girl, aged about
eighteen, and aside from a slight disorder of her hat and dress she was
none the worse for the wreck.

"No, I am not hurt," she admitted. "I don't know why I wanted to smash
that glass. It seemed that I was in some burning building and must get
out that way. Oh, I wonder if any one is hurt?"

"I am afraid so," answered Frank gravely. "But all in this car seem to
have escaped very luckily."

His brother was picking himself up from under a seat, and Billy, who
had been hurled toward a passage leading to a private compartment, came
limping back.

"Hurt?" asked Frank.

"Not much. Just a twisted ankle. How about you?"

"Oh, I'm fine. Let's go outside and see what happened."

"Take me with you," pleaded the girl. "I can't bear to stay in here
after that awful crash."

Frank looked to see his brother approaching and then he helped the girl
along the aisle, as she was trembling from fright.

The maiden lady, for whom Andy had gotten the water, was getting up,
and feeling of her curls as if to see if any were missing. They were
all in place, and, after smoothing down her dress, she seemed more
composed, though she was pale.

The old gentleman across the aisle from her, however, seemed dazed. He
still sat on the floor of the car, with the water from the cup Andy had
carried trickling down his face, and in one hand held his wig, which
had slid off his shiny, bald pate. He was contemplating the mass of
hair as if wondering whose it was, and where he had seen it before.
Then he caught sight of Andy and a flood of red surged into his face.

"Here, you!" he called. "Help me up. You're responsible for this."

"Me responsible?" queried Andy in surprise.

"Yes. You were passing me with that cup of water when everything went
to smash. Why did you do it? Answer me. I demand to know."

"Well," said Andy slowly, "I did spill the water on you--but I couldn't
help it. The train stopped too suddenly. But I can't see how you make
it out that I caused the wreck."

"Wreck? Is it a wreck? Oh, don't say that, young man!" pleaded the man,
now taking a different tack. "I've always been in fear of a wreck. It
can't be possible I'm in one now."

"Well, you're in one now, all right," went on the younger Racer lad;
"though how bad it is I can't tell. Certainly this car didn't sustain
much damage. I'm glad we took a parlor coach," he added to Billy.
"They're heavier, and stand shocks better."

"That's right," agreed the Western lad.

"Oh dear me! A wreck!" exclaimed the old man. "Oh, will no one help
me up. I--er--Oh, I beg your pardon, madam!" he said hastily, as he
saw the maiden lady looking at him. "I do beg your pardon. Just one
moment," and then hastily turning his back toward her he adjusted his
wig on his bald head, and tried to get to his feet.

"We'll help you," said Andy, forgetting all about the changed valises.

"A wreck! Bless my soul!" exclaimed the man. "And I forgot to take out
an accident policy. How unfortunate! I've traveled all my life," he
went on, speaking to the two boys; "and never before did I go without
an accident policy. I never was in a wreck yet, and now the first one
that happens to me I have no insurance."

"But you don't need it," said Andy. "You're not hurt."

"How do you know?" asked the man quickly. "I may have a fractured liver
for all you can tell. But if I have, I'll sue the railroad, even if I
did forget to take out a policy. Oh bless my heart!"

Leaning heavily on Andy, he made his way out of the car. The old maid
seemed capable of taking care of herself, but Billy went over to her
and helped her to the door.

The parlor car conductor came running in, seemingly much excited:

"Any one here hurt?" he cried.

"I--I may be!" exclaimed the fussy old man. "I'm not sure yet--I'm
going to have a doctor look me over, and I'll let you know later,
conductor. And if I am hurt, I'll sue----"

"Oh, I guess you're not hurt much," murmured the conductor. "Any one
else?"

"I don't believe anyone was seriously hurt in this car," spoke Billy.
"They're all out but us, anyhow."

"I'm glad to hear it," was the rejoinder.

"Was it much of a wreck?" asked the Western lad.

"Yes, pretty bad. A switch was left open, and we ran onto a siding and
into a train of box cars. They were not loaded, however, which made
them easier for our engine to plow through."

"Many killed?"

"None, so far, though several are badly injured. Our engine climbed
right on top of the freight cars."

"That must be a great sight," said Billy.

He helped the lady down the steps, and there she was taken in charge
by a number of other ladies, who had gotten over their first fright,
and had organized themselves into a sort of relief corps. Billy looked
forward and saw a strange sight.

The passenger train, going at high speed, had run head-on into a
string of empty box cars. The first two had been split lengthwise, and
the pieces tossed aside. But the passenger engine had fairly climbed
the third one, and had come to a stop reared up in the air like some
mechanical monster charging an enemy.

"Some wreck, this!" exclaimed Billy. As he spoke he saw wreaths of
smoke arising from the shattered cars.

"The wreck's caught fire," he thought. "From the coals of the boiler. I
hope every one is out of the coaches!"

One or two of the passenger cars had been slightly smashed, and some
were tossed from the rails. The parlor car, however, stayed on, as did
the coaches back of it.

The engineer and firemen had jumped when they saw the crash coming, the
engineer having put on the emergency air brakes, however, which locked
the wheels. But the train had been going too fast to stop in time.

Billy saw Frank and Andy approaching, each of them having turned their
charges over to others.

"Well, we got out of that lucky," said Frank, with a shake of his head
as he looked at the burning wreck.

"I should say so," agreed Andy. "No more smash-ups for mine!"

"I wonder if everyone is out?" mused Billy. "Let's take a look."

As all about them was confusion, with half-frenzied men and women
crying aloud, and with the injured ones moaning, the boys realized that
no one might think of the helpless ones possibly imprisoned in the
cars, that would soon be consumed by the flames.

As they approached the fire they saw a man leap from one of the forward
coaches. At the sight of him, Billy exclaimed:

"There he is! I thought we'd left him behind!"

"Who?" asked Frank.

"That man--Shackmiller."

"That isn't he--at least he isn't the one who attacked you," declared
Andy. "That man had a beard, and this one is smooth shaven."

"Yes, but look at his limp," said Billy in quiet tones. "He walks
exactly like Shackmiller. He's followed me after all, and I've got to
carry that paper with me. What shall I do?"

The Racer boys did not know how to answer him, and, indeed at that
moment there was no chance, for, a second later, there came a terrific
explosion, and the body of the man who limped was hurled toward them
through the air.

[Illustration: A SECOND LATER THERE CAME A TERRIFIC EXPLOSION.]




                             CHAPTER XIII

                           THE RELIEF TRAIN


"Look out!" yelled Frank.

"The boiler has blown up!" added Andy. "Run for cover!"

But there was no need, even had there been time to do so--to race
against the awful speed and power of steam--for the one explosion was
followed by no others.

For a moment the air was filled with flying debris, pieces of the
locomotive boiler, and bits of the wrecked cars. But, fortunately,
the mass scattered, and fell to one side, so that none of it hit the
unfortunate survivors of the wreck.

The man whom Billy had called Shackmiller--the man he so feared--had
been hurled forward, rather than up, as though blown along, slightly
above the surface of the ground by some mighty wind.

"That's the end of him!" cried Frank. "He'll be killed sure!"

"How did he happen to be near the boiler?" asked Andy, but there was no
chance to answer him, had anyone been so inclined. For at that instant
the crumpled-up body of the man fell on a pile of the car seat cushions
that had been carried out to make beds for the wounded ones.

"Let's see how badly he is hurt," suggested Billy. "Poor fellow. I hate
to see him suffer, even if he is a plotter."

They rushed toward where the man had landed. So did a number of
others--nearly all save those who were looking after the injured
passengers.

"He's done for," murmured Billy. But even as he spoke the man moved.

"Quick! Get the doctor here!" called the conductor of the train, and
the much over-worked physician began to work on the man.

"Say, that was a close call for us," remarked Andy, when the excitement
had somewhat calmed down.

"I should say yes," agreed his brother.

"And on our first day out," added Billy. "I'm afraid you fellows will
think I got you in bad, having a railroad smash to start off with."

"That part's all right," said Andy. "We like the excitement, but----"

"Well, if he hasn't nerve!" exclaimed Frank. "Is that all the sympathy
you have for the ones who were hurt?"

"Of course not!" snapped Andy. "I'm as sorry as you are that any one
was injured, but as long as we're in for excitement we might as well
have a railroad wreck as anything else."

"You're the limit," said Frank. "Well, now that the boiler has gone
up, and there's no danger from that, let's finish looking at what we
started to see when the steam went off."

But it was not easy to approach very close, as the splintered box cars,
into which the locomotive had plowed, were now blazing fiercely. There
was no means of extinguishing the fire, and it simply had to be allowed
to burn itself out. The wounded had been carried to places of safety,
and were now resting on the car seats. The man who had followed our
heroes was the worst hurt of any, and the doctor did not have much hope
for him.

The trainmen were getting out the baggage of the passengers, and
helping the express and mail clerks to save the contents of their cars
before the fire should spread to them.

In a great measure, however, the excitement caused by the wreck had
calmed down, when it was found there was no loss of life.

The accident had occurred while the train was passing through a farming
section, and soon the countrymen, for miles around, flocked to the
scene, coming in wagons and on foot. They offered to care for any who
did not want to continue their journey, and some women, whose nerves
were shattered, took advantage of the kind offers.

Not so the little old lady on whom Andy had been playing the innocent
trick when the smash came. She was as calm and collected as she had
been at first. And the man whose wig had come off had somewhat regained
his composure.

"I should think you could get a relief train here before this!" the man
snapped to the conductor.

"It's coming--it's coming," said that much-harassed official. "They're
coming as fast as they can get here."

"Well, I'm going to sue your road for damages, whether I'm hurt or
not," the man went on. "I'll be delayed, anyhow, and I'm going to have
satisfaction."

"I hope you get it," murmured the conductor, as he hurried off to see
that the others of the train crew were getting the baggage and other
stuff out of the way of the advancing flames.

The three boys walked about, lending a hand whenever they could, and
talking about the accident. They had a glimpse of the locomotive,
almost turned over, where it had crashed into the cars, and had reared
up.

"That's what made the boiler explode," was Frank's opinion. "The water
level was changed, and some part of the boiler had none in. The fire
kept getting hotter and hotter and the steam got to such a pressure
that it blew the steel apart."

"If it had happened a minute later we'd have been in it," said Andy. "I
wonder what Shackmiller was doing so near the engine--that is, if it
was he?"

"Oh, it was he, all right," was Billy's comment. "I'm sure I wasn't
mistaken, even though he had shaved off his black beard. He was
following me. Probably he was in some other car all the while, and when
the crash came, fearing I might see him, he ran up ahead to hide. Then
he got near the boiler just as the explosion came. Well, I don't wish
him any bad luck, but I hope this ends his following me."

"Have you the paper safe?" asked Andy.

"Yes, it's all right--pinned to the inside of my vest pocket," was the
answer.

There was a shrill whistling down the track, and the sound of a
fast-puffing locomotive that could be heard above the roar and crackle
of the flames. A flagman came running up to the group of trainmen and
others who surrounded the place where the injured ones lay.

"The relief train!" he shouted, waving his red flag. "Here is the
relief train!"

"That's good," said the doctor with a sigh of satisfaction. "I need
medicines and bandages for these injured. It didn't come any too soon
for him," he added, and nodded toward Shackmiller.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                             FORWARD AGAIN


Getting the injured aboard the relief train was the first care of
everyone, including the wrecking crew, that had come in response to the
telegraphed appeal for aid. Tenderly the men and women, and one or two
children, were carried into a car that had been temporarily converted
into a hospital.

Several physicians had come on the relief train, and a number of
trained nurses, so that those with hurts were assured of every
attention.

"I'm afraid we'll have to operate on that man," Frank heard the
physician who had been on the wrecked train say to one of the relief
doctors.

"Which man is that?"

The first doctor pointed to Shackmiller, who was being carried into the
hospital car.

"He has a fractured skull," went on the doctor who had made the first
examination. "He's the worst hurt of the lot. It was a mighty lucky
accident otherwise."

Two engines had come with the relief train, and also a big wrecking
derrick. Now that the passengers--injured as well as those not
hurt--were being looked after, the wrecking crew turned their attention
to saving as much of the railroad property as possible.

By means of a switch, the empty freight cars were pulled away, so that
no more of them, save those entangled in the locomotive, would burn.
Then the passenger coaches were pulled out of the way, some of them
having to be put back on the rails. Others were lifted to one side, as
so much junk, for in a railroad wreck, after the saving of life, next
in importance comes the "clearing of the line," so that traffic may not
be held up any longer than necessary.

With as many of the cars cleared away as possible, the wrecking crew
next attacked the fire. There was no water with which to fight it, but
chemical extinguishers were used, and with long poles and axes the
burning timbers were torn apart, so as to afford the flames less to
feed on. In a remarkably short time, comparatively speaking, the scene
of the wreck was much changed, and something like order was brought out
of chaos.

"Get aboard! Get aboard the relief train, those who wish to go on to
their destinations!" called the conductor.

"I guess that means us; doesn't it?" asked Andy.

"Sure it does," asserted Frank.

"Unless you're going to back out," added Billy.

"Not much!" exclaimed Frank. "We've started and we're going to see this
thing through. We said we'd help you, and we will; eh, Andy?"

"That's what! We'll find out where the treasure of Golden Peak is, or
know the reason why."

This was just the spirit the Racer boys always showed. Andy might be
quick and impulsive, but he had something of the quiet determination of
Frank, and together they made a "team" that was hard to beat.

All the injured having been made as comfortable as possible, the
other passengers filed into the cars of the relief train, leaving the
wrecking crew to do their work. By means of a freight switch the relief
train could get back on the main track and pass around the wreck.

"Well, our baggage is all right," announced Frank, as he saw their
trunks, among a number of others, taken from the smashed car and put
aboard the other. "Now we must send word to father and mother that we
are safe, so they won't worry."

"That's right," agreed Andy.

"As my uncle doesn't know just what train I'm coming on he won't be
alarmed," said Billy, "so there is no need to send him word. But you
fellows ought to wire home, for there'll be all sorts of newspaper
stories of this smash."

The conductor readily undertook to forward any messages which
passengers might wish to send, and the Racer boys filed theirs with
him. Then the relief train left the sad scene, carrying many who had
thankful hearts that it was no worse, for the escape of nearly all the
passengers had been little short of miraculous.

"Well, we're on our way again," remarked Andy, as they made themselves
comfortable in the car.

"And there is the little old lady, and the man whose valises you
switched," said Frank. "But I guess the trick is spoiled, Andy, for
neither of them seem to have any baggage."

This was true, the satchels of the pair having been missed in the
confusion. The owners were too excited to notice it. Andy's plans had
come to naught.

"Oh, well, I don't care," he said. "A joke would lose its flavor now,
anyhow. I'll get a chance to play another before we reach the prairies,
and if I don't, I can have some fun with the cowboys."

"You want to be careful about that," warned Billy. "A cowboy is a bad
customer to play a joke on, unless he takes it in the right way. He's
very likely to get back at you worse than you expect."

"Oh, I guess I can take care of myself," said Andy, airily.

"That's just like him," murmured Frank. "He'll get his good and plenty
some day, and it'll teach him a lesson."

Little was talked of in the train save the recent accident. Some who
had loved ones in the hospital car made frequent trips to it to learn
how they were doing, and most of the reports were favorable.

"How's the man who was hurt in the boiler explosion?" asked Billy, as
the doctor who had first attended the wounded ones came through their
car.

"Not very well," was the grave answer. "We want to operate, but we
can't risk it on the train. We are hoping for the best."

Almost unconsciously Billy put his hand in his pocket where he carried
the valuable paper, and there was a look of relief on his face as he
felt its folds.

The rescue train ran to the nearest station which, fortunately,
happened to be in a city where there was a hospital. To this
institution the worst of the injured were taken, others being sent to
hotels. Those who wished to continue their journey were to be provided
with accommodations on the next regular train, and our boys took
advantage of this offer.

They delayed long enough, however, to receive a congratulatory message
from Mr. and Mrs. Racer, and there was added a caution to be very
careful in the future.

"Mother put that in, bless her heart!" said Andy, and though he spoke
lightly there was a trace of tears in his voice.

"I--I wish I had one to send me a message," said Billy; and there was
longing in his tones.

That night saw our heroes once more speeding to the West and in sleep
they did their best to forget the harrowing experience through which
they had passed that day.

"And we're leaving Shackmiller behind," said Billy. "I won't worry so
much now."

"Well, we're making time," observed Frank, after breakfast the next
morning. He looked out at the scenery speeding past. The rapid click of
the rails told that indeed the engineer was sending his train ahead at
high speed.

"I hope we don't hit anything," remarked Andy.

"Here! Drop that kind of talk!" exclaimed his brother, playfully
punching him. "We've had enough of a hoodoo so far--don't mention it
again."

Owing to the fact that they had to change to another railroad, they
were obliged to spend several hours, the next day, in a large city.
They took advantage of the stop to stroll about, and even go to a
theatrical matinee, which effectively broke up the weariness of waiting.

"This beats boning away at Riverview Hall," said Andy, as they came out
of the playhouse, and headed for the railroad station.

"Oh, school wasn't so bad," declared Frank. "We had good times there;
didn't we Billy?"

"Sure we did. I'll never forget how you fellows threw a scare into me
the night you had on the black beards. I sure did think Shackmiller and
his gang had me cornered."

"And that was what made you act so frightened all the while?" asked
Frank. "Fear of losing that paper you carry?"

"That was it. I'm not half as nervous as I was. By the way, I think
I'll send my uncle a message."

"What about?" asked Andy.

"Oh, just to let him know we're on our way, and that Shackmiller has
been left behind."

They filed into the nearest telegraph office, and Billy soon had the
message written out. As he was paying for it, the operator remarked:

"Sageville, Kansas, eh? I don't often get messages for there. But this
is the second one that has passed over the wires to-day for that
place."

"It is?" exclaimed Billy. "Was the other one to my uncle?"

"I don't remember. I just remember the name Sageville. The message only
passed through this office. It didn't originate here. It came from
Northup, in Pennsylvania."

"Northup--Pennsylvania!" exclaimed Billy. "Why, that was where the
relief train brought us after the wreck--where the injured were left.
And a message went from there to Sageville, you say?"

"That's right," assented the operator. "Quite a coincidence."

"Can you tell me who the message was to, and who sent it?" asked Billy
eagerly.

The agent shook his head.

"I'm sorry," he said, "but I'm not allowed to give out any information
like that."




                              CHAPTER XV

                            ON THE PRAIRIES


Billy Chase looked at the two Racer boys, and then back at the
telegraph operator.

"Is there any way in which I could get that information?" he asked. "It
may be very important to me."

"I'm afraid you can't get it," replied the agent. "In the first place,
I only happened to hear the message as it went over my wires, and,
though I caught it all, for I was not busy at the time, it would be as
much as my job was worth to repeat it."

"Why?" asked Frank.

"Because a telegraph company regards a message entrusted to it just
as sacred as Uncle Sam does the mail. No one but the persons directly
interested are allowed to know of it."

"Then there's no chance for me to find out about it?" remarked Billy.

"I'm afraid not," answered the operator. "But why are you so anxious?"

Then the Western lad told something of the trouble he and his uncle
had been experiencing, and how he had been followed by a man who wanted
to get possession of certain papers. Then he told of the wreck, and of
this man being injured.

"I think that message you overheard, as being sent to Sageville, was
from him," said Billy. "Maybe he recovered enough to tell that he was
laid up, and to put some of his confederates on my track. In that case
I'd like to know about it."

"Well, I don't blame you for wanting to know," commented the agent;
"but, as I said, I can't tell you anything. The company forces me to
remain quiet. I couldn't give out any information about _your_ message
if some one should ask me," and he tapped the paper on which Billy had
written his telegram.

"No, I suppose not," agreed the western lad, "and yet if I knew whether
that message was from Shackmiller, and to whom it went, I might save my
uncle a lot of future trouble. But if I can't--I can't--that's all."

"Sorry, but that's the way it is," concluded the agent, and the three
boys went out.

"I believe it was from Shackmiller!" declared Andy, who often drew
impulsive conclusions.

"What makes you think so?" asked Frank, who was slower in making his
judgments.

"Oh, well, I just feel so. I think that when he recovered
consciousness, and realized that he was laid up, he started someone
else on our trail."

"Maybe," admitted Frank; "but it's pretty hard to decide. I wonder how
he came to follow us in the first place? I thought we had given him the
slip."

"Oh, he's as sharp as a fox," declared Billy. "Lots of times I thought
I had fooled him, but he'd always turn up when I least expected him. He
kept track of me somehow, though I couldn't always trace him. He knew I
had that paper, and he found out that I was coming West."

"That last was easy enough," put in Andy. "It was talked of all over
the school."

"Yes, I suppose he didn't have much difficulty in finding out that
part," went on Billy. "And now, if he has started someone else on my
trail, I've got to look sharp."

"We all will," said Frank. "We'll stand by you, Billy."

"Surest thing you know," agreed Andy. "Well, let's get back to the
station; it's almost train time. Oh! look at those bananas! I'm going
to have some!" and he darted into a fruit store.

"Andy isn't serious long at a time; is he?" asked Frank of his chum,
with a smile.

"No, and maybe it's a good thing. There's enough serious people in
this world," and Billy's tone was a trifle depressed.

"He's worrying about that message," thought Frank, and he was right.

Andy came out with a big bag of bananas and passed the fruit around to
his friends. The younger Racer lad was in a joking mood, and made funny
comments of the street scenes, but, though Frank laughed, Billy hardly
smiled.

"Oh, I say, now; this won't do, old man!" expostulated Andy, after they
had seen a fat pug dog, led by a fleshy lady, run between the legs of
a tall, thin man, tripping him up. Frank and Andy went into roars of
laughter, but Billy barely smiled. "This won't do at all," went on
the younger Racer lad. "What's the matter, Billy? You're as glum as a
burned cork."

"Well, to tell the truth," was the answer, "I am worrying about
what that telegraph operator told me. I more than half believe that
Shackmiller is putting someone after me."

"What if he is?" asked Andy. "We can get the best of him. Don't worry."

"That's right," chimed in Frank. "It may have been only a coincidence
after all. Don't cross a bridge until you hear footsteps approaching on
horseback."

"All right, I'll try," and Billy laughed for the first time since
hearing the news that disturbed him. "Maybe I'm foolish, after all, to
worry."

"Of course you are," said Frank. "Brace up."

After the next day's travel they reached the prairie country, and the
boundless expanse of gently-rolling land was a delight to the Racer
boys, who, though they had traveled much, had never been so far West.

"Say, this is great!" cried Andy, as his eyes took in scenery that was
strange to him.

"It's immense!" added Frank.

"It's immense, all right," agreed Billy, with a smile. "You haven't
begun to see the prairies yet. It's like the ocean; you don't
appreciate it until you've seen it a dozen times--or more. It takes a
long while to get acquainted with the West."

As the train passed on, the boys saw signs of the extensive way in
which agricultural operations were carried on in that locality.
Here were no small farms, of a few acres each, but a vast extent of
territory.

They passed great herds of cattle, and whizzed by long trains of the
patient beasts which were being shipped East. They saw big fields,
extending farther than their eyes could reach, under cultivation, or
being prepared.

Then there was plowing, which was being done in one or two places. Here
were no horses hitched to the implement, with a man or boy following,
with the lines about his waist. Instead, gang plows--a score or
more--were pulled through the mellow soil at once by many teams or by a
steam engine.

"Some plowing, that!" commented Frank.

"I should say yes," agreed Andy.

"That's the only way we can get work done in the West," said Billy.
"All the operations are on a large scale. Why, if a farmer or rancher
tried to do as you folks do out East--work a farm with a team of horses
and one hired man--the West wouldn't be half as developed as it is
to-day. There'd be buffaloes and Indians here instead of wheat lands
and cattle ranches. The West is big--as big as all outdoors, and it
takes big men and big business to keep it going!"

He grew enthusiastic as he proceeded, and the Racer boys saw that he
meant what he said.

"You must like the West and the prairies," commented Frank.

"I do," was the answer. "There's no place like it, and when I get
through with my uncle's Eastern business, maybe I'm not going back. Not
that I didn't have a good time there, and that I don't like Riverview
Hall," he hastened to add, "but--it isn't the West."

"No, I should say not--not by a long shot!" exclaimed Andy, as he
looked across the boundless expanse of the prairies.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                       "WE ARE BEING FOLLOWED!"


"Here we are, fellows!" exclaimed Billy Chase.

"Here?" asked Frank Racer.

"Where?" echoed his brother.

"Pulling into Sageville," answered the Western lad. "We'll be there in
a few minutes now. Better get your stuff in shape."

"Say, if this is _some_ place, where's _no_ place?" asked Andy, for as
he looked out of the car windows he saw nothing save the same prairies
over which they had traveled for many hours.

"Oh, Sageville isn't much of a place, compared to your Eastern cities,"
answered Billy, with a laugh; "but it does very well for us. We think
it quite a town. There it is," and, as the train swung around a curve,
the Racer boys could see a small town just ahead.

"Is that Sageville?" asked Frank, half doubting, and thinking perhaps
his new chum was perpetrating some joke.

"Sure it is," went on Billy, still laughing. "Can't you see the opera
house? It's over a hardware store, that's true, but we have shows there
once in a while, when some company gets stranded and has to work its
way back to New York. And we've got a bank, that gets shot up every
once in a while, so nobody keeps much money in it. The depot express
safe is more sure, for there is generally a man on guard.

"Then we've got a grocery, with a drug store attachment that works late
Saturday nights, and there was some talk, when I came away, of starting
a moving picture emporium, if that's what they're called. I wonder if
it materialized?"

He looked out of the open window, to get a better glimpse of the town,
and added:

"Yes, there's a new skyscraper going up. I guess that's it," and he
pointed to a one-story wooden building on which some carpenters could
be seen working.

"Well, I'll be jig-swiggled!" exclaimed Andy. "I thought the town was
larger than that," for truly it was but a small place.

"Larger!" cried Billy. "What do you want, anyhow? This is the biggest
town in this section. Big! Why, it's got more room to grow in than half
a dozen of your Eastern cities. Take your New York. That can't grow
any. It's reached its limit. It's hide-bound. It can't even stretch,
and the people are so close that they step on each other's corns. But
out here it's different. Why, we can swell Sageville up until it could
take in New York and never know it."

"Not this week, though," said Frank, with a laugh, and he felt a little
nettled at the slight put on his home city.

"Oh, no, it'll take a little time," admitted Billy. "But we've got the
room, and you Eastern folks haven't--that's the difference."

"Yes, it's big enough," admitted Andy, as he looked at the
great expanse of prairie surrounding Sageville. "But it's awful
lonesome-looking."

"Well, maybe it is now," confessed Billy. "That's because all the men
are out on the ranches. But it livens up at night."

"I suppose they'll take us for tenderfeet," suggested Andy, with
something like a sigh.

"Don't let that worry you," said Billy quickly. "I'll teach you the
ropes, and they won't bother you if you keep still and don't try to get
funny."

"Just remember that, Andy," said Frank, giving his brother a
significant poke in the ribs.

"Oh, I'm no worse than you," retorted the younger lad; but, at the same
time, he decided to be careful.

The train was slackening up now, ready for the stop. There were no
other passengers preparing to get off the car where our friends were,
save themselves.

"Not much travel out this way," commented Frank.

"No, this is rather the dull season. But I've seen as many as five
persons get off a train at once," and Billy laughed to indicate that he
was joking.

With a squeaking of the brakes the cars came to a standstill. Billy
went out on the platform, at the same time remarking:

"There's Archie."

"Who's Archie?" asked Frank.

"One of Uncle Richfield's men. He's an old cattleman, a fine shot, and
what he doesn't know about horses isn't worth losing any sleep over.
His real name is Archibald Lynch, but we all call him Archie."

"Sort of girlish name for a man; isn't it?" inquired Andy.

"That's what Archie is always complaining about," said Billy. "He says
he wonders why his folks ever saddled him with a name like that, but
he can't get rid of it. Once he thought of adopting a new one, and he
picked out 'Hank' as having the proper tone, but the boys only laughed
at him, and kept right on calling him Archie. I guess he's used to it
by this time."

The Racer boys looked to see a tall, bronzed man, with a weather-beaten
face, shoulders that slightly stooped, and legs that were bowed from
much riding of horses. He was a typical Westerner, with clear eyes that
seemed to look right through you, and plenty of reserve strength.

He sat on the seat of a buckboard wagon, drawn by a team of small, wiry
horses, and scanned the train narrowly.

"He's looking for us," said Billy.

"Is it far from here to the ranch?" asked Frank.

"Oh, about ten miles. But we make it in good time. Those horses
can travel, though they don't look very stylish. Oh, there's Uncle
Richfield!" and Billy waved to a tall, well-built man who was walking
down the depot platform. "I didn't think he'd come to meet us--he's so
busy," he added. "Hi, Uncle Richfield!" he called, and the man, looking
up suddenly, waved his hand to his nephew.

"Hello, Billy!" he answered in a pleasant voice. "So you got here all
right, did you? Boys with you?"

"Sure," was the answer. "I wouldn't lose them," and with that Billy
leaped from the steps and made a rush for his uncle. The manner in
which the two clasped hands, and looked into each other's faces for a
moment, showed how close was the bond of sympathy between them.

"Hello, Archie!" called Billy a moment later, as he swung over to the
old cattleman. "How are you?"

"Oh, able to sit up and take nourishment," was the quiet answer. "So
you got here safe?"

"Yes, after the railroad company tried to smash us," was the answer.
"Now, Uncle Richfield, let me introduce the Racer boys to you. Here you
are, Frank and Andy, this is my uncle that I've been telling you so
much about."

"I hope he didn't give me a bad character," said Mr. Thornton, as he
smiled and held out his hand to the two brothers.

"Well, we're used to Billy by this time, and we know how to take what
he says," said Frank, with a smile.

"Ha! ha!" laughed the ranchman. "I guess they've got you there, Billy,
my boy."

Then came introductions to the old cattleman, who sat in the buckboard
waiting for the start to be made for the ranch. Frank and Andy liked
him at once, as they did Mr. Thornton. There was a frank and hearty
manner about the Westerners; an atmosphere that seemed to make friends
at once, and the Racer boys felt that they were not among strangers.

"Well, how are things going, Uncle?" asked Billy, as soon as the
introductions were over. "I've told the boys as much as I knew
myself," he added. "I thought you'd want them to know, as long as
they're going to help us."

"Of course," replied Mr. Thornton. "Well, I can't say that things are
going any too well. I seem to strike a snag every now and then. Just as
I think I've got a clear track I'm held up by some action on the part
of this Shackmiller and his crowd. But you say he's laid up?"

"Sure," replied Billy, and he told about the wreck.

"Well, he's got someone acting for him here all right," went on the
ranch owner. "He's started another suit against me, and, though I know
it won't amount to anything, still it holds up operations for a while."

"How is the dam coming on?" asked Billy.

"Pretty well. It's nearly completed, all but a small stretch that goes
across the land that leads to Golden Peak. It is this little piece
that's in dispute, not because that strip on which the remainder of the
dam will stand is of any value, but because it's the only entrance to
Golden Peak, and that's why they don't want me to use it."

"It's too bad," consoled Frank. "And is there really any treasure on
the Peak?" he added eagerly.

"Treasure!" laughed Mr. Thornton. "Not a bit of it! That is all
bosh--moonshine--it's like a lot of other stories that originate out
West and keep growing until a lot of people believe 'em. The only
treasure of Golden Peak is the sunshine and fresh air. I wish I could
bring those fellows to their senses. Then I could go ahead, finish the
dam, and have water enough so I could get bumper crops, and raise some
decent cattle. As it is, I'm held up, and so are a lot of my neighbors
who are going to get water from my lake.

"What we'll have to do, if this thing keeps up, is to organize, and
drive these fellows out of the country. But never mind that now. How
did you make out, Billy? Have you that paper safe? What kind of a trip
did you have?"

Then began rather a long series of questions and answers between Billy
and his uncle, and, as they can have very little interest for my
readers, I will omit them. Sufficient to say that Billy told of the
attack on himself and of how the Racer boys came to his rescue, and how
he was followed by Shackmiller even on the train.

"But the wreck put him out of business," added Billy; "though he is
still active, if that telegram was from him," and he related what the
operator had said.

"Humph!" mused Mr. Thornton. "Well, I don't know just what to think.
If Shackmiller is out of the way, even for a little while, it may be a
good thing for us. On the other hand, it may force matters. We'll just
have to wait and see what happens. But I reckon you boys are tired, and
you'd like to get out to the ranch, and rest up."

"Oh, we're not so tired," said Frank; "but we would like to see the
ranch."

"Then hop on the buckboard and Archie will drive you out there," said
the ranchman.

"Aren't you coming, Uncle?" asked Billy.

"No, I've got some business to attend to in town. I came out with
Archie this morning, planning to meet you. I'll ride back with James
Perdue some time this evening. Just make yourselves at home when you
get there. I told the Chinaman to have a good supper for you."

"Chinaman?" asked Andy.

"Yes, he's the cook," explained Billy. Then he gave his uncle the paper
that was of such value, and the three boys, piling their baggage on the
buckboard, took seats.

"Giddap!" called Archie to the horses, and they started off at a fast
trot. Like everything else in the West, they were speedy--there seemed
to be nothing slow there.

"Is my pony all right, Archie?" asked Billy, when they had turned out
of town to the road that led over the prairies.

"Sure. He's as lively as ever. Needs some exercise, though."

"I suppose so. How about mounts for Frank and Andy?"

"Oh, I guess we can fix 'em up. Ride?" and he looked questioningly at
the Racer boys.

"Not much," said Andy.

"A little," confessed Frank.

"Oh, you'll soon learn," declared Billy. "Everyone rides out
here,--nobody walks;" and Frank and his brother had noticed that, brief
as had been their time in the West.

They kept on, the sturdy little horses making good time, and the boys
and the old cattleman talked of many things.

"Much of a force working on the dam now?" asked Billy.

"Not as many as there was," replied Archie. "There's only a small gap
to fill now, to make the lake, but your uncle can't do anything until
this dispute is settled. Them skunks is holdin' him back."

"Well, maybe we can help settle it," laughed Billy. "What's the matter,
Frank?" he asked a moment later. "I notice you looking back a lot."

"I was trying to see who was in that wagon following us," replied the
elder Racer lad.

"Following us!" exclaimed Billy, and he and Archie exchanged quick
glances. "I don't see anyone," said Billy, a moment later, as he
glanced to the rear.

"It's down in that hollow," replied Frank. "But it's a wagon, with two
horses hitched to it, and three or four men in it."

"Three or four?" mused Archie. "It can't be your uncle, Billy. He
wouldn't be following us so soon, for he said he had to stay in
Sageville a couple of hours longer. Besides, Jim's wagon only holds
two. Several men, eh? I guess we'll just look into this."

He slowed down the horses and looked back just in time to catch a
glimpse of a vehicle behind them, almost hidden in a cloud of dust.

"They're stopping!" cried Andy, as he saw the other vehicle pull up.
A man got down from it and seemed to be looking at one of the horses'
hoofs.

"Humph! I don't know that outfit," said the old cattleman. "They must
be on the wrong road. This one only goes to our ranch."

"Maybe they want to see Mr. Thornton," suggested Frank.

The cattleman shook his head.

"If it was that they'd have seen him in town," he replied. "He's there
yet, and, no matter who they inquired of, if they were strangers,
anybody could have pointed out Mr. Thornton. This looks queer. Did
anyone get off the train when you did, boys?"

"No one besides ourselves," said Billy.

All four were now watching the other outfit. The men in the wagon
seemed to be having a consultation, and there was apparently a
difference of opinion, for one was seen to point toward the ranch, and
several others waved their hands in the opposite direction. Finally the
one who had gotten out of the wagon to look at the horses, climbed back
again, and the steeds were swung about.

"Changed their minds," said Archie with a grunt. "I thought they were
on the wrong road."

He drove on again, and the conversation was resumed. But Billy seemed
thoughtful. It was perhaps an hour later, when they were nearing the
ranch, that Billy turned, as he had done several times before, to
glance back. As he did so he uttered an exclamation.

"We're being followed!" he cried. "There's the same wagon again!"




                             CHAPTER XVII

                             AT THE RANCH


"Followed!" exclaimed Archie Lynch, after the pause that greeted
Billy's announcement. "What do you mean? Who would want to follow us?"

"I don't know," replied Billy frankly. "Certainly it can't be
Shackmiller, for he's in the hospital. But that's the same wagon we
saw a while ago, and we thought it had turned back. Those fellows are
certainly following us."

There was no doubt about it, as all four of them could see a little
later, for, as the vehicle in the rear topped a rise, it could be noted
advancing slowly along the private road that led to the ranch.

"They don't seem to want to catch up to us," observed Andy.

"Maybe they're afraid we'll ask them some questions they don't want to
answer," suggested Frank.

"I don't like the looks of it," murmured Billy. "But I'm glad Uncle
Richfield has that paper."

"And he can look out for himself," observed the old cattleman, with a
grin. "I guess there's nothing for us to do, Billy. We can't very well
order the men off the road, for, though it's a private one, your uncle
doesn't object to folks using it."

"No, I guess we can't do anything," agreed the Western lad. "But we'll
tell Uncle Richfield about it, and he can make some inquiries."

"Look!" suddenly exclaimed Frank, and the eyes of all were once more
turned on the wagon, which had been lost sight of for a moment in a
cloud of dust. "They're turning off the road."

"So they are," agreed Andy. "I didn't notice any other road there."

"There isn't a regular road," said Archie Lynch. "But there's a sort of
trail that leads to the river and the big dam that's almost completed.
They've taken that road."

"What for?" asked Billy suspiciously.

"Say, I believe I have it!" exclaimed the old cattleman. "Your uncle
was telling me the other day that he'd sent for a water-works expert,
to report on the dam, and to see that everything was in good shape for
the completion of it. He didn't quite trust the contractors, for they'd
never tackled a job exactly like this before. That's who that party
must be--the expert and his assistants. They're going to the dam."

"Oh, then that puts a different face on it," said Billy, much relieved.
"But I should think Uncle Richfield would like to be with 'em when they
make the inspection."

"He may come later," suggested Archie. "I guess it's all right.
Giddap!" and his horses started off. The boys watched the other wagon.
It was swinging away from them now, and a little later was lost to
sight below some foothills, that marked the beginning of a rise of
land, in which rose the river, that the ranch owner proposed curbing to
make water his crops.

"Well, we'll be there in five minutes more," said Billy, as he
stretched out his arms, and playfully poked Andy in the ribs.

"Ouch! Quit that!" yelled the younger Racer lad. "But I don't see any
ranch."

"You will as soon as we get up on the next rise," was the answer. "The
hills hide the houses. There's some of our stock, though," and he waved
toward a herd of cattle that was roaming over the prairie.

"Golly! What a lot of 'em!" exclaimed Frank.

"Oh, that's only a small bunch," replied Billy. "Wait until you see 'em
all--but you can't--not at once, for they cover a big stretch."

The Racer boys were beginning to realize the extent of the Thornton
ranch, and to get some idea of the immensity of the prairies which
stretched out for miles and miles in every direction.

A little later, as the buckboard swung over the rise, there came into
view a cluster of low buildings, and the cattle corrals that made up
the Double X ranch.

"Here we are!" yelled Billy, and the next minute he had leaped from the
seat and was racing toward the stables, calling: "Matt! I say, Matt!
Where are you? Where's Buffalo?"

A short, squat figure of a man came out, a bridle dangling from his
arm. At the sight of Billy he threw up his hands.

"Glory be!" he ejaculated. "It's Billy himself! Well, but I'm glad t'
see you! It's been a long time you were away among them tenderfeet. An'
so you're back. Buffalo is it? Sure an' he's as lonesome for you as I
am myself. I'll trot him out," and, having shaken hands with the lad,
the man turned back into the stable, to come out presently leading a
black horse that whinnied with delight when Billy approached.

"That's Matt Boyle, the ranch foreman," explained Archie; "and that's
Billy's horse--Buffalo, he calls him--and a finer piece of horse-flesh
never was."

"Jove, look at Billy ride!" cried Frank, for the Western lad had, with
a bound, leaped to the back of his animal, and was speeding around the
corral at a swift pace.

"I never knew he could do that," spoke Andy.

"Oh, shucks!" exclaimed Archie. "That's nothing. You wait until you see
Billy do some _real_ ridin'. Then you can open your eyes."

"I wonder if we'll ever be able to ride like that?" mused Andy.

"Of course you will, if you stay here long enough," said the cattleman.
"It only takes practice."

"That's right, the same as it does for anything else--like being good,"
added Frank, with a nudge at his brother's ribs, bringing forth a grunt
of protest.

Billy swept up to the buckboard, on the seat of which his chums still
were, and pulling up his mount, suddenly cried out:

"Say, I didn't mean to be so impolite, but I couldn't wait any longer
to get on Buffalo's back. Come on down and I'll take you into the house
and introduce you to Aunt Kittie."

"That's all right--no apologies needed," said Frank. "We were just
wishing we could ride like you."

"I'll have some mounts for you in a jiffy," replied the Western lad.
"Come on now."

He slipped from the saddle, and, clapping his horse on the flank, said:

"Stable, old boy. I can't ride you any more now. I'll see you later."

But the beautiful animal turned and began nosing in Billy's pocket.

"He thinks I've got some lumps of sugar," the lad explained with a
laugh. "No, not now, Buffalo. I'll bring some out to you. Better come
and get him, Matt," he called to the foreman, and, as the latter
approached, Billy introduced the genial Irishman to his chums.

"Well, Aunt Kittie, here we are!" cried Billy, a little later, as he
led his chums to the residence of the ranch owner. The house was a low
one, and all about it were various buildings, where horses were kept,
the tools and implements for the ranch work stored, and quarters for
the men provided.

"Oh, land sakes!" cried a voice, and a little woman, in an apron that
seemed larger than she herself, hurried out on the porch, her face all
smiles. "Land sakes, I'd have known you were here, even if you hadn't
told me!" she cried, as she kissed Billy. "Oh, I'm _so_ glad you're
back," she went on. "It's been so lonesome without you. And these are
the Racer boys, I expect," she went on, as she shook hands with them.

"Guessed it the first time, Auntie!" exclaimed Billy. "And now what
have you got to eat? We're starved."

"I never saw you when you weren't!" she laughed. "But I guess the meal
is ready. I told----"

She was interrupted by the thrusting forth of a head from a window of
a small house a little distance from the main building, and a voice
exclaimed:

"No hab got, Mlissie Tholnton. No hab got!"

"Hello, Sing-Song!" yelled Billy, as he saw the Chinese cook. "Got
plenty of grub?"

"Me no Sing-Song--me Song Lee, Mlister Billy!" objected the Oriental.
"Me Sing Lee!"

"Well, Sing-Sing or Sing-Song or Lee Song, never mind about that,"
laughed the Western lad. "Rustle up the grub and we'll call you
anything you like."

"Billy, Billy!" expostulated his aunt, "wait a moment. Sing Lee wants
to tell me something. What is it, Sing?" she asked.

"No hab got, Mlissie Tholnton," went on the Chinaman, making all his
"r" sounds like an "l." Then, working his fingers into a complication
of knots and twists, he continued: "No hab got pig glease for make
twisty cakes."

"Pig grease," murmured Billy wonderingly. "That's a new one on me. And
twisty cakes? What in the world does he mean, Aunt Kittie?"

"I expect he wants to tell me that he hasn't any lard to fry the
crullers in, Billy," she answered, with a laugh.

"That's light," assented the cook. "No hab got--what can do?"




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                        MR. THORNTON IS WORRIED


Laughing heartily at the Chinese cook's queer talk, Billy and his chums
followed Mrs. Thornton into the house.

"Now, Billy," said his aunt, "you make the boys feel at home. Show them
to their rooms--you know, the two near yours--and I'll see what I can
do for Sing Lee. I told him to make some crullers when I knew you were
coming, as I remembered how fond you used to be of them."

"_Used_ to be!" exclaimed Billy, with the accent on the first word. "I
am yet, Aunt Kittie, and I guess these fellows are too; aren't you?"

"Well, I guess we can manage to eat a few," assented Frank.

"Same here," came from Andy.

"All right," went on Mrs. Thornton. "Now just make yourselves at home,
Frank and Andy, and I'll see if I can find some 'pig grease' for my
queer cook."

"He certainly is a star," commented Frank. "'No hab got--what can do?'
That's the limit in talk."

"Oh, that isn't a marker to what he says sometimes," declared Billy.
"But come on and I'll show you where you're going to bunk. You can
unpack as soon as Archie brings in your trunks."

The boys found pleasant rooms assigned to them. The house was like a
large bungalow, all on one floor, for sometimes strong winds--cyclones
in fact--blew over that portion of Kansas, making high buildings
dangerous. The eating and sleeping quarters were in one building, and
the cooking was done in another, a covered way connecting the two
structures.

"Say, where'd you get all this stuff?" asked Frank, admiringly, as
he saw Billy's room hung about with guns, knives, revolvers, horns
of steers and buffaloes, and Indian trophies, such as bows, arrows,
tomahawks and other implements of the chase.

"This is slick!" agreed Andy. "If we had this at Riverview we'd have
the finest den going. Why didn't you bring it on?"

"Too much trouble to cart," answered Billy, with a laugh. "I picked up
some of this stuff myself, and some my uncle had when he was a young
fellow, when there were Indians out here and a few buffalo. Then my
friends gave me things once in a while."

"It's swell, all right," said Frank admiringly, as he took down an
Indian bow.

"I'd like to have some of these," remarked Andy, as he reached for a
sheaf of arrows.

"Look out!" suddenly cried Billy.

"Why, what's the matter?" asked the Racer lad.

"Some of those points may be poisoned," explained Billy. "I cleaned
them, as I got them, for fear of that, but I can't be sure that I got
all the venom out at that. Better not scratch yourself with 'em. I
ought to fasten them higher up."

"How are they poisoned?" asked Andy wonderingly, as he backed away, and
looked up at the weapons.

"Of course I'm not sure that particular bunch is poisoned," went on the
ranch boy; "but it's best to take no chances. Archie gave me those. He
says the Indians used to get a big rattlesnake, and irritate him so
he'd strike at anything. Then they'd fasten him in front of a cow liver
and he'd bury his fangs in it until the liver reeked with poison. Then
they'd rub their arrow tips in it, and there you are--or, rather, there
you aren't, if you happen to be scratched by one.

"Of course that may not be so, but it sounds plausible, anyhow,"
concluded the Westerner, as he took down a handsome rifle, to show to
his friends.

"Crimps! I wish there were Indians here now," said Andy, wistfully.

"Why, are you anxious to see how fast you can run--away from them?"
asked Frank.

"Huh! I guess I wouldn't run any more than you," retorted Andy.

"The Indians are a back number," said Billy. "What few there are left
are on reservations. But come on, I think I smell the ham and eggs,"
and he led the way to the dining-room.

It was not yet time for supper, but Mrs. Thornton, knowing the
appetites of the boys, had prepared a meal for them, and they did ample
justice to it.

"Did Sing-Sing-Song-Song 'hab got'?" asked Billy, as the time for
dessert approached.

"Well, he has something, at any rate," answered Mrs. Thornton, and she
placed on the table a pie ornamented with all sorts of devices made
from sugar. The cook had drawn his patterns from the Orient.

"Looks like a Chinese laundry ticket," commented Billy, and truly the
icing on the pie was in the shape of the queer letters of the Flowery
Kingdom.

"I don't care how it looks, as long as it's got the taste," said Frank.

"And it sure has," added Andy, as he sampled the pastry.

The meal went on, with gaiety and laughter lending their aids to
digestion, and when it was about over Mr. Thornton came in.

"Well, boys!" he exclaimed, "I see that you got here all right."

"Yes," replied Andy and Frank, while Billy asked:

"Did you meet those engineers, Uncle Richfield?"

"Engineers? No. What do you mean?"

"Why, when we drove out we saw a wagon back of us. It seemed to be
following us--I mean the men in it did--and then they turned off by the
short cut that leads to the dam. Archie thought maybe they were the men
you sent for to inspect the concrete work, to see if it was all right.
Were they?"

For a moment the ranch owner did not answer, and then he said slowly:

"No, Billy, they weren't. And you say they went out to the dam?"

"Well, they headed out on the cut-off road. But if you didn't see them,
how do you know they weren't the expert and his men that you sent for?"

"Because," replied Mr. Thornton--and there came over his face a worried
look--"because I got a letter from this expert just as I was leaving
town to-day, saying he could not come out until next week. That's why I
know that couldn't be his party. Besides, he'd come here first, as he
doesn't know the location of the dam. I wonder who those fellows can
be?"

There was something strange about it all, and the boys felt that Mr.
Thornton was alarmed over the news.

"Can't you imagine who they might be?" asked his wife.

"No," he answered, with a shake of his head and a frown. "I don't like
it, either. If I didn't know that this Shackmiller was laid up, as you
told me, Billy, I'd say it was that rascal. And yet he would hardly
come on my land, when he knows how I feel toward him."

"But I thought he and his crowd owned--or claimed to own--some land in
between your two ranches," said Billy.

"He does claim to own it--a strip leading to Golden Peak--but he
doesn't have to come on my land to get to it. I'm going to look into
this," and Mr. Thornton got up to take down his hat and coat, which he
had hung up on entering the house.

"Oh, Richfield!" exclaimed his wife. "You'll be careful; won't you?"

"Of course," he laughed. "But if any of that crowd is trespassing on
my land they'd better go off in a hurry."

There was determination in Mr. Thornton's face as he prepared to
investigate the occurrence that had given him cause for alarm.

"Get my horse ready, Archie," he called to the cattleman, who was out
in the yard. "I'm going over to the dam."

"May we go along, Uncle Richfield?" asked Billy, eagerly.

"Oh, no!" exclaimed his aunt quickly. "If there's any danger----"

"There won't be," spoke her husband. "Yes, I guess you boys can trail
along if you want to. But can you ride?" he asked, looking at Frank and
Andy.

"Just a little," they confessed.

"I'm going to teach 'em soon," volunteered Billy. "But they can do well
enough on Max and Major."

"Yes, I guess those animals are safe enough," admitted the ranchman,
with a smile. "But they can't make very good time."

"Never mind," said his nephew. "You can ride on ahead, and I'll come
along with Frank and Andy."

"Oh, we don't want to keep you back," protested the elder Racer lad.

"That's all right," returned Billy. "Maybe when Max and Major see
Buffalo galloping along they'll show some speed. It's all right; we'll
get there sometime, anyhow. Come on to the stables."

"Now you will be careful; won't you?" pleaded Mrs. Thornton, as the
boys followed the ranchman out of the house.

"Of course, Aunty," promised Billy.

"Do you think there is any danger?" asked Andy, as he swung along
beside the Western lad.

"Danger? Why, no, I guess not," said Billy, thoughtfully.

"Gee! I wish there was!" went on Andy, eagerly. "I'd like to see a good
fight--not where anyone got hurt, of course," he hastened to add; "but
just for some excitement."

"Oh," laughed Billy. "That's how the wind blows; eh? Well, you may see
some excitement if Uncle Richfield finds those fellows on his land,
and there may be a fight, but it will be the good old-fashioned kind,
with fists. We don't run to guns out here half as much as some writers
of Western stories would have it appear. But come on, there are the
horses."




                              CHAPTER XIX

                              WARNED AWAY


Archie Lynch was leading out two fairly good-looking steeds, which did
not seem to have much speed, but for which the Racer boys were duly
grateful, for fast riding was not one of their accomplishments.

"Those are the ones you can take," said Billy, for his uncle, on
reaching the stables in advance of the lads, had given orders to the
old cattleman. "Here, Buffalo," he called, and his own steed, which
Archie had saddled and bridled, came to his young master of his own
accord.

"Trail along, boys," called Mr. Thornton, as he leaped to the back of
his horse, and galloped off. "I'll wait there for you, if I don't start
back. This may not amount to anything," he added, "but it's best to be
sure."

Billy gave his two chums some brief advice about managing their mounts,
and then the three rode off together, going much slower than Mr.
Thornton. Andy and Frank found it to be no trouble at all to control
their horses, for Max and Major were sedate old cow ponies that had
long since gotten over any such childish tricks as shying or bucking.

"Let's see if they'll get a move on when they see Buffalo leaving them
behind," suggested Billy, as they rode out of the ranch yard, and
started across the prairie.

He spoke to his steed and the horse at once leaped forward, and to the
delight of the two Racer boys, who did not care for the slow pace,
their steeds also started to gallop. It was easier riding this way.

"That's great!" complimented Billy, when he saw how well Andy and Frank
sat their saddles. "We'll make cowboys of you yet."

Once, while spending some time on a farm, the two brothers had learned
the rudiments of riding, and this now stood them in good stead. Whether
they were glad to be out in the open, away from the stable, or whether
they wanted to show that they were good for something yet, did not
develop, but certainly Max and Major kept up a fair gait, and, as Billy
reined in his steed, the three boys rode along together, making better
time than they had anticipated.

"Is it far to the dam?" asked Frank.

"About five miles," answered Billy. "We'll strike right across the
plains for it, instead of going back down the road the way the wagon
went."

As they rode on they talked of many things, and Billy told something of
the building of the dam, and the trouble his uncle had experienced from
the men who claimed to own Golden Peak, and the approach to it.

The way led through patches of purple sage, and over short buffalo
grass. Now and then they would pass herds of grazing cattle, or skirt
some great field where big crops had been raised, or would soon be
sprouting up again.

"What's that?" suddenly asked Frank, as something darted from beneath
the feet of his horse, and scurried off in the grass.

"Jack rabbit," answered Billy, with a grin. "Some day we'll come on a
hunt for 'em. It's lots of fun."

"Gosh! I thought it was something big," said Andy.

"They are pretty big--for rabbits," explained the ranch lad. "And you
ought to see 'em run!"

They could see, by the waving grass, the course taken by the animal,
and a little later they had a glimpse of him sitting on a hummock and
staring at them with his long ears held up like signal flags.

"If I had a gun," began Andy, "I'd take a----"

He did not finish the sentence, for the next moment he went flying over
the head of his horse, which went down in a heap. Andy sat down rather
suddenly, a curious expression on his face.

"Wha--what happened?" he asked in a daze, while his mount, after
scrambling to his feet, and trotting off a short distance, came to a
halt and began nibbling the grass. "Did someone hit me?"

"Your horse put his foot in the burrow of a prairie dog," explained
Billy. "Are you hurt?" and in an instant he was off his horse, slipping
the reins over Buffalo's head, as a sign that he was to stand still.

"No, only sort of shaken up," confessed Andy. "A prairie dog's burrow;
eh? What's it like?"

"Just a hole in the ground--that's all," said Billy. "I meant to tell
you about them, but you can't see 'em, anyhow, until you're right on
top of 'em, and then it's generally too late. Lucky you're not hurt.
Can you ride?"

"Sure I can, if my horse doesn't bolt," and Andy got to his feet. He
had fallen in a thick bunch of grass that acted as a mat, and, beyond a
shaking up, was not hurt.

"Oh, Max won't run," said Billy, and he proved it by walking up and
catching the steed. Soon the trio of lads were riding on again.

"Well, you didn't get the rabbit after all," remarked Frank, with a
smile at his brother.

"No, and it was his fault that I stumbled," complained the younger
Racer. "I'm going to watch for prairie dogs' holes after this."

"You won't often see 'em, unless you get on a barren place," spoke
Billy. "But let's see if we can hit up the pace any. We don't want to
be out after dark."

He spoke to Buffalo, who increased his speed, the other horses doing
the same thing. In a little while the rancher's nephew said:

"There it is!"

"What?" asked Andy.

"The dam. See those two low hills over there?" and Billy pointed to
them. "It's between those hills, and the river is right there."

"Oh, yes," answered Frank. "And what's that break in the middle of the
concrete work?"

"That's the strip of land that's in dispute. If Uncle Richfield could
build over that the dam would be done. It would only take a short time,
too, as all the material is on the ground. But the dispute will have to
be settled first."

"And where is Golden Peak?" asked Andy.

"That other hill which you see just beyond the two bigger ones,"
explained Billy. "When the dam is completed and the river backs up,
Golden Peak will be under water."

"And the treasure with it," added Frank grimly.

"Yes, if there's any treasure there," assented the ranch lad, with a
laugh.

"We'll have to see if there is any," suggested Andy.

"I don't know," and Billy shook his head. "It may be risky business,
especially if those fellows and my uncle have a clash now. But if you
fellows are game, I am."

They soon came to the river which the ranch owner proposed damming. It
was not a large stream, but once held in bounds would produce a good
supply of water for irrigation purposes. The two hills, between which
the stream flowed, formed a sort of gateway. All that was necessary
to do was to connect them with a concrete wall, and the river would
be dammed. But, as Billy pointed out, there was, right in the central
space, a strip of land of which the ranchman could not get control. And
this land formed the right of way to Golden Peak.

Golden Peak was situated in what would be about the middle of the lake
when the dam was completed and the waters backed up. And it would be
entirely submerged. But until the strip in dispute could be acquired,
and the dam completed, nothing more could be done. The work was at a
standstill.

And, as the Racer boys already knew, it was hard to get a title to
this land--that is, a title that would stand in the courts. In fact,
if Mr. Thornton lost possession of the paper which Billy had brought
from the East with him, the enemies of the rancher might even claim
another parcel of land, and might be bold enough to tear down part of
the concrete work already built.

As they came nearer to the dam the boys could see how well-made it was,
and what a big piece of engineering it was to stop the flow of even a
small river.

"Say, this is immense!" exclaimed Frank.

"I should say so," agreed Andy.

"There'll be a dandy lake here when the dam is completed, all right,"
said Billy.

"Won't it take a long time for the river to back up and fill all that
valley?" asked the elder Racer lad.

"Oh, not so very long. If we get some good heavy rain, such as we
sometimes have, or a cloudburst, it would almost fill up over night,
providing the outlet gates were all closed."

The boys went nearer the dam to inspect it. The workmen had left,
for there was nothing for them to do as long as the dam could not be
completed. The land in dispute, which led to Golden Peak, was only
about ten feet wide at the dam--a mere road, though it widened out as
it approached the third hill.

There were several sluice-ways leading from the dam, with controlling
gates, so that the water could be sent in many directions and to a
number of ranches, as well as to almost every part of Mr. Thornton's
land.

While the boys were looking at the irrigation works, they heard someone
approaching from the inner side of the dam, and presently a voice
hailed them.

"Oh, it's Uncle Richfield," said Billy, as he saw his relative
approaching on his horse. "Did you see anything of them?" he asked.

"Not a sign, though someone has been here lately in a wagon with thin
tires, and that isn't the kind the construction men used. I shouldn't
wonder but what those fellows you saw have been here."

"But where did they go?" asked Billy.

"I don't know. They must have moved off back there, though it's hard
going for a wagon," and he waved his hand toward the region where the
river had its rise, a stretch of scrub trees and low foothills.

"Did they do anything?" Frank wanted to know.

"No, nothing seems to have been disturbed. I guess it was a false
alarm. We'll get back home. It looks as if it might rain. I suppose I
ought to have a watchman here, but nothing short of dynamite could harm
the dam now, and I don't believe they'd venture on that," concluded the
ranchman.

He showed his nephew and the Racer boys how he proposed to use the
water when it was imprisoned by the dam, and after a tour of the place,
and a look at Golden Peak from a distance, the party started back.

"We'll have to go at that hill soon," said Andy, in a low voice to his
brother, as they rode back across the prairie.

"That's what," agreed Frank.

But for two weeks after that they were so occupied with having a
good time that they hardly thought of their plan to see of what the
"treasure" might consist.

Their chief business was in learning to ride as Billy did--making
himself almost a part of his horse. This took time, but the Racer boys
were apt pupils. Then came lessons in throwing the lasso, and, though
it took longer to acquire this knack, they managed to become fairly
adept at it.

They went on hunting trips, helped round up the cattle, watched the men
at their crop work, and took long rides across the big stretches of
prairie that always seemed to have something new to disclose.

"Oh, it's a great country!" exclaimed Frank, as they came back one
evening from a long gallop--on faster steeds than Max and Major.

"It sure is," agreed his brother.

"What do you say to a try for Golden Peak to-morrow?" suggested Billy.
"There's nothing special to do, and if it's good weather we can take
our dinner and stay there all day."

"Just the cheese!" declared Frank, and Andy nodded enthusiastically.

The day proved all that could be desired, and early in the morning
saw the three chums galloping across the prairie, headed for the big
unfinished dam, and the hill known as Golden Peak.

The ride was without incident, save that they startled any number
of jack rabbits, which they did not fire at, as the flesh was not
considered prime at that time of year.

As they approached the dam, Frank, who was slightly in the lead, called
out:

"Is your uncle over here, Billy?"

"Why, no, I don't think so. He didn't say anything about coming. In
fact I know he isn't, for I remember, now, he went into town. But why
do you ask?"

"Because there is someone moving around the dam," went on Frank. "I
can see one, two, why there's half a dozen men there, Billy!"

"There are?" and the ranch lad galloped up beside his chum. Quickly
taking a pair of field glasses from the case at his side, he focused
them on the concrete wall.

"That's right," he said, in a low voice. "I wonder what this means? I
don't like it, I wish Uncle Richfield was here."

He called to his horse, and increased the animal's speed, and Frank and
Andy did likewise. A few minutes later, as the boys galloped across the
stretch of land that was in dispute, a man suddenly arose from where he
had been sitting on a stone in the deep grass.

"Hold on there!" he exclaimed, and he reached for his gun, which was
standing near him. "I wouldn't come any farther if I were you. It might
not be just altogether healthy."

"Why--why, what do you mean?" asked Billy, "This is my uncle's land!"

"Oh, is it? Well, I guess not--not here, anyhow!" the fellow jeered.
"Now you clear out if you don't want to get hurt!" and he started
menacingly toward the lads.




                              CHAPTER XX

                            THE BLACK CLOUD


Billy Chase wheeled his horse to bring the animal head on toward the
fellow who had warned them away. The man halted, and seemed to be
considering matters.

"Well, are you going to leave?" he snarled, as he saw that his orders
were not likely to be obeyed.

"I don't see why we should," replied Billy, coolly. "We came out here
to look at my uncle's property, and----"

"Yes, but you're not on your uncle's land now!" fired back the man.
"This strip is owned by me and my friends, and it will be many a day
before Mr. Richfield Thornton gets control of it. Now you vamoose!"

"Hold on!" suddenly called Billy, as he saw that the man was bringing
his gun to bear.

"Hold on for what?" growled the man.

"Don't get rash--that's all," suggested Billy, still calmly.

"No, that gun might go off," added Frank, taking a hint from the cool
conduct of his chum.

"And it might hurt somebody," added Andy.

"Why--why--what do you mean?" snarled the man. "I tell you to get off
this land! Your uncle don't own it and he never will, if I have my way.
You haven't any right here, and in a little while this will be fenced
off so no one can come on. Now you leave in a hurry."

The boys looked at each other. Clearly they were "up against it," as
Andy said afterward. They knew that the land was in dispute and, though
they felt sure that Mr. Thornton had a good claim to it, they realized
that, for the time being, possession was nine points of the law.

"Supposing we don't go?" asked Billy, and Frank understood that his
chum was seeking to gain time, though for what reason he could not
fathom.

"If you don't you may get hurt," was the menacing answer. "My friends
won't stand for any nonsense."

"And how do you know just where my uncle's land ends, and what you
claim is yours begins?" went on Billy, and now the two Racer boys
understood their chum's reason for questioning the man. He hoped to
catch sight of the others who were with him. He wanted to see if he
could recognize any of them.

"How do I know?" asked the man with the gun. "Because it's all been
staked out; see?" and he pointed to a row of wooden pegs that marked
off a ten foot strip which led in through the open place in the dam.

"So that's who those fellows were that followed us the day we got
here," said Billy, in a low voice. "Surveyors--and they did their work
in a hurry, marked out the strip in dispute, and went back to town by a
different route."

"I guess that's right," agreed Frank.

"Well, are you going to vamoose?" asked the man, coming a pace nearer.

"I suppose we'll have to," agreed Billy. "But I want to tell you that
you fellows are making a big mistake. My uncle has a valid claim to
this land, and he'll enforce it, too. Then it will be you who'll have
to get out--not us."

"All right. When the time comes--if it ever does--we'll slide," sneered
the man.

"What's the trouble?" inquired a voice, and turning, the boys saw a
tall man, with a handsome, if evil face, leering at them.

"Oh, these kids think they can go where they like," said the man with
the gun. "I've warned 'em away, but they won't go."

"They won't; eh?" snapped the newcomer, who bestrode a big black horse.
"Well, I'll see about that."

"Oh, we're going, Rick Morton," said Billy, calmly. "We just rode out
here to see what was going on, and now we're going back. I'll tell my
uncle."

"Yes, and you can tell him if he comes out here I'll serve him as he
once served me!" snapped the big man.

"Oh, I suppose you mean horsewhipping," spoke Billy. "Well, I wouldn't
advise you to try it!"

"Now you march!" fairly yelled the big man, to whom the remembrance of
the horsewhipping did not seem pleasant.

"Come on, Buffalo," called Billy, to his horse. "I guess they don't
want us here."

"And we never will," added the man with the gun. "You can't dam up this
river, and flood our property. The courts'll stop you, or, if they
don't, we will ourselves. This dam will be torn down in another month."

"I don't believe so," answered Billy. "Come on, boys," and he motioned
with his head to Frank and Andy.

"Can't we do anything?" asked the younger Racer lad, who did not like
to thus easily give in.

"I say let's go around some other way," suggested Frank, who felt much
of the same spirit.

"It's no use," counselled Billy. "They've got the upper hand now. But
our time will come."

"Why, there's only two of 'em," said Frank. "I guess we could manage
'em if it came to a fight."

"No, it wouldn't be wise," said Billy. "Besides, look over there,"
and as they came opposite the opening in the dam where they could see
through to Golden Peak, they beheld a number of men on horses riding
about. "There are too many for us. They must have something big under
way. The best thing to do is to hurry back and tell my uncle. He may be
able to get ahead of 'em yet."

"And to think that we were almost there and had to turn back," said
Frank.

"We might have found the treasure," added Andy. "I wonder what those
fellows think it is, anyhow?"

"Oh it must be a deposit of gold ore; at least, that is the rumor,"
said Billy. "You see this section of the country is not far from
Colorado, and you know there is gold there. Maybe in the ancient
geological times, before this world was quite made, some gold ore got
into this mountain. I know it's been called Golden Peak for a good many
years. The Indians used to have that same name for it. But no one that
I ever heard of, except that man who went crazy, ever got any gold out
of it, though lots of prospectors have had a try for it.

"Now these fellows imagine there's a fortune in it and they don't want
my uncle to put it under water in his irrigation lake. But it's all
bosh!"

"It looks as if there'd be a fight over it," suggested Frank.

"Yes, and it's too bad," went on Billy. "We need the water for the
ranch, and so do the others who are depending on it. Yet, as long as
this dispute keeps up, we can't do anything."

They rode away in rather moody silence, followed by the searching gaze
of the two men on guard. Then the big man on the horse galloped back
through the opening in the dam to join his companions, leaving the
fellow with the gun near the rock.

"Is there any way we could get around and come to Golden Peak from the
back?" asked Andy.

"Yes, it could be done, but it's a long ride," said Billy. "Maybe we'll
take it, if these fellows stay here. But we'll see what my uncle says."

Much disappointed at the failure of their trip, the boys guided their
horses out of the valley to the higher part of the prairie. They talked
over what had happened, and Andy said he wished he had brought his gun
along.

"If we'd been armed," he said, "they wouldn't have been so ready to
order us off."

Billy shook his head.

"Firearms are bad business," he said. "This will be settled without
powder, I guess. But it sure is mean to have every thing held up, when
you know those fellows are in the wrong."

They rode on for several miles, and, when within a comparatively short
distance of the ranch, Frank, looking up, asked:

"What sort of a cloud is that over there, Billy?"

The Western lad turned in his saddle, and at the first glimpse of the
slate-colored mass, he cried:

"Ride! Ride for your lives, boys! That's a cyclone cloud as sure as
you're a foot high! And it's headed right this way! Ride for all you're
worth!"

[Illustration: "RIDE! RIDE FOR YOUR LIVES, BOYS!"]




                              CHAPTER XXI

                            THE INJURED MAN


Frank and Andy Racer did not need a second warning to urge their steeds
to top speed. One look at the black and menacing cloud, now they knew
what it portended, was enough for the lads. With Billy in the lead,
they sped over the prairie, seeking to gain the shelter of the ranch
houses ere the storm broke.

"She's a'coming!" yelled Billy, as he snapped his quirt to urge his
horse to do even better. "She's going to be a hummer, too! It's a good
thing we saw it in time."

"What'll it do?" asked Andy, galloping his animal alongside that of his
Western chum.

"Tear things loose generally, if it hits anything," was the grim answer.

"Won't it be dangerous for the buildings at your home?" asked Frank,
who had ranged up on the other side of his friend.

"It sure will--if it hits 'em. But that's the way with a cyclone. You
never can tell just where it's aiming. It may pass off and not come
near us at all. But from the looks of that cloud it seems to be headed
right this way."

Billy turned in his saddle and looked back. The dark, low,
funnel-shaped mass of vapor was undoubtedly nearer, and was coming
on rapidly. The air had been quiet--too quiet in fact--and now the
unnatural stillness was broken by a low, moaning sound, as if from some
animal in pain. The horses started as they heard it, and quickened
their pace.

"Steady, old boy, steady!" called Billy, soothingly, to his beast. "It
isn't going to hurt you, old fellow."

The horse quieted down somewhat, but it was easy to see that he was
alarmed. And his fear was conveyed to the horses ridden by Andy and
Frank, for they cavorted about, and acted more like skittish young
colts than staid cow ponies.

"Keep a firm rein," advised Billy. "Don't let 'em bolt with you or you
might lose your seat, and it would be a hard job to catch 'em again
with this storm coming up behind us. They'd bolt for the stable at top
speed. Hold 'em in!"

"That's what," agreed Frank. It was rather curious to note how Billy
took command of matters now, whereas, back East, and at the school, it
had been the Racer boys who were in the van in every thing. But here
they recognized that Billy knew more about what was best to be done
than they did.

"Is it getting any nearer?" asked Frank, as he noted Billy looking over
his shoulder again.

"I should say it was. This is going to be one of the worst storms we've
had here. And we've had some ripping ones, too. Hark to that wind!"

The moaning sound had now risen to a scream, as if the wounded animal
was wild with rage, and about to break loose.

"What does it do, blow straight ahead and lift things off the ground?"
asked Andy.

"No, it goes more in a circle," answered the ranch lad. "That's how it
gets its name-cyclone--cycle--circle, you know."

"Of course, I might have remembered," agreed Andy.

"But what does it do?" asked Frank, who had never seen the effects of
one of these curious wind storms.

"Oh, it pulls things up by the roots when it gets a chance," answered
Billy. "It just seems to twist everything off--a sort of corkscrew
motion you know. I've seen whole houses twisted right around and set
down some distance from where they stood, just facing the other way.
That's the reason we build everything low, hoping the wind will pass
over it."

"Does it rain?" inquired Andy.

"Sometimes. I think we're going to get some now. See if you can get any
more speed out of those nags. We're almost at the ranch and we may make
it in time."

Frank and Andy called to their ponies, and, as Buffalo was able to make
a little better time under Billy's urging, the other two animals forced
themselves to do likewise, for they did not want to be left behind.

"Won't it be more dangerous in a building than out in the open?" asked
Frank, when they had ridden on about a mile, and had a glimpse of the
ranch in the distance. "If the house is going to be lifted up and
twisted around----"

"Oh, we can go in the cyclone cellar," said Billy, almost yelling to
be heard above the noise of the wind. "We've got a sort of underground
cave where we sometimes take refuge if it gets blowing too bad. A
cyclone has no effect on that."

The wind, which had been blowing in fitful puffs, now swooped down on
the three lads with terrific force. They could feel the tremendous
pressure of it, and in a few minutes they saw little clouds of dust
caught up from the dry fields and whirled about in funnel-shaped masses.

"Whirlwinds!" yelled Andy.

"Little cyclones," shouted Billy. "It's coming here all right!"

The roaring and screaming of the wind now became louder, and, looking
back, the lads saw the black cloud fairly rushing down on them.

"Use your quirts!" called Billy, swinging the short whip about his
head, and bringing it down lightly on his horse. "Make 'em know they've
got to make better time."

The horses, up to now, had not felt the lash, but even in the stress of
speed the lads were merciful, and only swung the lashes lightly. But it
was enough, along with the howling of the wind, and the curious hue of
the atmosphere, for it had turned yellow, from the effect of so much
dust in the air.

Leaping forward, the frightened horses carried their riders in advance
of the storm. There came a few drops of rain, and, just as the gale
burst in all its fury, the three raced into the ranch yard.

"Quick!" yelled Archie, who was on the lookout for them. "Into the
cellar. It's going to be a screamer! I'll look after the horses!"

The steeds were trembling with fright as Archie fairly shoved them into
the low stable, built of heavy logs capable of withstanding a fierce
blow.

"Come on!" yelled Billy, as he led the way, through darkness almost as
black as night now. The yellow glow had faded and the ink-hued cloud
seemed to envelope everything. The rain was coming down in torrents,
and Frank and Andy noticed that the wind had a circular motion, marking
the true cyclone.

"Here we are!" yelled the ranch boy, and grabbing hold of Frank and
Andy, he pushed them through the entrance to what looked like an old
fashioned root-cellar, or dugout. It was a shelter partly under ground
and partly raised, with sod and earth built over a wooden roof.

"My, boys! We were getting worried about you!" exclaimed a voice, and
Frank, clearing his eyes from the dust that had blown into them, saw by
a light of a lantern in the cyclone cellar that Mr. Thornton, his wife,
and a number of the hands of the ranch had gathered in the place.

"Oh, we're all right," answered Billy confidently.

"This terrible storm!" cried Mrs. Thornton. "We were so worried about
you, Billy! Where were you when it came up?"

"On our way home. But say, Uncle Richfield, I've got great news for
you."

Before he could tell what it was there came a terrific crash, that
sounded above the roar of the cyclone. Involuntarily everyone crouched
low, though there could be no danger to them in the underground place.

"Oh, what was that?" cried Mrs. Thornton, clinging to her husband.

"I don't know," he answered, steadily. "But I hope it wasn't the house.
See if you can get a glimpse of it, Matt."

The foreman tried to open the door of the cellar, but something had
evidently blown against it. Tug as he would, it did not budge.

The gale was now howling so that ordinary talk in the improvised cave
could scarcely be heard, and Sing Lee, the Celestial cook, was howling
his Chinese prayers at the top of his voice.

"Be quiet!" ordered Mr. Thornton, for the shrill tones of the Chinese
were getting on Mrs. Thornton's nerves. "This will blow over in a
minute more."

Hardly had he spoken, when there came a perceptible lull in the storm.
The howling of the wind died down as does the whine of an electric fan
when the current is shut off. In about two minutes there could be heard
only the patter of the rain on the ground, and, a little later, this
ceased. In all, the actual blow had not lasted five minutes.

"Well, see if you can get that door open now, Matt," ordered the
ranchman. Once more the foreman tried, and with the help of one of the
hands he managed to push the portal partly open.

"There's a beam wedged against it," he reported, but by shoving out his
foot he managed to kick it away, and the door swung wide.

A flood of light streamed in, making the lantern grow pale and sickly.
The dark cloud had passed, and the sun was out. It was a most wonderful
transformation.

"Are--are there any of our buildings standing?" gasped Mrs. Thornton.
"I'm almost afraid to look."

"Sure, they're all right," answered her husband, with a reassuring
laugh. "I guess we only got the edge of the storm at that. The roof's
off one of the pony sheds, but that's all. It was part of that which
blew against the door. All hands out to take stock of damage," he
ordered.

They hurried from the cyclone cellar. The storm had passed, doing
comparatively little damage, and, as Mr. Thornton had said, probably
one edge only had hit the ranch.

"Whew! That was a hot one!" cried Andy, as he looked off in the
distance and saw the funnel-shaped cloud tearing away to do more damage
elsewhere.

"I should say so," agreed Frank. Billy said nothing. He was looking at
a dark object huddled on the ground, not far from the entrance to the
cyclone cellar. The ranch boy advanced toward it.

"What's that?" called his uncle sharply, as he, too, saw it. "A dog?"

"No, it's--why, it's a man!" cried Billy, as he stooped over the
figure. "It's a man, and he's hurt!"

Then, as Frank and Andy ran to join their chum, they uttered cries of
astonishment.

"Look! Look who it is!" said Frank.

"It isn't he! It can't be possible!" added Andy.

"But it is, by all that's wonderful!" ejaculated Billy. "How in the
world did he get here, and how was he hurt?"

"Something hit him on the head, evidently," said Frank.

"Who is it? What's the matter?" cried Mr. Thornton, running up. "Who is
it, boys?"

"Sam Shackmiller, the man who tried to get that paper away from me!"
answered Billy.




                             CHAPTER XXII

                           THE MISSING PAPER


"Impossible!" cried Mr. Thornton, as he reached the group of lads
standing near the wounded man. "How could he be here when you said he
was hurt in the railroad accident and was in the hospital? It can't be,
boys."

"And yet there he is," said Billy, passing his hand over his forehead
as if to ascertain whether or not he was awake. "I leave it to Frank
and Andy."

"It surely _is_ he," asserted the elder Racer lad. "But when we saw him
last he had shaved off his black beard."

"And it's had time to grow in the meanwhile," said Andy.

"Yes," went on Billy, "and I suppose he's had time to recover from his
injuries and leave the hospital, though it did not seem possible."

"Well, whether it's he or not, and, even though he tried to rob you,
Billy, I guess it's up to us to look after him, now that he's hurt,"
said Mr. Thornton. "Lucky we've got some place to carry him to, for
the storm didn't do much damage after all. Take him into the house,
boys, and we'll see what ails him, and send for a doctor."

The man was unconscious, and it was easy to guess what had happened to
him. Near him, lying on the ground, was a billet of wood, evidently
part of the roof of the shed that had blown off. This had struck the
man on the head, making a long gash, though Billy, looking at it as
well as he could, gave it as his opinion that it was only a scalp wound.

As the three boys carried the limp form into the house, whither Mrs.
Thornton had preceded them, they could not help being more and more
sure in their minds that the man was Shackmiller. Every feature was
there, but the beard was as fully grown as if it had never been shaved
off. The clothing too, was such as the man had worn when hurt in the
train wreck.

"Put him on the couch," said Mrs. Thornton, as the injured one was
carried into the living room. "Then we'll bathe his head. I guess you'd
better telephone for the doctor, anyhow, Richfield. We may need him."

"I will if the wires aren't down," replied the ranchman; "but I hardly
expect that they stood that blow." They had not, as was proved when he
tried to get Central, for his ranch, as well as that of several of his
neighbors, was connected with the town by a telephone.

"One of the men will have to ride in," he said, as he hung up the
useless receiver. "Archie, I guess you'd better go. Tell the Doc. to
come right out if he can. I don't want to be mean, or inhospitable,
but I don't want this fellow at my place any longer than I can help.
I don't like his kind, especially after what he's tried to do to me,
and the sooner he can be moved the better I'll like it. So go get
the medicine man, Archie. And tell Matt to see what he can do toward
rigging a temporary roof on the shed. Now that we've had one cyclone
there oughtn't to be any more right away."

"Anything we can do?" asked Frank, anxious to help.

"No, I guess not, except you boys might stay around here, and if
Shackmiller comes to, sort of be on the watch. He may get delirious.
I've got to see to things outside."

By this time Mrs. Thornton, who was a good nurse, had bathed the
injured man's head and bound it up. He was breathing heavily, and was
still unconscious. Then, as household matters needed her attention, she
went out, leaving the three boys in charge.

"Well, say, things are certainly happening with a rush," remarked
Frank, as he looked at the figure on the couch.

"They generally do, once they start with us," commented Andy. "It's
been this way ever since I can remember."

"Then I'm glad you came out here," spoke Billy. "Not that I want
cyclones, and the appearance of our enemies, to happen every day of the
week, but I like some excitement. I'm glad I tied up to you fellows."

"Hush! He's coming to!" suddenly exclaimed Frank, as he saw the man's
eyes open.

As the boys watched they saw a look of returning consciousness come to
the man's features. He gazed about wonderingly, glanced at the three
lads, and then around at the room where he lay. In the minds of Frank,
Andy and Billy several questions came at once.

How had Shackmiller managed to get from the distant hospital to the
ranch? What was he doing so near it in the storm? How had he come to be
hurt?

"Where--where am I?" asked the man, feebly.

"You don't need to ask that; do you?" Billy inquired.

"Why, yes--of course," and the voice was stronger. "I know I was near
some ranch when the storm came up, and then it all got dark. I was
going to ask for shelter when something hit me on the head, and that's
the last I know."

"But you know me; don't you?" asked Billy. "And you know my chums, the
Racer boys. You saw us at the wreck, when the boiler exploded. You know
me all right, Sam Shackmiller!"

"Shackmiller!" fairly cried the man, as he struggled to a sitting
position. "Then you know me! But I don't know you. The Racer boys? I
never heard of them. And you--you----"

"I'm Billy Chase--from whom you tried to get the land paper," said the
ranch lad. "Only you didn't. But how does it come that you're out of
the hospital, Sam Shackmiller?"

"Sam Shackmiller--I'm not Sam Shackmiller!" cried the man.

"Oh, come!" exclaimed Billy. "That's too thin. Why, we know you as
well as you know us, even if you have grown your beard again. Come, if
you're not Sam Shackmiller, who are you?"

"I am Bruce Shackmiller, Sam's twin brother," was the quick answer, and
the boys gasped in astonishment.

"Bruce Shackmiller!" cried Billy.

"His twin brother!" added Frank.

"Yes," went on the man, "and if you know anything about him, for pity's
sake tell me. I have been looking all over for him, ever since he went
East. He wrote me that he was coming out West again, and then I lost
trace of him. I was on my way to Sageville, to go and hunt him up, for
he has friends there, when this storm overtook me. Oh, if you can tell
me anything about him I wish you would!"

The boys were too astonished to speak, at first. In fact, they doubted
that the man spoke the truth, and, seeing this on their faces, he went
on:

"I can easily prove that I am not Sam. He was lame, wasn't he?"

"Yes!" exclaimed Billy, eagerly.

"Well, I am not. See!" and, in spite of his weakness, the man walked
across the floor with never the semblance of a limp. "Sam and I are
twins," he went on, "and we are so near alike, except that he is lame,
that few can tell us apart. And yet there are several points where we
do not resemble each other. His eyes are blue, and mine are brown."

"That's right," said the puzzled Billy, after a look. "But I surely
took you for Sam."

"Nearly everyone does. Oh, but what has become of him?"

Thereupon the ranch lad related briefly about the train accident, and
how Sam had tried in vain to get the valuable paper.

"That is what I have feared all along," said Bruce Shackmiller,
gloomily. "I was afraid Sam had gotten in with bad companions. And so
he and they are trying to defeat your uncle's irrigation project; eh?"

"That's about the size of it," replied Billy. "Your brother followed me
about at school, trying to get that valuable paper. But I was too much
for him, and now my uncle has it safe."

"Oh, your uncle has it?" asked the wounded man, quickly.

"He sure has!" exclaimed Billy, answering in spite of the sudden nudge
Frank gave him. Then the ranch boy looked at his chum, who frowned, and
Billy understood. He wished he had not been so quick to reply. But it
was too late now. However, there could be no danger, he thought.

"Sam always was a little wild," went on the injured man. "He got in
with some fast companions, and, though I did my best to reform him, it
was useless. I think he was always a little bitter against the world
because of his lameness, which afflicted him from the time he was a
little boy. He was never like other lads, and, as he grew older, he
became morose and vindictive. But I hoped he had reformed. Of late I
lost track of him, but recently I had a telegram from him, saying he
was ill, and was coming back West."

"That was the one sent from the hospital I guess," said Billy. "But
what about yourself? How do you feel now?"

"Oh, much better. The blow made me unconscious for a time but I'm all
right now. I must go on, and see if I can find my brother."

"You had better wait until the doctor sees you," suggested Frank.
"He'll be here soon, now."

Mr. Thornton came in then, to see how the sufferer was getting along,
and his surprise may well be imagined when he heard the story.

"Well, I'm glad you're not the man who has been trying, with others of
his gang, to make trouble for me," said the ranchman; "though if you
had been we'd have done what was right by you. I wish you'd use your
influence with your brother to have him drop this business. I'm willing
to pay what's right for that land, though I have a valid claim to it.
He'll lose out in the end, and the sooner he gives in the better for
all of us."

"I'll tell him," said Bruce Shackmiller. "I'm sure that after he has
suffered so much, and uselessly, he will give up. I will seek him out
as soon as I can."

"Better rest up here for a day or so," suggested the owner of the
Double X ranch. "The doctor will be here soon. He has an auto, and it
doesn't take him long to get out from town."

The physician arrived shortly after that, bringing Matt, the foreman,
with him, the latter having left his horse in town.

"Great blow we had," commented the doctor, as he came in to look at his
patient. "Half a dozen of the skyscrapers in Sageville unroofed. Well,
now, let's see what we have here."

He made a rapid examination, and said that the wound was only a scalp
affair, which would soon heal if no complications set in. He dressed
and bandaged it, and prepared to take his departure.

"Now we'll make you as comfortable as we can," said the ranch owner, to
Shackmiller. "Stay a week if you like. On the whole it may be a good
thing that we met you, for it may end all this trouble."

"I hope it doesn't do us out of a chance to get the treasure of Golden
Peak," said Frank, softly.

"Oh, we'll have a try for that, anyhow," spoke Billy, and as he turned
aside, Frank thought he detected a strange gleam in the eyes of Bruce
Shackmiller.

"I'll do my best to influence Sam," said the man in a low voice, and
then he was taken to a room that had been prepared for him.

"He'll be all right in a day or so," the doctor said, on leaving. "All
he needs is rest and quietness. That blow must have been a glancing
one."

"Oh, by the way, Billy," said Mr. Thornton, at supper a little later;
"what was it you started to tell me when that cyclone crash came?"

"Great news, Uncle Richfield," replied the ranch lad. "Some of
Shackmiller's crowd are on guard at Golden Peak, and they ordered us
off when we went there to-day."

"They did!" cried the ranch owner. "I've got to look into that. It may
mean a big change in the situation. I've got to get busy. I must beat
these fellows at their game, or it will spoil everything."

The ranchman sat up late that night, going over various documents in
his room. The boys, after talking over the events of the day, had gone
to bed, rather tired. The effects of the big storm had fully passed
away.

"Well, what shall we do to-day?" asked Frank of Billy, as they got up
the next morning.

"Have another try for Golden Peak, I vote," came from Andy. "Maybe we
can get the best of those fellows."

"Not so soon after we've been there once," was the opinion of the
Western youth. "Give 'em time to forget about us, and we'll have a
better chance. But we can go hunting to-day if you like. One of the men
said he saw a lot of jack rabbits over on the far range the other day.
And maybe we might meet a stray wolf or so. It's always good work to
pot them, as they pull down a calf occasionally."

"Fine!" cried Frank. "We'll do it!"

"Hello, there's your uncle," said Andy, looking out of the window, and
seeing Mr. Thornton dressed for a trip to town. "He's off early."

"Yes, I guess he's got a lot of business to attend to on account of the
new move those fellows made," ventured Billy.

The next moment his uncle called to him:

"Billy, I say Billy! Did you take back that paper you brought from the
Eastern lawyer--the title deed to the land in dispute?"

"No, Uncle Richfield. I haven't seen it since I gave it to you. Why?"

"Because it's gone!"

"Gone?"

"Yes. I had it last night, looking it over together with some other
documents, and I put them all in my desk, intending to take them
into town this morning. Now the most valuable document of the lot is
missing!"

"Missing!" cried Billy. "How can that be? Has anyone----"

At that moment the Chinese cook appeared in the yard with a bowl of
steaming coffee. Addressing Mr. Thornton he said:

"Him no can do."

"No can do what?" snapped the ranchman, not altogether pleased to be
annoyed by household matters at such an important time.

"No can dlink coffee."

"Who can't? What are you talking about, Sing Lee?"

"Man no can dlink. Man what hab chopee-chopee on head--he no can dlink.
Him gone--vamoose!"

"What?" cried the ranchman, a sudden suspicion coming into his mind.

"Him no can do. Him gone," blandly repeated the Celestial. "Mlissie
Thornton send me him for coffee to dlink--I go--he no there. He no can
do!"

"By Jove!" cried the ranchman. "That explains it! Boys, that twin
brother is a sham! He's skipped with my papers! We've got to get right
after him!"




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                               THE CHASE


Instantly all was excitement at Double X ranch. The word quickly went
round of what had happened, and a number of cowboys, and men that
worked on the farm part of the land, gathered at the stables, anxious
to mount their horses and begin the chase.

"That paper stolen!" cried Billy. "That undoes all the work I
accomplished in the East. Oh, if I could only lay hands on that slick
twin brother of Sam Shackmiller!"

"Do you think he told the truth when he said he was a twin brother?"
asked Andy.

"I don't know," replied the ranch boy. "But he surely looked enough
like him to be Sam himself. Only the limp was different."

"He wasn't much different from him in character," declared Frank, "not
if he stole that paper."

"And he did steal it as sure as guns!" exclaimed Billy. "We never
should have trusted him. He was too slick for us."

"But his story sounded reasonable," put in Andy.

"Yes, so it did. Well, let's go down and talk to Uncle Richfield about
it. I hope he'll let us join in the chase."

"So do I," chorused the Racer boys.

They found Mr. Thornton busily engaged in going over the papers in
his desk, hoping against hope that he might have overlooked the most
valuable one. But it was not there.

"What time did he skip out?" asked Billy. "When did you miss him--I
mean Shackmiller?"

"Just now, when Sing Lee went to give him some coffee your aunt sent in
to him," replied the ranchman. "He must have been waiting for just this
opportunity. Maybe he was on his way to the ranch to do this very thing
when the storm overtook him. Oh, why wasn't I more suspicious?"

"Do you think you can catch him?" asked Frank.

"I hope so. We're going to make a big try, anyhow. Do you boys want to
come along?"

"Do we?" chorused the three, and that was answer enough.

"Now you will be careful; won't you?" pleaded Billy's aunt.

"Of course," he promised. "Let's have breakfast in a jiffy, and get on
the trail. Have you any idea what time he left, Uncle?"

"It must have been after midnight, for I sat up until nearly twelve
going over my papers."

They made some inquiries, but no one had seen or heard anything of
the missing man after he went to his room. Nor had there been any
suspicious sounds during the night. Shackmiller, if that really was his
name, had slipped out quietly, secured the valuable paper, and made off
with it. At least that was the way all signs pointed.

There was nothing in his room that would lead to any clue. His bed had
been slept in--or at least the man had stretched out on it--for the
clothes were tumbled. None of the locks on the outer doors were forced,
showing that the man had either escaped by a window, or had used a
false key, since the ones that locked the doors were always taken in
charge by Mrs. Thornton each night.

"Then he's got at least six hours start of us," said Billy, as he and
the Racer boys ate a hurried breakfast. "It's going to be hard to
capture him."

"Oh, I don't know," said his uncle, thoughtfully. "He didn't have a
horse."

"How do you know?" his wife inquired.

"Because none of ours is missing, and he had no horse when he came
here."

"Then if he's afoot it ought to be easy to run him down," declared Andy.

"If we can pick up his trail," spoke Mr. Thornton. "Well, boys, are you
ready?"

"We sure are!" exclaimed Frank. He and his brother would have gone
without breakfast for the sake of taking part in the chase.

The cowboys and others had been saddling their horses, looking to
girths, lariats and stirrups, and to their guns.

"I'd like to get a chance to rope the fellow!" exclaimed Archie,
vindictively. "He won't get away once I get my rope on him," and he
swung the lariat around his head.

"Scatter, boys, and look for signs," commanded the owner of Double X
ranch. "He may have headed for town, or he may be going to cross the
line and get into Colorado. If he gets among the mountains we might as
well give up."

The men, experienced at reading signs on the ground where a tenderfoot
could see nothing, were soon looking to pick up the trail of the
missing man. They scattered about, and, because of the fact of the
rain, it was easier than otherwise to notice marks in the soil.

Suddenly a cry from Matt Boyle called the others to him.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Thornton.

"Here's where a strange pony has been tethered," was the answer. "See,
those shoes are none of ours," and he pointed to the hoof-marks in the
soft ground.

"That's right," admitted Mr. Thornton. "And here's where a man has come
along and mounted him," he went on. "I see it now. That fellow rode up
here, and picketed out his horse. Then the storm came and he was hurt.
He thought he saw a chance to get that paper and he took it. He waited
until we were all asleep and took it out of my desk. Then he sneaked
out, got his horse, and rode off."

"That's it!" cried Billy.

"On the trail, boys!" shouted the ranchman. "I'll give a hundred
dollars to the one who first sights that fellow!"

"Whoop-ee!" yelled the cowboys, flinging their hats in the air. One or
two fired off their big revolvers, and several swung their lariats.
Then, amid shouts and yells, and with a clatter of hoofs, the cavalcade
started off on the chase.

"We'll stick together!" called Billy, to his two chums.

"Oh! I hope we can get that fellow!" cried Frank.

"If we don't find him in this direction I know where we ought to look
for him," said Andy, for the trail was leading toward town.

"Where?" asked Billy.

"At Golden Peak," replied the younger Racer lad. "I believe he'll head
for there, to join the others of his gang."

"If he does," said Billy solemnly, "it's good-bye to Uncle Richfield's
dam. Those fellows will have the upper hand!"




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                          OFF TO GOLDEN PEAK


"Well, it's no use, boys, I guess we may as well go back."

"And give up the chase?"

It was Mr. Thornton who spoke first, and Billy who questioned him. They
had been on the trail since early morning, seeking to find the man who
had disappeared from their ranch at the same time as did the valuable
document, and now, at sunset, they had come to a halt, unsuccessful.

All day they had followed the trail of the fugitive--or rather, they
had tried to follow it--for they lost it a short time after leaving the
ranch, and not even the most skilful of the plainsmen or cow punchers
could pick it up again.

"Yes, Billy," resumed the ranchman, "that's the only thing to do, I
guess. There's no use keeping on after a forlorn hope. We can't get
that fellow to-night."

"Then you're not going to give up altogether; are you?" asked Frank.

"No, indeed, but I'll have to adopt other tactics now. They have
forced my hand, so to speak, and I'll have to do something I have been
contemplating for a long while, but which I hesitated to do because it
might bring matters to a crisis. Now I shall have to go ahead whether I
want to or not."

Mr. Thornton did not say what it was he intended to do, and as he
seemed so thoughtful and dispirited after the unsuccessful chase, the
boys forebore to ask him.

"We can hardly get back to Double X ranch to-night," observed Andy,
as the men began to draw in from the big circle in which they had
stretched out to try and pick up the trail.

"No, we won't try it," decided the ranchman. "We'll camp in the open. I
rather thought something like this would happen, so I told Archie and
Matt to bring along some grub. You boys have your blankets, haven't
you?"

"Yes, we don't go far without 'em," answered Billy, and this was so,
for strapped at the backs of the saddles were the means of making an
improvised bed on the plains. Some of the cowboys had things to eat,
while some carried materials for making coffee.

"We'll just camp here," decided Mr. Thornton, as they came to a place
where a little stream afforded water for man and beast, and where the
grass offered good grazing for the horses.

Saddles were thrown off, and after the steeds had been given a hasty
rub-down with dried grass, the fire was made, and supper, such as it
was, was soon under way.

The meal, not elaborate by a good deal, was much enjoyed by all,
especially by the Racer boys, to whom this sort of life was quite novel.

Then, after supper, they sat about the fire, listening to the stories
told by the cattlemen, or discussing the events of the day.

The night passed without incident, though Frank and Andy found it
rather hard to drop off to sleep as easily as did the others. The
movements of the tethered horses, the occasional call of an owl, the
howl of a wolf, or the barking of a distant colony of prairie dogs,
were all new and strange to the Easterners. Yet ere long they found
themselves in dreamland.

"Well, there's only one thing to do," announced Mr. Thornton, at
breakfast the next morning.

"What's that?" asked Billy.

"I'm going to finish that dam, and make the lake," the ranch owner
said decidedly. "I'll beat those fellows at their own game. They have
stolen my legal authority to proceed, but I'll go ahead and complete
the dam, and fight it out in the courts anyhow. If possession is nine
points of the law, then I'm going after those nine points. I'll flood
the district and when they want what they claim is their property--but
which isn't--they can look for it at the bottom of the lake. I'll
finish the dam at once."

"And cover Golden Peak?" asked Billy.

His uncle laughed.

"What harm will it do?" he asked. "All that's there are some worthless
yellow rocks, and those fellows are crazy to think there'll ever be a
treasure found there. Yes, I'm going to flood it."

Billy and his chums looked at one another. There was the same thought
in all their minds. They must go to Golden Peak before it was covered
with water.

"I'm going on in to Sageville," continued Mr. Thornton, when the
saddling-up had been completed. "You boys had better go on to the ranch
with the others. Tell your aunt," he said to Billy, "that I'll be home
as soon as I can. And also tell her what I'm going to do. I'm going to
hire the biggest gang of men I can find, and put them to work on the
concrete dam. We can fill in the gap in a week, and back up the water.
Then I'd like to know where Shackmiller and his gang will be?"

He galloped off, and in due time the three boys and their escort
of cowboys were at the ranch again. Mrs. Thornton was not a little
surprised at the news they brought, and she had also been alarmed at
their absence all night, but she had become somewhat used to the manner
in which things were done in the breezy West.

The boys planned to go on a trip to Golden Peak the next day, but
decided to go hunting instead, and, as Billy pointed out, they had over
a week before the waters would rise and cover the hill.

Meanwhile Mr. Thornton carried out his plan. A big gang of men
assembled at the dam, and soon began the work of finishing it. It was
decided to build up the concrete work, and set the many water gates.
Then, when the cement had set, all that would be necessary to do would
be to close the gates against the river, the water would begin to back
up, and the lake would form.

A search had been made for the missing man, but he had not been found.
The men who had been on guard at Golden Peak had also disappeared, and
the place was in possession of the forces of the ranch owner.

"I guess they're not going to trouble you," said Frank, one day.

"I'm not so sure of that," replied Billy's uncle. "This may be the
calm before the storm. I'm always suspicious when such men lay low and
do nothing. They're preparing for a big move, I have no doubt; but
I'll be ready for them. They've got one advantage on their side, in
possessing that paper, but I'll have the dam built and the lake over
their property before they can act, I hope."

Men guarded the dam day and night. In fact the work went on at night,
by means of the light of flaring gasoline torches.

The gap was nearly closed. The gates were all in place, and only a few
more yards of concrete and rubble needed to be dumped in.

"If you fellows are going to get the treasure of Golden Peak you'd
better get a move on," said Mr. Thornton, dryly, to Billy and his chums
one night.

"Why?" they asked. They had been so busy having a good time, hunting
and riding over the prairie, that they had almost forgotten about it.

"Because," answered the ranch owner. "I expect to close some of the
gates to-morrow, and soon flood the region. Golden Peak will be out of
sight in two days more."

"Then we'll explore it to-morrow!" cried Billy. "Hurray, boys! Off for
Golden Peak and the treasure--if it's there!"




                              CHAPTER XXV

                              CAMPING OUT


"Have you got the grub?"

"What happened to that frying pan?"

"Who saw the coffee pot? I'm sure I had it a minute ago."

"Where are the tin cups?"

"Yes, and the knives and forks."

"I wonder if we've got plenty of matches."

"Is this tent going to be big enough?"

These were only a few of the questions, demands, exclamations and
wonderings that came from the three lads, Frank, Andy and Billy, as
they prepared to set off to explore Golden Peak.

It was a fine day--a better one could not have been desired--and the
sun shone warm over the prairies, while in the distance, as the trio
stood in the ranch yard, could be seen the twin hills between which
flowed the river that was soon to be harnessed, and made to irrigate
the vast farms.

Beyond the hills lay Golden Peak, showing yellow in the strong sun, and
fully justifying its name. Surely it looked as if treasure were there,
and if it was, the Racer boys and their chum were determined to find
it. They had arranged to camp for several days on the mysterious hill,
which many believed contained wealth in some form, but which others
said only held worthless yellow rocks.

In the ranch yard some burros, well laden with the camp stuff, stood
patiently about, while Billy, Frank and Andy looked to their saddle
horses, tightened girths, and saw to it that they had all they needed
for a stay of some time.

"Now boys," said Mr. Thornton, "I wouldn't waste too much time on this
expedition. Don't be gone more than three days. Because I'll want to
close the big gates and let the river rise, and I won't want to drown
you out like rats in a hole. So don't stay too long," and the ranchman
smiled broadly.

"Well, we counted on a week," spoke Frank.

"Well, then spend three days at Golden Peak, and the rest of the week
camping somewhere else," suggested Mr. Thornton. "There are lots of
good places around here, Billy knows 'em. Besides, it won't take you
three days to find out that there is no treasure at Golden Peak," and
he laughed.

"I don't know about that," returned Billy. "But we could finish our
camping expedition somewhere else, I suppose. We'll do it, and when we
send you word, Uncle Richfield, that we've vamoosed off the Peak, you
can turn on the water."

"All right," agreed his uncle. "Now have you everything you need?"

"If they haven't they never will have," said Mrs. Thornton, with a
laugh. "They've been up since before daylight getting their traps
together. Now boys, you will be careful; won't you?" and she put the
question for about the tenth time.

"Of course we will," said Billy, as he gave her a hug and kiss, for she
had been almost like a mother to him.

"Yes, I think we have everything," said Frank, as he looked over the
packs on the backs of the burros, and saw to the things he and his
brother and chum were to carry. The Racer boys had gone camping many
times, and, though the method of procedure might be somewhat different
on the prairies, still the general rules to be observed were the same.

"Then good-bye and good luck to you," said the ranch owner. "Don't
forget to let me know when you leave Golden Peak, as I'll then shut the
big water gate and start the flood."

"We will," promised Billy. "Though we may stay there four days instead
of three, in case we come across the treasure."

"In that case you may," laughed his uncle.

"Forward then!" cried Andy, as he leaped to the back of his horse. Or,
rather he tried to leap to the saddle, but his movement was unexpected,
and his steed a trifle frisky, so, as a matter of course, Andy missed
his mark and came down on the ground rather heavily.

"If that's the way you're going to march I'm not with you!" exclaimed
Billy, with a broad grin.

"Come here and I'll pick you up," invited Frank, from the saddle of his
own mount.

"Huh! You fellows think it's funny," grumbled Andy, as he slowly arose.
This time he was more careful, and successfully reached the leather.
There was a chorus of good-byes, a shout of encouragement from a group
of cowboys, who fired off their big revolvers, and a waving of Mrs.
Thornton's apron in lieu of a handkerchief.

"Vely much nice boys!" called Sing Lee, his yellow face all smiles.
"Goo' luck!" and he threw after them one of his queer shoes, filled
with rice.

"Gosh!" exclaimed Andy. "He must think this is a wedding party instead
of a treasure hunting expedition. But I hope the old custom holds good."

They rode off over the prairie under the summer sun, their hearts
filled with hope, and with no thought of the dangers they were soon to
face. Probably if they had had intimations of them it would had made no
difference.

"We'll head for the dam first," said Billy, "and take a look at the
work going on. Then I can arrange for one of the men to take back word
for us when we leave Golden Peak, so uncle can turn on the water."

"I rather think I'd like to see that operation," said Frank.

"Oh, we can come down to it if we like," returned Billy. "That is, if
we're not too busy getting out the treasure."

"I wonder what the treasure will be, anyhow?" spoke Andy. "I should
think gold ore."

"Or maybe silver, or copper," suggested Frank. "You know we're not a
great way from Colorado, and some of the rock strata of that State,
where there is gold, and other minerals, may have outcropped in Golden
Peak."

The boys talked of the possibility of this as they rode on. Now and
then they would flush some partridges, or sage hens, but they did not
shoot any, as they wanted to wait about getting game until they were in
camp.

"Watch out for prairie dogs' burrows," warned Billy. "There are a lot
of 'em around here." He spoke only just in time, for Frank managed to
pull his steed aside from stepping in one, which might have given him a
bad tumble.

They reached the dam, where scores of men were at work, and the foreman
greeted them pleasantly. He readily agreed to send back word for them
when they left Golden Peak.

"And if you find more gold than you need, just drop off a couple of
bags here," he invited, with a laugh.

"He's just like the rest of 'em," complained Billy, as they rode on.
"He doesn't believe in the treasure."

They saw that the dam was almost completed, and that a few more days'
work would bring it to the point where the big gates could be closed
and the river stopped from flowing, except as it was needed.

Already the stream was partly confined, flowing through several
openings in the big concrete wall, and this made the current much
swifter, also deepening the water. It had backed up some behind the dam.

"Another hour will bring us to Golden Peak," announced Billy, toward
the close of the afternoon, when they had stopped for lunch and again
taken the trail. "Then to get up the tent and camp out."

"It doesn't seem as if that hill was so far away," remarked Frank.
"Why, to look at it from the ranch I'd say we could walk to it in a
little while."

"That's because the air is so clear," explained Billy. "Distances look
shorter than they are. It's a good way off yet, but we can make it
before night."

The shadows were just beginning to lengthen when they reached the foot
of the curious little mountain where they expected to remain several
days, and which they hoped would contain a treasure trove.

"Make camp!" cried Billy, as he leaped from the saddle. His companions
did likewise, bringing the burros to a halt. As they were about to
unload the animals, looking the while for a good location for the tent,
Andy, who had strayed off to one side, uttered an exclamation. At the
same time there was a sound in the bushes as if somebody was forcing a
way through them.

"What is it?" cried Frank.

"Someone's here!" replied Andy, and they could hear his rifle being
brought up, ready for use.




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                            THE CLOUDBURST


Billy sprang to where he had leaned his weapon against a tree, and his
example was followed by Frank. Then, fully armed, they looked to where
Andy was gazing at a spot in the underbrush.

"What is it?" called Billy, in a hoarse whisper.

"I can't see," was the answer, "but it was some large body, and it made
off as soon as I came near."

"Be careful," advised the ranch lad, as he advanced nearer his chum.

"Why, what do you think it might be?" asked Frank. "A bear?"

"No bears around here," came in a whisper. "But it might be a wolf.
We've been losing some cattle lately, and the beasts may have a den
here."

The boys remained on the alert for several seconds, but they heard no
further sounds.

"Guess it was a false alarm," spoke Andy, in a relieved voice. Frank
did not answer, but, creeping cautiously forward, he bent low to
the ground, and looked carefully for some tell-tale sign in the
fast-disappearing light.

"See anything?" asked Frank.

"Yes," replied Billy. "I see some marks."

"Was it a wolf?"

"No--a man!" came the unexpected reply.

"A man?" chorused the Racer boys.

"Yes. Fellows, we're not alone on Golden Peak, and we've got to be on
our guard," and Billy's voice was a trifle solemn.

"Who do you imagine it can be?" asked Frank. "Some of those same men
who are making trouble for your uncle?"

"I shouldn't be surprised," said Billy, as he laid aside his gun. "They
can't help but see the work going on at the dam, and they know what it
means--the burying of Golden Peak under many feet of water. So they may
be making a final effort to get at the treasure."

"And they may not like it that we are here," suggested Andy.

"Very likely not. But we've got as good a right as they have, and
better," spoke the ranch boy. "We'll stick it out, and if they try any
of their funny business we'll do the same."

"That's right!" exclaimed Frank, with a grim tightening of his lips.
"We're with you from the word go."

"Well, as long as that's settled, suppose we see about grub?" suggested
Andy, and his companions laughed at his practical idea. But, none the
less, they were willing to conform to it, and soon the campfire was
going, and the meal being cooked. Then the tent was put up, the horses
picketed, and the boys drew lots to decide the order of standing watch.
Frank's turn came first.

The night passed, however, without any alarm sounding, though each lad,
in turn, was sure he heard suspicious noises, and with ready rifle
stared off in the darkness. Nothing more, however, than the movement of
some creature of the underbrush resulted.

"Who's going to get breakfast?" demanded Billy, some hours later, when
the sun coming up over the prairies made the yellow rocks about them
gleam.

"I got supper," came from Andy.

"Well, I got the water," asserted Frank.

"And I made the fire," laughed the ranch boy. "So as long as we all had
a hand in that meal I guess we can do the same for breakfast."

Soon the eggs and bacon were sizzling in the frying pan over the fire,
and the appetizing odor of coffee filled the air.

"My! but that certainly smells good!" exclaimed Andy.

"And it'll taste better," declared his brother, who was in charge of
the actual cooking.

"And after grub we'll start in and explore Golden Peak," said Billy.
"It's queer, that, though I've lived near it a long time, I never have
been all over it. It's only recently that the rumor of treasure got
started anew, and since then I haven't had much chance. But we'll run
this thing down now."

"Unless those other fellows prevent us," suggested Frank.

Golden Peak was rather a curious formation. It was the central and
the lowest of three hills in what was otherwise quite a flat country,
and, with the twin points between which the river flowed, marked the
beginning of a gentle rise that culminated in mountains many miles
away. It was as if some great force of nature had sliced off the plain,
leaving the prairies almost like a barn floor, but with these three
peaks sticking up.

Golden Peak was of good height, and was several miles in circumference.
It was well wooded, beginning at a point about half a mile up from the
level, and there was much rocky formation.

The boys started on their explorations soon after breakfast, leaving
the pack animals tethered, but riding their own steeds and carrying
their guns.

"Suppose those fellows come upon our camp?" suggested Andy.

"Well, we've got to take that chance," answered Frank. "We can't hide
it where they couldn't find it. But if they wreck it we'll take our
revenge, that's all."

"I don't believe they'll bother us," said Billy. "They know this is the
last round of the fight, and they're going to lose. If we come face to
face with them they may act mean, but I don't believe they'd dare do
anything."

They rode on for several miles and saw no signs of any other persons
than themselves on Golden Peak. Now and then a movement in the
underbrush indicated the passage of someone or some animal, but they
could glimpse nothing.

They managed to shoot some sage hens and a partridge or two, insuring
them a good dinner.

"But I don't see any treasure," complained Andy.

"There's where someone has been digging for it," remarked Billy,
pointing to a hole in the ground. "But I guess he gave it up as a bad
job."

There was quite an excavation amid the dirt and yellow rocks, but it
had been abandoned after having been sunk to a depth of about five
feet, showing that the looked-for gold, or other precious minerals, had
not been found.

"I wonder what the treasure will be?" ventured Frank.

"Gold, I hope," said Billy. "As soon as we get to a likely place we'll
do a little digging ourselves, but there's no use trying where these
fellows have, for they'd find it if it was in plain sight."

"How will we know gold if we see it?" asked Frank.

"Oh, I've got a prospector's testing outfit," replied the ranch lad. "I
can manage to wash some of the dirt or gravel, and if I get some yellow
particles that will stand the acid test I'll know we're on the right
track."

"These rocks look as if they contained some gold," suggested Andy, a
little later, leaping from his horse to pick up several of the yellow
stones.

Billy laughed.

"Lots of people are fooled by that," he said. "It is iron pyrites, a
mixture of iron with lots of sulphur in it. The sulphur gives it the
yellow color, and that's what makes Golden Peak show so yellow in the
sun. Iron pyrites is often called 'fools' gold,' as it has fooled so
many people. No, we've got to get a different yellow than that if we
want to strike the treasure."

"Just my luck!" exclaimed Andy, in disgust, as he tossed the rocks
aside.

All that day they roamed over Golden Peak, looking in vain for any
signs of hidden wealth. The most that Billy hoped was that they would
come to some out-cropping of precious metal that would tell of a hidden
vein; but, though they did find several promising places, many of which
had been prospected by the unknown men on the hill, the boys were not
rewarded.

"Well, let's hike back to camp," proposed Frank, as the afternoon began
to wane. "We don't want to stay in the open."

They found nothing disturbed when they got back to where they had left
their burros and outfit, and supper was soon cooking.

The next day was a repetition of the first, and the boys were beginning
to get discouraged. Not that they had been too hopeful, but they
expected to find something.

"The treasure of Golden Peak is a myth!" exclaimed Frank, as they
prepared to go back to camp on their third evening spent on the hill.
"I say let's go somewhere else and camp."

"One more day," pleaded Andy, who was more hopeful than either of his
companions. "Let's have one more day of it."

"All right," agreed Billy, "though I expect Uncle Richfield is getting
impatient to close the gates of the dam and let the water rise. But
he'll wait for us."

"It would be inconvenient if he didn't, and tried to drown us out,"
said Frank.

"Well, let's go down," began Andy, "and see----"

He did not finish the sentence, for he suddenly disappeared from sight,
crashing through some bushes with a clatter of earth and stones.

"Hello! What's the matter?" gasped Frank.

"Andy, where are you?" yelled Billy.

"Down in a hole!" was the answer, in muffled tones. "I fell half-way
through to China, I guess. Look out, don't follow me here."

Andy had been off his horse when the accident happened, or it might
have been more serious. Frank now leaped from his animal and cautiously
approached the place where his brother had fallen in. He saw an opening
into some sort of cave, but, almost as he reached it, Andy came walking
out, for the floor of the cavern, that had been concealed by the brush,
was sloping.

"Well, what are you trying to do?" asked Frank.

"You can search me," answered Andy, grimly. "I didn't know that cave
was there any more than you did. But it sure is a hole."

"Let's have a look," suggested Billy, and with his two chums he began
pulling aside the bushes. Soon a good-sized opening was revealed,
leading into a cavern the depth or size of which it was impossible to
determine in the fast-gathering darkness.

"Let's go in!" cried impetuous Andy.

"Let's wait until morning," said his more cautious brother.

Billy stooped down and picked up something. It was a rusty knife, with
a few specks of yellow stone.

"What have you got?" asked Frank.

"Someone has been in this cave--years ago I should judge by this rusty
knife," said the ranch boy. "And, unless I'm very much mistaken, we've
stumbled on the hiding place of the treasure."

"The treasure!" gasped Andy. "What do you mean?"

"I mean this is the most promising sign we've struck yet," went on
Billy. "I think these are particles of gold. I can soon tell. Make a
fire, so we can see."

One was kindled, and by the light of it the test was applied.

"Gold! It's gold all right!" fairly yelled Billy, as the biting acid
did not tarnish the touchstone on which he rubbed the yellow particles.
"There's gold in this cave, and this is probably where the old miner
found his nuggets, just before he went crazy, and forgot the location
of it. Since then the bushes have grown over the mouth of the cavern,
and no one stumbled upon it until----"

"Until I stumbled _in_ it!" interrupted Andy, with a laugh. "But if
there's gold there let's go in and get it!"

"No," said Billy, after a moment's thought, "it's too late to-night.
But we'll come the first thing in the morning, and, if the cave is big
enough, we'll camp here instead of in the tent."

"But maybe those fellows will discover the cave in the night," objected
Frank.

"There's not much danger," was Billy's opinion. "In fact I think those
fellows have skipped out. We haven't seen any signs of 'em lately.
But we can put the bushes back and in the darkness I don't believe
those fellows will notice anything if they do come this way. Come on,
fellows, get busy."

They soon had the entrance to the cave well concealed, and then, with
their hearts filled with hope, they rode down to their camp, which they
found undisturbed.

"We're going to have a storm," was Billy's forecast, as they got supper
by lantern light. "But it won't matter, as we can get in the cave
to-morrow and be dry while we are digging for gold."

"Just think of it!" cried Andy. "We have really found the treasure of
Golden Peak!"

"Not yet," said the more careful Frank. "That old prospector may have
taken it all out."

"But that's where it was, at any rate," declared Billy, looking at some
of the shining yellow particles he had brought away with him.

They could hardly sleep that night, but at length did drop off in a
doze, Andy taking the first watch. It was almost at an end, and he was
about to awaken Billy, who was to relieve him, when he became aware of
a curious noise up the valley at the end of which Golden Peak stood.

"I wonder what that is?" he mused. "It sounds like wind and rain."

At that moment a gust shook the tent, and Billy called:

"All right! I'm coming."

He glided out to join Andy a little later, and when he heard the sounds
he said:

"It is rain. The storm's coming. No need to stand watch now. Let's make
everything snug and stay in the tent."

Hardly had they done so when the downpour began, and it was a hard one.
Fortunately the tent was waterproof, but it was sorely tried, for the
wind was strong.

It was no fun getting breakfast the next morning, but they managed to
boil coffee, and then, still in the downpour, they set out for the cave.

"No one's been here!" cried Andy in delight, as they saw that the
bushes were not disturbed. "Now for the gold!"

They soon discovered that the cave was large enough to shelter them and
their animals, and the patient beasts were glad enough to get in out of
the wet.

Hardly had they made all snug, and prepared with torches and lanterns
to explore the cavern, when there came a terrifying sound outside. It
was like a great clap of thunder, followed by a roaring of waters.
Billy rushed to the mouth of the cave.

"Fellows!" he cried, "we didn't get here a minute too soon. There's
been a cloudburst, and the whole place below us will be flooded in
another minute!"




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                         GETTING OUT THE GOLD


With a rush and a roar the storm descended, increasing in intensity
each minute. Well it was for the Racer boys and their chum that they
had reached the cave in time, for they would have found it almost
impossible to make their way up the side of the hill in that downpour.

"A cloudburst; eh?" echoed Frank, as he came to the entrance of the
cavern and stood beside Billy. "It's lucky we got in on time."

"I should say so," agreed Andy. "Look at it rain!"

The water was coming down in sheets, and they could see scarcely ten
feet beyond the mouth of the cave. It seemed as if that terrific
thunder clap had actually shattered a cloud, and the rain, instead of
coming down in drops, was descending in torrents.

"If those other fellows--Shackmiller's crowd--are out on Golden Peak
now they'll need umbrellas," observed Andy, with grim wit.

"That's right," agreed his brother. "Lucky if they don't slide down to
the bottom."

"And that's likely to happen," added Billy. "Look at those small rivers
of mud and water."

He pointed to big rivulets that were coursing down the side of the hill
on either hand from the opening to the big cave. Horse or man would
have found it difficult to make progress against them, for they washed
the soil out from under foot.

"Well, now that we're here, what shall we do?" asked Frank. "No use
standing looking at the rain, even if it is a cloudburst."

"That's right," agreed Andy. "Let's get at the gold."

"I'm with you," came from Billy. "Say, we couldn't have found a better
place to camp in a storm. This cave is as dry as a barn."

"Oh, that's Racer luck," answered Andy, lightly.

"I believe you," agreed his Western chum. "Well, as long as we have
some lanterns, and can make torches from some of this dry wood in the
cave, let's explore it a bit."

The cavern was, as I have said, a large one, extending back under the
brow of Golden Peak. As the boys could see, it also branched off in
different directions, smaller caves opening from the large one.

"And the question is, where is the gold?" came from Andy.

They did not have to hunt long to find it. Hardly had they gone a
hundred feet back into the cave when Frank uttered a cry of delight and
wonder.

"Here it is!" he shouted. "Gold! Lots of it! Sticking right out of the
side of the cave!"

His brother and chum hurried to his side. Frank, holding his lantern
aloft, flashed it on a vein that glowed a golden yellow in the light.

"Maybe it's only 'fools' gold," suggested Andy.

"No, I think this is the real thing," came from Billy. "We can soon
tell."

Quickly he made the test, and gave a cry of delight.

"It's gold, all right!" he yelled. "Boys, we've found the treasure of
Golden Peak! Or, rather, Andy did, by falling into this cave!"

"Oh, I'll whack up even," said the younger Racer boy, quickly.

Now that they were sure they had come upon the gold they examined the
precious vein more closely. It cropped out in the soft sand-like rock
of the cavern wall, as though squeezed by some giant hand that had
crushed the rocks into their present form. The gold was in the form of
a soft ore, as if it had been mixed with clay or putty, and with their
hatchets the boys had no difficulty in chopping out a considerable
quantity.

"But hold on!" exclaimed Billy, when they had made a precious pile in
the middle of the cavern floor. "Now that we have located this lode
let's look for others. This one isn't going to run away, and we may
find a richer one to work."

"That's a good idea," declared Frank. "This will keep, and we might as
well go to the far end of the cave and see what's there. Maybe there's
a bigger vein."

They fed the horses, for it was now nearly noon, and then, eating
something themselves, they started for the rear of the cavern.

It was larger than they had imagined, but their plan of going to the
end of it was quickly halted. For, proceeding cautiously along, on the
lookout for pits or crevices, Frank suddenly uttered a cry of warning.

"Hold on!" he called. "There's a big hole here! I nearly stepped into
it! Bring the lights!"

His companions hastened to his side. There they saw that, extending
all the way across the floor of the cave, was a great crack, the other
side of which they could not discern. Silently Andy picked up a stone
and dropped it down. It was many seconds before, from the black depths,
came floating up the echoes of the crash as the rock found bottom.

"By Jove!" whispered Frank. "That must go all the way down to the foot
of the hill--thousands of feet!"

"And if you had fallen--" began his brother.

"But he didn't," said Billy quickly, for he was in the habit of
looking on the bright side. "Well, this ends the cave as far as we are
concerned. We can't go any further, and all we can do is to go back to
where we first found the gold and get out as much as we can."

"That's right," agreed the Racer boys, and, after another glance into
the black depths before them, they turned back. A look from the mouth
of the cave showed them that the terrific storm was still keeping up.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                           THE RISING WATER


"Well, how much do you think we've got?" asked Andy Racer, as he sat
down on a pile of dirt, and looked at a mass of dull, gleaming yellow
near the side of the cavern.

"Oh, we must have two or three thousand dollars' worth," declared Frank.

"More than that," came from Billy, who was wielding a shovel, pausing
at intervals for a rest. "Of course this isn't pure gold, as it's mixed
with clay and earth, to say nothing of the rocks, but with all that we
must have nearly five thousand dollars' worth."

"As much as that?" cried Andy, eagerly.

"I think so," replied the ranch boy. "Of course my test isn't very
reliable, and about all I am able to do is to say that it really _is_
gold that we're digging out. But I think we have struck it rich, all
right."

"And to think those fellows have been searching all the while for the
treasure of Golden Peak and didn't find it!" commented Andy. "It was
just our luck."

Billy again resumed his digging, loosening the soft soil in which
appeared the curious out-cropping of the gold vein. For it was curious.
It defied all the known laws of mining. It seemed that, ages ago, there
must have been some upheaval of nature that thrust into the interior of
the hill a streak of rich metal, isolated, as it were, from everything
else.

Then the cave was formed, making a sort of envelope above the treasure,
and it had been undiscovered for many years. Then came the unfortunate
prospector, who, after finding the rich deposit, went crazy. Others had
searched for it in vain.

Suddenly Billy uttered a cry of dismay.

"What's the matter?" asked Frank.

"It's gone!" was the answer.

"What is?"

"The gold streak! It's come to an end!"

They flashed their lanterns and torches into the crevice where Billy
was working. It was only too true. After digging out a considerable
quantity of the valuable earth, filled with gold, the seam, or vein,
had come to an abrupt end.

"No more gold here," said Billy, digging his spade into the side of the
cave.

"Maybe it crops out somewhere else," suggested Frank.

"In that case we'll have to have more tools, and help, to get at it,"
said the boy from the ranch. "We've reached our limit now."

"Let's try on the other side," suggested Andy. "There may be a vein
there."

They looked--going carefully over the opposite side of the cavern--but
no yellow streaks showed. It was as if all the gold had been collected
in one narrow space.

"And we can't pass beyond the chasm in the floor of the cave," said
Frank, referring to the big opening down which he had nearly fallen.

"Not without a bridge," said Andy. "But we can go back to the ranch,
and come here again to look for more gold."

"Let's make sure of what we have, first," suggested Andy. "We ought to
get this in shape to carry home."

Looking carefully into the big crack they had dug in the wall of the
cave, to make certain that it contained no more of the precious metal,
the boys proceeded to put into bags the treasure they already had. It
was heavy, but they did not mind that, and, as it was about half pure
gold, they figured that they had a goodly sum.

"I guess the burros can pack it back to the ranch," said Billy, as they
made up bundle after bundle.

"Especially since our grub is nearly gone, and they won't have to carry
that," added Frank.

"But it will be hard going through the rain," said Andy, for the big
storm had still kept up, though not with such fury. The rain still
descended, and the wind blew, but the cloudburst was a thing of the
past.

They made the gold into small packages, so that they could easily be
put on the backs of the pack animals. Since they had taken up their
camp in the cave they had not gone out, as there was no necessity. They
had their food, they could cook it over fires made in the cavern, their
horses were safely stabled, and all there was to do was to dig out the
gold.

The treasure of Golden Peak had not amounted to nearly as much as they
had hoped it would, but it was still a good find, and they were very
glad.

"Well, I suppose we might as well move," suggested Frank, when they had
put all the precious ore into bags. "We can come back later and make a
bridge across the chasm to see if there is any of the yellow stuff on
the other side."

"Yes, I guess we've got all we can get at present," added Billy.
"Besides, my uncle will be glad to get word that we are going to leave
so he can close the dam, and----"

"But if there is more gold here he won't do that!" interrupted Frank.
"We ought to hurry and tell him that we have found the treasure, and
to wait a while before flooding Golden Peak."

"That's so," agreed the ranch boy. "We'll do it. Let's get back to the
ranch as fast as we can."

Little more preparation was required to put them in shape for travel.
It was still raining, but they did not mind that, though they realized
that they would have to make quite a circuit in order to pass the
river, which would be much swollen.

"Forward!" cried Frank, when the burros were laden with the remains of
the food, and the precious sacks of gold. "Back to the ranch!"

They emerged from the mouth of the cave. Riding their horses, holding
them well in hand, lest they slip on the wet earth, and leading the
burros, the lads began their homeward march with the treasure of Golden
Peak.

As Frank, who was in the lead, made a turn in the downward trail, he
suddenly came to a halt. Then he uttered a cry of alarm.

"What is it?" called Andy.

"The water--the rising water!" answered his brother. "Look, there's a
lake below us! We're surrounded by water!"

[Illustration: "LOOK, THERE'S A LAKE BELOW US! WE'RE SURROUNDED BY
WATER!"]

It was even as he said. A quarter of a mile down from the top of Golden
Peak there was a sea of turbid water, and it was still rising.

"What has happened?" cried Andy.

"The gates of the dam are closed!" shouted Billy. "There has been
some mistake! Uncle Richfield has closed the dam, and the lake is
being made! We're caught here on Golden Peak! Everything else is under
water!"




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                               MAROONED


Billy's announcement seemed to strike a chill of terror to the hearts
of his chums. They stood there, at the mouth of the treasure cave, and
looked at the water below them--a vast lake that was slowly growing in
size, and increasing in depth as the river backed up against the dam,
the gates of which had been, in some manner, closed.

"It--it can't be possible!" gasped Andy.

"But it is!" cried Frank. "Here's the lake, and here we are on Golden
Peak, and there's no way of getting off!"

"Unless we swim," put in Billy, "and that's no easy job, with the
horses----"

"And the gold," added Andy. "What are we going to do?"

No one could answer him. Their situation was desperate, and yet, after
the first feeling of fear and terror, the boys looked at the situation
more calmly. They were not the sort of lads to give up easily.

"We'll find a way out; or, rather, a way off," said Frank, after a
bit. "It's queer that this should happen, and, I suppose, if we hadn't
been so busy getting out the gold, and stayed in the cave, we would
have noticed the water rising, and we could have gotten away in time."

"That's right," agreed Billy. "There's been some mistake, I'm sure.
Uncle Richfield must have thought we had left the Peak, and closed the
gates. You know we did stay here longer than we said we would."

"Yes, but he was not to close the dam until he got word from us,"
declared Frank "And we didn't send any word. How----"

"No, but someone must have!" cried Billy, now much excited. "I begin to
see it now. Those fellows--Shackmiller's gang--they knew we were here.
Probably they've been spying on us all the while, though we could see
no trace of them. They could not find the treasure themselves, and they
decided to leave, for they must have realized that the game was up.
Then they had it in for us, and hit on this revenge. They sent word to
Uncle Richfield that we had left, as we said we would, and he closed
the gate."

"But how could they have known we were going to send any word?" asked
Andy.

"We talked of it at the dam, where all the men were working," went on
Billy; "and unless I'm mistaken Shackmiller must have had a spy or two
among the construction men. It would have been easy enough to do that."

"But would your uncle accept word that we had left from someone he did
not know?" asked Frank.

"Probably the man, whoever he was, never saw my uncle at all,"
explained Billy. "He may have just ridden up to the dam and called to
the foreman that we were off Golden Peak, and that the water could be
backed up. We didn't say we would send word by any special messenger,
you know."

"That's right," agreed Andy. "It could have been done that way. Well,
we're in for it now, all right. What a lot of water!"

It was indeed a large lake that they were gazing over, and it was
constantly growing larger. The river, augmented by the cloudburst, and
by the continued heavy rains, had swollen greatly in size, and, in
consequence, the water backed up much more rapidly than would otherwise
have been the case.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Andy. "We can't stay here--that is,
not much longer. The hill will be under water in a few hours more."

"That's true," said Frank. "We've got to do something, and that soon."

It was curious to see now how the Racer boys had, in a measure, taken
charge of things. Now that an emergency had arisen--one that did
not have to deal directly with range matters, with which Billy was
familiar--his chums came to the fore, as they had often done in times
past.

"What can we do?" asked Billy, half gloomily. "I don't believe we can
swim that distance. It must be miles to the nearest shore."

"Fully three," said Frank. "Yes, it would be a pretty long swim, though
we might do it. But I have a better plan than that."

"What is it?" asked Billy, eagerly.

"Well, there are two things we can do," went on the elder Racer lad.
"In the first place we must go to the highest part of the Peak, the one
that will be the longest out of water. Then I want to see just how fast
the water is rising, and we'll know how much longer we have."

"But that isn't getting us away from here," said Andy, impatiently.
"We're marooned on Golden Peak. What is to be done?"

"I'm coming to that," said his brother, calmly. "We can do two things.
One is to make a signal fire on the highest point of the Peak. The
smoke will be seen at the ranch, for they must be watching the forming
of the lake. So get some wood from the cave and we'll climb to the top,
and make the signal fire."

"What's the other thing?" asked Billy, as Frank paused.

"The other thing is to cut down some trees and make a little raft that
we can float on until we're rescued, after this hill is under water."

"But the horses and burros," spoke Billy. "What about them?"

"They'll have to take their chances," replied Frank. "They may be able
to swim to shore. We'll have to save ourselves."

"And the gold," added Andy, quickly. "Don't forget the treasure of
Golden Peak."

"We're not likely to," answered Frank, in a low voice. "It came near
being the end of us--and may yet," he added. "Come on," he cried, more
cheerfully. "Get to the top, and start the fire. It ought to smoke well
with all this rain."




                              CHAPTER XXX

                        THE END OF GOLDEN PEAK


"Does it rise very fast, Frank?"

"Yes, she's coming up at a pretty good speed. We haven't much time to
spare. We want to get away before dark if we can."

"Then come on up to the top where Billy is," and Andy began making his
way up the side of Golden Peak.

He and his brother had gone from the treasure cave to the edge of the
fast-forming lake to note the rise of the water, and having ascertained
that the rate was quite rapid they were ready to proceed with the work
of making the raft, and sending up the smoke signal. Billy had gone up
toward the summit, taking the horses and pack animals with him, and
also the store of gold.

"First we'll cut down as many trees as we think we'll need," suggested
Frank, when the three were together again. "Then we can bind them
tightly with these vines and our ropes. Andy and I will do that, and
you can make the fire, Billy."

"All right," agreed the ranch lad. "Only it's getting so hazy that our
smoke isn't going to be seen a great distance."

"All the more need of hurrying then," said Frank, as he gazed off
across the lake. He could scarcely see the big dam, some miles away, on
account of the haze that hung over the water. The ranch buildings were
altogether out of sight.

"But the smoke may rise above the mist," reasoned the elder Racer lad.
"I hope so, at any rate."

Rapidly he and Andy cut down small trees. They would not need many to
make a raft capable of supporting themselves. As for the animals, they
would have to take their chances.

The rain still continued, and Billy knew the river, in dry times a
small stream, must be greatly increased in volume. He soon had a fire
going, and a thick cloud of smoke arose, swirling this way and that--an
excellent signal of distress if it could be observed.

"I wonder how they can rescue us?" asked Andy, as he made the last chop
at a small tree, felling it.

"In a boat, of course," said Frank.

"Uncle has a boat," put in Billy. "He had it built for use on the lake.
It's a big barge, and will hold several horses. In fact, it's a sort of
ferry, for he calculated that he might want to send some of the ponies
or farm machinery from one end of the lake to the other after the dam
was built. Now, if he would only send that for us we'd be all right."

"Maybe he will," suggested Frank, hopefully. "Anyhow, keep the fire
going. Now, Andy, I think we've got enough trees down. Let's see what
sort of a raft we can make."

It was a crude affair that was soon in process of construction, but it
would answer the purpose of saving the lads, though it would not hold
the horses.

"It isn't going to be very hard to launch," commented Andy, when it was
almost completed. "All we'll have to do will be to get on it and wait
for the water to float it."

"And that won't be long, for she's rising fast," said Frank.

It was indeed so, as they could tell by looking down the slope of the
hill. Tree landmarks that had been wholly out of the water were now
almost covered. It would not be long before the whole of Golden Peak
was submerged.

Several hours passed. The raft was completed, but there was no need to
go to the laborious work of getting it down the side of the hill to the
level of the lake. The lake itself would rise up soon enough to float
it.

"Another foot will do the business," said Frank, in a quiet voice, as
he noted the water lapping the stones and bushes about twelve inches
from where the raft rested.

"Then we might as well get on and wait," suggested Andy. "We've got the
gold as secure as we can make it."

"All right," agreed Billy. "I guess I may as well let the fire go out.
They don't seem to have seen our smoke." He tossed on a final armful of
wet leaves to make a thicker smudge, and gazed off through the mist for
a sign of rescue. But he saw none.

The boys got on the frail raft. As they did so the horses and burros
came closer to them. The animals seemed pitifully frightened.

"Good-bye, Buffalo!" exclaimed Billy, as he patted the faithful steed.
"I hate to leave you, old fellow, but it's got to be. Maybe you can
swim ashore."

Buffalo whinnied and stretched out his velvety nose for a caress.
There were tears in Billy's eyes, and those of Frank and Andy were not
altogether free from moisture, for they had grown to care very much for
the animals they had ridden over the prairies.

A half hour passed. Frank, who had been looking at the water from time
to time, suddenly uttered an exclamation.

"What is it?" asked his brother. "Do you see anything?"

"Yes!" cried Frank. "I see that the water hasn't risen an inch in the
last half hour. Before that it was going up at the rate of nearly a
foot an hour."

"Are you sure?" cried Andy.

"I certainly am. I've been watching that yellow rock there, wondering
when it would be covered, but the water has been lapping at the base of
it more than thirty minutes."

"What does that mean?" asked Andy, anxiously.

"That the lake has stopped rising," said Frank quickly. "Either it has
reached its limit, or they have suspected something wrong at the dam,
and opened the gates."

"It hasn't reached its limit," declared Billy, "for when it does this
hill will be covered. It's away below the top of the dam."

"Then they know we're here and they've opened the gates!" cried Frank.
"Boys, I believe we're going to be rescued!"

"And I know it!" yelled Andy, suddenly leaping to his feet. "We _are_
rescued, fellows! There's the boat now!"

His cry of joy was answered by a shout, and from out the mist on the
lake, straight for Golden Peak, came a large barge or flat-bottom
ferryboat, propelled by long sweeps in the hands of the lusty cowboys.
In the middle of the craft stood Mr. Thornton.

"Boys! Boys!" he cried in eager tones, "are you safe? Oh, what a narrow
escape! Are you all right?"

"Yes, Uncle!" cried Billy. "We were just going to launch our ship when
you hove in sight. Did you see our smoke signal?"

"We did, and that's why I had the gate opened. The waters are going
down now. Oh, that scoundrel! To bring word that you had left the Peak!
That's why I closed the openings in the dam. Oh! if I catch the rascals
I'll fix them for this!"

"Did they say we had gone?" asked Frank.

"That's what they did--some days ago, or I never would have allowed the
water to rise. But, thank Providence, you are safe. Get aboard now, and
bring the horses, too. And so you were going to sail on the raft."

"That's what we were," said Billy. "The Racer boys thought of that
scheme."

"Well, get aboard the barge," advised his uncle, as he gazed admiringly
at the brave lads. "What have you in those bags?" and he pointed to the
gold.

"That," said Frank, and he could not keep a note of satisfaction from
his voice; "that is the treasure of Golden Peak!"

"The treasure of Golden Peak?" cried Mr. Thornton. "Are you joking? Was
there a treasure?"

"There was!" cried his nephew, "and we got it," and then, when they had
all boarded the barge, though it was no easy work to induce the animals
to embark, the boys told their story, while the cowboys propelled the
boat toward the lower end of the lake.

"Well, you certainly are the luckiest chaps I ever saw," said Mr.
Thornton. "And it all happened just as you guessed. There must
have been a traitor among the construction gang, who informed the
Shackmiller crowd of your plans. We thought you had gone camping
somewhere else as you said you would.

"Then, when you did not come home, after the rain kept up, your aunt
got worried. I tried to tell her it was all right, but she insisted
that we go out and hunt you up. We were just starting when one of
my men saw the smoke on Golden Peak. Then I guessed the truth and I
ordered the gates of the dam opened, so the waters would stop rising."

"And only just in time, too," said Frank. "We were so busy in the cave,
getting out the gold, that we never noticed the rising waters, or we
might have escaped unaided."

"But what about those men who made trouble for you?" asked Billy of his
uncle.

"Oh, they've cleared out," said Mr. Thornton. "I've got them just where
I want them, now. Though I did go ahead without any legal authority
and flood this region I was within my rights for, only yesterday, I
succeeded--or rather, my lawyers did--in getting full title to the land
in dispute. There is no doubt now that Golden Peak, and the approach to
it, is mine beyond question. And it will soon be where no one can get
at it, for I'm going to let the waters rise again as soon as we land,
and Golden Peak will be no more--that is unless there is more gold
there."

"No, I think we got all there was," said Frank. "I'm glad we dug it out
when we had the chance. This is the first treasure hunt I was ever on."

"And very successful," added Andy. "Say, but things have been happening
lately. I wonder what's next on the list?"

What was, and what share the Racer boys had in some further adventures,
will be told of in the next volume of this series, to be called "The
Racer Boys on Guard, Or, The Rebellion at Riverview Hall."

It did not take long to reach the dam, where the boat was moored, and
then the Racer boys, and their chum, with Mr. Thornton and the cowboys,
rode across the prairie to the ranch. The gates in the dam were closed,
and that night Golden Peak disappeared forever under the waters of the
irrigation lake.

There is little more to tell. The treasure did not amount to as much as
the boys had hoped it would, but still it was a substantial sum.

"Besides, look at the fun we had!" exclaimed Andy.

"That's all you think of," complained his brother, with a laugh.

"Well, haven't we a right to, after what we've gone through?" asked
Andy.

"I should say so," agreed Billy. "Oh, but I'm glad you boys came West
with me! I've never had such a fine summer."

"And we got the best of Shackmiller and his crowd," commented Frank.
"You won't have anything to fear now, when you come back to Riverview
Hall, Billy."

"That's right, though I don't know whether I'll come back or not."

As Frank had said, the Shackmillers were completely routed. The twin
brothers disappeared after Sam had recovered from his injuries.
Later it was learned that Bruce Shackmiller had played the part of
the hypocrite while being taken care of at Double X ranch. It was he
who had taken the valuable paper and escaped in the night, though
the document did him no good. As for the others who had sought the
treasure of Golden Peak, and claimed the land that was rightfully Mr.
Thornton's, they, too, went their several ways, it not being thought
worth while to seek to bring them to justice, even though they had
tried their best to endanger the lives of our heroes.

"And now for a good gallop!" cried Andy, one day, as he and his brother
and chum leaped on the backs of their horses.

"I'm glad we could save them," said Frank, as he called to his mount to
leap ahead and get on even terms with his brother's. "I never knew I
could like a horse so."

"He's yours--to keep," said Billy quickly. "And so is Andy's. Uncle
said I could give them to you."

"He did?" cried the Racer boys. "Whoop! That's great!" and away they
dashed over the sun-lit prairie, toward the big dam, behind which the
waters of the lake sparkled bright. And there we will take leave of
them.


                                THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

                        BOOKS BY CLARENCE YOUNG


                         THE RACER BOYS SERIES

                          12mo. Illustrated.

                 Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.

                            THE RACER BOYS
                   THE RACER BOYS AT BOARDING SCHOOL
                     THE RACER BOYS TO THE RESCUE
                    THE RACER BOYS ON THE PRAIRIES

                    (Other volumes in preparation.)


                         THE MOTOR BOYS SERIES

                          12mo. Illustrated.

                 Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.

                            THE MOTOR BOYS
                        THE MOTOR BOYS OVERLAND
                       THE MOTOR BOYS IN MEXICO
                   THE MOTOR BOYS ACROSS THE PLAINS
                         THE MOTOR BOYS AFLOAT
                    THE MOTOR BOYS ON THE ATLANTIC
                   THE MOTOR BOYS IN STRANGE WATERS
                     THE MOTOR BOYS ON THE PACIFIC
                     THE MOTOR BOYS IN THE CLOUDS
                    THE MOTOR BOYS OVER THE ROCKIES
                     THE MOTOR BOYS OVER THE OCEAN
                      THE MOTOR BOYS ON THE WING
                    THE MOTOR BOYS AFTER A FORTUNE
                     THE MOTOR BOYS ON THE BORDER


                        THE JACK RANGER SERIES

                       12mo. Finely illustrated.

                  Price per volume, $1.00, postpaid.

                       JACK RANGER'S SCHOOLDAYS
                      JACK RANGER'S WESTERN TRIP
                    JACK RANGER'S SCHOOL VICTORIES
                      JACK RANGER'S OCEAN CRUISE
                        JACK RANGER'S GUN CLUB
                      JACK RANGER'S TREASURE BOX








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RACER BOYS ON THE PRAIRIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


