The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Calumet Book of Oven Triumphs!
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Calumet Book of Oven Triumphs!

Author: General Foods Corporation

Release date: May 21, 2021 [eBook #65398]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CALUMET BOOK OF OVEN TRIUMPHS! ***

                  _The Calumet Book of Oven Triumphs!_


                             Copyright 1934
                       GENERAL FOODS CORPORATION
                                Form 516
                           PRINTED IN U.S.A.




                    _All your baking can be perfect_


    [Illustration: _Velvet-soft and velvet-fine—every cake_]

What makes a perfect cake? Even rising? Tender brown crust? Delicate
flavor and fragrance? All these qualities and one more—the fine, moist,
tender texture that is hard to describe by any word except “velvety”!

“Velvety crumb”—that is the expression cake judges use in speaking of
the beautiful texture of cakes leavened by Calumet, the Double-Acting
Baking Powder.

See it in this close-up picture of a slice of Calumet cake! Then make
any cake in this book—cut a slice and feel a crumb between thumb and
finger. Soft as velvet! Touch the cut surface. So moist and springy! Now
taste a morsel of the cake. Velvet-fine—velvet-smooth!

Every Calumet cake, plain cake or party cake, dark or light or
golden-yellow, has this same lovely texture—thanks to Calumet’s
dependable Double-Action. Use the recipes in this book, following
Calumet’s thrifty proportion with care, and all your cakes will be
perfect—the envy and admiration of your friends!

    [Illustration: _Light, tender, golden brown—every biscuit_]

What makes a perfect biscuit? A little flaky, crusty morsel—and pass the
plate often—that’s the South’s perfect biscuit, while a Yankee biscuit
is fluffy and high as your Grandmother’s comforter. Westerners like
sugar and spice.... New Yorkers have a fondness for the old-world flavor
of cheese.

But thick or thin, sweet or tangy, the best biscuits the country over
are light and tender biscuits—perfectly leavened biscuits.

Calumet, the modern Double-Acting Baking Powder, will show you the way
to biscuits light as air, delicately brown and tender. And on pages 19
to 20 are tested Calumet recipes, based on Calumet’s marvelously
economical proportion, for any type of biscuit you prefer to make and
serve.

There is an extra touch of perfection in every quick bread made with
Calumet. Muffins are tender, evenly risen, free from humps and from
tunnels. Waffles, griddle cakes, cookies, gingerbread, all owe a new
quality and sureness to Calumet’s Double-Action. Read on and see just
how it works!




                        CALUMET’S DOUBLE-ACTION
                    _What it means to your baking!_


                              First Action

    [Illustration: _Just enough leavening in the mixing bowl_]

See Calumet’s First Action. It begins in the mixing bowl when you add
liquid (milk, water, or eggs) to the dry ingredients. The instant liquid
is added, things begin to happen. Thousands of tiny gas bubbles surge
through the batter, making it light and spongy and ready for baking.
BUT—only part of Calumet’s leavening gas is released in the mixing
bowl....


                             Second Action

    [Illustration: _—just enough leavening in the oven_]

Calumet’s Second Action is released by heat. See what happens in the
oven. Steadily, evenly, hundreds of new tiny bubbles swell through the
batter and continue the leavening. Up! ... up! ... they keep raising the
batter and hold it high and light. Thanks to these two scientifically
balanced actions, Calumet Baking Powder protects your baking from start
to finish.


Baking powder is a small part of any given recipe, yet it plays such an
important role that it is often called “the biggest little thing in
baking”. Too much or too little baking powder or baking powder that is
not efficient ... what a lot of baking trouble that can cause! Humped,
uneven cakes ... dry, harsh, coarse-grained cakes ... even flat
failures!

Calumet’s two leavening actions are perfectly timed and balanced to give
maximum protection and superb quality to all your baking. A little of
this Double-Acting Calumet does a superfine job—and this means extra
economy for Calumet users. The usual Calumet proportion is 1 level
teaspoon per cup of sifted flour. This amount is only one-half to
two-thirds the amount recommended for many other baking powders.

Most of the recipes in this book call for this proportion. In some
recipes, however, the number of eggs, the type of flour, or the nature
of other ingredients make advisable slightly more or slightly less. But
every recipe has been tested again and again and has been carefully
built with exactly the right proportions to give you the full advantage
of Calumet’s Double-Action. Follow these recipes accurately, faithfully,
and rejoice in the efficiency and economy of Calumet.




                    _Such a comfort to busy women!_
                        CALUMET BATTERS CAN WAIT


    [Illustration: _Mix batter ... wrap tightly_]

    [Illustration: _Store in a cold place_]

    [Illustration: _Bake when you please ... without last minute
    bustle_]

Cake Batter on hand in the icebox! Muffin batter! Cooky dough! Ready to
slip into the oven and bake whenever you want them.

Fresh, hot, good things for dinner without the fuss and flurry of last
minute mixing! Three or four hot desserts for week-end meals from one
batter mixing! No more cake failures because of ringing doorbells and
children’s demands just when a batter is ready for the oven.

Calumet batters can wait—for moments or for days! This is another
wonderful advantage that Calumet’s Double-Action brings you. For even
when you store cake batter for days, you can count on perfect lightness
when you bake it.

If baking is to be delayed only an hour or so, slip the bowl or pan of
batter into the refrigerator. To store longer, follow directions below.
Turn to page 11 for a large quantity cake recipe that will give you
batter for three quick desserts—a real Miracle Cake.

1. Mix Calumet batter, pour in pan; cover tightly, first with a damp
      cloth, and then with waxed paper. Tie securely.

2. Store batter in a cold place until you are ready to bake. Calumet’s
      second action will be held in reserve until the batter reaches the
      heat of the oven.

3. Unwrap pans and bake as usual. Results will be perfect—delicately
      light, tender, fine and velvety in texture. How delightful to
      serve things fresh-baked—hot—delicious, without one bit of
      last-minute fuss and flurry ... thanks to Calumet’s remarkable
      Double-Action.




                         REMEMBER THESE POINTS
                          _whenever you bake._


    [Illustration: _Sift flour before measuring—fill cup lightly_]

    [Illustration: _Measure baking powder exactly—a level teaspoon_]

_Do_ be orderly. Plan your baking before you start. Choose your recipe,
      read it through carefully, understand it clearly. Collect all the
      ingredients specified, and arrange them in the order called for in
      the recipe; assemble all the utensils needed on your work table.
      Cultivate the do-it-right habit.

_Do_ use good ingredients. You can’t do first-rate baking with
      second-rate materials. Use fresh, sweet shortening and eggs of
      fine quality. Use fine granulated sugar, unless some other kind is
      called for in your recipe. Remember that baking powder and flour
      are the most important ingredients in baking. Give yourself the
      protection and advantages of Calumet, the Double-Acting Baking
      Powder ... and of Swans Down Cake Flour, too, whenever the recipe
      calls for it. It gives to cakes and to certain quick breads a
      fineness and lightness that you cannot expect from ordinary flour.

_Don’t_ use more Calumet than the recipes call for. Calumet’s
      Double-Action gives it extra efficiency—less of its leavening gas
      is lost from the surface of batters during mixing. Thousands of
      tests have proved that the small amounts of Calumet Baking Powder
      specified in these recipes will give you best results. One level
      teaspoon of Calumet to a cup of sifted flour is the correct
      proportion for most recipes. In some recipes the nature of the
      ingredients makes advisable slightly more or slightly less.




                         THESE ARE BASIC RULES
                      _for surest, best results_!


    [Illustration: _A bit of care brings results in preparing pans_]

    [Illustration: _Watch your baking temperatures—finally, test the
    cake_]

_Do_ measure all ingredients accurately with standard measuring cups and
      standard measuring spoons. A standard measuring cup is an accurate
      half-pint measure—the equivalent of 16 level tablespoons. It is
      grooved on one side to read ¼, ½, and ¾; on the other, to read ⅓
      and ⅔. A standard tablespoon is equivalent to 3 standard
      teaspoons. Always sift flour once before measuring, and remember
      that all standard measurements are _level_.

_Do_ mix carefully. Follow exactly the mixing directions given in each
      recipe. The way you combine and handle your ingredients is
      important.

_Do_ use the type and size of pans specified in the recipes, and prepare
      your pans before mixing. A greased paper lining in pans for large
      butter cakes gives added protection.

_Do_ handle cakes carefully, after baking. Place butter cake and pan on
      cake rack, for about 5 minutes; then remove from pan, and turn
      cake, top side up, on rack to finish cooling. For sponge cakes,
      follow directions given in recipes.

_Don’t_ guess about your baking temperatures. If your stove does not
      have an oven heat regulator, use a portable thermometer. It does
      not control heat, but it does tell you when to adjust the baking
      temperature.




                 _“Velvety crumb” in all your Calumet_
                              BUTTER CAKES


    [Illustration: _See the fine even grain—the velvet-soft texture!_]


                          Calumet One-egg Cake

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg, unbeaten
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together well. Add egg and beat very thoroughly. Add flour, alternately
with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each addition until
smooth. Add vanilla. Bake in greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate
oven (350°F.) 50 minutes. Spread Chocolate Butter Frosting (page 17) on
top and sides of cake.

This cake may be baked in two greased 8-inch layer pans in moderate oven
(375°F.) 25 minutes.


                          Orange Dessert Cake

Use recipe for Calumet One-egg Cake. Add 2 teaspoons grated orange rind
to butter before creaming, and ½ cup finely cut raisins to creamed
butter-sugar-egg mixture; omit vanilla. Bake in greased 8 × 8 × 2-inch
pan in moderate oven (350°F.) 50 minutes. When cake has cooled ½ hour,
cover with part of sweetened orange juice, prepared by adding ½ cup
sugar to ½ cup juice and stirring until sugar is dissolved. Repeat at
intervals until all juice has been used.


                            Boston Cream Pie

Use recipe for Calumet One-egg Cake. Bake in two greased 9-inch layer
pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 minutes. Spread Custard Cream Filling
(page 18) between layers. Sift powdered sugar over top.


                          Chocolate Fudge Cake
                                (1 egg)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add egg and beat well; then chocolate
and blend. Add flour, alternately with milk, a small amount at a time.
Beat after each addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Bake in greased pan,
8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate oven (325°F.) 1 hour, or until done.
Spread Fudge Frosting (page 16), or Hungarian Chocolate Frosting (page
18) on top and sides of cake.


                         Plantation Marble Cake
                                (2 eggs)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  ⅔ cup milk
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  2 tablespoons molasses

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add eggs; then flour, alternately with
milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each addition until smooth.
Divide batter into two parts. To one part, add spices and molasses. Put
by tablespoons into greased loaf pan, 8 × 4 × 3 inches, alternating
light and dark mixtures. Bake in moderate oven (350°F.) 1 hour and 15
minutes, or until done. Spread Butter Frosting (page 17) on top and
sides of cake.


                          Louisiana Spice Cake
                                (2 eggs)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon ginger
  1½ teaspoons cinnamon
  ¾ teaspoon cloves
  ¾ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  3 tablespoons molasses
  7 tablespoons cold coffee

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and spices, and sift
together three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and
cream together until light and fluffy. Add eggs and beat well; then
molasses and blend. Add flour, alternately with coffee, a small amount
at a time. Beat after each addition until smooth. Bake in two greased
9-inch layer pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 minutes, or until done.
Spread Butter Frosting (page 17) between layers and on top of cake.


                         Patty’s Birthday Cake
                             (2 egg whites)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  2 egg whites, unbeaten
  ¾ cup milk
  ¼ teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ teaspoon almond extract

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together well. Add egg whites, one at a time, beating very thoroughly
after each addition. Add flour, alternately with milk, a small amount at
a time. Beat after each addition until smooth. Add flavoring. Bake in
greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate oven (350°F.) 50 minutes.
Spread Seven Minute Frosting (page 16) on top and sides of cake;
sprinkle with Baker’s Coconut, Southern Style, tinted a delicate pink.
Insert tiny pink candles in frosted cake.


                     Favorite Chocolate Layer Cake
                                (2 eggs)

  2¼ cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add eggs and beat well. Add flour,
alternately with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each
addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Bake in two greased 9-inch layer
pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 minutes. Spread Fudge Frosting (page
16) between layers and on top and sides of cake.


                           Favorite Cup Cakes

Use recipe for Favorite Chocolate Layer Cake. Turn the batter into
greased cup-cake pans, filling them ⅔ full; bake in moderate oven
(375°F.) 20 minutes, or until done. Cover with Chocolate Wonder Frosting
(page 17), or Burnt Sugar Frosting (page 16). Makes 2 dozen cakes.


                             Busy Day Cake
                                (3 eggs)

  3 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  4 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1⅔ cups sugar
  ½ cup softened butter or other shortening
  3 eggs, well beaten
  1¼ cups milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
together three times. Add butter. Combine eggs, milk, and vanilla, and
add to flour mixture, stirring until all flour is dampened. Then beat
vigorously 1 minute. Bake in three greased 9-inch layer pans in moderate
oven (375°F.) 25 minutes. Spread Orange Butter Frosting (page 17)
between layers and on top of cake.


                           Coconut Layer Cake
                                (3 eggs)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅔ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  3 egg yolks, well beaten
  ⅓ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten
  1 can Baker’s Coconut, Southern Style

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add egg yolks; then flour, alternately
with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each addition until
smooth. Add vanilla and fold in egg whites. Bake in two greased 9-inch
layer pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 to 30 minutes. Spread Seven
Minute Frosting (page 16) between layers and on top and sides of cake.
Sprinkle each layer and outside of cake with coconut while frosting is
still soft.


                        Prize Devil’s Food Cake
                                (3 eggs)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2¾ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ⅔ cup butter or other shortening
  1½ cups sugar
  3 eggs, well beaten
  3 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add eggs and beat well; then chocolate
and beat until smooth. Add flour, alternately with milk, a small amount
at a time. Beat after each addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Bake in
two greased 9-inch layer pans in moderate oven (350°F.) 35 minutes, or
until done. Spread Seven Minute Frosting (page 16) between layers and on
top and sides of cake.


                            Burnt Sugar Cake
                                (3 eggs)

  ½ cup sugar
  ¼ cup hot water

  3 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1½ cups sugar
  3 egg yolks, well beaten
  1 cup water
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2 tablespoons caramelized sugar syrup
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

To make caramelized sugar syrup, place ½ cup sugar in skillet over
medium flame and stir constantly until melted and quite dark. Remove
from fire, add ¼ cup hot water, stir until dissolved. Cool.

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add egg yolks and beat well. Add flour,
alternately with water, a small amount at a time. Beat after each
addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Add 2 tablespoons caramelized sugar
syrup and blend. Fold in egg whites. Bake in two greased 9-inch layer
pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 to 30 minutes, or until done. Spread
Burnt Sugar Frosting (page 16), made with remaining caramelized sugar
syrup, between layers and on top and sides of cake.


                       Pineapple Upside Down Cake

Use recipe for Apricot Upside Down Cake, substituting 4 slices canned
pineapple for apricots, and adding 1 cup slightly broken pecan meats.
Arrange pineapple slices on butter-sugar mixture covering bottom of 8 ×
8 × 2-inch pan, and sprinkle pecan meats over top. Turn batter over
contents of pan, and bake in moderate oven (350°F.) 50 minutes, or until
done. Serve upside down on dish with pineapple and nuts on top. Serve
warm. Garnish with whipped cream and additional nuts, if desired. Cut in
wedges.


                          Lady Baltimore Cake
                             (3 egg whites)

  3 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1½ cups sugar
  ½ cup milk
  ½ cup water
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ teaspoon almond extract
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add flour, alternately with liquid, a
small amount at a time. Beat after each addition until smooth. Add
flavoring; fold in egg whites. Bake in two greased 9-inch layer pans in
moderate oven (375°F.) 20 minutes. Spread Lady Baltimore Filling (page
17) between layers, and Frosting over cake.


                        Apricot Upside Down Cake
                                (1 egg)

  1¼ cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup granulated sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  ½ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

  4 tablespoons butter
  ½ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  12 cooked apricots

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together well. Add egg and beat very thoroughly. Add flour, alternately
with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each addition until
smooth. Add vanilla.

Melt 4 tablespoons butter in 8 × 8 × 2-inch pan or 8-inch skillet, over
low flame. Add brown sugar; stir until melted. On this arrange apricots,
cut-side up. Turn batter over contents of pan. Bake in moderate oven
(350°F.) 50 minutes, or until done. Loosen cake from sides and bottom.
Serve upside down with apricots on top.


                         Chocolate Ribbon Cake
                        (2 eggs and 2 egg yolks)

  3 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅔ cup butter or other shortening
  1½ cups sugar
  2 eggs and 2 egg yolks, well beaten
  1 cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  3 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted and cooled
  2 tablespoons sugar
  ¼ cup hot water
  ½ teaspoon soda
  2 tablespoons butter

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add eggs and beat well. Add flour,
alternately with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each
addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Combine chocolate, sugar, water,
soda, and butter, and mix well. Cool slightly. Turn a generous one-third
of batter into greased 9-inch layer pan. Add chocolate mixture to
remaining batter, stirring until thoroughly blended; turn into two
greased 9-inch layer pans. Bake in moderate oven (375°F.) 30 minutes, or
until done. Spread raspberry jam between layers, arranging light layer
between dark ones; cover cake with Seven Minute Frosting (page 16).


                          Hungarian Cream Cake
                                (2 eggs)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1¼ cups heavy cream
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Add sugar gradually to eggs, and beat well. Add flour,
alternately with cream, beating after each addition until smooth. Add
vanilla. Bake in greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate oven
(350°F.) 50 minutes. Spread with Hungarian Chocolate Frosting (page 18).


                          Economical Gold Cake
                             (3 egg yolks)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  3 egg yolks, beaten until thick and
  lemon-colored
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla, or
  ½ teaspoon orange extract

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, and sift together three
times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream together
until light and fluffy. Add egg yolks and beat well. Add flour,
alternately with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each
addition until smooth. Add flavoring. Beat well. Bake in two greased
9-inch layer pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 to 30 minutes. Spread
Lemon Coconut Filling (page 18) between layers and Snowy Lemon Frosting
(page 17) on top and sides of cake. Sprinkle Baker’s Coconut, Southern
Style, over cake.

This cake may be baked in greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate
oven (350°F.) 50 minutes, or until done; or in greased cup-cake pans in
moderate oven (375°F.) 20 minutes, or until done. Makes 3 dozen small
cup cakes.


                              Silver Cake
                             (4 egg whites)

  3 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1½ cups sugar
  1 cup milk
  ½ teaspoon lemon extract
  4 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, and sift together three
times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream together
until light and fluffy. Add flour, alternately with milk, a small amount
at a time. Beat after each addition until smooth. Add lemon extract.
Fold in egg whites; bake in two greased 9-inch layer pans in moderate
oven (375°F.) 25 to 30 minutes. Spread Snowy Lemon Frosting (page 17)
between layers and on top and sides of cake.


                              Miracle Cake
                                (4 eggs)

  4⅔ cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  4½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup butter or other shortening
  2 cups sugar
  4 eggs, well beaten
  1½ cups milk
  2 teaspoons vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream
together until light and fluffy. Add eggs and mix well. Add flour,
alternately with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each
addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Divide batter into pans for storing
and baking in the three ways suggested below.


_Orange Layer Cake._ Turn about ⅓ of Miracle Cake batter into two
greased 8-inch layer pans. Cover closely with a damp cloth, then with
waxed paper; tie securely, and store in refrigerator until cake is to be
baked. Bake in moderate oven (375°F.) 25 minutes, or until done. Cool.
Spread Orange Butter Frosting (page 17) between layers and on top and
sides of cake.


_Favorite Jam Squares._ Turn about ⅓ of Miracle Cake batter into greased
pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, cover closely with damp cloth, then with waxed
paper; tie securely, and store in refrigerator until cake is to be
baked. Bake in moderate oven (350°F.) 50 minutes, or until done. Cool.
Top with ½ cup of any favorite jam folded into ½ cup cream, whipped. Cut
in squares for serving.


_Currant Cup Cakes._ Turn about ⅓ of Miracle Cake batter into greased
cup-cake pans, filling them ⅔ full. Sprinkle currants or seedless
raisins over tops of cakes. Cover closely with damp cloth, then waxed
paper: tie securely, and store in the refrigerator until cakes are to be
baked. Bake in moderate oven (375°F.) 20 minutes, or until done. Makes
16 large or 24 medium cup cakes.


                               Fruit Cake
                               (10 eggs)

  1 pound (4½ cups) sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1 teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon mace
  1 pound butter or other shortening
  1 pound brown sugar
  10 eggs, well beaten
  ½ pound candied cherries
  ½ pound candied pineapple
  1 pound dates, seeded and sliced
  1 pound raisins
  1 pound currants
  ½ pound citron, thinly sliced
  ½ pound candied orange and lemon peel
  ½ pound nut meats, chopped
  1 cup honey
  1 cup molasses
  ½ cup cider

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and spices, and sift
together three times. Cream shortening thoroughly, add sugar gradually,
and cream together until light and fluffy. Add eggs, fruits, peel, nuts,
honey, molasses, and cider. Add flour gradually. Turn into four 8 × 8 ×
2-inch pans which have been greased, lined with heavy paper, and again
greased. Bake in slow oven (250°F.) 3 to 3½ hours. Makes 10 pounds fruit
cake.


                              Gingerbread
                                (1 egg)

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon soda
  2 teaspoons ginger
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup butter or other shortening
  ½ cup sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  ⅔ cup molasses
  ¾ cup sour milk or buttermilk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, soda, spices, and salt, and
sift together three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually,
and cream together until light and fluffy. Add egg and molasses; then
flour, alternately with milk, a small amount at a time. Beat after each
addition until smooth. Bake in greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in
moderate oven (350°F.) 50 minutes, or until done.




               _Thank Calumet for delicious and thrifty_
                              SPONGE CAKES


    [Illustration: _Sponge cakes are ideal cakes for children_]


                          Hot Milk Sponge Cake
                                (3 eggs)

  1 cup sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1 teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  3 eggs
  1 cup sugar
  2 teaspoons lemon juice
  6 tablespoons hot milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, and sift together three
times. Beat eggs until very thick and light and nearly white (10
minutes). Add sugar gradually, beating constantly. Add lemon juice. Fold
in flour, a small amount at a time. Add milk, mixing quickly until
batter is smooth. Turn at once into ungreased tube pan and bake in
moderate oven (350°F.) 35 minutes, or until done. Remove from oven and
invert pan 1 hour, or until cold. This mixture may be baked in two
lightly greased 8 × 8 × 2-inch pans in moderate oven (350°F.) 25
minutes, or in 12 × 8 × 3-inch pan in moderate oven (350°F.) 30 minutes.


                        Old-fashioned Jelly Roll
                                (4 eggs)

  ¾ cup sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  ¾ teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  4 eggs
  ¾ cup sifted sugar
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup jelly (any flavor)

Sift flour once; measure. Combine baking powder, salt, and eggs in bowl.
Place over smaller bowl of hot water and beat with rotary egg beater,
adding sugar gradually until mixture becomes thick and light-colored.
Remove bowl from hot water. Fold in flour and vanilla. Turn into 15 ×
10-inch pan which has been greased, lined with paper to within ½ inch of
edge, and again greased. Bake in hot oven (400°F.) 13 minutes. Quickly
cut off crisp edges of cake. Turn from pan at once on cloth covered with
powdered sugar. Remove paper. Spread with jelly and roll. Wrap in cloth
and cool on rack.


                           Orange Sponge Cake
                        (2 eggs and 1 egg yolk)

  1¼ cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 cup sugar
  1 tablespoon grated orange rind
  2 eggs and 1 egg yolk
  ¼ cup orange juice
  ¼ cup water

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Add ½ cup sugar and orange rind to eggs, and beat with
rotary egg beater until thick and lemon-colored; add remaining sugar
gradually, beating very thoroughly; then add orange juice and water. Add
flour gradually, beating with rotary egg beater until smooth. Bake in
ungreased tube pan, in moderate oven (350°F.) 55 minutes, or until done.
Remove from oven and invert pan 1 hour, or until cold.


                      Chocolate Sponge Layer Cake
                                (4 eggs)

  1¼ cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate
  1 cup milk
  1½ cups sugar
  4 egg yolks, beaten until thick and lemon-colored
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  4 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, soda, and salt, and sift
together three times. Add chocolate to milk and heat in double boiler.
When chocolate is melted, stir until blended; add ½ cup sugar and cook
until thickened, stirring constantly. Cool. Add remaining sugar
gradually to egg yolks, beating with rotary egg beater until mixture
becomes very thick and light-colored. Add chocolate mixture and
flavoring and blend. Fold in flour, a small amount at a time; then egg
whites. Turn into two greased 9-inch layer pans. Bake in moderate oven
(350°F.) 30 minutes. Spread with Chocolate Butter Frosting (page 17).


                         Chocolate Sponge Roll
                                (4 eggs)

  6 tablespoons sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  ½ teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup sifted sugar
  4 egg whites, stiffly beaten
  4 egg yolks, beaten until thick and lemon-colored
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Fold sugar gradually into egg whites. Fold in egg yolks and
vanilla. Fold in flour gradually. Then beat in chocolate, gently but
thoroughly. Turn into 15 × 10-inch pan which has been greased, lined
with paper to within ½ inch of edge, and again greased. Bake in hot oven
(400°F.) 13 minutes, or until done. Quickly cut off crisp edges of cake.
Turn from pan at once on cloth covered with powdered sugar. Remove
paper. Spread Seven Minute Frosting (page 16) over cake and roll. Wrap
in cloth and cool on rack. Cover with chocolate coating, made by adding
1 teaspoon melted butter to 1 square Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate,
melted, and stirring to blend.


                          Fruited Sponge Torte
                                (3 eggs)

  1 cup sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1 teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  1 cup coarsely cut dates
  1 cup broken walnut meats
  1 cup sugar
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  3 egg yolks, well beaten
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, and sift together three
times. Add dates and nuts. Add sugar and vanilla to egg yolks, mixing
thoroughly. Fold in flour mixture, then egg whites. Bake in two greased
9-inch layer pans in moderate oven (375°F.) 30 minutes, or until done.
Serve whipped cream between layers and on top of cake. Garnish with
additional walnut meats, if desired.

Chopped, blanched almonds may be substituted for walnut meats in this
recipe, if desired.




                  _Calumet does wonders for favorite_
                                COOKIES


    [Illustration: _Store soft cookies and crisp cookies separately_]


                         Calumet Sugar Cookies

  2¼ cups sifted flour
  1½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  1½ teaspoons grated lemon rind
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 tablespoon rich milk or cream

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and nutmeg, and sift
again. Add lemon rind to butter and cream thoroughly. Add sugar
gradually, and cream together until light and fluffy. Add eggs and
cream, and beat thoroughly; then add flour gradually, mixing well. Chill
until firm enough to roll. Roll ⅛ inch thick on slightly floured board.
Cut with floured 3½-inch cutter and sprinkle with sugar. Bake on
ungreased baking sheet in hot oven (400°F.) 10 minutes, or until done.
Makes 3 dozen cookies. Cookies may be cut in fancy shapes and frosted.


                      Vanilla Nut Ice Box Cookies

  2 cups sifted flour
  1½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  1 cup granulated sugar
  ¼ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  1 egg, well beaten
  1 cup chopped nut meats
  1½ teaspoons vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cream butter and add sugars gradually, creaming thoroughly; add egg,
nuts, and vanilla, and beat well. Add flour gradually, mixing well after
each addition. Shape into rolls, 1½ inches in diameter, and roll in
waxed paper. Chill overnight, or until firm enough to slice. Cut in
⅛-inch slices; bake on ungreased baking sheet in hot oven (435°F.) 5
minutes, or until done. Makes about 3½ dozen cookies. (This dough may be
stored in refrigerator for several days, if carefully wrapped.)


                           Bran Drop Cookies

  1½ cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  2 eggs, well beaten
  ½ teaspoon almond extract
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup broken nut meats
  1 cup raisins
  1 cup Post’s Whole Bran or Post’s 40% Bran Flakes

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream together until
light and fluffy. Add eggs and beat well; then flour, flavoring, nuts,
and raisins, and mix well. Add bran and blend. Drop on greased baking
sheet. Bake in hot oven (400°F.) 10 minutes. Makes 4 dozen cookies.


                                Brownies

  ⅔ cup sifted flour
  ⅓ teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  6½ tablespoons butter or other shortening
  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup broken walnut meats

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Add butter to chocolate and blend. Combine sugar and eggs; add the
chocolate mixture, beating thoroughly: then add flour, vanilla, and
nuts. Bake in greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate oven (350°F.)
35 minutes. Cut in squares before removing from pan. Makes 2 dozen.


                           Chocolate Indians

Follow the recipe for Brownies (above), using 3 eggs, and reducing
vanilla to ½ teaspoon. Toast walnut meats, and add ½ cup finely cut
dates. Bake in two greased pans, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, in moderate oven
(350°F.) 35 minutes. Cut in squares before removing from pan. Makes 4
dozen.


                            Coconut Vanities

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  3 teaspoons grated orange rind
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg, unbeaten
  ¼ cup milk
  ½ cup orange juice

  4 tablespoons sugar
  1 egg white, stiffly beaten
  ½ can Baker’s Coconut, Southern Style

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift together
three times. Add orange rind to butter and cream thoroughly. Add sugar
gradually and cream together well. Add egg and beat very thoroughly. Add
flour, alternately with milk and orange juice, a small amount at a time.
Beat after each addition until smooth. Turn into greased pan, 15 × 10
inches. Cover with thin layer of meringue made by beating sugar into egg
white. Sprinkle with coconut. Bake in moderate oven (350° F.) 25
minutes. Cool. Cut in diamond-shaped pieces. Makes 2 dozen vanities.


                                Hermits

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  1 teaspoon mace
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  ½ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  2 cups raisins
  ½ cup broken nut meats

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and spices, and sift
together three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugars gradually,
creaming until light and fluffy. Add eggs and beat thoroughly; then
raisins and nuts and mix well. Add flour gradually, mixing well. Drop
from teaspoon on greased baking sheet and bake in moderate oven (350°F.)
15 minutes. Makes 4½ dozen hermits.

English walnuts, black walnuts, or pecans may be used, if desired.




                  _Festive, dependable, easy-to-make_
                     FROSTINGS · FILLINGS · SAUCES


    [Illustration: _Good frosting is the crowning glory of the cake_]


                             Fudge Frosting

  3 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate
  1½ cups milk
  3 cups sugar
  Dash of salt
  3 tablespoons light corn syrup
  3 tablespoons butter
  1½ teaspoons vanilla

Add chocolate to milk and place over low flame. Cook until mixture is
smooth and blended, stirring constantly. Add sugar, salt, and corn
syrup; stir until sugar is dissolved and mixture boils. Continue
boiling, without stirring, until a small amount of mixture forms a very
soft ball in cold water (232°F.). Remove from fire. Add butter and
vanilla. Cool to lukewarm (110°F.). Beat until of right consistency to
spread. If necessary, place over hot water to keep soft while spreading.
Makes enough frosting to cover tops and sides of two 9-inch layers, or
top and sides of 8 × 8 × 2-inch cake.


                         Seven Minute Frosting

  2 egg whites, unbeaten
  1½ cups sugar
  5 tablespoons water
  1½ teaspoons light corn syrup
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Combine egg whites, sugar, water, and corn syrup in top of double
boiler, beating with rotary egg beater until thoroughly mixed. Place
over rapidly boiling water, beat constantly with rotary egg beater, and
cook 7 minutes, or until frosting will stand in peaks. Remove from
boiling water; add vanilla and beat until thick enough to spread. Makes
enough frosting to cover tops and sides of two 9-inch layers, or top and
sides of 8 × 8 × 2-inch cake (generously).


                          Burnt Sugar Frosting

Use the recipe for Seven Minute Frosting, substituting 2 tablespoons
caramelized sugar syrup (page 9) for vanilla.


                          Snowy Lemon Frosting

Use the recipe for Seven Minute Frosting (page 16). Substitute 2
tablespoons lemon juice for 2 tablespoons water, and omit light corn
syrup; and substitute ¼ teaspoon grated lemon rind for vanilla.


                            Butter Frosting

  4 tablespoons butter
  2 cups sifted confectioners’ sugar
  3 tablespoons milk (about)
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  Dash of salt

Cream butter; add part of sugar gradually, blending after each addition.
Add remaining sugar, alternately with milk, until of right consistency
to spread. Beat after each addition until smooth. Add vanilla and salt.
Makes enough frosting to cover tops of two 9-inch layers, or top and
sides of 8 × 8 × 2-inch cake, or 2 dozen cup cakes.


                       Chocolate Butter Frosting

  4 tablespoons butter
  2 cups sifted confectioners’ sugar
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  Dash of salt
  1½ squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  4 teaspoons milk (about)

Cream butter; add part of sugar gradually, blending after each addition.
Add vanilla, salt, and chocolate and mix well. Add remaining sugar,
alternately with milk, until of right consistency to spread. Beat after
each addition until smooth.


                       Chocolate Wonder Frosting

  3 ounces (1 package) cream cheese
  2 to 3 tablespoons milk
  2 cups sifted confectioners’ sugar
  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  Dash of salt

Soften cream cheese with milk. Add sugar, one cup at a time, blending
after each addition. Add chocolate and salt and beat until smooth. Makes
enough frosting to cover tops of two 8-inch layers. Double recipe to
cover tops and sides of two 9-inch layers.


                  Lady Baltimore Frosting and Filling

  1½ cups sugar
  ½ teaspoon light corn syrup
  ⅔ cup boiling water
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  6 figs, chopped
  ½ cup chopped raisins
  ½ cup chopped pecan or walnut meats

Combine sugar, corn syrup, and water. Bring quickly to a boil, stirring
only until sugar is dissolved. Boil rapidly, without stirring, until a
small amount of syrup forms a soft ball in cold water, or spins a long
thread when dropped from tip of spoon (240°F.). Pour syrup in fine
stream over egg whites, beating constantly. Add vanilla. Continue
beating with a rotary egg beater 10 to 15 minutes, or until frosting is
cool and of right consistency to spread. Use wooden spoon when too stiff
for beater. For filling, add enough frosting to fruit and nuts to make a
filling that will spread easily. Spread between layers. Spread remaining
frosting on top and sides of cake. Makes enough frosting and filling to
spread between two 9-inch layers and cover tops and sides of cake.


                         Orange Butter Frosting

  3 teaspoons grated orange rind
  ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
  4 tablespoons orange juice
  2 teaspoons lemon juice
  3 tablespoons butter
  1 egg yolk, unbeaten
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  3 cups sifted confectioners’ sugar

Add orange and lemon rind to fruit juice and let stand 10 minutes;
strain if desired. Cream butter; add egg yolk and salt and mix well. Add
part of sugar gradually, blending after each addition. Add remaining
sugar, alternately with fruit juice, until of right consistency to
spread. Beat after each addition until smooth. Makes enough frosting to
cover tops and sides of two 9-inch layers, or top and sides of 8 × 8 ×
2-inch cake (generously), or about 3 dozen medium cup cakes.


                      Hungarian Chocolate Frosting
                           (Using egg yolks)

  3 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate
  1½ cups confectioners’ sugar
  2½ tablespoons hot water
  3 egg yolks
  4 tablespoons butter

Melt chocolate in double boiler. Remove from boiling water, add sugar
and water, and blend. Add egg yolks, one at a time, beating well after
each addition. Add butter, a tablespoon at a time, beating thoroughly
after each amount. Makes enough frosting to cover tops and sides of two
9-inch layers, or top and sides of 8 × 8 × 2-inch cake (generously), or
top and sides of 10 × 10 × 2-inch cake, or about 2 dozen cup cakes.


                         Custard Cream Filling

  ⅓ cup sugar
  3 tablespoons Swans Down Cake Flour
  Dash of salt
  1 cup milk
  1 egg yolk, slightly beaten
  ½ teaspoon vanilla

Combine sugar, flour, and salt in top of double boiler; add milk and egg
yolk, mixing thoroughly. Place over rapidly boiling water and cook 10
minutes, or until thick, stirring constantly. Cool; add flavoring. Makes
enough filling to spread between two 9-inch layers.


                         Lemon Coconut Filling

  1 cup confectioners’ sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
  ¼ cup lemon juice
  1 egg, slightly beaten
  1 cup Baker’s Coconut, Premium Shred

Combine sugar, salt, lemon rind and juice, and egg in top of double
boiler. Place over boiling water and cook 5 minutes, or until mixture is
thick, stirring constantly. Remove from boiling water; add coconut, and
cool. Makes enough filling to spread between two 9-inch layers, or to
fill centers of about 9 cup cakes.

To fill cup cakes, remove cone-shaped piece from center of each cake;
add filling and replace tops. Cover with whipped cream.


                            Chocolate Sauce

  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate
  2 cups milk
  ⅔ cup sugar
  2½ tablespoons flour
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Add chocolate to milk and heat in double boiler. When chocolate is
melted, beat with rotary egg beater until blended. Combine sugar, flour,
and salt; add gradually to chocolate mixture and cook until thickened,
stirring constantly; then continue cooking 5 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Add butter and vanilla. Makes 2½ cups sauce.


                         Fluffy Chocolate Sauce

Fold 4 tablespoons Chocolate Sauce into ½ cup heavy cream, whipped.
Serve cold. Makes about 1¼ cups sauce.


                         Luscious Orange Sauce

  ½ cup sugar
  3 tablespoons Swans Down Cake Flour
  Dash of salt
  ¾ cup water
  1 egg yolk, slightly beaten
  1 tablespoon butter
  ½ cup orange juice
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ¾ teaspoon grated orange rind
  ¼ teaspoon grated lemon rind

Combine sugar, flour, and salt in top of double boiler; add water and
egg yolk, mixing thoroughly. Place over rapidly boiling water and cook
10 minutes, stirring constantly. Remove from boiling water; add butter,
fruit juices, and rinds. Serve hot or cold. Makes 1½ cups sauce.


                        Butterscotch Hard Sauce

  ½ cup butter
  ½ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  1 tablespoon cream
  ½ teaspoon vanilla

Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually, and cream together until
light and fluffy. Add cream and vanilla and beat well. Makes 1 cup
sauce.




                       _Nine grand variations of_
                            CALUMET BISCUITS


    [Illustration: _Tender and flaky and light—perfect biscuits_]


                     Calumet Baking Powder Biscuits

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup milk (about)

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening. Add milk gradually, stirring until soft dough is
formed. Turn out on slightly floured board and knead 30 seconds, or
enough to shape. Roll ½ inch thick and cut with floured 2-inch biscuit
cutter. Bake on ungreased baking sheet in hot oven (450°F.) 12 to 15
minutes, or until done. Makes 12 biscuits.


_Emergency Biscuits._ Use recipe for Calumet Baking Powder Biscuits,
adding about 1 cup milk instead of ¾ cup milk. Drop from teaspoon on
ungreased baking sheet. Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 12 to 15 minutes.
Makes 16 biscuits.


                      Prize Baking Powder Biscuits

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ⅔ cup milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening. Add milk all at once and stir carefully until all
flour is dampened. Then stir vigorously until mixture forms a soft dough
and follows spoon around bowl. Turn out immediately on slightly floured
board and knead 30 seconds. Roll ½ inch thick and cut with floured
2-inch biscuit cutter. Bake on ungreased baking sheet in hot oven
(450°F.) 12 to 15 minutes. Makes 12 biscuits.

For tall biscuits, use 1¾-inch biscuit cutter and place biscuits close
together in 8 × 8 × 2-inch pan. Makes a sheet of 14 biscuits with soft,
not crusty, sides. These biscuits are delicious served hot with chicken
fricassee.


                     Crusty Baking Powder Biscuits

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 teaspoons sugar
  6 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup milk (about)

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Cut in shortening; add milk gradually, stirring until soft dough
is formed. Turn out on slightly floured board and knead 30 seconds, or
enough to shape. Roll ⅓ inch thick and cut with floured 1¾-inch biscuit
cutter. Place ½ inch apart on ungreased baking sheet; bake in hot oven
(450°F.) 12 to 15 minutes. Makes 24 biscuits.


                              Cream Scones

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 teaspoons sugar
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  2 eggs
  ⅓ cup light cream

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Cut in shortening. Reserve about ½ egg white for glaze. Beat
remaining eggs well and add cream; add all at once to flour mixture and
stir until all flour is dampened; then stir vigorously until mixture
forms a soft dough and follows spoon around bowl. Turn out immediately
on slightly floured board and knead 30 seconds. Roll ½ inch thick and
cut in triangles. Place on ungreased baking sheet. Brush tops lightly
with reserved egg white, slightly beaten; sprinkle with additional
sugar. Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 12 to 15 minutes, or until delicately
browned. Makes about 12 scones.


                          Holiday Fruit Scones

Use the recipe for Cream Scones, increasing sugar to 2 tablespoons, and
adding 1½ teaspoons grated orange rind and ½ cup finely cut, seedless
raisins to flour-fat mixture. Makes about 18 medium size scones.


                           Lemon Tea Biscuits

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1½ teaspoons grated lemon rind
  ⅔ cup milk

  4 tablespoons sugar
  1½ teaspoons grated lemon rind
  ¼ teaspoon lemon juice (about)

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening; add lemon rind and blend. Add milk all at once and
stir carefully until all flour is dampened. Then stir vigorously until
mixture forms a soft dough and follows spoon around bowl. Turn out
immediately on slightly floured board and knead 30 seconds. Roll ¼ inch
thick and cut with floured 1½-inch biscuit cutter. Combine sugar, lemon
rind, and enough lemon juice to make a crumbly mixture. Place half of
biscuits in greased muffin pans or on greased baking sheet; spread with
melted butter and with sugar mixture, and top with remaining biscuits,
pressing lightly together. Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 8 to 10 minutes, or
until done. Makes 2½ dozen small biscuits.


                            Cheese Biscuits

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1 cup grated American cheese
  ¾ cup milk (about)

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening and cheese. Add milk gradually until soft dough is
formed. Turn out immediately on slightly floured board and knead 30
seconds, or enough to shape. Roll ½ inch thick and cut with floured
1¾-inch biscuit cutter. Bake on ungreased baking sheet in hot oven
(450°F.) 12 to 15 minutes. Makes 24 biscuits.


_Pimiento Cheese Biscuits._ Omit cheese in Cheese Biscuits. Before
baking biscuits, spread with mixture made by melting together 4 ounces
pimiento cheese and 4 tablespoons butter. Makes 24 biscuits.




                  _Calumet brings you quicker, easier_
                             ROLLS & BREAD


    [Illustration: _Store fruit bread overnight before cutting_]


                        Calumet Pocketbook Rolls

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon butter or other shortening
  ⅔ cup milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening; add milk all at once and stir carefully until all
flour is dampened. Then stir vigorously until mixture forms a soft dough
and follows spoon around bowl. Turn out immediately on well floured
board and knead lightly 2 to 3 minutes. Roll ¼ inch thick. Cut with
floured 2-inch biscuit cutter. Fold double and press edges together
lightly. Place in greased pan; brush tops with melted butter. Cover and
let rise in warm place 20 minutes. Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 10 minutes.
Again brush tops with melted butter; continue baking 5 to 10 minutes.
Remove from oven; brush tops with butter. Makes 18 rolls.


                           Swedish Tea Rolls

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoons salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  ⅔ cup milk

  ⅓ cup sugar
  1 teaspoon cinnamon

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening; add milk all at once and stir carefully until all
flour is dampened. Then stir vigorously until mixture forms a soft dough
and follows spoon around bowl. Turn out immediately on slightly floured
board and knead 30 seconds. Roll ¼ inch thick. Cut in 2½-inch squares.
Fold each square in half and press cut edges into mixture of sugar and
cinnamon. Sprinkle thickly with more sugar and cinnamon. Place on
ungreased baking sheet and bake in hot oven (450°F.) 15 minutes. Makes
18 rolls. Chopped nut meats may be added to sugar mixture.


                             Novelty Rolls


_Muffin-rolls._ Use recipe for Calumet Pocketbook Rolls (page 21). Shape
dough into l-inch balls and place in small greased muffin pans. Brush
tops with melted butter. Cover, let rise in warm place 20 minutes, and
bake as directed.


_Knots._ Use recipe for Calumet Pocketbook Rolls (page 21). Roll dough ¼
inch thick on slightly floured board and cut in strips, 6 × ½ inches.
Tie each in loose knot, or shape in figure 8. Place in greased pan;
brush tops with melted butter. Cover, let rise in warm place 20 minutes,
and bake as directed in recipe.


_Finger Rolls._ Use recipe for Calumet Pocketbook Rolls (page 21). Shape
dough into balls, then roll out with hand on board until of desired
length. Make rolls smooth and of uniform size. Place in greased pan;
brush tops with melted butter. Cover, let rise in warm place 20 minutes,
and bake as directed in recipe.


_Crescent Rolls._ Use recipe for Calumet Pocketbook Rolls (page 21).
Roll dough ¼ inch thick on slightly floured board and cut in 4-inch
triangles. Roll each, beginning on diagonal, and shape into crescent
with point on top of roll. Place in greased pan; brush tops with melted
butter. Cover, let rise in warm place 20 minutes, and bake as directed
in recipe.


_Poppy Seed Rolls._ Prepare any of the above rolls. Place in greased
pan; brush tops with melted butter and sprinkle generously with poppy
seeds. Cover, let rise in warm place 20 minutes, and bake as directed,
dropping melted butter from teaspoon, instead of brushing on rolls, to
avoid displacing any of the poppy seeds.

Caraway seeds may be sprinkled over rolls instead of poppy seeds, if
desired; or rolls may be topped before baking with a mixture of sugar
and cinnamon. To prepare mixture, add ⅛ teaspoon cinnamon to 1
tablespoon sugar, and mix well.


                          Quick Cinnamon Rolls

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup milk (about)

  3 tablespoons butter
  ⅓ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup currants or raisins

  4 tablespoons butter
  4 tablespoons brown sugar

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening; add milk gradually until soft dough is formed. Turn
out immediately on slightly floured board and knead 30 seconds, or
enough to shape. Roll ¼ inch thick. Cream together butter, sugar, and
cinnamon; spread on dough, and sprinkle with currants. Roll as for jelly
roll. Cut in 1-inch slices. Melt 4 tablespoons butter in 8 × 8 × 2-inch
pan, add 4 tablespoons brown sugar, and mix well. Place rolls in pan,
cut-side down. Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 15 minutes; then decrease heat
to moderate (350°F.) and bake 15 minutes longer. Remove from pan at
once. Makes 10 to 12 rolls.

When rolls are baked in a smaller pan, use less butter and sugar for
mixture in pan.


                         Whole Bran Brown Bread

  1½ cups sifted flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup raisins
  1 cup milk
  3 tablespoons molasses
  1½ cups Post’s Whole Bran
  1 egg, well beaten
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Add raisins. Pour milk and molasses over Post’s Whole Bran; add
egg and shortening. Add to flour mixture and blend. Bake in greased loaf
pan, 8 × 4 × 3 inches, in moderate oven (350°F.) 1 hour, or until done.
Bread should be stored for at least a day before cutting in thin slices.


                               Corn Bread

  1¼ cups sifted flour
  2¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  2 tablespoons sugar
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 cup yellow corn meal
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1¼ cups milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Add corn meal and mix well. Combine eggs and milk; add to dry
ingredients, mixing well. Add shortening. Turn into greased 9-inch layer
pan or 8 × 8 × 2-inch pan; bake in hot oven (425°F.) 40 minutes, or
until done. Cut in wedge-shaped or square pieces.


                           Crusty Corn Sticks

Use recipe for Corn Bread. Bake in well greased corn-ear pans, or
greased bread-stick pans in hot oven (425°F.) 20 to 25 minutes, or until
done. Makes 2 dozen corn-ear sticks, or 3 dozen short corn sticks.


                              Fruit Bread

  2 cups sifted flour
  4 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¾ cup sugar
  2 cups Graham flour
  ¾ cup candied orange peel, thinly sliced
  ¾ cup broken nut meats
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1⅔ cups milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine Graham flour, orange peel, and nuts, and add to flour
mixture. Combine eggs, milk, and shortening. Add to flour and blend.
Bake in two greased loaf pans, 7 × 3 × 2½ inches, in moderate oven
(350°F.) 1 hour, or until done. Bread should be stored for at least a
day before slicing.

For delicious sandwiches, cut Fruit Bread in thin slices and spread with
softened butter or with well seasoned cream cheese.


                           Quick Coffee Cake

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup sugar
  6 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1 egg, well beaten
  ½ cup milk

  1½ tablespoons melted butter
  4 tablespoons sugar
  1 tablespoon flour
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Cut in shortening. Combine egg and milk; add to flour mixture,
stirring until mixture is blended. Turn into greased 9-inch layer pan,
spreading dough evenly. Brush top with melted butter. Sprinkle with
mixture of sugar, flour, and cinnamon. Bake in hot oven (400°F.) 25 to
30 minutes.


                           Sandwich Nut Bread

  3 cups sifted flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup sugar
  1 cup chopped nut meats
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1¼ cups milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Add nuts and mix well. Combine eggs and milk; add to dry
ingredients and blend. Add shortening. Bake in greased loaf pan, 8 × 4 ×
3 inches, in moderate oven (350°F.) 1¼ hours.


                          Southern Spoon Bread

  ¾ cup yellow corn meal
  1 teaspoon salt
  3 tablespoons melted butter
  1 cup boiling water
  1 cup milk
  2 eggs, well beaten
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder

Combine corn meal, salt, and butter. Stir in boiling water slowly and
beat until smooth. Add milk, eggs, and baking powder. Mix well. Turn
into greased casserole or pan, 8 × 8 × 2 inches, and bake in moderate
oven (350°F.) 40 to 50 minutes, or until firm.




                       _No tunnels, no humps in_
                            CALUMET MUFFINS


    [Illustration: _Nine kinds of muffins from one recipe_]


                            Calumet Muffins

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  2 tablespoons sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 egg, well beaten
  1 cup milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Combine egg, milk, and shortening. Add to flour, beating only
enough to dampen all flour. Bake in greased muffin pans in hot oven
(425°F.) 25 minutes, or until done. Makes 12 muffins.


_Nut Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, adding ½ cup broken nut
meats to the sifted flour mixture.


_Raisin Spice Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, sifting ¾
teaspoon cinnamon with flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt. Add ¾ cup
chopped raisins to the sifted flour mixture.


_Currant Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, adding ½ cup currants
to the sifted flour mixture.


_Apricot Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, adding ½ cup cut,
dried apricots to the sifted flour mixture.


_Prune Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, adding ⅔ cup finely cut
prunes to sifted flour mixture.


_Date Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, adding ⅔ cup finely cut
dates to the sifted flour mixture.


_Surprise Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins. Drop a scant
teaspoon of currant jelly on each muffin before baking.


_Bacon Muffins._ Use recipe for Calumet Muffins, adding ½ cup crushed,
crisp bacon to flour mixture. Bacon drippings may be used for part of
butter.


                           Blueberry Muffins

  2½ cups sifted flour
  2½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup fresh blueberries
  1 egg, well beaten
  1 cup milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Combine berries with ⅓ cup of flour mixture. Combine egg, milk,
and shortening. Add to flour, beating only enough to dampen all flour.
Fold in berries. Bake in greased muffin pans in hot oven (425°F.) 25
minutes, or until done. Makes 18 muffins.


                           Cranberry Muffins

  2½ cups sifted flour
  2½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup sugar
  1 cup coarsely chopped cranberries
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 cup milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine berries with ⅓ cup of flour mixture. Combine eggs, milk,
and shortening. Add to flour, beating only enough to dampen all flour.
Fold in berries. Bake in greased muffin pans in hot oven (425°F.) 25
minutes, or until done. Makes 18 muffins.


                              Corn Muffins

  1½ cups sifted flour
  2¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  2 tablespoons sugar
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup yellow corn meal
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 cup milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Add corn meal and mix well. Combine eggs, milk, and shortening;
add to flour, stirring only enough to dampen all flour. Bake in greased
muffin pans in hot oven (425°F.) 25 minutes, or until done. Makes 12
muffins.


                       Grape-Nuts Orange Muffins

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ⅔ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 eggs, well beaten
  ¾ cup orange juice
  1 tablespoon grated orange rind
  2 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening
  1 cup Grape-Nuts

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Combine eggs, orange juice and rind, and shortening. Add to
flour, beating only enough to dampen all flour. Add Grape-Nuts. Bake in
hot, greased muffin pans in hot oven (425°F.) 20 to 25 minutes. Makes 12
muffins.


                              Bran Muffins

  1 cup sifted flour
  3½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  3 tablespoons sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup milk
  1 cup Post’s Whole Bran
  1 egg, well beaten
  3 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Pour milk over Post’s Whole Bran. Add egg and butter to bran
mixture. Add flour, beating as little as possible. Bake in greased
muffin pans in hot oven (425°F.) 25 minutes. Makes 10.


                           Fruited Bran Gems

  1 cup finely cut dates
  ⅔ cup boiling water
  1 cup Post’s Whole Bran
  1 cup sifted flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  3½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  1 egg, well beaten
  3 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening
  ⅓ cup molasses

Combine dates and water. Let stand 5 minutes. Add Post’s Whole Bran.
Sift flour once, measure, add salt and baking powder, and sift again.
Add egg, butter and molasses to bran mixture. Add flour, beating as
little as possible. Bake in greased muffin pans in hot oven (425°F.) 25
minutes, or until done. Makes about 12 gems.




                   _New lightness and tenderness in_
                        WAFFLES & GRIDDLE CAKES


    [Illustration: _Serve pancakes at once on hot plates_]


                                Waffles

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  3 egg yolks, well beaten
  1¼ cups milk
  5 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Combine egg yolks and milk; add gradually to flour, beating only until
smooth. Add shortening. Fold in egg whites. Bake in hot waffle iron.
Serve with butter and Log Cabin Syrup. Makes four thick 4-section
waffles.


                             Cheese Waffles

Use the recipe for Waffles, adding 1 cup grated American cheese to
batter just before folding in egg whites. These waffles may be served
with fresh or broiled tomatoes and broiled bacon, as a luncheon or
supper dish.


                              Ham Waffles

Use recipe for Waffles, sprinkling ¼ cup finely cut boiled ham over
batter just before closing waffle iron.


                             Orange Waffles

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup sugar
  1½ teaspoons orange rind
  2 egg yolks, well beaten
  ⅔ cup milk
  6 tablespoons melted butter
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Add orange rind to egg yolks and mix well; combine with milk and
add to flour mixture, beating only until smooth. Add butter and blend.
Fold in egg whites. Bake in hot waffle iron. Serve hot with butter and
orange marmalade or orange sauce. Makes four thick 4-section waffles.


                       Chocolate Dessert Waffles

  1½ cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  1½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup sugar
  2 egg yolks, well beaten
  ½ cup milk
  ½ cup melted butter
  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine egg yolks and milk; add to flour mixture, heating until
smooth. Combine butter and chocolate, add to batter, and blend. Add
vanilla. Fold in egg whites. Bake in hot waffle iron. Serve hot with
whipped cream, or Luscious Orange Sauce (page 18). Makes four 4-section
waffles.


                             Griddle Cakes

  1 cup sifted flour
  1 teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  ¾ cup milk
  2 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine egg and milk. Add gradually to flour, beating only until
smooth. Add shortening. Bake on hot, greased griddle. Makes 12 to 15
griddle cakes.


                           Bran Griddle Cakes

  1¼ cups sifted flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  2 teaspoons sugar
  2 egg yolks, well beaten
  1¾ cups milk
  1 cup Post’s 40% Bran Flakes
  1 tablespoon melted butter or other shortening
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine egg yolks and milk; add gradually to flour, beating only
until smooth. Add Flakes and shortening. Fold in egg whites. Bake on
hot, greased griddle. Makes 2 dozen griddle cakes.


                           Corn Griddle Cakes

  1¼ cups sifted flour
  2¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  2 tablespoons sugar
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 cup yellow corn meal
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1⅓ cups milk
  4 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, sugar, and salt, and sift
again. Add corn meal and mix well. Combine eggs and milk; add to dry
ingredients, mixing well. Add shortening. Bake on hot, greased griddle.
Serve hot with Log Cabin Syrup. Makes 20 to 24 griddle cakes.


                    Grape-Nuts Flakes Griddle Cakes

  1 cup sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  1¼ cups milk
  1 cup Grape-Nuts Flakes
  2 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine egg and milk; add gradually to flour, beating only until
smooth. Add Grape-Nuts Flakes and shortening. Bake on hot, greased
griddle. Serve hot with Log Cabin Syrup. Makes 15 to 20 griddle cakes.


                            Rolled Pancakes

  1 cup sifted flour
  1 teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon sugar
  2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  1 cup milk
  2 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and sugar, and sift
again. Combine egg yolks and milk; add gradually to flour, beating only
until smooth. Add shortening. Fold in egg whites. Bake on hot, greased
griddle. Roll and serve with broiled sausages or bacon. Makes six 7-inch
pancakes.




                  _Extra quality ... sure success for_
                            OTHER FAVORITES


    [Illustration: _Calumet pie crust, golden brown and flaky_]


                       Chocolate Coronet Pudding

  1 cup sifted flour
  1½ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon cinnamon
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ½ cup sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  ¾ cup raisins
  2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, melted
  ⅓ cup milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and cinnamon, and
sift together three times. Cream butter thoroughly, add sugar gradually,
and cream together until light and fluffy. Add egg and raisins and beat
well; then chocolate and blend. Add flour, alternately with milk,
beating only enough to blend. Turn into greased tube pan; cover with
waxed paper and tie securely. Steam about 2 hours. Serve hot with
Butterscotch Hard Sauce (page 18) or with Fluffy Chocolate Sauce (page
18). Serves 10.


                               Doughnuts

  4 cups sifted flour
  4 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, well beaten
  ¼ teaspoon lemon extract
  2 tablespoons melted butter or other shortening
  1 cup milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt, and nutmeg, and sift
together three times. Add sugar to eggs, beating thoroughly; then lemon
extract and shortening. Add flour, alternately with milk, mixing well
after each addition. Knead lightly on slightly floured board. Roll ⅓
inch thick; cut with floured 1¾-inch doughnut cutter. Fry in deep fat
(385°F.) until golden brown, turning frequently. Drain on unglazed
paper. Sprinkle powdered or fine granulated sugar over doughnuts, if
desired. Makes 4 dozen small doughnuts.


                    Individual Strawberry Shortcakes

  3 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  3 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup milk
  2 quarts strawberries, washed and hulled

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening; add milk all at once and stir carefully until all
flour is dampened. Then stir vigorously until mixture forms a soft dough
and follows spoon around bowl. Turn out immediately on slightly floured
board and knead 30 seconds. Roll ¼ inch thick and cut with floured
3-inch biscuit cutter. Place half of circles on ungreased baking sheet;
brush with melted butter. Place remaining circles on top and butter tops
well. Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 15 to 20 minutes. Cut strawberries in
small pieces and sweeten slightly. Reserve 8 whole berries for garnish.
Separate halves of hot biscuits, spread bottom halves with soft butter
and some of sweetened strawberries. Place other halves on top,
crust-side down. Spread with butter and remaining berries. Garnish with
whipped cream and whole berries. Serves 8.

Dough may be rolled ½ inch thick, cut, and baked; split shortcakes after
baking.


                       Delicious Cottage Pudding

  2 cups sifted Swans Down Cake Flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  3 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  1 cup sugar
  1 cup milk
  ½ teaspoon vanilla

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cream butter, add sugar gradually, and cream together well. Add flour,
alternately with milk, a small amount at a time, beating after each
addition until smooth. Add vanilla. Bake in greased pan, 8 × 8 × 2
inches, in moderate oven (350°F.) about 1 hour. Serve hot with Chocolate
Sauce (page 18).


                               Plum Rolls

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup milk (about)
  1½ cups canned red plums, seeded and drained

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening; add milk gradually, stirring until soft dough is
formed. Turn out on slightly floured board and knead 30 seconds, or
enough to shape. Roll ¼ inch thick. Cover with plums and roll as for
jelly roll. Moisten edge and press against roll. Cut in 1½-inch slices.
Place in pan, cut-side down and pour Plum Sauce over them. Bake in hot
oven (425°F.) 30 minutes or until done, basting often. Serve hot with a
tablespoon of whipped cream on each slice, if desired. Serves 6.


                       Plum Sauce for Plum Rolls

  1 cup sugar
  1 tablespoon flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 cup plum juice
  1 cup water
  1 tablespoon butter
  1 tablespoon lemon juice

Combine sugar, flour, and salt. Add fruit juice and water and boil 3
minutes. Add butter and lemon juice. Serve hot.


                            Chicken Pot Pie

  2½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Dash of pepper
  Dash of paprika
  2 cups cooked chicken, cut in pieces
  1¼ cups milk or chicken stock
  2 tablespoons melted butter

  6 to 8 unbaked baking powder biscuits, rolled ¼ inch thick

Combine ingredients in order given. Turn into greased casserole and bake
in hot oven (425°F.) 25 minutes, stirring mixture twice during first 10
minutes of baking. Place biscuits on top of chicken mixture after it has
baked 10 minutes; return to oven and bake 12 to 15 minutes longer, or
until browned. Serves 4.


                           Calumet Pie Crust

  2½ cups sifted flour
  ¼ teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅔ cup cold shortening
  ⅓ cup cold water (about)

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening until pieces are about size of small peas. Add water
(preferably ice water), a small amount at a time, mixing lightly with
fork. Handle as little as possible. Wrap in waxed paper; chill
thoroughly. Roll out on slightly floured board. Bake in hot oven
(450°F.). Makes enough pastry for 9-inch two-crust pie, or two 9-inch
pie shells.


_Pie Shell._ Line a 9-inch pie plate with ½ of pastry rolled ⅛ inch
thick, allowing pastry to extend 1 inch beyond edge; fit loosely. Fold
edge back to form standing rim; flute with fingers. Prick with fork, or
line with waxed paper and fill with rice or beans to hold shape. Bake in
hot oven (450°F.) 15 minutes, removing rice after first 10 minutes of
baking.


                           Lemon Meringue Pie

  1¼ cups sugar
  ½ cup Swans Down Cake Flour
  Dash of salt
  1½ cups water
  3 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  ½ cup lemon juice
  1 tablespoon grated lemon rind
  1 baked 9-inch pie shell
  3 egg whites
  6 tablespoons sugar

Combine sugar, flour, and salt in top of double boiler; add water and
egg yolks, mixing thoroughly. Place over rapidly boiling water and cook
10 minutes, stirring constantly. Remove from boiling water; add lemon
juice and rind. Cool. Turn into pie shell. Beat egg whites until foamy
throughout; add sugar, 2 tablespoons at a time, beating after each
addition until sugar is blended. Then continue beating until mixture
will stand in peaks. Pile lightly on filling. Bake in moderate oven
(350°F.) 15 minutes, or until browned.


                          Chocolate Cream Pie

  3 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate
  2½ cups milk
  1 cup sugar
  6 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 baked 9-inch pie shell
  2 egg whites
  4 tablespoons sugar

Add chocolate to milk and heat in double boiler. When chocolate is
melted, beat with rotary egg beater until blended. Combine sugar, flour,
and salt; add gradually to chocolate mixture and cook until thickened,
stirring constantly; then continue cooking 10 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Pour small amount of mixture over egg yolks, stirring
vigorously; return to double boiler and cook 2 minutes longer. Remove
from boiling water; add butter and vanilla. Cool. Turn into pie shell.
Beat egg whites until foamy; add sugar, 2 tablespoons at a time, beating
after each addition until sugar is blended. Then continue beating until
mixture will stand in peaks. Pile lightly on filling. Bake in moderate
oven (350°F.) 15 minutes.


                             Red Cherry Pie

  2½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
  1 cup sugar
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon melted butter
  2½ cups canned, sour red cherries, pitted and drained
  1 cup cherry juice
  1 recipe Calumet Pie Crust

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, butter, cherries, and cherry juice;
let stand while pastry is being made. Line a 9-inch pie plate with
pastry rolled ⅛ inch thick. Fill with cherry mixture and moisten edge of
crust. Make several slits in top crust for escape of steam, then adjust
on filled crust. Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 15 minutes; then decrease
heat to moderate (350°F.) and bake 30 minutes longer, or until filling
is cooked and crust is browned.


                          Deep-dish Apple Pie

  1 recipe Calumet Pie Crust (page 30)
  4 to 6 apples, thinly sliced
  1 cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ⅛ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¼ cup water
  1 tablespoon butter

Line sides only of deep baking dish with a strip of pastry rolled ¼ inch
thick, adjusting it so that pastry comes within ½ inch of bottom and
extends over rim of dish as for pie. Fill with apples. Combine sugar,
cinnamon, and nutmeg, and sprinkle over apples. Add water and dot with
butter. Roll remaining pastry ¼ inch thick; cut several slits to allow
escape of steam, and place over filled dish. Press edges together. Bake
in hot oven (450°F.) 15 minutes; then decrease heat to moderate (350°F.)
and bake 45 minutes longer, or until apples are tender. Serves 8.


                             Cherry Cobbler

  3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
  ¾ cup sugar
  3 cups canned, sour red cherries, pitted and drained
  1 cup cherry juice
  2 tablespoons butter

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  6 tablespoons butter or other shortening
  ¾ cup milk (about)

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, cherries, cherry juice, and butter, and
let stand while crust is being made. Sift flour once, measure, add
baking powder and salt, and sift again. Cut in shortening. Add milk
gradually, stirring until soft dough is formed. Turn out on slightly
floured board and knead 30 seconds, or enough to shape. Roll ⅔ of dough
in strip, 2 inches wide and ¼ inch thick; fit into 8 × 8 × 2-inch pan,
lining sides well. Fill with cherry mixture. Roll remaining ⅓ of dough ¼
inch thick; with sharp knife make slits to permit escape of steam. Fit
over cherries, pressing edges together. Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 15
minutes; reduce heat to moderate (350°F.); bake 20 minutes longer.


                         Christmas Plum Pudding

  2 cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon allspice
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¼ cup chopped figs
  ½ cup raisins
  ½ cup currants
  ¼ cup sliced citron
  ¼ cup candied cherries, quartered
  1 tablespoon candied orange peel, chopped
  ¼ cup blanched and chopped almonds
  ½ cup chopped apple
  ½ cup chopped suet
  ½ cup molasses
  2 eggs, well beaten
  ½ cup milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, soda, salt, and spices, and
sift together three times. Sift ½ cup of flour mixture over dried and
preserved fruits and nuts, and mix well. Combine apple, suet, molasses,
eggs, and milk; add to flour mixture and beat thoroughly. Add fruit and
nuts. Turn into greased molds, filling them ⅔ full; cover tightly. Steam
about 3 hours. Serve hot with Butterscotch Hard Sauce (page 18). Serves
12.


                          Steamed Bran Pudding

  1 cup sifted flour
  2¼ teaspoons Calumet Baking Powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup Post’s Whole Bran
  ⅓ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  1 cup raisins, finely cut
  1 egg, well beaten
  ¼ cup molasses
  ⅓ cup melted butter or other shortening
  1 cup milk

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Add Post’s Whole Bran, sugar, and raisins; mix well. Combine egg,
molasses, shortening, and milk; add to flour mixture and beat
thoroughly. Turn into greased molds, filling them ⅔ full; cover tightly.
Steam 2 to 3 hours, depending upon size of mold; steam individual molds
1 hour and 20 minutes. Serve hot with fruit sauce or Butterscotch Hard
Sauce (page 18), as desired. Serves 8 to 10.




                             Get this book—
                        “All About Home Baking”


    [Illustration: Calumet Double Acting Baking Powder]

_Learn the whole art of baking in 23 easy picture-lessons!_


          Almost like a movie ... these step-by-step pictures!

    [Illustration: 1 _Chocolate is melted over water to prevent
    scorching_]

    [Illustration: 2 _Beat egg; add to creamed mixture and mix well_]

    [Illustration: 3 _Blend chocolate with butter, sugar, and egg
    mixture_]

    [Illustration: 4 _Bake chocolate cake at slightly lower
    temperature_]

Recipes alone can never tell you all the things you need to know for
perfect baking. Not even the complete and carefully worded recipes in
“The Calumet Book of Oven Triumphs.”

It takes pictures and step-by-step directions to show you the fine
points that make baking easy and invariably successful.

“All About Home Baking” is a new book, just published this year, that
brings you a _complete set_ of such baking pictures and directions.

Tells you all the things that recipes have to take for granted—how to
measure, sift, cream, beat, fold, prepare pans, regulate ovens. Why you
should mix a white cake one way and a chocolate cake another. How to
make biscuits flaky, waffles tender, muffins without tunnels. How and
when to remove cakes from pans. Tricks in making perfect pie crust,
never-fail frostings and meringues.

Truly—the most helpful baking book you ever saw. 144 pages, with 156
pictures ... 185 recipes in all, based on 23 key recipes. Glorious color
plates ... 14 pages of menus and table-settings ... bound in washable
cloth covers of yellow and blue. If you don’t think “All About Home
Baking” is worth $1.00 ... just return it to us within one week and we
will gladly send back your 25¢.

Use the coupon—or if you do not wish to cut this book, write to the
address given on the coupon, enclosing 25¢ in stamps or money order.




  Frances Lee Barton, _Dept. OT_
  General Foods, Battle Creek, Mich.

Please send me your book, “All About Home Baking” for which I enclose
25¢ (stamps or money order).

  _Name_______________________

  _Street_____________________

  _City_______________State_______

 Print name and address plainly. This offer expires December 31, 1935;
                          not good in Canada.




                                 INDEX


                                 CAKES
      _Butter Cakes_                                                6-11
          Apricot Upside Down Cake                                     9
          Boston Cream Pie                                             6
          Burnt Sugar Cake                                             9
          Busy Day Cake                                                8
          Calumet One-egg Cake                                         6
          Chocolate Fudge Cake                                         7
          Chocolate Ribbon Cake                                       10
          Coconut Layer Cake                                           8
          Currant Cup Cakes                                           11
          Economical Gold Cake                                        10
          Favorite Chocolate Layer Cake                                8
          Favorite Cup Cakes                                           8
          Favorite Jam Squares                                        11
          Fruit Cake                                                  11
          Gingerbread                                                 11
          Hungarian Cream Cake                                        10
          Lady Baltimore Cake                                          9
          Louisiana Spice Cake                                         7
          Miracle Cake                                                11
          Orange Dessert Cake                                          6
          Orange Layer Cake                                           11
          Patty’s Birthday Cake                                        7
          Pineapple Upside Down Cake                                   9
          Plantation Marble Cake                                       7
          Prize Devil’s Food Cake                                      8
          Silver Cake                                                 10
      _Sponge Cakes_                                               12-13
          Chocolate Sponge Layer Cake                                 13
          Chocolate Sponge Roll                                       13
          Fruited Sponge Torte                                        13
          Hot Milk Sponge Cake                                        12
          Old-fashioned Jelly Roll                                    12
          Orange Sponge Cake                                          13
  COOKIES
          Bran Drop Cookies                                           15
          Brownies                                                    15
          Calumet Sugar Cookies                                       14
          Chocolate Indians                                           15
          Coconut Vanities                                            15
          Hermits                                                     15
          Vanilla Nut Ice Box Cookies                                 14
  FROSTINGS, FILLINGS, SAUCES
          Burnt Sugar Frosting                                        16
          Butter Frosting                                             17
          Butterscotch Hard Sauce                                     18
          Chocolate Butter Frosting                                   17
          Chocolate Sauce                                             18
          Chocolate Wonder Frosting                                   17
          Custard Cream Filling                                       18
          Fluffy Chocolate Sauce                                      18
          Fudge Frosting                                              16
          Hungarian Chocolate Frosting                                18
          Lady Baltimore Frosting and Filling                         17
          Lemon Coconut Filling                                       18
          Luscious Orange Sauce                                       18
          Orange Butter Frosting                                      17
          Seven Minute Frosting                                       16
          Snowy Lemon Frosting                                        17
  QUICK BREADS
      _Biscuits_                                                   19-20
          Calumet Baking Powder Biscuits                              19
          Cheese Biscuits                                             20
          Cream Scones                                                20
          Crusty Baking Powder Biscuits                               20
          Emergency Biscuits                                          19
          Holiday Fruit Scones                                        20
          Lemon Tea Biscuits                                          20
          Pimiento Cheese Biscuits                                    20
          Prize Baking Powder Biscuits                                19
      _Rolls and Bread_                                            21-23
          Calumet Pocketbook Rolls                                    21
          Corn Bread                                                  23
          Crescent Rolls                                              22
          Crusty Corn Sticks                                          23
          Finger Rolls                                                22
          Fruit Bread                                                 23
          Knots                                                       22
          Muffin-rolls                                                22
          Novelty Rolls                                               22
          Poppy Seed Rolls                                            22
          Quick Cinnamon Rolls                                        22
          Quick Coffee Cake                                           23
          Sandwich Nut Bread                                          23
          Southern Spoon Bread                                        23
          Swedish Tea Rolls                                           21
          Whole Bran Brown Bread                                      22
      _Muffins_                                                    24-25
          Apricot Muffins                                             24
          Bacon Muffins                                               24
          Blueberry Muffins                                           25
          Bran Muffins                                                25
          Calumet Muffins                                             24
          Corn Muffins                                                25
          Cranberry Muffins                                           25
          Currant Muffins                                             24
          Date Muffins                                                24
          Fruited Bran Gems                                           25
          Grape-Nuts Orange Muffins                                   25
          Nut Muffins                                                 24
          Prune Muffins                                               24
          Raisin Spice Muffins                                        24
          Surprise Muffins                                            24
      _Griddle Cakes_                                                 27
          Bran Griddle Cakes                                          27
          Corn Griddle Cakes                                          27
          Grape-Nuts Flakes Griddle Cakes                             27
          Griddle Cakes                                               27
          Rolled Pancakes                                             27
      _Waffles_                                                    26-27
          Cheese Waffles                                              26
          Chocolate Waffles                                           27
          Ham Waffles                                                 26
          Orange Waffles                                              26
          Waffles                                                     26
  PUDDINGS, PIES, AND OTHER FAVORITES
      _Puddings_                                                   28-31
          Cherry Cobbler                                              31
          Chocolate Coronet Pudding                                   28
          Christmas Plum Pudding                                      31
          Delicious Cottage Pudding                                   29
          Plum Rolls                                                  29
          Steamed Bran Pudding                                        31
      _Pies_                                                       30-31
          Calumet Pie Crust                                           30
          Chocolate Cream Pie                                         30
          Deep-dish Apple Pie                                         31
          Lemon Meringue Pie                                          30
          Red Cherry Pie                                              30
      _Other Favorites_                                            28-29
          Chicken Pot Pie                                             29
          Doughnuts                                                   28
          Individual Strawberry Shortcakes                            29

    [Illustration: Back cover]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CALUMET BOOK OF OVEN TRIUMPHS! ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


