The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pursuit
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pursuit

Author: Andrew A. Caffrey

Release date: May 13, 2025 [eBook #76083]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: The Butterick Publishing Company, 1929

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PURSUIT ***





                                PURSUIT

                          By Andrew A. Caffrey

               A tale of the American “Balloon Strafers”


When headquarters separated Jack Langdon from his pursuit group and sent
him to fly two-seaters, headquarters came very close to breaking a stout
flying heart. For Langdon, there was nothing to do but pack and go;
anything in the way of protest would have netted him nothing, besides
being very bad taste. Nevertheless, between high dudgeon and low
spirits, the boy hovered and suffered for days.

Flying _chasse_--pursuit--was the holding of all that war could give.
But piloting a two-seater--any two-seater was just plain hell. You would
not ask an Oldfield or a De Palma to drive a ten ton truck, and expect
him to like it, would you? Nor would you detail Sande to ride a
mechanical nag. Well, Langdon was to air what these others are, or were,
to track and turf; and that, thoughtless headquarters should have known.
But this same headquarters--Air Service, S.O.S. Tours--was no respecter
of individuals. If the observation outfits were short of men, there was
only one place to get them--from pursuit.

Langdon, when the ax fell, was at Issoudun’s last instruction field--the
combat school--Field No. 8. Another day or two and he would have been
safe.

“Now, look here, Langdon,” the officer in charge of flying at No. 8 had
said, when the boy was called upon the carpet and assigned to report at
Romorantin for De Havilland training. “We don’t want you to go out of
this field tonight feeling rocky against us. We’re not discriminating.
Tours called for five. There were only five of you ready to shove off.
It’s tough; it’s rough; it’s rotten. You’ve put everything on the ball.
You’re an A-1 _chasse_ flyer, and the best hand with a machine gun we’ve
ever turned out. The game was made for you, and nobody hates worse than
we do to see you leaving pursuit.”

“That’s all right, Captain,” Langdon had said. “You’ve been white to me
here at No. 8; she’s a _bon_ school. But--and pin this in your hat--I’m
not quitting pursuit. They can send me to the two-place hacks, but they
can’t make me do two-place missions.

“I’m a pursuit man, and no matter where they sink me, I’ll still be a
pursuit flyer. They can anchor me to an observation balloon’s cable, or
put me on the business end of a shovel, but as long as I have life in
me, I’ll fight this war _a la chasse_--right on the other guy’s tail.”

Late that night Langdon and his four fellow travelers detrained at
Romorantin. Romo’, along with its many other things of air, was the
first European home of the American made De Havilland plane. Langdon had
only seen one of these big ships before--big to scout flyers. That was
when Lieutenant Rube Williamson had flown the first DH from Romo’ to
Field 8.

“Oh, these big crates are all right, I guess,” Rube had told the gang.
“But a DH is a DH, and can never be a _chasse_ machine, you know. No
matter how you figure, bunch, a ten ton truck is a ten ton truck and, if
the truth must be known, that’s how these DH babies handle--like heavy
duty trucks on old rubber. They’ve got lotsa power, but little pep; and
less of that old maneuverability stuff than an Otis elevator. But let me
tell you, cadets, when the nose of this hack gets away from you, it’d
shame an elevator with the cables cut. Whew! They’re planting them every
day at Romo’.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

At Romo’, Langdon and his mates reported for DH instruction.

“Are these DH’s bad?”

The instructor was fast on retort.

“Boy, I’ll say they’re bad! These here culls just ain’t got no
conscience a-tall, nohow. For my own part, I’m going to quit air for the
Tank Corps. As a rule, when these crocks hit the sod, nothing’s above
ground but the rudder, waving like a flag over a hole in the ice. I came
here with ten friends. Four of them are up there on the hill--boxed.”

“Ten friends?” Langdon mused, as though this had something to do with
the business at hand. “Nobody in the world has ten friends.”

“That’s how it looks to you,” the instructor answered. “Any guys that
are sent up here to fly DH’s sure have no friends! And that’s why you
won’t mind being bumped off ... Anyway, let’s see what you boys can do
with these arks. Who’s who here? Let’s get a look at your monikers. When
I call your name, step stiffly to the front, stand at rigid attention
and answer--‘Here, kind sir.’ Lieutenant John J. Langdon!”

“On the job, kind sir,” the new arrival answered. “And I’m a guy as
ain’t got no friends.”

“Langdon?” the instructor repeated. “I’ve heard of you,
Lieutenant--never mind the salute. Weren’t you the bird who flew Major
Greene from Mitchel Field clean to Hazelhurst, upside down, and told him
that you were trying to get a look at your landing gear--that you
thought you had blown a tire on the takeoff?”

“The same dizzy guy,” Langdon said. “And wasn’t it strange? I couldn’t
get a look at those wheels; and that was why I flew the major all the
way back to Mitchel in the same way, upside down. Till I’d tried it, you
couldn’t tell me that a pilot wouldn’t see the bottom of his plane by
turning the bottom up. Is it not all strange, kind sir?”

“It sure is,” the instructor agreed. “But lend an ear, Lieutenant. We
have a commanding officer here who likes to ride in DH’s. One of these
days I’ll manage to get you and him in the air in the same ship. Do you
begin to see light?”

“That’s one of my worst troubles, kind sir. My eyes take in too much
light. The docs have a fancy name for it. But, anyway, it causes me to
see--or think I see--fun in things that strike others as being drab. For
instance, after that flight at Mitchel, Major Greene said that it was
his first trip in the air.”

“And the records,” the instructor smiled, “prove that it was his last.
Now, ten years later, the record still stands.”

After one turn of the field with Langdon on the controls, the instructor
gave him an O.K. He simply said, as he stepped from the plane:

“You’re jake, Lieutenant, but if I were you, I wouldn’t land these DH’s
out of a loop like that. Hell, Langdon, life’s sweet, even at an
observation school. Come on now, go on living. Maybe you’ll get a
shipment back to _chasse_. Others have done it, and the war is young.
You know your air, and that’s no small item. But the good ones, Langdon,
are the ones we pack in large boxes. And the other kind, damn ’em, we
can’t get rid of. You know, there are observers here, Langdon, who just
won’t qualify. They’re afraid of the Front and won’t leave Romo’. And
just so long as their observation work is below grade, we can’t ship
them out. What’s the use? They wouldn’t be worth a damn to any
squadron....

“Now, just a minute. A mighty thought strikes me. Langdon, I’m going to
put some of these dumb johns behind you. Maybe you can show them their
objective. If you’ll fly ’em the way you just flew me, the Front will
look like an old ladies’ home to the most timid of these goldbricks. Oh,
just one more word before you take off. Don’t fly as close to other
planes as you flew to that one a little while ago. That was Colonel
Kingsley. He’s from Tours. Man, you were too near.”

“That was all right,” Langdon assured the instructor. “I wasn’t trying
to pull anything fast. I just wanted to learn something. You see, I’m
accustomed to flying rotary motors with propellers turning at about 1400
revs. Well, this Liberty was doing about 1700 revs per minute and I just
wanted to get a peek at that other bird’s instrument board. It was all
right; his was turning the same. But 1700 r.p.m. seemed mighty fast.”

“Hell!” the instructor said. “I hope your clock never stops, or you
might try to get a peek at some other pilot’s wrist watch. But go ahead,
take off. See you later ... We’re going to like each other, Langdon.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

With a full tank, good for four hours’ flight, the new DH pilot went
back into the sky. Off toward Vierzon, at sunset, he spotted something
that made his heart glad. There, with about twenty thousand feet under
them, was a Nieuport “27” patrol, from Field 8. He knew that they were
from No. 8 because, coming in close, all five Nieuports revealed ship
numbers with which he was familiar. All of them were students; not an
instructor’s ship was among the lot.

Langdon felt fine. He climbed on the front man’s tail, broke the
formation and tried to induce the bird to go “round and round”. The lead
man was not looking for combat with a DH. He went into a dive and waved
Langdon away. But the merry one followed. Then, with his power running
wild, the retreating Nieuport flyer burned out his rotary engine.
Langdon saw the propeller stop. Then he leveled off and started to climb
back to the rest of the flight. A man with a dead engine is no man at
all.

One of the remaining four, when Langdon closed down on their rear again,
deliberately killed his motor and went into a spin. The other three,
somewhat bewildered, remained to mill a bit. But when Langdon’s
propeller came near to biting chips out of one of their rudders, that
Nieuport also called it a day. Enough is enough. Langdon saw the machine
start down for a landing.

Jack Langdon had discovered something. What had started as fun, took on
the magnitude of worthwhile research. He had learned that a DH, rightly
flown, could combat--could go round and round--with a _chasse_ plane.

The remaining two Field No. 8 ships had followed their disabled mates to
earth. Jack Langdon hung around to make sure that five safe landings had
been made; then he laughed, sang a bit and looked about for new worlds
to conquer.

West of Bourges, he found a Farman “pusher” from the French school at
Châteauroux. It was drifting along at eight thousand feet. Langdon came
up from the rear and had his left wingtip nestled in close to the
Frenchman’s outriggers, before the Châteauroux flyer noticed that he was
not alone. Then a badly frightened face under a large crash helmet
stared, wild eyed, across that short space. Langdon’s heart skipped a
beat with the shock. The face under the helmet was a boy’s.

“You damn’ bully,” Jack Langdon said to himself. “Get t’hell gone from
here before you scare this game little frog to death.”

He throttled his power, dropped his right wing and slipped away from the
Farman. Then he turned back, headed into the last rays of the sun and
cut for Romo’. There was joy in his heart, and he was making himself all
kinds of fine promises.

These DH’s, he decided, were not the poorest things in the air, and if a
young fellow were to apply his best talents-- Well, chances were, he
could manage to make himself felt.

“Yes, sir,” he said, talking aloud. “I’ll talk with the riggers. See
what they think about washing some of the incidence out of these wings.
Bet with the outer wing bays washed flat, there’d be no drag and the old
crate would swing around on a dollar. And that will speed her up a lot,
too. No question at all. If we flatten these surfaces out, we’ll add
eight to ten miles per hour. What _can_ be done, is _going_ to be done,
or I’m a wet bird. In the meantime, unless they put the screws on me,
I’ll combat everything that flies in this neck of the tall timber.”

Early the next day, though, they did climb Langdon’s frame. They climbed
him twice. Once on account of the complaint that Field No. 8 sent
through from Issoudun; again because of a wail that came up from
Châteauroux.

“I don’t blame the French kid in the hayrack Farman,” Langdon told the
officer in charge of flying, upon whose carpet he was arraigned. “But
those dudes from No. 8 should hang their heads in shame. The idea of
refusing combat with a DH! Those five birds should be forced to stand a
court-martial, sir. Why not make this an issue, sir?”

“By hell, Lieutenant, there’s food for thought there! But look here,
Langdon--be careful not to climb any of these two-place Sopwiths that
you see fluttering around here; any Sops, Avros or Caudrons. They’re
always full of fat majors and lean colonels, to say nothing of a few
supernumerary generals of sundry ranks. And if you ride any of them, the
war ends for you. We have one cadet in the guard house now. He dared to
come in with a dead stick when a major was trying to take off.”

“Well, what the hell should he have done?” Langdon asked. “Stay up there
with a dead motor till the major decided to take off?”

“That was the cadet’s problem,” the officer in charge of flying stated.
“And he didn’t get the right answer. The major gave his own ship the gun
and crashed into the cadet’s plane. Don’t you work up any problems here,
Langdon, unless you can see the solution beforehand. A pilot in the
guardhouse is no flyer at all.”

“I’m immune, sir. You know how blacksmiths and guardhouse keepers laugh
at love, or something like that? Well, I’ve fallen in love with DH’s.
That’s strange, I know; but it’s a fact. Me and the DH’s are getting
together, and we’re going some place.”

“I’ll give you a push toward the Front, Langdon, as soon as I see a
chance. Now get into the air and pile up as many hours as you can.
That’s what counts. These forty and fifty hour pilots are not lasting
long on the Front.”

“I’ve had two hundred hours, sir, and I’m ripe for the bow. All my old
bunch are fighting the Battle of Paris right now, and here am I poling
DH’s for the everlasting glory of the S.O.S. The thing ain’t right, sir,
no matter how you figure.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

During the day he flew different missions with two of the instructor’s
worst goldbricking observers. Each time Langdon arrived over the
practice objective--Neung, Orleans, Chinon, Blois--he would yell back--

“Do you get it?”

“Too high,” the student observer would invariably sing out. And, as a
rule, the approach altitude would be above fifteen thousand feet. “Too
high, Lieutenant.”

“Hold everything! We’ll fix that all right,” Langdon would assure the
victim. Then he would put the rambling DH into a tight power spin and
cut down the altitude so fast that no rear seat observer would care to
be present a second time. Or, if he did not spin, he would execute a
vertical sideslip that, by rights, belonged to much smaller and trimmer
craft. At any rate, each man he took up finished his observation class
in one quick lesson. The unfortunate goldbrick would come back to Romo’,
pea green and dead eyed.

“Can he fly?” these boys who had liked Romo’ so well would say. “Can he!
Oh, hell, give me air.”

But no more air with Langdon. Within the week, he had every goldbrick
off the instructor’s hands.

“But I don’t want you to get too good, Langdon,” the instructor would
warn. “They’ll keep you right here for the duration if you do. Then
you’ll have to pull something raw to get moved. For instance, stop
rolling your wheels across the shop roofs. You think they don’t see it,
but the headquarters gang have been watching you. You know how they like
to be entertained. Don’t show ’em anything. But here’s good news:

“I’ve got you lined up for a mission to Paris. You’re going to lead a
ferrying group close to the big town and deliver ten DH’s for Front line
squadrons. No, you don’t get a smell of the Front. Your mission ends
when you deliver the ferry at Orly. But you’re going to get a chance to
_oo-la-la_, kid.”

“Strange, but that leaves me cold,” Langdon replied. “I don’t want to
fight that Guerre de Paree till after I’ve won the right to spread my
line on the boulevards. Then I’ll strut. And don’t think that I don’t
want to. Boy, I’m saving up for the biggest pair of chest wings that’s
ever been worn on a Yank blouse. And that’s some big. And I’ve got me a
swagger stick, too. It has a spark plug in the end of it, and a machine
gun cartridge on the tip. You see, I’m a regulation Yank. All set and
a-rarin’ to go--when the right time comes. Yes, sir, Paris is going to
sit up and rub a pair of bleary eyes. Yankee Doodle’s going to ride
right into town and on the make, too.

“But how about giving me a final _lâche_ and kicking one _bon pilote_
toward the Promised Land?”

“No can do right now, Langdon. But I’ll tell you what might be done. If
a call for DH men comes down the line while you’re up Orly way, I’ll get
a wire to you there and have your orders sent along. If you’re traveling
light, take your personal junk by air on the ferry trip.”

“I’ll do that,” Langdon said. “The other pair of socks won’t be any kind
of a load for a DH’s observation pit. When do I head this ferry?”

“Tomorrow. That is, if the new planes are all assembled by that time.
They’re all on the floor in final assembly now. In the meantime, be a
good guy, Langdon. Watch your step. And if you run across any Issoudun
Nieuports, Spads or Morane Saulniers--well, snub the whole gang. What’s
a bunch of _chasse_ pilots to a guy who can do his _chasse_ in a DH?
Stick to your class, kid.”

“Damn’ tootin’!” Langdon said, and went out to fly--and snub everything
on wings.

At 2 p.m, the next day, Langdon stood in the cockpit of the point DH of
a grounded V of ten such planes. The nine who were to follow him were,
to a man, of Langdon’s type, eager for anything, and anxious to get
under way on this cross country hop. Cross country flying, at that time,
rated high among the glories that went to make the romance of air. It
was all adventure. Impatiently, the waiting nine goosed their motors and
watched for the second when Langdon’s hand should fall. At 2:05, the
leader slid into his seat, cracked his throttle, lifted his tail and
took off. Two by two, in an ever mounting cloud of dust, the others took
up the slack, filled in on Langdon’s rear and roared into flight. A turn
of the field, and the shabby V formation went into the north. All ten
did not get to Orly that day. Langdon watched three of the boys make
safe landings with dead, or dying, motors, at Neuville, Etampes and
Juvisy.

“Guess that’s all right by me,” he mused, after he and the others had
circled about the unfortunate each time. “Those boys either had motor
trouble or they know chickens in these towns. If it’s motor trouble,
it’s common and unavoidable; and if it’s chicken, it’s class and _pour
d’honneur d’Air Service d’Ame-rique_. And either way, or both, I’m for
’em. Just three little jobs for Field Service; and Field Service must
have something to do.”

Through benefit of Field Service they were all at Orly next noon.

“I’m going to hold you boys here for a few days,” the commanding officer
said when they reported for return railroad transportation. “We expect
to have a flock of ships going back to Romo’ for repair. And you’re the
men to ferry them. Enjoy yourselves.

“How’re you boys fixed for francs?” And the commanding officer, who was
young himself once, smiled.

                   *       *       *       *       *

On the second day of their lay-over, orders for the Front came through
for Langdon and two of his ferry mates. A Roman holiday was held, and
the three borrowed scout planes to celebrate. Langdon flew his through
the _Arche de Triomphe_ at high noon, wearing a high hat. He got away
with it, and nothing much was said.

“But,” the Orly flying officer reminded him, “you’d have rotted in
Prison Camp No. 2 had things been messed up in the _Place de l’Arche de
Triomphe.”_

“Ain’t it the truth, sir?” Langdon had agreed. “Nowadays failure doesn’t
pay. Yes, sir, a guy’s crazy to slip up.”

“Tomorrow, Lieutenant Langdon, “the Orly official went on, “you three
transfers, with you in charge, will ferry three of these new DH’s up to
the Trente-Neuf squadron’s ’drome. You’ll get their location last thing
before taking off. It’s an American group in an American sector--a
sector all bought and paid for. Major John Mack’s in charge up there.
Boy, you’re in luck--drawing a C O. like Mack. He’s one of the gang and
actually flies. Pilots from the front seat too, and without a second
lieutenant hidden away on the rear controls. Give the major a hello for
me, Lieutenant. Get the numbers on those three ships and look ’em over.
If you want anything around here, ask for it--and see if you get it! Or
if you want anything, take it--and see if we care!”

The next day was fine. It was life’s rosiest for three willing Yanks.
Birds were singing, poppies blowing and the skies were high and clear.

“Follow me,” Langdon said.

The ferry up was without event; and the Trente-Neuf’s ’drome was where a
blind man could find it. Later, Langdon and his mates were to learn that
German airmen also located the place without much trouble.

“You boys,” Major Mack said, “can see the highway commissioner and take
out registration papers on those machines you ferried up. We’ve lost a
few men in the past week--flu, you know--and it won’t be many hours
before you’re out on your own. The Trente-Neuf welcomes you. It isn’t
much of a name, but the outfit’s top-notch. Also, remember it’s your
home; and a home’s what you make it--between drinks. And right now and
here--no drinking, boys, except at mess and between meals.

“Look around now. Get to know the mechanics. Treat ’em right--the
mechanics--and they’ll treat you right. Don’t ever forget to remember
that air battles are won on the ground. You know, they say a celebrity
is only a dub to his valet. That’s the way up here. A cocky pilot
finishes fast and quick on these strange airways. I know because I’ve
lost several pilots in battle who were never game enough to get out of
the weeds. Why, to get them, an enemy pilot would have to use telepathy.

“Don’t do anything I wouldn’t do, boys, and report for mess in clothes.
That’s all the orders we have here. If you salute me, I’ll credit you
with a gold star. If you don’t salute me, I’ll never hold it against
you. This old uniform of mine is a disgraceful affair and by all rights
does not rate a salaam. Go; come when you’re in trouble.”

The three saluted us though it were a pleasure, and went out.

“If the Trente-Neuf is like its C.O,” Langdon said to his flying mates,
“this dump’s going to be a home. Guess we can work here.”

For anybody looking for work, the place could supply the limit. Having
heard that the air branch was the eyes of the Army, the Artillery,
Infantry--and even the Medical Corps, through force of bad habit--were
incessantly asking for observations. They did not care much what was
observed, but they liked to keep the Air Service in hot water. These old
line branches know how easy it is to loaf when it rains, or the fog gets
too heavy; so they figure that, being the highest branch of the Service,
aviation should do its stuff while others sleep. And the young branch,
extending itself to the limit, made those observations; flew when flying
was out of the question, and sacrificed men when men were scarce.

                   *       *       *       *       *

That evening, by low candles in the Trente-Neuf’s mess, Langdon and his
two mates met the outfit. Except for one, it was easy to know. That one,
Lieutenant Charles Mudd, F.F.V., A.S., U.S.R., was hard for Langdon to
meet because he had met him before.

F.F.V. Mudd and Langdon had both been assigned to the 10th Aero Squadron
for shipment overseas. Together, at Mitchel Field, they had reported in
to the 10th’s old topkick, Sergeant Benton; and upon reporting, when the
10th’s C.O. was absent, the Old Man had had them sign the register.
Langdon had signed first, and in a self-conscious way.

“Put down your rank, Lieutenant,” Sergeant Dad Benton had said. “There’s
no misters in this man’s Army. Put down your ‘Lieutenant, First’, and
your ‘A.S., U.S.R’.”

Next, Lieutenant Mudd signed. But first he found a resting place for his
swagger stick, and deposited his gold tipped cigaret on the edge of
Dad’s blotter. And when that baby signed, he signed--and how!

“First Lieutenant Charles Surry Mudd, F.F.V., A.S., U.S.R.”

“What the hell’s all this ‘F.F.V.’ stuff?” the old sergeant quizzed.

“That, suh, is, First Families of Virginia,” Lieutenant Charles Surry
Mudd answered.

Of course, his tone of voice was the tone that should be used when a
lieutenant speaks to an enlisted man. And it went just about as far as
the talk of a lieutenant usually goes with an enlisted man. The old
sergeant, with a stroke of the broad pen, struck out the F.F.V.

“There are no F.F.V’s in this man’s Army, Lieutenant Mudd.”

Lieutenant Charles Surry Mudd stepped back. His pale face grew even
paler. The sensitive lips and chin quivered, and the flesh above his
knees prickled within their well tailored confines. His breath came
hard, his eyes flooded, then the proud youth fell to chewing his lower
lip. The Army, uncouth thing that it is, had taken him for another ride.

Finally, deciding against mixing with a lowly sergeant, Lieutenant Mudd
retrieved his swagger stick and cigaret, and strode to the door. He
hesitated upon the threshold long enough to say--

“I’ll report this, Sawgent.”

“Report and be damned,” the old topkick mused, and closed the register.

More than a quarter of a century in the service of Uncle Sam had placed
Sergeant Dad Benton in a position where lieutenants, and even higher
rankers, were of no more importance than the most lowly 10th Aero buck.
With the ever expanding bubble that was the war of T7, wise heads of
Dad’s caliber were only too few. Newly made captains, suddenly advanced
majors and dizzy colonels came hurriedly into the old man’s council to
ascertain just what gentlemen of their rank should do under this, that
and the other condition. And they got their answers.

“You’ll find the answer to that, sir,” the old man would say, after
twisting his long mustaches for maybe as much as ten seconds, “on page
so and so, paragraph this or that in your Blue Book.”

And how any man, even in twenty-seven years, could memorize--page and
paragraph--as large a volume as Army Regulations, is beyond the
understanding of one who could never remember which of two was the right
foot.

So you can see, First Lieutenant Charles Surry Mudd’s report, if made,
caused no ripple on the already troubled waters of Mitchel Field. And
Mudd’s report, very likely, was turned in because, in the several weeks
of his stay with the 10th, the lieutenant was hard to get along with. He
wanted salutes from the enlisted men. Enlisted men, though, seldom
salute those who fail to command their spontaneous respect; and Mudd was
out of luck.

Shortly after the 10th’s arrival upon an active field in France, a plane
crew sent Mudd into the air with an almost empty gasoline tank, two
flying-wire turnbuckles unsafetied and a landing gear wheel loosed and
ready to fall off. When the motor died at five thousand feet, Mudd came
down for a landing. When he hit the ground, the right wheel bounced
through his lower off-side wing and went places. The small pursuit
plane, a Nieuport 27, with one wheel missing, somersaulted three times,
by the count, and Mudd came up from the wreckage like an angry hen from
a messed up nest. Shades of Southern hospitality and gentility! What a
yell went up!

However, the 10th Aero was a good outfit. It was also a mighty useful
outfit and had an important top sergeant in its orderly room.

“The whole damn’ affair must have been just an accident,” Dad Benton
convinced the benzine board appointed to smell into Mudd’s rotten
charges. “Why, these 10th boys are worked to death. Sixty-odd pursuit
planes in the air for five periods a day. Of course now and then
something is going to go wrong.”

The benzine board made its report. Headquarters made a move. Mudd was
the pawn. And because the 10th gang ran with every other gang at
Issoudun’s many fields, headquarters made the move big enough to put
Mudd out of danger for all time. He, First Lieutenant Charles Surry
Mudd, F.F.V., was sent to observation, away from Issoudun.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Now, with the Trente-Neuf, Langdon and Mudd were in the same outfit once
again.

“How are they breaking, F.F.V?” Langdon asked.

Mudd gazed through Langdon and went to his place at table. A quiver of
anticipation went through the room. And that told Langdon that
Lieutenant Mudd had not changed one whit.

“You’ll remember, Lieutenant Langdon,” Mudd said, when he was seated,
“my Army salutation is Lieutenant Mudd.”

“The hell you tell!” Langdon smiled. “Where at is your F.F.V., Charles?”

Mudd gave his attention to the meal. The table tried hard to smother its
mirth, and Langdon explained--

“Lieutenant Mudd and I made our transport with the same outfit, attached
to the 10th Aero--”

“The swine!” Mudd snarled.

“The best damn’ air unit in France,” Langdon said. “That is, with the
exception of the Trente-Neuf.”

“That’s the spirit, Lieutenant Langdon!” Major Mack cheered from his end
of the long table. “The old outfit is always good, but the new outfit,
to be an outfit, must always be _the_ outfit ... stand, devils-- To the
Trente-Neuf!”

“This Trente-Neuf,” a man at Langdon’s right said, after the toast, “is
a jake outfit, Langdon. There’s only one thing wrong with it.”

He stopped talking and stared at Mudd.

“There was only one thing wrong with the 10th,” Langdon told the man,
“and it was the same thing. An outfit’s mistakes are its own, and the
unpardonable mistake is the mistake made when an outfit makes the
mistake of not rectifying its mistakes. Am I right?”

“No mistake,” the other agreed.

Next morning, Langdon went out on his first mission behind Mudd. That
is, because of seniority, F.F.V. was in the front plane of a three ship
flight. Now, this thing of following F.F.V. Mudd was not the worst
medicine on earth, and Langdon had no kick coming. Mudd was a flying
man, and that seems strange. None, no matter what his idea of manhood,
could ever deny Mudd his place in air, and for more than two months now,
he had been taking missions out and, what was more important, he was
bringing them back. Maybe that was why the Trente-Neuf had not taken
steps to clean up this one mistake.

Mudd was one of those conscientious flight leaders who gave flying
orders like a pedagogue and then expected every man to do his duty.
There was no fun to be found behind him. The objective was the
objective, and not fun. His unit took no long chances. If enemy planes
were above, Mudd toured all France on their four hour DH tanks, then
came back. Came back, got the pictures or observations, and went hell
bent for home. A pilot might just as well have been touring France with
the “Y”. And on more than one occasion, he had been told so; but not by
Major Mack. No matter what the major might have thought personally, he
stood firmly behind Mudd because of results shown. The business of an
observation squadron is observation. Let the pursuit groups do the
combat stuff.

This first Front line flight of Langdon’s was the quietest thing
imaginable. Not an enemy craft crossed their skies. He wondered where
these comebacks from the Front got all their stuff about dog fights,
painted circuses and German infested ceilings. And as he followed Mudd,
above territory that should have been bad, he recalled what Rube
Williamson had told them, back at Issoudun.

“Hun planes! Never saw a single Hun plane in two weeks’ flying. Maybe
they’re there for some, but they were not there for me.” And now they
were not there for Langdon.

At the end of the eastward mission, Mudd, with the observations on the
cuff, signaled for a turn and back home push. Then, for about ten
minutes, Langdon kept the other two planes close in where they belonged
and began to look about to see what he could see. They came above a road
that was jammed with the properties of Germany’s late summer try.
Without a great deal of thought, Langdon parted company, dropped down
from Mudd’s six thousand feet elevation and went to strafing the enemy
activities.

                   *       *       *       *       *

It was fun. It was war. It was more like it. He turned to his
observer--a Lieutenant Akeley--and winked. Akeley stood up on his stool,
bent over Langdon’s shoulder, and yelled:

“Go back and give ’em hell! When you come in above that little burg
where they were eating--where all the smoke was--sideslip and let me get
a crack at ’em with my gun. Hop to it!”

Langdon looked for his two companion planes. Mudd and the other had gone
ahead. For a moment he might have hesitated. This thing of pulling a
private strafe while detailed on a mission would not be considered
exactly good. But being a strong youth, Langdon weakened. He flew a turn
and went back along the German supply road.

Where he found the field kitchens smoking, Langdon climbed to about five
hundred feet. From that altitude, with the nose of his plane high, he
slipped right and gave Akeley his chance with the rear gun. At the same
time, watching his slip, he also watched Akeley and cheered the gunner
above the roar of slipping struts and wires. At a hundred feet or less,
he kicked out of the slip, redressed his ship, whaled full motor to the
craft and flew across the concentration of troops--and through a hail of
rifle fire ... Akeley went back to the Trente-Neuf a corpse in Langdon’s
rear pit.

At sunset, Jack Langdon sat upon his heels before a hangar, smoked, and
tried to figure out the whole thing. Within the hangar at his back,
under a tarpaulin, was the quiet Akeley. A short distance away, where
the sun’s light was yet available, Trente-Neuf mechanics worked at
patching thirty-seven holes in Langdon’s DH. The mechanics talked and
wondered why that new bird, Langdon, did not get bumped too.

Within his quarters, till the evening’s dusk gave way to dark,
Lieutenant Mudd, martinet at heart, worked assiduously upon his report.
He missed supper in its completion; then with the several pages in hand,
the conscientious one straightened his blouse, put a rag to his boots,
strapped on his Sam Browne and went toward Major Mack’s room. On the
way, Lieutenant Charles Surry Mudd detoured only once, and this detour
sent him past the enlisted men’s quarters where the loungers were forced
to snap into it and deliver the salute.

“Too bad, Lieutenant Mudd,” Mack said as he received the report. “Hell,
I liked Akeley. We’ll miss him. The whole Trente-Neuf will miss his
mandolin of evenings.”

“It was murder!” Mudd snarled. “This man Langdon-- It was murder, sir!”

“But Sergeant Rictor--” the armorer of the Trente-Neuf--“reported that
Bob had fired several hundred rounds. His gun was still warm when
Lieutenant Langdon returned,” Major Mack protested. “And you know Bob
Akeley, Lieutenant. If he had a chance to go out like that, in action,
why, the boy was at a feast with a fork in each hand.”

This glorification of personal thrill was not for Mudd. Wordless, white
and a-tremble, he weaved on the threshold and tried again and again for
words. In the end, he said:

“You have my full report, sir. A flight leader must have unbending
discipline, sir.”

Major Mack walked toward the window. Then, because there was nothing
else he could do, he walked back.

“Lieutenant Mudd,” he said. “Send Lieutenant Langdon to me.”

Major Mack was still pacing when Langdon knocked, came in and reported.
The Major eyed the pilot and paced once more to the east window, then he
paced back and eyed Langdon once more.

“What have you got to say, Lieutenant?” the superior finally asked.

“Not a word, sir.” Langdon fought hard to swallow his grief. “I know
I’ve pulled a star boner. Guess I’ve had my war--been hired, fed and
fired all in a day, sir.”

“Whose idea was it, Langdon?”

“Mine, sir. As yet, I can’t always remember that I have another man
behind me. Observers weren’t in my first schooling, sir.”

“Even if the thing were excusable, Lieutenant, you should have asked
Akeley what he thought of the plan.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Maybe you did.”

“No, sir. I just got the idea that I could do damage on that road, so I
shoved down the nose and went. Then we got together, Akeley and I. He
said--“‘Go back and give ’em hell!’ And we went.”

“I thought that was it!” Major Mack smiled. “Langdon, ever since Bob
Akeley came to this squadron, at least twice a day he’s been in here
trying to talk me into turning the squadron to pursuit. Of course we
can’t sanction such doings, Langdon. And for my own part, I wouldn’t
pull such a strafe. No, I’m a little too old and slow on the controls.
You see, I like to have a little more space between my wheels and the
ground. But I’m not so old as to be unable to appreciate the finesse of
the thing and, Lieutenant, if we could roll back time, and circumstance
would place Langdon in Mack’s place, and Mack in Langdon’s-- Well, that
road would have been strafed today. Maybe not as good, but after a
fashion at least.

                   *       *       *       *       *

“Now, Lieutenant, I’m neither going to call out a firing squad nor mark
you on the ground. Between you and me, aviation, as the eyes of
artillery, doesn’t carry even the weight of a good joke. I’m an old
artillerist myself, Langdon, and I know. So if we can wage any kind of a
war of our own, I’m not going to stand in the way of progress. You
understand, Langdon, I am not authorizing, sanctioning or legalizing
future side trips; but in your own right, you are in command of one ship
while off the ground. Orders, the best orders ever made, were only made
to be broken. And so long as they are broken without going into the red,
when it’s all over, there’s no kick coming. In other and fewer words--be
sure you’re right, then go ahead and don’t slip up. The quick are always
right in war, Langdon. But it is far better that the quick be dead than
be wrong.

“Now, there’s one observer in the Trente-Neuf with whom I want you to
become well acquainted. It is Lieutenant Samter. Samter, during such
times as Bob Akeley wasn’t pestering me, has spent much wind trying to
show me where and how this outfit might run up a big record in combat
victories. He’s of the opinion that an observer should only observe when
there’s no fighting to be done. And he can do things with that rear
machine gun, Langdon. Sergeant Rictor tells me that Samter has shown him
more trick stuff than he’s ever seen before. And Sergeant Rictor has
been an armorer for upward of fifteen years. If you and Samter find that
you have much in common, come to me and we’ll talk it over. No reason at
all why he shouldn’t hold down your rear stool on all flights . . .
English fags, they are. Take a couple with you, Lieutenant.”

Late into that night, Langdon and Samter talked. And they discovered
that they had just about everything in common, including a rotten
opinion of one Charles Surry Mudd, F.F.V. Lieutenant Samter had been
riding behind Mudd a great deal of late, and the war had lost its
flavor.

“I’d rather hold on to the rear saddle of a motorbike with an enlisted
stiff chewing hard on the handlebars,” he told Langdon. “All of the
white haired boy’s good flying is wasted. And I’ll say old F.F.V. can
pilot. But what’s the use of being behind him--just going the route,
delivering the milk and coming home? There’s more thrill working at
kitchen police where you have the ever present danger of cutting your
finger while paring spuds, eh?”

“Sure,” Langdon agreed. “The C O. gave me these cigs. They’re English.
Ain’t they rotten, what?”

“I wouldn’t walk a mile,” Samter answered, “unless it was to get away
from such smokes.”

The next day it rained and the new team worked ship. Langdon and the
Trente-Neuf’s head rigger washed out the outer bays of all four wings.
Also they took out one of each pair of outside flying wires.

“They don’t need all these wires,” the rigger agreed. “Each one of these
cables has a breaking strength of more than two thousand pounds. When
would you ever get such a load on a wing? Same way with the landing
gear. You know how to set these babies down, Lieutenant. I watched you
when you brought Akeley in yesterday. You wouldn’t have broken an egg,
so we’ll pull out all the extras and that will help to speed the crate
up too.

“We’ll do some streamlining on her, too. I’m glad to get a chance to see
what can be done about pepping up a DH. I always argued that something
could be done. They ain’t such dead culls. They’ll maneuver if you’ll
help ’em.”

Samter and Rictor put hour after hour on the two guns. That DH had
surely fallen into good hands. Toward the end of day they flushed the
water radiator, drained the old and refilled with new motor oil, cleaned
ignition heads, and the ship was set. Then they prayed for a morrow full
of flying weather.

Next morning, September the twenty-third, Langdon and Samter mooched
their way into a real melee above the road from La Harazee, where the
77th Division was convoying guns through to the Bois des Hautes Batis.
That fight, by rights, belonged to the pursuit gang. It was no place for
a DH. But when Langdon and Samter pulled out, they had done damage
enough to justify a bid for confirmation on two enemy planes. Their ship
had been hit seven times, and Samter once. But his was just a minor rap,
only a little job for the squadron doctor.

                   *       *       *       *       *

On the day following, the two wild men accounted for three of eight
German observation balloons that had hung above the main road through
the Vesle. And Langdon and Samter were beginning their traditional climb
toward lasting air fame.

On October the thirteenth, divisional headquarters called for a rock
bound verification on all observations covering that tough stretch of
road between Grand Pre and St. Juvin. It had been a hard line to
bend--that German stronghold along the northern bank of the Aire: but
now, one way or the other, it was not only going to be bent, but
broken--and completely.

Mudd, with four following ships, and covered from above by twelve
pursuit planes, went out to do the job. They were nearly above Grand Pre
before hell broke loose; and they were past St. Juvin and making a
turnabout before the first Hun ship broke the high defense and took a DH
off the Trente-Neuf’s rear.

With his remaining three, stiff lipped and obstinate, Mudd flew his turn
and went down the St. Juvin-Grand Pre line for a return whirl. Then a
second DH fell, and Langdon broke out with combat, quit formation, and
won another Boche ship from the milling group.

Lieutenant Charles Surry Mudd worked long and late upon another report.
Then Major Mack paced late and long into the night and tried hard to be
a good fellow and, at the same time, a good soldier. Which is a thing
well nigh impossible. In the end, he called all six who had returned.
All of Mudd’s five companions, including Mudd’s own observer, swore by
all that might have been holy that Langdon, in quitting formation and
taking on combat, had only done so to cover the successful retreat of
the camera planes. And Charles Surry, F.F.V., went into the night
talking to himself and kicking stones. That war was a war for him.

Langdon and Samter, listening to the guns that were pouring it into
Grand Pre and the road to the east, waited impatiently for the morrow.

“This damn’ swagger stick dude of a muddy Mudd!” Samter said from his
shakedown. “If the simple minded, simpering juvenile does anything more
to tear down our meat house, Jack, I’ll work him over with a prop wrench
on my own time. Reports for the major! He’ll make one more report to the
Old Man and I’ll land on him so hard that his brains, if any, will
detonate and blow some he-man color into his insipid map.

“F.F.V.--Far From Vodka, Finest Fish Vender, Faint Falsetto Voice--I’ll
F.F.V. the white haired, white livered rat!”

“Check--a madman,” Langdon laughed. “Roll over, Samter, and tear off
some sleep. Charles F.F.V. is the least of our many worries. And he’s a
good enough gun. One Wing. The only thing is, you and I are fighting a
different war. On the level, Mudd’s scrap is gamer than ours. His is an
impersonal _guerre;_ and he doesn’t even keep a diary.”

“A good drunk is what Mudd needs,” Samter decided. “A trip to town, a
big town, a good drunk and--”

“That’s a two or three motored ship, and she’s mighty close,” Langdon
said, as they caught the throb and pump of a night flyer. “Wish we were
doing night missions, too.”

“Ambitious guy,” Samter said to his inflated pillow. “When would Mudd
find time to write lengthy reports?”

“It really doesn’t make much difference,” Langdon said to his blanket,
“because nobody ever reads them anyway.”

During the following days, as the line pushed up through Champigneulle,
St. Georges, Alliepont and on to Verpel, the two wild men, for the
greater part, went it alone. Major Mack heard Mudd’s bleat often, but
the major was too busy to bother himself with such minor distractions.
This war was what men like Mack had lived a life for. Mudd could not be
expected to sec this; and Mack made no effort toward proselyting F.F.V’s
conversion to the cause of Langdon, Samter--and, if the truth must be
known, Mack.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The Major was on the wing a great deal during those busy days. With his
own eyes, he saw Langdon knock an enemy craft out of the skies behind
Buzancy, and follow a second out of sight toward Stonne and the Meuse.

“Yes, sir,” Major Mack told Mudd upon his return to the ’drome. “That
heller of a Langdon went down on a Fokker. And when the Hun fell into a
spin, after Langdon’s first burst, the kid sideslipped right with him
and Samter poured his load from the rear gun. They had the poor devil
burning through the last two thousand feet. The second plane they picked
on was doing observations near Harricourt.”

“But it’s not consistent, sir!” Lieutenant Mudd insisted.

“But hell, Lieutenant,” Mack said, “it is strictly American, you know.
And when we take this out of the Yank youth, we’re eternally lost.”

So Major Mack continued to make allowances for one of his planes which
had no more right in an observation outfit, than has a free balloon in a
pursuit squadron.

On the third of November Langdon got a German ship which was busily
strafing roads near Authe; and on the fourth he accounted for a like
worker near Oches.

“The damn’ gorillas--strafing our troops!” he said to Samter, as they
regassed their ship at ten o’clock that morning.

Then, reserviced, the two went directly into the air and strafed roads
as far back as La Neuville and Raucourt.

In his own way, Mudd was making history through the long hours of those
crowded days. Time and again, even with his overhead defense shot to
pieces, he made requested observations along the Meuse. He located
ambushes near La Bessage and Le Vivier and dropped warning notes to the
infantry. On a hill above a graveyard in Raucourt, there was a machine
gun and anti-aircraft nest. Mudd wiped it out. Twice in four days he
brought dead observers home in his rear pit. And on one of those trips
he had landed his burning plane on the long hillside slope before
Champigneulle.

“But why the hell doesn’t he stay and fight?” Samter argued. “Every slug
hole in his linen is frayed to the front. Dead observers are of no use
to anybody. They’re not worth a dollar a thousand ... Langdon, if I ever
see a slug coming into the rear of your crate, I’ll spray you with my
own gun just to teach you a lesson.”

“And I’ll pile you up surer’n hell if you do!” Langdon promised.

There was no freebooting on the seventh. Artillery and infantry wanted
to learn all there was to be known of the bridges on, and the terrain
adjacent, the Meuse. Headquarters told the Trente-Neuf to “go get it”.
And, behind Mudd, Langdon and four other pilots--three of them
green--took off.

At Villers Devant Mouzon, a detachment of engineers were doing their
best to throw a path across the Meuse. The German machine gun nests and
snipers were making of the job a nasty detail, till Mudd’s flight put an
end to those ambushes.

At Remilly, a like detachment was having a still harder time. And the
covering aerial defense was no enviable task. Before the first four hour
patrol had ended, two of Mudd’s new men had limped back to the ’drome
with motor trouble, and one had been driven down a few kilometers east
of the river by an enemy pursuit plane. Mudd and Langdon, close at hand,
had seen that Trente-Neuf pilot burn his ship before he was taken
prisoner by ground troops. Then, still behind the lines, the two had
turned back toward the river.

There was a heavy sky that day, November 7, and anything in the way of
altitude had been out of the question. But now, here and there, the blue
was breaking through and showing a higher ceiling. Suddenly, out of this
clearer sky, a bi-motored enemy craft crossed their line of flight.
Langdon jumped it. After a few seconds of thought, outclassed by the
faster Yank, the enemy ship turned east. And the eager Langdon hung on.
Mudd, after a moment, followed. Samter, as Langdon came down on the big
ship’s tail again, thumped Langdon on the back and pointed to Mudd.

“Old F.F.V. himself,” Samter yelled. “He’s going to pile on with us. Now
there _will_ be a war!”

But war and a personal battle were not Mudd’s concerns. Coming east from
the Meuse, he had spotted two Hun pursuit planes that had seen Langdon
and the bomber.

Mudd was pretty well off to the south, and the pair of single-seater
Germans came down on Langdon before he could work into position. With
the first burst of lead, Samter crumpled, shot through both legs. He
fought to stay, clinging tenaciously to his machine gun mount. He pulled
a belt from his flying suit, passed it through and around the gun scarf
and worked his way to a standing position. Langdon had dived and
slipped; now he zoomed and flew a wing-over. They came back under the
pursuing planes--and Samter got one as they went by.

In a moment Langdon was crowding down on the bomber and single pursuit
ship again. And just when he came into position, his gun jammed. The
German seemed to realize his predicament; they passed the laugh from
ship to ship. That was a mistake on their part; it made Langdon angry.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The speed of the chase was the speed of the big ship out front. The
combat plane easily maintained a position between the pursuing DH and
the huge German, thus further increasing Langdon’s rage.

For a few minutes, as they flew in line, the American thought hard. Then
he gained a little altitude, and with it under him, he threw full power
to his motor, went into a long dive and closed the distance between him
and the pursuit plane. Before the German knew what was up, Langdon had
hooked his left lower wingtip into the right side of the lighter craft.
The latter’s single interwing N-strut came out, and half his lower wing
went with it. That pilot was finished with the war.

But Langdon’s ship could not go through such a high speed collision
without damage. He had counted on losing a few feet of wingtip. If only
that much were wiped off, a pilot could carry the difference of lateral
stability by using full rudder on the opposite side from the wing so
damaged. Also the use of aileron would help offset the loss of wing
lift. But he had lost more than was good for the wing balance of any
plane. He was in a bad situation.

They had crashed at five thousand feet. Fighting to hold up the clipped
lower left wing, he flew a flat turn to the right, covered a great deal
of space and started back for the Meuse. But, even with full right
rudder and his control stick clear to the side, he was losing altitude.
He had to lose altitude in order to remain at all level. Two or three
times, in the following five minutes, he came very close to falling into
a spin. Each time, he dived, gained high speed and fought the craft out
of its wing drag.

Here and there along the Chiers River, the anti-aircraft outfits were
sending up feelers for Langdon. Even the machinegun crews were putting
steel through his ship as he crossed the highest spots.

Finally he had Mairy just ahead and off to the right. It looked as
though he would come to earth and pile up some place between the town
and the Meuse; and as yet, the east bank of the river was in enemy
hands. The war was just about over for two willing young men and....

Langdon had been watching Mairy, to his right. All of a sudden the
weight came off his weak left side. He stared, full of bewilderment, for
Mudd’s right wings were tucked under his damaged panels and carrying the
load. That, for Langdon and Samter, was the grandest moment of life.

Both motors now roared full on. They lost no more altitude and the river
became more than just a possibility.

Samter, still hanging on his belt, shook his head and fainted. Langdon
made sure that it was Lieutenant Charles F.F.V., shook his head and
tended strictly to his flying. The Meuse came closer, and Archie came up
oftener. The war was as good as over for the enemy, but they still had a
goodly amount of ammunition on hand and they were throwing most of it
toward Langdon and Mudd. But that did not worry Langdon now. The river
was only a matter of short kilometers. Soon F.F.V. would be working on
his report.

“And he’s got me with my suspenders cut,” Langdon found time to reflect.
“Hell, who ever heard of such a dumb thing as an intentional collision
on the wing! Collisions are strictly for high rankers and to be made
only upon takeoff and landing.

“They’ll ground me for this sure. I might even draw a bobtail. And old
kid Charlie Mudd....”

As suddenly as he had arrived, Mudd left. A rifle shot from the east
bank of the Meuse had found him. His plane, with dead hands and feet on
the controls, spun into the river.

                   *       *       *       *       *

From the dressing station where Langdon sat, richly swathed in iodine
soaked wrappings, he could watch the engineers fishing for a pilot and
observer where the rudder of a plane waved above the surface of the
Meuse. On a cot, where a few medical men had been busy for an hour,
Samter was showing the first signs of returning consciousness. Now and
then the observer had said, in delirium:

“F.F.V. Old F.F.V., himself.”

“We used to have one of them in this corps,” a medical private said. “He
was from Norfolk, I think. That F.F.V. stuff stands for First Families
of Virginia.”

“Right you are,” Langdon mused, from where he sat.

“Wrong as hell,” Samter mused. “It stands for Fell Flying Valiantly.”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the April 15, 1929 issue
of _Adventure_ magazine.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PURSUIT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


