The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Silver Caves: A Mining Story
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Silver Caves: A Mining Story

Author: Ernest Ingersoll

Release date: June 17, 2018 [eBook #57345]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILVER CAVES: A MINING STORY ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)










                             SILVER CAVES.




            [Illustration: THE IMPASSABLE CHASM (Page 91).

                     Silver Caves, Frontispiece.]




                           THE SILVER CAVES

                           _A MINING STORY_

                                  BY
                           ERNEST INGERSOLL

                               NEW YORK
                         DODD, MEAD & COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS

                              COPYRIGHT,

                                 1890,

                       By DODD, MEAD & COMPANY.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

    I. THE “LAST CHANCE,”                                              1

   II. THE FURNISHING OF A NEW HOME,                                  11

  III. A DISCOURAGING EXPLORATION,                                    19

   IV. MAX HAS AN IDEA,                                               31

    V. OLD BOB TAKES A PARTNER,                                       47

   VI. PROGRESS IN MINING,                                            55

  VII. A DIME NOVEL HERO,                                             63

 VIII. HOW LEN FOOLED THE PROFESSOR,                                  79

   IX. SANDY MCKINNON’S EAVESDROPPING,                                91

    X. FACING THE NEW SITUATION,                                     101

   XI. PREPARATIONS FOR WAR,                                         111

  XII. THE ENEMY APPEARS,                                            127

 XIII. A FLAG OF TRUCE,                                              139

  XIV. SOME DANGEROUS TARGET PRACTICE,                               151

   XV. OLD BOB TAKES A THRASHING,                                    167

  XVI. THE FIGHT AT THE FORD,                                        177

 XVII. THE CAPITALIST EXAMINES THE MINE,                             193

XVIII. SUCCESS ACHIEVED,                                             209




THE “LAST CHANCE.”




THE SILVER CAVES.




CHAPTER I.

THE “LAST CHANCE.”


Matters had come to a crisis with Len and Max, when Sandy McKinnon
arrived at the camp, with a letter of introduction from a friend in
Denver.

These two young men had not been at all fortunate, so far, and, like the
rest of the community, were sorely discouraged. They had wavered for
some days between deserting the place and another alternative, the
nature of which they kept to themselves, for they knew that they might
not only be laughed at, but perhaps prevented from carrying out their
plan, were it announced.

The camp I refer to is now a flourishing town, the center of many small
side-villages on the northern slope of Sierra San Juan; but twenty-five
years ago, when my story occurred, it was at the point of collapse, and
perhaps would never have recovered had not what I am about to relate
occurred; and you must bear with me while I explain the circumstances
that led up to its revival.

The beginnings of the town had been made half a dozen miles higher up
Panther Creek, almost at its source, in fact; but after digging
numberless prospect-holes and driving three fairly long tunnels,
everybody voted that locality a failure, and came down to the present
town-site where paying mines had since been worked for two or three
years.

The two young men had become the owners, some time before, of one of
these early tunnels (that one nearest the source of the Creek), through
taking it as payment of a joint debt because nothing better was to be
had. It was called the _Last Chance_, and the boys accepted the name as
significant, and proposed to risk what means they had left in giving
the mine a new trial.

About 200 feet down stream was a second tunnel, the _Aurora_, owned by
two men who were friendly to our heroes, one of whom, named Bowen, was
famous for his reckless yet good-natured exploits of bravado.

Some distance still farther down the cañon, on the same side (the
right-hand wall of the narrow gulch, looking down stream), was the third
old tunnel, the _Cardinal_. This last was the property of a thorough
scallawag, despised and avoided by all respectable citizens, and only
kept from being a positive criminal by his natural cowardice. The enmity
of this man, whose real name was lost in the nick-names “Old Bob” and
“Squint-eye,” had been incurred by the boys through their exposing a
fraud by which he had once proposed to sell to a stranger named
Anderson, as a productive mine, this very property--the Last
Chance--although he neither owned it nor believed it worth anything.

It was not strange, therefore, that, while trying to avoid general
curiosity, they were especially anxious to keep their intentions secret
from Old Bob.

And just at this juncture came Mr. Alexander McKinnon, straight from
Glasgow, and hoping to do something at the camp which might teach him
how silver mining should be carried on, and perhaps open a way to make
his fortune. Placing all the chances of failure, and their poverty,
fairly before him, they offered to let him into their new partnership,
to be called Brehm, Bushwick & Co., on very liberal terms, and he
accepted.

So they fitted him out with the kind of clothing, tools, and general
outfit which were needful, purchased enough provisions to last a
fortnight, after which they could come to town for more, and to-morrow
the three were to start bright and early to their new home and the Last
Chance.

When the rising sun of the next morning had begun to tinge the
snow-peaks with rose-color, but hours before his beams could scale the
mountain wall of this deep valley and flood it with warmth and light,
our hopeful adventurers were awake and busy with breakfast.

Sandy showed himself a much more skillful cook than either of his
American friends, and was warmly applauded.

“There’s a difference between fend and fare weell,” he remarked,
sententiously, when they told him of some of their troubles in this
matter; “by which I mean,” he added, as he saw their puzzled faces,
“that shifting for a meal is bad policy beside knowing how to have
plenty of good food and how to prepare it. It’s poor economy, I’m
thinkin’, to half-starve one’s self. ‘Lang fasting hains’--that’s
_saves_, ye ken--‘nae bread.’”

McKinnon dropped more and more into broad Scotch as he became better
acquainted, and his fund of old saws, into each of which whole chapters
of worldly experience had been boiled down, were a constant source of
enjoyment to his partners.

Breakfast out of the way in a hurry, the three _burros_ (Mexican
donkeys) hired to carry their luggage were brought around, the little
sawbuck saddles placed upon their backs, and cinched to them with a
tightness that made them groan and grunt lustily; then the load of each
was placed between the forks, or hung to the four horns of the saddle,
surmounted by the long-handled tools, and securely lashed on by ropes
and thongs of twisted rawhide, which never break or stretch, and rarely
get loose from the “squaw-hitch.”

The whole baggage made about six fair burro-loads, and these were to be
carried in two trips. It was not necessary for them to burden themselves
with a great amount of furniture or provisions, since the former could
be left locked up in town, and the provisions could be replenished when
they ran short. Besides, the lads expected to catch an abundance of
trout and perhaps shoot an occasional deer or mountain sheep, an
expectation in which they would not have been disappointed had the
extraordinary affair which happened later left time for hunting and
fishing.

The trail was a steep and little-used pathway up the mountain, through
dense woods, where it straggled about to avoid rocks and fallen logs. It
was built up, shelf-fashion, around projecting knobs, crossed fierce
torrents upon narrow bridges, and was full of sharp turns, miry holes,
and bad going of every description. Here and there an opening in the
forest gave a magnificent view, far out over the foot-hills, for the
elevation, toward the head of the creek, was more than four thousand
feet above the valleys and fully ten thousand feet above the sea.

Beyond the woods the party found itself on the brink of a deep gorge, at
the bottom of which Panther Creek tore down in a series of cascades. The
torrent ran four or five hundred feet below, and above them the
mountains rose to invisible heights. Along this cliff-face the narrow
trail had been carried irregularly and often very dangerously, but the
hardy little beasts picked their way cautiously up and down, and never
sank too deep in a bog or got too far over the edge of a precipice.

Finally the trail reached the edge of the creek, near its head, and here
was a ford, beyond which it led through the willows and over the
Aurora’s dump to the Last Chance, whose cabin, perched on a bench, or
terrace, was gained by a stiff climb up a zigzag in the face of the
rocky bluff.

The burros were turned loose in a small meadow above the cabin, and
after a hearty supper the tired boys quickly made beds of boughs and
blankets, and slept as their long tramp entitled them to do.




FURNISHING A NEW HOME.




CHAPTER II.

THE FURNISHING OF A NEW HOME.


It was understood, without discussion, that Max should take the
superintendence of all mining operations, that Len should be the buyer
and business man of the firm generally, and that Sandy should look after
the housekeeping. Of course, they would all work together, but these
were the specialties of each partner.

“Now who is to go back after the rest of our possessions,” demanded
Lennox, as they gathered at breakfast on the morning following their
arrival. “I don’t reckon there’s any use of two going.”

“No--I’d as lief do it,” Max remarked. “I can re-cinch and manage the
jacks rather better than the rest of you, I imagine.”

“You certainly have my permission,” remarked Lennox, with a smile.

“An’ I’m no hinderin’ ye, as the brig said to the burn,” Sandy echoed.
“The young man frae Virginia can stay an’ help me get the hoose in
trim.”

So the donkeys were brought up and saddled, Max marched away, and the
other lads turned to their house-cleaning.

The former owners of the property had built a pretty good log cabin at
the head of the dump, close to the mouth of the tunnel, the door and
front window of which faced down the gulch and straight at the Aurora’s
dump. There was a rude fireplace in which had been left a dilapidated
cooking stove. The first task was the straightening up of this, and
putting it into condition for use, which Len soon accomplished.

At the farther end of the cabin a series of bunks had been built out of
poles. These were now broken and unwholesome, so they were pulled to
pieces, the loose bark and other dirt cleared away from the logs and
floor behind them, and new ones were put up, a layer of slender,
elastic poles making an excellent bed-bottom in each bunk; and spruce
boughs luxurious mattresses upon which to spread the buffalo robes and
blankets.

This and some other tidying had taken all day, but when Max came in
about sundown, the kettle was singing and dancing on the old stove, that
leaked fire-light, if not fire, from a dozen cracks, and all three were
well satisfied with themselves and their snug home; while the boy, who
came with Max to drive the donkeys back, was loud in his praises, and
went away convinced that no body on the Creek could make flapjacks equal
to Sandy McKinnon.

That evening, as they sat in the doorway, wedging handles into the picks
and preparing the little mine lamps, Max suddenly exclaimed:

“Oh, I forgot to tell you! While I was packing the last burro,
Squint-eyed Bob came moseying around and wanted to know what I was up to
and where I was going, and so on--evidently prying ’round for
information. I gave him short answers, but he wasn’t satisfied, and
finally boned me outright to know if we weren’t going up to Jim Bowen’s
mine on Panther Creek. That roused my dander. ‘Hang it, Bob,’ I
retorted, ‘what business is it of yours, where I’m going, or what I am
doing? May be I’m going up Panther Creek and may be I’m not--I don’t see
what odds it makes to you!’ He saw I was mad and backed off, but he
blurted out one thing before he left, that I don’t quite savvy.”

“What was that?”

“I can’t give his words exactly, but it was to the effect that ‘in this
country, when a man jumped another man’s claim he was dogon likely to
hear from it pretty soon, and that what was left of him wasn’t worth any
funeral expenses.’ Then he yelled something about ‘fixing me,’ and went
off. Now what can he do?”

“Oh, nothing at all,” said Len. “It’s all bluster. He was trying to
bluff you.”

“That may be, but he means to make mischief if he can, and we must look
out for him. However, I fancy we’re safe till morning, and I’m going to
sleep. Good-night.”

“As for Jim Bowen,” Len answered, “he told me himself, when he was here
last, that if I ever wanted to do anything in or about the Aurora, I was
welcome to do what I could, for he never should try to develop it.”




A DISCOURAGING EXPLORATION.




CHAPTER III.

A DISCOURAGING EXPLORATION.


It was with eager interest that the young partners shouldered their
picks, lighted their lamps, and prepared to begin work on the second day
after their arrival. And yet it was with no little trepidation--at any
rate in the minds of the two leaders in the enterprise; for Max and Len
well knew that they were relying wholly upon a theory, and were going
against not only the experience of the early prospectors and miners
here, but against the judgment of the whole population of the district,
among which were many miners of practical knowledge. As for Sandy--a
stranger to these facts--he was simply full of the buoyancy which hope
and novelty lends to every new movement in the line of one’s ambition.

If there is anything more inspiriting than mining for the precious
metals, the world has not yet found it. It is the secret charm of how
many a fairy tale! By it how many a fable can be practically
interpreted! Just before you, perhaps right under the first clod, or
hidden in the dark recesses of this very crevice out of which springs
the service-bush whose sugary berries you are pausing to taste, lies
waiting the all-powerful gold.

But just here halt with me a moment, while I sketch the position and
outward appearance of this mine. The entrance of the tunnel had been
made in a pretty nearly vertical face of rock, at the edge of the little
bench or terrace upon which the cabin stood, and the rock which had been
excavated had been brought out by cars running upon a rude wooden
tramway, and pitched down into the valley, forming an elongated heap of
stone, like the beginning of a railway embankment. This was called “the
dump.” The track still remained along the level top of the dump, and
one of the small cars, somewhat out of repair, lay overturned beside it,
its load, apparently the last brought out of the mine, still half
filling its box.

How deep and large the tunnel or drift might be, the boys could judge
only by the size of the dump, for a heavy door prevented entrance. From
under the door trickled a stream of clear cold water, which had already
proved a great convenience. The Aurora mine, a hundred yards below, was
almost precisely similar in outward appearance--even to the rivulet, but
it had no door.

Breakfast dispatched and overalls donned, their picks sharpened, their
lamps “trimmed and burning,” the firm marched up to the portal in single
file, Max at the head.

“Open, sesame!” shouted the leader.

“Allee samee open,” echoed Len, in the best Chinese he knew.

“Kai duxon parasitidos gignotai,” muttered McKinnon in broad Gaelic
Greek.

But his talisman was no more effective than that of the others, and the
door stood firm.

Max struck an attitude resembling Thor with his hammer, and made ready
to deal the barricade a splintering blow.

“He that would eat the kernel maun crack the nut,” pronounced Sandy, in
as solemn a tone of voice as though he were giving a death-warrant.

“Hold on!” exclaimed Len, seizing his partner’s uplifted arm. “Don’t
smash it. I reckon we can get in more peaceably. Let’s try to pry off
the lock.”

“Very well,” assented Max; “here goes!”

Inserting his pick-point carefully into the staple clasping the padlock,
by which the door seemed to be secured, two or three forcible wrenches
pulled it out, and the released latch fell easily out of place.

It only remained to swing open the door and face the burst of icily damp
air that rushed out, as though delighted to be set free and allowed to
mingle with the sunshine.

[Illustration: FORCING THE BARRICADE.

     Silver Caves, Page 24.]

You will remember that a steady stream of water was described as pouring
out from beneath this door, and coursing down the side of the dump in a
channel which showed it had long been followed. The water was cold and
pure, and had proved a great convenience to the boys in the cabin, who
otherwise must have made a tedious descent to the creek-bed for all they
wanted to use.

Upon opening the door it was seen that this stream spread itself over
nearly the whole width of the tunnel, which was badly made and far from
orderly.

The trio were not afraid of mud and water, however, so they pushed their
way in, stumbling along over fallen fragments, and in and out of the
puddles, feeling that it would take a longer time to clear the path of
these obstacles than they could well afford. They had not gone more than
thirty or forty paces, however, when the tunnel became choked with
prostrate and moldy timbers and great heaps of fallen rock, which they
could with difficulty crawl over. No sooner had this first obstruction
been passed than a second similar one was encountered, and they began to
feel that it was perilous work to proceed under a tunnel roof so
insecure as this one appeared to be.

“I wonder how much deeper this thing is,” said Max, after a third great
barricade had been surmounted. “What did our dear old friend, the late
lamented proprietor, tell you under that head, Lennox?”

“Said it was 180 feet long.”

“But he didn’t mention that it was only six inches wide!” Max retorted,
coming to a halt at the same time.

“We may as well go on a bit farther,” Sandy advised. “A Scotchman doesna
like to gie it up till he ha’ seen the end of a thing. ‘A’maist and very
near,’ I’ve heard, ‘hae aye been great liars.’”

“All right, we’ll explore it as long as we can scramble,” Max rejoined
cheerfully, and the three pushed on, enduring many a bump and scratch
on hands and toes, knees and elbows, in spite of their lamp light.

Before long, however, progress was completely blocked. A great mass of
the roof had fallen where a crevice opened upward and sideways, and out
of this crevice gushed a steady stream of water to swell that which
trickled from lesser fountains elsewhere, and drained out along the
bottom of the tunnel.

“Thus far and no farther. Satisfied, Sandy?”

“Oo, aye. ‘Down wi’ the lid,’ quo’ Willie Reid.”

They were turning back when Max asked them to wait a minute, and taking
out a pocket-compass, he noted as well as he was able the direction the
excavation pointed at that inner end.

“I suspect,” he explained, “that as it deepens this tunnel bends a
trifle to the left--down the creek--on a slight curve following the
vein. If so I want to know it.”

Making their way out, he took another compass observation near the
entrance and found he was right, though the bend was a slight one.

Before leaving the inner end, the two Americans had selected several
specimens of the vein-rock from the sides and roof of the tunnel, and
other pieces were gathered as they returned. When daylight was reached
they spread these specimens out and talked them over, explaining to
Sandy, who turned out rather wiser in respect to minerals than he had
claimed to be, what were the prominent characteristics of each kind of
rock represented.

A few of the fragments, showing some peculiar brown nodules and threads,
they separated from the rest, and compared them with similar pieces
taken from the overturned car-load on the dump, which had excited their
attention before. None of the rock at the entrance had shown this
characteristic; all pieces of that kind, they discovered, had come from
the innermost depth.

“If we could get past that barrier I think we should find much more of
it,” Max remarked.

“We know well enough as to that,” Len replied, “for certainly that
car-load was about the last one brought from the mine, and must show
what the breast is made of.”

“What do you mean by the breast?” Sandy inquired.

“The rock across the end of the tunnel into which the digging is carried
forward.”

“Well,” Max resumed, “the gangue there, judging by the car-load of
specimens, contains more of this brown stuff than anything we saw as far
as we went, so I think it is fair to conclude that it increases steadily
in that direction, and that if the tunnel were pushed farther the whole
vein would be seen, before very long, to be well impregnated with it,
taking the place of this useless copper and quartz.”

“Can we not examine the outcrop?” Sandy asked, “and learn something from
that?”

The outcrop of a vein is that part of it which appears above the surface
of the soil, or enclosing rocks,--crops out, as geologists say.

“I don’t know; perhaps so. It would do no harm to go and take a look at
it.”




MAX HAS AN IDEA.




CHAPTER IV.

MAX HAS AN IDEA.


Nobody, of course, would ever deliberately have purchased a piece of
mining property about which he knew so little as these lads did about
the Last Chance claim. But it must be remembered, that they did not buy
after selection, but that the mine was forced quickly upon them, taken,
like Hobson’s choice of a horse in the stable which held but one animal,
because there was no other pay to be got. Now it was their business to
explore the property thoroughly and see what could be made out of it.
They knew that many a mine had been abandoned by one owner and yielded a
fortune to his successor; it was possible some good might have been
overlooked in this one. “No man,” wrote the wise philosopher, Francis
Bacon, “prospers so suddenly as by other’s errors.”

At any rate, they proposed to find out all they could about the
prospect-hole, and not run away without at least loudly knocking at
fortune’s door. A man can endure failure with much composure when he
feels that it has been through no lack of diligence on his part, and if
success follows, it is all the more satisfactory for having been earned
by good judgment and hard work.

Putting into their pockets some pieces of cold bread and a handful
apiece of dried fruit, for they did not know how far their search might
lead them, they began to climb the steep rocks which formed the wall of
the valley, and after a few moments worked their way up to where a less
steeply inclined slope stretched onward to the summit of the range.
Here, after some difficulty, they were able to discover the crest or
outcrop of their vein, and to trace it two or three hundred yards by its
occasional appearance at ledges and bare spots among the herbage and
heather of short, thick, huckleberry-like bushes, which clothed the
mountain-side. At the farther border of this plateau, a huge land-slide,
in some long-past spring, had come thundering down from the cliffs
above, burying under it all further trace of the vein, no outcropping of
which was visible in the rocks again exposed a quarter of a mile beyond,
so far as they could make out after a wearisome tramp of investigation.

It was evident that they had not been the first to go over this ground,
for nigh under the foot of the land-slide, which was now a bank of
richest flowers, some nodding on tall stems in the splendor of purple,
scarlet and gold, others equally gaudy but more lowly, bearing blossoms
modestly beautiful in white and brown, they found a pit ten or twelve
feet deep, sunken into the rock.

The stone which had been thrown out of this pit was examined with great
care, and Max even scrambled down to its bottom and flaked off more
specimens, which he tossed up with exclamations of rejoicing. They
certainly showed a far larger proportion of the brown mineral, in which
our prospectors were taking so much interest, than anything that had yet
been seen, and strengthened the notion that it increased in plenty the
farther the vein was followed.

“Now let us see if we were right about the bending,” Max remarked, when
he had climbed out of the prospect-hole.

“All right,” Len answered, his tongue hampered by bunches of the acrid
purple berries of the Oregon grape, which not only filled his mouth, but
puckered his lips. “Can you trace the outcrop all the way?”

“No, but I’m going to climb up on this slide a little ways, and then
have you go back and stand at the edge of the cliff, while Sandy stands
midway between us. I can see then whether the vein curves.”

“Why, of course it does,” called out the Scotchman, who had quietly
mounted the broken face of the land-slide, until he could overlook the
ground. “The vein just follows along the base o’ this low ridge here,
and I can see that it curves quite decidedly.”

“What ridge?”

“You can scarcely glint it, I dare say, where you stan’, but come up
here, and you will see it plainly. It’s lang and narrow.”

The others mounted to his side, and then could easily discern that a
narrow ridge, like the ruins of a big wall which had been made of white
rock but now was fallen and overgrown with weeds and briers, stretched
in a gentle curve from the brink of the gulch to the foot of the
land-slide, where it seemed a trifle narrower than at the cliff.

“And look there,” said Max, pointing with his finger straight across the
gulch to the gray wall of the opposite mountain, which seemed to rise
almost plumb from the bed of Panther Creek. “Look! Do you see that
whitish upright patch, with the darker streaks on each side of it,
extending up and down the face of the cliff?”

“Ay,” they assented together, Lennox adding, “It’s like a Kensington
panel.”

“Plainly that panel is the continuation of this ridge and the vein,
which have been cut through by the creek.

“But there’s another vein on the other side apparently.”

“Yes, that must be the extension of the Aurora lead. And if I am not
mistaken this ridge is a wedge of porphyry, what geologists call a dyke,
thrust up between these two veins. Probably it narrows in or pinches, as
they say, just here, and further on would thicken again.”

“Do you mean that it split what was originally one vein,” Len asked,
“and pried the halves apart?”

“No, I should say not, for, as you know, the rock in the Last Chance is
different from that in the Aurora. Probably the dyke was formed first,
and the lodes came afterward by forcing themselves between it and the
trachyte-body of the mountain.”

“That’s a’ vera interesting,” was Sandy’s dry remark, “but, in my
eegnorance, permeet me to ask how it affects our eenterests practically?
A blind man’s nae judge o’ colors, ye ken.”

“I am not sure that it affects our interests at all, and yet I have an
idea it may.”

“Trot out your little idea!” exclaimed Len, with characteristic
impatience; and with equally characteristic caution Max declined to do
so until he had thought more about it. Whereupon, with good-natured
compliance, his questioners departed and busied themselves in hunting
for more of the tart berries of the Oregon grape, which grew purple
among the lichen-printed stones.

Returning half an hour later they found Max pacing slowly down the crest
of the ridge like a sentinel on a rampart.

“I want you fellows to help me get the breadth or thickness of this dyke
here as nearly as we can come at it.”

“How?” asked Len.

“Oh, by pacing over the ridge and estimating it carefully.”

They decided after a close examination that it was about one hundred
feet in thickness at that point, or, at any rate, considerably less than
the distance between the Last Chance and Aurora lodes, at the mouths of
their respective tunnels.

Then they strolled back to their cabin, where Sandy busied himself in
mixing raised bread for the evening meal, while Max stuck a lamp in his
cap and disappeared within the Aurora tunnel.

When, that evening, the trio were ready to sit down together again
around a cheerful fire outside the house, Max threw off his reserve and
began to talk.

“I suppose you fellows think I’ve been a running things in a high-handed
sort of a way this afternoon, but I had to do a bit of studying over my
idea before I could get it into such a shape that I could explain it to
you, and get your help intelligently. See?”

[Illustration: SITUATION OF THE TWO MINES.

     Silver Caves, Page 41.]

“Ay,” Sandy answered for both. “Ilka bird must hatch its ain egg.”

“Well, this is the egg I have been incubating. I am convinced that there
is nothing to be got out of the Aurora; it’s just a dead quartz-lode all
through. But our mine will show more and more of the stuff we want the
deeper we go, or else I am greatly mistaken.”

“But it will take all the fall to clean that tunnel out and timber it up
so as to be safe!” Len grumbled.

“Exactly! Now the Aurora is open and has a firm roof. She runs right
alongside of ours, with only that dyke between them like a stone
partition, and goes about one hundred feet further into the hillside. My
notion is to go to the end of the Aurora, cut through the dyke into the
Last Chance lode, and so get quickly at new rock, beyond any reached by
our old drift, where I believe the mineral will be found richer, since
all that we can learn goes to show that the lode improves steadily in
the quantity of that brown stuff which it carries. What do you think of
it?”

“It sounds very reasonable indeed,” Len agreed instantly, and went on to
elaborate the plan with his customary enthusiasm, but the more cautious
nature of McKinnon asserted itself in questions.

“D’ ye ken whether the dyke-rock is haird or saft?” he inquired, among
other things.

“Not certainly,” Max answered. “It’s easy enough to work at the surface,
but it may be much tougher down below. It appears to be coarse porphyry
all through, however, and that usually does not make very hard digging.”

“Should we have to blast?”

“I suppose so, now and then.”

“Do you know how?”

“Oh yes, that is not a difficult matter when one has cartridges of giant
powder.”

“How long do you suppose it will take to dig through the partition?”

“Can’t say. If we work hard and have good luck, I should think we ought
to cross-cut the dyke in from two to three weeks.”

These objections, and all the obstacles likely to be encountered, as
well as the probable success of the venture, having been thoroughly
discussed and a favorable decision reached, no time was lost, next day,
in beginning upon their plan of opening at the farthest end a cross-cut
through the porphyry dyke separating the Aurora from their own vein.

The whole of the first day’s toil, however, was expended in setting the
broken car (of which I have already spoken) in good shape upon its
wheels; in dragging it over to the other mine, a work of no little
difficulty, and in clearing the floor of the tunnel of fallen fragments,
so that the car could be pushed along the rails without impediment.

On the second day, however, digging could be done in earnest. As only
two could work to advantage at once, and as they did not care to labor
for ten or twelve hours at a stretch, they arranged a series of watches
by which each one had about two hours in the tunnel and then two hours
outside, when he could be attending to the house, preparing meals, or,
as presently became necessary, stand guard over the defenses.

The rock of the dyke proved to be a pinkish quartzose porphyry,
containing crystals of felspar, garnets,--many of which were very
perfect, and these were carefully saved by the miners,--hornblende and
several other minerals. Though in many places so tough that they were
obliged to drill holes and blast it, much of the time the rock could be
knocked down with the pick, and at one point proved to be so soft and
spongy that it fairly crumbled under their blows, and they made as much
progress in one morning as had before cost two whole days of labor.

As fast as the rock was tumbled down from the breast it was shoveled
into a wheelbarrow and taken to the mouth of the cross-cut, where it
was reloaded into the little car which ran on rails in the old Aurora.
As soon as this had been filled, it was pushed out to the mouth of the
tunnel and its cargo thrown down the side of the mountain, over the
front of the great dump of waste rock already built out from the mouth
of the cave.

Thus two weeks of hard and systematic work with shovel, pick and barrow,
carried them through the dyke, and on the morning of the fifteenth day
their tools struck into the darker and wholly different vein-rock of
their own lode, a hundred feet or so beyond the breast, or interior end,
of the Last Chance tunnel.




OLD BOB TAKES A PARTNER.




CHAPTER V.

OLD BOB TAKES A PARTNER.


One day when our miners were nearing the end of their cross-cut, Old Bob
was sitting in his cabin down in the outskirts of the village, trying
with his squinting eyes and stiff fingers to mend a pair of brown duck
trousers, which were past any further wearing without repairs.

He was worrying and muttering over this miserable task, when he heard
hurried footsteps approach and stop at the door. A moment later it was
pushed open and a man entered whom he did not recognize.

“I ’spose likely you don’t know me,” the stranger said. “I’m Scotty.”

“Scotty, eh? Well, stranger, I don’t know ye much better by that, but
take a cheer. Did ye come over the range? and did ye have any business
with me?”

The stranger sat down, took from his pocket a flat-bottle, unscrewed the
top and offered it to his host.

Bob received it, remarked civilly, “Well, here’s how,” and poured a deep
draught of its contents down his throat. Then wiping his lips with the
back of his hand he passed the bottle back, with the comment:

“You air a gentleman, sir, or you wouldn’t be passin’ round whisky ’s
good as that.”

“Well, I try to treat a square man right when I meet him. Do you
remember a little scrimmage in the El Dorado a few days ago with a
feller in your camp here, named Morris? I guess you wa’n’t there.”

“No,” Bob replied, “I had other business that night. But I heerd about
it, and came darned near being hung afterward by a little mistake o’ the
boys, who thought I was hiding the feller they bounced out of town so
suddent.”

“Didn’t you hear his name?”

“No--nobody knowed him, and I never set eyes on the coon.”

“I’m the man.”

“You?” yelled Bob--surprised fairly out of his wits.

“Yes, that’s me, and I reckon it’s all right.”

“Well, Scotty,” Bob replied. “I’ve drunk with you, and when I drink with
a man he’s my friend; but ef I hadn’t you’d have to get right out o’
this, ’cause I aint got use for fellers like you.”

“Now, Mr.--?” The visitor hesitated, in a questioning way, evidently
wishing the name to be supplied.

“No matter about the mister, call me Bob as the rest of the boys do. I
hain’t mistered _you_ yet.”

“Now, Bob,” Scotty began again, “you may be prejudiced. That aint fair
as between friends. You ought to hear both sides. I’m not so bad a man
as they make out in this ’ere camp. Fact is, we were all pretty
high-strung that night, and a little rumpus oughtn’t to be laid up agin
a gentleman who tries to deal square and make an honest livin’. I don’t
lay up nothin’ agin Morris. We just pulled pistols on one another as
gentlemen will sometimes, ye know, and he got the drop. That’s all. Now
a man like me shouldn’t be sent out o’ town for a little thing like
that. It’s an outrage, and you know it, Bob.”

“Yes,” the upright Robert assented. “It’s a big outrage. Mor’n that, I
b’lieve the boys would see it now, ’n’ nobody’d say a word if you were
to go into the El Dorado to-night. I’ll risk it, ’n’ I’ll introduce you
as my friend, and then let any one object if he thinks best!”

“There’s one young feller you can’t catch with no chaff like that, and
if I get a good chance, I’ll break his head.”

“Who’s that?”

“Don’t know his name, a tall, red-bearded galoot, that looks like a
Scotchman. Now I’m part Scotch myself and I admire the way he hit me
under the ear, for my country’s sake, but all the same I owe him one!”

“Why, that must be that new pardner of Brehm and Bushwick’s up the
creek.”

“Very likely. He’d just come up in the stage and was askin’ after a man
o’ that name.”

Describing him to one another, they agreed that Sandy was the object of
Scotty’s special aversion. This knock-down incident (into which it is
unnecessary to go more particularly) was only one more count against the
firm, and a new bond uniting this precious pair of scallawags. How and
why Bob hated Max and Lennox we know; for a still better reason the
gambler fostered a grudge against Sandy. They needed no oath-taking,
therefore, to make them firm allies in any plan which might present
itself to get revenge and possible profit; but in respect to the latter
point they had deceived themselves into a belief that our young friends
had far more money than was really the case.




PROGRESS IN MINING.




CHAPTER VI.

PROGRESS IN MINING.


Almost as soon as Max had dug through the dyke, and penetrated the Last
Chance lode, he saw, to his great satisfaction, that he had reasoned
correctly, for the vein showed even here a much larger proportion than
before of the brown streaks and nodules, which, in their opinion,
constituted its value. Whether the rest of the gangue carried gold or
silver, could not be known, but that this rusty material contained one
or the other they felt confident. The assurance that it increased the
deeper the vein was followed, therefore gave them great encouragement
and raised their enthusiasm to the highest pitch.

The moment this vein was struck, however, a new difficulty met them, for
they found that in this pact it was full of crevices, through which
water percolated from above. At first this water was disregarded and
trickled out through the cross-cut, but as they advanced in their
digging it grew more and more troublesome, and harmful to their health.
Max therefore proposed to cut a drain down through the vein of the Last
Chance to the old tunnel entrance, and soon convinced the others that it
was necessary to do so.

This was certainly a misfortune, and an unlooked for one. It consumed
valuable time, cost money which they could ill spare, and was in itself
an intensely disagreeable job, since the workmen would be compelled to
use the pick upon their hands and knees, or lying down, and always with
wet clothing, since it would not pay to clear out the hole to the size
of a regular tunnel, but only to make a passage-way through which the
water might escape from the interior of the mine; furthermore, the old
tunnel, when it had been reached, must be somewhat cleared, to allow of
a proper passage of the water, in spite of the fact that it was an
unsafe and unpleasant place to do work in.

Cheered by the thought of future success, all went at this disagreeable
task with great alacrity, shortening the hours and avoiding all needless
labor. As small a tube was made as it was possible to work in, but now
and then a hard surface would require severe work, and these obstacles
were dreaded, after the first experience, for behind them, when the
shell was broken, would often be found a little cavity more or less full
of water, which would gush out by the bucketful and once or twice
threatened to drown the young miners like so many ground-squirrels in a
burrow.

The distance they were obliged to go was only about thirty yards, and as
they worked toward one another, from both ends, they made their way
through in about ten days. It was a very irregular and unsafe hole, but
it drained the rock almost perfectly and served them afterward in
another way quite as important.

As, by this new plan, a door was unnecessary on the Last Chance while it
might possibly be wanted some day at the Aurora, it was removed and set
up frame and all at the mouth of the other tunnel, which could now be
locked if necessary. This door proved a benefit also, in helping them to
regulate the draft of air.

The only incident worth recording that broke their daily loneliness and
labor during all the month which had now nearly gone by, was the advent
of a visitor, who appeared one evening about the time they had completed
the cross-cut.

He was a tramping miner who said he had crossed the range from the
South, and begged to be allowed to spend the night at their cabin. A man
of decent appearance would have been welcomed gladly, but this applicant
was an ill-featured, coarse-grained, blasphemous fellow, whom they
disliked at once, and yet could not well turn away. It was with great
relief, therefore, that they saw him take his thin frame down the trail
next morning. In addition to his disagreeable manner he had been much
more inquisitive and prying than they liked, and had plainly shown
himself angry because they had not made a full confidant of him.

Let us follow this visitor and find out more of his habits and
associates. It is scarcely fair to condemn a man forever out of a single
day’s experience.




A DIME NOVEL HERO.




CHAPTER VII.

A DIME NOVEL HERO.


When their unpleasant guest departed from the cabin of our heroes, he
marched straight down to Bob’s cabin in the village and there found
himself heartily welcomed. Old Bob introduced him to Scotty as “Bill
Stevens--a fellow who knows the San Juan like his own barn-yard.” Scotty
said he was glad to see him, and no doubt he was, for he felt in need of
friends, and this new man, as a chum of Bob’s and evidently training in
the same band, would of course become an ally of his. This Scotty
needed; though he had not been sent out of town a second time, and was
permitted to lounge around the El Dorado and to sit at the
gambling-tables, or join the story-telling circles at the public corral,
he saw that most of the men whom he met were far from cordial toward
him, and that his earnest efforts to be agreeable were of small avail in
making friends. It did not suit his plans to resent this, nor to leave
the camp in search of a more congenial community; so he put up with the
unpopularity as well as he could. It galled him, however, and caused him
to lay up hatred rather than love toward the whole population of the
valley.

As soon as Bill Stevens’ back was turned, Scotty took occasion to
inquire somewhat about him. Bob really knew little of his history,
except that, as he said, they had been “pards” in a little game some
time previous, after which Stevens had thought it prudent to go away.
Scotty pressed Old Bob to know the particulars of this partnership
enterprise, but Bob declined at first to tell them. Finally, however, he
exclaimed:

“Well, I s’pose you might as well know, its only another point against
them dod-rotted young swells up the creek. The fact is, when Brehm and
his partner lived down in that there cabin ’cross the bridge yonder,
Bushwick went off to Denver. By’n bye he came back with a heap o’
cash--don’ know how much--mebbe a thousand or so. ’Bout that time Bill
came over to see me from t’other side the range, and I was telling about
it, you know. Well Bill, he made out ’s how Bushwick didn’t have no
right to the money no how, havin’ stole it from somebody else by some
kind of lawyer’s game, and ’twas as much ours as his’n or anybody’s,
which of course that is true, providin’ he got it by swindlin’, which
like enough he did, you know.”

“So you and Bill held him up, did you?”

“No, we didn’t have no chance to rob him on the road, but we thought we
could get into his cabin easy enough. So we tried it, Stevens climbin’
softly into the winder and I outside a-holdin’ the ladder. He’d got
e’en-a ’most in, when bang went a gun and out tumbled Bill on top o’me.
I thought we was both killed sure, but Bill picked himself up, and we
lit out as though the Old Scratch himself was after us, which the same
he mighty near was.”

“Didn’t hit Stevens, then?” Scotty inquired, with a grin which showed
how well he enjoyed the comical side of the situation, and how little
his conscience was touched by the villainy of the story.

“No, but it was an awful close call. Great Cæsar! But Max Brehm kin
shoot, now you just bet!”

“Does Stevens know that the boys up the creek where he stopped t’other
night are the same fellows?”

“I guess not; he aint said nothin’ about it.”

“If he did know, I reckon there’d be three of us as thought we owed the
fine gentlemen a little debt of honor, which the same we hadn’t ought,
on no account, to fail to pay--eh?”

Scotty’s leer and chuckle were as long as these slow and wicked words,
and Bob’s squinty and bleary eye answered with a distorted,
left-handed, evil grin of comprehension as he snarled out the laconic
assent:

“Bet yer boots!”

And yet this is the kind of men whom so many well-meaning but
romantically inclined eastern boys, knowing the far West only as they
read of it in cheap books of a very poor sort, regard as heroes in
disguise, and long to see and associate with. Thieves and gamblers at
home are justly abhorred by them, yet the same man, perhaps,
transplanted to the Rockies to escape the sheriff at home, becomes in
these flashy books a sort of chivalrous knight whose uncouth ways only
heighten his supposed virtues.

This is the worst of nonsense. A brave, heroic man does not show himself
in this garb. The honest heroes of the Rockies never figure in dime
novels and never will. They are not loud and “chinny” enough for that.
They do not wear long hair, nor carry a big Kentucky rifle, nor appear
and disappear in any mysterious Jack-in-the-box manner. They are not
accustomed to kill six or eight “red-skinned varmints” at a single blow,
and if ever they are engaged in Indian warfare, are far too wise to get
so surrounded by a circle of Indians that they are obliged to take a
standing leap over the heads of their foes, as did Eagle-eye or some
other scout I once read of. If they tried to behave in this way, or to
dress in story-book fashion, they would be hung or driven out by men of
action who have no time to spend watching Bowery-museum foolishness, and
whose business would be harmed by its display.

There is in every mining district a class of men who behave more or less
as these novels portray, going as far toward it, anyhow, leaving out
some of the theatrical foolishness, as they dare; and I suppose they
form the material out of which the writers of the sorry stuff try to
make their heroes. But as a matter of fact they are lawless scamps,
brutal, lowlived, ignorant, unclean men, with whom not one in fifty of
their admirers among the readers of these false and miserable tales
would allow himself to be seen on the streets of the town where he was
born. They are more noisy and more difficult to separate from their
betters in the rough and unarranged surroundings of a new mining camp or
cattle district, than they would be in an eastern village where the
affairs of life are well classified; but they are none the less avoided
and despised by good citizens, and are feared rather than trusted in any
emergency, like an Indian war, which calls for courage and discretion.

I cannot conceive of a more complete disappointment and experience of
fraud, than would meet the romantic reader of the Indian-slaying and
horse-stealing tales in yellow covers, who should go on a search through
the far West for the originals of those thrilling pictures.

Ruffianly men exist and attempt their wicked schemes among honest men,
who, in the absence of regular police protection, and at the great
distance which many mines and ranches lie from courts, are often obliged
to defend themselves as soldiers would in an enemy’s country, or as any
man has a right to do when attacked by robbers. But, boys, for the sake
of all that is fair and square, let us call a ruffian a ruffian, and not
attempt to see glory in the doings of a horse-thief, or a gambler, or a
man who tries by force of rifle and pistol to seize upon property which
does not belong to him.

While Scotty and Bob were discussing the achievements by which Mr.
William Stevens, so called, had made himself distinguished, that worthy
came in, bringing a new bag of cheap black tobacco. Filling their pipes,
the three scallawags sat down in front of the coals smouldering in the
adobe fireplace, and Bob immediately began to tell Stevens the names of
the miners whose hospitality he enjoyed the night before, and how eager
he ought to be to join the other two in a scheme to break them down.
Partly from ignorance, partly by design, they exaggerated to each other
the injury each had suffered, and also the amount of plunder which it
was likely might be obtained from the firm of B. B. & Co. The upshot of
it all, was a compact between them to “get even” with the lads. This
meant to rob them and drive them from the town, or, if it was at all
necessary, to kill them, accounting for their crime by some artful story
of self-defense or the like.

They were in no great hurry, however, to carry out their wicked
purposes, and three or four days passed without their making any
movement, since no plan suggested itself that seemed promising.

One evening Old Bob came home and remarked, as he took the coffee-mill
between his knees and began to fill it from a buckskin bag that hung
against the chimney, that Morris had returned from below, and that he
had talked with him a little.

“Did he say he loved ye?” inquired Scotty, in sarcastic tones, and
betraying a little uneasiness as to what might follow when Morris should
hear of his return in defiance of the order of banishment.

“Wall--no, I reckon he’s soured on me,” was Bob’s candid response. “But
that didn’t phase me. I wanted mighty bad to find out suthin’, and I
played sweet and boned him for the information.”

“Did he play sweet, too, and tell ye?”

“Wall--no. But all the same I found out what I wanted. I let on I’d
heard Jim Bowen was dead, and asked him was it true.”

“What did he say?”

“Oh, he glared at me, as though he was a bull buffalo and I was a
ky-yote, ’n’ just says ‘dead and buried,’ and then he marched off as if
he’d been sent for. I’ll get even with that sardine yet!”

This was a pretty accurate account of what really had passed between
them. In fact, Morris had just been hunting with “Buckeye Jim” Bowen all
that week, and knew he was

[Illustration: SCOTTY AND OLD BOB.

     Silver Caves, Page 74.]

as much alive as anybody had need to be; but Morris hated Bob, thought
he had no business to be playing the hypocrite and asking questions
about what was none of his affair, and so sent him off with this short
and reckless answer, not thinking or caring how much Bob might believe
of it.

“So the Terror’s passed in his checks, eh?” was Scotty’s comment. “He
wasn’t a bad sort of a party. I used to know him in Illinoy. They runned
him off because they said he stole some horses,--fine nags they was,
too. But it turned out he wasn’t the feller after all. I could ’a’ told
’em all the time they was wrong, only it wouldn’t a’-been quite
healthy.”

“Why?” asked Stevens, whose wits were not of the quickest. “Did you know
the right man?”

“I should smile! _I_ stole them horses, pardner! But, Bob, what made you
so anxious to know whether Buckeye Jim was dead?”

“Cause it fixes us O. K. The boys up the creek are working his mine. I
don’t know whether they’ve got any show of right about it or not, but
now Jim’s dead I reckon they’d have hard work to keep it if we war to
jump it.”

Do you know what it is to jump a mine? It means simply to seize it
without any right, and hold it by force, a thing very often successful
when the first claimant has no legal title to the property.

Bob’s proposition interested the others at once, and they began to
discuss it eagerly. Stevens asserted that it was the middle one of the
three mines at the head of the creek, namely the Aurora, that the boys
were working. He confessed that he had not gone into it, but was sure
that he was right. There was too much water in the upper tunnel near the
cabin, he assured them, to do anything there.

“Don’t you ’spose Morris knows that these boys have jumped Buckeye’s
mine?” asked Scotty, who remembered that Bowen partly owned the Aurora.

“Tain’t likely,” Bob answered. “But it will be just as well to keep him
from findin’ out they’re in there, if we can, for fear of any
interference. I reckon he feels friendly toward ’em by reason of helpin’
him in your El Dorado scrape.”

The very next morning, therefore, the three conspirators were thrown
into a quiver of alarm, by seeing both Len and Max in town. Bob met them
at the post-office, and loitered around, hoping, even if Morris should
appear, that he might be able by some good chance to prevent their
meeting. He thus heard Max tell the postmaster that they meant to stay
in town until the next day, and took it for granted, from something else
which he overheard, that the Scotchman had come in also, leaving the
mine and cabin alone over-night.

The moment he heard this, Old Bob hastened to find his partners and to
say that now was their opportunity to go up the creek, get a look at the
property, and make a plan for capturing it. Scotty and Stevens agreed
that this was advisable, and borrowing horses, the three rattled up the
road to Panther Creek as fast as possible, since no time ought to be
wasted if they were to get back before sundown, and to travel on those
mountain trails in the darkness is by no means a comfortable or safe
proceeding.




HOW LEN FOOLED THE PROFESSOR.




CHAPTER VIII.

HOW LEN FOOLED THE PROFESSOR.


Entirely unaware that Old Bob had regarded them with so much interest,
or had been so glad to overhear the fact that they would spend the night
in town, Len and Max hastened to finish their errands, and then to go
about the principal business which had brought them on the long walk to
town. In one important point their squint-eyed friend had misunderstood
them badly,--Sandy had remained at the mine.

As soon as possible, therefore, the two young men took their way briskly
down the familiar path which led to the home of an old fellow who was
known in the camp as “Mr. Professor.” His queer, solitary habits and
sharp tongue had made him rather unpopular, but everyone acknowledged
his expertness in judging ores, and his opinion was often sought by
those who dared to face him.

“Are you sure you remember the shape of the specimens?” Max asked, for
the twentieth time.

“As certain as anybody can be,” Len replied confidently.

As they approached the professor’s cabin, they saw that worthy chopping
at a log beside it, whereupon they slackened their eager pace and
sauntered up to his door with an air of unconcern.

“Good morning, Professor,” said Len pleasantly.

“Mornin’,” was the short reply, while the chips flew right and left.

“You must have learned how to chop in sme good school,” Max observed,
in a tone expressing admiration.

“Raised in No’th Ca’lina,” was the gruff response.

“Is that so?” Len exclaimed. “Why, that’s not far from my home--I was
raised in Roanoke county, Virginia. Sorry I didn’t know that before. I
should have liked to come over and talked with you about things down in
that region. Don’t see many men out here that know much about the
Piedmont country. Were you ever up in Roanoke?”

“Many a time.”

Thus the ice was broken, and the lads won their way through the crust
which this stern old miner was proud to wear, though it cut him off more
and more from the society of those around him, who voted him an
unsociable old curmudgeon that somehow had picked up a lot of
information about rocks and ores.

Max did not smoke, but he had bought the best cigar he could get in
town, for the special purpose of giving it to the old man, and this
gift, with Len’s pleasant chat, quite thawed the professor in the course
of a quarter of an hour or so. Len was very diplomatic. He seemed to be
in no hurry, but finally steered the conversation around to rare
minerals. Then, as if by chance, he recalled a package he had brought to
the professor from Denver, on his return from that recent journey which
Bob had alluded to in his conversation with Scotty, and asked the old
man to show him the specimens again, and to tell him more about them
than he had done on the evening when they were delivered.

Ordinarily a request like this would have met with refusal; but now the
old man consented at once, and led the way into his cabin.

Many rude little shelves were stuck up against the log walls, upon which
were heaped dusty rows of minerals and various other objects. One shelf
contained several cigar-boxes. These the professor took down and opened
one after another. Rummaging through half a dozen he finally found the
one he wanted, and unfolded from their wrappings the five small bits of
rock which Lennox had brought to him from Denver.

Selecting three of the specimens the professor took them to the light
and began to talk about what they represented.

“That’s an ore of tellurium,” he said, holding one of the pieces between
his thumb and finger, “and it carries gold,--or may sometimes--a right
smart percentage of it, too--in the shape of a telluride. It is a very
nice smelting ore and a valuable one.”

“Is there much of it in the Rockies?” he was asked.

“Mighty little’s been found yet, worse luck. It almost always occurs in
veins with a lot of lead and other stuff, and everywhere I have ever
seen it, it’s alongside a porphyry dyke.”

This last remark made Len’s heart jump, but he showed no excitement. In
a well-controlled voice he remarked that he wished they had a magnifying
glass so that the professor might point out to them more effectively the
peculiarities of the mineral, which he was turning over in his fingers.

“I’ve a good one,” the old miner answered.

“I’ll get it,” and he stepped back into the cabin.

Instantly Len drew from his pocket three fragments of the brown rock
taken from the deepest part of the Last Chance lode, and slipped the
Denver specimens out of sight. He thought the change would not be
noticed; certainly there was no difference between the former and latter
specimens discernible to a careless eye, and if they deceived this
expert, he might feel sure that his pieces of ore were as truly
tellurium as were the others.

The professor came out wiping the lenses of a small but powerful
magnifier upon the lining of his old coat. Taking one of the changed
specimens unsuspectingly from Len’s hand, he began to scrutinize it very
carefully under the microscope.

“By George,” he exclaimed, “that’s a bully specimen! I wonder where
Pete,”--his Denver acquaintance,--“got it. I never saw anything richer
in tellurides.”

Then he took the other pieces and examined those in the same way. “Guess
the glass must ’a’ been dusty when I looked at ’em before,” he muttered,
as he handed them and the magnifier to Len that he might study them; and
then he went on to say what were the particles to be seen in the rusty
rock which denoted the presence of telluride of gold, and that certain
other black spots, filling small cavities, seemed to be carbonate of
lead, which might contain silver.

“Well,” he remarked, as the boys finished their examination, “If Pete’s
got a mine of that stuff he ought to be a rich man pretty soon. It’ll
assay mighty high, or I don’t know coals from chalk.”

       *       *       *       *       *

To re-exchange the specimens and give the professor his own back again,
was a matter of no great difficulty while they talked, and as both the
lads were eager to get away by themselves and sing a song over their
tokens of success, it was not long before they took their leave,--the
warmth of that proceeding causing the old miner considerable
astonishment.

“Darned queer fellows, them,” he said to himself, as he watched them go
down the road very sedately for a little way, then suddenly fall to
shaking one another by both hands and slapping one another’s backs.

“Bet you they’ve been a leetle too long at the El Dorado,” he suggested
aloud to himself, as there was no other auditor; and Himself quite
agreed with the speaker. “Now just look at that!”

They danced and chorused their _yah, yahs!_ till they were out of
breath, an ending not long delayed in the thin air of the high Rockies.
And as the aged and weather-beaten wanderer looked at them, he felt such
an attack of memory, and suffered such twinges of boyish feeling, as had
not pierced his cynical old frame in many and many a day.

“They’re way-up boys!” he exclaimed to himself. “I hope they’ll get the
drop on that cantankerous old female they call Fortune,--and I reckon
they will!”




SANDY McKINNON’S EAVES-DROPPING.




CHAPTER IX.

SANDY MCKINNON’S EAVESDROPPING.


Taking the absence of Max and Len as a holiday, Sandy locked the tunnel
entrance, pulled the house-door shut (it never had a lock), and started
off on a long tramp up the mountain, within an hour after his partners
left the cabin. He carried his rifle, intent upon both game and glory,
for apart from the desire for fresh venison in the larder, he thought it
would be a fine thing to go back some day to Scotland and tell how,
single-handed, he had met and killed a grizzly bear on some snowy
pinnacle of the wild Sierra San Juan.

He walked far and reached a great elevation. He looked abroad upon
magnificent pictures, shot an elk and some smaller animals, and had a
variety of interesting experiences, though he got no nearer a grizzly
than to catch sight of one on the further side of an impassable chasm.
But these adventures do not come into our story, which was resumed in
his surprising experiences that afternoon.

Turning homeward, when warned to do so by the declining sun, he was
caught in a thunder-shower, which, at the great altitude where it
encountered him, meant a deluge of sleet, hail, and most uncomfortably
cold rain. Drenched, sore and shivering, Sandy made his way as rapidly
as he was able down toward the crest of the cliff under which the cabin
was sheltered. In the foggy condition of the air,--to those in the
valley this fog was a rain-cloud,--and in his weary and half-dazed
state, he passed beyond the point where the faint trail led down the
precipice; but early discovering his error, turned back, creeping slowly
along the brink of the ledge in search of it.

He had scarcely begun the search, however, when he was startled by the
sound of human voices. The first thought was that his partners had come
back. The next instant, however, he perceived that the voices were
strange to him, and with cautious curiosity he crept stealthily to the
bushy brink and peered over the low cliff.

He found himself squarely above the entrance to the Aurora, which was
hardly fifty feet beneath him. Three rough men were standing on the dump
in front of the tunnel, trying to open the door, but it stood firm under
their pulling. They tried some keys, but none would fit the lock, and
Sandy grinned as he thought of something his grandfather used to
say,--“Lock your door that you may keep your neighbor honest.”

“Let’s smash it!” exclaimed the smallest of the three, whom we know to
be Stevens.

At the sound of his voice Sandy pricked up his ears; he was sure it must
be the same man who had spent a night at their cabin a few days before,
and stolen the knife. He could not see their faces, however, because of
his position and their slouched hats.

“No,” objected the tallest, whose voice also seemed vaguely familiar to
the listener--“No, we don’t want ’em to know we’ve been here; leave no
traces to set ’em a-watching. We musn’t disturb nothing, and we must get
out o’ here as soon as we can, so’s not to be caught prospectin’ their
trail. What we want is to surprise ’em some fine mornin’, when they aint
lookin’ for no visitors, drop on ’em like a gobbler on a June-bug. I
reckon there’ll be some regular squealing fun ’bout that time, eh, old
pard!” and Scotty banged the rheumatic back of his squint-eyed companion
in a way that made Bob howl, and did Sandy’s heart good.

“You bet!” echoed Stevens, “and wont there be a racket afterward! I aint
had a real red-hot blow-out in a coon’s age--I say, pard, it’ll be at my
expense, remember, all at my expense. I’ll have the money and I’ll spend
it too, you’ll see!”

“Nae doot,” was Sandy’s inward soliloquy overhead; “but I’m thinkin’
ye’re cawking the claith ere the wab be in the loom.”

“Oh, dry up!” came the gambler’s rejoinder. “You’re a fool! You haven’t
got inside the mine yet. Now, mates, I reckon this is our best lay:
To-day is Wednesday. We need time to get an outfit to live on cached
near here, somewheres, so that after we’ve captured the place we can
hold the fort for a little while, if they should come back at us. You
see we’ve got to give ’em back their grub and furniture, cause if we
take that it’s _stealin’_, and we aint no thieves, leastwise not in this
deal.”

“A liar should hae a gude memory,” thought Sandy.

“And, besides, they could drop on us for that, whereas this is a free
country and we’ve a perfect right to jump a man’s claim--”

“Pervided we kin hold it!” Old Bob interrupted.

“Yes, of course. Well, as I was a-saying, to-day’s Wednesday; and I
reckon Saturday night’s about our figure. We’ll come up here in the
evening, and then along about twelve o’clock we’ll capture this ’ere
mine, and then bounce ’em right out o’ their beds and send ’em down the
cañon. Next day, if they’re civil, we’ll give ’em their blankets and
notice to leave. And if they aint civil--”

The villain paused and glared right and left at his companions, with a
satanic grin on his face. Slowly drawing from the leg of his rust-red
cowhide boot a huge knife, he finished the sentence with slow and
venomous emphasis,--

“We’ll give ’em this!”

After that boodthirsty remark the three conspirators rose from their
seats and scrambled down the farther slope of the dump.

So cold and stiff was the young Highlander with lying in wet clothes
upon the rough rocks, that at first he could hardly travel; but slowly
picking his way down to the cabin he made haste first to build a fire,
and after

[Illustration: “WE’LL GIVE ’EM THIS.”

     Silver Caves, Page 98.]

giving himself a brisk rubbing, to put on dry clothing, so that no ill
result ensued.

He did not enjoy that night, alone among those storm-breeding heights,
nearly as much as he had expected to, yet quickly fell asleep, not to
awake until rather late on the following morning.

Hurrying through breakfast, he set off at once down the trail in hope of
meeting Max and Len, for he thought it important to gain every moment
between that and Saturday in the effort to forestall the enemy.




FACING THE NEW SITUATION.




CHAPTER X.

FACING THE NEW SITUATION.


Sandy’s partners, meanwhile, having left the village as early as
possible, had made so good progress that the three met at about the
half-way point.

“Hello!” Len sang out gaily, as he caught sight of Sandy, “here’s our
canny Scot! But why makest thou such a walking arsenal of thyself?
’Fraid of Injuns?”

“Weel,” was the slow reply, as the tall son of Saint Andrew glanced down
at himself, “he needs a long shankit spoon wha sups kail wi’ the deil.
I’m no likin’ neeknames as a rule, but may be ye’re no far wrang when
you ca’ me an arsenal. Did ye obsairve the new trick I’ve learned?”

Stooping down, while the twinkle in his eyes belied the gravity of his
face, he solemnly pulled from his boot-leg the long butcher-knife with
which the boys were wont to slice their bacon.

This was too much. Both tumbled upon the nearest bed of moss and made
the rocky walls ring with shouts of laughter, but Sandy remained as
grave as an undertaker.

“Laugh at leisure, ye may greet ere e’en,” he said in his proverbial
style, adding, when they had checked their merriment, “Now if you’re
wantin’ to hear a vera pretty tale, why I’m willin’ to tell ye, though
you’ve not been ower respectfu’ to a puir body during the last five
minutes or so.”

“Oh, go on Sandy, go on. We don’t mind you’re making yourself a scalp
hunter from the wild west, if you like it. Go on, let’s have your story.
What sort of a mare’s nest have you found this time?”

“I’m not sure ye quite heard my remark aboot bein’ respectfu’; an’ if I
ha’ foond a mare’s nest, I’m thinking ye’ll find yoursel’ unco
eenterested in the aiggs.”

After this parting shot Sandy began to tell what he had seen and heard,
as he lay on the edge of the cliff. Two of the men he knew, as we have
seen, and his description of the third at once identified him in the
minds of the rest as Old Bob.

“So that’s where you learned to carry a knife in your boot is it?”

“Ay,” admitted Sandy, “That’s where I learned it. I was tickled, dinna
ye ken, wi’ the idea that a man like him, hating me as he did, should be
teachin’ me sumthin’.”

“But that’s no way to carry a knife,” Max interrupted with fine
contempt. “At least no gentleman would do so, though a gambler might.”

“How then?” asked Sandy, considerably crest-fallen. “Where does a
_gentleman_ usually carry his bowie-knife?”

“Down the back of his neck.”

“Weel, weel, what would my old grandmither up in Dundee say to that!
This is what I’m thinkin’ she would remark, that a wise man gets
learnin’ frae them that has nane to themsel’s.”

This ten-strike scored to Scotch credit, they settled down again to
their study of the new situation, the full meaning of which grew upon
them as they talked it over.

“It strikes me,” said Sandy, “that it wad be a gude thing if Bushwick
were to go directly back to town and see that Mr. Morris. Perhaps,
considerin’ a’ the saircumstances, he would watch the rascals a wee bit.
I suppose he’s na ower-fond o’ that blackleg, and maybe he wad come up
on Saturday night, and so gie us a bit o’ help if we happened to be
needin’ it. Meanwhile Brehm an’ mysel’ will put our castle in a state o’
defense, as it were.”

This course was decided upon. Len unslung his load of groceries,
ammunition, the ever-welcome mail, and other purchases, and it was
shouldered by Sandy, who gave him in return one of his pistols. Then Len
started back toward town, caring little for the extra walk.

The other two lads meanwhile hastened home, busily talking as they
strode along.

Max recounted how Lennox had secured an entirely unbiased judgment from
the old miner, who had assured them positively that the brown stuff
which had been so long the object of their attention was certainly a
telluride ore of gold, and apparently a rich one.

“Ay, that sounds well,” Sandy assented, “but can you be quite certain
this Professor, as you dub him, kens well what he’s talkin’ aboot?”

“I think he does,” Max assured his friend, and gave his reason.

“But how has it escaped notice heretofore?” the Scotchman persisted.

“It’s an extremely uncommon ore in northern Colorado, where most of the
mining has been done up to this time, and few of our citizens have ever
seen it. Moreover, I suppose the early prospectors here were looking
wholly for chlorides, or sulphurets, or ruby silver, or some other well
known ores of that sort, and this is like none of these, or any other
silver indication I know of. But if they had gone a little deeper, I am
inclined to think they’d have found plenty of that, too, and
consequently, that we would never have got possession of this prospect
hole.”

“What makes you say that?”

“Oh, I judge so from the way the rock looks.”

“Then you think we may strike a silver ore in addition to this telluride
of gold?”

“Don’t know, can’t see into the ground further’n your pick-point. Sorry
I didn’t get a letter from the Denver assayer, to whom we sent our
specimens for analysis. I expected to have heard from him by this time.”

As they neared the house they fell to discussing what it would be best
to do toward preparing for their unwelcome visitors. Sandy asked why
they could not have Old Bob and his crew arrested, whereupon Max
explained the loose condition of legal matters in that country, and that
they had no ground to stand a trial upon. Sandy had no witnesses to
threats he had heard. They could not legally prevent any one from going
on the Aurora dump, or into the Aurora tunnel, or even from staying in
it, since it was not their property, and they themselves were there only
by permission. This gave them no rights which they could defend without
blame.

“But we have such rights in the Last Chance premises,” Sandy persisted,
“and can protect that?”

“Yes, but in this region it would be a poor plan to call in the sheriff,
at any rate before we’re attacked; and when the attack comes on I reckon
the sight of that knife-handle sticking out of your boot-leg will keep
’em off better than all the sheriffs in the San Juan. By the way, I can
find a second bowie for the other boot if you want it!”

“Not this moment, thank’ee. Then as I understand, you mean to let ’em
take the Aurora, but you’ll fight for the Last Chance and the cabin, our
hearthstone, as it were?”

“Yes, I don’t see what else we can do. It would be difficult to defend
both if we tried, and when they get possession of the Aurora I fancy
they wont go to any great trouble or risk to wrest this from us. You see
they believe it is the Aurora we are working and that there the riches
lie. I don’t believe they have a hint of the cross-cut or the real state
of things, do you?”

“Not to judge by what I overheard yesterday. But once they get
possession of the Aurora entrance, wont they be able to find it all out
in a few minutes, and seize on the cross-cut and the new work? Our army
is rather sma’ to garrison the mine-chamber and the cabin too; besides,
how can we get in or out, if they hauld the entrance? I’m ’fraid, my
friend, ye’re biting off mair than your cheeks’ll hold.”

“Not at all. Come with me and I’ll show you how I mean to begin a flank
movement on the enemy.”




PREPARATIONS FOR WAR.




CHAPTER XI.

PREPARATIONS FOR WAR.


Schemes looking toward the same object were at the same time busily
advancing down at the camp.

Len had made his way back as rapidly as possible, and fortunately met
Morris just as he was riding away into the mountains to be gone over
night. He explained to him the whole situation, excepting that interview
at the Professor’s, and at once enlisted his sympathy and interest. This
was doubled when he heard that the real leader of the would-be jumpers
was his antagonist in that El Dorado affair of which we have heard,
whose overthrow would give him much satisfaction. He promised,
therefore, that he would watch the three rascals sharply, and would
certainly be on hand if they made any attempt to carry out their plans.

“More’n that,” he said, “I shouldn’t wonder if Buckeye Jim would be
there too. That was all bosh, of course, that I told Bob about his being
dead. I didn’t suppose the old fool’d swallow it as slick as he did. All
the boys know he’s ’live and hearty, and he wrote me he was coming up
here in a few days. If he’s on hand I ’low there’ll be some fun.”

“I hope there wont be any fighting,” said Len.

“Oh, of course, we all hope that; we’re all men of peace up here! All
the same, if we should happen to want to shoot at a mark on t’other
dump, or something of that kind, for a little amusement, after supper,
you know, why it would do any fellow proud that happened to be over
there, to kind o’ lay low, don’t you see, for fear of stray bullets,
cause Jim and me shoots kind o’ free when once we turn loose.”

And having delivered himself of this long and oracular speech, Morris
shook hands and turned his broncho’s head up hill.

Len might now have gone home, but he thought it worth while, as another
mail would come in soon, to wait for possible letters, or what were even
more desirable, the newspapers and magazines that his far-away people at
home sent with pleasant frequency. He was rewarded by a bundle of these,
and one letter, addressed to Max. It bore the card of the Denver assayer
to whom specimens of the ore from the interior of the Last Chance had
been sent for analysis. Perhaps it might dash their hopes, and his hand
trembled a little as he put it away in his pocket. Then he tied the
newspapers in his rubber coat, flung it over his shoulder, and had
turned his face homeward, when a thought struck him.

Going back, he walked round the corner to the office of the Bull Pup
mine, which had been bought, and was now operated, by a Mr. Anderson,
the same eastern capitalist whose refusal to buy Old Bob’s prospect had
been the beginning of Max’s adventures and our history, Len’s intention
was to ask the agent whether Mr. Anderson was expected at the camp soon,
and what was his present address.

In response to these questions he learned that Mr. Anderson would arrive
ten days hence, and that meanwhile he could be communicated with at
Denver.

“I think, if you will let me sit down here a moment, I will write a
letter to him,” said Lennox.

“Certainly,” the agent replied, and gave him pen and paper.

His letter was a short one. It merely recalled Max Brehm and himself to
Mr. Anderson’s recollection, stated that they had opened a prospect
tunnel wherein they believed they had discovered good indications of a
new and valuable sort of gold ore in paying quantities, and begged him
to come and see it as soon as he could, with a view of buying a part of
it, or otherwise helping them to develop the mine.

This done, Len lost no time in leaving town.

Not a sign of either of the three blacklegs had he seen all day, and
when on his way out he passed Old Bob’s cabin, it was dark and silent.

In fact these worthies were not in town, but early in the morning had
gone up the creek with two pack-loads of tools, provisions, and so on,
which they cached at Bob’s old prospect-hole, the Cardinal, in order to
have them convenient after they had jumped the Aurora and had driven B.
B. & Co., dead or alive, out of the cañon.

A new moon was just holding its sickle over the notch in the mountains
toward which the cañon opened, when Len reached the cabin, where his
tired partners were getting supper; and he was glad to learn, a little
later, that they approved his course in writing the letter to Mr.
Anderson.

Two days remained before the expected attack, and the firm agreed that
out of these must be squeezed all possible advantage, by double work.
This was a time when, if their fortune was to be made, or even if the
results already achieved were to be saved, every effort must be put
forth. They had wit enough to see that whether the Last Chance held a
fortune, or contained nothing, it would never do to relinquish it at
this stage of trial.

Men who were on the threshold of success have failed to attain it often
because of the want of sagacity to understand, and of energy and
self-sacrifice to work hard, at just such a crisis as this. The next
man, seizing with a firm grip, and holding his chances at every risk
until the opposition has vanished, finds a great reward.

But in order that our friends might hold on to their property it was
necessary to put it on a war footing. Their way of operating the mine
through the Aurora’s tunnel must be abandoned, of course, unless they
proposed to defend that, too, which they could not do, as they had no
legal rights there. The plan proposed, then, was to enlarge the
waterway through their own vein into a tunnel of serviceable size, and
at the same time to turn the stream of water into the Aurora, and drain
the whole of the remoter part of the mine out that way.

They abandoned their arrangement of two-hour stints, and all worked
together just as hard as they knew how.

Going into the interior chamber of the mine, they first dug a drain
through the cross-cut, and then, as fast as they tore down the rock in
enlarging their own tunnel outward, it was heaped up in the cross-cut;
for they wished to block that up completely. By Friday night this
barrier was almost built.

All were stiff and sore when they arose at daybreak on Saturday morning,
but each knew they could not afford to spare themselves, and that this
one day’s hardship might be repaid tenfold.

Before noon they tapped the main fountain, and brought its stream, which
would have measured a foot wide and a foot deep, into their new drain.

When this great point had been gained, they felt that the worst was
over, and by night they had finished barricading the cross-cut. They
were obliged that evening, when their day’s work was done, to worm their
way out to daylight through the narrow, ragged, insecure, and still
dripping waterway which threaded the Last Chance, but was by no means a
tunnel in any proper sense of the word, nor a safe place for a man to
work in.

Lennox, who was of slighter build, and at the same time of more
enthusiastic temperament than his associates, was entirely used up when
he reached daylight, and could only fall down and lie still. Fortunately
for him, however, Sandy and Max had strength enough left to cook supper.

While they were eating supper, and before darkness had come, the three
young miners were startled by a loud hallo, and on running to the door
saw Morris sitting on horseback at the foot of the dump.

“Can I ride up?” he called out.

“No, leave your nag down there. I’ll show you later how to get him
around behind the cabin, where there is some pasture.”

So Morris drew the bridle reins over his horse’s head and let them hang
down from the bit, knowing that by this sign the horse would understand
that he was to stay where he was until his rider returned. Then he
scrambled up the rough side of the dump, saying, as he reached the top
and shook hands with Max:

“Well, you needn’t worry over any jumpers to-night.”

“Why,” exclaimed Len. “What’s up?”

“Oh, the regular thing with that crowd. The minute they got a little
excited over a scheme, they had to go and drink a lot o’ whisky on it,
and there they are, sittin’ round the El Dorado, stupid as ground-hogs.
That is, two of ’em are; that beauty they call Scotty was a-begging to
fight all hands when I came away. I reckon somebody’ll accommodate him
before midnight.”

“An’ did ye say he’s called Scotty?” asked Sandy, appearing in the
doorway of the cabin for the first time.

“Yes,--why, hello, stranger! _You_ know the El Dorado, when you see it,
don’t you? How are you,” extending his hand with great cordiality, “put
it thar! I shouldn’t wonder if we could pull a double team when it comes
to layin’ out that same gambler from over the range, eh?”

“Weel, we hae done something o’ the kind a’ready, Mr. Morris, an’ I dare
say he’s no in love wi’ eyther of us.”

“Not he. He’d like nothing better than to blow up the whole of us with
giant powder. Now how are you fellows going to handle this crowd when
they do try it on? I thought if you didn’t mind I’d stay and see the
fun. Likely enough I could help you some. When my Winchester here turns
loose people ’d better stand one side!”

So they explained to him how they had used the Aurora as a new means of
entrance to their mine, the cutting of the cross-cut through the dyke,
and the way they had closed this approach by turning all the water into
the other tunnel and barricading the cross-cut.

“You see we had no right in the Aurora, and couldn’t fairly fight for
it. So we made up our minds to let ’em jump that and welcome.”

“But I have rights there--Jim and I own that together, and you’ve done
enough work on it to keep up the assessment, so that it’s ours, and
nobody can jump it while I’m around, unless they’re a heap stronger ’n I
am.”

They argued with Morris as to the uselessness of this resolution. He
admitted that the Aurora wasn’t worth fighting over, but urged that it
riled him to have it drop into the clutches of such small potatoes as
Old Bob and his pals.

Finally, however, it was agreed that the question of defending the
Aurora should be left until the attacking party appeared; and,
meanwhile, that they would devote themselves to getting their own
property into still better shape.

That night, relieved of the strain of watching, they had a long and
refreshing sleep, continued until far into the morning, for this was
Sunday.

The day of rest passed quietly.

Early on Monday they were at work again, Morris helping. Two had picks
and labored in the interior of the tunnel, enlarging the passage-way. A
third shoveled the rock torn down into a wheelbarrow and carried it part
way out, where the fourth gave him an empty wheelbarrow, took his full
one, and dumped the débris at the mouth of the mine.

By this arrangement somebody was outside nearly all the time and could
watch against any surprise from the enemy, at the same time
contributing his share of labor.

All of Tuesday and Wednesday they were undisturbed, and made such good
progress that by Wednesday evening a man could pass readily into the
farthest part of the mine, the barricade protecting the cross-cut easily
against any enemy who could get to it by way of the flooded Aurora. It
was a great gain in another direction, too, for they were expecting Mr.
Anderson, and could now show him the whole length of the mine.




THE ENEMY APPEARS.




CHAPTER XII.

THE ENEMY APPEARS.


On Wednesday afternoon Len stopped work a little earlier than the
others, though it was quite dusk, and left the mine to get supper.
Turning his gaze down the cañon, the moment he came to the mouth of the
tunnel, he saw three men on horseback riding up the trail nearly a mile
away. It was merely by good chance that he happened to catch a glimpse
of them, for had he been a moment later they would have been out of
sight, not to reappear until the ford of the creek was reached, which
was only a few yards beyond the foot of the Aurora dump.

Dropping his shovel he ran back and reported, whereupon all hands
hastened to the mouth of the tunnel, and lay down behind a rough sort of
wall of loose rocks which had been heaped up in front of the cabin in
clearing the space around the door.

Ten or fifteen minutes passed, and the twilight was fast becoming dense
in the cañon, though on the mountain-tops a full blaze of light glowed
strong and red, bringing out every glorious feature of the white-headed
old peaks.

Soon was heard the stumbling clatter, not loud, yet distinct enough, of
horses’ shodden feet on the stony path, and, as the riders came nearer,
the faint sound of human voices. A moment after this the three figures
came into view, riding cautiously through the ford, peering right and
left, with guns in readiness, as though fearful of ambuscades. A few
steps further took them out of sight behind the jutting headland of the
Aurora dump.

Then came sounds denoting that the jumpers had dismounted and were
unsaddling. The clatter of the heavy wooden stirrups echoed along the
rocky walls of the narrow gulch as the saddles were flung down.

After a short interval of silence, it became plain, by the rattle of
rolling stones, that the invaders were charging up the dump. Instead of
trying to steal to the top, they sprang up as fast as they could
scramble.

“It’s evident,” whispered Sandy, “that they’re expectin’ to catch us in
that tunnel like a fox wi’ his ’earth’ stopped. But it’s a puir fox that
has na mair than one hole to his burrow!”

Sandy seemed to have hit it, for their first act, when Bob, Scotty and
Stevens had reached the crest, and found no one there, was to rush to
the door as though to shut it and fasten it.

Imagine their chagrin when they saw that it was already closed, and that
a great quantity of water was rushing out under the sill. They pointed
one another to it, as though asserting that nobody could work in a
tunnel which was as nearly flooded as that. Still, to make matters quite
sure, they began to heap great rocks at the door and kept at it until
no three giants, much less our not over stalwart friends, could have
forced it open.

It was vastly amusing to the spectators to see these men, who were more
distinguished for their laziness than for their energy, toil at the big
stones, and when, having made sure they’d secured full possession of the
place, they sat down and wiped their brows, Max and Len and Sandy
suddenly rose up and wished them good-evening.

“Thought you’d tree’d us in that hole, eh?” Len sings out with a
sneering laugh. “Not much! We’ve been waiting for you fellows half the
week. Why didn’t you come up Saturday night as you promised?”

Astounded and angry, the three ruffians hurled back a lot of brag and
bad language, the substance of which was that nobody dare come and take
back the Aurora.

They replied with a laugh, and went in with a parting shot in broad
Scotch: “It’s the life o’ an auld hat to be weel cockit.”

Morris had already sneaked into the house and was slicing bacon for
supper.

“I’ll lay low for the present, I reckon,” he said, “‘t wont do no harm,
and it may be worth something to let those fellows think you’re alone.”

A few moments later Sandy stepped out, and was amazed to find two of the
adversaries stealing up the bank beside the cabin.

His alarm brought Max and Len in a hurry, and when they found themselves
discovered the roughs retreated in great haste and a cloud of wrathful
phrases, while Max shouted: “Hereafter we shall be watching, and it wont
be healthy for any man to set foot on this side of the gulch.”

“Those men mean business, for sure,” Morris asserted, and added this
counsel: “We musn’t show ourselves any mor’n we can help, and especially
at night by the firelight. And it wouldn’t be a bad idea to make a
better breastwork when it gets so dark they can’t see what we’re
doing.”

“We might hang blankets on the wall along that side of the cabin, so
that no one could see to shoot through the chinks,” Len suggested.

“Yes, that’s a good scheme, and somebody must be on watch night and day
lest they play some trick on us. I don’t think they’ll shoot in the
daytime, but I’ll bet they’ll take the first chance at night they can
get. I tell you, gentlemen, not only your mine, but your _lives_ are at
stake in this yere scrimmage, and it’ll stand you in hand to take mighty
good care of ’em.”

This was from Morris and was sober talk, but seemed to be no less than
the truth, considering the character of the desperadoes.

Acting upon the suggestion, in his prompt, quiet way, Max remarked that
he would take the first watch, and going to the door of the cabin which,
it will be remembered, looked down the cañon, and hence faced the
Aurora, opened it and started to pass out.

Before he could step across the threshold, a faint report rang out, not
loud nor sharp, for the air was too thin to let much noise be made, and
with an audible _ping_ a bullet splintered the log over the door.

Max dropped so quickly his chums thought for an instant he must have
been hurt, but he shouted “Keep back! Keep back!” and at once began to
wriggle forward under cover of the wall toward the brink of the dump.

Dropping on hands and knees they followed him, and a few seconds later
all four were lying behind the pile of stones, peering out into the
gloom.

Nothing could be seen, or even heard, for a time, but presently muttered
talking was detected on the other hillock and our friends concluded that
the shot did not mean an attack, but had been fired, sharpshooter
fashion, when Max exposed himself in the brightly lighted doorway. The
enemy’s camp had evidently been made down behind the shelter of the
dump, as was shown by the light reflected from the fire, but neither
the blaze nor its kindlers were visible, so that the compliment of the
shot could not have been returned had our boys felt so disposed.

“I make no doot they’re watching us as shairp as we’re peerin’ at them,”
whispered Sandy; “and the sooner we improve our fortifications, the
better.”

Max watched until midnight, then crept softly to where Morris was
stretched upon the cabin floor and asked him to take his place; but
nothing disturbed them, and the next morning two of the boys went to
their work in the mine, leaving two outside on guard. These improved
their time in strengthening the breastwork and in curtaining with
blankets that wall of the cabin. In the afternoon they exchanged places
with the men in the tunnel.

The jumpers were seen about the Aurora, but nothing was said to them.
They broke down the mine door, and penetrated the tunnel a short
distance, but soon returned, discouraged by the wetness within.

The night passed quietly and Friday morning went by without any
incident. About the middle of the afternoon, while Len and Sandy were
outside, Old Bob and Scotty came to the edge of the Aurora dump, and
held aloft a pole with a handkerchief, supposed to be white, tied upon
it, which they waved toward the cabin.

“What do you mean by that?” Len sung out, for he and Sandy happened to
be on duty as sentinels.

“Flag o’ truce,” Bob yelled back. “One o’ you fellers come down in the
hollow and meet me. I want to talk. Leave yer gun behind. I aint got no
arms, you see. Will you come?”

“I reckon. Hold on, I’ll see my partner!”

Len lighted a little lamp and disappeared into the mine, whence he
returned in five minutes. Max and Morris came as far as the door, but
did not show themselves.

“All right,” Len called out, as he blew out his lamp and climbed over
the breastwork. “Come down in the hollow if you want to talk.”

Old Bob moved clumsily down from the Aurora to meet him, while Sandy
perched himself on the wall and Bob’s friends stood behind him on their
own knoll.




A FLAG OF TRUCE.




CHAPTER XIII.

A FLAG OF TRUCE.


The younger man reached the bottom the sooner, and sitting down began to
shy pebbles at a bowlder a few yards below, to see how far they would
glance.

Bob came lumbering down the slope of loose stones, took a seat pretty
near Len, and slowly drawing his knife from his pocket, opened it with
great deliberation and began to whittle at a bit of spruce bark.

Nothing was said for some time, and neither took any notice of the
other. Each was waiting for his opponent to begin. At last the eager
disposition of the young Virginian, who never could bear to waste time
in going about whatever he had to do, and who in consequence had often
exemplified the maxim “more haste less speed,” overcame his reserve and
broke the silence.

“Well, Bob,” he began in a careless manner, “I never expected to see you
in as mean a scrape as this.”

If our embassador had studied over it for a week, he could not have made
a remark which would better serve his purpose. Bob had long deemed
himself a very wily old dog indeed. He had boasted of this to his
associates more than once, and had assured them that they would see how,
on this occasion, he would “argify and bamboozle that young cub of a
Bushwick” until, figuratively speaking, he had tied him all up in a
bundle and laid him away on a shelf in safe storage.

But Len’s cool remark, driving straight home to the very heart and
spirit of all his pretensions, let the wind out of Old Bob’s behavior
and arguments together. It angered him in an instant, and when a
diplomat gets angry he loses his power. Instead of the soft words and
sly reasoning by which he had hoped to fool his antagonist into opening
his doors to the treachery which it was intended should follow; instead
of the pretty speeches which Bob had carefully thought out and talked
over, came furious retorts, bad language, and threats, to which Len
listened with the utmost composure.

The substance of it all was, that Bob and his precious accomplices had
jumped the mine, and yet they hadn’t jumped it, rightly speaking,
because they had as much right there as anybody. The claim had been
abandoned, and if anybody had gone to work at it why that was at their
own risk, and they mustn’t complain when another man came along and took
it away from the first party.

“Now I’ve got this yere ’Rora mine,” Bob shouted excitedly, “and I’m
goin’ to keep it, don’t you forget that! An’ wot’s more, my friend Mr.
Stevens is agoin’ to jump that claim you’re holdin’ now, ’n’ that cabin.
That cabin belonged to my friend Pickens, ’n’ he told me, before he went
away, that if I wanted it I could have it, and I can prove it.”

“Now,” Bob kept on, “you young roosters ’d better give up and crawl out.
We’ll give you a chance to get away and take your blankets and things if
you’ll quit peaceable-like and git out. We don’t want no trouble, nor
nobody hurted.”

“Then why did you put a ball into our doorpost?” interrupted his
listener.

“Scotty did that. I told him’t wa’n’t on the squar, an’ ’twas kinder
haxidental anyhow. If you’ll quit shootin’ at us we wont shoot at
you,--an’ _I_ wouldn’t nohow.”

“We haven’t fired a shot.”

“You’re jist ready to all the time,” Bob persisted, “so’s we gentlemen
can’t work our property for fear of you.”

“You ‘gentlemen’! Your ‘property’!” repeated Lennox, with infinite
scorn.

“Yes, ours. And, as I was sayin’, we’ll go to town and get help, if we
arn’t enough alone, and we’ll bounce you out o’ that cabin which we want
for ourselves, and you may thank your stars if you yet out with whole
skins. The hull filin’ of ye must pack up and scoot ’fore sundown.”

“That’s rather sudden,” Len pleaded; “can’t you give us till to-morrow
morning? It looks like it was going to rain to-night.”

“Well, we don’t want to be rough on young chaps like you, though you’re
too cheeky for these parts,” Bob conceded, thinking he had frightened
the lad; “and we wont crowd ye to-night. But, by this, that and the
other! if you don’t skip out early to-morrow you’ll hear from us, you
bet!”

“All right!” Len rejoined. “I’ll tell the boys. I’m glad you gave us
till to-morrow to get out, for it looks mighty like a storm to-night.”

It required only a very brief report from Lennox to acquaint the firm
with what Bob had threatened, and, no doubt, would try to carry out.

“They have no suspicion,” Len asserted, “that Morris is with us, and it
will be a good thing if we can continue to keep it secret.”

“They’ll find it out mighty sudden and pointed-like,” muttered Morris,
“if they don’t play cautious.”

There was a pause for a moment or two, until Len remarked that he
supposed something should be said, or the enemy would think they
intended to act upon Bob’s bluster and abandon the claim, “which, of
course, nobody thinks of doing for an instant.”

“I understand it’s ours, fair and square,” said Sandy, “and sin’
possession’s nine points of the law, we might as well haud on for the
other point. I remember that my grandfeyther used to say to us
bairns,--‘better to keep the deil wi’oot the door, than drive him oot o’
the hoose.’ I’m thinking, though, I’d like to take that gambler-man by
the nape of his neck and gie him the name of an auld Scotch dance down
the bank,--I mean the Highland _fling_, ye ken?”

Max did not join in the laugh; in his despondent way, he was filled with
hesitation which none of the others felt. Had he been quite alone, I’m
not sure how much he might have wavered, postponed, and yielded; but
while all were waiting for him to say something, a shout came across
from the other dump:

“What’re you fellers a-goin’ to do?”

Len was roused. The indignation he had repressed hitherto now came to
the surface.

“I’ll show those miserable sneaks that they can’t bluff _me_!” he
exclaimed; and springing upon a heap of stones, he yelled back:

“You know you lied about your right to this mine. We bought it and we’re
going to keep it. If you want it you’ve got to take it, and you’d better
look right sharp after your own stake. This is ‘what we’re a-goin’ to
do!’”

“Well,” said Max, as the excited lad leaped down out of rifle-range,
“you’ve declared war for certain, and I imagine we’ll have to fight it
out on this line if it takes all--”

“Don’t say ‘summer’; there’s snow and frost enough in this wind to
furnish a Virginia January.”

“Well--all Winter, then. But they wont try it on--they know better.”

Evidently Max’s indecisions were over.

“No,” Morris agreed, “I don’t think they’ll attack by themselves, but
they can make about as much trouble for you by simply staying there.”

“Besides,” Sandy put in, “one of ’em’ll start to town as soon as it
comes dark, and na doot can find plenty o’ their own kind, who wad like
na better sport than to join in a scheme o’ this nature.”

“I can put a stop to that,” said Morris.

“How?”

“Nobody’ll try to get away till night, and by that time I’ll be down
there to stop him, whoever he is, and send him back again with a flea in
his ear.”

“How will you get down the cañon without their spotting you?”

“I’ll climb up the cliff and work my way down about a quarter of a mile
away. I know a spot that’ll suit me to a T. I wish Buckeye Jim was
here, we’d make a break for those jumpers and clean out the whole nest
in no time. He’d ought to a’ been here before this. Mebbe he’s in town
now--there’s no telling.”

“Likely enough Mr. Anderson is there by this time, too,” said Len.

“Why, would it not be a good plan, borrowing a hint from the adversary,
for one of us to go to town and be ready to hasten these gentlemen, or
perhaps get assistance otherwise?”

It was Sandy who made this suggestion, to which, at first, there was
only silent attention.

“I’m thinkin’ that the three of us left can stand off, as ye say, those
fellows yonder, and if we can manage to hold ’em all in, our agent would
come back with an overwhelming force and put ’em wholly to rout.”

“I guess you’re right, Sandy--but who shall go?”

“Weel, I’m vera willing to do that, or anything as ye weel ken, but I’m
so much of a stranger in town, that probably I could be of more use
here.”

“I reckon I’m your man,” said Len. “Max and Morris are both too heavy
weights to be spared from the garrison, while I can do as well on this
errand as any one else, I suppose.”

“It’s no fun for you to walk all the way down that mountain trail, with
the weather so threatening, but undoubtedly you might gain a great deal
for us,” Max interposed.

“If he didn’t get any more men to come up,” Morris suggested, “he might
be able to stop the other crowd’s getting any recruits.”

“Yes, that’s so. When shall I start?”

“The sooner the better,” said Max and Sandy in the same breath.

“Meaning after dark this evening,” added Morris. “You go along down with
me, and mebbe I’ll show you a bit of fun to cheer you up. It’ll be early
moonlight; you wont have a bad tramp.”




SOME DANGEROUS TARGET PRACTICE.




CHAPTER XIV.

SOME DANGEROUS TARGET PRACTICE.


This settled, Max and Sandy returned to their mining, while Len and
Morris lay down behind the newly-strengthened breastwork. The elder man
filled his pipe and stretched himself in the sunshine, while Len brought
out one of the few books they had and read the stirring story of the
robber Doones, and the giant farmer who got his sweetheart from among
them by such a pleasant mixture of strategy and strength.

Morris was interested, but his position was easy, the pipe was soothing,
the sun was warm, and Len’s steady tones were slumberous in their
influence. The reader, therefore, presently found his listener asleep,
in spite of his interest and his resolution. Seeing this he shut the
book, and fell into a reverie over the strange series of circumstances
that had brought him to this remote spot and outlandish surroundings,
how--Crack--ping!

Morris was wide-awake. Len’s dreams had vanished. Both men were on their
knees behind the breastwork, guns in hand and every sense alert.

On the opposite dump they saw all three of the jumpers sitting with guns
by their sides. They were gesticulating toward the smooth, whitish panel
on the cliff walk which showed where the dyke had been cut through by
the ice and floods that in ages past had carved this channel in the
mountain side; they seemed to be paying no attention to the Last Chance
people, but were pointing as though at a target, on the face of the
cliff. After a short time Scotty raised his rifle and took steady aim,
apparently at the target previously pointed out. The report of his gun
was followed by the sharp click of the ball against the porphyry wall,
and then by its rattling among the rock on the slope of the dump in
front of our sentinel friends.

“What do you suppose they’re shooting at?” muttered Len, straining his
eyes to find some mark.

Morris did not reply. He was watching the enemy going through another
pantomime, which looked as though Bob was explaining something wrong in
the shot. This was speedily concluded by Scotty’s moving his position
and aiming a third time at the face of the cliff, sighting at a little
different angle than before.

Crack!--ping! went the report, and almost at the same instant a spruce
log which lay just in front of Morris’s face jarred under the blow of a
half-ounce of lead, which sank deeply into its tough core.

“Great Harry!” shouted the incensed miner. “They’re caroming on us!”

And before Len could interfere, Morris rose on one knee, brought his
rifle to bear on the gambler, and pulled the trigger.

Scotty’s hat flew off, and he tumbled over, while Bob and Stephens let
loose a volley, which rattled harmlessly against the breastwork.

But Morris’s snap shot had not gone quite true, for Scotty picked
himself up almost instantly and scrambled out of range, followed by his
two companions.

This firing had brought Sandy and Max to the door of the mine with
anxious faces, and you may believe they were not only enraged, but made
very solicitous by the incident.

“It’s clear,” remarked Max, “that they mean to kill us if they can do so
without open-handed murder. Of course they intended those balls to
glance and hurt somebody.”

“I meant mine to, anyhow!” exclaimed Morris.

“I am glad you fired; it’ll teach those scoundrels that we are
wide-awake. But do you not think they knew you!”

“No, they couldn’t see well enough. I was kneeling behind the wall.”

“There is a’ the mair necessity, Mr. Bushwick,” remarked Sandy, “why you
should go to town to-night.”

“I feel it strongly, and Morris and I’ll get away as soon as it is dark.
You fellows have worked enough to-day, haven’t you? Suppose you stay out
now.”

“All right; we will. We’ve got a fair sort of a hole in there, anyhow.
It’s pretty deep, and a man can walk upright all the way except in one
or two places.”

They saw no more of the enemy that day, however, and Sandy occupied
himself by cooking an extra good supper.

By seven o’clock that evening a deep gloom filled the gulch, and was
scarcely less heavy on the cliffs, for thick clouds stretched like a
canopy from peak to peak.

The only means by which the jumpers could get away from their camp was
by the trail down the cañon, along which, during daylight, any one would
be exposed for some distance to the fire of our friends in the
garrison.

From the Last Chance, however, a man might easily ascend, as we know,
and then, by care and trouble, he could pass along ledges above the
Aurora, to where, some distance beyond, a crevice enabled him to clamber
down to the bottom of the gulch, a few hundred yards below where the
trail crossed the creek.

This is what Morris and Len did, as soon as the shadows of the range
enveloped them in its curtaining gloom. When they had made their way far
enough, they crept to the edge of the cliff, and could see the jumpers
eating their supper around their fire on the safe side of the dump. A
horse was hitched near by, and Old Bob was saddling him.

“You are right,” Lennox whispered. “He’s going to town to-night, and is
most ready to start. We’d better hurry up, if you want to get into
ambush ahead of him.”

Moving as quietly as possible, they hastened to where the shelving of
the cliff let them get down to the bed of the creek.

[Illustration: A SHORT CUT.

     Silver Caves, Page 159.]

Just as they reached this point, where they most needed the light to aid
them, a fierce squall swept down upon the groaning and cracking branches
of the spruce fringing the border of the crags, the air became suddenly
colder, and whirling volleys of snowflakes were dashed in the faces of
the wanderers.

“This is bad!” growled Morris. “‘Taint none too easy a job to crawl down
here in daylight, let alone trying to do it in this pitch; look out!”

Len had slipped on a wet stone and started to make the descent by an
extremely short cut, but caught hold of a young tree stem just in time
to stop himself. Warned by this, they felt their way with more caution,
and finally succeeded in clambering down to the creek-bed without
serious mishap. On reaching the trail the coating of snow was found
undisturbed, showing that as yet no one had passed over it.

A few rods below, the path was crowded into a narrow passage between a
steep bank and the water. This place Morris thought would suit his
purpose capitally, and here he proposed to meet the unsuspecting enemy
and turn him back.

His first movement was to cut and carefully trim a stout cudgel.

“Quakin-asp is the kind of a stick to make his bones ache,” said Morris,
as he trimmed away the twigs.

“I’ve no doubt of it, and I’d like to stay and see the fun, but I reckon
I’d better mosey if I’m to get to town before this snow buries me.”

“You bet you had!” was the earnest advice of his roughly-speaking but
good-hearted comrade. “It’s no soft job you’ve got on hand, and you want
to be mighty careful. Got a thick overcoat?”

“Yes.”

“Any matches?”

“Yes, lots of ’em.”

“Got your pistol?”

“Yes, borrowed Max’s. Thought I might meet wolves. I’ve heard ’em howl
down here once or twice.”

“They’re ’round on snowy nights, but they’re cowardly. Any whisky?”

“No; and I don’t want any.”

“Hm! I’m not so sure about it. Whisky’s always good, I’m thinkin’,
especially on a cold night like this.”

“You and Old Bob could agree on one point, at any rate.”

“Me and Squint-eyes agree?--not much! Still,--whisky’s good.”

“Well, I’ll wager you a jug o’ molasses, or a new hat, that I can get to
town better to-night without whisky than with it.”

“Mebbe you’re right. I know whisky’s done me a heap more harm ’n it ever
did me good, or any other fellow I ever heard of. Still, whisky’s good!”

Len laughed at this defiance of rhyme and reason, and shaking hands,
started away, Morris calling out as a last word that if he lost the
trail in the snow, or got bewildered, the only proper thing to do was
to build a fire and camp “right there,” instead of working into worse
difficulties.

The brief gale with which the storm had leaped down from its
headquarters in the heights of the Sierra had wholly subsided now, or
only reappeared in occasional momentary squalls. The snow continued
falling steadily, nevertheless, and already the ground, tops of the
bushes, and all the protruding rocks were white. The stars of course
were blotted out, but there was a pale, unearthly luminosity in the air
which showed that somewhere the moon was shining.

“How splendid a sight it would be,” thought the plucky young traveler as
he pushed steadily on, “to be above this storm, and able to look down
upon the wide sea of heaving, billowy snow-clouds, a sea of wan, soft
vapor, gleaming in the moonlight here and there as rounded masses are
rolled upward, and showing shadowy hollows or curving wrinkles, coming
and going, forming and changing before one’s eyes.”

Len had no great difficulty in keeping upon the trail, though he often
felt himself in very delicate places where a wrong step might mean a bad
fall, if not death.

In the wooded district lying between the Panther Creek gorge and the
village side of the mountain, he got bewildered once or twice, but by
keeping his wits about him passed safely beyond the forest, and felt
thereafter in no great danger of going astray. Yet he was not prepared
for the way the storm had quickly disguised all the landmarks, so that
he found the trail unexpectedly hard to follow.

This latter half of the journey was the strangest part of all. Now that
he had got out of the gorge and past the woods upon the ridge, he could
see abroad for the most part; but the whole wide and beautiful landscape
with which he had grown familiar was so lost and transformed that it was
hard to recognize its most familiar features. Where in the summer
daylight, of that wonderfully crystal-clear daylight of the alpine air,
he had been confronted by bold bluffs and clearly cut, prominent peaks,
only the vaguest outlines of a few of the nearest headlands now
appeared. Everything else was hidden under a veil of snowflakes. To his
left, as he reached the opening, half-way down, which allowed the
broadest view, a misty expanse took the place of a well-known rank of
towering peaks; in front, an undefined, Titanic shadow against the sky
showed dimly the wall of guardian cliffs enclosing the valley; while at
the right, clusters of rugged and spruce-grown foot-hills were merged
and invisible under the graceful arch of a mighty dome, faintly outlined
in the tumult of the storm, which was wrapping its mantle so swiftly
round every mountain.

In spite of his haste, and of the cold wind which hurled the powdered
snow against his face and drove it into the crevices of his clothing,
Lennox stood still here to gaze upon this shadowy picture of a new
world, this ghostly Walpurgis Night, which formed the most impressive
scene he had ever beheld. And as he gazed, there came faintly to his
ear, from far up the mountain behind him, a long, shrill scream as of
some one in deadly distress.

Len knew it was the cry of the mountain lion, but in that palely-lighted
dance of the snow-spirits among these awful rocks, it might well have
been taken for the last cry of some forlorn and freezing witch.

Shaking off these fancies and the snow together, our hero turned his
steps downward, and an hour later aroused the astonished landlord and
went to bed at the hotel, thoroughly tired, but safe and far ahead of
his adversaries.




OLD BOB TAKES A THRASHING.




CHAPTER XV.

OLD BOB TAKES A THRASHING.


Morris had not to wait more than fifteen minutes after Len’s departure
before he found his work at hand. The snow so softened the trail that
the sound of the horse’s hoofs were not heard until they had approached
within a few feet of the ambush, and amid the blinding flakes, it was
impossible to recognize the face of the well-muffled rider.

It was certainly Old Bob, however, who had been seen saddling the horse,
and Morris concluded that the man before him was he. Had it been Scotty,
he might have hardened his heart to almost any degree of severity, but
heretofore he had had no quarrel with Bob, for whom he felt contempt
chiefly, and he intended to let him off as easily as it would be safe to
do.

Rousing himself at the sound of the stumbling nag, Morris had but half a
minute to pause, before suddenly springing in front of the horse, with a
blow at the animal’s head and a yell like a wild Shoshone.

The startled and punished animal reared, spun round in the narrow trail
as nimbly as a deer could have done, slipped on the wet stones, and fell
headlong over the low bank at the edge of the trail, flinging his
astounded rider over his head into the creek.

Morris, delighted at the effect of his first charge, followed it up with
a second whoop, hearing which the horse picked himself up and rushed up
the trail at break-neck speed, frightened out of its senses.

Old Bob, panic-stricken, dumb-founded, and shocked by his fall, was just
rising from the shallow water, when Morris got down the bank. Leaping
upon him, he seized the wretched victim by collar, and shook him by both
hands as a terrier does a rat. Then snatching up his stick he began to
lay it vigorously over Bob’s shoulders, keeping at it until the old
fellow could find enough of his scattered wits and tangled legs to
enable him to run away.

“Get back in your hole, you old sarpint!” Morris yelled, as he flung his
cudgel after the retreating enemy. “Next time you thieves want to sneak
off to town, mind you get permission of your betters!”

To this Bob replied, as was expected, by a couple of shots from his
revolver, which, up to this time, he had fairly forgotten in the
surprise of the unexpected attack, but Morris dodged behind a rock at
the first flash, and no harm was done.

He did not return this random fire, but kept wide-awake for a few
minutes, thinking Bob might come back with his companions. This,
however, he did not do, and Morris lost no further time in starting
home.

Bob admitted afterward, that he thought that at least two men had
attacked him, which spoke well for Morris’s activity, and that it was
Max who was giving him the shaking. Wet, sore, chilled and altogether
dazed, he was in no condition to lead an attack against an ambushed
enemy in the middle of a snowy night, nor were his accomplices eager to
go and avenge his wrongs, preferring, so long as their own precious
skins remained whole, to stay where they were and scold at him for his
failure.

All this happened on Friday night, and to that fact the superstitious
miner attributed his misfortunes.

The storm ceased before daybreak. Then what a strange, new, glorious
landscape was that the sun rose upon! Its beams streamed athwart
limitless spaces of snow. Overhead, the height Sandy had partly ascended
rose in rounded outlines, a huge dome of unblemished white. Ahead, as if
a mighty drift had been heaped across the gap between the mountains, lay
the saddle over which the trail led through the woods; and inside the
gorge all the roughnesses were smoothed, all the bowlders and prostrate
logs, the boughs of the spruces and cottonwoods, bushes, ferns, and
weeds, were packed full and weighed down with the soft and flurry
flakes.

Beyond calling for a little shoveling inside the fort, the snow was no
hindrance, of course, to the underground work of the firm of B. B. & Co.
They hammered away at improving their tunnel all day on Saturday and
until late at night, and followed it by a pleasant Sunday’s rest, in
spite of their cramped quarters and tedious guard-duty.

The case was far different with the unfortunate jumpers, who, at the
Aurora, had no shelter, and no way of getting free from the snow and the
wet.

This misfortune was doubled by a thaw on Sunday afternoon, suddenly
letting loose a great flood of melted snow, and turning the creek into a
torrent, which, before Monday morning, had so swollen as to cover the
trail and ford with a rushing flood six or eight feet deep, that it
would have been madness to cross.

Old Bob and his companions, therefore, were not only very uncomfortable,
but between the impassable creek and the unscalable wall on one side,
and the rifles of our friends on the other, they were really prisoners.

“I reckon they’re getting hungry over yonder, too,” remarked Morris,
when a heavy rain on Monday night had produced a second flood in the
creek. “I don’t believe they have grub enough to last much longer. They
couldn’t have brought a great deal with ’em, and it must be about used
up.”

That was the fact of the case. Rations were growing very short in the
enemy’s camp, and if the end had not come pretty soon they would have
been obliged to surrender, since it was impossible to get to where their
provisions had been cached with such great labor preparatory to this
campaign.

Even to our friends, who had no such miseries to fret them, the
situation was becoming extremely monotonous and annoying. Max was glum
and anxious. Sandy had lost his humor. Morris would growl softly at
himself first for letting Old Bob get away with a single unbroken bone,
and then for having allowed that kid, as he called Len, to go on alone
to town in the storm. It was tedious enough to be shut up in this cabin,
in the midst of such miserable weather, and in hourly danger of a bullet
in one’s brain, but when to that was added the worry over Len’s safety,
the suspense became nearly unendurable.




THE FIGHT AT THE FORD.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE FIGHT AT THE FORD.


“I tell you what it is!” exclaimed Morris, as Wednesday morning brought
no tidings, and the clouds began to break away, “if that kid, or
somebody else, don’t show up to-day, I’m going to look him up. I
oughtn’t to ’a’ been such a dod rotted fool as to let him go nohow.”

No one opposed an objection; in fact it would have done no good if they
had, since Morris was his own master, while at the same time, every one
hoped he would be saved the journey.

The two went to work after breakfast, as usual, in the tunnel, and
rejoined Sandy, who had combined sentinel with kitchen duty, to eat a
famous dinner about one o’clock. The sun had been out an hour or two,
and the creek had fallen so rapidly, that Max thought it might now be
crossed at a pinch.

“Heard anything from our neighbors this morning?” the guard was asked.

“Not a word. I was a leetle suspeecious in consequence, and kept my een
peeled as ye say out here, but I kenned naething wrong.”

“They’re up to some trick or other, you can bet your boots,” was the
opinion of Morris, who followed his words by going out and peering
through crevices in the barricade at the enemy’s fortifications.

He had no more than got there, when they heard him yell out in angry
astonishment, and when they hurried out of the cabin were amazed to see
him standing on top of the wall, rifle in hand, like a picture of
Sergeant Jasper at New Orleans.

“Look there, will you?” he shouted, pointing down the cañon.

The place where the trail was visible from the cabin was a stretch of
about forty yards, so situated between the cliff and the creek, that
any one going up or down could not escape coming under rifle range from
the fort. At its further end was the ford of the creek, which with the
rise of the opposite bank could also be seen, a protruding bastion of
rock cutting off all further view of the trail for a mile or more.

At the instant Morris had glanced through the crevice in the wall, he
had seen his old enemy Scotty riding his horse at the top of its speed
toward the creek, into which he was about to plunge, when he suddenly
reined up, and seizing his rifle from the leathern sling, which held it
balanced on the horn of his saddle, lifted it toward his shoulder. His
horse, however, alarmed at the rapid motion, gave a shying jump, which
nearly dislodged the man from the saddle, and the gun went off before
any aim had been taken.

It was at this juncture that Morris had leaped upon the wall, and Sandy
and Max had followed. Before they had time to speculate upon the
matter, there rushed into view down the opposite bank of the creek the
stalwart, buckskin-clothed form of Buckeye Jim, leveling a revolver at
the disconcerted horseman, who with quick presence of mind threw his
hands above his head in sign of surrender and so saved his life,--“a
great peety!” in Sandy’s opinion.

Close behind Jim was to be seen Lennox with a stranger whom nobody at
first recognized; and a moment later Mr. Anderson rode into view,
driving slowly ahead of him the horses of the other three.

Jim still kept Scotty under his eye, while the others mounted and waded
the stream. The stranger approached Scotty and took his rifle away from
him, while Len seized the bridle of his horse. Then the hands came down
and were placed behind his back, where they remained as though fastened,
after which the cavalcade started up the trail toward the mines.

“Scotty’s been handcuffed,” Morris explained, when he saw these
movements. “I can tell by the way he rides.”

Suddenly Max exclaimed, “They’re running right against the others’
guns,” and leaping over the wall he hurried, revolver in hand, straight
toward the Aurora’s dump.

Divining his intention, the others followed him, stumbling over the
slushy and rolling stones in hot haste, and rushed up the face of the
enemy’s embankment like a storming party. They had almost as far to go
as the others, and must make haste, breath or no breath. It was well
they did so, for the first thing that met their eyes when they had
reached the top of the dump, was Old Bob and Stevens lying behind two
logs, guns in hand, ready to shoot the instant the approaching party
should get clear of the last thicket.

Waiting for no orders or permission, Morris drew bead on the nearest man
and fired, and with an awful cry Stevens sprang to his feet and fell
back a senseless heap on the ground.

Bob, thunder-struck, whirled round to find the three men above him and
all hope gone. Dropping on his knees in abject terror, and green with
fright, the miserable poltroon shrieked for mercy, and he received the
boon with the contempt of his foes not only, but of his friends, for the
captured Scotty at once began pouring upon his head the most bitter
revilings.

Except to take away his gun and give him a kick, nobody else paid any
attention to him, for all were hurrying to congratulate Lennox upon his
safe return, to welcome Mr. Anderson, to be introduced to Buckeye Jim
and the stranger, who proved to be a Deputy Sheriff from Denver with a
warrant for Scotty’s arrest, and to clap each other on the back over the
fortunate escapes and successes which had marked the last five minutes
with so much excitement.

Until this hand-shaking had been gone through with, no one thought of
the wounded man. The time had not been long, however, and at first it
was more needful to make sure of the living than to attend to the dead.

But was he dead?

“Na,” replied Sandy, who was the first to kneel by his side and place a
hand within his shirt-bosom to feel if any life remained. “His hairt
beats.”

“Glad to hear he’s got one; where is he wounded?” asked Morris, also
kneeling by his side. “Oh, here,” pointing to where the blood was slowly
dripping from the left arm of the prostrate and unconscious man.

“We maun cut away his sleeve,” commanded Sandy, who seemed to know
precisely what to do, “or he may bleed to death.”

To slit up the sleeves of the coat and woolen shirt was the work of only
half a moment, and the pain caused by the chill air striking the
lacerated flesh, brought back consciousness in short order.

Glancing around the circle of strange faces, catching sight of the
handcuffed Scotty and mournful Bob, and feeling the numb pain in his
naked arm, which Sandy was washing, the poor fellow turned aside his
face, closed his eyes, and muttered in complete disgust:

“Why in thunder didn’t ye let me die?”

“There’s naething but mends for misdeeds,” was Sandy’s sententious
rejoinder, as he cleansed the wound of blood, picked the shreds of cloth
out of it, and lifted the arm to examine its extent.

“The ball ha’ passed quite through the muscles,” he announced, “and
entered the man’s side. I’m not so sure, my fair body, that it was worth
while to bring you to.”

“Eh! What’s that? you don’t mean to say--?”

“Keep cool!” commanded Sandy sternly “D’ye want to bleed to death, ye
fool, before we can bind ye up? Keep quiet!”

Dipping a handkerchief in cold water he bound it tightly round the
perforated arm, a proceeding which set Stevens groaning pitifully.

“Now let’s see what else,” he said; and began to search the chest of his
patient for marks of harm.

The hole in the outside of the coat made by the bullet was plain enough,
but no blood was visible on the vest or shirt. Opening his coat Sandy
found the bullet-hole just over a pocket; and as he moved the garment
farther, out tumbled a thick slab of tobacco holding a flattened bullet,
which had not been able to force its way through. There was a black
bruise on the skin, but to this ignoble agent the wicked man owed his
life.

“Thank God!” he ejaculated, when it was shown him. No one echoed the
words more fervently then Morris, for though he could have acquitted his
conscience, had his bullet, in defence of his friends against reckless
ruffians, proved the death of one of them, yet he was heartily relieved
to know that his hand had sent no human soul to judgment.

“Aye, thank God!” retorted Sandy with deep sarcasm, “who, in His
inscrutable wisdom, sends the greatest fuils the greatest fortunes.”

Having had his arm bandaged, Stevens was able to get upon his feet and
walk, supported by Old Bob. The whole party then slowly made their way
to the cabin, Sandy running in advance to get the cooking started again.

The wounded Stevens is given a bunk to lie in, and Scotty a box to sit
on, but the Sheriff declines to take off the handcuffs.

“What is the charge against him?” the Sheriff is asked.

“Horse-stealing and various other things,” replied the deputy. “Mr.
Anderson can tell you more about it than I, who am acting on a
requisition from the Governor of Illinois.”

“He stole some valuable horses from my farm near Aurora, Illinois,
several months ago,” said that gentleman, “and we only lately heard that
he was in this region. It’s a sore subject with Buckeye Jim here,”
continued Mr. Anderson, smiling on that big man, “for we suspected him
for a while.”

“That’s all right now,” Jim responded heartily. “A man who is fool
enough to keep the bad company I’ve been in sometimes, must share their
color, I suppose, whether he deserves it or not. We’ll say no more about
it.”

While this conversation is going on, and dinner is preparing, Max and
Old Bob are talking outside the door.

“Why do you make all this trouble, Bob?” Max asked--“What did you expect
you’d get out of it?”

“Reckoned I’d get a good mine. I lowed you wasn’t staying up here for
nothin’.”

“And you thought it was the Aurora I was at work in?”

“To be sure; where else? this is no good!”

“Isn’t it? Well, we’ll see about that. At any rate the Aurora is
worthless, and I have merely been using that as a runway to get to the
back end of this mine easily, through a cross-cut. We’re not working the
Aurora, we’re working the Last Chance. You could a’ jumped that all day
and we wouldn’t have objected enough to fight, but when you came over
here we had to.”

“And you’ve won the turn,” said Bob dejectedly.

“Yes I’ve won, just as I did once before, Bob,--maybe you remember--when
a couple of burglars tired to crawl into my window.”

“I don’t know nothin’ about that,” Bob replied, in a dogged tone.

“Don’t you? Well now, Bob, this makes twice you escaped being shot in
your rascalities with me, and if you ever see your way out of this
present scrape, I’m thinking you’d better leave the gulch.”

“Leave; you bet I’ll leave. I ’low you wouldn’t be none too friendly,
but that there Scotty would murder me the first day he got loose, though
this bust-up aint no more my fault ’n’ ’tis his’n.”

“Do you think so?”

“Think so; I know it! And I’ve got to get clear away from this country,
or I’m a dead man!”

“Maybe I can be of some use to you--I mean in saving you from Scotty;
but you must tell me who was with you that night you came to our cabin.”

“It was Stevens,” said Bob quietly.

“Could you prove it, if you were wanted to?”

“Yes, I could.”

“Well, Bob, there’s your horse, and a trail clear to Denver. Good-by. I
hope you’ll do better hereafter than I’ve known you to yet.”

Max turned his back and went into the cabin, where all the rest were
gathering around the table. By the time he had filled his plate and had
found a seat on an inverted powder-can, Squint-eyed Old Bob was taking
his unworthy self out of the cañon, and out of my story, at the best
pace he knew how.

He got safely away and never came back; but I am sorry to say he behaved
no better, and probably only escaped hanging at last by getting crushed
in a snowslide.

Before dinner was ended, a new arrival, and a hungry one, appeared in
the person of the Superintendent of Mr. Anderson’s mine near the
village, a gentleman whom our firm knew well, and had a high respect
for, both as an expert in mining and as an honest man.




THE CAPITALIST EXAMINES THE MINE.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE CAPITALIST EXAMINES THE MINE.


The capitalist frankly told Max and Len, as the three sat a little apart
from the others, that he had great faith in that region, and was willing
to invest a reasonable amount of money in any prospect that gave him
sufficient encouragement.

He recalled how the attempt had been made to dupe him at Old Bob’s
diggings a short distance below, and said that he had felt so well
satisfied that nothing this creek could show was good, that he had
resolved never to look at any property on its banks again.

At the same time, the behavior of Mr. Brehm, during the examination of
Bob’s prospect-hole to which he had just alluded, was so upright and
intelligent, that when he heard that something different had been
discovered on Panther Creek, and by whom, he had readily consented to
come and see it. “Now I want to see all you have to show me; and if you
have anything good, I’ve no doubt we can make some sort of a bargain.
But I don’t profess to understand these things as well as some, and at
any rate two heads are better than one. ‘In a multitude of counsellors
there is wisdom,’ the Wise Man says. Therefore I shall ask you to let my
superintendent go in with us.”

This long speech was not in the least tiresome to its hearers, as you
may well believe; indeed they took a great liking to Mr. Anderson’s
frank, bluff, and business-like manner, which inspired both respect and
confidence.

At once, therefore, the little lamps were lighted, old canvas coats were
lent to the visitors, and the four started into the Last Chance tunnel,
Max leading the way, and Len bringing up the rear.

Sandy remained at the cabin, partly because he felt himself an outside
factor, and partly to bear company with Buckeye Jim, Morris, and the
Deputy Sheriff, who were guarding the prisoner, and chatting over Rocky
Mountain adventures in a way very entertaining to the Scotchman.

Apologies for the unworkman-like condition of the mine were unnecessary,
since everybody knew the history of the undertaking, so that nothing was
said until the inner chamber had been reached, at the crosscut, the
shape and situation of which was first explained to the visitors.

“Is your title unquestionable?” asked Mr. Anderson.

“Yes; we had the papers examined by a lawyer, and the transfer properly
recorded. There is no flaw, that we can discover.”

“Where does this water come from?”

“Mainly from a surface seam. I think it could be drained off above
ground by a little engineering, and thus stopped entirely without much
expense.”

While this colloquy was in progress, the superintendent had taken up a
pick and chipped off some pieces of rock from the roof and sides of the
vein, at which he was looking very sharply under the flame of his smoky
lamp. Lennox noticed with a thrill of gratification how his expert eye,
with the instinctive perception acquired by a long training, threw away
what they had learned was worthless rock, while the brown stuff, which
they had proved to be valuable, was selected for closer examination.

“This is queer-looking stuff,” he remarked, “I never came across
anything just like it. What do you take it to be, Mr. Brehm?”

“That, sir,” Max replied, with a bit of tremor in his voice, for this
was the first announcement, “that, sir, I suppose to be a telluride of
gold, carrying about twenty-eight ounces to the ton.”

“Great Scott! That’s the best show of gold in these parts! And this
black grit must be a lead-carbonate!”

“So we are told by Denver assayers. They pronounce it a soft carbonate,
rich in lead and iron, and worth--here’s the letter--about one hundred
and twenty dollars to the ton.”

Both Mr. Anderson and the superintendent were vastly interested by this
information, which evidently they accepted as true. The latter gentleman
read aloud the assayer’s statement of his analysis of the ore, and
pointed out that it gave very little black-jack, antimony, etc., which
indicated that the ore would be easy to smelt, a most important
consideration in estimating its value.

“Is the whole vein, so far as you have gone, like this?” Mr. Anderson
asked, as he held up his light, and scrutinized the walls and roof of
the small chamber.

“No; there is not much at the very entrance, though, after we learned to
recognize them, we could find traces of both the carbonate and telluride
clear to the door-way, but we saw much more in the interior, and argued
that the deeper we went the richer the mine would grow, which has
proved true up to the present time. If it hadn’t been for those pesky
jumpers, we should have gone several yards deeper.”

“The vein doesn’t seem to be uniformly composed of the ore minerals.”

“No, it has been growing very strange in its distribution of late, a
fact we began to notice when we were about two-thirds of the way to this
point. The lode gradually became filled with more or less globular
cavities, which steadily increased in size. The wall of each of these
cavities is formed almost wholly of the telluride, and the spaces
between are pretty nearly dead rock. Inside, whenever they are
small,--there are some little ones in the roof, just over your head,
which show it well,--they are quite filled with nearly solid carbonate;
but when they are larger--the last one we struck, you can see a remnant
of it in the breast, was as big as a barrel--they are only partly full,
and the ore of the interior soft and crumbling.”

“They are like miniature caves or monstrous geodes,” said Mr. Anderson.

“Yes,” Len put in--he had been quiet as long as he could stand it, “and
sometimes we are warned of what is ahead by the hollow sound.”

“Maybe we can find one now, to show you,” Max suggested; and, taking a
pick, he moved toward the extremity of the tunnel, whither the rest
followed him.

Tapping here and there the breast of rock forming the head of the
tunnel, Max presently detected near the floor a peculiar echo; all
listened, and agreed that this sound denoted a hollow.

“I’m not very sure, but I’ll try it,” he said, and slipping aside swung
back his sturdy arms preparatory to delivering a tremendous stroke.

Down came the pick, crashed through a shell of rock, and sank out of
sight, except a few inches of handle.

“You’ve hit it, sure!” exclaimed Mr. Anderson. “Make the hole a little
bigger, so that we can see in.”

Max did so, knocking off the edges until Len could put head and arms in,
whereupon he reported that he could neither touch nor see the further
side.

Drawing back, the hole was again enlarged, and Max tossed in a stone,
which was heard to roll downward a long distance.

The whole party was now excited in no small degree. Taking the
superintendent’s candle in addition to his own, Mr. Anderson crept
inside the aperture, cautiously descended a short incline, closely
followed by the others, and soon reached a level bottom. The adventurers
now found themselves in a large natural chamber--the interior, in fact,
of an extensive cavity like those of a lesser size which have been
described. The flickering rays of their lamps and candles let them see
that overhead was a dome-like ceiling, seamed with bright streaks of
galena, and interspersed, in a sort of rude fresco, with

[Illustration: THE FAIRY CAVE.

     Silver Caves, Page 202.]

brown carbonates of lead, greenish chlorides of silver and pure white
talc. At several points in this remarkable chamber small openings
appeared, apparently leading to similar chambers beyond and above.

Choosing one of these apertures opposite the breach by which they had
entered, they enlarged it somewhat, until one by one they could squeeze
through into a natural tunnel which ran for a hundred feet or more on an
upward slant. Following it slowly, they clambered over boulders of
galena, cubic crystals of lead, almost always accompanied by silver, and
left the first of human footprints upon mounds of soft gray carbonates.
Here, as before, the walls and roof showed themselves to be solid masses
of chloride and carbonate ores of silver, through which small deposits
of the telluride of gold were lying like plums in a pudding.

Returning to the starting-point the explorers broke down another
doorway, and passing through a second natural tunnel a distance of
about forty feet, found indications of other chambers and passages
beyond.

“It would seem,” cried Mr. Anderson, who was now more astonished than
were our young friends, the fortunate owners;--“it would seem as though
nature had selected choice treasures from her great storehouses, and had
placed them in these chambers and made them beautiful with glittering
crystals, wrought in the heart of these remote mountains, on purpose to
lure men to still greater exertions and richer rewards of labor and
perseverance.”

“She’s had to wait a good while for visitors to her show,” Len remarked.

“Yes,” Mr. Anderson replied, “but that is no matter. Nature is never in
a hurry. She can afford to be patient and wait, and let things move
slowly. With her ’a thousand years is but a day.’ She has had, and will
have, all the time there is.”

“For that matter,” Max remarked, catching up the strain, “what is this
little bit of beauty and interest, curious as it is, beside the
splendid shows nature arranges for us, with never wearying change, from
morning till night.”

“And from night till morning,” added the superintendent, remembering the
brilliant heavens spread over the clean-aired mountains.

“Nevertheless, for our purposes,” said Mr. Anderson, heartily, “this
does very well indeed, and I compliment you most sincerely on your
success.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Then they made their way out and told their wonderful tale. The storm
had wholly cleared from the mountains, and the sun was shining
brilliantly, robing the magnificent landscape, softened by autumn haze,
in its most glorious garb.

Buckeye Jim and Morris were hearty in their congratulations, and began
to build enthusiastic hopes that their own worthless Aurora might be
pushed into a similar group of silver-caves. But that lode lay on the
wrong side of the porphyry partition, and I regret to say that the money
they afterwards spent in trying the experiment was wholly wasted.

The deputy sheriff from Denver was not greatly moved; said he had heard
tall stories before; knew how to boom a prospect-hole as well as the
next man, and altogether made himself disagreeable by his air of
unbelief and his sneering tone. It is wise, no doubt, to be cautious,
but it is very unfortunate for a man, and especially for a young man, to
get into such a state of mind that no statement is to be credited,
nothing considered genuine, and no man accepted as honest and
well-meaning.

As for the prisoners, they were sullen, irritated by the good fortune of
those whom they had intended to ruin, and spent their time in planning
vengeance upon Old Bob for misleading them and getting them into a
scrape from which they could see no escape,--since, in fact, there was
none.

“Fools aye see ither folk’s faults, and forget their ain,” Sandy
informed them when he had become disgusted with their profane growling
and threats.

Of all the company in the cabin, indeed, Sandy McKinnon, naturally, was
the one most deeply interested in this marvelous find, which, for him,
meant a sudden and unhoped-for good fortune out of his brief essay in
America.

“Hech, man,” he cried out, “it’s jest the old days of Alladdin an’ his
lamp--the open-sesame business, ye mind. Why, the riches o’ it must be
untold!”




SUCCESS ACHIEVED.




CHAPTER XVIII.

SUCCESS ACHIEVED.


The next morning, after all the rest had started for town (for Stevens
was quite able to travel, despite his wound), Mr. Anderson and his
adviser sat down to a business talk with our heroes.

“As I understand it,” the capitalist began, “you were anxious to sell an
interest in this mine, and hoped to persuade me to buy such an interest.
Is that so?”

“It is,” came in double response from Max and Lennox.

“Do you still wish to sell, in view of the remarkable disclosures
yesterday?”

“I do not see how otherwise we are to get money to carry on the work,”
said Max, “and therefore, though we should be glad to retain the whole,
I fear we shall be obliged to dispose of a part.”

“How great a part?”

“Last week,” replied Max smiling, “I should have said half, but now I
think a quarter would be enough to take off, at any rate, as the first
slice.”

“What is your idea of price?”

“Well, yesterday my partners and I had agreed upon a price, but I fear
that wont do for to-day, since Len and Sandy here seem to think the mine
looks a little more promising than heretofore.”

You should have seen the grins that passed around that circle and
answered one another.

“We would like to hear what you have to offer,” Len suggested,
addressing Mr. Anderson.

“Well,” the capitalist answered, “I’ve been thinking about it, and am
free to say, that I feel disposed to join with you,--buy a share of your
mine, organize a new firm, and go in for its thorough development; but
before I can say what I am willing to give, I must know more than I do
as to the probable cost of certain preparations, such as the drainage of
the mine, the availability of timber for inside bracing, etc., the cost
of making a wagon road up here, the kind of winter houses which will be
needful, and various other things. How would ten thousand dollars strike
you as payment for half the mine?”

Sandy’s eyes opened wide. That is a great deal of money to a Scotchman.
Lennox looked as though he was just ready to jump at it, but Max calmly
raised one foot over his knee and said quietly:

“It doesn’t come within sight of the proper figure.”

Mr. Anderson laughed, and put on his hat for a tramp up the cliff,
where, Max had said, it might be possible to head off the water.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week later all assembled in Mr. Anderson’s office in the Camp to hear
his proposition.

“I will give you,” he said, “fifty thousand dollars in cash for one half
of the mine, for if I cannot have more than a quarter, it will not pay
me to touch it; a new partnership to be made between us four for
continuing the work, and the profits to be divided according to the
amount which each one contributes under the new arrangement toward
putting the mine in a shape to produce and sell ore.”

This proposition was accepted. And while the proper papers were being
made out, the three members of the old firm of Brehm, Bushwick & Co.
went aside to settle their own affairs preparatory to dissolving the
partnership.

“McKinnon,” said Len, as spokesman, “Max and I have been studying what
ought to be your share of this money. We think that the circumstances
have been so peculiar, that it would not be doing as well by you as we
want to, if we stick by the old agreement, and at the same time we felt
that you were not quite even with us in the affair. We thought we would
split the difference by offering you ten thousand dollars and a chance
to come into the new firm for so much as you choose to re-invest. Will
that be satisfactory?”

“Parfectly--parfectly, and I thank ye for your leeberality, since I
wadna hae blamed ye had ye stuck to the original terms, though, to be
sure, they would ’a’ fallen far short o’ what ye are proposin’. But, I
ha’ had eno’ o’ the mining business. It’s no what I was cut out for, I’m
thinkin’, and wi’ all respect to you, and carryin’ away a life-long
gladness, that I ever met ye, I will take my belongings back to auld
Scotland and aye stay there.”

And so he did.

The new firm, Mr. Anderson, Max and Lennox, put the Silver Caves, as
they called the new mine, into fine shape; constructed wagon-roads,
built good houses in place of the old cabin, and in a few years were
carrying on one of the most extensive mines in that part of the
mountains. It came to be only one in a group of good mines which were
discovered on both sides of the creek, when men learned what kind of ore
to look for in that district. But none of them have ever excelled this
in value, nor is any company more likely to reach a higher and higher
prosperity, than this first mine and its managers, in which we have been
interested; a success due not to luck, but to keen eyes, willing hands,
and stout hearts.


THE END.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILVER CAVES: A MINING STORY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


