The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chinese cook book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Chinese cook book

Author: Vernon Galster

Release date: September 4, 2024 [eBook #74369]

Language: English

Original publication: Morris: Vernon Galster, 1917

Credits: Richard Tonsing, Aaron Adrignola, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHINESE COOK BOOK ***





[Illustration]

                          _Chinese Cook Book_
                            In Plain English


                                   By

                             VERNON GALSTER


                              Recipes for

                            CHOP SUEY
                            EGGS FO YOUNG
                            WAR MEIN
                            YET CA MEIN
                            CHOW MEIN
                            BIRDS NEST SOUP
                            ETC.

                              PRICE, $1.00

                    COPYRIGHT 1917 BY VERNON GALSTER




                            COPYRIGHT NOTICE


The contents of this book are fully protected by the copyright laws of
the United States, as enacted in the past few years. Anyone reprinting
these recipes, or causing them to be reprinted, or using them after
being reprinted, unless by special permission of the publisher, will be
prosecuted to the fullest extent.

                       VERNON GALSTER, PUBLISHER
                            MORRIS, ILLINOIS




                         Is This Book for You?


To the person who is a thousand miles from a Chinese Restaurant. To he
or she who would appreciate the opportunity and consider it a matter of
pride to be able by a little practice in the art of an unknown science,
to treat their friends, and themselves, to some of these remarkably
delicious, fascinating, toothsome dishes.

To the man, out in the woods, in camp, on shipboard, at the club, who
feels that the connecting link to unalloyed happiness would be a good
big dish of Chop Suey. To the persons who are fond of Chinese dishes,
but unable to eat them with the same relish in a Chinese Restaurant as
they could at home.

To the woman who hears hubby talk about the dandy feed he had at the
Chinese Restaurant, and who would welcome the chance to be able to treat
him with the surprise of his life.

To these people I open the door to the secrets of Chinese cookery,
giving them the methods herein used by the greatest Chinese Chefs in the
world. By supplying you with the imported Chinese flavoring sauces and
vegetables I make it possible for you to cook these foods in the ONLY
GENUINE WAY.

To these people I respectfully dedicate this little book, with the hope
that now and then my efforts may be appreciated by the fellow in the
woods, or the lady who loves to cook (and eat Chop Suey.)

                     VERNON GALSTER, Morris, Ills.


                       IMPORTED CHINESE SUPPLIES

The Chinese flavoring sauces and vegetables called for in these recipes
can be purchased from the publisher of this book. An illustrated
catalogue containing prices and descriptions of the various imported
ingredients will be sent FREE for the asking.




                                 INDEX


                                                  Page
                 American Chop Suey (Plain)          3
                 American Chop Suey (Extra Fine)     3
                 American Chop Suey (Fine Cut)       3
                 Birds Nest Soup                     7
                 Chinese Chop Suey (Plain)           2
                 Chinese Chop Suey (Extra Fine)      3
                 Chinese Chop Suey (Fine Cut)        3
                 Chinese Chop Suey (White M’hr’m)    3
                 Chinese Chop Suey (With Lamb)       3
                 Chinese Chop Suey (With Veal)       3
                 Chinese Chop Suey (With Beef)       3
                 Chicken Chop Suey (Plain)           4
                 Chicken Chop Suey (Fine Cut)        4
                 Chicken Chop Suey (Mushroom)        4
                 Chinese Cured Pork                  4
                 Chow Mein (Plain)                   7
                 Chow Mein (With Chicken)            7
                 Chow Mein (With Mushrooms)          7
                 Dinner of China                     8
                 Eggs Fo Young (Plain)               5
                 Eggs Fo Young (With Shrimp)         5
                 Eggs Fo Young (With Lobster)        5
                 Eggs Fo Young (With Chicken)        5
                 Rice (Cooked Chinese Style)         2
                 War Mein (Plain)                    6
                 War Mein (With Chicken)             6
                 War Mein (White Mushroom)           6
                 Yet Ca Mein (Plain)                 5




                           CHINESE CHOP SUEY

                            For Two Portions

  (Prepare all of these ingredients before starting to cook the Suey)


  1 POUND LEAN PORK (Sliced size and thickness of half dollar.)
  1 CUP SPANISH ONIONS (Sliced thin.)
  1 CUP CELERY (Sliced thin crosswise. Remove leaves.)
  1 CUP CHINESE MUSHROOMS (Soak in water until soft. Remove stems,
     slice.)
  5 CHINESE WATER CHESTNUTS (Pare and slice thin.)
  1 TABLESPOONFUL CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.
  1 TABLESPOONFUL CHINESE SWEET SAUCE.
  3 DROPS SESAMUN OIL.
  1 TEASPOONFUL CORNSTARCH (Dissolved in a little water.)

Cook in an iron kettle on a very high flame.

Fry the pork until half done, using about a tablespoonful of lard, meat
fryings or peanut oil. Add the onions and fry a few minutes longer; then
add the celery, mushrooms, Chinese water chestnuts and salty sauce
together.

Cover with tight fitting lid and allow to cook in its own juices for
about 8 to 10 minutes. Stir occasionally, adding water or soup stock
(hot) if necessary to prevent burning.

Then turn flame low and stir in thoroughly the Chinese sweet sauce,
sesamun oil and corn starch, and it is ready to serve. Serve on oblong
chop suey dish, and with it serve rice (cooked Chinese style) and
Chinese tea.




                      RICE (Cooked Chinese Style)


Wash a half pound of good quality head rice (Jap style rice will not
cook properly in this manner) and cover with water. The depth of the
water above the rice should be exactly the same depth as the rice.

Boil fast, stir frequently until all of the water is absorbed by the
rice, then cover with tight fitting lid and set on low flame (with
asbestos pad between) for 30 minutes, and leave without stirring.


  NOTE—Careful attention should be directed to the size of the flame
  which is used during the 30 minutes. Understand that you are to have
  as much heat as the rice will stand, without stirring, at the same
  time without burning it.




                           CHINESE CHOP SUEY

                               Extra Fine


Made the same as Chinese Chop Suey, but omit the cupful of Spanish
onions and use a half cupful of the bamboo shoot instead. Cut the bamboo
shoot very thin and small.




                           CHINESE CHOP SUEY

                                Fine Cut


Make the same as Extra Fine Chop Suey but cut all of the ingredients
smaller and thinner.




                           CHINESE CHOP SUEY

                          With White Mushrooms


Make the same as Extra Fine Chop Suey, but use a half canful of the
French Mushrooms (small size are best) instead of the Chinese Mushrooms.




              LAMB, VEAL AND TENDERLOIN OF BEEF CHOP SUEY


Follow out the directions given for making Extra Fine Chop Suey, but use
the meat you desire instead of pork.




                           AMERICAN CHOP SUEY

                                 Plain


Made with the same ingredients as Chinese Chop Suey, but use very little
of each of the Chinese sauces and very little of cornstarch. Use a
cupful of chicken or beef stock in the cooking of this, adding it when
the vegetables are added. On account of the gravy in this Chop Suey, it
is served in soup bowls. There is a special sized bowl used for serving
this.




                           AMERICAN CHOP SUEY

                               Extra Fine


Make the same as plain American Chop Suey, but omit the onions and use
bamboo shoots (cut thin) instead.




                           AMERICAN CHOP SUEY

                                Fine Cut


Make the same as Extra Fine American Chop Suey but cut all ingredients
smaller and thinner.




                           CHICKEN CHOP SUEY

                            For Two Portions


  1 POUND COOKED CHICKEN (Sliced thin, cut small.)
  1 CUP CELERY (Sliced thin crosswise. Remove leaves.)
  1 CUP CHINESE MUSHROOMS (Soak in water until soft. Remove stems.)
  7 CHINESE WATER CHESTNUTS (Pare and slice thin.)
  1 CUPFUL BAMBOO SHOOT (Cut thin and small.)
  1 TABLESPOONFUL CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.
  1 TABLESPOONFUL CHINESE SWEET SAUCE.
  3 DROPS SESAMUN OIL.
  1 TEASPOONFUL CORNSTARCH (Dissolved in a little water.)

Cook in round bottomed iron kettle, or any deep porcelain kettle will
do, and use a high flame.

Place the celery, mushrooms, water chestnuts, bamboo shoot and a cupful
of chicken or beef stock in kettle, cover tightly, and allow to cook for
about 8 minutes. Stir occasionally.

Then add the chicken to this and allow to cook 4 minutes longer. Now
turn flame low and stir in the Chinese salty and sweet sauces, sesamun
oil and cornstarch. Serve with bowl of rice (cooked Chinese style, see
page two), Chinese tea and a few Li Chee nuts.




                           CHICKEN CHOP SUEY

                       Fine Cut or White Mushroom


Fine Cut is made as above, but cut all ingredients smaller and very
thin. White Mushroom Chop Suey is made same as above, but omit the
Chinese mushrooms and use a half canful of the French mushrooms instead.




                           CHINESE CURED PORK


Cut strips of pork ½ inch thick (shoulder or butts) and trim off all
fat. Place in pan and cover with ½ cupful of Chinese salty sauce diluted
with 2 cupfuls of water. Let simmer slowly until the fluid has nearly
cooked away, or until done. Turn the meat frequently.

Pork prepared by this method is used as a garnish for Yet Ca Mein, and
is the important ingredient for Eggs Fo Young.




                             EGGS FO YOUNG

                            For Two Portions


  ¼ POUND CHINESE CURED PORK (Cut into fine shreds.) (See page 4 for
     recipe for curing pork.)
  ½ CUP BAMBOO SHOOT (Cut into fine, long shreds.)
  4 CHINESE WATER CHESNUTS (Pared and cut into fine shreds.)
  ½ CUP CELERY (Cut into fine, long shreds.)
  1 STEM OF GREEN ONION TOP (Cut small.)
  6 EGGS.
  1 TEASPOONFUL CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.

Mix all of the above into a batter (don’t stir too much) and fry into
six oval omelets or cakes on a low flame. When done, make a gravy by
putting into the lard in which the cakes were fried in, a cupful of
water, a half teaspoonful of Chinese sweet sauce and a teaspoonful of
cornstarch.

To serve, place 3 cakes for each portion on a flat chop suey dish and
cover with the gravy. Serve with bowl of rice (cooked Chinese style) and
Chinese tea.




                             EGGS FO YOUNG

                    With Shrimp, Lobster or Chicken


Substitute the same quantity of cooked shrimp, lobster or chicken meat
for the Chinese cured pork and proceed the same as plain Eggs Fo Young.




                       YET CA MEIN (Noodle Soup)

                             For Two Bowls


  ¾ POUND NOODLES (Fresh noodles are best. Dry noodles can be used.)
  4 SLICES OF CHINESE CURED PORK (Size and thickness of a dollar.)
  4 SLICES BOILED CHICKEN.
  1 HARD BOILED EGG. (Cut in two.)
  2 TEASPOONFULS CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.
  2 CUPS CHICKEN OR BEEF STOCK (Hot.)

Boil the noodles in not less than a gallon of water, to which you have
added a pinch of salt, until done. Then drain in colander, and put half
in each bowl, in which you have already poured a cupful in each of the
hot chicken or beef stock and added the teaspoonful each of the salty
sauce.

Garnish by placing the half hard boiled egg in center, and the two
pieces of each of the cured pork and chicken near edge. Serve with
Chinese tea.




                   WAR MEIN (Extra Fine Noodle Soup)

                            For Two Portions


  1 POUND NOODLES (Fresh made noodles are best.)
  2 CUPS CHICKEN OR BEEF STOCK (Hot.)
  2 TEASPOONFULS CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.

  ¼ POUND LEAN PORK (Cut in fine shreds.)
  ¼ CUP CELERY (Cut in fine shreds.)
  ¼ CUP CHINESE MUSHROOMS (Cut in fine shreds.)
  3 CHINESE WATER CHESTNUTS (Pare and cut small and thin.)
  ¼ CUP BAMBOO SHOOT (Cut in fine shreds.)
  ½ CUP CHICKEN OR BEEF STOCK.
  1 TEASPOONFUL CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.
  1 GREEN ONION STEM (Cut small.)
  1 DROP SESAMUN OIL.
  ½ TEASPOONFUL CORNSTARCH (Dissolve in a little water.)

Boil the noodles in not less than a gallon of water to which has been
added a pinch of salt, until done. Requires about 20 minutes. Then drain
in collander and put half the noodles in each bowl, in which you have
already poured a cupful each of the hot chicken or beef stock and the
teaspoonful each of the salty sauce.

Make the Chop Suey while the noodles are boiling as follows: Fry the
pork until half done, using a teaspoonful of lard or meat fryings. Then
add the celery, mushrooms, water chestnuts, bamboo shoot, salty sauce, ½
cupful stock and stew on a high flame (use tight fitting lid) for about
ten minutes. Then stir in the sesamun oil and cornstarch. Cover the
noodles with a layer of this Chop Suey and garnish it with the shredded
green onion stem.




                                WAR MEIN

                              With Chicken


Make same as above but use chicken meat (cooked) instead of the pork.




                                WAR MEIN

                          With White Mushrooms


Make the same as War Mein but use about a half canful of the French
mushrooms instead of the Chinese.




                               CHOW MEIN

                 (Fried Noodles Covered with Chop Suey)

                            For Two Portions


  1 POUND NOODLES (Must be freshly made. Shake apart.)
  1 EGG (Scrambled and cut in fine shreds.)
  ½ POUND LEAN PORK (Cut in fine shreds.)
  ½ CUP CELERY (Cut in fine shreds.)
  ½ CUP CHINESE MUSHROOMS (Cut in fine shreds.)
  5 CHINESE WATER CHESTNUTS (Pare and cut small and thin.)
  ½ CUP BAMBOO SHOOT (Cut in fine shreds.)
  ½ CUP CHICKEN OR BEEF STOCK.
  1 TEASPOONFUL CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.
  1 DROP SESAMUN OIL.
  1 TEASPOONFUL CORNSTARCH. (Dissolve in a little water.)

After shaking the noodles well apart, drop them in hot lard at least 3
inches in depth, the same you would in French frying potatoes. Fry about
4 minutes and turn the noodles over. When done to an orange color, drain
and place on a large platter and cover with the Chop Suey, made as
follows:

Fry the pork until half done, using a tablespoonful of lard or meat
fryings. Then add the celery, mushrooms, water chestnuts, bamboo shoot,
salty sauce, ½ cup stock and stew on a high flame (use tight fitting
lid) for about 10 minutes. Then stir in the cornstarch and sesamun oil.
Cover the fried noodles evenly with this Chop Suey and garnish by
covering the entire food with the shreds of fried egg.

Serve with Chinese tea and Li Chee nuts.




                           CHOW MEIN YEB GUM

                    With Chicken and White Mushrooms


Made the same as Chow Mein (plain) but substitute French mushrooms for
the Chinese, and chicken meat for the pork.




                            BIRDS NEST SOUP

                             For Two Bowls


  2 OUNCES BIRDS NEST (Soak in water over night.)
  4 CUPFULS HEAVY CHICKEN STOCK.
  1 CUPFUL WHITE MEAT OF COOKED CHICKEN (Cut in fine shreds.)
  2 TEASPOONSFUL CHINESE SALTY SAUCE.

Drain the birds nest in collander and remove the feathers that might be
found and wash in two or three changes of water. Boil 30 minutes in the
chicken stock (after having strained it and removed all fat.)

Add the Chinese salty sauce and chicken meat and serve in soup bowls;
and with it serve rice and Chinese tea.




   Instructions for Serving a Dinner in Complete Chinese Style Called
                           “Dinner of China”

                           (For Four Plates)


                             GAI GUNG MAIN
                      (Chicken Soup with Noodles)

                              FO YOUNG DON
                        (Eggs in Fo Young Style)

                           TONG YUN CHOP SUEY
                          (Chinese Chop Suey)

                                LI CHEE
                             (Li Chee Nuts)

                     CANTON OR OOLONG CHAR YET WOO
                     (Pot of Canton or Oolong Tea)

CHICKEN SOUP WITH NOODLES. Follow out the recipe for making Yet Ca Mein,
but omit the garnish entirely. See page 5 for recipe for Yet Ca Mein.

EGGS IN FO YOUNG STYLE. See page 5 for recipe for Eggs Fo Young. Fry 8
cakes from the amount of batter and serve two for each portion. Serve on
the oblong flat Chop Suey dishes.

CHINESE CHOP SUEY. See page 2 for instructions for cooking. Serve this
course with a bowl of rice cooked Chinese style. Use the oblong Chop
Suey dishes for serving.

LI CHEE NUTS. This desert is served on any small fancy dish.

CANTON OR OOLONG TEA. In steeping Chinese tea, allow it to steep
considerably longer than ordinary tea, in fact, bringing it to a boil
will not impair the flavor. A pot of this tea should be served with the
first course. The small Chinese tea cups are used and individual Chinese
tea pots (red earthenware) are the correct thing.


                              FREE ADVICE

Should you require any further information pertaining to the cooking of
these foods; or should the results you secure not be absolutely
satisfactory to you, you are requested to write the author of this book,
who invites your correspondence on any matter of this kind, and will
gladly help you to remedy your difficulty by giving you FREE ADVICE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHINESE COOK BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


