The Project Gutenberg eBook of The best short stories of 1922, and the yearbook of the American short story
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The best short stories of 1922, and the yearbook of the American short story

Editor: Edward J. O'Brien

Release date: July 2, 2025 [eBook #76427]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: Small, Maynard & Company, 1921

Credits: Carol Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1922, AND THE YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY ***

Transcriber’s Note:

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Additional notes are at the end of the book.




                   THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1922




                                 THE
                          BEST SHORT STORIES
                               OF 1922

                               AND THE

                       YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN
                             SHORT STORY


                              EDITED BY
                          EDWARD J. O’BRIEN

              EDITOR OF “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1915”
                   “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1916”
                   “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1917”
                   “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1918”
                   “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1919”
                   “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1920”
                   “THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1921”
               “THE GREAT MODERN ENGLISH STORIES,” ETC.

                            [Illustration]

                                BOSTON
                       SMALL, MAYNARD & COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS




Copyright, 1921, by Broom, The Curtis Publishing Company, Brief Stories
Publishing Company and The Pagan Publishing Company.

Copyright, 1922, by The Boston Transcript Company.

Copyright, 1922, by The Dial Publishing Company, Inc., The Pictorial
Review Company, The Junior League Bulletin, George H. Doran Company,
The Century Company, The Metropolitan Magazine Company, Smart Set
Company, Inc., Margaret C. Anderson, The International Magazine
Company (Cosmopolitan), and Waldo Frank.

Copyright, 1923, by Conrad Aiken, Sherwood Anderson, Konrad
Bercovici, Susan M. Boogher, Frederick Booth, Edna Bryner, Rose
Gollup Cohen, Charles J. Finger, F. Scott Fitzgerald, David Freedman,
Katharine Fullerton Gerould, Ben Hecht, Joseph Hergesheimer, William
C. G. Jitro, Ring W. Lardner, James Oppenheim, Benjamin Rosenblatt,
Wilbur Daniel Steele, and Clement Wood.

Copyright, 1923, by Small, Maynard & Company, Inc.




               PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                 PRESS OF THE MURRAY PRINTING COMPANY
                      KENDALL SQUARE, CAMBRIDGE




                                           Forest Hill, Oxon, England,
                                                 October 10, 1922.

_My dear Mr. Herford_:

I had just finished star-stamping for the year, and I felt a bit
exhausted when one of those kind friends every one has, sent me
a copy of “Say It with Asterisks,” beautifully bound. Picture my
delight when I discovered that a baffling problem which had haunted
me for weeks was solved. To whom should I dedicate “The Best Short
Stories of 1922”? I could not inscribe it to our Mr. Anderson always,
and yet he insisted upon writing the best stories year after year. At
last I knew. _Palmam qui meruit ferat._ No curate’s egg this time!
The dedication should read:

                      * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                      *                       *
                      *           TO          *
                      *                       *
                      *    OLIVER HERFORD     *
                      *                       *
                      *    “SUCH IS LIFE”     *
                      *                       *
                      * * * * * * * * * * * * *

For we both deserve it.

                           Cordially yours,

                                                    EDWARD J. O’BRIEN.




                      BY WAY OF ACKNOWLEDGMENT


Grateful acknowledgment for permission to include the stories and
other material in this volume is made to the following authors,
editors and publishers:

To the Editor of _Broom_, the Curtis Publishing Company, the Editor
of _Brief Stories_, the Editor of _The Pagan_, the Editor of _The
Dial_, the Editor of _The Pictorial Review_, the Editor of _The
Bookman_ (New York), the Editor of _The Century_, the Editor of
_The Metropolitan_, the Editors of _The Smart Set_, Miss Margaret
C. Anderson, the Editor of _The Cosmopolitan_, Mr. Conrad Aiken,
Mr. Sherwood Anderson, Mr. Konrad Bercovici, Miss Susan M. Boogher,
Mr. Frederick Booth, Miss Edna Bryner, Miss Rose Gollup Cohen, Mr.
Charles J. Finger, Mr. F. Scott Fitzgerald, Mr. David Freedman, Mrs.
Katharine Fullerton Gerould, Mr. Ben Hecht, Mr. Joseph Hergesheimer,
Mr. William C. G. Jitro, Mr. Ring W. Lardner, Mr. James Oppenheim,
Mr. Benjamin Rosenblatt, Mr. Wilbur Daniel Steele, and Mr. Clement
Wood.

Acknowledgments are specially due to _The Boston Evening Transcript_
for permission to reprint the large body of material previously
published in its pages.

I shall be grateful to my readers for corrections, and particularly
for suggestions leading to the wider usefulness of this annual
volume. In particular, I shall welcome the receipt, from authors,
editors, publishers, of stories printed during the period between
October, 1922 and September, 1923 inclusive, which have qualities of
distinction and yet are not printed in periodicals falling under my
regular notice. Such communications may be addressed to me at _Forest
Hill, Oxfordshire, England_.

                                                         E. J. O.




                             CONTENTS[1]


                                                            PAGE
      INTRODUCTION. By the Editor                             xv

      THE DARK CITY. By Conrad Aiken                           3
                          (From _The Dial_)

      I’M A FOOL. By Sherwood Anderson                        13
                          (From _The Dial_)

      THE DEATH OF MURDO. By Konrad Bercovici                 25
                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)

      AN UNKNOWN WARRIOR. By Susan M. Boogher                 42
                 (From _The Junior League Bulletin_)

      THE HELPLESS ONES. By Frederick Booth                   49
                           (From _Broom_)

      FOREST COVER. By Edna Bryner                            70
                     (From _The Bookman, N. Y._)

      NATALKA’S PORTION. By Rose Gollup Cohen                 83
                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)

      THE SHAME OF GOLD. By Charles J. Finger                100
                        (From _The Century_)

      TWO FOR A CENT. By F. Scott Fitzgerald                 115
                      (From _The Metropolitan_)

      JOHN THE BAPTIST. By Waldo Frank                       132
                          (From _The Dial_)

      MENDEL MARANTZ--HOUSEWIFE. By David Freedman           151
                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)

      BELSHAZZAR’S LETTER. By Katharine Fullerton Gerould    171
                      (From _The Metropolitan_)

      WINKELBURG. By Ben Hecht                               195
                       (From _The Smart Set_)

      THE TOKEN. By Joseph Hergesheimer                      203
                 (From _The Saturday Evening Post_)

      THE RESURRECTION AND THE LIFE. By William Jitro        232
                     (From _The Little Review_)

      THE GOLDEN HONEYMOON. By Ring W. Lardner               242
                      (From _The Cosmopolitan_)

      HE LAUGHED AT THE GODS. By James Oppenheim             260
                           (From _Broom_)

      IN THE METROPOLIS. By Benjamin Rosenblatt              270
                       (From _Brief Stories_)

      FROM THE OTHER SIDE OF THE SOUTH. By Wilbur
           Daniel Steele                                     273
                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)

      THE COFFIN. By Clement Wood                            293
                         (From _The Pagan_)

      THE YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY,
           OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922                 303

      Addresses of American Magazines Publishing
           Short Stories                                     305

      The Biographical Roll of Honor of American Short
           Stories                                           307

      The Roll of Honor of Foreign Short Stories in
           American Magazines                                316

      The Best Books of Short Stories                        319

      Volumes of Short Stories Published in the United
           States: An Index                                  320

      Articles on the Short Story: An Index                  324

      Index of Short Stories in Books                        337

           I. American Authors                               338

          II. English and Irish Authors                      341

         III. Translations                                   344

      Magazine Averages                                      346

      Index of Short Stories Published in American
           Magazines                                         349

           I. American Authors                               352

          II. English and Irish Authors                      382

         III. Translations                                   386


        [1] The order in which the stories in this volume
            are printed is not intended to indicate their
            comparative excellence; the arrangement is
            alphabetical by authors.




                            INTRODUCTION




                            INTRODUCTION


During the past year I have had occasion to think often and seriously
of disintegration in American literature as a force which can no
longer be ignored. There are times in the history of a people when
disintegration is a form of creation, and when the cry goes up on all
sides: “Écrasez l’Infame,” it is not generally recognized that this
cry is a passionate prayer. Such a cry is heard in all countries of
Europe today, though it is not yet general, and the question arises
whether it is historically the moment for that cry or prayer to be
uttered by American writers. Well, I do not think so at all, and yet
the cry is usually synchronous with disintegration.

I do not think so because the disintegration which I see in American
life and literature is the effect of weakness rather than of strong
relentless force. It takes two forms in the work of our story
writers. First of all, we have the disintegration of laziness and
spiritual compromise which is manifest in the commercial short
story’s surrender to the machine and to business. That is a present
fact which can never be sufficiently taken into account. It follows
the line of least resistance, and utters no cry of passionate
conviction.

The second form of disintegration is often thought to be more subtle,
but it is really equally obvious and weak. Those who manifest it are
sitting home quietly observing the spiritual disintegration of Europe
as a fascinating spectacle, and finding in it only æsthetic values
which they long to imitate. They do not see, or perhaps they do not
choose to see, that the pattern which they admire is the result of
a conflict which they have shirked, and that any attempt to copy it
without undergoing the experience which justifies it as expression
will result only in pastiche, and in bad pastiche at that. Joyce and
Lawrence and other Europeans are not accidents, but their American
imitators may prove to be serious accidents. Joyce, who will serve
very well to illustrate my point, is subduing the show of things to
the desires of the mind, because he is a possessive European male
who has suffered. Any one of many American writers whom I refrain
from naming perceives the patterned result of this suffering, but is
unable or unwilling to pay the price.

We are told in the Old Testament that Dada followed Babel as a
penalty, and the European Dadaists have only sought, as critics of
a civilization which has become a spiritual failure, to make this
clear by symbols. The American Dadaists, who seem likely to spring
up like mushrooms from now on, say “Dada” for its own sake, and so
revert to infancy at the moment when men are most needed to interpret
our obscure desires. I find their assumed superiority to other
mortals snobbish, and their æsthetic attitude is only one present
manifestation of the intellectualist sterility and anæmia from which
we have begun to escape at last. They are taking “Art” entirely too
seriously, and forgetting that every great artist is only great in so
far as he can laugh at his own pretensions a little sadly.

We are also in some danger of seeking romantic escape from the
machine by creating a mysticism of the machine, and by regarding the
machine as something transcendental. This is sincere enough, because
it is the result of action on the part of those who have suffered
from the machine. We know how deeply rooted is the instinct to lay
propitiatory offerings before something powerful of which we are
afraid. But the artist should not imitate Caliban, even if he does so
beautifully, and so while I recognize the truth underlying the work
of Stieglitz, for example, I cannot accept this new transcendentalism
in American art and literature as a liberating force. It is clear to
me that it is really an ostrichlike way of accepting slavery.

These remarks are perhaps less irrelevant to the general reader than
he is likely to believe. If our more promising artists are driven
into a cul-de-sac, it is because they perceive the banality of Main
Street, and are seeking a way out into the country. It is perhaps
necessary to continue trying cul-de-sacs until the right road has
been found, and it may even be probable that when that road is
found, many artists will not be disinterested enough to bring back
the news. The romantic escape of many is perhaps necessary for the
realistic return of one, and all I am seeking to do is to point out
if I can what ways appear to me to be cul-de-sacs, and what artists
seem to have stumbled on the way out. If these artists run away,
something is lost, but more is lost if they are all driven into
narrow cul-de-sacs. Meanwhile, Sherwood Anderson seems to me the man
who is nearest to finding freedom, and I believe he is also the man
who is most anxious to return to Main Street and report what he has
found.

To repeat what I have said in these pages in previous years, for
the benefit of the reader as yet unacquainted with my standards and
principles of selection, I shall point out that I have set myself the
task of disengaging the essential human qualities in our contemporary
fiction which, when chronicled conscientiously by our literary
artists, may fairly be called a criticism of life. I am not at all
interested in formulæ, and organized criticism at its best would be
nothing more than dead criticism, as all dogmatic interpretation of
life is always dead. What has interested me, to the exclusion of
other things, is the fresh, living current which flows through the
best American work, and the psychological and imaginative reality
which American writers have conferred upon it.

No substance is of importance in fiction, unless it is organic
substance, that is to say, substance in which the pulse of life
is beating. Inorganic fiction has been our curse in the past, and
bids fair to remain so, unless we exercise much greater artistic
discrimination than we display at present.

The present record covers the period from October, 1921, to
September, 1922, inclusive. During this period I have sought to
select from the stories published in American magazines those which
have rendered life imaginatively in organic substance and artistic
form. Substance is something achieved by the artist in every act of
creation, rather than something already present, and accordingly a
fact or group of facts in a story only attain substantial embodiment
when the artist’s power of compelling imaginative persuasion
transforms them into a living truth. The first test of a short
story, therefore, in any qualitative analysis is to report upon how
vitally compelling the writer makes his selected facts or incidents.
This test may be conveniently called the test of substance.

But a second test is necessary if the story is to take rank above
other stories. The true artist will seek to shape this living
substance into the most beautiful and satisfying form, by skillful
selection and arrangement of his materials, and by the most direct
and appealing presentation of it in portrayal and characterization.

The short stories which I have examined in this study, as in previous
years, have fallen naturally into four groups. The first consists of
those stories which fail, in my opinion, to survive either the test
of substance or the test of form. These stories are listed in the
yearbook without comment or qualifying asterisk. The second group
consists of those stories which may fairly claim that they survive
either the test of substance or the test of form. Each of these
stories may claim to possess either distinction of technique alone,
or more frequently, I am glad to say, a persuasive sense of life in
them to which a reader responds with some part of his own experience.
Stories included in this group are indicated in the yearbook index by
a single asterisk prefixed to the title.

The third group, which is composed of stories of still greater
distinction, includes such narratives as may lay convincing claim
to a second reading, because each of them has survived both tests,
the test of substance and the test of form. Stories included in this
group are indicated in the yearbook index by two asterisks prefixed
to the title.

Finally, I have recorded the names of a small group of stories
which possess, I believe, the even finer distinction of uniting
genuine substance and artistic form in a closely woven pattern with
such sincerity that these stories may fairly claim a position in
American literature. If all of these stories by American authors
were republished, they would not occupy more space than six or seven
novels of average length. My selection of them does not imply the
critical belief that they are great stories. A year which produced
one great story would be an exceptional one. It is simply to be
taken as meaning that I have found the equivalent of six or seven
volumes worthy of republication among all the stories published
during the period under consideration. These stories are indicated
in the yearbook index by three asterisks prefixed to the title, and
are listed in the special “Roll of Honor.” In compiling these lists
I have permitted no personal preference or prejudice consciously to
influence my judgment. It has been a point of honor with me not to
republish a story by an English author or by any foreign author. I
have also made it a rule not to include more than one story by an
individual author in the volume. The general and particular results
of my study will be found explained and carefully detailed in the
supplementary part of the volume.

                                               EDWARD J. O’BRIEN.

  Forest Hill, Oxon, England,
       November 23, 1922.




                   THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1922




Note.--The order in which the stories in this volume are printed is
not intended as an indication of their comparative excellence; the
arrangement is alphabetical by authors.




                           THE DARK CITY[2]

                           By CONRAD AIKEN

                          (From _The Dial_)

His greatest pleasure in life came always at dusk. Its prelude was
the reading of the evening paper in the train that took him out
of the city. By long association the very unfolding of the grimy
ink-smelling sheets was part of the ritual: his dark eyes dilated, he
felt himself begin to “grin,” the staggering load of business detail,
under which he had struggled all day in the office, was instantly
forgotten. He read rapidly, devoured with rapacious eyes column
after column--New York, London, Paris, Lisbon--wars, revolutions,
bargains in umbrellas, exhibitions of water colors. This consumed
three-quarters of the journey. After that he watched the procession
of houses, walls, trees, reeling past in the mellow slant light, and
began already to feel his garden about him. He observed the flight
of the train unconsciously, and it was almost automatically, at the
unrealized sight of a certain group of trees, oddly leaning away from
each other, like a group of ballet dancers expressing an extravagance
of horror, that he rose and approached the door.

The sense of escape was instant. Sky and earth generously took him,
the train fled shrieking into the vague bright infinity of afternoon.
The last faint wail of it, as it plunged into a tunnel, always seemed
to him to curl about his head like a white tentacle, too weak to be
taken seriously. Then, in the abrupt silence, he began climbing the
long hill that led to his house. He walked swiftly, blowing tattered
blue clouds of smoke over his shoulders, revolving in his mind the
items of news amusing enough to be reported to Hilda; such as that
Miss Green, the stenographer, who had for some time been manifesting
a disposition to flirt with him, today, just after closing, when
everybody else had gone out, had come to him, blushing, and asked
him to fasten the sleeve of her dress. A delicious scene! He smiled
about the stem of his pipe, but exchanged his smile for a laugh when,
looking in through a gap in his neighbor’s hedge, he found himself
staring into the depraved eyes of a goat. This would add itself to
the episode of Miss Green, for these eyes were precisely hers. He
turned the corner and saw his house before him, riding on the hill
like a small ship on a long green wave. The three children were
playing a wild game of croquet, shrieking. Louder sounds arose at his
appearance, and as he strode across the lawn they danced about him
chattering and quarreling.

“Daddy, Martha won’t play in her turn, and I say--”

“Marjorie takes the heavy mallet--”

The chorus rose shrill about him, but he laughed and went into the
house, shouting only, “Out of the way! I’m in a hurry! The beans are
dying, the tomatoes are clamoring for me, the peas are holding out
their hands!”

“Daddy says the beans are dying. Isn’t he silly?”

“Let’s get to the garden before daddy does.”

As he closed the door he heard the shrieks trailing off round the
corner of the house, diminuendo. He hung up coat and hat with a rapid
gesture and hurried to the kitchen. Hilda, stirring the cocoa with a
long spoon, looked round at him laconically.

“Chocolate!” he shouted, and pulled a cake of chocolate out of his
pocket. He was astonished, he rolled his eyes, for it appeared to
have been sat upon--“in the train.” Hilda shrieked with laughter. He
thrust it into her apron pocket and fled up the stairs to change.

He could not find his old flannel trousers. Not in the cupboard--not
in the bureau. He surrendered to an impulse to comic rage. “Not
under the bed!” he cried. He thrust his head out of the window that
overlooked the garden and addressed his children.

“Martha! Bring my trousers here this instant!”

He drew in his head again from the shower of replies that flew up at
him like missiles and going to the door roared down to his wife.

“I’ve lost my trousers!”

Then he found them in the closet behind the door and, laughing, put
them on.


                                  II

He ran out of the side door, under the wistaria-covered trellis, and
down the slippery stone steps to the vegetable garden.

“Here comes daddy, now,” shrilled to him from Martha.

He lighted his pipe, shutting his left eye, and stood in profound
meditation before the orderly, dignified, and extraordinarily
vigorous rows of beans. They were in blossom--bees were tumbling the
delicate lilac-pink little hoods. Clouds of fragrance came up from
them. The crickets were beginning to tune up for the evening. The sun
was poised above the black water tower on the far hill.

Martha and Marjorie began giggling mysteriously behind the lilacs.

“My hoe!” he wailed.

The hoe was thrust out from behind the lilacs.

“If anybody should drive up in a scarlet taxi,” he said to Martha,
accepting the hoe, “and inform you that your soul is free, don’t
believe him. Tell him he’s a liar. Point me out to him as a symbol of
the abject slavery that all life is. Say that I’m a miserable thrall
to wife, children, and beans--particularly beans. I spend my days on
my knees before my beans.”

“I’ll do nothing of the sort,” said Martha.

He held his hoe under his arm and walked solemnly among the beans.
The two girls followed him.

“Here’s a caterpillar, daddy!”

“Kill him!”

“Here’s another--a funny green one with red sparkles on his back. Oh,
look at him!”

“Don’t look at him! Kill him!”

“He squirts out like green tooth-paste.”

“Don’t, Martha!” he cried, pained. “Don’t say such things! Spare your
neurotic father.”

He shrank visibly and strode off to the corner where his peas were
planted and started methodically hoeing the rows, turning the rich
loam up about the pale stalks. Now and again a pebble clinked, he
stooped and threw it off into the meadow. Mary, the youngest, came
to the top of the steps and cried. Martha and Marjorie went to
her, and he forgot them. The rising and falling of the hoe-blade,
shiny with much polishing in the brown soil, hypnotized him, and
his thoughts fell into a sort of rhythm, came and went without his
interference. “Ridiculous!” he thought, “that this solemn singular
biped, whom other bipeds for convenience call Andrew, should stand
here with a stick and scratch the skin of this aged planet. What does
he expect to get for it? It pleases the aged planet. She stretches
herself in the twilight, purrs like an old cat, and expresses her
pleasure in the odd and useful effluvium we call peas. And this
biped wears clothes. Think of it! He wears clothes; things made out
of plant-fibre and sheep’s wool cunningly and hideously made to fit
his arms and legs. He has in his pocket--a small pouch made in these
singular garments--a watch, a small shiny round object in which he
has reduced to feeble but regular iambics the majestic motions of
the sun, earth and stars. He takes it out and looks at it with an
air of comprehension and puts it back again. Why doesn’t he laugh at
himself?”... He chuckled.... “This object tells him that he has time
for two more rows before dinner. Clink, clink. Damn these pebbles.
My antediluvian anthropoid ape of an ancestor had to walk round
them, they were so huge. He sat on them, cracked nuts against them,
chattered with his family. He had no watch, and his trousers grew
like grass.... Thank the Lord they’ve become pebbles.”

He sighed, and for a moment rested his chin on the hoe-handle,
peering out towards the tree-encircled swamp. The hylas were
beginning to jingle their elfin bells. A red-winged blackbird sailed
in the last sunlight from one apple-tree to another.

“All a vicious circle--and all fascinating. Utterly preposterous and
futile, but fascinating.”

He dropped the hoe and trundled the wheelbarrow to the edge of the
strawberry-bed.

“Why can’t you stay where you’re put?” he said. “Why do you grow all
over the place like this?”

With a trowel he began digging up the runners and placing them on
the wheelbarrow. It delighted him to part the soft cool soil with
his fingers, to thrust them sensitively among the finely filamented
roots. The delicate snap, subterranean, of rootlets gave him a
delicious pang. “Blood flows--but it’s all for the best; in the
best of all possible worlds. Yield to me, strawberries, and you
shall bear. I am the resurrection and the life.” When he had a
sufficient pile of plants, he trundled the wheelbarrow to the new
bed, exquisitely prepared, rich, warm, inviting. With the hoe he made
a series of holes, and then, stooping, thrust the hairy roots back
into the earth, pressing the soil tenderly about them. Then he rose,
stretched his back, and lighted his pipe, shutting his left eye, and
enshrining the flame, which danced, in the hollow of his stained
hands. The cloud of smoke went up like incense.

“Water!” he cried. “Water! Water!”

Martha appeared, after a moment, bringing the watering-pot. She held
it in front of her with both hands.

“Quick, Martha, before they die. Their tongues are turning black.”

“Silly!” Martha replied.

The earth about each plant was darkened with the tilted water, and
the soiled leaves and stems were brightened.

“Listen, daddy! They’re smacking their lips.”

“They are pale, they have their eyes shut, they are reaching
desperately down into the darkness for something to hold on to. They
grope and tickle at atoms of soil, they shrink away from pebbles,
they sigh and relax.”

“When the dew falls, they’ll sing.”

“Ha! ha! what fools we are.”

He flung the hoe across the wheelbarrow and started wheeling it
towards the toolhouse.

“Bring the watering-pot.”

Martha ran after him and put it in the wheelbarrow.

“That’s right--add to my burden--never do anything that you can make
somebody else do.”

Martha giggled in response and skipped towards the house. When she
reached the stone steps she put her feet close together and with dark
seriousness hopped up step after step in that manner. He watched her
and smiled.

“O Lord, Lord,” he said, “what a circus we are.”

He trundled the bumping wheelbarrow and whistled. The red sun,
enormous in the slight haze, was gashing itself cruelly on a black
pine tree. The hylas, by now, had burst into full shrill-sweet chorus
in the swamp, and of the birds all but a few scraping grackles
were still. “Peace--peace--peace,” sang the hylas, a thousand at
once. Silver bells, frailer than thimbles, ringing under a still
and infinite sea of ether.... “Peace--peace,” he murmured. Then he
dropped the wheelbarrow in horror, and put his hands to his ears.
“The enemy!” he cried. “Martha! hurry! Martha!” This time Martha
seemed to be out of earshot, so he was obliged to circumvent the
enemy with great caution. The enemy was a toad who sat by preference
near the toolhouse door: obese, sage, and wrinkled like a Chinese
god. “Toad that under cold stone.” Marvelous compulsion of rhythm....
He thrust the wheelbarrow into the cool pleasant-smelling darkness
of the toolhouse, and walked towards the kitchen door, which just at
that moment Hilda opened.

“Hurry up,” she said. Her voice had a delicious mildness in the still
air and added curiously to his already overwhelming sense of luxury.
He had, for a moment, an extraordinarily satisfying sense of space.


                                 III

He lifted his eyes from the pudding to the Hokusai print over the
mantel.

“Think of it with shame! We sit here again grossly feeding our
insatiable bellies, while Fujiyama, there, thrusts his copper-colored
cone into a cobalt sky among whipped-cream clouds! Pilgrims, in
the dusk, toil up his sides with staves. Pilgrims like ants. They
struggle upwards in the darkness for pure love of beauty.”

“I don’t like bread-pudding,” ejaculated Mary solemnly, “it’s beany.”

Martha and Marjorie joined in a silvery cascade of giggles.

“Where _did_ she get that awful word!” said Hilda.

“Tom says it, mother.”

“Well, for goodness’ sake forget it.”

Mary stared gravely about the table, spoon in mouth, and then,
removing the spoon, repeated, “It’s beany.”

He groaned, folding his napkin.

“What an awful affliction a family is. Why did we marry, Hilda? Life
is a trap.”

“Mrs. Ferguson called this afternoon and presented me with a
basket of green strawberries. I’m afraid she thought I wasn’t very
appreciative. I hate to be interrupted when I’m sewing. Why under the
sun does she pick them before they’re ripe?”

“That’s a nice way to treat a neighbor who gives you a present!...
You _are_ an ungrateful creature.”

Hilda was languid.

“Well, I didn’t ask her for them.”

Her eyes gleamed with a slow provocative amusement.

“They’re beany,” said Mary.

He rolled his eyes at Mary.

    “Our kids are too much with us. Bib and spoon,
    Feeding and spanking, we lay waste our powers!”

They all pushed back their chairs, laughing, and a moment later, as
he lighted his cigar, he heard, from the music-room, Hilda’s violin
begin with tremulous thin notes, oddly analogous to the sound of
her voice when she sang, playing Bach to a methodical loud piano
accompaniment by Martha. Melancholy came like a blue wave out of the
dusk, lifted him, and broke slowly and deliciously over him. He stood
for a moment, made motionless by the exquisite, intricate melody,
stared, as if seeking with his eyes for the meaning of the silvery
algebra of sound, and then went out.

The sun had set, darkness was at hand. He walked to the top of the
stone steps and looked across the shallow valley towards the fading
hill and the black water-tower. The trees on the crest, sharply
silhouetted against a last band of pale light, looked like marching
men. Lights winked at the base of the hill. And now, as hill and
water-tower and trees became obscure, he began to see once more
the dim phantasmal outlines of the dark city, the city submerged
under the infinite sea, the city not inhabited by mortals. Immense,
sinister and black, old and cold as the moon, were the walls that
surrounded it. No gate gave entrance to it. Of a paler stone were
the houses upon houses, tiers upon tiers of shadowy towers, which
surmounted the walls. Not a light was to be seen in it, not a motion:
it was still. He stared and stared at it, following with strained
eyes the faint lines which might indicate its unlighted streets,
seeking in vain, as always, to discover in the walls of it any sign
of any window. It grew darker, it faded, a profound and vast secret,
an inscrutable mystery.

“She is older than the rocks,” he murmured.

He turned away and walked over the lawn in the darkness, listening
to the hylas, who seemed now to be saturating the hushed night with
sound. “Peace--peace--peace--” they sang. _Pax vobiscum._ He gathered
the croquet mallets and leaned them against the elm tree, swearing
when he tripped over an unseen wicket. This done, he walked down the
pale road, blowing clouds of smoke above him with uplifted face,
and luxuriated in the sight of the dark tops of trees motionless
against the stars. A soft skipping sound in the leaves at the road’s
edge made him jump. He laughed to himself.... “He had no watch, and
his trousers grew like grass....” He took out his watch and peered
closely at it. The children were in bed, and Hilda was waiting for
a game of chess. He walked back with his hands deep in his pockets.
Pawn to king-four.

“Hilda! Wake up!”

Hilda opened her candid eyes without astonishment and sat up over the
chess-board, on which the tiny men were already arranged.

“Goodness! How you scared me. What took you so long? I’ve been
dreaming about Bluebeard.”

“Bluebeard! Good Heavens! I hope he didn’t look like me.”

“He did--remarkably!”

“A _nice_ thing to say to your husband.... Move! Hurry up!... I’m
going to capture your king. Queens die young and fair.”

He smoked his pipe. Hilda played morosely. Delicious, she was when
she was half asleep like this! She leaned her head on one hand, her
elbow on the table.... When she had been checkmated at the end of
half an hour she sank back wearily in her chair. She looked at him
intently for a moment and began to smile.

“And how about the dark city tonight?” she asked. He took slow puffs
at his pipe and stared meditatively at the ceiling.

“Ah--the dark city, Hilda! The city submerged under an infinite sea,
the city not inhabited by mortals!... It was there again--would
you believe it?... It was there.... I went out to the stone steps,
smoking my cigar, while you played Bach. I hardly dared to look--I
watched the hill out of the corner of my eyes and pretended to be
listening to the music.... And suddenly, at the right moment of
dusk, just after the street lamps had winked along the base of the
hill, I saw it. The hill that we see there in the daylight, with
its water-tower and marching trees, its green sloping fields and
brook that flashes in the sun, is unreal, an illusion, the thinnest
of disguises--a cloak of green velvet which the dark city throws
over itself at the coming of the first ray of light.... I saw it
distinctly. Immense, smooth and black, old and cold as the moon, are
the walls that surround it. No gate gives entrance to it. Of a paler
stone are the houses upon houses, tiers upon tiers of shadowy towers
that surmount those sepulchral walls. No motion was perceptible
there--no light gleamed there--no sound, no whisper rose from it.
I thought: perhaps it is a city of the dead. The walls of it have
no windows, and its inhabitants must be blind.... And then I seemed
to see it more closely, in a twilight which appeared to be its own,
and this closer perception gave way in turn to a vision. For first I
saw that all the walls of it are moist, dripping, slippery, as if
it were bathed in a deathlike dew; and then I saw its people. Its
people are maggots--maggots of perhaps the size of human children;
their heads are small and wedge-shaped, and glow with a faint bluish
light. Masses of them swarm within those walls. Masses of them pour
through the streets, glisten on the buttresses and parapets. They are
intelligent. What horrible feast is it that nightly they celebrate
there in silence? On what carrion do they feed? It is the universe
that they devour; and they build above it, as they devour it, their
dark city like a hollow tomb.... Extraordinary that this city, which
seen from here at dusk has so supernatural a beauty, should hide at
the core so vile a secret....”

Hilda stared at him.

“Really, Andrew, I think you’re going mad.”

“Going? I’m gone! My brain is maggoty.”

They laughed and rattled the chessmen into their wooden box. Then
they began locking the doors and windows for the night.


        [2] Copyright, 1922, by The Dial Publishing Company, Inc.
            Copyright, 1923, by Conrad Aiken.




                            I’M A FOOL[3]

                         By SHERWOOD ANDERSON

              (From _The Dial_ and _The London Mercury_)


It was a hard jolt for me, one of the most bitterest I ever had to
face. And it all came about through my own foolishness too. Even
yet, sometimes, when I think of it, I want to cry or swear or kick
myself. Perhaps, even now, after all this time, there will be a kind
of satisfaction in making myself look cheap by telling of it.

It began at three o’clock one October afternoon as I sat in the grand
stand at the fall trotting and pacing meet at Sandusky, Ohio.

To tell the truth, I felt a little foolish that I should be sitting
in the grand stand at all. During the summer before I had left my
home town with Harry Whitehead and, with a nigger named Burt, had
taken a job as swipe with one of the two horses Harry was campaigning
through the fall race meets that year. Mother cried and my sister
Mildred, who wanted to get a job as a school teacher in our town that
fall, stormed and scolded about the house all during the week before
I left. They both thought it something disgraceful that one of our
family should take a place as a swipe with race horses. I’ve an idea
Mildred thought my taking the place would stand in the way of her
getting the job she’d been working so long for.

But after all I had to work and there was no other work to be got. A
big lumbering fellow of nineteen couldn’t just hang around the house
and I had got too big to mow people’s lawns and sell newspapers.
Little chaps who could get next to people’s sympathies by their sizes
were always getting jobs away from me. There was one fellow who kept
saying to everyone who wanted a lawn mowed or a cistern cleaned, that
he was saving money to work his way through college, and I used to
lay awake nights thinking up ways to injure him without being found
out. I kept thinking of wagons running over him and bricks falling on
his head as he walked along the street. But never mind him.

I got the place with Harry and I liked Burt fine. We got along
splendid together. He was a big nigger with a lazy sprawling body and
soft kind eyes, and when it came to a fight he could hit like Jack
Johnson. He had Bucephalus, a big black pacing stallion that could do
2.09 or 2.10 if he had to, and I had a little gelding named Doctor
Fritz that never lost a race all fall when Harry wanted him to win.

We set out from home late in July in a box car with the two horses
and after that, until late November, we kept moving along to the race
meets and the fairs. It was a peachy time for me, I’ll say that.
Sometimes, now, I think that boys who are raised regular in houses,
and never have a fine nigger like Burt for best friend, and go to
high schools and college, and never steal anything or get drunk a
little, or learn to swear from fellows who know how, or come walking
up in front of a grand stand in their shirt sleeves and with dirty
horsey pants on when the races are going on and the grand stand is
full of people all dressed up-- What’s the use talking about it? Such
fellows don’t know nothing at all. They’ve never had no opportunity.

But I did. Burt taught me how to rub down a horse and put the
bandages on after a race and steam a horse out and a lot of valuable
things for any man to know. He could wrap a bandage on a horse’s leg
so smooth that if it had been the same color you would think it was
his skin, and I guess he’d have been a big driver too and got to the
top like Murphy and Walter Cox and the others if he hadn’t been black.

Gee whizz, it was fun. You got to a county seat town maybe, say, on
a Saturday or Sunday, and the fair began the next Tuesday and lasted
until Friday afternoon. Doctor Fritz would be, say, in the 2.25 trot
on Tuesday afternoon and on Thursday afternoon Bucephalus would
knock ’em cold in the “free-for-all” pace. It left you a lot of time
to hang around and listen to horse talk, and see Burt knock some yap
cold that got too gay, and you’d find out about horses and men and
pick up a lot of stuff you could use all the rest of your life if you
had some sense and salted down what you heard and felt and saw.

And then at the end of the week when the race meet was over, and
Harry had run home to tend up to his livery stable business, you and
Burt hitched the two horses to carts and drove slow and steady across
country to the place for the next meeting so as to not over-heat the
horses, etc., etc., you know.

Gee whizz, gosh amighty, the nice hickorynut and beechnut and oaks
and other kinds of trees along the roads, all brown and red, and the
good smells, and Burt singing a song that was called Deep River, and
the country girls at the windows of houses and everything. You can
stick your colleges up your nose for all me. I guess I know where I
got my education.

Why, one of those little burgs of towns you come to on the way, say
now, on a Saturday afternoon, and Burt says, “let’s lay up here.” And
you did.

And you took the horses to a livery stable and fed them and you got
your good clothes out of a box and put them on.

And the town was full of farmers gaping, because they could see you
were race horse people, and the kids maybe never see a nigger before
and was afraid and run away when the two of us walked down their main
street.

And that was before prohibition and all that foolishness, and so you
went into a saloon, the two of you, and all the yaps come and stood
around, and there was always someone pretended he was horsey and knew
things and spoke up and began asking questions, and all you did was
to lie and lie all you could about what horses you had, and I said
I owned them, and then some fellow said, “Will you have a drink of
whiskey?” and Burt knocked his eye out the way he could say, offhand
like, “Oh, well, all right, I’m agreeable to a little nip. I’ll split
a quart with you.” Gee whizz.

But that isn’t what I want to tell my story about. We got home late
in November and I promised mother I’d quit the race horses for good.
There’s a lot of things you’ve got to promise a mother because she
don’t know any better.

And so, there not being any work in our town any more than when I
left there to go to the races, I went off to Sandusky and got a
pretty good place taking care of the horses for a man who owned a
teaming and delivery and storage business there. It was a pretty good
place with good eats and a day off each week and sleeping on a cot in
the big barn, and mostly just shoveling in hay and oats to a lot of
big good-enough skates of horses that couldn’t have trotted a race
with a toad. I wasn’t dissatisfied and I could send money home.

And then, as I started to tell you, the fall races come to Sandusky
and I got the day off and I went. I left the job at noon and had
on my good clothes and my new brown derby hat I’d just bought the
Saturday before, and a stand-up collar.

First of all I went downtown and walked about with the dudes. I’ve
always thought to myself, “put up a good front,” and so I did it. I
had forty dollars in my pocket and so I went into the West House,
a big hotel, and walked up to the cigar stand. “Give me three
twenty-five cent cigars,” I said. There was a lot of horse men and
strangers and dressed-up people from other towns standing around in
the lobby and in the bar, and I mingled amongst them. In the bar
there was a fellow with a cane and a Windsor tie on, that it made me
sick to look at him. I like a man to be a man and dress up, but not
to go put on that kind of airs. So I pushed him aside, kind of rough,
and had me a drink of whiskey. And then he looked at me as though
he thought maybe he’d get gay, but he changed his mind and didn’t
say anything. And then I had another drink of whiskey, just to show
him something, and went out and had a hack out to the races all to
myself, and when I got there I bought myself the best seat I could
get up in the grand stand, but didn’t go in for any of these boxes.
That’s putting on too many airs.

And so there I was, sitting up in the grand stand as gay as you
please and looking down on the swipes coming out with their horses
and with their dirty horsey pants on and the horse blankets swung
over their shoulders same as I had been doing all the year before.
I liked one thing about the same as the other, sitting up there and
feeling grand and being down there and looking up at the yaps and
feeling grander and more important too. One thing’s about as good as
another if you take it just right. I’ve often said that.

Well, right in front of me, in the grand stand that day, there was a
fellow with a couple of girls and they was about my age. The young
fellow was a nice guy all right. He was the kind maybe that goes to
college and then comes to be a lawyer or maybe a newspaper editor or
something like that, but he wasn’t stuck on himself. There are some
of that kind are all right and he was one of the ones.

He had his sister with him and another girl and the sister looked
around over his shoulder, accidental at first, not intending to start
anything--she wasn’t that kind--and her eyes and mine happened to
meet.

You know how it is. Gee, she was a peach. She had on a soft dress,
kind of a blue stuff and it looked carelessly made, but was well
sewed and made and everything. I knew that much. I blushed when she
looked right at me and so did she. She was the nicest girl I’ve ever
seen in my life. She wasn’t stuck on herself and she could talk
proper grammar without being like a school teacher or something
like that. What I mean is, she was O.K. I think maybe her father
was well-to-do, but not rich to make her chesty because she was his
daughter, as some are. Maybe he owned a drug store or a dry goods
store in their home town, or something like that. She never told me
and I never asked.

My own people are all O.K. too, when you come to that. My grandfather
was Welsh and over in the old country, in Wales he was--but never
mind that.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first heat of the first race come off and the young fellow
setting there with the two girls left them and went down to make a
bet. I knew what he was up to, but he didn’t talk big and noisy and
let everyone around know he was a sport, as some do. He wasn’t that
kind. Well, he come back and I heard him tell the two girls what
horse he’d bet on, and when the heat was trotted they all half got
to their feet and acted in the excited, sweaty way people do when
they’ve got money down on a race, and the horse they bet on is up
there pretty close at the end, and they think maybe he’ll come on
with a rush, but he never does because he hasn’t got the old juice in
him, come right down to it.

And then, pretty soon, the horses came out for the 2.18 pace and
there was a horse in it I knew. He was a horse Bob French had in his
string, but Bob didn’t own him. He was a horse owned by a Mr. Mathers
down at Marietta, Ohio.

This Mr. Mathers had a lot of money and owned some coal mines or
something, and he had a swell place out in the country, and he was
stuck on race horses, but was a Presbyterian or something, and I
think more than likely his wife was one, too, maybe a stiffer one
than himself. So he never raced his horses hisself, and the story
round the Ohio race tracks was that when one of his horses got ready
to go to the races he turned him over to Bob French and pretended to
his wife he was sold.

So Bob had the horses and he did pretty much as he pleased and you
can’t blame Bob, at least, I never did. Sometimes he was out to win
and sometimes he wasn’t. I never cared much about that when I was
swiping a horse. What I did want to know was that my horse had the
speed and could go out in front if you wanted him to.

And, as I’m telling you, there was Bob in this race with one of Mr.
Mathers’ horses, was named “About Ben Ahem” or something like that,
and was fast as a streak. He was a gelding and had a mark of 2.21,
but could step in .08 or .09.

Because when Burt and I were out, as I’ve told you, the year before,
there was a nigger Burt knew, worked for Mr. Mathers, and we went out
there one day when we didn’t have no race on at the Marietta Fair and
our boss Harry was gone home.

And so everyone was gone to the fair but just this one nigger, and he
took us all through Mr. Mathers’ swell house and he and Burt tapped a
bottle of wine Mr. Mathers had hid in his bedroom, back in a closet,
without his wife knowing, and he showed us this Ahem horse. Burt was
always stuck on being a driver, but didn’t have much chance to get
to the top, being a nigger, and he and the other nigger gulped that
whole bottle of wine and Burt got a little lit up.

So the nigger let Burt take this About Ben Ahem and step him a mile
in a track Mr. Mathers had all to himself, right there on the farm.
And Mr. Mathers had one child, a daughter, kinda sick and not very
good looking, and she came home and we had to hustle and get About
Ben Ahem stuck back in the barn.

I’m only telling you to get everything straight. At Sandusky, that
afternoon I was at the fair, this young fellow with the two girls
was fussed, being with the girls and losing his bet. You know how
a fellow is that way. One of them was his girl and the other his
sister. I had figured that out.

“Gee whizz,” I says to myself, “I’m going to give him the dope.”

He was mighty nice when I touched him on the shoulder. He and the
girls were nice to me right from the start and clear to the end. I’m
not blaming them.

And so he leaned back and I gave him the dope on About Ben Ahem.
“Don’t bet a cent on this first heat because he’ll go like an oxen
hitched to a plough, but when the first heat is over go right down
and lay on your pile.” That’s what I told him.

Well, I never saw a fellow treat any one sweller. There was a fat man
sitting beside the little girl that had looked at me twice by this
time, and I at her, and both blushing, and what did he do but have
the nerve to turn and ask the fat man to get up and change places
with me so I could set with his crowd.

Gee whizz, amighty. There I was. What a chump I was to go and get
gay up there in the West House bar, and just because that dude was
standing there with a cane and that kind of a necktie on, to go and
get all balled up and drink that whiskey, just to show off.

Of course she would know, me setting right beside her and letting her
smell of my breath. I could have kicked myself right down out of that
grand stand and all around that race track and made a faster record
than most of the skates of horses they had there that year.

Because that girl wasn’t any mutt of a girl. What wouldn’t I have
give right then for a stick of chewing gum to chew, or a lozenger, or
some licorice, or most anything. I was glad I had those twenty-five
cent cigars in my pocket, and right away I give that fellow one and
lit one myself. Then that fat man got up and we changed places and
there I was plunked right down beside her.

They introduced themselves, and the fellow’s best girl he had
with him, was named Miss Elinor Woodbury, and her father was a
manufacturer of barrels from a place called Tiffin, Ohio. And the
fellow himself was named Wilbur Wessen and his sister was Miss Lucy
Wessen.

I suppose it was their having such swell names got me off my trolley.
A fellow, just because he has been a swipe with a race horse, and
works taking care of horses for a man in the teaming, delivery and
storage business, isn’t any better or worse than any one else. I’ve
often thought that, and said it, too.

But you know how a fellow is. There’s something in that kind of nice
clothes, and the kind of nice eyes she had, and the way she had
looked at me, awhile before, over her brother’s shoulder, and me
looking back at her, and both of us blushing.

I couldn’t show her up for a boob, could I?

I made a fool of myself, that’s what I did. I said my name was Walter
Mathers from Marietta, Ohio, and then I told all three of them the
smashingest lie you ever heard. What I said was that my father owned
the horse About Ben Ahem, and that he had let him out to this Bob
French for racing purposes, because our family was proud and had
never gone into racing that way, in our own name, I mean. Then I had
got started and they were all leaning over and listening, and Miss
Lucy Wessen’s eyes were shining, and I went the whole hog.

I told about our place down at Marietta, and about the big stables
and the grand brick house we had on a hill, up above the Ohio River,
but I knew enough not to do it in no bragging way. What I did was to
start things and then let them drag the rest out of me. I acted just
as reluctant to tell as I could. Our family hasn’t got any barrel
factory, and, since I’ve known us, we’ve always been pretty poor, but
not asking anything of anyone at that, and my grandfather, over in
Wales--but never mind that.

We set there talking like we had known each other for years and
years, and I went and told them that my father had been expecting
maybe this Bob French wasn’t on the square, and had sent me up to
Sandusky on the sly to find out what I could.

And I bluffed it through I had found out all about the 2.18 pace in
which About Ben Ahem was to start.

I said he would lose the first heat by pacing like a lame cow and
then he would come back and skin ’em alive after that. And to back up
what I said I took thirty dollars out of my pocket and handed it to
Mr. Wilbur Wessen and asked him would he mind, after the first heat,
to go down and place it on About Ben Ahem for whatever odds he could
get. What I said was that I didn’t want Bob French to see me and none
of the swipes.

Sure enough the first heat come off and About Ben Ahem went off his
stride, up the back stretch, and looked like a wooden horse or a sick
one, and come in to be last. Then this Wilbur Wessen went down to
the betting place under the grand stand and there I was with the two
girls, and when that Miss Woodbury was looking the other way once,
Lucy Wessen kinda, with her shoulder you know, kinda touched me. Not
just tucking down, I don’t mean. You know how a woman can do. They
get close, but not getting gay either. You know what they do. Gee
whizz.

And then they give me a jolt. What they had done when I didn’t know,
was to get together, and they had decided Wilbur Wessen would bet
fifty dollars, and the two girls had gone and put in ten dollars each
of their own money, too. I was sick then, but I was sicker later.

About the gelding, About Ben Ahem, and their winning their money, I
wasn’t worried a lot about that. It come out O.K. Ahem stepped the
next three heats like a bushel of spoiled eggs going to market before
they could be found out, and Wilbur Wessen had got nine to two for
the money. There was something else eating at me.

Because Wilbur come back after he had bet the money, and after that
he spent most of his time talking to that Miss Woodbury, and Lucy
Wessen and I was left alone together like on a desert island. Gee, if
I’d only been on the square or if there had been any way of getting
myself on the square. There ain’t any Walter Mathers, like I said to
her and them, and there hasn’t ever been one, but if there was, I bet
I’d go to Marietta, Ohio, and shoot him tomorrow.

There I was, big boob that I am. Pretty soon the race was over, and
Wilbur had gone down and collected our money, and we had a hack
downtown, and he stood us a swell dinner at the West House, and a
bottle of champagne beside.

And I was with that girl and she wasn’t saying much, and I wasn’t
saying much either. One thing I know. She wasn’t stuck on me because
of the lie about my father being rich and all that. There’s a way you
know.... Craps amighty. There’s a kind of girl you see just once in
your life, and if you don’t get busy and make hay then you’re gone
for good and all and might as well go jump off a bridge. They give
you a look from inside of them somewhere, and it ain’t no vamping,
and what it means is--you want that girl to be your wife, and you
want nice things around her like flowers and swell clothes, and you
want her to have the kids you’re going to have, and you want good
music played and no ragtime. Gee whizz.

There’s a place over near Sandusky, across a kind of bay, and it’s
called Cedar Point. And when we had had that dinner we went over
to it in a launch, all by ourselves. Wilbur and Miss Lucy and that
Miss Woodbury had to catch a ten o’clock train back to Tiffin, Ohio,
because when you’re out with girls like that you can’t get careless
and miss any trains and stay out all night like you can with some
kinds of Janes.

And Wilbur blowed himself to the launch and it cost him fifteen cold
plunks, but I wouldn’t ever have knew if I hadn’t listened. He wasn’t
no tin horn kind of a sport.

Over at the Cedar Point place we didn’t stay around where there was a
gang of common kind of cattle at all.

There was big dance halls and dining places for yaps, and there was
a beach you could walk along and get where it was dark, and we went
there.

She didn’t talk hardly at all and neither did I, and I was thinking
how glad I was my mother was all right, and always made us kids learn
to eat with a fork at table and not swill soup and not be noisy and
rough like a gang you see around a race track that way.

Then Wilbur and his girl went away up the beach and Lucy and I set
down in a dark place where there was some roots of old trees the
water had washed up, and after that, the time, till we had to go back
in the launch and they had to catch their trains, wasn’t nothing at
all. It went like winking your eye.

Here’s how it was. The place we were setting in was dark, like I
said, and there was the roots from that old stump sticking up like
arms, and there was a watery smell, and the night was like--as if you
could put your hand out and feel it--so warm and soft and dark and
sweet like a orange.

I most cried and I most swore and I most jumped up and danced, I was
so mad and happy and sad.

When Wilbur come back from being alone with his girl, and she saw him
coming, Lucy she says, “we got to go to the train now,” and she was
most crying, too, but she never knew nothing I knew, and she couldn’t
be so all busted up. And then, before Wilbur and Miss Woodbury got up
to where she was, she put her face up and kissed me quick and put her
head up against me and she was all quivering and--Gee whizz.

Sometimes I hope I have cancer and die. I guess you know what I mean.
We went in the launch across the bay to the train like that, and it
was dark too. She whispered and said it was like she and I could get
out of the boat and walk on the water, and it sounded foolish, but I
knew what she meant.

And then quick, we were right at the depot, and there was a big gang
of yaps, the kind that goes to the fairs, and crowded and milling
around like cattle, and how could I tell her? “It won’t be long
because you’ll write and I’ll write to you.” That’s all she said.

I got a chance like a hay barn afire. A swell chance I got.

And maybe she would write me, down at Marietta that way, and the
letter would come back, and stamped on the front of it by the U.S.A.
“there ain’t any such guy,” or something like that, whatever they
stamp on a letter that way.

And me trying to pass myself off for a bigbug and a swell--to her, as
decent a little body as God ever made. Craps amighty. A swell chance
I got.

And then the train come in and she got on, and Wilbur Wessen come and
shook hands with me and that Miss Woodbury was nice and bowed to me
and I at her and the train went and I busted out and cried like a kid.

Gee, I could have run after that train and made Dan Patch look like a
freight train after a wreck, but socks amighty, what was the use? Did
you ever see such a fool?

I’ll bet you what--if I had an arm broke right now or a train had run
over my foot--I wouldn’t go to no doctor at all. I’d go set down and
let her hurt and hurt--that’s what I’d do.

I’ll bet you what--if I hadn’t a drunk that booze I’d a never been
such a boob as to go tell such a lie--that couldn’t never be made
straight to a lady like her.

I wish I had that fellow right here that had on a Windsor tie and
carried a cane. I’d smash him for fair. Gosh darn his eyes. He’s a
big fool--that’s what he is.

And if I’m not another you just go find me one and I’ll quit working
and be a bum and give him my job. I don’t care nothing for working
and earning money and saving it for no such boob as myself.


        [3] Copyright, 1922, by The Dial Publishing Company, Inc.
            Copyright, 1923, by Sherwood Anderson.




                        THE DEATH OF MURDO[4]

                         By KONRAD BERCOVICI

                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)


“Oh, Murdo, grandson of the mighty chief Lupu, but father of none
worthy of thy blood. I shall tell of thy death to the ‘other ones’ so
that they might know how to die themselves. I have already told them
of thy great wisdom; that wisdom which was far greater than that of
the snake, yet had none of its poison; and thy great wing-strength,
more powerful than that of the eagle, on which thou hast lifted thine
own soul above the dirt and the dust of the valley, but never soiled
with the blood of prey.

“Murdo, grandson of Lupu, the Wolf. Eagle and Snake. Man. Of all who
have seen thee die I am the only one to know the truth. The tribe is
scattered to the four winds. ‘Lilith’ has done her dreadful work.
Murdo, my teacher, my chief, thou who hast been more than father
or brother to me, forgive me if I do not tell the story as thou,
incomparable one, wouldst have had me tell it.”

I had been away from the camp for over a year. Civilization and
father and mother had claimed me; but hardly had the green shown
itself from underneath the snow and I rejoined Murdo’s tribe again.
An old Tzigany had told me that Murdo was mortally ill and that the
whole tribe was stranded near the Black Sea. The morning after I
reached Konstanz, through marshes and mire, found me by Murdo’s cot.
The great chief had grown considerably older. The knife-wound he had
received from Yorga, the fiddler, the previous fall, had not healed,
and the concoctions and incantations of Miora had not successfully
replaced a needed physician.

“It is well thou art here,” Murdo greeted me. “I have called thee
with my soul. It is too soon for me to die. Though I am advanced in
years, my tribe still needs me. Nicolai, son of my own blood, is
no man to be chief of a tribe. He dreams away on his violin. Oh!
that a pigeon should be born in an eagle’s nest! The starost of the
village has told me many a time to go to one of your doctors. But I
have believed and still do believe that illness and recovery from
it is Fate; with which neither doctor nor witch can interfere. Yet
your people, who have made wagons go without horses, a bridge span
the Danube, who can talk with one another across distances without
the aid of witches--by stretching wires that the sparrows stand
upon--perhaps you do know something about diseases which we neither
believe nor understand. So do take me to one of your doctors and talk
to him and tell him I must yet live a short while. It is not health I
want, but life. Life until I choose a chief in whom my people shall
believe. Their trust in me is so great--too great--they will never
be satisfied with another man unless it be proved he is as good or
better than I.”

I looked at Murdo’s wound and marveled that he was still alive. Only
his great powers of resistance had enabled him to live that long. I
wondered that he had not died long before of blood-poisoning! He was
emaciated beyond belief. His long arms were so thin that it looked
as though his bones had been shaved down to spindles. The veins of
his neck and around his temples showed like blue cords from which the
hemp had been worn and loosened. The cheek-bones of his dark-grained
face edged against the parched skin and gave him a haunted aspect.
Even his voice, that great and haughty drum-voice, though still big
and commanding, had lost the firmness of its tissue. It rasped like
drumsticks upon the loosened skin of a bass drum.

The tribe, nervous and restless, wandered hither and thither in
narrow circles, like lost children, uncertain and afraid, forming
little groups behind the trees in the forest, or under distant tents,
discussing in subdued voices every detail, bickering, quarreling,
doing their best to keep disagreeable things away from the ears
and eyes of their chief. The horses and the dogs looked worn and
forlorn, sick and sorely in need of a master. For the horse of the
Gipsy and the dog of the Gipsy are happy when their master is happy,
and sad when their master is sad, and grow restless and nervous when
sojourning too long in the same place.

“But why are you all so sad?” I asked Lica, the son of Miora, the
witch, who had somehow assumed some sort of command during the
chief’s illness.

“How can we be happy,” he replied, “when we no longer hear the song
of the hammer upon the anvil, when the smith dares not blow his
bellows lest he disturb Murdo from his sleep? When we have looked
upon the same hill so long the pegs of our tents are rotting in the
ground? Look! Our horses have lost half their hoof-bones. It is an
age since they have been shod. Look! We have muzzled our dogs, and
when our goats bleat in the morning, our women rush out with knife in
hand to cut out their tongues. Because our chief battles with death
we have become like old women; fussy and afraid of noise.”

That very afternoon, having bedded Murdo as comfortably as possible
in the wagon, I started on my journey with him to the town of Braila
on the Danube. The trip lasted several days.

“Now tell me what thou hast learned while away from my camp,” Murdo
turned upon me suddenly the night of our first stopover at an inn
kept by a Greek.

I was certain the doctor would have to operate and cleanse the wound
where Yorga’s knife had struck. Fearing Murdo might oppose such
operation, I began to explain the cause of infections and the means
employed for staying them, and the existence of microbes in the human
body. Murdo listened very attentively as though I were telling him
some interesting story, but I could see that he did not believe what
I was telling him. After a long pause he said to me:

“It is a well-knit tale thou hast put forward. But thou, who hast
argued against the existence of spirits and goblins in the air, how
is it thou wantest me to believe in your tale of the existence of
worms which I do not see. Surely our fairy-tales are nicer than
yours!”

He called me over to his cot the following night and asked me to
continue my “fairy-tale.”

“But since you do not believe, Murdo--” I objected.

“And hast thou ever believed our fairy-tales? Yet thou hast insisted
we tell them to you!”

I recalled to him a telescope we had once seen together and explained
how by increasing the number and the power of these glasses one could
see things placed at enormous distances. He believed that. Then I
told him how with the aid of such powerful glasses very small things
could be magnified and how upon increasing the power of these glasses
things too small to be seen with the naked eye could be made visible.

“I should love to see with my own eyes through those glasses those
invisible little goblins of which you speak so convincingly,” he
answered sarcastically.

“Thou shalt see,” I assured him.

“Truly,” Murdo rejoined, “thou art a good story-teller. Thou even
believest what thou tellest. Go off to sleep now. Perhaps I shall
dream of what thou hast told me--of those powerful glasses through
which thou hast magnified thy story!”

I knew I had won my point. I knew I had won because the doctor to
whom I was taking Murdo, an old friend of the family, possessed a
microscope.

No sooner had the doctor seen the old man’s wound than he called in
another physician. Without asking any questions, they put Murdo under
ether, and before long they had opened and cleansed the wound. When
Murdo awoke he found himself solidly strapped to the bed. I had urged
that method upon the doctor, for I feared what Murdo might do upon
his awakening from ether. But he was very mild and submissive. He
asked me to sit near him. A few days later Murdo, who for the first
time in many moons had slept peacefully, was completely restored.
The doctor had allowed him the use of a room in his own household.
Another few days and Murdo was ready to return to his camp.

“I hate to make thee feel guilty,” Murdo said when we were ready
to leave. “If what thou hast told me on the road hither was but a
fairy-tale, well and good. If, however, it is a true tale, I shall
willingly give a year of my life to see it proved.”

Within five minutes the microscope was brought to light, and the
doctor himself put underneath the lens a few pieces of glass upon
which he had made different smears. He allowed Murdo to look at the
whirling mass of squirming matter. Murdo looked for a full hour.
Having fully satisfied his curiosity, he walked out of the room and
asked me to leave him by himself.

The following day we were upon our homeward journey. Murdo was
driving. I was sitting near him. The whole day long he remained
silent.

“Well?” I inquired that evening. “Art thou satisfied about the
existence of _these_ goblins?” He turned two very sad eyes upon me;
then replied:

“I never knew there were things alive and yet too small to kill.
Living things that could destroy a man, but whose smallness saved
them from our wrath! I have been thinking of them the whole day
long. In size those little worms are about in the same relation
to the ant as the ant to us. A drop of water, which they in their
infinitesimality cannot see, is enough to drown millions of them.
A little child passes over an ant-hill and under its little sole
destroys the work of a whole season of millions of them. The ants do
not understand what has crushed them. They only feel its power. They
are too small to see the child from sole to head as a whole being.
They only feel its strength. You blow your softest breath, and it is
like a devastating hurricane.

“If we stand in the same relation to some other bigger being as those
little worms stand to the ant and the ant to ourselves, when one of
those huge beings moves its hand, a great storm arises, a tempest. A
drop of sweat falls from his brow, and our fields are inundated; it
forms a lake, a river upon which sail large ships. He looks at us,
at all of us, because we too are too small to be seen singly and--we
have light! We are warm! Perhaps the sun is one of his eyes. Who
knows upon what other little thing his other eye may rest? A speck of
dust--our hills, our mountains. Think of what all our wisdom means,
what our time and space are to him, the earth and the oceans and the
waters all perhaps so small that he, too, needs some powerful glass
to see us! And there may yet be still other beings standing in the
same relation to him as he to us----”

When Murdo was in one of his reflective moods he was better left
undisturbed. But the following day he continued the conversation.

“And if this be so--and I am almost certain it is so--then we are so
small that one’s life is not worthy of the slightest consideration.
It is the good of the whole tribe one must think of; and if I, Murdo,
will soon be too old to rule--for man should rule only when he is
able to enforce his commands--should I not beforehand choose a man
fit to follow me? What matters it which ant is alive just so that
the ant-hill lives? So I shall choose a chief in my own manner. One
in whom they shall have absolute confidence; for the wisdom and the
power of a ruler are in the belief of his people. And I shall choose
the best one in my own manner. And I shall choose him while I am yet
able to do so, before old age has dimmed my mind and while I am yet
ruler. But one thing I want of thee. Never a word to the others of
what thou hast told me! Never a word of what we have seen through
those glasses! Never speak of our stay at your doctor’s! A witch has
cured me! And never question when I ask thee to do something! Just do
it!”

Another day and we were in camp. Seeing him restored, the happiness
of the Gypsies broke all bounds. Wine began to flow freely. The
musicians brought out their fiddles again, and song and dance
continued through days and nights. The smith set up his anvil and was
singing loudly to the accompaniment of the hammer while fashioning
shoes out of red-hot iron. Of all music, the clang of the hammer,
alternating from the hard steel of the anvil to the soft hot iron,
pleased the Gypsies most. When the smith and his helper hammered
together, they composed and improvised melodies and accompaniments
for the hammer.

The lustrous, black hair of the maidens was plaited with early
violets and evergreens, in thankfulness to the Great Spirit who
had restored Murdo to life. Fresh holes were bored in the lobes of
the men’s ears and new rings of white gold were inserted. In their
frenzy, even the little boys came and offered their lobes to be
pierced. Little cries of pain were mixed with great cries of joy. At
last they could again be noisy. They could allow the horses to neigh,
the dogs to bark, and the goats to bleat at will. They could shout,
they could quarrel, they could fight. There was no need of hushing
one another. No need of soul-torturing restraint. If one were hurt,
he could cry aloud. They could be Gypsies again!

Postponed weddings were celebrated. Oh, since the wine was flowing so
freely and the musicians were playing, since the women were at their
best and the men at their happiest, let it be; for the good of future
generations. Let Tanase marry Nitza and Andrea marry Tina; so they
could remember and say later on they married the spring Murdo was
restored to life. Great joys should be remembered through great joys.

At the camp-fire one night, Lica, the son of Miora, who was believed
to have great witch-power, asked Murdo, “What has restored thee to
health? Some great ‘gagiu’ in high silk hat and long black frock? Or
who else?”

“No!” answered Murdo. “A witch who knew more incantations than I have
ever heard. Who brought down goblins from the air so near to me I
could see them. Who brought them down in millions and had them dance
before me. And by payment of much gold I have not only been restored
to health, but obtained from her immunity. No harm can befall
me--except from a knife. And immunity of danger even from that source
could have been assured, had I been willing to pay what she asked,
and stay there a longer time. But for what I paid she has given me
immunity against many things. Look!”

And as he said that, Murdo rose and handed me his pistol. “Here I
stand.” Then turning to me, he added, “Stand six feet away. Now.
Raise your arm and aim. Here!” he commanded, exposing his chest.

Murdo’s words, followed by his immediate action, took all the men by
surprise. “What did he say? What did he ask that boy to do?”

I, standing there, facing Murdo, trembling, held under the spell
of Murdo’s eyes, which were immeasurably dilated with his own
excitement, only remembered his words, “Don’t question. Do what I
tell thee.”

“Pull the trigger!” he ordered. And I did as he told me. There was
a loud report. I fell exhausted with my own emotions. Yet Murdo
remained standing and laughing.

“That is what the witch I met did for me! Until some man meets a more
powerful one, I shall be immune. That’s what makes a great chief.
Immunity from disease and murderous weapons.”

When I recovered I saw that the Gypsies no longer crowded their
chief. Awe kept them open-mouthed at a distance. Only Miora, the old
witch, allowed a little cynical smile to play around her lips as she
looked at Murdo and her son. I was fully aware that Murdo had noticed
that, and was also aware that Miora’s disbelief in the power of that
great witch about whom Murdo had spoken was not displeasing to the
chief.

The following day Murdo, who recuperated more rapidly than I thought
possible, was up and about his work. I had never before seen him as
quarrelsome. He found fault with everything. The horses had been
neglected too much. The dogs were too lean. The canvas of the wagons
had not been kept in order. The goats were dry. Murdo, who had never
paid any attention to the work of the women in the camp, now found
fault with it and censored the women for their lack of order. When
Sunday came he quarreled with the younger women for having too many
jewels; too many dresses, he said, had been wheedled out of their
men, who had become as soft as old women. Some of the children whom
he inspected closely had sores and boils which had broken out among
them while Murdo was ill. And then he accused Miora of knowing as
little of incantations and witchery as the cat in the tree.

While Murdo was talking to Miora, Lica came nearer the chief. Murdo
sailed savagely right into him, telling him that he was the worthy
son of his mother, that he was sloppy, that his whip was not strong
enough to hurt a chicken, that his boots were as dirty as those of a
beggar, and that while he had carefully waxed his mustache he had not
washed his face.

“Has all the water dried up?” Murdo asked sarcastically, “or are you
waiting for your mother to wash your face clean with her tongue, as a
mother cat her kitten?”

The big, taut frame of Lica shook upon hearing his chief’s words.
He loved his mother passionately and believed implicitly in her
supernatural powers. That Murdo should have singled him out, him and
his mother, for such unjust reproaches, when he had done his best to
keep some order when Murdo had been ill, pained the big Gypsy.

“If thou hast lost entire belief in the power of my mother’s
witchcraft,” Lica answered, “why not bring here the one thou hast
newly met to replace her? At any rate, I thought she had only
coarsened thy hide, but I see I was mistaken----”

I could hardly believe my ears. What man dared use such language to
Murdo and hope still to live?

By that time a number of men and women of the camp surrounded the two.

“Lost my belief!” Murdo exclaimed, laughing. “I never had any!”

“Never had any!” Lica echoed, and looked around at the other men. His
mother’s face twitched, her body became contorted. She gave one long
hiss, like a snake, and hobbled away on her stick.

“Never had any! What about the time she had darkened the sun? When
she had sailed away on a broomstick in open daylight?” many of the
other Gypsies repeated. They put as much space between themselves
and their chief as they could. It was blasphemy. Murdo was calling
down the wrath of the evil one upon himself and the camp. And if
Miora were no witch at all, why had he not told them before? Was it
possible they had lived so many years without protection from evil
spirits? From “Ciuma,” the mother of the forest!

When they had all gone Murdo said to me, “Keep as near my tent as
possible, for, though thou hast not insulted them, their anger may
turn upon thee.” I sat in front of the tent watching the men busying
themselves feverishly each at his work. I could hear them muttering
as they worked. I could see them grouping themselves and talking in
subdued voices as they shot out glances from underneath their lashes
toward where Murdo was sitting. Only Lica and Miora were not to be
seen. Curiously enough, Murdo’s face, which had been so choleric only
a while ago, had suddenly turned a glossy white. A certain beatitude
seemed to be enveloping him. His eyes were very wide open and an
unearthly smile played about his lips. It was the same smile that
played when he confused an adversary in a discussion, when he was
tremendously satisfied with himself.

“One can never rule too well,” he said to me after a while. “If a
ruler is kind, men think him a weakling. So he is a bad ruler. If a
ruler is severe, his men think him a tyrant. So he is a bad ruler.
One should rule well according to his own lights. A kind ruler should
be kind and a severe one severe.”

That night Murdo remained awake. He came over several times to my
tent. He said he could not sleep; but I knew he was watching over me,
fearing something might happen.

I had attempted several times to make conversation with the men
and the women of the tribe, but they avoided me and sent me
unceremoniously about my work. Only Miora had come nearer, and,
passing her bony hands through my hair, she asked, “Were you with
Murdo when he visited that witch?”

“No,” I replied. “He was alone. I never saw the witch.”

Miora looked into my eyes to see if I had told the truth. Satisfied,
she hobbled away to the tent she occupied with her son.

In two days Murdo had worked up the men and women of his tribe to
such an extent that they were in almost open revolt. He had used the
whip mercilessly. He had insulted and beaten them. He had taken away
the jewels from the women, broken the cask of wine, smashed the jugs
of whiskey, and fed to the dogs the quarters of dried lamb which hung
inside the tents. At the smithy he had elbowed away the smith to show
him how shoes ought to be made and put on. He accused the wheelwright
of putting the iron rims upon his wheels when too cold. It made the
spokes become loose too soon and ruined the carriages. He tore the
big needle from the hands of the harness-maker and showed him how
stitches should be made in thick leather. He even kicked the boys
currying the horses; told them that their hands were made of cotton
and their feet of putty and that they were not worthy of attending to
horses.

I could not understand the reason back of Murdo’s action. I was
certain that there was a motive and a good one, because he was not
at all as grouchy when alone in his tent or talking to me. On the
contrary, he seemed satisfied with his own attitude toward his men,
and talked glibly and banteringly of what he might yet do to them.

Miora had evidently spread the news that I had had nothing to do with
the chief’s finding of a new witch. For the men and women in the
tribe renewed old friendships with me. Murdo found me talking to one
of the young women. He called me aside.

“She is married now,” he told me. “So you had better keep at a
distance from her.”

“But I have talked to her before, Murdo, and neither thou nor her
husband ever objected!”

“No, he has not objected; only he is no longer your friend. It is
the way with women. They want every man who comes near them to
forswear all his men friends. A woman hates less and fears less the
mistress of her husband than she hates and fears his men friends. It
is the reason she separates her man from his friends. All means are
fair--jealousy as well as others. And another thing I will tell thee.
Women do not want you to tell them the truth. They want men to lie
to them. They urge them on, and the more they know that he lies the
more satisfied they are, the more they like him. For she knows that
it is because of her that he lies, that he has done what is most
contrary to his own nature. For man needs never lie to a woman if she
did not compel him to do so. It is the lies a man tells a woman that
chains him to her more than his love. Each lie is a link forged to
the chain. And another thing I will tell thee. It is well it is so.
Two things a woman has to hold a man near her when he no longer wants
her--her tears and her children. It is well she has a third one--his
lies.

“And still another thing I will tell thee--this time about high
mountains. The higher the peak the deeper the root. And about large
wheels moving slowly but covering great distances. But all this thou
wilt in time know, coming to the knowledge in a different way. Oh,
you who have discovered how to see things too small to kill, yet
not learned how to live! Oh, you with your books and solidly walled
houses, with your customs and your manners, with your kings and your
doctors! You neither understand how to live nor know how to die. And
though you have knowledge, you have no wisdom. You are like overfull
barrels. You cannot flow. You ooze. Your brains are clogged; stuffed,
leaving you no room for thought.”

Sunday. The inn at the market-place. The peasants of the neighborhood
are there to buy horses. The plowing done, they are soon to begin to
harrow. They use horses for that work. Murdo’s men are out with their
brown little ponies, proving their speed, endurance, and pulling
strength. Two fiddlers on chairs upon a table are scraping furiously
away with their bows. A few of the youngsters are already dancing,
though it is far from midday. The village tippler, chronically drunk,
stands with his full, white-trousered legs wide apart, holding an
enormous earthen pitcher in his outstretched hand, and offers drink
to all passers-by. “Drink, for spring is here!”

The girls stand in little groups, like field-flowers, and talk among
themselves, nod approval or bend in laughter, looking from between
long and lowered eyelashes in the direction from which the young men
arrive on their way to the inn. They know one another so intimately
that they remark the slightest change of detail in apparel.

“Oh, look, Stan has put a new ribbon on his hat!”

“Oh, did you ever know Dan had a shirt with red-embroidered sleeves?”

“No, I know of one embroidered with yellow and another with black.
This one with red is a new one.”

“Had his mother bought any red wool?”

“No, but Fanutza did.”

“Then it must be Fanutza! And I had always thought he was to marry
Viora!”

And among the young men they talked of the girls.

“Angelica has added a new silver piece to her necklace. It looks a
bit too long; dangles too low.”

“Her father resoled his boots the other day and quarreled with the
cobbler.”

“The innkeeper broke a new pitcher last week. Fell on the stairs
coming from the cellar and broke the pitcher.”

“Which one?”

“The one with blue flowers on a yellow background.”

“Innkeepers are so clumsy!”

“Clumsy and rich.”

“Nae, the musician, snapped three strings in one month. It is a good
omen. Never let the Gypsy use the same strings at two weddings.
Either you or your wife will be unfaithful within the year.”

Every little thing is noticed. Every little thing is discussed,
is food for thought and talk. And if one bought a horse the whole
village is ready to give him advice. And even after the man and horse
are buried, the story of how he began the bargain, the first price
asked, the price offered, every word, every gesture and word of the
Gypsy and the buyer are repeated for years and years; standing near
the fences in the summer nights or sitting at the fireside in the
winter.

“Do you remember when George bought his horse? It was the year Stan
married and Maren’s bitch gave him a litter of six black little
puppies.”

The chief topic of that Sunday, however, was Murdo’s marvelous
recovery and the tale he had told of being immunized from bullets and
disease by a great witch he had met somewhere along the shores of the
Danube.

When Murdo appeared at the inn he was surrounded by older peasants
who plied him with questions. The younger ones kept respectfully
aside.

“But really,” said one who had great faith in Miora’s great powers,
“you will not tell me, Murdo, that the one you recently met can
do what Miora is able to do? That she can ride upon a broomstick
through the air as well as Miora, or stay the pest as Miora has done?
Don’t we know how many times Miora has saved this whole world from
destruction with her incantations! And what the other one can do,
Miora can and better. I am sure of that.”

Murdo listened smilingly, allowing his interlocutor to wax warmer and
warmer on the subject of Miora and attracting more and more people
around him.

When the crowd was big enough Murdo turned around and said, “There
is Miora and there is her son, Lica. He is the truest shot of all
my men. He is a good man. And were he not to believe as much in his
mother’s power as he does, he would be still a better man. Here is a
test. I shall go away for two days to my witch. While I am away let
Miora immunize her son against pistol-shots. Then we will stand six
feet apart with raised arms and cocked pistols. Who remains standing
is chief.”

Murdo’s proposition was received with astonishment and awe by his
listeners. Something worth while remembering had already happened. A
legend was in the making. A great chief, Murdo!

I shall never forget the face of Miora after Murdo had spoken. The
locks of her lower jaw seemed to have slipped out of their hinges.
She was incapable of articulating a word. The gurgling, moaning cry
she let out was so unearthly; it sounded more like the faint howl of
packs of distant wolves than that of a human being. In her anxiety
to protect with her own body the stature of her son, she stretched
herself so high, it seemed her humped back was flattening out. Big as
he was, Lica seemed a small baby near that knotted, bony, hardened
frame of his old mother.

Murdo vanished from the place as though the earth had swallowed him.
As everybody was looking for him and he was not to be found, the tale
quickly spread that he had ridden away on the proverbial broomstick
of the witches. Children playing in front of the inn pointed to a
lone, wild duck high up in the air. They assured their elders that it
was Murdo; that they had seen him rise. Before nightfall the miracle
was believed. Even Miora believed it.

No horse-trading was done that day. When night came everybody felt
that the thing had resolved itself into a fight of witches. That the
contest was to be fought between Miora and that other witch who had
cured Murdo. And that the price was to be the chieftainship of the
tribe.

How could it be otherwise? If Murdo’s witch knew more powerful
incantations, more effective ones than Miora’s, then Miora was a
useless member of the tribe; then both she and her son Lica should
have to go elsewhere. But if Murdo, who had courted and obtained the
disapproval and hatred of Miora, if Murdo’s witch was not all he
pretended her to be, then he could not remain the chief of the tribe.
For a man had to be protected against evil and had to be able to
recur to witchery if he were to rule effectively a tribe of Gypsies.
What if a disease befell the cattle? What if a disease befell the
people? And how frequently those two afflictions came together! How
could a man be without the protection of a witch? And when that man
was a ruler he had to be immune from many evils and had to be able to
consult with the supernatural.

It was strange to see how the absence of Murdo affected his tribe.
During the following two days life became an unbearable burden to me.
Miora and her son kept to their tent. The rest of the tribe, men,
women and children, huddled pell-mell, cried, yelled, scratching,
pushing, at times moving like a flabby, will-less mass of soft flesh,
hither and thither, without aim, without reason.

The soul-shattering experience made them remember old words and old
curses. Customs and habits which had long ago fallen into disuse,
fallen by the wayside at the Ganges River, on the Turkestan roads,
rose to the surface again. The women formed a circle holding each
other’s braids and pulling hard, yelling and turning round and round.
The men stripped and flogged one another. At one time during the
night, when I had seen an altar built, I feared a return to human
sacrifice. But the fire was not lighted. An old Gypsy spoke and
stayed whatever was about to take place. He urged them to keep their
minds away. Not to commit themselves. For if Miora were stronger
and they had committed themselves mentally to the other one, they
were sure to be punished. So they danced rhythmless dances and sang
tuneless songs, buried their nails in the flesh of their faces and
their breasts, and howled with delight. In the end some one started
to repeat incessantly two words, “Cirtra, vatra; cirtra, vatra;
cirtra, vatra.” Soon they were all repeating the same words, holding
one another under the spell of their feverish, dilated eyes and the
jerking, nervous movements of their limbs and shoulders.

The loud moaning of Miora rose above the din of the monotone, which
soon became like an accompaniment to the wailing song. From time to
time this unearthly cacophony was punctured with a dry and piercing
report from Lica’s pistol.

In their distraction the Gypsies had not noticed the appearance of
Murdo in their midst. When they had noticed him they remained silent
and surrounded him. Oh, they believed in him and his witch! He could
see that in their eyes. Why had he thought it necessary to test them?

Murdo was in his bare feet and dressed only in a white shirt, held
closely to the hips with a wide red sash.

“Call Lica,” he ordered, “but let two men keep Miora in her tent.”

Lica came out. He was not too sure on his feet. I could see Murdo
remarked that. The old chief walked to where the young Gypsy was
standing, measured six feet away from him, opened the shirt at his
chest until the gray-haired surface was exposed, and said:

“Aim well, Lica, for I want no excuse afterward. It is known thou art
the best shot of the tribe.”

Miora howled her loudest. The others were awe-struck and silent.

“Now,” and the old chief leveled his pistol. “When I say ‘three.’”

Lica was pale, but he had regained his composure. It was evident both
men were anxious to end the affair.

“One.”

“Two.”

“Three.” Both men emptied their pistols; and Murdo fell flat on his
back. The blood trickled.

“Murdo!” I cried, leaning over the dying man.

Lica was untouched, wondering, amazed at what had happened.

“In--my--left--hand--take it--” Murdo murmured softly.

“He--is--a good shot. They will believe in him. It’s what--they need.
A chief--in whom they believe--a great witch, Miora--greater than
mine----”

From his left hand I took the lead of the bullet Murdo had fired at
Lica!

He died to give them a chief they could believe greater than he was.

So they danced and made merry. And there was song and wine, and the
women were again at their best and the men at their happiest.

“Oh, Murdo, grandson of the mighty chief Lupu, but father of none
worthy of thy blood. I shall tell of thy death to the ‘other ones’ so
that they might know how to die themselves. I have already told them
of thy great wisdom; that wisdom which was far greater than that of
the snake, yet had none of its poison; and thy great wing-strength,
more powerful than that of the eagle, on which thou hast lifted thine
own soul above the dirt and the dust of the valley, but never soiled
with the blood of prey.

“Murdo, grandson of Lupu, the Wolf. Eagle and Snake. Man. Of all who
have seen thee die I am the only one to know the truth. The tribe is
scattered to the four winds. ‘Lilith’ has done her dreadful work.
Murdo, my teacher, my chief, thou who hast been more than father
or brother to me, forgive me if I have not told the story as thou,
incomparable one, wouldst have had me tell it.”


        [4] Copyright, 1922, by The Pictorial Review Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Konrad Bercovici.




                        AN UNKNOWN WARRIOR[5]

                         By SUSAN M. BOOGHER

                 (From _The Junior League Bulletin_)


Snow was falling over London; a great blur of zig-zagging flakes; the
embankment was deserted; the streets half-filled; in the houses of
Parliament long windows etched themselves in light; Westminster Abbey
was almost obliterated by the downfall, its time-stained crevices had
filled, like cups, with drifts of snow.

Out of the obscurity and the snow a soldier approached Westminster.

He paused a moment on the opposite side of the street to peer at
the great pile before him, and in his eyes was the half-incredulous
amazement of one who finds himself at home again after strange,
unhappy wanderings.

For an instant the Abbey seemed subtly changed; vague, intangible,
unearthly. It was the drifting snow, of course, that obliterated the
stains of time in its multitudinous delicate crevices; the drifting
snow that was like a veil about his vision.

The zig-zagging flakes momentarily blinded the soldier, confused him
... for an instant in the falling snow, he saw the Abbey white and
stainless like a transcendent chalice lifted to the sky.

Then the soldier passed through the high-pointed portal. The padded
doors fell to behind him. Dim and quiet, the great nave stretched
away into the gloom.

After a moment the soldier raised his bared head; his eyes, grown
accustomed to the twilight, lifted to the rose window above the altar.

He had taken off the heavy coat he wore; shorn of its bulk, he seemed
extremely young, boyish, child-like even. There was something of
childhood in the hidden, secret happiness of his eyes; something of
childhood in the furtive way he fingered the column at whose base he
stood, then quickly withdrew his hand.

As one touches a flower, his gaze fondled the dim Abbey.

Presently he moved slowly down the splendid nave, pausing now and
then to drink in with thirsty eyes the beauty about him....

In a distant chapel, candles like captive fireflies were flickering
amid the gloom of drooping banners, and the furled flags of forgotten
wars....

The vastness of Westminster, the stateliness, lifted him as wings
lift.

It had always been so; throughout his childhood the Abbey had held
for him the beauty and romance that other boys find in sport, in
girls, in love.

He was remembering how often and often as a child he had brought
lunch with him and spent whole days exploring the Abbey--its great
naves and chapels, its crypts and tombs.

And it was still the same. War had not changed the Abbey.

The soldier now was standing before the chancel at the high altar,
his face lifted to the rose window that glowed above it. And
suddenly, like light, transcendent happiness was about him.

War had not changed him either!

The thought that was like light about him bore him in an ecstasy of
thanksgiving to his knees. His prayer was incoherent; a feeling of
infinite, lifted happiness: to have gone from college, physically
untrained for war, psychologically unprepared, to have spent three
years in the mud and blood,--and to have remained unchanged!

War had not changed him. War was an interruption, a suspension, a
holding of one’s breath ... the things for which he had lived--poetry
and beauty still were first.

Irrelevantly, and with an overwhelming longing, he remembered the
casual eyes of men who dwell in peace; he remembered English lanes
that call out to be trod; violets like music in the grass; the
cloistral quality of libraries; that first faint tremble in the
trees of spring; moonlight like snow upon the night....

And then, a tremendous symphony, the poems he had loved broke over
him. For an interval he was breathless, remembering the unbearable
beauty of Shakespeare’s sonnets; Chaucer, like a dayesie in the
grass; the music of Milton; Shelley’s “luminous wings”; Wordsworth,
“whose dwelling is the light of setting suns.”

Poetry! English poetry! He felt abased and purified and lifted. In
a sudden flash he re-beheld his England as the land of poets. Not
of shopkeepers, sailors, empire-builders. But of poets--the winged
voices of the race!

There were Ireland, of course, and India, and Egypt, and opium;
dreadful ills! He shuddered imperceptibly. But these things, in the
final analysis, were not England. England was the poets whose voices
sing always of freedom; England was the barons at Runnymede; Magna
Carta; England was America, too; the pilgrims who planted a dream
upon the wilderness; and that still prophetic voice speaking today
above the roar and belch of war to the heart of the world. England
was Westminster: Shakespeare and Wordsworth and Wilson.

“Cloud-capped towers” ... “and visions splendid” ... “men too proud
to fight.”

Then the young soldier thought of his king; instinctively his eyes
lifted, his hand rose to the salute. Not as a kindly, middle-aged
man, slightly shrunken with mediocrity, did the young soldier think
of his king. To him, he was a knightly, shining figure, splendid with
romance. Medieval mysticism; crusaders faring forth to holy lands;
the glamour of Elizabeth’s bright reign; all the lesser poets like
fugitive and falling stars upon the night; these things were England
to the young soldier, were his king. King and Country! The phrase
lifted him again in exaltation. King and Country! It was for that
he was a warrior; it was for poetry and peace--tranquility like the
silence here in Westminster, where dreams unfold.

War was a cloud that would pass from before the shining beauty of
life. Others would know it again. _Others_....

Bitterness and grief for a moment assailed him. He had felt life
poignantly. A poet does; most poignantly, perhaps, the man not quite
a poet. Beauty had been so vividly acute; the laughter of forsythia
in the spring; summer’s perfumed, star-sown nights, the flaunting
flags of autumn, the thrill like military music on the wind. These
things to him were happiness as sharp as pain. And winter, too, with
its largo of snow.

It was winter now ... and snowing.

As the exaltation of his mood subsided, the soldier found his
down-cast gaze caught by an insignia on the overcoat that hung across
his arm; the number of a regiment, a division. The symbols seemed
to him suddenly utterly divorced from himself, alien. War was not
possible, _the war was not_. It could not be that yesterday he had been
in France; tomorrow he would be there again.

Incredulity swept him.

In the silence and the solitude and the twilight of Westminster, the
thing that he had left, the thing to which he must return, seemed
impossible, an unreality, delirium.

He thought suddenly of death ... it was the first time he had thought
of death since he had entered the Abbey. It seemed incredible that
men were dying at that instant, killing each other with terrible
guns, when the quiet here was so profound.

For an instant one of those moments of distorted sensation assailed
him, of familiarity with what occurs; the silence was acute with
soundless sounds; in the shadow about him crowded unseen presences;
the pounding of his heart was louder than a drum ... and suddenly he
knew that he had never been surprised, always the things that had
come to him he had foreseen. Suddenly he knew that he had always
known that this would happen to him; war and death. For an instant he
closed his eyes against memory, against war, presentiment.

Like terrible and bitter waters, despair engulfed him; he was
conscious of a fumbling, still-born gesture after the youth that he
had lost, the beauty forgotten, the poems he would not write.

_He had meant to be a poet._

Always, as a child, a youth, he had meant to be a poet, and write
phrases like the “vision splendid,” and sleep in Westminster with the
mighty dead.

A strangling agony was in his throat.... He felt betrayed. War had
betrayed him. Fate had. Now he would never be a poet and sleep in
Westminster. He was only a soldier, a warrior ... an unknown warrior.

The terrible and bitter waters, the strangling agony at length
subsided. He felt spent, exhausted, devoid of emotion.

And after a moment he rose from his knees; he was remembering why he
had come back to England on this strange leave; he was remembering he
must hurry if he were to stand again among the mighty dead.

The look of childhood, the look of hidden, secret happiness returned
to his face as he turned away from the high altar and traversed the
transept.

When at last he had come to the Poets’ Corner, he paused, he relaxed,
he drew a deep breath, as one who has indeed come home.

Above him in the stained glass windows myriad colors gleamed. It was
lighter there than any place in the Abbey, than any place in England,
the young soldier thought ... any place in the world.

England’s poets! He found himself again among them.

It was a tryst he kept!

As he stood there, the twilight, and the storm, and war, all the
weary weight he carried, vanished from about him. Like a rush of
purifying waters, poetry and beauty swept his soul.

It was for this he had come home!

Hot, unexpected tears in his eyes startled the young soldier.
Poetry! He had not until today really thought of poetry for three
hideous years of war. Poetry! The very word was the loveliest in the
language. Unexpectedly, he remembered his bookshelves, his volumes of
poems, certain pages--words themselves were before his eyes.

“Whither is fled the visionary gleam?”

“Where is it now, the glory and the dream?”

Like a deep-toned organ, the music of Wordsworth’s Ode was about him.
“Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting.”... The words suggested
phraseless things; they lifted him, he soared upon their beauty.

Suddenly illusion swept him....

Visions swirled upon the dark; about him the dim distances leaped
into light; the great Abbey was ablaze with candles; through its
windows gleamed the sun; a thronging multitude was gathered beneath
the drooping banners and the furled flags of forgotten wars; upon the
silence pulsed the slow beat of funeral music, as a vast procession
passed in insubstantial pageantry behind a flag-draped bier to where
the mighty dead of England sleep.

Illusion crowded upon the young soldier; blinded him; dazzled him....
Life had been too stabbing to last, poetry too poignant. And now it
did not matter; _his_ life, _his_ death, _his_ poetry.

“Another race hath been, and other palms are won.”

A flag-draped bier! Like great protecting wings about his soul
presentiment enfolded him.... Peace comes after war; death after
life; and always to the poet, come poetry and beauty. A shining
something, like light, was about him, was in his eyes and soul.
Unsung songs ... a voiceless poet ... a soldier, an unknown warrior
... _sleeping in Westminster with the mighty dead_!

The swirling visions vanished. Illusion fell away.

The young soldier sank to his knees; for an instant his head was
bowed in prayer ... “thoughts too deep for tears.”

The vision he had seen had blinded him, and humbled him and healed.
Gradually his eyes re-focused to the dark, but the shining something,
like light, remained in his soul.

In the stained glass window the colors had blurred together, but
still a lantern, in the hand of a figure grown shadowy and dull,
retained its fire; the soldier watched it fade.

And then he rose and moved away. Beyond a transparent dimming
window, he glimpsed a gargoyle vague with snow. The great nave as
he traversed it was a well of darkness. Out of the silence came the
muffled sound of a padded door.

In the vestibule, a ragged newsboy flitted past him like a bat; his
face and the papers under his arm made white blots in the gloom.
“’Ello! A soldier hin the Habbey!” The boy drew up at his side.
“Paper, sir? News from the front?”

The soldier looked about him tentatively, as one waking from a dream.
In the shadows the newsboy’s face was strangely white, and he had
eerie eyes. The man wondered what he was doing in the Abbey.

“Hit’s the quiet ’ere hafter the streets,” the boy volunteered, as if
in answer to the unspoken thought. His strangely white face and his
eyes fascinated the soldier, hypnotized him.

“Hit’s quiet ’ere too hafter the guns!” The boy was pirouetting from
one foot to another.

“Yes,” the soldier said. He wanted to tell the boy to come here
often. He wanted to tell the boy about poetry and beauty--the
Intimations of Immortality.

“Hi come to the big shows they pulls off ’ere, too,” the child said
unexpectedly.

For an instant his illusion recurred to the soldier; a vast crowd,
lights and banners--funeral music, a _flag-draped bier_!

“But Hi likes hit better when hit’s dark and quiet--like now!”

The newsboy’s eerie eyes re-focused to the soldier’s vision. It had
come to him that this boy, other boys, loved the Abbey as he had. For
an instant he realized the linked chain of life. He saw a passing
torch.

Then he got into his overcoat. Shrinking a little as one does who
leaves home for the darkness and the cold, the young soldier passed
out from Westminster.

Snow was falling over London; a great blur of zig-zagging flakes....


        [5] Copyright, 1922, by _The Junior League Bulletin_.
            Copyright, 1923, by Susan M. Boogher.




                         THE HELPLESS ONES[6]

                          By FREDERICK BOOTH

                            (From _Broom_)


Eddie Gordon sprawled face upward on the living-room couch, asleep.
His head was at the foot of the couch, hanging partly over the
edge, and his shod feet lay nearly buried where the pillows and his
overcoat were jumbled together. One arm hung over the side of the
couch, and his hand, crumpled against the floor, lying limp in the
shadow, resembled a cast-off gray glove. He lay so still with his
clothes all tumbled and his head turned and hanging back against one
shoulder, one might have thought him dead. But he only slept.

At six o’clock a lively step sounded in the hall. A key snapped in
the lock. The door opened and Sally Gordon came in.

She turned her head deliberately toward the couch as she closed the
door. A sigh, rather tremulous but brief, whispered in the gloom.
She went quickly to the table in the middle of the room, felt
about for a match, and lighted the gas chandelier. Without looking
again toward the couch she removed her overcoat and hat, went into
the bathroom, turned high the gas and washed her face and hands,
vigorously brushing the ink-stains from her fingertips. She turned
from the bathroom into the bedroom, turned up the light there, and
brushed her hair with soft, slow strokes. She touched her face
rather indifferently with a powder-puff, and stood then stroking her
eyebrows with the tips of her fingers, looking long into the mirror.
She gazed at her reflection and her face wore a look of pleasure.
Once with her palm she smoothed back the hair from her forehead
with a slow, caressing stroke, as one would stroke back the hair
from the forehead of a child. She regarded herself steadily with
the unaffected and unconcealed tenderness with which she would have
regarded a child.

At last, reluctantly, she turned down the light and walked back into
the living room.

She stood by the couch and stared down at her husband. Her eyes had
the peculiar intent look of a mother who watches her sleeping baby.
Her eyes roamed the whole length of his body, looking at his untidy
clothing, his uncombed hair, at his muddy boots that had muddied
his overcoat and the pillows. At last she slipped one arm under his
shoulders and with a great effort pulled him up on the couch so that
his head had a better resting place. She reached for a pillow and
tucked it under his head. She picked up his limp, hanging arm and
laid it across his body, pulled his gaping coat together and buttoned
the bottom button. She made quick, sure movements, the movements of
one who performs an accustomed human task.

Having made him easier, less ungraceful in his inertness, she sat
down on the edge of the couch and gazed intently into his face. Her
eyes dwelt in turn on every one of his features and to every one she
gave some sort of touch, his tousled hair a pat, his forehead a slow
stroke, his closed eyes a touch of her finger-tips, and still in her
face was that peculiar intent and anxious look, the look of a mother
who dotes on her fragile treasure.

Eddie Gordon slept, hardly breathing, not moving. His sleep was
profound, sodden, the sleep of a hard and habitual drinker who gets
drunk every night and sleeps until morning, drunk every morning and
sleeps until night. His face had a greenish yellow color about the
forehead and eyes, was flushed at the cheeks and swollen at the mouth.

Sally knew what ailed him. It was a daily event in her life, and she
found herself reacting to it this time exactly as she had many times
before, as she did every time she saw her husband lying so still
and helpless, his heart barely beating, his breath barely stirring.
Always when she saw him thus, so profoundly helpless, so utterly and
mystically babelike, the feelings of a mother for awhile possessed
her completely. It possessed her as one is possessed by a mood. It
possessed her against her will, this common emotion that had not
yet found expression in her life. She dreaded this slow welling up
of morbid desire to fondle and nurse that helpless, still baby, her
husband. But it was not to be resisted while it ran its course. In
that desire, during its beginning and even during the moments of her
surrender to it, was something that filled her with self-horror. She
felt herself tricked and made worse than silly. She felt herself
infected with moral decay. Always she had fought against it, as she
had this time, with little devices, delays, as one in sleep fights
the approach of a bad dream which comes on regardless. And always she
surrendered, for awhile. Always, for awhile, something in her was
glad to have this man even thus dependent, thus her own.

So she sat, prinking her husband’s hair, straightening his disordered
clothing, lost in this strange little orgy of motherliness.

But after awhile a look of distaste ruffled a little her face. Little
dimples puckered the middle of her forehead. The wide pupils of her
eyes narrowed a little. She turned her face a little away, still
looking, cocked her head a little sideways, bit her lip and drew
her hands back, hesitating. The man’s mouth was sagging open, and
impulsively, with a studious, earnest air, like a child modeling
clay, she took his face in both her hands and firmly pressed his
mouth shut, and for a moment held it so. But when she took her hands
away his mouth again sagged open. He slept.

She frowned and again put out her hands, but drew them back. She
recoiled a little and turning her head swept his body from head to
foot with one swift glance. She took his limp hand in hers, held
it up to the light and looked at it narrowly. His hand was unclean
all over and the nails were black. She flung it down hurriedly, and
without getting up she turned her back to him, and bending over, her
elbow on her knee, her mouth resting against her fist, stared at the
floor a long while. The silence was absolute.

Minutes passed. She arose and walked aimlessly about for awhile,
tucking at her hair, rearranging the furniture. Once she glanced at
her watch. She came and leaned back against the table, looking at her
husband. Her hands arranged and rearranged a bunch of violets pinned
between the buttoned lapels of her jacket.

After awhile she called sharply, “Eddie! Eddie!” Silence.

She bit her lip and shook her head slowly a long time, gripping the
edge of the table and holding her body rigid. She lifted up her head
and gazed at the ceiling.

“Oh, God!” she whispered, as though she believed God might be in
the room above. Her body sagged while she gazed at the ceiling. She
sobbed without making a sound. Tears glinted in her eyes but did not
roll down her cheeks.

The man lay regardless.

At last the woman smiled, a wry smile; looked at her watch; and
turned toward her coat and hat.

A step sounded in the hall, heavy and rather slow, coming toward
her door. It stopped at her door, there was a wait, a firm rap. She
opened the door at once.

“You, Allen?” she exclaimed in an undertone.

A tall man was looking in at her. He was rather angular and awkward.
His eyes were deepset and gray, and his large, rather bony face had a
sober look.

“May I come in?” he said.

She led the way into the room. He followed slowly, closing the door
behind him. She looked at him with a question in her face.

“I could not stay away any longer,” he said.

“I never told you not to come,” she replied.

He had not appeared to notice the man on the couch. Now, as if he had
known all the time, he turned slowly and looked down at Eddie. After
some moments he again faced her.

“The same as ever,” he said.

She shrugged her shoulders and a poor smile flickered on her lips. He
looked at her steadily but not offensively, and she could not take
her eyes from his face. The steady, full breathing of this man could
be heard in the room. He put out his great hand and stroked back the
hair from her forehead as she herself had done when she stood before
the mirror in the bedroom. Her head was thrust a little back by the
weight of his hand, but she continued to look up into his eyes. Her
hands trembled on the edge of the table.

“You’ve had enough,” he said at last. “You’re going away with me this
evening. You are going now.”

The pupils of her eyes widened. Her face grew pale and her lips
seemed brilliant by contrast. She put both of her hands against his
shoulders. The quick gesture seemed to warn him not to come any
nearer, yet the touch of her hands against his coat was almost like a
caress.

A sort of eagerness animated the face of the man, tempered by
hesitancy and grave concern. The look of his face plainly said, “I
want you, but I wouldn’t hurt you.”

He held his head in an awkward fashion and moved his lips, searching
for words. They gazed at each other without speaking.

The man on the couch flung his head fretfully about, opened his eyes
and blinked up at the light, turned his body a little more and raised
himself on his elbow. His swollen lips made a grotesque attempt to
draw themselves down, and failed; but the stare of his eyes was
fixed, unwinking and terrible. He saw how her bare arm, the sleeve
slipped back, gleamed like a bar of silver against the tall man’s
shoulder. He stared and then his face became dull. Quietly he laid
himself down again.

The tall man said at last, “Pack your suitcase and come away. I’m not
asking you to.... You know. You understand me, don’t you, Sally? I
love you. But that’s not it, not entirely. I wouldn’t try to break
up your home, not if you had a home. I see you wearing yourself out
here. This is breaking you, this business. You’ve said so yourself.
Now it’s time to cut it out, anyway, for awhile. I saw that look in
your eyes when I came in. Leave him a note. I’ll take you anywhere
you say. You can go to my mother’s, or you can go to a hotel. But
you’ve got to have a rest for awhile anyway. I saw that look in your
eyes when I came in. Now you’ve got to give this business a let-up.
Don’t worry about him. Leave him a note and some money. Anyway, I
have always managed to look him up every day or so, I’ll see to it
that he gets along. You know that Eddie and I understand each other,
Sally, I mean, when he’s sober. And I don’t have to tell you, do I
Sally, that I am honest about it with both of you, no matter how much
I want you? You and Eddie and I, we’ve always been friends, and we
always will be, no matter what happens. I’ll see him and I’ll talk to
him straight out. It will be for the best all the way round, for him
too. He’ll see the thing straight. He’s not so unreasonable, not when
he’s sober. I know he will consent. I know it can be settled in the
right way. Pack a suitcase and come away with me tonight.”

His heavy manner, his blunt speech, his awkwardness, revealed the
heaviness of his desire and his anxious earnestness.

The woman had slowly drawn away from him. Now she leaned back against
the table, one hand braced against the edge, the other hand smoothing
down the lapel of her jacket. She held her head sideways and cast at
the floor a troubled and pensive look, its pathos heightened by the
whiteness of her face and supple neck.

She thinned her lips and a frown puckered her forehead.

“No,” she said slowly, in a small voice. “No, I couldn’t do that. You
know I couldn’t, Allen. No. No.”

The tall man looked at her with an expression of benign indecision
and puzzlement. He turned his head toward the sprawled shape on the
couch. He bit his lip. A deep flush mounted to his forehead and made
the arteries in his temples swell. He stroked his chin, meditating.

“Sally,” he said at last. The constraint in his voice made the woman
look quickly up. “I’ll tell you, Sally, I haven’t talked to you about
this thing the way I feel like talking. Now I’m going to talk the way
I feel like talking. Maybe it’s brutal of me to do it, but I can’t
help that. I have to say what I think. I’m that way and you know me
well enough not to mind too much.”

But he paused and studied her face, hesitating, half afraid. Then he
said:

“You loved me before you met Eddie, didn’t you, Sally?”

“Yes.”

“I knew it.” His voice trembled a little, and he stopped for
a moment because he did not want to show how pleased he was at
her confession while he was still under the disadvantage of her
resistance.

His slow voice went on, “Yes, I used to feel almost sure of it. Even
though it was presumptuous of me, I did think so. You were always
straightforward. You were never ashamed of your feelings. But I
couldn’t ask you to marry me, not then. You remember how things were
with me--my kid sisters and all to be looked after. I had to wait.”

“I understood,” said Sally in a low voice. “I knew you cared, and why
you--didn’t say anything.”

“But you married Eddie just the same! And it wasn’t because you
didn’t care for me. I know why you married him. I’m going to tell you
why you married him.”

“Don’t! You needn’t tell me. I know. I didn’t know then. I just felt
something that was too strong for me. I didn’t know why I had to give
in to it. I just had to. Now I know what it was. I know why I had to
give in to it.”

She paused, pressed the back of one hand against her mouth. She bent
her head. Her hand trembled against her mouth and her shoulders
trembled a little too. She took her hand away from her mouth and
began to tug at one of the buttons of her coat. Her lips were white.
She pressed her upper lip against her teeth to keep it from quivering.

“I could have waited for you. I knew you would ask me some day. But
there was one thing I couldn’t wait for. I was twenty-four, and
natural. My whole feeling for life and people was full of a woman’s
desires. I didn’t know it then, but I know it now. I was strong,
I could have waited if I had known it then. I know now that my
whole feeling for Eddie was that I wanted to mother him. I had to
mother somebody. But I didn’t know it was that, not then. I didn’t
understand it at all. I used to be afraid and ashamed because I still
loved you and here all the time Eddie and I were coming closer and
closer together. I didn’t understand myself at all. Yes, I still
loved you, but ... I couldn’t have children then, it takes money to
have children. Those days you were having your own struggles and I
could barely make my living. I couldn’t even allow myself to think of
having children.”

She stopped, turned her head and looked at the sleeper on the couch.
She knitted her brows and compressed her lips. The tall man moved his
lips as if to speak, but she went on:

“One night he came to see me. That was when he was on _The Sun_, and
he had made such a hit, you remember? He was drunk that night. He
came to the house drunk. I used to wonder how he could get drunk--how
he could--such a sweet boy. Now I know why. He got himself drunk so
he could run away from responsibilities--so he would be helpless--so
he could be a child, just as he is now. He was beautiful that
night--drunk. He was beautiful partly because he was drunk. Can you
understand that? Some men are that way. He was that way then. His
cheeks were flushed, his eyes sparkled, and his yellow hair stood
up all over his head, glittering in the lamplight. He sat on the
couch and drew up his knees so that his feet were on the couch too.
He sat there and talked to me. He lisped when he talked. His head
was unsteady on his shoulders, like a baby’s. He talked to me about
his mother. You know she died when he was five. He had to grow up
unfinished. He had become a man but he was still a child. He told me
how beautiful his mother was and how he would have been different if
she had lived. I was like her, he said. He sat there and talked to
me just about as he would have talked to his mother, I suppose, if
she had been there in my place. The room was warm and after awhile he
couldn’t talk at all. But he was beautiful, as a child is beautiful.
His yellow head fell over against me. I put my arms around him and
pulled his head down and held him close to me. I didn’t know what I
was doing. Maybe I didn’t want to know.

“After that I couldn’t resist him. I didn’t try. I wouldn’t let
myself think about you. Eddie needed me. The whole thing with me was
pity. A woman must pity something! I told myself that Eddie needed
me. I loved him for his weaknesses.”

The tall man slowly nodded his head. “I knew that was why you married
him,” he said. “I can see how a woman would do that.”

The woman went on: “After we were married I used to go out and hunt
for him when he didn’t come home. I still do sometimes. I hunt for
him in the back rooms of saloons, at the bar, down at the Press Club.
I go along the streets where I know he is likely to be. I lead him
home by the hand. Yes, and he leans on me, and he babbles to me like
a baby as we go along the streets, he says the same things over and
over again the way a baby does. He comes with me through the streets
like a child that was lost and is glad to be found again. And when I
get him home I wash his face and feed him. I put my arm around him
and make him eat. I undress him and put him to bed. And he is glad of
it. He is glad to be like a baby; then he can live that part of his
life that was never finished. And I used to be glad too.”

“You used to be glad?” the tall man said. “That is hard to believe.”

“Yes, I think I must have been glad of his helplessness. Do you
understand? His helplessness gave me an excuse to mother him. I had
to mother somebody! The worst thing is, no good at all has come of
our being married--no good to either of us. No, it has hurt us both.”

She turned her head, holding it a little sideways as she had when she
sat on the couch by her husband, and looked at him again. There was
something childlike in the expression of her face and in her pose.
Her whole body expressed ingenuous bewilderment and trouble. She put
her finger to her lips.

The tall man, his hands at his side, studied her face. He said
nothing. He waited for her to go on.

She made a little gesture with her hand as if she were brushing
something away.

“See, now he has got to where he no longer wants even to be helped.
Now he doesn’t even want to be cared for.”

Her voice was tired and plaintive, the voice of a tired child.

“To be a coddled baby doesn’t satisfy him any more. He wants to be
a sleeping baby. Sleep! Sleep! Only let him sleep! He gets drunk
at night and sleeps till morning. He gets drunk in the morning and
sleeps till night. That is what drinking is with him. That is what
drinking is for. That is the way he escapes--he has always drunk
to escape--he is backing out of life entirely. Do you see? Now he
doesn’t want me to take care of him any more, for that reminds him
that he is alive and in the world. I know. He is trying to find again
the deep sleep that a baby has before it is born.”

The tall man would have spoken but she went on.

“Can’t you see how it is with me now? There is no longer any
satisfaction, not even the kind of satisfaction I got from it at
first. Maybe I should have known better at first. But we always say
that afterward, when it is too late.”

“It isn’t too late,” the tall man said. “You know it was a mistake.
It’s a simple thing to correct that mistake, and you know it’s
perfectly straight. As far as Eddie is concerned we will take care of
him.”

“But I couldn’t do it. I just couldn’t, somehow. You don’t know how
it is. But I know. The whole thing is like a habit, only it’s worse
than a habit. I know. I have tried to break it. But I didn’t use much
will power. Maybe I didn’t want to break it.

“You think I am strong. Maybe I am strong. But I am like most women.
My strength does just about as it pleases with me.”

She bowed her head and looked hopelessly at the floor.

The tall man had already taken her by the shoulders. She lifted her
head quickly. Her face wore a look of surprise and fear because of
his sudden and strong grip on her shoulders.

“You may call it a habit or whatever you like, you’ve had enough of
it,” he said. His face had turned pale and his mouth was stern. But
his eyes regarded her kindly. She made no attempt to pull away from
him. The frightened look left her face.

“You’ll put an end to this business. I’ll make you. Then you’ll be
glad.”

They looked at each other in silence. The sleeper on the couch seemed
to be holding his breath.

“I don’t know,” said the woman at last. “Maybe I would be glad. Yes,
maybe I would be glad. But I don’t know--I just don’t know how I
could make myself do it.”

“How about me?” said the tall man in a voice that had changed since
last he spoke. “Why do you always leave me out of it? Maybe if you
let yourself think about me once in a while....”

He had turned pale and his lips were trembling. He stopped speaking,
but not because he was ashamed of his emotion. He stopped speaking
because he was ashamed of what his emotion had impelled him to say.

She was looking at him in surprise and wonder. She put out one hand
and touched his coat with her finger-tips, unconsciously, lightly.
Her chin quivered.

“Allen,” she said softly, “Allen, I didn’t mean--please--”

“Never mind,” he said slowly, in a constrained voice. “You know I
didn’t mean to talk to you that way. I don’t want to appeal to your
sympathy. And I don’t want to make you do anything. You know that.
I meant all along to appeal to your understanding. You know that.
I still mean to. And as far as understanding goes, you understand
everything as well as I do. It’s all a matter of making up your mind.
I don’t want to force you to do anything. I know how hard it is for
you. You take your time about it. Don’t think about me. Try to think
about what is the best thing to do. And just take your time about it.”

She still kept her head lowered and still her fingers touched his
coat. He knew that if he had taken her in his arms then and there the
decision would have been entirely of his own making, and to his own
liking. But his pride rebelled at the thought of reaching a decision,
above all a decision in his own favor, by such a primitive method, by
a method so contrary to his idea of how an issue between a man and a
woman should be met. He would have her make her decision through her
own understanding and by her own will! His hands left her shoulders
and he stepped a little away from her. They no longer touched each
other.

She nodded her head a little, looking at the floor.

He studied her, a little puzzled. “Then, may I come back next week,
say, next Monday evening?”

Again she nodded her head, without looking up.

“Will you try to make up your mind between now and then? Will you be
ready to tell me what you have decided to do?” He spoke almost as he
would have spoken to a child.

For a moment she still looked at the floor. Then she lifted her head.
She met his kind gaze timidly.

“Yes, Allen, I will,” she replied in a low voice.

He drew a deep breath. “Good night,” he said, awkwardly holding out
his hand.

“Good night, Allen.”

He was gone and she closed the door quickly behind him.

She stood by the door while the sound of his footsteps rang in the
hall. She looked wistfully about the room, sunk again in silence. She
puckered her brows, thinking.

She understood Allen. She knew why he had not followed up his
advantage. She respected him for it. But she almost hated him for it
as well.

She walked slowly back into the middle of the room. Again she leaned
back against the table. The uneasy breathing of the man on the couch
could be heard.

“Eddie,” she called.

Slowly he turned his face away from the wall. He opened his eyes and
for a moment stared without winking down the length of his body. Then
he crooked one arm, raised himself to a sitting posture, turned and
pulled his feet off the couch. He sat with his body toward her. But
he looked down at her feet. He put his hands down on either side of
him against the couch, as if to brace himself. He moved his dry lips
two or three times.

“So you let Allen go away without you,” he said.

“You were awake?”

“Most of the time.” He looked up at her. He had slept a long time
and he was quite sober. The pupils of his blue eyes were like black
pin-heads. He tried to control the uneasy movements of his swollen
upper lip.

“I heard what you told him,” he declared in a high, assertive voice.
“You’re right about me. I know it. But it’s worse than you think.
I’m done. I’ll be glad when I’m dead. Not on your account either. On
my own account. I’ll be glad when I’m dead, I tell you. You ought to
have gone away with him. What makes you so silly?”

“Please, Eddie.”

“I mean it. I wish you’d go away and leave me. I wish to God you
would.”

He stared defiantly at her, blinking his eyes.

She tried to speak. She moved her lips, searching for words.
Exasperation struggled with the pity in her face.

She looked at him without trying to hide her pity. Her forehead was
puckered with little dimples. She tilted her head a little to one
side and half extended one hand.

“Eddie!” she cried. “Eddie, my poor boy! If you’d only let me--”

“Ah-k!” He waved his hand in front of his face, brushing away her
words.

“Don’t I know what you’re about to say!” he sneered, twisting his
face and making his light-colored eyes glare at her.

“Save me--eh? Want to try that again, eh? What do you want to do that
for? You’ve tried that before. Now you want to try it again, eh? I
know. I know. What makes you so silly? I’m done. You know I’m done.
Allen’s right. Better chuck the whole thing and forget it. You’ll be
glad afterward.”

He wagged his head, smirked at her and added: “And maybe you don’t
know it but I’ll be damned glad of it too.”

“You mustn’t talk that way, Eddie. You mustn’t.”

“Yes I will,” he declared, pulling down his puffed upper lip. He
looked around at the floor, at the furniture, at her, with an
unchanging, hard stare. A silence followed. Nothing could be heard
but his quick, uneasy breathing and the uneasy motions of his body
on the couch. His hands moved all of the time. His yellowish face
moved. His eyes rested nowhere.

She came and sat by him. She put her hand on his shoulder. She
regarded him with a look of pity, watching his face. Her feeling for
him trembled on her lips. Her eyes watched every movement he made,
dwelt on every one of his features. Her fingers trembled.

But he would not look at her. He looked sideways at the floor.

“When he comes Monday you’ll go with him. You’d better.” His voice
was high and harsh.

“No I won’t go!” She put her arms around him and began to cry. “I
just couldn’t, somehow. What would become of you? How could I when I
know you would be alone and nobody to take care of you! Eddie, I feel
so sorry for you. I feel so sorry for you. As long as you need me I
shall stay. I shall stay. I don’t know what will become of us but I
shall stay. I can’t help myself.”

He stiffly put up his hands and pulled her arms away from his
shoulders. She turned away from him. He, bending over, propping his
elbows on his knees and his chin against his fists, stared at the
floor. He blinked his eyes and puckered his forehead as if he were
trying to think.

She stood half turned from him, with her head bent, staring at the
floor. She was half ashamed, half pensive. The silence lasted a long
time. In the silence the man made a despairing gesture and ejaculated:

“Oh, Jesus, what’s the use!”

Minutes passed. The woman stood without moving. The man’s lips
writhed, his forehead scowled, his eyes stared.

“There’s no use in talking about it, is there Eddie?” The woman
turned and looked at him with patient weariness. He let his hands
fall and dangle between his knees. He shook his head.

“Christ, no! What’s the use in talking!”

She slowly crossed the room and began putting on her hat.

“I’m going to dinner; will you come with me?” She looked at him with
a flash of wistfulness in her eyes.

He shook his head without saying anything. She put on her overcoat
and came over to him, stood by his side and stroked his hair. He
stared at the floor.

“I’ll be back in about an hour,” she said at last. “Good-by, Eddie.”

“Good-by.”

He listened to her footsteps in the hall until they died away. He sat
thrusting his head forward. The fixed stare of his light-colored eyes
defied the lines of his mouth which changed all of the time.

At last he stood erect in a crumpled sort of way and walked into
the middle of the room. His wrinkled trousers clung to his calves
and bagged at the knees. His coat had come unbuttoned and he held
it together with one hand like a woman wearing a shawl. He frowned,
sticking out his upper lip; and his forehead was broken by many
little wrinkles. His forehead was greenish-yellow in the gaslight. He
shivered and a whisper rang through the room:

“Jesus, it’s cold!”

He let go of his coat, felt in his pockets and brought out a sack of
tobacco and some papers, rolled a cigarette, lighted it and began to
smoke greedily, inhaling the smoke. He looked at the table, at the
chairs, at the floor. And all the time he made grimaces, scowled and
shivered. His movements were uncertain and halting, but he stared
intently this way and that. He was trying to reflect. But he was
dizzy and cold. His blood felt yellow.

Once he looked at the door where they had gone out. He listened a
long time while the cigarette smoked in his fingers.

At last he turned away from the door, back toward the middle of the
room. He happened to see her handkerchief lying at the foot of the
table. He threw away the cigarette and picked up the handkerchief and
stared at it. He shivered more than ever and pulled his coat together
at the bottom, but forgot to button it.

With a gesture of finality he threw the handkerchief from him, on
the table. With the manner of an idle or a sick man he walked to
the window, drew aside the curtain and looked down at the glittering
street. His mind became clearer and his thoughts began to arrange
themselves in more orderly fashion.

After a long time he turned away from the window.

“Yes,” he drawled in a fretful voice, “yes it would serve me right.
Christ, yes, she’d be doing the right thing.”

His forehead became smooth. His face ceased to pout and wrinkle. It
became calm. The pupils of his staring eyes became a little larger.
He lifted his head a little. His face had almost an eager look. One
would have said that he had reached some sort of a decision.

He found some paper and envelopes in the table-drawer and took a
pencil from his pocket. Craning over the table, his intent face
pallid in the gaslight, his hair gleaming like disordered gilt plush,
he began to write in a shaky large scrawl.

He wrote one sheet almost full; signed it; folded it crookedly; put
it in an envelope and scrawled a single line across the face of
the envelope. On another sheet he wrote six or seven short lines,
underlining each one; signed it boldly at the bottom and put it in
another envelope, which he addressed.

He stood the two envelopes against some books and looked at them
as he put the pencil back in his pocket. On the first envelope was
written: _For My Wife._ On the other: _For the Police._

He rolled and smoked another cigarette slowly, looking at one spot on
the carpet.

At last he tossed the remnant of the cigarette on the floor as if
something in him craved disorder. He walked slowly into the bedroom,
thrusting his head forward and his elbows out.

In the bedroom he turned up the light and without hesitation opened a
little drawer in the old-fashioned bureau, taking out a revolver. He
held it in both hands and cocked it. He stared into the mirror, and
with something of the manner of a man who prepares to take a new kind
of medicine he lifted the revolver and pointed it at his temple.

Then something in his whole mechanism seemed to stop and something
else seemed to start. His body sagged and quivered at the same time.
His eyes bulged. His mouth opened in such a way that his teeth
glittered. A loud groan rang through the room. Quickly he laid the
revolver down and walked back into the living room. He took unsteady
steps and held his hands against his forehead.

“Oh, Jesus!” he cried.

He stood still a long time, pondering. It seemed to him that the
silence of the room was lost in another silence.

His eye fell on a quart whiskey-bottle standing on a corner of the
table. The unusual character of his awakening had made him, thus far,
forget all about it.

It was nearly a third full of liquor. A little gleam came into his
eye, the faintest color into his cheeks. He looked at the bottle with
a sort of eagerness and went hopefully toward it.

He was thinking of the revolver on the bureau and it seemed to him
that some of the whiskey would make that business easier.

He picked up the glass and the bottle and poured out a large drink,
shuddered and swallowed it, making a face. He had eaten nothing all
day and at once the whiskey was racing in his blood. Color flashed
into his cheeks. He felt his blood becoming red again.

He took another drink and waited for the effect. After a little while
he took still another. There was only a little left in the bottle.

Now his eyes were brighter and they had a misty look. The pupils
were larger. He blinked his eyes and looked about. His face looked
almost cheerful. He appeared to be reflecting. Indeed his thoughts
raced rapidly but they began to tumble over each other. He hardly
understood his thoughts. Vague emotions stirred him.

A sort of courage was mounting in his body, warming him like a
new-kindled fire. But he felt mournful too.

He waited. He was about to have great thoughts. He was about to
discover some magnificent solution of everything.

He stood still a long time, pondering. A little smile began to
tremble on his mouth.

He poured out the last of the whiskey and shook the bottle to get the
last drop. But now his head was rolling a little and his eyes were
vague.

He lifted the glass. Just then his uncertain glance fell on his
wife’s handkerchief. He looked long at the handkerchief, blinking.
His head wobbled a little. He was trying to seize some idea that
eluded him. Thoughts rose up in his mind but they fell over one
another. His face wore a crippled look.

A long while he stood in thought, staring feebly at the handkerchief.
But at last a faint, self-satisfied smile appeared on his trembling
mouth.

Visibly swaying he turned around, his gaze wandering a little;
steadied himself a little bit, and began to look uncertainly in the
direction of the door. The smile flickered over his face like a blue
flame. His mouth moved. His lips picked at words.

But he remembered the whiskey. He lifted the tumbler and emptied it,
spilling some on his chin, half turned and with a single motion flung
the glass ringing on the table.

He turned toward the door again, peering uncertainly as a man peers
in the dusk. His head wagged. His voice blurred the silence:

“Di’ think I was ’sleep?”

Pleased, he laughed, rolling his head. But he stopped laughing to
look toward the door, listening. His mouth got ready to talk.

“Di’--di’ y’ think I was ’sleep? Di’ y’ think I was ’sleep?” he
called. No reply. Silence beyond the door. He smiled a satisfied
smile. He laughed at the silence beyond the door; wagged his head;
turned away; made two or three sidelong steps and brought up against
the table. He flattened one hand out on the table-top and leaned
against that hand. He stood there. His body swayed back and forth
to a certain rhythm, like a weed in a creek. A smile flickered back
and forth across his face like shadow on a shaking leaf. Sunk in
drunken revery he blinked his drunken eyes, smirked and blinked. Now
and again, when he leaned harder than usual, the legs of the table
creaked under his weight. The hiss of the hot gas-lamp mingled with
the noise of his breathing.

The little handkerchief lay on the table just under his nose. He had
to see it if he looked. And when at last, tired of leaning against
the table, he roused himself a little from his revery, he did see it
at once. Pulling himself up as straight as he could he confronted
the handkerchief with all his unsteady dignity, and with a righteous
smirk, as one confronts an offender. He took the handkerchief in both
his hands and turned it over and over. He stared at it as a baby
stares at a new plaything. He moved his mouth all the time, breathing
noisily. He blinked hard and often, looking and pondering. He seemed
to be trying to recall something the handkerchief almost reminded him
of, something he had forgotten.

At last he made the sort of motion a baby makes when it throws down a
plaything, and threw the handkerchief on the floor. He looked pleased
with himself and smirked down at the handkerchief. Satisfied, he
pondered no longer. He turned with studied care, aimed himself at the
bedroom door, made crooked long steps and went unsteadily in.

He looked at the revolver a long time. Sometimes he scowled.
Sometimes he smiled. After awhile he picked up the revolver in both
hands; turned and swayed back into the living room. He stood in the
middle of the room, his body bending to and fro, and peered at the
revolver with idiotic eyes. He stuck out his lips; blinked his eyes
with great deliberation, pondered over the thing he held in his hands.

Now he began to look at the door again, listening and watching more
and more attentively. At last he fixed his gaze wholly upon the door.
The pupils of his eyes were distended. Bending in the middle, his
legs trembling, his body swayed this way and that. His lips no longer
smiled, but writhed.

“Think I was ’sleep?” he called. “Di’ y’ think--steal m’ wife when I
was ’sleep?”

His voice shrilled in the room. He began to hurl at the door inept
anathemas against the treachery of wives and the cowardice of
men. He made uncouth accusations. He delivered himself of bizarre
philosophies; sometimes mumbling, sometimes shrilling his words. He
twisted his shoulders, stepping about in a small space. His voice
quavered, rising and falling. His head tossed as if he rode in a boat.

But the silence at last reduced him to silence.

The labor of thought again showed in his face. Something was eluding
him. Yes, he had forgotten something he was going to do. He tried
hard in his own way, opening and shutting his mouth, blinking and
searching the floor with his aimless eyes. Sometimes mutterings fell
out of his mouth.

He smiled again. Something stirred him. Now he remembered what he had
forgotten. He lifted the hand that held the revolver and aimed his
wavering gaze down toward it. He raised his eyebrows and blinked. He
turned the gun over this way and that, staring and blinking as if he
had never seen one before in all his life. His face was pulled out
of shape with the labor of cogitation. He began to smirk. He looked
toward the door again, opening and shutting his mouth; and at last he
delivered himself:

“Di’ y’ think I was go’ shoo’ m’self? Di’ y’ think I was go’ shoo’
m’self?”

His head sank on his breast and his eyes half closed. But he heaved
his head up again and opened his eyes.

“Ah, sure, sure,” he called. “Steal m’ wife an’ I shoo’ m’self. Sure!
sure!”

He laughed. But the laugh crumpled up in the silence.

His eyes were witless. It looked as though his pale head had talked
without his knowing it. He wagged his head and announced solemnly:

“I’ll shoo’ you.” He waited a moment, trying to keep his gaze on the
door, and repeated more loudly:

“I’ll shoo’ you. I’ll shoo’ you.”

He smiled down at the revolver and patted the barrel with an aimless
motion.

“We know where fin’ ’im, don’t we?” he said to the revolver.

His eyes brightened and he became a little steadier smirking at the
door, he called loudly, “We know where fin’ ’im. We know where fin’
’im.”

He turned, and like a man walking in the dark he made his way to the
couch. Here he laid the revolver down. With much labor and fumbling
he gathered up his overcoat. With much labor he began to put it on.
Half way through the job he paused, turned, and sent a wavering look
toward the door.

“Di’ y’ think I do’ know where fin’ im?” he jibed.

He got his overcoat on and put on his hat. He stood a long time with
a solemn expression on his face. He blinked studiously. He had become
steadier. A fixed purpose seemed to have got him under its control.
With great care he buttoned the overcoat and settled his hat as
straight on his head as he could. Now his eyes were no longer blurred
and wavering. They glowed as with fever and a flame was mounting in
his cheeks. But his mouth was a woeful thing, a wound that opened and
shut, writhing.

He picked up the revolver and looked at it, smirking. With the smirk
on his face he turned toward the door and began to shove the revolver
down into the inside pocket of his overcoat.

“We know,” he said, wagging at the door. “We know where--”

The trigger of the revolver must have caught in some part of his
clothing. The crash of the discharge tore the wavering smirk from his
face. Piteously intent, he stared for a second at the door. Then he
lay quickly down, as if he accepted everything.

He lay first on his face, and muzzled his face snugly between his
hands. Presently he turned over quietly on his back. One hand knocked
once or twice against the floor.

The look fixed on his countenance was the look of one who has at last
discovered something real.


        [6] Copyright, 1921, by _Broom_.
            Copyright, 1923, by Frederick Booth.




                           FOREST COVER[7]

                           By EDNA BRYNER

                     (From _The Bookman, N. Y._)


The ribbon of road wound down through the forest. A woman followed
it. The road seemed to come from the town of a thousand souls but it
only came through there, just as it came through forest on the other
side of the town, and through another town on the other side of the
forest, and through forest again on the other side of that town. The
woman followed the road just that way. At some time or other she had
stepped out upon it from some place through which it came and ever
since she had been following it. Somewhere she would stop following
it, she would make an end of it. The road itself would go on,
ceaselessly, in and out of forest, through towns and again through
forest.

As the woman walked, a sharp, long needle of words, “No one must
ever know,” drove itself in and out of her brain. The words made a
thin pattern that spread out sprawlingly to form a lid, like the
pan of some cunning trap, which shut down automatically over every
projection of thought that tried to make of her an articulate being,
conscious of her own exigency. At the same time, something of her
beyond the reach of words, finely hidden away from all snares,
escaped like a thin cloud and entered the forest, crept along the
dark leaf-mold earth, over the mossed rocks, up the dark, strong
trunks of trees, out to the tips of the branches, to the edges of the
leaves, swaying there until by its own motion it was dissipated--and
again she was a woman walking along a piece of road.

The woman was in a daze with her following of the road. When she
bent her head down and stared upon its yellow dirt surface, she was
one with it, a piece of itself walking upon it. When she lifted up
her head, she was separate from it, a living thing walking upon a
piece of dead earth. Then she looked upon the wall of forest to right
and left and became aware that the trees were intimate with the
earth. She felt heavily their greater intimacy with the earth.

This intimacy bothered her. The forest came up out of the earth in
trunks swelling into branches that burst into leaves. The earth was
proud of this, proud of the roots that bored into it and sucked at
it, at the trunks that went up, swelling into branches, a network
between it and the sky, mesh to sift sunshine through. The trees
were proud, too, proud of the earth that lay quiet and heavy with
nourishment under them, receiving their roots, feeding them. The
deep, unfathomable intimacy made them proud. They were joined in
understanding, one. Their oneness bothered the woman. At the same
time she felt strangely protected by it. She walked quietly and
firmly, not fast, as she did in the towns. In the towns she hurried
through, looking at no one, eager to get into the safety of the
woods, eager almost to be in the bother of the oneness of earth and
trees.

There were times when she wanted to stop, to leave the road, go up
the side of the forest-clothed mountain and lie down; but she did not
dare. Something within her urged her on. The Something was her Sin.
Her Sin made her put one unwilling foot before the other and follow
the winding strip of dirt road.

It was her Sin that set her out upon the road. Through long months
she had kept it secret, hidden quite from knowing eyes. She kept it
secret, shutting out admission that the hour of its triumph would
come. She had hoped to kill it, had encased it in prison bars,
ruthless, holding herself impervious to the pain of the hurt that
wrenched her with the hurting of the thing secret within her. She
had tried to starve it, suffering in silence from the lack that she
caused herself in withholding food from it. But her Sin lived. It
was alive and strong. The day came when its strength moved terribly
within her and that set her feet upon the road. While she walked, it
was quiet, sleeping like a child carried in its mother’s arms. When
she sat down to rest, it moved and urged her on, on down the narrow
road winding through the forest around the side of the low mountain.

Many turnings and windings the road had. By and by it would come to
a swift creek, with a bridge set across, and a mill beside it, and
there would be human habitations, imitations of houses, rough hemlock
shells, with people carrying on an imitation of living, going through
motions that made time slip by. The woman knew all this well. The
road had taught her as she came. At some such place her Sin would
have its hour of triumph.

There must be an end soon. She stopped to drink at a little spring
under a jutting bank. Her Sin grew angry, threatened her. She
straightened up and went on rounding the turn. A heavy team dragging
its load of deftly packed shingles came up the flank of the mountain,
its driver walking slowly beside. The brawny blue-shirted lumberman
did not speak but drew the horses aside to let good footing be for
the woman and his eyes looked with friendly respect upon the neat
young figure in the gray print dress.

The woman felt the look penetrating deep, into a place thin and
clear, a place that existed long before her Sin came upon her. She
bent her head and moved quickly past, down the long slope of the road
toward the swift creek.

A rough shack set high on the bank above the big mill dam came into
view. Would this be the place? Her Sin gave no sign. Now that she was
in motion it lay quiescent, pacified. She stood still in the road.
Her wide, gray eyes rested in appraisement on the house. A dirty old
woman smoking a corn-cob pipe slouched around the corner from the
back. On her wrinkled face greedy curiosity showed itself. She took
her pipe out of her mouth and started to speak.

The woman of the road began walking again very fast. She went down
across the bridge and past the mill from which came forth the
rhythmical high hungry whine of the saw cutting virgin timber, the
slap-thwack of boards thrown from one receiver to another.

The road was going up again past a house set high to the left, a
large house with an air of well-being. Perhaps here? She went up
the steps from the road, walked the single board path to the porch,
knocked against the casing of the open door. From an inner room a
woman came, in a blue wrapper, young and blowsy, with red eyes,
holding a sleeping baby to her breast.

“Will you give me a drink?”

“Yes. It’s hot today, ain’t it? Come right in. You must be tuckered
out walking in the sun.” Voluble, she led the way to the back porch.
“There it is in the big tin pail. Wait a minute. I’ll git you a
glass.” She fetched a heavy tumbler from the kitchen shelf. “It’s
prob’ly warm. I can’t git water many times with this baby to look
after. He cries every time I put him down. It’s all I kin do to git
the men’s meals. They’s two from the mill besides my husband.”

There was no place here for her. The woman drank the water hastily.
“I’m much obliged.” She turned back through the house. “I’ll be going
on.” She was on the porch.

“Better set a minute. Needn’t be hurryin’ off so quick.” There was
slight resentment in the tone.

The woman was on the walk. “I have to be going. I’m much obliged.”
She went down the steep steps into the road.

She followed the road doggedly. A little house to the left, door and
windows shut. She went up and peered in. It was empty. Here? She
looked around fearful. Her Sin gave a great lurch within her. She
shuddered. She could not be alone with it here.

She went out into the road again and toiled on up the curve, crossed
the slide where the logs came shooting down, moved slowly up the
straight, nearly level piece. More buildings came into view, to the
right a large rough barn, to the left a watering trough and a long
picket fence fronting a cleared space with a big hemlock house set in
the middle and a spring-house a stone’s throw away. Farther ahead to
the right a little shack squatted on the flat side of the road and
near it a woman’s figure in bright blue was tying a bony horse to a
stake.

The woman walked past the watering trough and approached the figure.
She saw a stringy woman in a tight blue sateen dress, face the color
of old leather, a great bang of hair falling down into faded blue,
piglike eyes, a little knot of hair in the back twisting tightly away
from the cordy neck. A frowsy child came out of the shack. “Ma, ma,”
it cried like a little animal. A wailing arose from within the house,
a sound of violent rocking. “Not here,” said the woman in a cold fear
to herself.

“Will you give me a drink?” Automatically the words came.

“I sure will. We got the best drinkin’ water anywheres around. Liz!”
she shouted into the house. An ungainly elder girl appeared in the
dark hole of the doorway. “Git some fresh water from the spring!”

The girl stood sullen a moment, then disappeared. She came out with a
small tin pail dangling against her dirty legs.

“Git a move on you. Seems like I can’t make her do a thing.”

Sullen, the girl moved across the road, swung open a gate, and took
the path to the spring-house.

“Who lives there?” asked the woman. Hope burned low in her.

“That’s Bennet’s. He’s the lumber boss. He don’t take no boarders
neither. They got too many children for that, five boys an’ two
girls, an’ Mrs. Bennet’s pertickiler. I allays scrub the floors for
her. See this dress? I saved the money she give me an’ got it last
week come Sataday.”

A great despair came over the woman. She made a couple of steps
forward.

“Where air you goin’? Air you all alone?”

Anything to put an end to questioning. She spoke at random, strangely
in accord with the custom of the forest dwellers. “My husband’s
coming along behind with our goods. We’re moving.”

“Oh, movin’? What’s your husband do? Gonno work in the mill or in the
woods?”

“He’s going into the mill.”

“You ain’t gonno walk all the way to Goff’s, air you?”

The woman felt fright. “How far is it?” Her Sin was threatening her
again.

“Must be a matter of five miles.”

“Is that the nearest mill?” She could never walk that far.

“By the road ’tis. If you cut through the woods you kin git to Fox’s
mill down the path back of Bennet’s barn, but that mill’s shet down.
You kin cut up back of their house an’ git to Sumner’s. That’s a mile
or so an’ a good path. Mrs. Sumner, now, she comes over to see Mrs.
Bennet an’ brings Gertrude. She ain’t tied down like the rest of
us. She ain’t but the one, an’ a good little girl, too. Not like my
good-fer-nothin’ Liz.”

Hope suddenly leaped high, a sense of surety crowned its leaping.
“And the path to her place is back of the house over there?”

“Yes. Walk right past the spring an’ cut up over the hill, an’
there’s a path.” The woman started to go. “But I thought you was
goin’ to Goff’s? An’ your husband?” Suspicion came into the lines of
the leathery face.

“I must have misspoken myself.” The woman kept her head turned toward
Bennet’s. Her voice was calm. She had a slight wonder at her calmness
while her mind searched out through the forest back of Bennet’s. “I
came the wrong way, I guess. It was Sumner’s I wanted.”

“But you said your husband--”

“He isn’t coming for a few days.” She spoke with decision. It was
easy to say anything, anything that any one wanted her to say. “I
came on first to kind of look around and it was Sumner’s I wanted but
I forgot the name.”

“Well, it’s a good thing you found me. You’d been to Goff’s not
knowin’ no better.” She laughed a hoarse chuckle.

The woman said, “Yes, I’m glad I found you. Now I know how to go.”

“But you ain’t had your drink. Liz!” the raucous voice screamed.
“Fetch that water or I’ll tan your hide good!”

“Never mind, I’ll get a drink as I go past. I’m much obliged to
you.” The woman crossed quickly over the road, took the path past
the spring, not stopping to drink, cut up back of Bennet’s, and was
swallowed up in the forest before the figure in blue had recovered
from surprise.

She was surrounded by forest, by trees growing out of earth. She was
full of pain. Her head was a ball of fire and her body a world of
pain. Roots were twining in her trying to get a foothold, roots were
sucking away at her vitals trying to extract nourishment. She was
earth and she could not lie down, for she had a Sin that kept urging
her on.

Blindly she followed the pathway. The pathway led to Sumner’s where
there was a woman who had time to visit and a little girl who was
good. If Sumner’s was not the place, there was only the forest. She
was in forest now but she was on a path that divided forest. Forest
on both sides of her, trees and earth in a great swelling together
and the sky smiling through the network of branches and leaves. She
went on. She went quickly. Roots caught at her feet. The smart of
branches fell on her face. Her Sin clamored for its hour.

She ran, she could not see, her feet kept the path like a miracle.
Suddenly the path gave out on a road. Across the road was a house.
She felt that there was a house, she did not see it. She made her
last effort against the Sin that was tearing her to pieces, taking at
last its deep revenge. She fell toward the blur that she felt was the
house. She gave way at last to the strength of her Sin....

The woman awoke. She was lying in bed in a ceiled room whose windows
looked out on low branches of hemlock. There was a patchwork quilt
on the bed. She felt light, light and drowsy. She slept. Again she
awoke. She felt light, light and her head was clear. Her Sin? It had
triumphed. She felt like laughing. Her Sin had triumphed, yet she
felt light, light and quite clear. She stirred. A large, motherly
form appeared, an anxious face bent over her. “I’ll lift it up and
you can see it.”

The woman looked upon it. It was her Sin. She had lost her Sin. But
here it was beside her still. Would it never leave her? She stared
hard at it. Yes, it was her Sin. She closed her eyes to shut out its
sight.

“I’ll put it right beside you where it’ll keep warm. It’s so tiny, we
must take good care of it.”

The little bundle lay beside her. She could put her hand upon it,
pick it up. Her Sin was outside of her now. Everyone could see it. A
Sin should be hidden, kept secret, covered over....

She dozed. She was walking along a road. The road went on and on,
hard, smooth, implacable, hard and hurting under her soft feet. The
wall of the forest rose up on both sides and mocked her. The wall to
the right bowed in derision. The trees leaned over and swept their
branches on the road in front of her. The wall to the left bowed in
derision and swept its branches before her. “Come this way,” one
said. “Come this way,” said the other. They swept their branches in
front of her making it difficult for her to walk.

She tried to placate them. She bowed first to the one wall and then
to the other. As she bowed, the one wall said in a great voice as
though all its trees were many-forked tongues demanding together,
“Speak!” and as she bowed again, the other wall said in a great voice
of many tongues, “Speak!” They settled their trunks stiffly across
her way like dark crossed swords and waited for her to begin.

She saw now that they were full of eyes, terrible accusing eyes, an
eye on every leaf, thousands of eyes. “If I could change their eyes
to ears,” she thought, “then I could tell them.” She became clever.
She shut her own eyes so that they could not see her. No sooner had
she done so than she remembered that this was a game she had played
with Him when she was a little girl. She stood in the corner with
closed eyes and said, “Now you can’t see me.” He hunted from corner
to corner until he stumbled upon her. Then she opened her eyes and he
shouted, “Now I see you!” She knew all the time really that he saw
her. So she knew now that the thousands of eyes saw her and there
was no use trying to play a silly game with them.

“Perhaps he will be here now if I open my eyes,” she thought, “and he
will tell them.” Dismay swept over her. “But how can he? I never told
him. How could he know if I did not tell him?”

She opened her eyes and looked upon the walls of forest. They were
waiting for her to speak, unsettling themselves uneasily. The eyes
began to move back and forth and as they moved they read words out of
her through her own voice: “His mother never would have forgiven me.
She wouldn’t have believed he did it. She’d have thought I made him
do it.”

The words seemed weak, thin, a flimsy covering for something that
lay underneath. The trunks of the trees rubbed against one another,
complaining at her words. The eyes glowered upon her, piercing
into her. “They want to know everything,” she thought desperately,
“everything, from the beginning.” She addressed them as though they
had commanded her. “But that would take too long, all of it, the
whole thing.”

The forest ruffled itself still more uneasily and murmured against
her. The eyes became sinister. In fear, she spoke: “His mother took
me in when I was little, from the city, nobody’s. She brought me up
to be his sister. She called me daughter, gave me things.”

The forest began sweeping its branches in front of her. “It doesn’t
believe me,” she thought in terror. “It won’t let me pass, ever.” She
began to cry. “He might have hated me if I told him. He might have
hated me.” The branches swept in front of her. She could not see the
road. It was covered with sweeping branches....

She awoke. Her face was wet, quite wet, as though she had been in the
water. Her hand lay on the bundle that held her Sin. She became wide
awake, alert. She felt cunning arise within her. She stirred in bed.
No one came. Sin should be covered. Her hand was on the patchwork
quilt, grasped it, drew it up over the bundle of Sin, held it close.
Her hand unclosed after a while, dragged the quilt back a little. She
lay still. Her eyes slept....

Some one came in, over to the bed, leaned over, jerked the quilt
away. The bundle was taken up. At last they were taking her Sin
away. They had left it too long beside her. She felt herself looked
steadily upon. She opened her eyes. “Did you--have you been awake
since I left the room?” The motherly voice was stern, suspicious,
reluctant, too.

“I was asleep.”

“I fixed the quilt carefully before I left. It was over the baby’s
face when I came back.”

Why did they trouble her about a baby? It was her Sin she had covered
up so that no one could see it. “The quilt,” she whispered painfully.
“I pulled the quilt up. I was cold.” She settled down in bed.

A breeze, soft and full of the resinous breath of hemlock came
through the slightly opened window and blew her eyelids down. Leaves
began piling upon her in layers, soft and pressing, trying to smother
her.

The dream began again. She was walking on a road through the forest.
The road was narrow, oh, so narrow, she could hardly keep on it,
narrow, and hard and smooth like glass. The wall of forest to the
right kept bowing, the trees swept down, their branches lashed her.
The wall of forest to the left kept bowing, its branches lashed her.
The branches were full of eyes, eyes that burned when the branches
lashed.

The eyes _knew_. “I must tell them the whole truth,” she said to
herself, but she knew that she said it aloud and that the forest
heard it. “Huah! Huah!” The wind swept through the branches. “The
truth! The truth!” The wind blew the words through the branches. A
tall strong tree with great bulging eyes swept down upon her. “I
wanted him!” she screamed.

The trees stopped lashing. The eyes became ears. She knelt before
them feeling their compassion. “I tried not to, at first--but when
he touched me, I wanted him. He spoke words of poetry, words that he
knew out of a book he brought back with him from his travel. ‘Your
gray eyes are like pools. I lose myself in them.’ He took the pins
from my hair. ‘Your hair is a mesh. I am caught in it. I cannot
escape.’ He held me to him. ‘Your body is softer than this milkweed
down. Shall I float away with it?’ He had never spoken that way
before. His mother wouldn’t have believed that he talked that way.”

Now that the forest was compassionate, her mind unloosed itself all
at once in a great rush of hurrying thoughts that went out like waves
into the leafage, communicating her secret without the tedious use
of words. “I had no right to him. His mother meant us always to be
brother and sister--to keep us apart. She didn’t really think I was
as good as he. She only took me because his father wanted me. She
didn’t know what his father said, once, when he teased me: ‘I chose
you because you were the prettiest of all the children. Your gray
eyes asked me to take you, and so I had to. You were a little fairy
without any father or mother.’ She would have given him up some day
to some one else. But I wanted him. I needed him. She would never
forgive me if she knew. I never told anyone, not even him. He would
have married me. His father would have made him marry me. But I kept
away from him, after I knew. And he--”

“And he, and he,” whistled the trees. The sky became dark, the wind
came in a gale, the branches crashed together and began lashing her.
Despair overwhelmed her. “Now I shall be destroyed. They were only
trapping me.” She submitted herself to annihilation. The branches
lashed her, lashed her clothes away, lashed into her flesh....

“Poor thing! She didn’t know what she was doing. I thought at first
she had done it on purpose. She doesn’t seem to know she’s had a
baby.” She lay and listened with closed eyes. She felt she was lying
in a pool of water that softened her flesh, took life away from her.
“It looks real pretty in that little dress of Gertrude’s. I always
felt I’d have use for those baby clothes some day, but I didn’t think
it would be like this.”

They brought it for her to see. She looked upon it dry-eyed. She knew
that they wanted her to cry. Foolish people! Why should one cry for a
Sin once it is dead?

She was sitting up.... She could walk a little.... She dressed
herself and came out on the porch. They were kind. They never asked
her anything. She knew they hoped she would tell them. The husband
spoke clumsily to her. They were sorry--could they help her? She
shook her head.

Early in the morning she awoke. She felt quite clear. She must be on
the road. She dressed hastily, quietly, was out of the house. The
road led her. She walked fast, following it through the forest. She
did not know where she went. She simply went on. By and by she would
come out of the forest and there would be a town and there she would
step off the road.

She walked quickly, she felt so light. She was light for her Sin was
gone. She walked quickly for a long time. She became tired. She sat
down to rest. Nothing within her urged her on. There was a great
emptiness within her, a consuming emptiness. She felt how heavy her
breasts were and how great her emptiness was. She wanted to go up
in the forest and lie down. She did not dare. The forest and earth
seemed allied against her, trees and earth together, their oneness
held her out.

She had a desire that the roots of the trees should take hold on her,
disintegrate her, find a place for their support and nourishment. A
great and horrible yearning took hold on her. She yearned that her
emptiness should be filled, she yearned for her Sin, for the bundle
that held her Sin, she yearned to nourish her Sin....

She threw herself in the dust of the road and sobbed. The forest
repudiated her. The wall of the forest pushed her into the road.
She was one with the road. Nothing grew out of her; she nourished
nothing. She was a way, to be passed over, trampled upon....

She felt the throbbing ache of her breasts in the dust. She arose
and stood quiet, looking sombrely at the dark, unrelenting wall of
forest. Then she walked slowly along. Sadly, drearily, the life that
lay behind her, the life that she had shut out from her when her feet
first set out upon the road, began to filter back into her bruised
mind. It came as something she had known long ago, so long that
it seemed as though it must have been quite another life, and she
another person, a young dreaming girl, moving about in the big white
house set on the great planted space up against the forest, learning
from a shadowy placid woman who called her daughter the ways of the
little world of which she was a part, teased by a shadowy kindly
man when the woman was not there to hear, captured by the shadowy
grown-up figure of the little boy who had played games with her, come
back from school and travel a mysterious young man....

How far away it was, how far and how long, long ago! Slowly, slowly,
she walked along the road through the forest, carrying in her the
dream fragments of her shattered world. Soon she would come out of
the forest and there would be a town and there she would step off the
road. She would leave the road that went on ceaselessly, in and out
of forest, through towns, and again through forest.


        [7] Copyright, 1922, by George H. Doran Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Edna Bryner.




                         NATALKA’S PORTION[8]

                         By ROSE GOLLUP COHEN

                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)


Sabinka lay buried in snow. The hills, the forest, the lake, all lay
hard, white, glittering, and the air also glittered and stung and cut.

Looking toward the village, the two rows of huts looked small,
insignificant, mere specks of time-grayed timber weighed down with
snow. Over each speck a thread of smoke rose, going straight up into
the still, glittering air. Within, doors and windows sealed, the
peasants huddled for warmth, here and there, together with their
animals, to keep them alive, or for the life that they could give.
In the chimneyless huts even the smoke was kept in for the warmth it
gave. It poured from the oven into the room and hung there from the
ceiling. Beneath it the peasants went about, their bodies bent to
the ground. When at last the smoke settled on ceiling and walls they
still went about bent, from habit now, and peering with weakened eyes.

Then winter ended! Suddenly, as if it spent itself in its own
cruelty, it ended. The sun came out warm. From the ragged straw roofs
of the huts the snow slipped and melted and fell in a thick shower.
Birds appeared. The peasants came out to look at their fields. Their
faces were sallow and pinched, and the smoke soaked into the skin
showed plainer in the strong light.

The snow blackened with every moment, and suddenly the earth lay
bare. The men began to scatter over the fields. The women tended
nearer home.

One afternoon, when the air was sweet with the warmth and the
moisture of the earth, and in the pastures about the village Sabinka
a tint of green showed faintly, Katherina came to her husband,
Gavrelo, where he was mending the fence around the field to be
planted with wheat.

“Gavrelo,” she said, “I have come to plead with you again about the
marriage portion of our daughter Natalka.” She stood meekly, a clumsy
little body in a red plaid shawl. Her face was steaming with heat and
perspiration, and her worn birch-bark sandals were clogged with earth
from the soggy fields.

Gavrelo had not looked up when she had been coming to him through
the fields, and now it was as if she were not there. Near him lay a
pile of poles, a heap of freshly cut twigs and a hatchet. He selected
a long, pliant twig and began twisting it in and out between two
poles as a bar-rest. His face was sullen. He was short and wide and
brown; his thick hair and beard, and worn homespun clothes, and his
weather-beaten skin, all were brown. He was like the powerful trees
about him, and, like these deep-rooted trees, he looked as capable of
being moved.

Katherina turned her eyes away from him. It crushed her to see him
so. It had always crushed her--even so long ago when he used to come
to court her at her father’s house--the way he would sit there of a
Sunday, sullen, silent, never a kind word, never a smile, contrary,
scowling at the whole world.

“Gavrelo,” she repeated her sentences in a way peculiar to the people
of Sabinka, “I have come to plead with you about Natalka’s marriage
portion.” Her voice was full of restrained passion.

“Look, Gavrelo, at your home.” She pointed to a hut across the great
field. In one of the two dingy windows a young girl could be seen,
though vaguely, at a spinning-board.

“There is your home. Moldy and rotten, it is sinking to the ground.
You were supposed to have built twenty years ago, soon after we were
married. All you have built are barns. There they stand, shaming your
house. And there is your daughter, as pretty as the prettiest in
Sabinka, in that rotting home. Yet, Gavrelo, have I ever pestered you
about it? But now it is about Natalka that I beg you.” Her clumsy
little body leaned toward him. But her voice became more patient,
more restrained.

“Gavrelko!” She used the diminutive, and then stood dumbly looking
down a moment. Yes, she could have cared for him if he had let her.
“Gavrelko, you are not going to send Natalka away without a portion
to her husband’s home, a strange home in a strange village! You are
not going to do it!”

Dumb and silent, Gavrelo’s scowl never relaxed. It was always so,
always--except--except when he stood looking at his fields--at his
wheat. Then his furrowed face smoothed and the light in his eyes
reflected the light in the fields.

Gavrelo now selected a long pole, sharpened it, and began driving it
into the ground. “Hagh!” his breath echoed, and the pole sank deep
into the earth.

“And you have so much, Gavrelo.” She glanced about. Their hut stood
a good distance away from the village, and all surrounding it was
Gavrelo’s.

“All that, all about us is yours, and your barns are stacked with
wheat. You will not send Natalka away with empty hands.” Her own
clasped in agony. “You won’t do it. I know, Gavrelo, how bitter it is
to come with empty hands.” Her head drooped, her voice sank low.

“I know how it is. I came to your home, Gavrelo, without a portion.
My people were very poor. You have never thrown it up to me, Gavrelo,
but your mother cast it in my face every day as long as she lived.
And I was never able to lift my head.”

Gavrelo’s face was turned from her, and he worked on steadily.

“And Natalka, too, is marrying into a large family. It is perhaps
a disadvantage to marry into a large family. There are so many to
find fault with your ways, a mother-in-law and sisters-in-law and
brothers-in-law. All watching and criticizing you. And when you
have come without a portion--Ach! Gavrelko! They will throw it up
to her, the mother-in-law and the sisters-in-law--and--and even
Simyonka--Simyonka is a fine fellow. And yet--in a quarrel--would
he not remember?” She began to weep passionately. “You won’t do it,
Gavrelo. And Natalka has really earned it. You know how she can spin
and weave. Her cloth is straight and fine. And during the harvest she
has been among the quickest hands. You won’t bring this shame upon
her, Gavrelo!”

Gavrelo turned to her. At last she had touched him. His face was
distorted with anger, and he stopped his work for a moment. “Why does
she want to marry, the fool!” The words burst from him through his
teeth, and he bent down to pick up his tools. He had finished the
fence. Katherina stared at him.

“What--what else do you expect? Oh! It is a harvest hand you are
thinking of!” Then realizing that he was going, she ran to him.

“Gavrelo!” she cried, “what do you say? What will you say when at the
wedding Simyonka’s father will ask, ‘And what do you give Natalka as
her portion?’ What will you say, Gavrelo?”

Gavrelo lifted a few poles to his shoulder and slipped the hatchet
into his girdle. “I told you,” he said doggedly. “Simyonka has
enough!” And he walked away with his long, even stride, his sandals
making deep prints in the soft earth.

Katherina staggered to the newly mended fence and buried her face in
her arms. “_Ach, Boshi Moi!_” she cried. With the habit of the lonely
she talked to herself. Gavrelo did not tolerate neighbors. Indeed, he
was hated because of his hardness and meanness.

“Life is bitter,” she wept. Her own had been a cruel fate.

“You have come like a beggar.” Her mother-in-law had cast it in her
face. And now her own fate was to be Natalka’s fate! And why? Because
Gavrelo was an unnatural father, because he was stingy and cared for
nothing--but--his fields, his wheat, more and more wheat. His barns
were stacked with wheat. He kept them under lock and key, and he
sowed still more wheat. She raised her head and looked about. This
field was to be all wheat, acres and acres. And Natalka was to go
to her husband like a beggar. “They will throw it up to her, the
mother-in-law and the sisters-in-law. And Natalka is young; she will
never be able to lift her head!” Her own head sank into her arms
again.

It was late when she started for the hut. The red sun hung on the
very edge of the forest. She picked her way to a back road not far
off which would be less soggy than the fields, though roundabout and
longer. Trudging along, her eyes on the path, her sandals heavy with
the mud, she at once upbraided and defended Gavrelo, and analyzed and
schemed.

It would take so little to give Natalka a fine portion. There, for
instance, was the little pig, only a year old, but so aggressive that
he had to be fed with the old hogs. Parshuchuck would be an excellent
gift. He could take care of himself anywhere. Even in a litter of
strange pigs he could hold his own. Also there was Chulka, a heifer,
for whom no fence was too high. She used her knobby little horns with
such skill that often won a long stare of surprise from the old cows.
Chulka, too, could take care of herself in a strange herd. These two
would be an excellent gift. It would be pleasant for little Natalka
to have something of her own that was alive, in a strange home, in a
strange village. Parshuchuck and Chulka might even be an example to
her, not to bend her head too low.

But what was the use in thinking about it? “Ach! The mean peasant!
The unnatural father!” She stumbled, unable to see the path through
her tears.

“Bah! They are fools, those wise men,” she shook her head
disgustedly. “They are fools who say that it is better to have a
relative rich, though a miser, than one who is poor and generous.
Both are like death. Can you take from the miser? Nor can you take
from the one who has nothing to give.”

Presently, on reaching a sudden turn in the road, she heard a merry
voice babbling incoherent fits of song. That was Addom on his way
home from the _kabock_. Addom was a drunkard. He drank like a fish.
Addom, too, was often idle, she mused. Gavrelo never drank, though
he liked a glass of vodka. But what would Gavrelo do in a _kabock_
where men talked as they drank? Gavrelo never talked to any one. He
only worked. That was why her parents had made her marry him instead
of Addom, who drank and who never kept his word, just as Gavrelo
never broke his word. But Addom’s daughter Anulia, who was also to
marry this spring, was to receive one of her father’s two cows as her
wedding-gift. Anulia Addom also wore machine-made stockings which she
bought from the Jewess Deborah--stockings and boots every Sunday!
Natalka bound her ankles in cloths and wore birch-bark sandals
to church. Katherina shook her head. A man who drank was perhaps
better-natured, more generous.

Reaching the yard, she saw Natalka still in the window spinning.

Natalka was eighteen. She was small like her mother, but she was rosy
and healthy. Her hair lay in two thick, brown braids on her back. Her
faded red kerchief was tied with a coquettish knot, and her little
round nose had a mischievous tilt. But just now she was neither
coquettish nor mischievous. She was very earnest. Her wedding was
to be the first in the village this spring, and she was hurrying to
finish all her mother’s spinning before it came. Her hands twirled
the spindle rapidly; her head scarcely moved except to moisten the
thread with her lips, or to extricate a knot in the flax with her
small white teeth.

Katherina watched her a moment. Should she tell her--that her father
would send her away with empty hands? No! There was time enough.
But as she stood watching she saw Natalka stop her work suddenly;
her hands became still, her head drooped for a moment. In agony,
Katherina wondered. Could she know, then? Perhaps she guessed!
Katherina turned away from the window.

About the yard all the buildings stood facing in a semicircle, the
hut, the barns, the pig-pen, the chicken-coop. Katherina went toward
the coop. In the barn she heard Gavrelo. He rarely forgot the keys.
“He rarely forgets them,” she muttered to herself. The corners of
her mouth lifted firmly. “Well, Natalka shall have a fine trousseau,
anyway. Her _kubial_, at any rate, shall not go off empty!”

Late that night the full moon rose, and Sabinka, with its two rows
of huts, its hills and dales and lakes, lay transformed in silver
light.

In the shadow of the fences a woman went stealing along. Climbing,
here forcing a way through the bars, running a step where the shadow
broke, and again lingering where it resumed, she reached a small hut
standing in the full light. She rapped on the door and shook the
latch impatiently.

“Open, Deborah!” she whispered. “It is I, Katherina.” A tall, thin
woman with a white kerchief about her head came out on the threshold.

“So late, Katherina!”

“Yes, and I must hurry back. Here.” Katherina took a large ball of
thread from her _swita_ pocket. “You are to knit a pair of stockings
for my daughter Natalka’s wedding,” she whispered. “But mind,
Jewess,” her voice rose suspiciously, “you are to return to me what
is left of the thread.”

“We are not thieves!” came from Deborah in a tone hurt, yet patient.

“Well, perhaps not,” Katherina said, softening slightly. “Perhaps
not. But all Jews are swindlers.”

“We are what we are forced to be.” Restraint and infinite patience
were in Deborah’s voice. Hesitating an instant, she turned suddenly.
“Look, Katherina, would you not much rather come along the road, in
the light of day, to order stockings for Natalka, instead----”

“Do you mean to insinuate, Jewess?” Katherina flamed.

“No, no,” Deborah hastened to assure her. “I am not insulting you. I
am not blaming you. I just want you to see, Katherina, how one may be
forced to become what one does not want to be.”

“Well,” said Katherina, somewhat mollified, “I suppose so. I suppose
Jews, like people, have their troubles.”

Carefully she put her hand into her bosom and counted slowly six
eggs into the apron Deborah held out. “There,” she said, brushing
her hands with an air as if the transaction was quite satisfactorily
completed.

“My dear Katherina!” Deborah exclaimed, “you expect me to knit a pair
of stockings for six eggs?”

“How much then?” Katherina’s voice was suspicious again and cross.

“Twelve, Katherina; at least twelve. This is not winter, you know.”

“In the next village----”

“I know,” Deborah broke in. “In the next village lives a Jewess who
knits a pair of stockings for six eggs. Don’t believe it, Katherina.
It’s a fairy-tale. Anyway, I cannot do it. We have to live, too. And
little Miriam is growing up. There is no chance for a penniless girl
here, a girl without a dowry.” Deborah’s voice came brooding.

Katherina put her hand into her _swita_ again. The trouble of a dowry
she could easily understand.

“Here, Deborah,” she said sympathetically, “here are twelve eggs. But
remember every inch of the thread you are to return. And don’t let
your blind mother-in-law knit the stockings. She might drop a stitch!”

A whispered good night followed, and Katherina stole forth into the
shadows again.

The village peeped through a mist of tender green buds. Warm
sunshine, dazzling blue skies were continuous. Scattered over the
fields far and near the peasants were. Mere specks between earth and
sky, their bodies moved slowly, heavily, all day long. Nearer the
homes the women labored, digging in the gardens, bleaching at the
lake. At dawn and after dark they took the time to prepare for the
weddings in the village.

When the mud in the road had dried a peddler came driving through the
village with summer finery and pots to sell.

“Pots to sell! Earthen pots to sell!” the peddler cried in a ringing
voice. And the dogs barked, and the children stared, and the women
left their work and hurried to the wagon with their bundles of rags.

Katherina was digging a draining-canal between two long beds in the
garden. When the peddler stopped at her gate she left her spade and
looked around. Natalka was at the lake bleaching. And Gavrelo--she
could see him in a far field, his arm swinging rhythmically back and
forth. Hastening to the outhouse, she came out with two bundles,
one of rags, and one small sackful of wheat. She carried it with
difficulty and threw it over the fence into the road, where it lay
hidden among some weeds.

“Did you see, little Jew?” she called to the peddler. “It is wheat!”

“I saw,” the peddler answered significantly. He was as accustomed to
this kind of transaction among the peasants as they themselves were.

Katherina hurried out to the wagon and climbed onto the axle.

“Quick, little Jew, let me see what you have. And don’t think you
can rob me. Wheat is dear now! Have you ribbons? And I want two red
bandannas, but of different patterns. And show me beads. Have you got
rings? Yes, show me that one with the red stone.”

And the peddler measured, using the length of his arm, and watched
Katherina. And she picked and fussed and worried in indecision, her
eyes never quite leaving the distant field where Gavrelo was working.

Her selections made finally, she gathered them into her apron
jealously, and a haggling ensued between the two, not unlike the
transaction some weeks earlier at Deborah’s hut.

“Now, peddler, how much? That sack of wheat is almost a bushel.”

“Almost!” he cried. “That should have been a full bushel for all you
have taken.”

“Don’t shriek!” she paled. “There are those rags. What do you give
for the rags?”

“The rags go to make up the full bushel of wheat.” His dark eyes
snapped.

“Oh, very well,” she said. “Take it! Take it! You are a robber.” She
climbed down and hurried away. The peddler threw his bundles into the
wagon and touched his pony with the end of his whip, his dark eyes
measuring the distance to the next hut.

Katherina breathed a sigh of relief as his wagon creaked away, and
she slowly entered the deep interior of the outhouse which adjoined
the living room. It was late afternoon, and the road was hot and
dusty. But here it was cool and dark; the only light came from the
door opening on the garden path.

In the dimmest corner Natalka’s _kubial_ stood, filled with her
trousseau. Katherina reached it by a small step-ladder and dipped
down into its tank-like body. She touched and patted the cool,
smooth linens, heavily embroidered and plain pieces. She added the
newly-purchased treasures. Yes, Natalka’s _kubial_ was filling--but
of the portion there was no prospect. She sighed hopelessly. There
was no prospect, and the day of the wedding was drawing nearer.
Gavrelo had ordered vodka from the _kabock_, and told her she might
have all the pork she wanted for the wedding-feast. But that was all.
Natalka must enter into a strange family owning nothing, come with
nothing belonging to her, nothing familiar. Everything she will look
at will be strange, his! Nothing that she had brought, that she could
feel pride in. “_Ach, Boshi Moi!_”

She finally climbed down the ladder. It had grown late. Outside the
mellow sunset lay full on the path and the bit of road she could see
before the gate. But in the outhouse the dimness was quite deep. And
the living room, through its door, looked out at her, a dark hole
with its sooty walls; the two tiny windows in it admitted but little
light. Only one bright spot--the icon in vivid red and blue of the
“Gracious Mother” looked out at her from the dimness.

“_Boshi Moi!_” Katherina’s eyes went out to it in a dumb appeal,
“_Boshi Moi!_” Wearily she sat down after a moment on the lower step
of the ladder. Voices came from the road. Presently she saw, from
her seclusion, Natalka and Simyonka enter through the gate. Their
young forms stood out clean, clear, in the soft light. This was
Simyonka’s market day, she remembered. He had evidently met Natalka
at the lake on his way from market. They were talking heatedly. The
little chit Natalka was arguing, smiling, coquetting. The youth
seemed to be entreating her, begging earnestly. Simyonka was not much
older than Natalka. He was tall and lean and brown, clean-featured,
clean-looking in his coarse, home-spun linen. Katherina watched, and
her soul filled with gratitude that he was so beautiful, for Natalka.

They came a few steps nearer on the garden path and she caught their
words.

“Just one! Just one, Natalka!” His face was lifted. His eyes were
beseeching her. And Natalka, laughing, radiant, mischievous, turned
and was backing away from him toward the house, her hand raised
between them.

“_Lublue ya tibya._” (I love thee.)

With the palm of her hand against his mouth, she pressed him away. He
was murmuring, “You are like a little flower, Natalka. You are like a
little birch-tree, a little white birch growing in the field.”

Katherina’s own face was radiant. “_Ya tibya lublue._” He loves her!
Yes, he loves her. She herself had never known such love. “Simyonka
loves Natalka!” The words filled her with dizzy joy.

Then her face twisted with agony. But soon, very soon, he would look
upon her with shame! At once! At her wedding! His father will ask
Gavrelo, “What is your daughter’s portion?” And Gavrelo will say,
“Nothing!” And the whole village will laugh and jeer. And little
Natalka will bend her head with shame. And later, again, when he
brings her home and the villagers and relatives gather about him, and
he has nothing of hers that he could tell them she brought, that he
could show--

She rose. Carried away by this thought, she no longer saw nor heard
them outside, and she went staggering into the living room of the hut
and fell upon her knees before the icon.

“Gracious Mother Maria!” Her clumsy little body crumpled to the
hard-trodden earth.

“Blessed Mother Maria, can you hear me?” she pleaded in the crude
way of Sabinka people. “Can you hear me? I have come to beg of you
for Natalka. You know, Mother, I have never come to you for myself.
But now I come for her. Mother,” her voice rose brokenly, “you know
how hard my life has been. At home when I was young we were so poor.
Often I was hungry for just bread. In marriage--Gavrelo is a strange
person.” She fell silent a moment, her tears choking her.

“The children were all I had. And when little Zacharka died I felt
as if my heart would break, Mother. He was so sweet to look at with
his golden hair and blue eyes. He would have been fifteen years old
now. Oh, Mother! It is hard; it has been hard to see other little
lads in the village and not see Zacharka. In the spring, when the
sky is blue, and the fields are covered with grass, I miss little
Zacharka. I miss him when from each home in the village a little lad
goes forth with his father’s herd. The mothers wait for them all day,
and in the evening they meet them at the gate. I, too, wait all day,
but it is a strange little lad that brings our cattle home.” She lay
still, sobbing brokenly.

“It has been hard, Mother Maria. Yet, have I complained? But now I
beg pity for Natalka.” Her hands clasped, her forehead pressed to the
earth. “Pity, Mother, pity for Natalka!”

The trees were in full leaf. The meadows were dotted with the first
flowers. The wheat in the great field stood a foot high. It was
Saturday at dusk. The cattle had long passed, and the dust they
had stirred was laid. Swarms of tiny insects danced in the open
spaces of the road. Far out frogs croaked at regular intervals.
The air was warm and sweet with the breath of the flowers and the
dew. The village seemed quietly at rest. Yet there was a silent
stir--preparation for the morrow, the first wedding in Sabinka this
spring.

The fence enclosing Gavrelo’s hut was strung with branches of green
foliage. High over the gate a wreath of orange-colored flowers hung
to mark the bride’s dwelling. Inside the yard was swept clean and
sprinkled with yellow sand, and long benches stood along the walls.
On the doorstep of the outhouse Natalka sat with her two bridesmaids
trimming her veil. Natalka herself was making the little rosettes of
red or green ribbon, and the maids stitched them on all over the long
strip of white muslin. The maids were talking and giggling, their
heads bent over their work. Natalka was quiet and solemn.

In the deep interior of the outhouse Katherina was giving the last
touches to the _kubial_. She lifted and replaced and folded and
finally fitted the cover and slipped in the bar. It was done! Her
hands fell at her sides. Katherina had grown thinner, paler, more
pinched. Since she prayed before the icon she had spent the time from
day to day, from hour to hour, waiting. But nothing--nothing had
happened to save Natalka. Since that hour at dusk, she, Katherina,
had spent morning and night kneeling before the icon. She had been
to the cemetery many times, where her dead were laid, and hung their
moldy wooden crosses with new little aprons of many colors. She had
watched Gavrelo from day to day, hoping for a sign of relenting, of
softening. But none had come. Sullen, stolid, he went about as usual,
working early and late in the fields and at the barns, only coming
in to eat his three meals of black bread and cabbage soup, and to
sleep the few hours between the extreme dark and early dawn. Standing
there, she could hear him now at the barns, still working--still
working--while others were long at rest.

“Ach, Gavrelo!” she cried to him silently, “what is it all for? What
are you doing it for, Gavrelo?” She lifted her coarse apron and wiped
away stinging tears.

The shadow before the door had just fallen on the threshold. By clock
time it would have been perhaps ten in the morning. A wagon lined
with green leaves and buttercups, harnessed to four pair, stood at
the gate in the road. The horses were snorting and beating the ground
impatiently, and a sturdy youth sat holding the reins mightily.
Within, the yard flashed with color--red, short, wide skirts, blue
and green streamers, red bandannas, white shirts, patent-leather
boots, sparkling black or green beads, shining brass buttons.

The guests sat primly on the benches along the walls, chanting
solemnly. Katherina and Gavrelo sat among the elders of the village.
Gavrelo looked browner in a well-bleached shirt, and he was the only
man who wore birch sandals instead of boots. Katherina sat beside
him, her head swathed in a white linen scarf decorated with little
red crosses. Her head was bowed, her hands were folded in her lap,
her face as white as her scarf. Simyonka, in patent leather boots
and white shirt, looked solemn. Natalka was tearful. Natalka looked
like some strange wild-flower, a poppy perhaps, with all the red
and green, and her loose brown hair. Her scarf flashed with every
possible color. Her skirt was red; her breast was covered with many
strings of beads.

Suddenly the chanting stopped. A hush fell. Solemnly, between her
two maids, the bride rose to ask a blessing of her parents before
starting for church. She walked with studied and becoming dignity,
her head bowed, her hands clasped in front of her. She reached her
parents. And here she forgot her rôle. Overcome by emotion, she fell
upon her knees rather clumsily, humanly, and a low cry, half song,
half wail of the braid song, pierced the air.

“_Boshi Moi_----”

“My braids--my beautiful brown braids.”

Blindly and convulsed, Katherina rose and made the sign of the cross
over her. Gavrelo did the same. Katherina watched, still watched and
hoped for a sign of relenting. But his face looked more stubborn than
ever. And Katherina now suddenly knew that she must not expect him to
relent. When had Gavrelo ever relented that she should have expected
it? Fool that she was! It had always been just the contrary even when
it was to his own disadvantage. His word given became law. Fool that
she was to have expected Gavrelo to change his word!

Meanwhile, Natalka, kneeling before each guest for a blessing,
reached the gate. There was a burst of song. All pressed forward.
The horses pranced, a whip cracked and a cloud of dust rose before
the gate, and the bride was gone. Katherina and Gavrelo followed in
a vehicle. Dazed and crushed, she was sped along. What could now
happen? The beginning of Natalka’s shame a mere few hours off.

Noise and confusion filled the yard. There was a babble of voices,
thick voices, incoherent, affectionate, querulous, crying of
children, snatches of song, the strains of a fiddle rising a moment
over the clamor, a rhythmic thomp, thomp of dancing feet.

It was late in the afternoon. The bridal pair had long returned from
church. The yard was now divided in two parts. One-half was occupied
by the dancers, and in the other half two long tables stood spread
with food--roast pork, dishes heaped with sour pickles glistening in
juice, salt herring, thick slices of black bread, tall green bottles
of vodka, white and stinging.

The guests sat about the tables, while the children clamored at their
elders’ elbows. The feast was at its height. Among the men several
of the guests already lay under the table. Of the women most were
intoxicated. Some sat wagging their heads. Others were awakened now
and then to shrill merriment. Still others drank little and sat
chanting solemnly, keeping up dutifully the burden of the rites.

In the dancers’ corner several couples whirled in a quadrille. In one
of these Natalka flashed in and out. Natalka’s face was still solemn
and dignified. But a twinkle of mischief and coquettishness was in
her eyes. Her husband was dancing in the same quadrille. Whenever
they had to dance opposite each other her eyes teased him; her little
red hand extended and withdrew half-way, and Simyonka was tantalized
and radiant.

Further a circle of young folk surrounded the great-grandfather of
the village, dancing a jig.

His hands on his hips, his white beard flowing, his head high, a
smile on his lips, his aged limbs performed with wonderful agility.
He toed to the right, he toed to the left, here he crossed, there he
kneeled. And the fiddlers fiddled with all their might, and the women
clapped, and the men cheered and stamped.

“Trala-lala-lala.”

At one table Katherina sat among her guests. Leaning to this one and
that one, she urged:

“Another piece of pork? Some more _kvass_?” She herself neither
ate nor drank. Her face was ashen white. Her eyes were fastened on
Gavrelo, who sat at the side of Simyonka’s father. At the other table
Gavrelo, urged by Simyonka’s father, had drunk deeply. This was the
second time in his life he had drunk. His face was purple, he talked
incoherently, and he sat gazing about him helplessly, as if he could
not make out what had happened to him. Simyonka’s father was leaning
on the table to keep his balance; but being accustomed to vodka he
had not quite lost his wits.

“You--you half a fine stock of cattle,” he told Gavrelo, dealing him
a complimentary blow on the back. “You half fine cowsh!”

Gavrelo threw his head back to drain a glassful, and drew it back
with difficulty, then sat swaying.

“Fine cowsh,” mumbled Simyonka’s father. Gavrelo turned his head and
eyed his new relative with a vacant stare. Then came the dreaded
question. Katherina, watching from her table, sat as still as if cut
from stone.

“What--what ish Natalka’s portion, Gavrelo?” Many bleared eyes were
turned on Gavrelo. This would be the first time Gavrelo had given
anything in his life. Some of the villagers actually sobered for a
moment and stared.

“Natalka’s portion?” Simyonka’s father insisted with drunken
stubbornness.

Suddenly Katherina’s face turned from its ashen pallor to a live red.
Oh, yes! Yes! She would! Why not? She would do it, yes, she would!
Or why would it have come into her head? Could it be that the Sacred
Mother had not forgotten her? She sat a moment staring stupidly, then
rose quickly, elbowed her way to her husband and stood at his side.

“Natalka’s portion?” Simyonka’s father clamored with piggish
persistence. His voice rose to a squeal. Katherina bent over Gavrelo
and whispered.

“Say Parshuchuck.”

“Parshuchuck,” Gavrelo repeated, and looked up at her as though he
were trying to recognize her.

“Natalka’s portion a pig!” the father-in-law called out to the guests.

“And Chulka,” Katherina again whispered to her husband. Gavrelo
stared at her doubtfully, but repeated “Chulka.”

“And the large field of wheat,” Katherina urged hoarsely.

“Wheat!” repeated Gavrelo. His head fell forward and his mouth
dripped water.

“Three pishes!” Simyonka’s father bawled out.

“Three pieces!” It was repeated around the yard.

“Simyonka! You lucky hound!” a young man shrieked. All were now
staring, eyes bleared, at the three. Natalka came over to her mother.
Her face looked white and scared.

“_Matushka!_” she exclaimed, “what have you done?” And Katherina
suddenly realized that Natalka had known all along that her father
would give her nothing.

“It is all right,” Katherina said. “Go dance. Go. But tell Simyonka
to come and fetch his father-in-law to a cool place. And Natalka--you
better tell Simyonka to take the pig and the heifer tonight. The
wheat you will get in the fall.”

“But, _Matushka_----”

“It is all right, Natalka. You know your father is a man of his word.
Go dance.”

A few minutes later Gavrelo lay stretched on a bench in the cool, dim
outhouse. Natalka and Simyonka were congratulated on their generous
portion. New quadrilles were formed, a new jig was being danced.
Katherina went back and sat among her guests. And as she clapped her
hands for the dancers she wondered, “And what about the morrow? Will
he think he did it of his own accord, or will he remember?” But what
mattered the morrow? Just now Anulia Addom was screaming into her
grandmother’s deaf ear:

“Natalka received three things, _Babushka_; you hear me, three
things!” And Katherina clapped.

“Trala-lala-lala-lala.”

“Ach, they were wise after all, those men,” she thought; “they were
wise who said that it is better to have a relative rich though a
miser than one who is poor and generous. The miser, sooner or later,
in one way or another, you may overcome. It is poverty that is like
unto death.”


        [8] Copyright, 1922, by The Pictorial Review Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Rose Gollup Cohen.




                         THE SHAME OF GOLD[9]

                         By CHARLES J. FINGER

                         (From _The Century_)


“L’Intransigeant” recently printed a short account of the failure of
the Franco-Brazilian ornithological expedition. Reading, you may have
caught a hint of tragedy in it; but it may have escaped you, because
our papers barely noticed the matter. I was specially interested
because of a conversation I had had with a stranger who knew Brazil
in a peculiar way.

Knowing Columbus, Ohio, you cannot fail to remember the place where
the C. D. & M. Traction crosses the main business street. It is
crowded at the corner, for a newspaper office is there, and bulletins
of the world happenings are posted every hour or so. On the day that
I have in mind, Hall and I paused there for a moment. A new bulletin
was being put up, which read:

_Franco-Brazilian expedition formed to explore upper Amazon
territory._

Hall made a remark laughingly as to new markets to exploit, and
hurried on his way to meet his investment broker; but I, gazing
upward, unaware of his disappearance, said:

“Yes, there are still spots on this little world untrodden by the
foot of man.”

Turning, I discovered his absence, while from another man who stood
where he had been came the words, very decidedly:

“I doubt it.”

“But why?” I asked, mildly interested.

“Good reason,” he replied, with a little shrug of his shoulders.
There was a moment of hesitation, then, simultaneously, we both
started off in the same direction, and for half a block walked
almost side by side. At a word it transpired that we were both bound
for the depot, for the Cincinnati train.

Later, on the train, he resumed the subject. “I know Brazil a
little,” he said, “and far out of the beaten track, but I know it
superficially. Others have been there--many others, and their lines
are crossed and crisscrossed.”

“White men?” I asked.

“Certainly, white men. That’s how I was surprised into the remark
I made there at the bulletin-board. Men poke everywhere about the
world.” The man sketched out roughly on the palm of his hand, and
with his pipe-stem, an imaginary map. “You recall the outline of
South America,” he went on, “nearly pear-shaped, an elongated pear.
Now, here is Peru, a little above the base of my thumb. Over here,
under the little finger, is Cape St. Roque. I have been here. Cut
across like this.” He drew a bold stroke entirely across his hand.
“That means Callao, into the Andes, and so north. North to strike
the head-waters of the Amazon, and then trouble, fever and hunger.
Wealth, too, in a way.”

“Love of adventure?” I hazarded.

He regarded me intently for a moment. I noticed his iron-gray hair
and queerly wrinkled face. He was not yet middle-aged.

“No. I never tried to analyze. I don’t know. I’m not really
adventurous. I like to be alone. Also, I drift, perhaps. When in
a crowd, nothing seems to be worth while, and one is an ant in a
hurrying mass. Alone, thoughts come with force. They strike one as
bluntly as seen things impress themselves. I can’t explain.”

I was unwilling to press him with questions. He was not the kind of
man that could be drawn out. When he spoke again there was a note of
quiet, pleasant excitement.

“By the way, in Prescott’s ‘Peru’ there is a passage somewhere
telling of one party of Spaniards crossing the Andes and discovering
silver. Then, being unable to get back, they built a boat and floated
down the Amazon, and presently turned up in Cuba again. It’s there
somewhere. Or in Irving. In Prescott, I think.”

I told him that I had a faint recollection of something like that.

“Well,” he continued, paying little heed, “that was, roughly, four
hundred years ago. No modern things to use, no chart, no map, no
compass, no tools, or camp paraphernalia; just plain, dogged go-at-it
and keep on. Keep in one direction, and you get somewhere. That’s how
Magellan felt his way, and Columbus his. Then the old Norsemen in
open boats. It excites me thinking of that. It was always that way,
one man pushing on.”

Again he lapsed into one of his ruminating moods.

“But about Prescott-- Once I was nearly all in. Over the Andes I’d
gone, and if I didn’t hit the trail of the Pizarro men, I’m crazy. I
never saw a helmet in my life until then, and I came across one under
an overhanging rock. A mighty thing it was--the rock I mean--a kind
of excavation under it that formed a cave.

“The helmet was there, and a few pieces of steel--short pieces; a
broken sword, perhaps. I took the helmet and carried it for days,
then threw it away. A man can’t be burdened with plunder like that.

“You see, I’d been on the trail for more than three months that
time. Now and then I caught sight of an Indian, and once I got an
arrow through my left shoulder. There were days and weeks in which
I saw no sign of human life, but, by George! there was plenty of
good company. Insects, you know, great glorious things. Butterflies,
too--butterflies that run and make a little noise like a rattle when
they fly away. It’s laughable. Living things are great fun to watch.
And then the concerts at evening at sunset, crickets and things. I
don’t know their names. Magnify insects, and I reckon you’d have a
fantastic world.

“When I did see a human face again, it gave me a start. I’d found
a good spot in the jungle to rest in. The stream ran clear there,
this stream I’d been following, and the bottom of it was sandy. One
does not often find a place like that. Thinking of an ideal spot,
you imagine a stream in the shade of a tree, with grass all about.
But when you get your stream, there is often mud, and where there
is shade there is no grass. Here there was everything; a pleasant
kind of spot, and I didn’t move all day. I just rested and smoked
and bathed my feet and watched the insects. It was quiet, too, still
as midnight, and the sun never pierced the leafy roof. It was just a
great, green arch like a cathedral, with smooth, lofty tree-trunks,
chamber after chamber of green, and, what was specially fine,
the place was clear of lianas. So I rested there and read an old
newspaper I had picked up in Callao and brought along. I’d read it
before dozens of times. Then my eyes would tire of the print, and I’d
doze off. I did that dozens of times. The peace of the place was too
much for me--too much both ways. The perfectness of it overcame me,
and drove me to the little thing, the silly newspaper.

“Once I woke with the notion that some one was watching me. What I
saw gave me a shiver. There was a big flowering-bush not ten yards
away. They were great red flowers, meat color, like raw beef, and
right between two of the flowers, as if it was stuck in a cleft,
was a man’s face, snag-toothed, red-bearded, shock-haired. It might
have been a great ape. The eyes stared straight at me. Remember, I’d
seen no natives for a long while, nor was there a settlement near,
and it was a region as big as the State of Illinois, and no white
man, I thought, had ever set foot there. Yet here was a face, and it
was not the face of a native. I knew enough to keep still, and only
peered through the narrowest slits I could make with my eyelids, so I
judged that the face in the flower would think I slept. Believe me, I
watched closely.

“It moved my way, but cautiously as a snake, and I saw a hairy
chest, a hairy human being, and stark. He came on hands and toes,
and I knew that he was a fellow used to the jungle and no native.
Noiselessly he came, not stirring leaf or blade, hardly. The smell of
his body assailed me unpleasantly, for there were sweetly smelling
spice-trees, and the human smell was rank as poison.

“I sat up suddenly when the fellow was not more than five yards away.
He stopped, rigid, expectant. Fear was in his eyes. Perhaps he saw it
in mine. In such cases men hate each other. Each resents the presence
of the other where white men should not be. Then he rose to his
feet, turned without a word, his feet making no sound, and made for
the flowering-bush again. I knew in a moment, somehow, that he was
ashamed of his nakedness in the presence of another of his race. So I
hailed him. At that he stood, regarding me with doubt.

“Well, he was one of those queer fish found everywhere. He told me
his tale that night. Of months and of years he had long lost count,
and he wanted to know of things strange to me. Queer things he had
been interested in, it seemed--a Londoner I guess, with the peculiar
sharpness of interest in political things that they have. It must
have been meat and drink to him, his interest in public affairs. He
talked of Gladstone and wanted to know whether some fellow named
O’Donnell who had killed some informer was hanged or not. From such
things we located the date when he left as about 1883. So he had been
there nearly thirty-five years. Think of it!

“But as to the unbelief of people who are credulous on some
things--tell people that for that length of time a white man, an
Englishman, had lived with savages, and every single one would jump
to the conclusion that he was chief among them. Naturally. On the
general principle, I suppose, that it is better to reign in hell
than to serve in heaven. But was he king? Boss? Chief? Not by a long
chalk. And naturally. The man from civilization was the servitor. The
savages were the superiors. Such things as he once knew were useless
in the wilds. Mind you, in civilization machinery is master, and man
the servant of the machine. Take him away from the mechanical things
and cast him on his own resources, and ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred he starves. He can’t make a fire, catch his food, build his
shelter. He is afraid to test things as to their edibility. He cannot
run, fight or climb. Among animals he is a weakling. Face to face
with nature he despairs. His education he finds to be ignorance. His
overpowering fear is that he may be hurt. You see, in civilization
man is protected, he does not have to struggle. All that he needs to
do is to sell himself, his time, his life, for the best price he can
command. So he becomes soft. He is unfit for liberty. Turn him loose,
and he is as useless as a canary-bird or a common hen turned adrift.
So was it with this fellow, Elfner. The savages were his superiors,
and he was the servitor. He had ceased to concern himself about
anything more than the needs of the body; and his brain had gone.
Once, I gathered, he had told them tales of the city life, but the
things he tried to picture they could not conceive; so he was lowered
still further in their estimation and set down as a liar.

“From this Elfner I learned of the Chequa tribe. He warned me against
them as a vicious people that had no dealings with other tribes, and
indicated their valley as farther east. That I was not to be led
to his tribe was made very clear. Obviously, he was ashamed of his
degradation. But really it was not degradation in one way of looking
at it. There are almost no men who would not rapidly find their level
in a savage tribe, and that level would be below its general average,
because of the new valuations that the man from civilization cannot
compass.

“There was a stranger tale he began to tell me--a tale of a
swamp-land to the southeast and of monstrous, yellow earth creatures
that heaved themselves out of the mire. Then I was sure he was
crazed. I knew of the giant armadillos and great sloths, but it was
none of these. He was loath to continue, and parried my questions.
He wanted to know of things in the world that he would never again
see. He wanted to tell me of John L. Sullivan and of Jake Kilrain,
or of sordid crimes that had interested him. Above all he wanted to
talk of eating, of ham and eggs, of bread and cheese and beer. Once,
for instance, when he had begun to tell me something of the Chequas,
he broke off quite unexpectedly, and apropos of nothing went into a
little rhapsody. ‘Say,’ he said, ‘this ’ere is a dull place. I often
think of colors, and there’s a bird all colors, and I always think
of when you hold a glass of whiskey up to the light. Lord! Lord!’ At
that he fell into a reverie and sat hunched, his chin on clenched
fist. Then he grew melancholy. ‘These ’ere fellers in my tribe, they
got me goin’, they ’ave. It’s work, work, work. An’ if I don’t, it’s
punishment tied up to a ant’s nest.’

“His talk was jumbled, disjointed, and I had much ado to get
something from him relative to the country. Very little I got, after
all. We had talked for perhaps a couple of hours when a ululation
filled the air. ‘It’s them blacks callin’ me,’ he said, leaping to
his feet. Now, while I was not anxious for his company, I felt an
urge to invite him to go with me; but, to my relief, he refused on
the ground that his masters would follow, capture and kill him. When
the ululation was again heard, he seemed panic-stricken, stood a
moment irresolute, then turned and fled into the bush as a dog would
on hearing the insistent call.”

The man stopped, and I hazarded the remark that it was strange to
meet a white man thus, because the chances against an encounter were
slight.

“That’s so,” he said.

“And the reference to those strange earth creatures. Didn’t you learn
anything further?”

He looked at me and shook his head doubtfully, and a little puzzled
frown appeared and disappeared.

“No. But I may have seen one, too. I don’t know.”

“May I hear?” I asked.

“There’s nothing to tell, because I’m not sure. And yet--” He passed
his hand over his brow. “I may have been mistaken. It was after I had
left the gentle people, and I was not myself then. I was worried,
grieved, half-starved. It is all muddled.

“You see, after Elfner left I decided to find the valley he had told
me of, and I did find it without any particular difficulty. It was
a bird that attracted me, a quetzal. If I had not gone toward it,
I might have missed the place. But I never could resist watching
a quetzal, for it is the most wonderful thing that God has made,
the most exquisite thing in creation. To see it, a living thing of
metallic green--gold-green and scarlet-breasted, with tail-feathers
of jet and ivory--is an experience. You watch it and lose yourself in
admiration. Nothing else is so gorgeous. I have watched as the light
struck them, and have seen them change from violet to steel-blue,
but colors that live. Then the bird moves slightly, and the blue is
blue-green, then again gold-green, and there are crimson flashes and
purple. And there was the valley, and it was the valley of quetzals
and butterflies, and in it lived the gentle people. I stayed there
many months, peaceful months, only to leave in sorrow. A gentle
people, indeed! Never did I hear a harsh word or see an ungentle
thing. I do not think that they knew of war or of violence. To live
was sweet in that valley of flowers and birds. There were sounds of
living things as sweet as the musical ripples of a little brook, and
the breeze was soft and laden with perfume. So I came to love the
gentle people and their land.

“It may seem odd to tell you this, but I have told you much, and
the mood is on me, and the place in which I tell it to you is odd,
here where there is the noise of people and of the moving train and
where there is glaring light or sooty smoke, and where every one is
burdened with the stern anxiety of duty. And yet it all comes to
me as the memory of a summer day may come to some poor fellow in
prison--the memory of that spot where existence is facile and where
trifles give joy and where people live as birds live. While there I
knew a fresh vigor of soul. I always seemed to be on the point of
grasping and understanding things, and the thought lived in me always
that I should never do a thing to bring the sorrow of the outside
world among this people. The memory is strong upon me now, and it
came to me as a dull blow when I read the bulletin uptown. I felt as
the prisoner might when the judge said the death sentence. It seemed
to mean that, you know.”

The man paused and relit his pipe. He gave a puff or two and laid it
aside again. Then he leaned back in his seat, folded his arms and
dropped his chin on his chest.

“All this noise about us must make what I tell you seem unreal.
I appreciate that fully. Sometimes I think that out there I lost
something well worth the losing, and found instead a precious thing.
Looking back, I seemed to have touched the supernatural. I wonder
if you understand. What I lost enriched me, and I seemed to have
lost forever my own people and the sins of avarice and anger and
pettiness. It was no illusion. There _was_ the valley of peace. There
_is_ the valley of peace. But I fear the ravening hand now stretched
out.

“There was a child there, a thing of beauty, who led me about at
times after I had been accepted as a visitor. Endol was her name, and
she was a dancing creature, who weaved circlets of flowers and often
brought to me, laughingly, water to drink, bearing it in a flattish
shell which held only a taste. I see her now, a bright fairy, dancing
and chasing the cloud shadows on the green, playing with the birds,
clapping her hands as she ran after butterflies, but never trying to
catch them. Do you know, at such times the memory of my own land was
as a dark and fearful dream. I remembered slum children. The memory
of the things that clatter about us in houses and in cities, and the
fret and the evil and the filth and the sickness--these things bore
upon me and oppressed my spirit. Now, sitting here, remembering that
valley of joy, it is as if I were in hell, and it is from that hell
that I am trying to escape, for all has been dark and ugly since I
left.

“One day Endol brought me a golden-colored flower, a new one to me.
I saw that she bore a shell in her left hand. When I made a motion
to take it she prevented me. Playfully, I held her, and as I did so,
she chanced to tip the shell, and a yellowish sand poured forth and
lay lightly on a large leaf. Looking, I saw that it was gold dust. At
that Endol laughed, stooped, scattered the gold, and, gathering the
grains that lay on the leaf, threw them afar.

“That naturally set me to wondering as well as wandering, for thus
far I had confined my walks to the upper end of the valley. As it
fell out, the next day I came upon a flat rock at the foot of a
vine-hung tree, and there in plain view was a shell, much larger than
that which Endol had had. It held gold dust, and a few nuggets, the
best of them not larger than a small pea. The shell had apparently
been set there and forgotten with the carelessness of a child tired
of a plaything. The gold was not free from iron dust, but I saw at a
glance that the vein from which it had been taken was extraordinarily
rich. So it came to me to think that this people knew nothing of the
value of gold and perhaps used it as a plaything. I suppose I should
have left it there, but I did not. Few men living as you and I have
lived in a workaday world could resist the temptation to bear it
away. So I took it to the bower in which I slept.

“Now, Endol and another child met me on the way and, chattering and
laughing, reached for the shell. I handed it to them. Their actions
astonished me. They drew slightly aside; their merriment fell from
them, and they held a rapid, whispered conference. Endol’s friend,
the older of the two, seemed the most urgent, and her counsel
apparently prevailed, for they set off running down the valley with
the gold. They seemed possessed of a new fear, one that I could not
understand.

“Soon after they returned with others, men and women, and I could see
that there was consternation. I was reminded of a crowd I once saw
running to the pit-mouth when the news of trouble came.

“Sima, a handsome youth with a splendid head ornament of quetzal
feathers, addressed me. He was gentle, almost persuasive. At first
I could not understand what he was driving at. There were evidently
references to a people and the setting sun, and in the midst of his
discourse others came up and now and again tried to aid him in making
me understand, as people will do all over the world when a foreigner
is dense. Presently Sima ceased, and another, an older man, took up
the parable. He grew excited in the telling of the tale and, as I
gathered, was eager to impress upon me that there was an evil time
when hate and murder and greed, until then unknown, had come into
the land. But it was not until he roughly fashioned a cross with a
couple of sticks and broke it to pieces that a light dawned on me.
Then when he told me of white men from the north, it dawned upon me
with clearness that here was a tribal memory of the coming of Pizarro
into the land of the Incas. Understanding that, I could piece things
together, the ancient wrong done to a gentle people in the name of
the cross, the white man’s greed for gold, which had been a specific
cause of strife and disorder, the hopeless resistance of an unarmed
people, and the cruel acts of retaliation. From another point of view
I saw what the lust of empire meant, and I saw how those who preached
civilization, philanthropy and religion came burning, shooting,
destroying and subjugating the weak, the simple, the harmless. The
forefathers of this people had escaped. What wonder, then, that to
them gold stood as an evil, something to hide and thrust away as
unclean lest its glitter again attract these who bear death in their
hands.

“I saw all that in a flash, and I understood the vague sense of
imminent chaos that must have possessed the simple, happy folk when
they pondered on what might happen if gold-mad white men again came
ravening. The wonder was that they did not slay me when first I came.

“The gold-bearing sand was exceptionally rich in the little river.
Grubbing about, I found pockets in the bedrock full of gold. I even
amused myself for a time extracting some of it and piling it in
little heaps here and there on stones, and once I dammed up a section
of the stream, turning the current so as to expose the river-bed,
thus laying bare a new and unexpected vein. But it meant nothing to
me then, for I still enjoyed the sighing of the wind through the
silky grass, the sweetness of the day, and the fullness of the earth.
The water that dripped sparkling from my finger-tips was finer to me
than the sifting gold.

“One day I found the cave. I had not found it before simply because
I had not sought it. There was no attempt on the part of the folk to
conceal its location, nor was there displayed any desire to keep me
from it.

“It was an opening in a hillside almost six feet long and four high,
a square, natural gap, and the chamber within was at least thirty by
thirty. The rays of the western sun flooded the place. For over three
hundred years, perhaps, the people had hidden their gold there. From
that you may have some idea how things were. The stuff lay scattered
over the floor of the cave. I worked my fingers through the gold near
the opening, and it was knuckle-deep before I touched the rock. In
the farther corner was a sloping heap of the stuff, and it had been
there so long that the iron dust had blown away. It shone dully as
the sun touched it. Here and there were small nuggets, some as large
as a cherry. Leaving the cave, I found a pile of them, oddly shaped,
laid along a large, flat rock. They were evidently the playthings of
children. I remember noticing one, flattish and almost heart-shaped.
It had a hole through it, and I strung it and hung it round my neck.
Look at this.”

As he spoke he fumbled at his soft shirt-collar and pulled up a
little nugget, which he handed to me.

“It’s all I have to show,” he said as he returned it to its place.
“That night I did not sleep. Strangely enough, my mind took a twist.
The life I was living fell behind me, as it were, and I was filled
with a new desire. It was not really a desire for wealth, but rather
a desire for power. That was it, a desire for power. That old
newspaper I told you of came to my mind, with all that it stood for.
I began to dream of walking into my native town, into Hillsboro, and
showing off. Crazy, isn’t it? But it was so. They were day-dreams
that might have pleased a boy, and it is almost too banal to tell,
the rapid succumbing to temptation. I had a vision of becoming the
local ‘big man,’ of buying out the banker, of building a fine house,
of owning a splendid automobile, of servants, and all that kind of
thing. Things! things! things! The pageantry of wealth! So dreaming,
the quiet of the valley and the peace of it became a hateful thing,
and I longed for the sound of a thousand footsteps and a thousand
wheels, for the noise of streets, and the haste and the clatter and
the excitement. Gradually the idea took possession of me that the
gold was mine and that it was a weak sentimentality which would
prevent a capable white race from using that which a brown-skinned
folk knew not how to use. I planned and dreamed, planned and dreamed.
The poison was at work.

“Weeks and weeks it took me to carry the gold to the hidden canoe. I
thought at the time that I was unwatched, but I do not think so now.
Some of the stuff I loaded direct from the river sand, but by far the
greater part I bore from the cave. Of course there were days when I
hesitated, half repenting. But, on the whole, greed had me.

“One day I saw Sima and Capaca, standing side by side, looking at
me, and I was suddenly overcome with shame. There fell away from
me my desire to leave. The glamor faded. It was as if I had been
discovered handling filth by those whose good opinion I valued, and
the hot blood rushed tingling to my cheeks. I wanted to make my peace
with the people again, but knew that to do so was hopeless now. So I
stood irresolutely by my canoe, and I hated myself for my insincerity.

“Sima came down to me. He said no word, but, with a look half pity,
half contempt, handed me his spear, and with a gesture dismissed me
and turned his back. For a moment I wished that he had thrust the
spear through me.

“So it was that I came to leave the valley where I had known peace,
and from then time was for me little but physical weariness. There
were days when I lay half-dead in the canoe on my bed of gold,
tortured by flies and things that bit and stung--days and days of
misery when I wished myself dead. Once, it seemed ages, a hovering
cloud of insects followed me, sometimes settling on me so thickly
that my arms were black. My bodily suffering was great, but greater
still the suffering within.

“I think that day after day in that jungle drove me mad, and there
were times when I was aware of nothing in the world but the rank
smell of decaying vegetation and a black strip of water winding,
winding, winding through a canon of dark brown earth through which
great roots thrust themselves like snakes. Days of impenetrable gloom
there were, and there were days when all about me there seemed to be
hushings, then hissing whisperings and pointing fingers and peering
eyes. Again there was a sensation that music was about me, and I
seemed to hear at a distance the opening chords of a brass band. I
knew that I was fever-stricken.

“Once I dared to land at a place where the virgin forest seemed to
end. There was a great green, open space, a mighty clearing, and a
fringe of trees between that and the river. I was the victim of a
strange hallucination, and it was as if the whole world were moving
swiftly to the right, swiftly, horribly swiftly, and I alone stood
still. I fought against it, fought myself. Do you understand? It
changed to a sensation of rushing backward. So dizzy I became that
I was constrained to squat at the foot of a tree, pushing against
it hard with my back, and press my temples until I felt the pain
of it. Then I heard a sound and looked up. I saw, or thought I
saw, something. The earth seemed to tremble and heave. Out from
it came swiftly a hideous thing, clay-colored and huge, a mighty
mass of living flesh. The mud fell from it to right and left. I was
breathless and unable to stir. The thing pushed upward and forward
with clumsy, lumbering movements, side to side, extricating itself,
growing huger each moment. Then I realized that what I saw was only
the head and shoulders. The head turned slightly, so that I saw the
upper part of it, blunt and triangular beyond the shoulder. The
heavy-lidded eyes I saw. Then I noticed the mud dripping heavily, and
part of the fore leg coming from the slime. My God! Send that there
are no such things on earth and that I was really mad!

“I remember rolling down the steep bank and falling into the river,
so shaded and still, and then there was an awe-inspiring roar,
dreadful to hear. I swam. I do not know. I cannot talk of it.”

The man sighed deeply. It was almost a stifled sob. He was
ashen-faced. When he spoke again, his voice was perceptibly huskier.

“There is no more to tell,” he said. “There were weeks and weeks of
misery in that jungle, and wanderings that I forget--wanderings in
the swamp lands, and most wonderfully I came to Mannos and, in time,
to Para, where the consul was good to me.”

He ceased suddenly and fell to smoking. It was a long time before I
dared to speak, but said at last:

“And you propose to return?”

“I want to get back to the people, to where the superstition of
gold is absent,” he said. “Only there is the world sane. Only there
do people enjoy their days and love the earth and know the beauty
of life. Gold blinds all others. So I must go to the gentle people
again. That is, if they will have me. Then there’s this expedition.”

His voice was tense now.

“Suppose. You see, once I might have been a traitor to them. I
dreamed of something of the sort, a betrayal to my own people. If
this expedition is a success-- Well, where white people go and where
there is gold, sorrow and disease and death follow. The consul at
Para knew something of my story. Would it not be a good thing to save
a race, a gentle people, from destruction?”

The man’s story stayed with me. And, as I said, since learning of the
failure of the expedition, I have wondered much.


        [9] Copyright, 1922, by The Century Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Charles J. Finger.




                          TWO FOR A CENT[10]

                        By F. SCOTT FITZGERALD

                       (From _The Metropolitan_)


When the rain was over the sky became yellow in the west and the
air was cool. Close to the street, which was of red dirt and lined
with cheap bungalows dating from 1910, a little boy was riding a
big bicycle along the sidewalk. His plan afforded a monotonous
fascination. He rode each time for about a hundred yards, dismounted,
turned the bicycle around so that it adjoined a stone step and
getting on again, not without toil or heat, retraced his course. At
one end this was bounded by a colored girl of fourteen holding an
anæmic baby, and at the other, by a scarred, ill-nourished kitten,
squatting dismally on the curb. These four were the only souls in
sight.

The little boy had accomplished an indefinite number of trips,
oblivious alike to the melancholy advances of the kitten at one end
and to the admiring vacuousness of the colored girl at the other,
when he swerved dangerously to avoid a man who had turned the corner
into the street, and recovered his balance only after a moment of
exaggerated panic.

But if the incident was a matter of gravity to the boy, it attracted
scarcely an instant’s notice from the newcomer, who turned suddenly
from the sidewalk and stared with obvious and peculiar interest at
the house before which he was standing. It was the oldest house in
the street, built with clapboards and a shingled roof. It was a
_house_--in the barest sense of the word: the sort of house that
a child would draw on a blackboard. It was of a period, but of no
design, and its exterior had obviously been made only as a decent
cloak for what was within. It antedated the stucco bungalows by about
thirty years and except for the bungalows, which were reproducing
their species with prodigious avidity, as though by some monstrous
affiliation with the guinea-pig, it was the most common type of
house in the country. For thirty years such dwellings had satisfied
the canons of the middle class; they had satisfied its financial
canons by being cheap, they had satisfied its æsthetic canons by
being hideous. It was a house built by a race whose more energetic
complement hoped either to move up or move on, and it was the
more remarkable that its instability had survived so many summers
and retained its pristine hideousness and discomfort so obviously
unimpaired.

The man was about as old as the house, that is to say, about
forty-five. But unlike the house, he was neither hideous nor
cheap. His clothes were too good to have been made outside of a
metropolis--moreover, they were so good that it was impossible to
tell in which metropolis they were made. His name was Abercrombie and
the most important event of his life had taken place in the house
before which he was standing. He had been born there.

It was one of the last places in the world where he should have been
born. He had thought so within a very few years after the event and
he thought so now--an ugly home in a third-rate southern town where
his father had owned a partnership in a grocery store. Since then
Abercrombie had played golf with the President of the United States
and sat between two duchesses at dinner. He had been bored with the
President, he had been bored and not a little embarrassed with the
duchesses--nevertheless, the two incidents had pleased him and still
sat softly upon his naïve vanity. It delighted him that he had gone
far.

He had looked fixedly at the house for several minutes before he
perceived that no one lived there. Where the shutters were not closed
it was because there were no shutters to be closed, and in these
vacancies, blind, vacuous expanses of gray window looked unseeingly
down at him. The grass had grown wantonly long in the yard and faint
green mustaches were sprouting facetiously in the wide cracks of
the walk. But it was evident that the property had been recently
occupied, for upon the porch lay half a dozen newspapers rolled into
cylinders for quick delivery and as yet turned only to a faint,
resentful yellow.

They were not nearly so yellow as the sky when Abercrombie walked up
on the porch and sat down upon an immemorial bench, for the sky was
every shade of yellow, the color of tan, the color of gold, the color
of peaches. Across the street and beyond a vacant lot rose a rampart
of vivid red brick houses and it seemed to Abercrombie that the
picture they rounded out was beautiful--the warm, earthy brick and
the sky fresh after the rain, changing and gray as a dream. All his
life when he had wanted to rest his mind he had called up into it the
image those two things had made for him when the air was clear just
at this hour. So Abercrombie sat there thinking about his young days.

Ten minutes later another man turned the corner of the street, a
different sort of man, both in the texture of his clothes and the
texture of his soul. He was forty-six years old and he was a shabby
drudge, married to a woman, who, as a girl, had known better days.
This latter fact, in the republic, may be set down in the red italics
of misery.

His name was Hemmick--Henry W. or George D. or John F.--the stock
that produced him had had little imagination left to waste either
upon his name or his design. He was a clerk in a factory which made
ice for the long southern summer. He was responsible to the man who
owned the patent for canning ice, who, in his turn was responsible
only to God. Never in his life had Henry W. Hemmick discovered a new
way to advertise canned ice nor had it transpired that by taking a
diligent correspondence course in ice canning he had secretly been
preparing himself for a partnership. Never had he rushed home to
his wife, crying: “You can have that servant now, Nell, I have been
made general superintendent.” You will have to take him as you take
Abercrombie, for what he is and will always be. This is a story of
the dead years.

When the second man reached the house he turned in and began to
mount the tipsy steps, noticed Abercrombie, the stranger, with a
tired surprise, and nodded to him.

“Good evening,” he said.

Abercrombie voiced his agreement with the sentiment.

“Cool”--the newcomer covered his forefinger with his handkerchief and
sent the swatched digit on a complete circuit of his collar band.
“Have you rented this?” he asked.

“No, indeed, I’m just--resting. Sorry if I’ve intruded--I saw the
house was vacant----”

“Oh, you’re not intruding!” said Hemmick hastily. “I don’t reckon
anybody _could_ intrude in this old barn. I got out two months ago.
They’re not ever goin’ to rent it any more. I got a little girl
about this high,” he held his hand parallel to the ground and at an
indeterminate distance, “and she’s mighty fond of an old doll that
got left here when we moved. Began hollerin’ for me to come over and
look it up.”

“You used to live here?” inquired Abercrombie with interest.

“Lived here eighteen years. Came here ’n I was married, raised four
children in this house. Yes, _sir_. I know this old fellow.” He
struck the door-post with the flat of his hand. “I know every leak in
her roof and every loose board in her old floor.”

Abercrombie had been good to look at for so many years that he knew
if he kept a certain attentive expression on his face his companion
would continue to talk--indefinitely.

“You from up north?” inquired Hemmick politely, choosing with
habituated precision the one spot where the anæmic wooden railing
would support his weight. “I thought so,” he resumed at Abercrombie’s
nod. “Don’t take long to tell a Yankee.”

“I’m from New York.”

“So?” The man shook his head with inappropriate gravity. “Never have
got up there, myself. Started to go a couple of times, before I was
married, but never did get to go.”

He made a second excursion with his finger and handkerchief and then,
as though having come suddenly to a cordial decision, he replaced
the handkerchief in one of his bumpy pockets and extended the hand
toward his companion.

“My name’s Hemmick.”

“Glad to know you.” Abercrombie took the hand without rising.
“Abercrombie’s mine.”

“I’m mighty glad to know you, Mr. Abercrombie.”

Then for a moment they both hesitated, their two faces assumed oddly
similar expressions, their eyebrows drew together, their eyes looked
far away. Each was straining to force into activity some minute cell
long sealed and forgotten in his brain. Each made a little noise in
his throat, looked away, looked back, laughed. Abercrombie spoke
first.

“We’ve met.”

“I know,” agreed Hemmick, “but whereabouts? That’s what’s got me. You
from New York, you say?”

“Yes, but I was born and raised in this town. Lived in this house
till I left here when I was about seventeen. As a matter of fact, I
remember you--you were a couple of years older.”

Again Hemmick considered.

“Well,” he said vaguely, “I sort of remember, too. I _begin_ to
remember--I got your name all right and I guess maybe it was your
daddy had this house before I rented it. But all I can recollect
about you is, that there was a boy named Abercrombie and he went
away.”

In a few moments they were talking easily. It amused them both to
have come from the same house--amused Abercrombie especially, for
he was a vain man, rather absorbed that evening in his own early
poverty. Though he was not given to immature impulses he found it
necessary somehow to make it clear in a few sentences that five years
after he had gone away from the house and the town he had been able
to send for his father and mother to join him in New York.

Hemmick listened with that exaggerated attention which men who
have not prospered generally render to men who have. He would have
continued to listen had Abercrombie become more expansive, for he
was beginning faintly to associate him with an Abercrombie who had
figured in the newspapers for several years at the head of shipping
boards and financial committees. But Abercrombie, after a moment,
made the conversation less personal.

“I didn’t realize you had so much heat here, I guess I’ve forgotten a
lot in twenty-five years.”

“Why, this is a _cool_ day,” boasted Hemmick, “this is _cool_. I was
just sort of overheated from walking when I came up.”

“It’s too hot,” insisted Abercrombie with a restless movement;
then he added abruptly, “I don’t like it here. It means nothing to
me--nothing--I’ve wondered if I did, you know, that’s why I came
down. And I’ve decided.

“You see,” he continued hesitantly, “up to recently the North was
still full of professional Southerners, some real, some by sentiment,
but all given to flowery monologues on the beauty of their old family
plantations and all jumping up and howling when the band played
‘Dixie.’ You know what I mean,” he turned to Hemmick, “it got to be
a sort of a national joke. Oh, I was in the game, too, I suppose, I
used to stand up and perspire and cheer, and I’ve given young men
positions for no particular reason except that they claimed to come
from South Carolina or Virgina--” again he broke off and became
suddenly abrupt, “but I’m through, I’ve been here six hours and I’m
through!”

“Too hot for you?” inquired Hemmick, with mild surprise.

“Yes! I’ve felt the heat and I’ve seen the men--those two or three
dozen loafers standing in front of the stores on Jackson Street--in
thatched straw hats.” Then he added, with a touch of humor, “They’re
what my son calls ‘slash-pocket, belted-back boys.’ Do you know the
ones I mean?”

“Jelly-beans,” Hemmick nodded gravely, “We call ’em Jelly-beans.
No-account lot of boys all right. They got signs up in front of most
of the stores asking ’em not to stand there.”

“They ought to!” asserted Abercrombie, with a touch of irascibility.
“That’s my picture of the South, now, you know--a skinny,
dark-haired young man with a gun on his hip and a stomach full of
corn liquor or Dope Dola, leaning up against a drug store waiting for
the next lynching.”

Hemmick objected, though with apology in his voice.

“You got to remember, Mr. Abercrombie, that we haven’t had the money
down here since the war----”

Abercrombie waved this impatiently aside.

“Oh, I’ve heard all that,” he said, “and I’m tired of it. And I’ve
heard the South lambasted till I’m tired of that, too. It’s not
taking France and Germany fifty years to get on their feet, and their
war made your war look like a little fracas up an alley. And it’s not
your fault and it’s not anybody’s fault. It’s just that this is too
damn hot to be a white man’s country and it always will be. I’d like
to see ’em pack two or three of these states full of darkies and drop
’em out of the Union.”

Hemmick nodded, thoughtfully, though without thought. He had never
thought; for over twenty years he had seldom ever held opinions, save
the opinions of the local press or of some majority made articulate
through passion. There was a certain luxury in thinking that he
had never been able to afford. When cases were set before him he
either accepted them outright, if they were comprehensible to him,
or rejected them if they required a modicum of concentration. Yet
he was not a stupid man. He was poor and busy and tired and there
were no ideas at large in his community, even had he been capable of
grasping them. The idea that he did not think would have been equally
incomprehensible to him. He was a closed book, half full of badly
printed, uncorrelated trash.

Just now, his reaction to Abercrombie’s assertion was exceedingly
simple. Since the remarks proceeded from a man who was a Southerner
by birth, who was successful--moreover, who was confident and
decisive and persuasive and suave--he was inclined to accept them
without suspicion or resentment.

He took one of Abercrombie’s cigars and pulling on it, still with a
stern imitation of profundity upon his tired face, watched the color
glide out of the sky and the gray veils come down. The little boy
and his bicycle, the baby, the nursemaid, the forlorn kitten, all
had departed. In the stucco bungalows pianos gave out hot, weary
notes that inspired the crickets to competitive sound, and squeaky
graphophones filled in the intervals with patches of whining ragtime
until the impression was created that each living room in the street
opened directly out into the darkness.

“What _I_ want to find out,” Abercrombie was saying with a frown, “is
why I didn’t have sense enough to _know_ that this was a worthless
town. It was entirely an accident that I left here, an utterly blind
chance, and as it happened, the very train that took me away was
full of luck for me. The man I sat beside gave me my start in life.”
His tone became resentful. “But I thought this was all right. I’d
have stayed except that I’d gotten into a scrape down at the high
school--I got expelled and my daddy told me he didn’t want me at home
any more. Why didn’t I know the place wasn’t any good? Why I didn’t
_see_?”

“Well, you’d probably never known anything better?” suggested Hemmick
mildly.

“That wasn’t any excuse,” insisted Abercrombie. “If I’d been any good
I’d have known. As a matter of fact--as--a--matter--of--fact,” he
repeated slowly, “I think that at heart I was the sort of boy who’d
have lived and died here happily and never known there was anything
better.” He turned to Hemmick with a look almost of distress. “It
worries me to think that my--that what’s happened to me can be
ascribed to chance. But that’s the sort of boy I think I was. I
didn’t start off with the Dick Whittington idea--I started off by
accident.”

After this confession he stared out into the twilight with a dejected
expression that Hemmick could not understand. It was impossible
for the latter to share any sense of the importance of such a
distinction--in fact, from a man of Abercrombie’s position it struck
him as unnecessarily trivial. Still, he felt that some manifestation
of acquiescence was only polite.

“Well,” he offered, “it’s just that some boys get the bee to get up
and go North and some boys don’t. I happened to have the bee to go
North. But I didn’t. That’s the difference between you and me.”

Abercrombie turned to him intently.

“You did?” he asked, with unexpected interest, “you wanted to get
out?”

“At one time.” At Abercrombie’s eagerness Hemmick began to attach a
new importance to the subject. “At one time,” he repeated, as though
the singleness of the occasion was a thing he had often mused upon.

“How old were you?”

“Oh--’bout twenty.”

“What put it into your head?”

“Well, let me see--” Hemmick considered. “I don’t know whether I
remember sure enough, but it seems to me that when I was down to the
University--I was there two years--one of the professors told me that
a smart boy ought to go North. He said, business wasn’t going to
amount to much down here for the next fifty years. And I guessed he
was right. My father died about then, so I got a job as runner in the
bank here, and I didn’t have much interest in anything except saving
up enough money to go North. I was bound I’d go.”

“Why didn’t you? Why didn’t you?” insisted Abercrombie in an
aggrieved tone.

“Well,” Hemmick hesitated, “Well, I right near did but--things didn’t
work out and I didn’t get to go. It was a funny sort of business. It
all started about the smallest thing you can think of. It all started
about a penny.”

“A penny?”

“That’s what did it--one little penny. That’s why I didn’t go ’way
from here and all, like I intended.”

“Tell me about it, man,” exclaimed his companion. He looked at his
watch impatiently. “I’d like to hear the story.”

Hemmick sat for a moment, distorting his mouth around the cigar.

“Well, to begin with,” he said at length, “I’m going to ask you if
you remember a thing that happened here about twenty-five years
ago. A fellow named Hoyt, the cashier of the Cotton National Bank,
disappeared one night with about thirty thousand dollars in cash.
Say, man, they didn’t talk about anything else down here at the time.
The whole town was shaken up about it, and I reckin you can imagine
the disturbance it caused down at all the banks and especially at the
Cotton National.”

“I remember.”

“Well, they caught him, and they got most of the money back, and by
and by the excitement died down, except in the bank where the thing
had happened. Down there it seemed as if they’d never get used to
it. Mr. Deems, the first vice-president, who’d always been pretty
kind and decent, got to be a changed man. He was suspicious of the
clerks, the tellers, the janitor, the watchman, most of the officers,
and yes, by golly, I guess he got so he kept an eye on the president
himself.

“I don’t mean he was just watchful--he was downright hipped on the
subject. He’d come up and ask you funny questions when you were going
about your business. He’d walk into the teller’s cage on tip-toe and
watch him without saying anything. If there was any mistake of any
kind in the bookkeeping, he’d not only fire a clerk or so, but he’d
raise such a riot that he made you want to push him into a vault and
slam the door on him.

“He was just about running the bank then, and he’d affected the other
officers, and--oh, you can imagine the havoc a thing like that could
work on any sort of an organization. Everybody was so nervous that
they made mistakes whether they were careful or not. Clerks were
staying downtown until eleven at night trying to account for a lost
nickel. It was a thin year, anyhow, and everything financial was
pretty rickety, so one thing worked on another until the crowd of us
were as near craziness as anybody can be and carry on the banking
business at all.

“I was a runner--and all through the heat of one God-forsaken summer
I ran. I ran and I got mighty little money for it, and that was the
time I hated that bank and this town, and all I wanted was to get out
and go North. I was getting ten dollars a week, and I’d decided that
when I’d saved fifty out of it I was going down to the depot and buy
me a ticket to Cincinnati. I had an uncle in the banking business
there, and he said he’d give me an opportunity with him. But he never
offered to pay my way, and I guess he thought if I was worth having
I’d manage to get up there by myself. Well, maybe I wasn’t worth
having because, anyhow, I never did.

“One morning, on the hottest day of the hottest July I ever knew--and
you know what that means down here--I left the bank to call on a man
named Harlan and collect some money that’d come due on a note. Harlan
had the cash waiting for me all right, and when I counted it I found
it amounted to three hundred dollars and eighty-six cents, the change
being in brand new coin that Harlan had drawn from another bank that
morning. I put the three one-hundred-dollar bills in my wallet and
the change in my vest pocket, signed a receipt and left. I was going
straight back to the bank.

“Outside the heat was terrible. It was enough to make you dizzy, and
I hadn’t been feeling right for a couple of days, so, while I waited
in the shade for a street-car, I was congratulating myself that in
a month or so I’d be out of this and up where it was some cooler.
And then, as I stood there, it occurred to me all of a sudden that
outside of the money which I’d just collected, which, of course, I
couldn’t touch, I didn’t have a cent in my pocket. I’d have to walk
back to the bank, and it was about fifteen blocks away. You see, on
the night before, I’d found that my change came to just a dollar,
and I’d traded it for a bill at the corner store and added it to the
roll in the bottom of my trunk. So there was no help for it--I took
off my coat and I stuck my handkerchief into my collar and struck off
through the suffocating heat for the bank.

“Fifteen blocks--you can imagine what that was like, and I was sick
when I started. From away up by Juniper Street--you remember where
that is; the new Mieger Hospital’s there now--all the way down to
Jackson. After about six blocks I began to stop and rest whenever I
found a patch of shade wide enough to hold me, and as I got pretty
near I could just keep going by thinking of the big glass of iced tea
my mother’d have waiting beside my plate at lunch. But after that I
began getting too sick to even want the iced tea--I wanted to get
rid of that money and then lie down and die.

“When I was still about two blocks away from the bank I put my hand
into my watch pocket and pulled out that change; was sort of jingling
it in my hand; making myself believe that I was so close that it was
convenient to have it ready. I happened to glance into my hand, and
all of a sudden I stopped up short and reached down quick into my
watch pocket. The pocket was empty. There was a little hole in the
bottom, and my hand held only a half-dollar, a quarter and a dime. I
had lost one cent.

“Well, sir, I can’t tell you, I can’t express to you the feeling of
discouragement that this gave me. One penny, mind you--but think;
just the week before a runner had lost his job because he was a
little bit shy twice. It was only carelessness; but there you were!
They were all in a panic that they might get fired themselves, and
the best thing to do was to fire some one else--first.

“So you can see that it was up to me to appear with that penny.

“Where I got the energy to care as much about it as I did is more
than I can understand. I was sick and hot and weak as a kitten, but
it never occurred to me that I could do anything except find or
replace that penny, and immediately I began casting about for a way
to do it. I looked into a couple of stores, hoping I’d see some one
I knew, but while there were a few fellows loafing in front, just as
you saw them today, there wasn’t one that I felt like going up to and
saying: ‘Here! You got a penny?’ I thought of a couple of offices
where I could have gotten it without much trouble, but they were some
distance off, and besides being pretty dizzy, I hated to go out of
my route when I was carrying bank money, because it looked kind of
strange.

“So what should I do but commence walking back along the street
toward the Union Depot where I last remembered having the penny.
It was a brand new penny, and I thought maybe I’d see it shining
where it dropped. So I kept walking, looking pretty carefully at the
sidewalk and thinking what I’d better do. I laughed a little, because
I felt sort of silly for worrying about a penny, but I didn’t enjoy
laughing, and it really didn’t seem silly to me at all.

“Well, by and by I got back to the Union Depot without having either
seen the old penny or having thought what was the best way to get
another. I hated to go all the way home, ’cause we lived a long
distance out; but what else was I to do? So I found a piece of shade
close to the depot, and stood there considering, thinking first one
thing and then another, and not getting anywhere at all. One little
penny, just _one_--something almost any man in sight would have given
me; something even the nigger baggage-smashers were jingling around
in their pockets.... I must have stood there about five minutes. I
remember there was a line of about a dozen men in front of an army
recruiting station they’d just opened, and a couple of them began to
yell: ‘Join the Army!’ at me. That woke me up, and I moved on back
toward the bank, getting worried now, getting mixed up and sicker
and sicker and knowing a million ways to find a penny and not one
that seemed convenient or right. I was exaggerating the importance of
losing it, and I was exaggerating the difficulty of finding another,
but you just have to believe that it seemed about as important to me
just then as though it were a hundred dollars.

“Then I saw a couple of men talking in front of Moody’s soda place,
and recognized one of them--Mr. Burling--who’d been a friend of my
father’s. That was relief, I can tell you. Before I knew it I was
chattering to him so quick that he couldn’t follow what I was getting
at.

“‘Now,’ he said, ‘you know I’m a little deaf and can’t understand
when you talk that fast! What is it you want, Henry? Tell me from the
beginning.’

“‘Have you got any change with you?’ I asked him just as loud as I
dared. ‘I just want--’ Then I stopped short; a man a few feet away
had turned around and was looking at us. It was Mr. Deems, the first
vice-president of the Cotton National Bank.”

Hemmick paused, and it was still light enough for Abercrombie to see
that he was shaking his head to and fro in a puzzled way. When he
spoke his voice held a quality of pained surprise, a quality that it
might have carried over twenty years.

“I never _could_ understand what it was that came over me then. I
must have been sort of crazy with the heat--that’s all I can decide.
Instead of just saying ‘Howdy’ to Mr. Deems, in a natural way, and
telling Mr. Burling I wanted to borrow a nickel for tobacco, because
I’d left my purse at home, I turned away quick as a flash and began
walking up the street at a great rate, feeling like a criminal who
had come near being caught.

“Before I’d gone a block I was sorry. I could almost hear the
conversation that must’ve been taking place between those two men:

“‘What do you reckon’s the matter with that young man?’ Mr. Burling
would say, without meaning any harm. ‘Came up to me all excited and
wanted to know if I had any money, and then he saw you and rushed
away like he was crazy.’

“And I could almost see Mr. Deems’ big eyes get narrow with suspicion
and watch him twist up his trousers and come strolling along after
me. I was in a real panic now, and no mistake. Suddenly I saw a
one-horse surrey going by, and recognized Bill Kennedy, a friend of
mine, driving it. I yelled at him, but he didn’t hear me. Then I
yelled again, but he didn’t pay any attention, so I started after
him at a run, swaying from side to side, I guess, like I was drunk,
and calling his name every few minutes. He looked around once, but
he didn’t see me; he kept right on going and turned out of sight at
the next corner. I stopped then, because I was too weak to go any
farther. I was just about to sit down on the curb and rest when I
looked around, and the first thing I saw was Mr. Deems walking after
me as fast as he could come. There wasn’t any of my imagination about
it this time--the look in his eyes showed he wanted to know what was
the matter with _me_!

“Well, that’s about all I can remember clearly until about twenty
minutes later, when I was at home trying to unlock my trunk with
fingers that were trembling like a tuning fork. Before I could get it
open, Mr. Deems and a policeman came in. I began talking all at once
about not being a thief and trying to tell them what had happened,
but I guess I was sort of hysterical, and the more I said the worse
matters were. When I managed to get the story out it seemed sort of
crazy, even to me--and it was true--it was true, true as I’ve told
you--every word!--that one penny that I lost somewhere down by the
station--” Hemmick broke off and began laughing grotesquely--as
though the excitement that had come over him as he finished his tale
was a weakness of which he was ashamed. When he resumed it was with
an affectation of nonchalance.

“I’m not going into the details of what happened, because nothing
much did--at least, not on the scale you judge events by up North.
It cost me my job, and I changed a good name for a bad one. Somebody
tattled and somebody lied, and the impression got around that I’d
lost a lot of the bank’s money and had been tryin’ to cover it up.

“I had an awful time getting a job after that. Finally I got a
statement out of the bank that contradicted the wildest of the
stories that had started, but the people who were still interested
said it was just because the bank didn’t want any fuss or
scandal--and the rest had forgotten: that is, they’d forgotten what
had happened, but they remembered that somehow I just wasn’t a young
fellow to be trusted----”

Hemmick paused and laughed again, still without enjoyment, but
bitterly, uncomprehendingly, and with a profound helplessness.

“So, you see, that’s why I didn’t go to Cincinnati,” he said slowly;
“my mother was alive then, and this was a pretty bad blow to her. She
had an idea--one of those old-fashioned Southern ideas that stick in
people’s heads down here--that somehow I ought to stay here in town
and prove myself honest. She had it on her mind, and she wouldn’t
hear of my going. She said that the day I went ’d be the day she’d
die. So I sort of had to stay till I’d got back my--my reputation.”

“How long did that take?” asked Abercrombie quietly.

“About--ten years.”

“Oh----”

“Ten years,” repeated Hemmick, staring out into the gathering
darkness. “This is a little town you see: I say ten years because it
was about ten years when the last reference to it came to my ears.
But I was married long before that; had a kid. Cincinnati was out of
my mind by that time.”

“Of course,” agreed Abercrombie.

They were both silent for a moment--then Hemmick added apologetically:

“That was sort of a long story, and I don’t know if it could have
interested you much. But you asked me----”

“It _did_ interest me,” answered Abercrombie politely. “It interested
me tremendously. It interested me much more than I thought it would.”

It occurred to Hemmick that he himself had never realized what a
curious, rounded tale it was. He saw dimly now that what had seemed
to him only a fragment, a grotesque interlude was really significant,
complete. It was an interesting story; it was the story upon which
turned the failure of his life. Abercrombie’s voice broke in upon his
thoughts.

“You see, it’s so different from my story,” Abercrombie was saying.
“It was an accident that you stayed--and it was an accident that I
went away. You deserve more actual--actual credit, if there is such
a thing in the world, for your intention of getting out and getting
on. You see, I’d more or less gone wrong at seventeen. I was--well,
what you call a Jelly-bean. All I wanted was to take it easy through
life--and one day I just happened to see a sign up above my head that
had on it: ‘Special rate to Atlanta, three dollars and forty-two
cents.’ So I took out my change and counted it----”

Hemmick nodded. Still absorbed in his own story, he had forgotten
the importance, the comparative magnificence of Abercrombie. Then
suddenly he found himself listening sharply:

“I had just three dollars and forty-one cents in my pocket. But, you
see, I was standing in line with a lot of other young fellows down
by the Union Depot about to enlist in the army for three years. And
I saw that extra penny on the walk not three feet away. I saw it
because it was brand new and shining in the sun like gold.”

The Georgia night had settled over the street, and as the blue drew
down upon the dust the outlines of the two men had become less
distinct, so that it was not easy for any one who passed along the
walk to tell that one of these men was of the few and the other of
no importance. All the detail was gone--Abercrombie’s fine gold
wrist watch, his collar, that he ordered by the dozen from London,
the dignity that sat upon him in his chair--all faded and were
engulfed with Hemmick’s awkward suit and preposterous humped shoes
into that pervasive depth of night that, like death, made nothing
matter, nothing differentiate, nothing remain. And a little later on
a passerby saw only the two glowing disks about the size of a penny
that marked the rise and fall of their cigars.


       [10] Copyright, 1922, by The Metropolitan Magazine Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by F. Scott Fitzgerald.




                            JOHN THE BAPTIST[11]

                               By WALDO FRANK

                              (From _The Dial_)


The room was bright with the sun. Three stories up.

Three dark halls, three worn stairs, the mustiness of walls to which
grimed hands, worn shoulders had rubbed their intricate soiled
burden, held up this room that was all bright with the sun.

The door was open: two windows with their mesh Dutch curtains were
thrown high: Clara Jones dusted.

She was a short woman, colored a dark brown in which were shadows of
blue and orange. She was of indeterminate age. She worked slowly,
diligently, with a sort of submissive rhythm to the sweep of her
arms, the sway of her head, as if an invisible Master timed her work
with gentle strokes on her bent back. The contours and objects of the
room were a familiar haze against her hands. Her eyes did not take in
the books upon the mantel, the morris chair which her hands groomed
and shifted, the blue cover of the couch which the room’s tenant used
for a bed. Her eyes were focused dimly beyond the room, beyond the
sunlight also that did not make them blink--beyond the sun. At times
a murmur as of words answering in herself, a shred of tune, came from
her. And these were in unison with the rapt measure of her work. And
it with the distant fixedness of her eyes that moved as if to remain
upon some point either far within or far without herself. Or both....

A tall young man ... almost a boy ... stood in the door. He
buttressed both his palms against the threshold’s sides: he watched
her.

Her face turned to her shoulder, then fell forwards back into its
somnolent rhythm.

“Lor’! that you already? You-all _quick_ this mo’nin’.”

“May I come in?”

“Sho’ly, sho’ly. Sit down over th’ah.”

She did not stop. She held a broom in her two brown hands. With
a steady stroke of shoulder, back and forth it went, rasping ...
swinging; her small, soft body cadenced with its stiff advance.

“Th’ah you are, Mr. Loer!” She waved a musty rag over his desk, over
a picture nailed above it. “Th’ah you are.”

She turned and smiled at him. He was still standing in the threshold.
She had a round, small face, and her big mouth smiling seemed to
cover it. Her eyes still focused distantly.

She dropped the broom against a shoulder and flung the rag into the
fold of an elbow. She laughed.

“What yo’ got, this mo’nin’? I’m done. Come along in.”

“I don’t feel like being alone this morning, Clara.”

Clara’s smile was tender. Her face tilted to a side.

“Lonely, Mr. Loer?” she said. He felt caressed.

“Oh, no.” He stepped into the room, lifting his knees unnecessarily
high. He sank down in the morris chair and primed a pipe.

“Clara,” he seemed to hold her, “how’d you sleep last night?”

She folded her hands.

“Oh, fine, Mr. Loer. You know I always sleeps fine.”

“Well I slept rotten.”

“I wouldn’t sleep none at all, Mr. Loer ... ef I went to sleep same
as you does.”

He looked up from his pipe. “What do you mean?”

“’Thout prayin’. Yo’ tole me so yo’self. No wonder you sleep rotten.
Lor’! I wouldn’t sleep none at all ... ef ... I went to sleep ’thout
prayin’.” She paused. “Watch out, Mr. Loer,” she said with a sweet
tremulousness. “Supposin’ the time comes when you cyant sleep at all.”

“I don’t know whom to pray to.”

The old woman looked at the broomstick standing against her shoulder.

“And you so--eddicated,” she declared.

She ambled out, still keyed to that impalpable warm measure kindling
her feet, her hips, the drone of her soft voice.

The door’s gentle click made him alone.

He relaxed forward in his chair. Crumpled hands held his sharp, fine
chin. His eyes were disturbed. They wandered. They saw his room:
sharply each object in his room caught in his eyes and held there.
His eyes were hurt because they saw no farther.

He jumped up, flung his coat. He ran his fingers through the high,
blond hair. He faced his books.

Spencer’s “First Principles” ... “Introduction to Anthropology” ...
Dewey’s “How We Think” ... caught like long splinters in his eyes. He
shook his head as if to shake them out.

Then he took the psychology book and settled, rigid in his chair, to
read.

His mind held back. It seemed stiff and small, dry and remote. It
gave no attention to the book. It gave no attention, now, to the
movement of his body as the book fell from limp hands and he was
stepping to the corner where stood his ’cello.

He placed a stool. His body flexed and grew co-ordinate as it
received the instrument. Softly, with eyes arching beyond him and
his mind still gone, he began to bow. His mind held away no more. It
broke forward. It leaped, it sang: his fingers moved with delicate
precision making slow music.

... The street. A woman, tall, clouded in dark glow, whom he had
seen, whom he had seen in the street. His mind out there beat against
her uprightness; it was a sea beating and breaking against her. It
went up, it went down--as did his fingers--avail-less.

... Then his mother. There was no doubt, she reminded him of his
mother who had died when he was a lad in Holland.

Karl Loer bent his face upon his loved ’cello and played deep,
plaintive words. He saw the woman whom he had passed so often in the
street.... She has arms piteous towards a man who is her husband.
She pleads with her arms. She wears a straight black dress. And
underneath her dress he saw her breast. It is bleeding! There is an
iron bar, clamped hard and close, on the breasts of the woman!

His fingers stopped. He drew his bow dazedly back and forth. He
jumped up.

“O you! O you!” he cried, clutching his loved instrument. “I could
wring your neck. I could dash you to bits--” He lifted his ’cello in
violence with both hands above his face. Softly he laid it on the
couch.

He stood now with eyes free and found that he was thinking of his
life.

“What nonsense! what nonsense!” he began. He had forgotten how he had
begun.... “Mother, this woman ... two women I have never known.” He
loved his mother. She was French. He recalled her stately and dark in
a town of light, plump people. He recalled her lovely in a world of
clods.

The whole world knew that she had been unfaithful, and had
disappeared ... disappeared for ever and for ever: that was eternity,
her disappearing ... after his father turned her out. He and his
two brothers knew how sensual indulgence grew like the fat upon his
father, clogged him, clotted his brain ... and he had turned her out.
His father’s soul shrank famished, he was a sucking brute. Then he
was mad ... she was gone ... and Karl had come away.

America! He brought to it, he thought, his yearning and his music. He
dwelt in misery. He dwelt, it seemed to his free eyes, in misery that
grew more deep, more blind.

He wondered why.

“I have a good mind,” he said aloud. He swung his chair to face the
row of books upon his mantel. So he sat looking at his books. Proud
of them--I wonder why?

And as he sat, he forgot the books that stood within his eyes. He
thought again of his mother. Why had she been unfaithful? What had
driven her, and what his father? Was his brutality the way of sorrow?
Had she found joy in that eternity where he had lost her?... Sudden
like a stroke across his brain, the woman with white breasts crushed
in a clamping iron: her piteous arms stretched towards a man--not he.

He walked up and down. He forgot the vision.

“There,” he said aloud, with an emphasis that was a plea, “there is
what comes of music ... of emotion. Idiotic ideas ... visions. That
woman ... what do you know about that woman? Rot!”

He bent down and picked up the book that he had failed to read.

“Here’s the place for your mind,” he said aloud.

“You,” he turned to his ’cello, “you’ll go on earning my living.” He
stroked the fragile wine-hued wooden breast. “For a while.... But
you’ll not boss me, hear?” He stood the instrument away.

There was a knock. Clara with a letter.

He took it. He seemed strangely perturbed. He laid the letter,
unread, aside. As she reached for the door, “Clara,” he said.

She turned.

“Clara,” he said again, “why are you so happy? What have you, Clara?”

Her round face was all warmth and smile. She found her ease on her
feet.

“I had fo’ babies, Mr. Loer. An’ ev’ one of ’em died afo’ they was
six. An’ my husband that I nussed fo’ ten years--he was sick ten
years a-dyin’ on his back--he’s gone too. They is all in Heaven,
Mr. Loer. They is all waitin’ th’ah fo’ me. Ev’y onct in a while,
they comes to me at night. I sees ’em, sees ’em standin’ th’ah as
clar--why as clar as you is! An’ they speaks to me: wuds as clar--as
clar as mine is. They’s all gone and safe, awaitin’ for me up th’ah.
Tha’s why I’m happy, Mr. Loer.”

Old woman and young man stood very still, looking at each other. Karl
stirred first. His hands, then his head. He walked up and down. She
was still.

“But Clara--but Clara--”

She beamed on him. He stopped. He smiled also. He grasped his cap. He
rushed into the street.

Into the street his smile and her words went with him ... shredding
his speed, eating into the mood of his release, until his smile went
and he stood stock still.

The sun splintered into the block, from the east, through mouldy
cornices of houses. Men and women moved separate upon stone, moved
from sun to shadow, brokenly. The day was yet too young to have
welded them into the substance of the block. Each was a particle
thrown out from a separate home.

Karl stood, looked down through the scatter of men and women, the
scatter of shade and sun. Athwart shoulders and skirts and hats that
bobbed like dark flotsam in a golden sluggish stream, he saw a man
move up.

A weight rose from his bowels, clutched at his throat. The man he had
seen once, with the woman he had seen often!--Her husband....

A sense of omen cloaked his head and made him dizzy. He felt only his
body free, his head was cloaked. The street was suddenly a force,
physical and relentless, fixing him there within the channel of this
man.

He could no longer fight for the fading word in him: Folly!

The man was almost abreast of him standing to face him. There, in
himself he heard, sharp like a fusillade, the words that were his own.

“_I’m stopping you! Because your wife’s in danger! Look at her! Who
put the iron bar across her breast?_”

A young man leisurely moved up. A smile in his ruddy face, his red
lips mumbling as if he discoursed amiably to himself. His eyes
wandered amenably. He saw Karl. Something furrowed his brow into a
question. Karl swerved aside. They passed each other....

And now the word that had been fading ... “folly” ... shrieked. It
besieged him and shrieked. It was very brave.

“Fool! Fool!”--what did the words mean? Why am I in the street? Why
did her husband cross me in the street?

His mind reached for the surety of his mantel and of its row of sober
books. These casual things could be explained. He was lonely. Perhaps
he was a bit ... unreally, of course, since what did he know of
her?... in love. Nonsense.

He jerked his cap over his eyes.... _Look at her! Take away the bar!
Place your arms there!_... he returned to the house he lived in.

The area-gate was open, so he went in by it.

His mind, he was very sure, was master now. It was a hard fight of
course. He had had so little training! For so very long, he had
weltered in emotion. At home, the emotion of rage and of salvation
against the brutal gluttony of his father: the emotion of faith
against the crass certainty of his world that his mother was bad. And
in America, above all, the emotion of hunger. With one way only to
destroy it ... his easiest gift ... the emotion of music with which
he earned his bread.

--But it shall not master!

His mind pictured the book on psychology upon his mantel. I’ll learn
about that. And then some day I’ll dash the old ’cello ... no,
absurd!... I’ll sell it.

His feet led him into Clara’s kitchen.

She was alone. An ironing board was laid from table to low shelf.
He saw her back. A bent old back ... a small round head ... a mass
of tousled hair dusted with white. Yet as the bare arm pressed the
steaming iron to and fro, he felt with a new poignance how a wind,
tropical and fresh, wielded this woman.

He tiptoed in, sat down and watched her. The rhythm fleshed.... A
naked woman, tall and firm and glowing like red earth. Her hands are
above her head. Her hands are flowers with the wind in them. There is
a tree above her. And her long, bare feet, with the straight toes,
are intertwined to the tree’s roots.

Clara moved to the farther side of the board so as to iron and see
him. Her shoes were huge misshapen shreds of leather barely holding
about her feet, so that but for the glide of her body, her moving
might have seemed a shuffle. He saw her smile now over her board at
him. He thought of a cloud saturate with sun.

“Clara,” he said, “I should be studying. But I’m a good for nothing.”

“Yo’ mustn’t say that, Mr. Loer!” As her words came, her arms went to
and fro, pressing the steamy steel. Her shoulders spoke in concord.

--Nigger woman ... you are all _one_!... What a strange thing to
think about a person!

“No, Mr. Loer,” she crooned, “yo’ mus’n’t say that! We is all good
fo’ som’p’n. We doan know what a heap o’ de time. But we all is--”

“How can you be so sure of Heaven?”

She rested her elbow on the board. “I done seen it, Mr. Loer. I sees
it ... _offen_.”

“How do you know you see it?”

“How do I know I’se a-seein’ you?”

“You could describe me, Clara. Could you describe Heaven?”

“Why, ob co’se I could! What I sees I can describe....” She ironed.
“It’s a great big place! Mos’ly light ... glorious, golden light!
An’ angels in white wings an’ harps a-singin’, a-singin’.... When
yo’ plays sometimes, Mr. Loer ... dem waily shatterin’ tones ... dey
sings like dat. Dey music ... it starts _away_ down an’ it leaps
_away_ up!”

She ironed.

“Clara, what would you say if I told you that was all a dream--what
you saw?”

She beamed and ironed.

“The wise people, Clara, the wise men who study deep and who write
books ... they say all that is nonsense.”

Clara beamed. “Dey ain’t wise ef dey say dat, Mr. Loer.”

She was bent over her towels, beaming upon her towels. Towel after
towel she ironed, folded, laid upon the pile of towels at her side
... her brown face beaming.

She stopped. She straightened and looked at Karl. Then she went back
to her work....


                                 II

Karl was at work. From twelve to half-past-two, from half-past-six
to twelve, six days of the week, Karl played in the Trio at The
Bismarck. Played sentimental music ... grime of German and Italian
soil, froth and scum of Broadway. He drew with his bow complacencies
and veiled obscenities ... at work. His mind and his senses in revolt
leaped away towards life: swirled, delved, circled; beaten, brought
back to his heart which sent them a burden whose eternity he could
not understand, would not accept: of Pain.

His eyes saw the café for whose lounging patrons his hand fingered,
his hand drew a bow. His eyes saw his associates ... clever, ugly:
Stumm with bald, blond-ruffed head at the piano; Silvis, the leader,
dark, agonizingly eager to be artistic, swaying, who was a muddy
cloud about his violin.

Karl was at work and his mind and senses beating out of tune.

The flamboyant German Hall: smoked woodwork, paneled and carved in
Gothic sayings, beermugs and flags under the sombre rafters like
brittle colors falling, unable to rest. And in the sudden alcoves,
men and women: idle eyes that took in so little, moist mouths,
distended bellies that took in so much. Karl bowing an aria from
Bohème; and the crass glint of the hall with its arrogant beer mugs,
its mottoes, its elbow-leaning guests currying his mind and his
senses as they yearned forth towards purer air.... The bald head of
Stumm was round, it rested upon his neck like the head of a pin. His
wrists bounced up and down. They dragged Karl back from the purer air
he sought. Silvis crossed a knee upon the other and swayed with a
small finger fluttering from his bow. His eyes were half shut in an
absorbent leer ... absorbing Puccini whom he loved. The weak grace of
his body, swaying, leading, sucked Karl from his need to be away....

Last chord. _D A F-sharp D_.... Stumm swung about on his stool.
Silvis’ legs stretched forward, abdomen collapsed--like a bug
stiffened no more into organic form by its creamy fluid ... the music
... now all oozed out. Their words scraped Karl’s head. When their
words spoke to him, it was, this day, as if their fingers touched his
lips.

“Lehnstein says, next fall we are going to move for a raise--”

“Did you hear about his wife? I guess she’s his wife--”

“Why don’t Max bring that beer?”

The hard loom of the hall, the coldness of men and women abject
before their senses, taking in heat ... heat of air, heat of sound,
heat of food, heat of sex ... into their coldness: the soil of these
two men, his partners, playing this parody of life for an unreal
living: himself with truant senses reeling back and bringing to his
heart what pitiful crumbled fragments?--a woman stately with white
breasts clamped in iron, a woman with brown beaming smile, all One,
a woman of whom he knew no good, no ill, save that she had been his
Mother--or to bar him from these a row of brittle books upon his
mantel?... Karl with a burst of pain he could not understand, at work
making his living to know that this was life?

He covered his ’cello and stood it away in the corner made by the
piano.

“Ain’t you going to eat?”

“No, thank you.”

He was in the street.

Where was his mind? What was he suffering for? What about?

A lovely day. Here was pure air. Why did he breathe it and not taste
it? He wanted more of it than he could breathe. What was air? Why was
it pure ironically to him?

Long stiff rows of dirty houses exuding like sweat and excrement his
sisters and his brothers. Cold houses sweating in the spring. Sick
houses emptying their bowels upon the pure air.

He climbed by stairs into a house.

A swarthy little man in a great white vest with gold chain larding it
from arm-pit to stomach, opened the door. Hands brandishing, lying,
welcomed him.

“Well, Loer!... Come in.”

“Just a moment, Dooch. I’m in a hurry.” Hurry for what? What am I
hurrying towards? “Will you, as a great favor, Dooch, take my place
tonight at The Bismarck?”

Brandishing lying hands: “O, my dear fellow. Y’ know I’d love
to--anything to help you out. But I’m so busy ... lessons ... lessons
... all day. I must have my rest. At night ... the only time. Why
don’t you ask, let me see ... well Facker’d be glad....”

Another visit? “Ten dollars, if you’ll do it, Dooch.”

Hands dropping from lying. “Well, you know, I’d do anything for
you.... Half-past-six?”

“Thank you, Dooch.”

Hands sincere, palm upward: waiting. A bill in a hand happy, silent.
Once more the air....

Sudden Karl heard these words in himself above the beat of his
feet: “I have never learned to use my mind. It’s hard. That is what
hurts.... It will come.”

His legs walked on. He walked through desolation.

“O God, let me find _something_--” He stiffened, hearing his words.
“Of all prayers, if one is absurdest, this is the one.”

But he walked still through desolation. He sensed how he walked
swiftly. Interminable houses were a heavy, fluttering canopy that
passed him: banners they were of some arrogant dominion, dragged
through mud, stiffened in frost. They shut him out.

Warm air. It was spring.

Children went under his beating knees like the drip of frozen houses
melting in spring.

“Let me think! What do I want?... Something more solid than air....
Something as pure that is more solid than air.”

His right hand clasped his left wrist behind him. His knees and chin
thrust forward. From waist to shoulder he tended back. So he walked.

He walked through his life. He ached as he walked through his life.
He felt himself trample. He trampled what he felt. Was it not clear?
Clarity. He had lived in a pigsty. He had come forth. He was young.
He would make a better way for himself in the world than the way
of Silvis and Stumm. He would study, he sensed already, and was
it not good that already beyond the bowing of fiddles he had won
the trenchant accent of Reason--Spencer, Darwin, Huxley? He yearned
towards the ecstacy of their release from mist and frowziness ...
from beer and Puccini. A crumble of old churches falling in dust,
drenching the air with dust. He had hands to tear down. He partook of
the ecstacy of the release that lay in clear books, clear eyes, hands
tearing down....

His father went to church. He saw again the great stomach and the
little eyes and the twist of the wreathing mouth ... the heft of fat
red hands he felt ... they were sodden in hair ... beating against
him, beating the children of his father’s house. Karl’s arm swung at
his side, his chin no longer thrust. He felt now his mother’s voice:
it lay like a warm purple scarf against the chill of his thoughts;
his mother had a red, sweet mouth shut upon her mystery; she moved
beyond the shoulder of the town like a sunset bleeding. Karl’s hand
clasped a wrist once more beyond his back.... The woman whom he had
seen in the street and who haunted him ... he struggling against her.

“Think! Think! Conquer yourself!”

He walked now heavy and stiff.

“Very well. What is she?” he fought.

He turned upon this woman with clamped breasts ... this myth ... this
nonsense. Why was she like green fields? Why was his mind like lead?
Married ... a stranger! Oh, she was suffering, he knew.

--Once I spoke to her; but my lips trembled.

“No, I am married,” came her pleading whisper. But her hand moved
toward him....

A complacent clod of a little man. But husband. Married. A
stranger....

Why was his mind a forest of hot trees when he needed a path? A
pavement. Hard, clear, cool, like here where his feet were pounding.

Tedium. He played in a waste of soiled senses. He walked through a
waste of frozen thoughts. He was frozen in tedium.

He sat down, for he was tired. He opened his eyes.


                                 III

The East Park gasped its scanty green between the loom of the streets
of men and the black tumult of the river. Here he, sitting upon a
bench....

Before his eyes first, two boys playing tether-ball. One of them
strong and with fresh eyes swung his racket well: it rose from a
clear forearm, muscle moulded, mazed with faint gold sleeping hair.
His mouth shut firm as he stroked. Against him, a boy, shorter, dark,
older. He lunged with mouth slant open, and dull feet. One of his
eyes stared wide, the other was half shut. He lost swiftly.

The victor stood bored, easefully; looking beyond for a comrade who
did not come. Saliva wet the chin of the other, whose effort had been
great. His hand hung, palm forward, near his knee.

“Let’s try again,” he said. “You give me your side where the sun’s
not in my eyes. That’s fair.” They exchanged places. The battle went
on, the same.

Karl was very tired. He leaned back in his bench.

In three straight strokes came to his passive eyes sky, river, park.
The sky was steadfast and still. The river was dense and still, boats
and waves moving upon the river were like the shiver of sun-motes
upon a steadfast sky. The park swayed under the stillness of sky
and water. Its swaying was a word that came from moveless lips;
its swaying was a word issued from moveless lips. Three horizontal
strokes in the eyes of Karl, of a world that did not move.

Stillness came within him.

He turned his head from side to side, as within steadfastness, not
stirring it. He saw no more, no less, by turning his head. He was
within a focus where all was steadfast and where stillness was all.
He moved his hands, and felt how he was wrapped in movelessness. He
was not prisoned. He felt free, fluent, felt the accessibility of
flight within stillness, within changelessness as within air.

He sat upright on his bench and was not tired.

He swung his left arm slowly under his face; he felt how the world
swung with him so that naught had moved.

Upon the cuff of his left sleeve a spot caught him and made him
focus his eyes.... A cockroach moved on his cuff. It moved. It moved
against the world. It lied.

It flowed into the mass of his right hand. It was crushed. It was
killed.

He said aloud: “I am sorry, life. But I cannot have you around.” He
was not surprised at his words.

But his words were another stroke, perpendicular to the three-fold
stroke of park and river and sky. A stroke cutting along and lifting
a veil before his eyes. The movelessness of life won by this fourth
stroke of his words another dimension still. So it was that things
seemed to happen. Within his immobile vision, he watched things
happen ... people move, sun slant farther beneath the green fingers
of trees ... as if this fourth stroke of his words saying, “Things
happen,” were a knife cutting a cord, unfolding a magic parchment.

Men sat upon benches as he sat upon a bench. Men had feet on a
pavement as he had feet on a pavement. Men had faces written with
thought as he had a written face. All this he saw as if it were
happening just now. There was ease in his soul which took each
happening and put it away and knew that all was one.

A man with a black, thick, filthy beard, black, bushed eyebrows
beneath which glistened black eyes, a man with a nose inordinately
long, falling sheer from his sooty brow, moved upon legs that carried
him circularly, level, as if they were wheels ... moved about. He
dipped his talonous hand into a refuse can: his shoulders swung like
the walking-beam of a boat. He dipped the other hand. There was
refuse in his hand. He put it in his mouth. He dove under benches; he
ransacked the scanty grass; he sought refuse. He put it in his mouth.

As he ate, his black eyes looked at Karl; they gleamed with a joy so
full that Karl breathed against the glisten of his eyes sparking the
air.

A little man with a face ghostly white, lips red like a gash of
blood soaking through chalk, a little man with up-pointed shoulders
and sleeves that were tatters to the elbow, moved, isolate, intent;
picking up scraps of paper. Each scrap his fingers feverishly
smoothed, his lean eyes bent and read what was there to read. Then
his fingers tossed the paper from his eyes behind his back ... eyes
roaming, roaming to another scrap.

As he read each message, his lips moved; as his lips moved they bled.

A man wide as a hogshead, short as a boy, wider than long, black as
black earth, a negro dwarf with a huge head sat with legs dangling
from a bench and looked at Karl. Karl saw him. The dwarf raised a
hand to his head and doffed his derby hat. Courteously he smiled,
swinging his hat and his arm. He had white separate teeth and no
lips. Beneath the frowze of his muddy trousers were patent leather
boots. And they dangled.

As he bowed, Karl knew that within the patent leather boots his toes
were twitching.

Karl sat easefully and still, and was not surprised to find beside
him on the bench the bearded tramp whom he had seen so often, here
and elsewhere, on his walks.

The tramp had always interested him; he had always wondered what
could be his story. But a terrible reticence, savage or divine,
fended this shambling blond man who with great tender eyes, long
beard and skin transparent, blue-veined, now sat beside him. This
man, he felt, speaks to no one. There is an embryon word, yet dumb,
sheathed by his presence. They had sat before in this park on a
single bench; it had been impossible to touch his eyes.

Slight and frail man beside him. Karl did not turn his head to look
at him. By virtue of the four-stroked vision within which he dwelt,
he saw him clear with his eyes beyond.

He saw between the straight, blond beard and the arching forehead
touched with delicate hair, a face young and worn. Sunken cheeks with
blue shadows; blue eyes gleaming in red sick lids; a hidden mouth; a
nose straight and fine and singularly sharp. He saw, lost within the
aged suit of brown, a tenuous body, and at the hip beside him a huge
excrescence ... a sort of tumor ... swelling the trouser leg which
elsewhere hung in folds.

Karl sat and let the world play and was aware of himself and was
aware sharply that he was at ease as he had never been before. Yet
it was ease, for he knew it so, and somehow he remembered.

A voice very thin, articulate like the faint etch of acid on a copper
plate, from his side:

“I shall call you what you like as we sit here. My name is Peter
Dawes. What shall I call you?”

Karl answered: “I have no name.”

“You call me Dawes, then,” said the bearded tramp, “and I shall call
you Peter.”

Karl-Peter nodded within himself, to himself he nodded.

The tramp went on: “Across the city the sun goes down. It will soon
go down to the Palisades. They are high there, that makes the sun
low. Do you see?” He was looking eastward.

Karl-Peter nodded within himself, to himself he nodded.

“Look at the little park,” said the bearded tramp.

From the park’s straight plane, the sun was away. The hands of the
westward trees were empty. But beyond his shoulder, above the wall
of tenements stood a flame: it leapt into the sky and fell upon
the park. The park was thick now with stillness. It was low and
leaden-green: it was thickly still under the leaping glow of the sun
that was not there.

Within it, moving ... steadfast in Karl’s eyes ... were busy men.
They pressed to and fro, furtive, intent, secret from one another.
The two boys at tether-ball kept exchanging places: the game was
forever the same.

Under Karl’s eyes was the black face of the long-nosed man. All of it
that was not under hair was under grime of coal, save the huge nose
that was white and the eyes that were clean and hard like a clear,
black sky.

He spoke: “My name is Theophilus Larch. Thank you, Theophilus.”

His quick hand delved into the cuff of Theophilus-Karl’s trouser. It
held up the dead cockroach. The long-nosed man had teeth very white;
they closed on the cockroach with a joyous crack.

The little man of the red mouth was in Karl’s eyes.

“My name is Martin Lounton. Call me Lounton, Martin.... And permit
me....”

He seized Martin-Karl’s hand. He smoothed it with feverish fingers.
His lean eyes sought the palm of it and read. He tossed it from him,
and was gone, feverishly peering under bench, in grass, for scraps of
paper.

The black dwarf bowed under Karl’s eyes.

“My name is Cæsar Dott. Call me Dott, Cæsar. And allow me to
congratulate you upon your wedding. Your bride gave me a favor, from
her own hands she gave it. Look, Cæsar....” He raised his trouser leg
and there against the obscene mass of blackish flesh was an iron bar,
toothed and clamped in the flesh.

“It makes my foot go to sleep. I have to wriggle my toes.”...

Karl sat still.

The strong boy and the idiot who played tether-ball for ever, for
ever; the eater of dirt, the dwarf, the picker and reader of scraps
... joined hands. They were unknown to one another. But they knew
Karl. They joined hands. They danced.

A heavy shattering measure. It made the glow of the gone sun tremble,
bounce up, join in. It shook the trees until their branches with
little leaves like bells reached down into the park and the trees
danced also. It broke into the sheerness of the house walls and they
rose stiffly and danced. All danced ... moveless in Karl sitting upon
the bench beside the bearded tramp.

He breathed in measure. A row of houses swung into the park and the
park swung into the river; and the river suddenly straightened up and
thrust like a lance, quivering white, to the sky. The sky came down
in a great gust of wind and lifted the beating feet and garlanded
the trees among the dancing legs of men, and stuck branches into the
windows of the rollicking houses. Karl breathed in measure.

The stillness was very thick like a night without clouds and with
neither moon nor stars.

Now, in the dancing stillness like a single star, a voice:

“Think!”

The tramp was moveless beside him. His voice: “Think! for the time is
not yet.”

The star-voice neared, no longer the moveless tramp’s. It pierced, it
was a shriek.... “Think! Think!”

Karl jumped up from the bench. “Think, think!” he echoed.

He thought. He beat with his thought against the dancing world. He
lunged and thrust: he hewed with his thought and beat. He beat the
sky up. He beat the houses back. He thrust the trees down. The strong
boy and the idiot boy, the eater of dirt, the dwarf, the picker and
reader of scraps he hewed and beat apart from their thick dance. He
trampled with his thought the park into the ground....

Then all was as it should be.... And it was as if he had fallen an
unfathomable distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat upon his bench under the darkling sky, alone, beside the
bearded man whom he had seen so often.

He turned to him and nodded.

The tramp’s reticent blue eyes nodded and turned away.

“It’s getting late,” said Karl.

He was tingling, as from a mighty fall that had not killed him, that
had made him drunk. It was as if an infinitude of space coursed
through his veins, as he had coursed through an infinitude of space.
He was daring as never before.

“Would you mind,” he turned again, very courteous, very quiet,
towards the tramp, “would you mind, sir, telling me who you are?”

The look of the frail man was steady and far beyond him. His words
came very still, very far away through the straight gold beard.

“You have seen me often,” he said, “and asked me nothing. You have
thought. What did it seem to you, I was?”

Karl was light with the abandon of his infinite flight, sitting so
commonly upon a bench. He was brave and clear, for his mind held one
memory--what this strange man, the first time, had seemed to him to
be. The words came unhindered.

“It seemed,” he stopped ... he began again, “the first time that I
saw you, I said to myself: ‘He looks like a ridiculous Jesus.’”

The bearded man gazed on beyond him. His head moved dreaming. His
hands floated underneath his beard.

“You were right in what you said to yourself,” he spoke. “For I am
John the Baptist.”


       [11] Copyright, 1922, by The Dial Publishing Company, Inc.
            Copyright, 1922, by Waldo Frank.




                          MENDEL MARANTZ--
                            HOUSEWIFE[12]

                          By DAVID FREEDMAN

                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)


“What is a landlord? A bore! He asks you one question all the
time--Rent! What is rent? A fine you pay for being poor. What is
poverty? Dirt--on the surface. What is riches? More dirt--under the
surface. Everybody wants money. Money! What is money? A disease we
like to catch but not to spread. Just wait, Zelde! The time will
come! I’ll be a landlord on Riverside Drive! We’ll have our own
home----”

“In the cemetery!” Zelde said bitterly.

“Not so fast,” Mendel replied, sipping his tea. “Cheer up, Zelde!
What is pessimism? A match. It burns the fingers. What is hope? A
candle. It lights the way. You never can tell yet! What is life? A
see-saw. Today you’re poor and tomorrow----”

“You starve!” Zelde muttered, as she rubbed a shirt vigorously
against the wash-board.

With a sudden impulse she slapped the shirt into the tub, dried her
hands on the apron, and, resting her fists on her hips, turned to
Mendel.

“Why shouldn’t I be mad?” she began, replying to a previous question.
“Here I stand like a fool scrubbing my life away, from morning till
night-time, working like a horse, cooking, washing, sewing, cleaning
and everything. And for what? For this I eloped with you from a rich
father? Did you marry me--or hire me?”

“I stole you. Now I got to pay the penalty. What is love? A conquest.
What is marriage? An inquest. Don’t worry; your father was no fool.
He made believe he didn’t see us run away. We felt romantic--and he
got off cheap! What is romance? Soap-bubbles. They look nice, but
taste rotten.”

“Never mind! Mister Mendel Marantz, I know you too good. You talk a
lot to make me forget what I was saying. But this whole business must
come to a finish right here and there!

“You talked into yourself you’re a great man, so you don’t want to
work and you don’t want to listen. Sarah sweats in the factory, Hymie
peddles papers, Nathan works by the telegrams. And what do you do?
You sit like a king and drink tea and make jokes--and nothing! I
betcha you’re waiting Jakie, Lena and Sammy should grow up so you’ll
send them to work for you too!”

Mendel shrugged his shoulders.

“What’s a woman’s tongue? A little dog’s tail. It wags too much!”

“I know what I talk. You hate work like poison. You like better to
smoke a cigaret and close your eyes and invent schemes how to get
rich quick. But you’ll get crazy quicker!”

“Zelde, you’re a old woman. You don’t understand. All I need is one
drop of luck and that drop will sweeten our whole ocean of troubles.
If only one of my inventions succeeds, none of us will have to work.
Then Sarah will have dowry. What is dowry? Every man’s price. And
we’ll move out of the fish-market. What is success? Fifth Avenue.
What is failure? Fifth floor.

“Some day, you’ll see. I’ll be president of the Refillable Can
Company and save the world millions in tin. Just wait!”

“And who’ll buy bread in the meantime? Mendel, remember what I tell
you. Knock out this craziness from your head. Forget about this can
business!”

Mendel’s dignity was roused.

“Crazy! That’s what you all are! You and all your relatives think I
got water on the brain!” He pointed with conviction to his brow. “But
up here is the refillable can. Zelde, you see it? It’s in the brain,
the whole scheme. Up here is full with ideas, plans and machinery.
Thinking, scheming, planning all the time. It don’t let me sleep. It
don’t let me eat. It don’t let me work. And I should forget it--ah?

“You’re all jealous because God was good to me. He gave your brother
Morris a shoe factory, your cousin Joe He gave a real estate, your
sister Dora a rich husband. But God gave me _brains_--and that none
of you got!”

Mendel paced the floor excitedly.

Zelde stood silent and bit her lip. For years she had heard the
same flow of rhetoric, the same boast of intellect, and the same
trust in luck. The net result was always an evasion of work, and the
responsibility shifted back to her and the children.

Mendel Marantz had brains, all right. Otherwise, how could he have
existed so long without working?

He always confused her with clever phrases and blurred the issue
by creating fictitious ones. And he always succeeded in infecting
her with his dreams, until she let him dream on while she did the
work. It was that way when they had the candy-stand which her
brother Gershon bought for them; it was that way when they kept a
vegetable-store which sister Dora financed and later reduced to a
push-cart; and it was that way now when they had nothing.

By trade a mechanic, by inclination an inventor, and by nature a
dreamer, Mendel abhorred the sordid commonplaces of labor and dreaded
the yoke of routine. He had been everything from an insurance agent
to a night watchman in rapid succession, and had invented at least a
hundred different devices for the betterment of civilization while
changing jobs. None of these inventions had as yet received proper
recognition, least of all from Zelde. But that could not discourage
him to such a point as to drive him to work.

He really believed in his powers. That was the tragedy of it. All
geniuses have an unalterable faith in their greatness. But so have
most cranks. And Zelde was not sure as to which of the two species
Mendel belonged.

She was sure of one thing--that the family was hovering perilously
near the brink. A single feather added to its burdens and it would
topple over. Mendel might take it lightly, but she knew better. She
had seen families in that neighborhood crumble to ruin over night.
She had known many who--like Mendel--started as harmless dreamers,
hopeful idlers, and ended--God forbid--as gamblers, drunkards, and
worse.

“How was it with Reznick? Every day he had a scheme to make millions
while his wife got sick working in the shop. She died working, and
the children went to a orphan asylum and he still wanted to make
millions. So he made a corner on the coffee-market and he lost
everything what everybody else had, and the only way they could stop
him from signing checks with Rockefeller’s name was to send him to
Bellevue.

“Or Dittenfass? Wasn’t he the picture of Mendel? Didn’t he hate work
like poison, and didn’t he pay for it? He thought he was smarter from
the rest. Didn’t his wife used to told him, ‘Dittenfass, look out!’?
But he laughed only. He looked out for himself only. And one day she
threw in his eyes vitriol! That’s what she threw in his eyes, and
then he couldn’t look any more!

“You can’t be too smart. Didn’t Karneol try? And it’s two years she’s
waitin’ already with swollen eyes he should come back. But he’s got
to serve three more.

“The best smartness is to do a day’s work. If you wait it shall
happen miracles--it happens! But the wrong way!”

Zelde knew. She wished she didn’t know.

“Maybe you can invent something to make you work,” she offered as
a possible solution. “Somebody else with your brains could make a
fortune. Why don’t you make at least a living?”

“Brains make ideas; fools can make money. That’s why your relatives
are rich. What is business. Blind man’s bluff. They shut your eyes
and open your pockets!”

“Again you mix me up,” she said warily, sensing this new attempt to
befuddle the issue. “What’s the result from all this? You joke and we
starve. It’s lucky Sarah works. If not, we would all be thrown out in
the street, already.”

At this moment Sarah entered. She was pale and tired from the climb
of stairs. She dropped her hat languidly on the couch and sank into a
chair.

Zelde was too surprised to speak. It was only one-thirty. She never
expected Sarah before six. An ominous thought flitted through her
mind. She looked anxiously at her daughter. Sarah’s gaze shifted to
the floor.

An oppressive silence gathered over them. Then Sarah tried to mumble
something. But Zelde understood without hearing. Her heart had told
her.

“It’s slack! Everybody laid off. Sarah, too!”

What she had dreaded most had happened. The family of Marantz was now
over the brink. Zelde stood crushed by the thought of the morrow.
Sarah sat staring vacantly, her chin against her clenched hand.
Mendel stopped smoking to appear less conspicuous.

Four female eyes detected him, however, and scorched him with their
gaze.

The handwriting on the wall was unnecessarily large.

Mendel Marantz knew that his crisis was at hand.

Zelde spoke.

“That settles it. Either tomorrow you go to work or go altogether!
Yessir! You, I mean, mister!”

Mendel had faced crises before. Some he had overcome with a jest,
others with a promise, still others with a pretence at work until the
novelty wore off. But there was a grimness in Zelde’s manner this
time that looked fatal. Nothing but a permanent job and lifelong
drudgery could save him now. But that would also destroy him.

Tying him down to a position was like hitching a lion to a cart. His
mind could not travel on tracks. It was too restive and spirited.
He could never repeat an act without discovering how much easier it
might be done by machinery, and immediately he set himself to invent
the necessary machine. That was why he could not be a tailor. After
he once threaded a needle, he started to devise a simple instrument
for doing it, and in the meantime lost his job. And that happened in
every case.

His head was so full of ideas that he often had to stand still to
keep his balance. His mind sapped all of his powers and left him
powerless for work. In order to work he would have to stop thinking.
He might just as well stop living. Idleness was as essential a part
of his make-up as industry was of Zelde’s.

“I wasn’t made for work,” he said with finality. “I mean--for just
plain work. Some people work with their feet, others with their
hands. I work with my head. You don’t expect I shall sit like Simon,
the shoemaker, every day, and hit nails till I get consumption.
One--two--three, I invent a machinery which hits nails, cuts leather,
fits heels, makes patches, and I sit down and laugh on the world. I
can’t work like others, just as others can’t work like me!”

“You can make me believe night is day and black is white, but it
won’t help you. It’s a new rule in this house from today on--those
who work, eat; those who don’t, don’t. If you think you can invent
food, go ahead. So long I live my children is not going to starve.
From today on I’m the father from this family. If you don’t want to
go to work--I will!”

Mendel was skeptical.

“What is a woman?” he thought. “A lot of thunder, but a little rain.”

Still, the shower was more drenching than he supposed.

“Tomorrow morning I go back to be a dressmaker by fancy dresses.
Sarah, you come with me. I learn you a real trade.”

Then she turned to Mendel with a sneer.

“You thought I play around in the house, didn’t you? All right! Now
you stay home and play like I did. You want to eat? Cook, yourself.
You think in the house it’s easy? You’ll find out different. Send
the children to school, go up on the roof to hang clothes, run down
with the garbage five floors, buy groceries, wash underwear, mend
stockings, press shirts, scrub floors--go on! Have a good time, and
I’ll pay the bills!”

Mendel admitted that Zelde had worn for some time the family
trousers, but he believed that he still wore the belt. However, her
inexorable decision disillusioned him. He admitted having been caught
slightly off his guard. He had never suspected that a type of work
existed so near him, into which he might be forced out of sheer
necessity. Not that he intended to do it! But still----

“What is a woman?” he reconsidered. “Lightning. It’s nice and bright
till it hits you.”

The next morning Mendel discovered perpetual motion. The children had
taken possession of the house. He dodged flying pillows, tripped over
upset furniture, slipped on greasy garbage from an overturned can,
found salt in his coffee and something sharper on his seat. He kept
constantly moving to avoid falling objects and fell into others. He
had planned to have nothing to do with the house, but the house was
having a great deal to do with him.

The youngsters seemed to be under the impression that with Zelde all
law and order had passed away. Mendel found it hard work to change
their minds. It was monotonous to spank Lena, then Jakie, then Sammy.
Then over again. It would be better to send them off to school. But
they had to be dressed and fed and washed for that!

He was tempted to snatch his hat and coat and leave the house. But
what would he do in the streets?

He hesitated, gritted his teeth, and set to work by scrubbing Jakie’s
face till it resembled a carrot.

“What’s a wife?” he muttered, and Lena started at the question. “A
telescope! She makes you see stars!” And some soap got into his eye.

“Sammy, don’t you never marry!” he exclaimed with a profound look
of warning at the frightened little boy. “What is marriage? First a
ring on the finger and later--on the neck. Lena, stop pulling Jakie’s
hair. She’s like her mother. Don’t do that, Sammy. A table-cloth
ain’t a handkerchief! Ai! Little children, little troubles; big
children, big troubles. What is children? Life insurance. Some day
they pay you back--when you’re dead. But you like them anyhow. Such
is life! You know it’s tough, but you try it once, anyway.

“After all, what is life? A journey. What is death? The goal. What is
man? A passenger. What is woman? Freight.

“Jakie, you bad boy! Don’t cry, Lena. He didn’t mean it. Here’s
an apple. Go to school. Sammy, get off the banister! Look out,
children! It’s a step missing down there! Who’s crying? Jakie, give
her back the apple! Did you ever hear such excitements? My goodness!”

Mendel, perspired, exhausted, sank into a chair.

“I’m working, after all,” he noted with surprise. “If this lasts, I
don’t.”

But the trials of Mendel Marantz had only begun. The sensation of
womanhood did not thrill his bosom, and the charms of housekeeping
failed to allure him. A home like a warehouse on moving-day tumbled
about him. The beds were upset, the table and floor were littered
with breakfast leavings, the cupboard was bare, the dishes were piled
in the sink, the dust had gathered already as if cleaning were a lost
art, and the general atmosphere was one of dejection, confusion,
chaos. The magic touch of the housewife revealed itself by its
absence.

Zelde had now proved to him conclusively that her presence and
service were essential to his comfort. As if he had ever questioned
the fact. Why did she go to all this trouble to drive home a point?

“Zelde, a glass tea,” he used to say, and the tea stood steaming hot
before him. “Zelde, it’s a draft. Shut up the window,” and presently
the draft was gone.

“Zelde--” he would call, leaning back in his chair, but why torture
himself with things that were no more?

That night when Zelde arrived, masculine and businesslike, through
with work and ready for supper, she beheld a pitiful spectacle.

The house was in hopeless disorder. The children had managed that.
The cat was on the table and Jakie was under it, while Lena kept him
there with her foot. Sammy’s eye had been darkened by a flying saucer
which Hymie let go in a moment of abandon. Everything was where it
should not be. The kitchen furniture had been moved into the dining
room and the feather beds were in the wash-tub.

Mendel was nowhere within the range of Zelde’s call.

“Where is papa?” she asked sharply, after calming the youngsters with
her two convincing hands. “Everything is upside down. I betcha he
didn’t do a thing all day. My goodness, that man will make me crazy!”

A crashing sound as of dishes in hasty descent issued from the next
room.

Zelde and her retinue rushed to the scene of disaster. With one foot
in the sink and the other on the wash-tub Mendel Marantz was poised
on high, searching through the closet. Dishes, pans, bottles and rags
lay scattered in ruined fragments beneath him.

Zelde blazed.

“Gozlen!” she almost shrieked. “What do you want up there!”

Mendel steadied himself. His heart having missed a beat, he waited a
moment, then answered quietly, “Iodin.”

“What for iodin, what for?” She was still furious, but also a little
anxious.

“A small scratch,” he explained without moving. “My finger got
caught--under the meat-chopper.”

“Oi! You clumsy! And what’s all the rags and the water on the floor?”

“To put by my side and my leg. I--slipped and--the gas-range fell on
me. My ankle turned around. The soup was good and hot. Maybe you got
something for burns?”

Zelde was a little less furious and a little more anxious.

“Then what are you climbing on the walls for? Go in bed. Go--you look
broken in pieces!”

She sighed heavily and shook her head.

“After all, he’s only a man,” she soliloquized. “What can you expect?
He don’t know if he’s alive!”

She continued to scold, but nursed him tenderly.

“How is it? You’re a inventor, and you don’t know how to light the
gas without blowing up the house? A man who can’t help nobody else
can’t help himself!”

After a pause she said, “Maybe I should stay home? Ah?”

“Maybe,” he murmured weakly.

Zelde vacillated.

“So what’ll be if I stay home?” she prodded.

“It’ll be better.”

“That I know, but what’ll be with you?”

“I’ll get well.”

“And--?” She expected him not only to recover, but to reform.

“And if I get well I’ll feel good. What is health? A garden. What is
sickness? A grave. What is a good wife? A gardener. What is a bad
wife? A grave-digger.”

“He’s as bad as ever,” she thought.

She finally resolved, “It’s not such a terrible! He won’t die from
it and we can’t live from it. He’ll learn a lesson and I’ll earn a
living.”

And the experiment continued.

It was very hard on Mendel. It was harder on Sarah and hardest on
Zelde. But time subdued Mendel’s protests and improved his work.

Zelde was surprised at his altered attitude of gradual submission. It
almost alarmed her. She had never really intended this radical change
to last. She had expected Mendel to rebel more and more violently as
time went on and finally to make a break for his freedom and exclaim,
“I’m sick and tired of this slavery. I’m going to work!”

Instead he was getting actually to like it. By degrees Zelde found
less to do in the house after her return from the shop. True, his
work was crude and slovenly to her practiced eye. She never would
have cleaned dishes as he did, with a whisk-broom, or swept dirt
under the table, or boiled soup in a coffee-pot, or wiped the floor
with a perfectly good skirt.

But withal, Mendel was doing things, and as his domestic
craftsmanship improved, Zelde grew more disappointed and depressed.
She felt that he was planning to displace her permanently. She
pictured him bending over the wash-tub as she used to do; or
arranging the dishes in the closet, which was once her favorite
diversion; or scouring the pots and pans as only she knew how, and a
genuine feeling of envy and longing seized her.

“Thief!” she was tempted to cry. “Go out from my kitchen! Give me
back my apron and let alone my housework!”

For she had become nothing more than a boarder in that home, to be
tolerated merely because she earned the rent. She saw the children
only at supper-time, and they looked curiously at her as if they
hardly recognized her.

At table all eyes were turned to pa.

“Papa, Sammy took my spoon!”

“Take his,” Mendel decreed.

“Pa, I want some more meat!”

“Take mine.”

“Pop, Lena stealed my bread!”

“Take hers.”

“Pa-ah! The thoup ith too hot. I tan’t eat it!” Jakie complained, and
turned a bruised tongue to his father.

“Take some water from the sink,” was Mendel’s motherly advice.

Zelde felt like a stranger. They did not seem to know that she was
present. She tried to interfere.

“Don’t put water in soup, Jakie! Better blow on it.”

But the little boy slipped down from the chair without noticing her,
wriggled out from under the table, and soon returned, gaily carrying
a cup of sink-water.

Her maternal instinct rebelled.

“No!” she said warningly, as Jakie tilted the cup over the plate of
bean-soup.

But the child, with his eyes fixed on Mendel, poured the contents
bravely.

Zelde slapped his hand, and the cup fell with a clatter. It was not
a hard blow, but an impulsive one. It created a strained and awkward
silence. Jakie burst into tears. He ran to Mendel and buried his
little face in daddy’s lap. Lena began to whimper in sympathy.

Something snapped in Zelde. Her appetite was gone. She rose and went
into the bedroom and shut the door behind her.

She did not want them to hear her sobs.

It had all turned out so different!

Instead of driving Mendel to work she had driven herself into exile.
Mendel the housewife was now further from ever getting a man’s job
than Mendel the idler had ever been. Zelde felt she had made a grave
mistake. Rather should she have permitted him to idle and mope--he
would have tired of it eventually--than that he should be wrongly
occupied and contented.

If only she could undo what she had done, she’d be satisfied.

“After all, a house to manage is for a woman,” she began, bent upon
re-establishing the old order. “A man should do housework? It can
make him crazy yet!”

“I believe you,” Mendel conceded.

“It don’t look like housework should agree with you,” she observed.

“Looks is deceiving.”

There was a pause. A good deal of understanding passed between them.

“Mendel, hard work will kill you yet,” she insisted.

“So will idleness--in the long run. What is death? An appointment.
You got to keep it some time.”

“But you don’t look good.”

“I don’t feel bad.”

Zelde became a little dizzy. Did he mean to say that he intended to
stick to housework? She tried to tempt him.

“Wouldn’t you like, like you used to, to have nothing to do, and sit
and cross your legs, and, without you should move, somebody should
bring you hot tea?”

Mendel blew rings of smoke at the ceiling.

Zelde continued, scarcely breathing.

“And wouldn’t you like to lie on the couch with your hands together
behind your head and look on the sky from the window and dream what a
great inventor you are?”

An impressive silence followed. On Mendel’s face were fleeting traces
of an inner struggle.

“And--I’ll clean the house,” she added softly to clear any doubts
that he might still have.

Mendel shook his head.

“It’ll be too hard for you,” he said gallantly.

“It’s not such a terrible!”

“I haven’t the heart to let you,” he complained feebly.

“You’ll get over it.”

His tone became firmer.

“No! Housework is not for a woman. Like the Masora says, ‘Be good to
your wife and give your children to eat.’ That means a man should
clean the house and cook for his children. What is a wife? A
soldier. Her place is on the field. What is a husband? A general. His
place is at home!”

Zelde was chagrined.

“So this is the future what you aimed for?” she chided. “To be a
washerwoman and a porter! Pooh! You ought to be ashamed to look on my
face! Think what people say! They don’t know which is what! If I am
the husband or if you are the wife or how!”

Mendel carefully rolled a new cigarette. There was a plaintive note
in her anger. He could afford to be defiant.

“Didn’t you make me to stay home and work? So! I’m working! What is
work? Pleasure!--If you know how!”

And he struck a match.

Zelde sat down to avoid falling down.

“Work is pleasure,” echoed through her mind like an explosion. Maybe
solitary confinement at home every day had gone to his head. Or
maybe--maybe--! She slowly repeated to herself his sally. “What is
work? Pleasure!” and “What is pleasure?” she wondered. The shock of
the answer almost made her scream.

So that was it! She had suspected something, but _that_ would never
have occurred to her in a million years. Those floor-brushes that
she found the other day under the bed, and the mop and the tin pail.
They did not belong to the house. To whom _did_ they belong? She had
certainly seen them somewhere before. Now she knew! At the janitor’s!

“No wonder he likes to stay home,” she muttered to herself. “I should
have knew; it’s a bad sign if Mendel likes work all of a sudden!”

Her suspicions were still hypothetical, but fragments of evidence
were fast falling in to shape an ominous and accusing picture.

One day, upon her return from work, Zelde found Mendel sitting near
the window, restfully smoking a cigarette. His legs were crossed
under his apron and his arms were folded over his lap. He gazed
wistfully out upon the city.

Zelde looked about her in astonishment. The house was tidy, the
kitchen spick and span, the wash dried and ironed, the floor freshly
scrubbed. A model housewife would have envied the immaculate
perfection of the work.

Zelde gasped. So early in the day and already through with all his
work! And what work!

“Sarah, I wonder who did it,” she finally said to her daughter when
she had somewhat regained her composure.

Her groping suspicions now became a startling conviction. Evidence
fairly shrieked at her from every corner.

“Only a woman could do this,” she thought, overcome by the shock of
the revelation.

“Who do you think?” Sarah asked innocently.

“Did you see the way she looks at me?” Zelde exclaimed with mounting
fury. “No wonder she laughs in my face. No wonder she tells all the
neighbors, ‘Such a fool! She works and he plays!’ No wonder!”

“What are you talking about?” Sarah inquired, bewildered.

“Never mind! Your father knows what I mean! _She_ did it! Rifke! The
janitor’s wife! I know her, all right. She made eyes to Mister Mendel
Marantz lots of times! She’s older from me by four years, but she
paints up like a sign and makes her hair Buster Brown and thinks the
men die for her. Ask your father. He knows!”

Mendel sat dumbfounded. His eyes opened like mouths.

“Don’t make believe you’re innocent. I know you men too good,” Zelde
broke out violently. “I slave like a dog and that dirty old--” Tears
of rage stifled her. But with a swift change of tone she added, her
finger shaking under Mendel’s nose, “Mister Marantz, remember, you’ll
be sorry for this.” And she walked out of the room.

Mendel was sorry for her. He turned a puzzled face to Sarah. “When
the house was upside down she said I made her crazy. Now when it’s
fixed up she tries to make me crazy! What’s a wife? An epidemic. If
it don’t break out here, it breaks out there!”

The next day Zelde fidgeted at her work. She was prompted to fling it
aside, rush home, and catch them together--Mendel and Rifke--and pull
out the old vixen’s hair and scratch out her eyes. But she bided her
time. Mendel was, no doubt, expecting a surprise attack and perhaps
had warned his paramour to stay away.

Zelde decided to be wily. She would make believe that she had
forgotten and forgiven. But how could she?

That night, on the landing of the fourth floor, she met Rifke coming
down from the fifth. There were only two tenants on the fifth
floor--Mrs. Peril Tzvack, a widow who hated Rifke and would never let
her into her house, and Mendel Marantz. From which of the two was
Rifke coming?

As Zelde entered her home the same neatness, the same cleanliness and
smartness stung her sight. In fact, she herself could not have done
better. To be honest--not even as good. The house was a mirror of
spotlessness. It was so obviously the accomplishment of the wicked
woman she had met on the stairs that Zelde spent a tortured and
sleepless night.

She went to work the next morning with a splitting headache, and
mists swam before her eyes as she tried to sew. Weird thoughts
revolved in her mind. If it were only a question of Mendel, she
would not hesitate a moment to leave him forever. But the children!
A daughter of marriageable age and the tiny ones! What would people
say? And even Mendel. True, there was no excuse--absolutely none--for
his abominable treachery. She would never forgive him! Still, Rifke,
that superannuated flirt, was the kind of woman that could turn any
man’s head! With that double chin of hers and the shaved neck and a
dimple like a funnel in her cheek! That’s what the men liked!

After all, Mendel was a helpless male, all alone in a house. He
probably did not know the first thing about housekeeping and would
have starved or been buried in dirt if he had not appealed to
somebody to help him. And Rifke was just the type to take advantage
of a defenceless man in such a predicament. She doubtless opened her
eyes at him like two coal-scuttles, and pursed her lips--she had
a way of doing it which gave the women of the neighborhood heart
failure. And Mendel must have been grateful and kind to her for her
assistance, and she must have mistaken his attitude for something
else. She always misunderstood kindness from men.

So that’s how Mendel managed to clean the house so well! And that’s
why work was pleasure to him! Judging by the amount and quality of
the work Rifke was doing for him, their affection for each other must
have developed to an alarming degree.

Zelde visualized the hateful scenes of faithlessness in which Mendel
probably danced fawningly about Rifke, the fifty-three-year-old
“vamp,” who cleaned dishes and washed clothes for him as a reward.
She must have nudged him with her elbow while she boiled the wash and
said invitingly, “Mendel, dear, why are you blind to beauty?”

And Mendel, edging closer, must have answered, “What is beauty? Wine!
The older it gets, the rarer it is!” Then pressing his cheek against
hers, he undoubtedly added, with tenderness, “You’re so fat! It’s
a pleasure to hold you around! What is a man? Dynamite. What is a
woman? A burning match. What is passion? The explosion!”

“Stop it! Your whiskers tickle me,” she probably replied with a
coquettish laugh, and slapped him playfully over the hands with a
rinsed shirt.

But she was only jesting, and was perhaps ecstatic with joy when
Mendel courageously kissed her on the cheek despite her protests,
and exclaimed, “What is a kiss? A smack for which you turn the other
cheek!” And she probably turned it.

Then Rifke amorously rested her head on his chest and looked up with
those devilish eyes of hers, and, linking her plump arms about his
neck, she whispered, “Love me, Mendel, love me! I am yours!”

And Mendel, planting his feet more solidly to bear her weight, and
carried away by the flames of desire, must have gripped her in his
passionate embrace and murmured in a throaty voice, “What is love? A
broom. It sweeps you away!”

“What’s the matter with you, Zelde?” cried Marcus, the tailor, biting
the thread from a seam. “You stitched the skirt to a sleeve and
you’re sewing up the neck of the waist!

“You look white like a ghost!”

Zelde drew herself up, as out of a lethargy.

“Eh! W--where am I? Oh!”

And her face sank into her palms.

Instantly there was a tumult in the shop.

A startled group of frightened men and women gathered about her.

But Zelde regained her self-control without aid, and pale and faint
though she was, she smiled weakly to reassure them all.

“It’s nothing. A dizziness. I’m better,” she said. But Sarah insisted
upon taking her home at once.

“That’s right,” Marcus advised. “Go home and take a hot tea with
lemon. It’ll sweat you out.”

He added in an undertone to his neighbor, “It’s a shame! Such a fine
woman! She’s got a husband who’s a nix!”

Zelde refused to have Sarah accompany her home.

“We can’t afford you shall lose a half day,” she argued. But the real
reason was that she did not wish her daughter to behold her father’s
infamy.

At eleven o’clock Zelde left. As she neared the house her breath
became short and rapid. She stumbled several times going up the
stairs. She stopped at the door.

Was it voices or was it her imagination?

No. Yes. It was. A man’s voice, then a woman’s laughter, then
some--oh! She could stand it no longer. She broke wildly into the
room and dislodged a bulky person who had been leaning against the
door. Zelde stood electrified.

It was Rifke. And she was laughing in her face! And there was Mendel.
And the janitor, too--Rifke’s husband. And two men! With stovepipe
hats and cutaways and spats! Detectives, no doubt! Brought by the
janitor to catch his wife and arrest Mendel! Oh, heavens! And there
was Morton, Mendel’s nephew, a lawyer!

“Oi! A lawyer in the case!” she moaned to herself. “Then everything
is lost!”

Zelde was ready to drop, but Mendel took her by the hand, and she
heard him say, “This is my wife. It’s all her fault. She drove me to
it.”

“We want you to come with us now,” one of the strangers said to
Mendel.

“What’s the matter here, anyhow?” Zelde exclaimed at last.

“I got to go with these people,” Mendel replied. “But you can
ask--Rifke,” he added significantly. “She knows all about it.”

Mendel, his nephew and the two gentlemen departed before Zelde had
time to protest. She turned with burning eyes to Rifke--the hussy!

“I wish they could take my husband where they take yours,” Rifke
began by way of explanation. “You don’t know what kind of a husband
you got. It’s gonna be in all the papers. He did something. Those men
what was here watched him, and when they seen it they jumped up like
crazy.”

“What did he do?” Zelde asked in great alarm. “I betcha you made him
to do it.”

“I? He says you made him. I only brought up the people. They knock by
me in the door. They say, ‘Do Mendel Marantz live here? Where is it?’
So I bring them up.”

“What for did you bring them up--what for? A blind one could see it’s
detectives!” Zelde muttered angrily.

“How shall I know it who they are? When they came in your husband
turned white like milk. ‘Are you the man which done it?’ they ask
him, and he says, shivering, ‘Yes.’”

Zelde wrung her hands.

“What for did he say ‘Yes’--what for?”

“Because it’s true,” Rifke explained.

“What’s true?”

“That he done it.”

“What did he done--what? You’ll make me crazy yet. Why don’t you tell
me?”

“But I told you already!”

“When did you told me--when? You’re talkin’ and talkin’ and it don’t
come out nothing! What happened here? What did they want here? Why is
your husband here? Why are you here? Why were they here? What’s the
matter here, altogether, anyway?”

“It’s a whole lot the matter--with you!” Rifke exclaimed impatiently.
“Come over here and look and maybe it’ll open your eyes!”

She led the dazed Zelde into the kitchen.

“You see it?” Rifke asked triumphantly, pointing out a mass of
wrinkled canvas in the middle of the room.

“What shall I see?” Zelde answered skeptically. “Rags, I see!”

“But under the rags!” Rifke insisted. She lifted the canvas. Zelde
stood completely bewildered. Her eyes opened wide, then her face
reddened. A feeling of indignation welled up in her.

“You can’t make a fool from me!” she began at last with rising
momentum. “What do you show me--what? An ash-can on wheels! What’s
that got to do with you and my husband? Don’t think I don’t know! You
show me this, I should forget _that_!”

Rifke began to perspire. She mopped her face with her apron as she
struggled to keep calm.

“You don’t know what I’m talkin’ about and I don’t know what you’re
talkin’ about. It’s mixed up, everything! Where do you see a ash-can?
This ain’t a ash-can! It looks, maybe, like it. But it ain’t. All my
friends should have such ash-cans! It’s a wonder in the world!”

Zelde’s head was reeling.

“So what is it, I’m asking you?” she gasped helplessly.

“It’s a whole business!” Rifke replied. “We seen it, my husband
Shmeril and me and the people which was here. Your husband showed
us. He winds up the can like a phonograph and it begins to play. The
dishes go in dirty and they come out clean like after a bath. You
see it? On these straps the dishes take a ride. They go in from the
back and come out on the front. When it’s finished the dishes, your
husband opens the box--I thought a man will jump out from it--but
it’s only wheels and straps and wires and pipes inside! Did you ever?

“Then he pulls off the feet and the box sits down on the floor, and
he takes out the straps from the back door and puts in such a board
with bumps and brushes, and he turns the handle and the box rides
around like a automobile and washes up the floor till it shines! I
tell you the people was standing and looking--I thought their eyes
would fall out!

“Then your husband stands up the box and puts back the feet and takes
out the bumpy board and sticks in a whole machinery with pipes and
wheels and winds up the machine and pumps in fresh water and throws
in all the old clothes, and you hear inside such a noises, and then
the clothes come out like frankfurters, clean and washed and ready
to hang! Such a business! You don’t have to work no more! It works
itself! I wouldn’t mind to have such a box by me!”

Zelde, dumb with amazement, gazed at the mute, ugly monster before
her. She recognized the wheels from the old baby-carriage; the legs
were from her kitchen chair; the handle from the stove. And now she
remembered the can, the brushes, and the mops that Rifke had probably
discarded, and that Mendel had used in the creation of this freak.

So this was the rival she had been jealous of, the usurper of her
rights!

“It makes in five minutes what I do a whole day,” Rifke rambled
along. “They call it such a fancy name--Combination House-Cleaner. It
cleans everything. The strangers is from a company which goes to make
millions cans like this.

“You’re gonna be rich, Mrs. Marantz!

“Who would think from house-cleaning you could get rich! Here I’m
cleaning houses for twenty-nine years and I never thought from such a
scheme! You gotta have luck, I tell you!”

“And I thought all the time it was Rifke! Oi, Mendel, you must think
I’m such a fool!”

“Forget it. If not for you I never would have did what I done. You
made me to do it.”

“I didn’t, Mendel.”

She added in a caressing tone:

“Your laziness did it, Mendel. You invented that machine because you
were too lazy to work.”

“What’s a wife? An X-Ray. She knows you through and through!”


       [12] Copyright, 1922, by The Pictorial Review Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by David Freedman.




                       BELSHAZZAR’S LETTER[13]

                   By KATHARINE FULLERTON GEROULD

                      (From _The Metropolitan_)


    “Belshazzar had a letter,
     He never had but one,”
murmured Fenwick.

I should never have suspected Fenwick of having read, much less
having memorized, the works of Emily Dickinson. Fenwick does not
read--much; and how should he have got hold of Emily, anyhow? It
appeared presently--for of course he was questioned--that he had
picked up her poems in the home of a New England foreign missionary,
where he had once perforce been marooned during a cholera epidemic.
Fenwick himself is, I fancy, outside all creeds; but he can’t
help--given his life--running into missionaries, and he usually
speaks well of them. He takes them, at all events, as all in
the day’s work, as he reports, from very strange places, to the
“interests” that employ him. They have an eye out, those “interests,”
for a good many different commodities, though I incline to believe
that rubber is the chief. Adventure has never seemed to pry Fenwick
loose from his very American moorings, though he told me on a certain
occasion, with a dropped jaw (in a kind of wry whisper) that he had
lost his religion once--just like that--in a typhoon.

I mention these facts concerning Fenwick for reasons that will
appear later. He was leaving for San Francisco and the East the next
week, by the way, and this was a scratch gathering of friends and
acquaintances more or less to do Fenwick honor. Ben Allis and Mrs.
Allis were giving the “party.” Nora Pate, Mrs. Allis’s niece, was
spending with them an enforced holiday from school. She was at the
dinner-table on sufferance merely. It was Nora, with her giggling
flapperish reference to a ouija-board occurrence at school that had
elicited Fenwick’s humorous quotation.

Now you must also know that we were a fairly intimate but more than
fairly eclectic group at the Allis’s table. Most of us were bred
to one or another form of the Christian religion, went to church
spasmodically (except Nora, who of course had to go every Sunday),
and comfortably or uncomfortably, according to temperament, let the
whole thing slide--took it for granted, or permitted it euthanasia,
as it and our souls chose. But Mrs. Conway was a Catholic--“just the
ordinary kind,” as she had once said herself, with a sidelong glance
at Mrs. Medford, who was waveringly “High”; Allis was a scientific
skeptic, and Fenwick a reverent free-thinker. Or so I had gathered.
The typhoon had made him a free-thinker, and his inheritance and
temperament had apparently kept him reverent. My personal convictions
do not matter, but when it comes to ouija-boards, I am all with Allis.

Young Nora had been rather stumped by Fenwick’s quotation. She had
probably heard of Belshazzar, but she had never heard of Emily, and
she certainly did not see what it had to do with the ouija-board
revelations at midnight in Betty Dane’s room.

After we had found out just where Fenwick had read Emily Dickinson,
the talk swung back to the occult. Mrs. Medford’s pearl-powdered
face and naturally red lips were eager. She even wanted the complete
account of what had happened in Betty Dane’s room. Nora needed no
more encouragement than that.

“Why, Betty was desperate because she couldn’t be at home when her
cousin had his leave; and she asked ouija if there wasn’t any chance
of his leave being changed. And ouija said, ‘Measles will make you
free,’ and of course we all laughed. Then we thought probably her
cousin would have measles, so he couldn’t come, and Betty would be
free of disappointment. And the next week Pauline Case came down with
them--and Betty _is_ at home with her cousin, and she’s going to
bring back a book that tells all about everything depending on the
way the breath circulates in your body.”

The flushed Nora, at a glance from her aunt, sank out of sight below
the conversational tide. But Mrs. Medford had smiled comfortingly at
her.

“Prophesying is one thing they won’t usually engage to do, you know,”
someone threw in. “I believe even Doyle and Lodge say that?”

“Naturally--since they have to get it out of your subconscious.” This
was Mrs. Conway.

Mrs. Medford turned upon her, a little acrid. You may have noticed
that the two kinds of “Catholic” don’t mix very well. “Has the Church
decided that it’s all your subconscious?”

Mrs. Conway’s smile was all that she herself could have wished it to
be. “Why, I believe so. Where else could they get it?”

“Whom do you mean by ‘they’?” the other woman challenged.

“Why, the evil spirits.” Mrs. Conway reached for a mint drop. “You
see, the Church has had all this to settle so _many_ centuries ago.
It’s hardly a new phenomenon.”

If there was irony in Mrs. Conway’s tone, it was not sharp enough
to wound Fanny Medford. She looked rather pleadingly at the other
woman’s clever, gentle face. “Always evil spirits?” she murmured.
“Never good ones?”

Mrs. Conway murmured back, and the two seemed for a moment to be
isolated together. “Never good ones; and _never_ the real dead. That
is forbidden, you know.”

I had hoped that our moving from the dining room would break the
current, but I had reckoned without Fenwick. We had our coffee all
together in Allis’s big library--so much the nicest room in the house
that I didn’t much wonder at Maud Allis’s refusing, except under
great pressure, to drag the women away elsewhere. Nora Pate was
sent upstairs to study, and we were freer. As soon as she had gone,
Fenwick led us back to the subject. Mrs. Conway sat apart in the
shadows, moving a fan slowly. Mrs. Medford fixed her eyes hungrily on
Fenwick. The rest of us listened. After all, it was Fenwick’s party.

“Of course you see all kinds of trances, and miracles, and
levitation, and tricks, out in the East,” he began. “I confess
I’m not much interested in what Hindus and such do. They’re so
different, anyhow. But it does interest me to come back to America
for the first time since the war, and find everybody going it this
way. The Americans and English out there do it, too. But there’s
an epidemic here, as far as I can make out. Look at your niece and
her ouija-board. And all of us ready to argue about it. Honestly,
I’m interested. I’m perfectly open-minded about it, myself. I’m not
psychic, or whatever you call it.”

“You don’t have to be ‘psychic.’ There’s no such thing.” This came
out of the shadows where Mrs. Conway’s fan waved.

Mrs. Medford turned and gazed at her, as if trying to penetrate even
deeper shadows that lay between them.

“Oh, well, I mean--I’ve sat in on table-tipping once or twice, but
I don’t think I added much. I never saw any ghosts, or had anything
queer happen to me. I know a man out in Singapore who does automatic
writing, though--gets stuff through from his mother. At least, he
says he doesn’t believe it’s his mother, but he keeps right on, all
the same. He says she has told him things that no one else could have
known about.”

“_He_ knew about them, didn’t he?” asked Allis, with heavy
matter-of-factness.

“Why, yes--he and she.”

“Well, it all came out of his subconscious.”

“I daresay.” Fenwick set down his coffee-cup and took a cigarette
proffered him by Mrs. Allis. “Only I’m sick of you people all wagging
your heads and saying, ‘the subconscious’ every time you’re up
against it. Why don’t you get busy and explain how the thing works?”

“Ah, yes, why don’t you?” Mrs. Medford seized on Fenwick’s challenge
as if it were her own.

Allis pulled his moustache and spoke judicially. “I’m not a
psychologist myself, as you very well know--not even a biologist.
I don’t know that science has explained the technique of it yet,
though they are working on this sort of thing all the time. Hysteria,
secondary personality, dreams--all these things are being put under
the microscope, and they’re finding out.”

“I’d rather believe in spooks than in Freud, any day.” This was
Carter, a gay soul.

Allis ignored him. “I daresay you do know, though, that alienists are
using automatic writing in their treatment of patients now. They find
that some traumas, too deep-laid for hypnotism to probe to, can be
brought to the surface by getting the patient to write automatically.
That is one for the subconscious, anyhow.”

“But--” this was Fanny Medford, brave on her own account--“what about
the things that never were in your subconscious; couldn’t have been
there? They get those too--indeed they do.”

“I agree with Fanny and Mr. Fenwick,” said Maud Allis. “I don’t
believe it’s the spirits of the dead; but neither do I believe that
the psychologists have explained it yet. I’m open-minded.”

“I’m open-minded, too,” laughed young Carter. “Ready to try anything.
Except Nora’s ouija-board. That’s too darned easy.”

A slim form in white came out of the shadows--Mrs. Conway, gray-eyed,
ivory-cheeked, like a warm ghost. “Can’t you see,” she said, “that an
open mind is the most dangerous thing there is? Because if your mind
is really open, any evil thing can get in.”

She put her arm round Fanny Medford’s waist, with a soft, sidelong
gesture, though she faced our host, directly questioning him. Mrs.
Medford stirred a little against the light encircling arm--barely
noticing it, it seemed. Her face was flushed beneath her pearl
powder. She addressed Allis and Carter, now standing abreast before
the fireplace.

“Have you ever tried automatic writing?”

“No.”

“Nor I,” cut in Mrs. Allis, “but I’m going to try sometime. Has
anyone here tried it?” Maud Allis went on, looking round at her group.

I shook my head, Fenwick and Carter theirs. Mrs. Conway merely said,
“You forget I’m a Catholic.”

“How about Mrs. Medford herself?” Young Carter marked us off on his
fingers.

“Oh, I--I’ve tried it, yes. But I can’t do it!” She bit her lip and
turned away, and before we quite realized that she was crying she had
made a soft plunge through the wide doorway into the next room. Maud
Allis followed her, but returned in a few moments.

“She’ll be all right presently. She’ll come back. It’s just that she
is so interested. Ever since her brother, Jack Hilles, was killed,
she’s been trying to ‘get through’ to him; and she can’t do it
herself. She began going to a medium, and the woman had no sooner
established communication for her than she died. Now, Fanny’s rather
up against it. She’s not the kind that likes to go to mediums, you
know. I’m awfully sorry you started the subject.”

“Why didn’t you stop us, if you knew all that?” Ben queried.

“I didn’t. She just told me about the medium now. Oh, she’ll pull
herself together all right. It may do her good to have it out with a
sensible crowd like this. We didn’t put it into her head. It’s there
all the time--has been, ever since Jack Hilles was killed in the
Argonne.”

“Well, we’ll drop it right here,” Allis replied.

But Mrs. Medford was back among us and heard him.

“You won’t drop anything on my account, I hope. Maud may have told
you it’s the one thing I’m interested in. It’s just awfully hard luck
that I can’t do anything by myself. If you people really feel like
trying anything, don’t let me stop you. I daresay the rest of you
are as bad as I am, anyway. Not ‘psychic’--though Mrs. Conway says
there’s nothing in that.”

“There isn’t,” Mrs. Conway averred again.

“Let’s try it, anyhow,” cried young Carter. “Not table-tipping. Let’s
sit about and turn the lights out and each take a pencil, and see if
we can do automatic writing.”

Fanny Medford clapped her hands. “Oh, do! Only, of course, I can’t.
But perhaps”--she looked us over hungrily--“some of you can, and I
might get a tip as to the right way to manage. And, anyway, it’s so
interesting.” Certainly she had recovered.

“I’m not going to sit with the lights out all the evening,” grumbled
Allis. “This was supposed to be, in its humble way, a dinner-party.”

“Well, of course, not all the evening,” Maud conceded. “Quarter of an
hour. And then we’ll stop and play bridge.”

“It would be rather fun.” This was Genevieve Ford. I have not
mentioned Miss Ford before, simply because she had taken no part in
the conversation that I have detailed. She happened to you, once in
so often, in somebody’s house, and you didn’t much care, one way or
the other. She was just a nice girl, a little more restful than some,
perhaps. I think the Allises hoped against hope that some day she and
Carter.... I don’t know why.

Somehow, Miss Ford’s quiet speech clinched it. Perhaps because she
had been an outsider through the talk.

“Good for you. Let’s!” Carter dashed to Ben’s table and swept some
pencils off it. “Paper, Allis? And more pencils. We’ll scatter
about through the rooms so that everyone can have a table-edge or a
chair-arm.”

Allis found us pads of paper and pencils--all except Mrs. Conway, who
refused to join us and went off to fetch her knitting. We all looked
at each other rather helplessly.

“How do you begin?” I asked.

“I suppose you douse the glim.” Carter snapped off the light nearest
to him.

“That’s perfectly unnecessary,” Fenwick commented. “The man I know
in Singapore does it any time--in broad daylight, between courses at
tiffin, if he feels like it. All you do is to let your hand go slack,
and think about something quite different.”

Mrs. Conway, who had returned with her knitting, intervened. “I
wouldn’t think too hard about something quite different, if I were
you. That is, not if you want results.”

“But we want to play fair,” Maud Allis protested. “There’s no sense
in trying this kind of thing unless you do your best.”

“I only meant,” Mrs. Conway explained, “that if you really want to
let them in, you must make your mind as blank as possible. Don’t
make an effort to think of anything. Just open the door and wait.
You make me feel like an accessory before the fact”--she smiled a
little--“except that I really don’t believe anything will happen.”

She withdrew to a sofa and began to knit.

“You just have to be quiet.” Fenwick gave his last explanations.
“And let your right arm be comfortably slack, and don’t look at the
paper if you do begin to write. And if nothing happens in twenty
minutes”--he looked interrogatively at Maud Allis--“then we play
bridge, do we?”

Mrs. Allis nodded. “And I’m going to put out some of the lights,
whether it’s necessary or not. We’d be rather ridiculous in a glare,
and we’d probably all be looking at each other to see if anyone’s
else arm was moving.” So she reduced the room to a demi-obscurity,
very soothing and non-committal.

Fenwick sat at the other end of Mrs. Conway’s sofa, resting his pad
on his knee. “Won’t your knitting spoil it?” he murmured.

“Dear no,” she whispered back. “I’ll stop, if you like. But
knitting-needles won’t keep them away.”

“No fooling, Ben.” Mrs. Allis’s admonishing words were the last
spoken. After that, silence.

I did my best to play the game, but my hand did not move. I became,
somehow, perfectly sure that it never would move, and that conviction
edged my voluntary slackness of spirit. The corners of the room
were too dark for me to see how each fellow guest was faring; but
I noted idly the little stir of Mrs. Conway’s needles, the faint
fire-glow on Mrs. Medford’s bent blonde head, Ben Allis’s comfortably
hunched position, Miss Ford’s graceful, pensive attitude. After
fifteen minutes, I constituted myself timekeeper, moving my left
hand so that the radium dial of my wrist-watch showed. I stared at
it until I began to feel prickly all over. If my arm didn’t move
then, I thought, I was surely no good at the business; for I was half
hypnotized by my concentrated stare at the dial, and my left hand
certainly had no physical knowledge of what my right hand, off in
space, was doing.

When twenty minutes were up, no one stirred. I decided to give them
a little more time, for good measure. The minute-hand crawled as it
does when you are taking a pulse or a temperature. Before the half
hour was quite reached, Ben Allis leaped to his feet.

“I’m tired of this. There’s nothing in it. Switch on the lights, you
people.”

But the others were stretching cramped limbs, rising slowly from
their fixed positions, tottering in the half-gloom. I had not risen,
myself, and I watched them. They looked drugged, unsure, wan and
ungraceful in the dim light--purgatorial poor souls. Only for a
second; but just for a second the only normal thing in the scene was
the implacable motion of Mrs. Conway’s fingers. Then Carter turned on
the light at my elbow, and I saw my own pad of paper. The page, ten
inches by eight, was covered with the huge scrawl of two words: “Ask
Fenwick.” And I had not known, staring at the dial of my watch, that
my arm had moved.

The other lights went on, then. People held their sheets of paper up
before them like shields, and moved to the nearest lamp. All except
Fenwick, who still held to his corner of the sofa.

“Nothing--of course.” Mrs. Medford spoke first, then flung her pad
down on the table.

“Nothing here.” Ben Allis grinned over his.

“Mine says something!” Maud Allis cried, as she bent over it under a
lamp. “But I can hardly read it, it’s so queer.”

Miss Ford and Carter pressed towards her.

“Oh, I see now,” she said. “It’s ‘Ask Fenwick.’”

I bit my lip and delayed my contribution to knowledge. But while
Carter and Genevieve Ford were examining the unsoiled whiteness of
their sheets of paper, I looked at Fenwick. He sat in his corner,
open-eyed now but tired, surrounded by white things. Mrs. Conway had
stopped knitting and was looking at him with concentrated interest.
Her hand fluttered over the sheets of paper that lay between them on
the sofa, but never once quite touched them.

The group at the table turned to me. “Did you get anything?” they
chorused. Their backs were all more or less turned to Fenwick and
Mrs. Conway, you understand.

I came forward. “Just like Maud’s. ‘Ask Fenwick.’ Pick up your
manuscript, Fenwick,” I called, “and let us see it.”

They all turned, then.

“Why, he’s written _heaps_!” Mrs. Medford rushed to the sofa, but
Mrs. Conway’s lifted hand fended her off from the papers. “Give him
time,” she murmured; “he doesn’t realize yet what he’s done.”

Mrs. Medford stopped, but Carter was not so easily dealt with. He
strode over and began picking up the sheets of paper.

Fenwick yawned. “Can I have a cigarette? By gum! I think I must have
pulled something off, my arm is so tired.” He flexed it as he rose.

“You did, my boy, you did! Well, who says we aren’t psychic?” This
was Carter, arranging the sheets in the order in which presumably
they had fallen from Fenwick’s busy hand.

An odd look passed between Mrs. Conway and her host. Both started to
speak together. Then she yielded to him, nodding acquiescence as Ben
said: “They are Fenwick’s property. It’s up to him whether or not he
gratifies our curiosity.”

But, Fenwick, jaunty now, uncramped, waved his cigarette. “It belongs
to the company. I’m delighted to have been successful. But isn’t it
extraordinary that I shouldn’t once have realized that I was writing
or that I was tearing those sheets off?”

“You did it very quietly. There was no noise,” Mrs. Conway
volunteered.

“Can’t we read the stuff, right off?” Carter inquired anxiously.

Allis leaned over and took the papers from him. There must have been
four or five sheets. Neither he nor Carter had examined them.

“Fenwick’s property. It’s up to Fenwick.”

“I don’t want the stuff. Let’s read it aloud if it makes any sense.”

Mrs. Conway rose with determination. “Why not hand it over to me? I
won’t read it.”

But Mrs. Medford cried out. “Mr. Gregory wrote, ‘Ask Fenwick.’ So did
Maud Allis. We _must_ ask Fenwick.”

“Yes. What’s the use of spending all this time in an experiment if
we can’t see what we’ve accomplished?” Miss Ford voiced her own and
Carter’s grievance.

“Well, Fenwick”--Allis’s bantering voice threw in--“if you are ready
to vouch for the absolute purity of your subconscious, shall we
oblige the ladies?”

Fenwick looked sheepish. “Oh, I say! You don’t mean to load that
stuff, whatever it is, off on me. Why, it may be a résumé of the last
French novel I read--or anything.”

Mrs. Conway spoke, for the first time, with some sharpness. “You
don’t, any of you, know what may be there. It may be utter nonsense,
or it may be a sermon. But whatever is there comes from no good
place.”

Some of us laughed. “You’re very hard on Fenwick’s subconscious,”
Allis said.

“It’s the first time you’ve ever done it?” Mrs. Conway asked.

“Absolutely the first.” Fenwick nodded.

“Well, then”--she sighed--“it’s probably all right. They’re usually
careful how they begin.” She shrugged her shoulders.

We moved in a body to the big lamp on Allis’s writing-table. “Thank
goodness, Nora’s upstairs,” Maud Allis giggled in my ear.

Fenwick now had let himself go in the spirit of Carter and Genevieve
Ford, as they chaffed him. “All right,” he said; “I may be done for,
but who wrote ‘Ask Fenwick’? Seems to me we’re all tarred with the
same brush anyhow.”

He held up the first page, getting the light over his shoulder, and
began to read:

“‘Jack Hilles speaking.’” The manuscript opened like a telephone call.

Fenwick broke off. “Oh, I say, you don’t want me to read this. There
can’t be anything in it, and we’d all be sorry to go any further----”

But Mrs. Medford came close to him, her eyes almost glaring with the
intensity of her feeling--a queer, soft, mad glare. I saw, like a
shot, that she wasn’t going to be easy to manage.

“Mr. Fenwick, you’ve no right to stop,” she panted.

Ben Allis had gone completely white under his pink-and-tan. Later, I
knew why, but then I was merely surprised. Ben was not the man to be
upset by preposterous hints of the supernatural.

Fenwick tried to temporize. “But, Mrs. Medford, we can’t play with
serious matters. We must respect the dead.” Fenwick had not looked
ahead; it was obvious that he simply did not wish to be responsible
for anything that purported to be a message.

“He’s my brother! And if he gets through to you while I’m here, it’s
for me. That is my property.”

Allis came up and looked shamelessly over Fenwick’s shoulder at the
writing. “No, it isn’t, Fanny. It’s Fenwick’s. He shall do absolutely
what he pleases with it in my house. I’m responsible.”

There was a curious morbid note of confession in his voice. But no
one paid any attention to tones of voice, because a very undignified
scene followed immediately on his words.

Mrs. Medford clutched the papers that Fenwick held. She got away
with the first page, too, and turned her back on us--heading for the
drawing room beyond. “Don’t you dare, as you believe in a God, to
destroy any of it,” she threw back over her shoulder.

She had to fight for even her one page--not very hard, for of course
Fenwick couldn’t struggle with her physically. The two men, Allis
and Fenwick, looked ridiculous as they faced each other in the tacit
admission that they couldn’t help themselves. Ben pulled himself
together quickly. “Get that away from her, Maud--by force, if
necessary.”

“But, Ben----”

“I said, ‘by force, if necessary,’ Maud,” he repeated sternly.

She flew ahead after Mrs. Medford, obedient, but sowing her path with
protesting murmurs.

Genevieve Ford giggled nervously. Carter raised his eyebrows to the
ceiling. “What _is_ up, you fellows?” he asked weakly.

I heard Allis whisper to Fenwick: “Did you ever know him--Hilles?”

“No. Never heard his name till tonight?”

“Then what the devil----”

“I thought you’d come to the devil in time.” This was Mrs. Conway on
the outskirts.

An indignant cry came back from Maud Allis. “Really, Ben, I can’t.
You’d better come yourself. She won’t give it to me. Fanny, be
sensible!” Then the sound trailed off further.

We followed--Allis, Fenwick, Miss Ford, and I. We passed through
the drawing-room where they had been a few seconds before, and out
into the hall. Maud Allis stood there furious, a little dishevelled,
sucking a hurt finger. “She’s locked herself into the telephone
closet. I don’t know what you expect me to do.”

“Not anything more. We can’t help it now. We’ll go away and leave
her. She’ll come out.”

But Maud was shaking with anger and nervousness. “How do you know she
will? If it’s anything so bad that she oughtn’t to see it, she may
never come out. She may just die there.”

Allis smiled in spite of himself. “People don’t just die in telephone
closets. And she’ll come out, if for nothing else, because she wants
to see the rest of it.”

“But if it should be so dreadful----”

“It doesn’t make any difference how dreadful it may be. She’ll feel
she’s got to see it. Oh, damn!”

Then he moved over to the door of the closet. “Fanny,” he shouted,
“we’re going back to the library. If you don’t come out inside of
five minutes, we’ll break down the door. Now what a fool thing that
was to say,” he murmured, precisely as if we were to blame for his
words.

A slender figure in white Spanish lace became suddenly manifest among
us. “Mrs. Allis, can I telephone?” Mrs. Conway asked softly.

“No, I’m afraid you can’t.” Maud’s answer was grim. “Fanny Medford
has locked herself into the telephone closet with the first sheet of
that wretched stuff.”

“Then will someone go out and telephone for me”--she gave the
number--“and ask them to send my car at once?”

“Ben can telephone from the extension upstairs,” Maud suggested
sullenly.

“Oh, thank you. I wish he would.”

Allis turned suddenly upon Mrs. Conway. “I can’t pretend that, as a
host, I’m proud of my hospitality. But don’t you think it would be
kinder all round if we didn’t break up? We might be able to get that
poor thing out of her hysteria if we all stuck about and did our
best?”

“I have no intention of going before Mrs. Medford does, Mr. Allis,”
was the very quiet reply. “I thought it might be a good thing to have
the car waiting. Mayn’t I go up and telephone, myself? I think Mr.
Allis ought to stay here.”

Maud nodded. “It’s in my room.” And Mrs. Conway moved upstairs. She
leaned over the stair-rail on the first landing and spoke to Fenwick.
“Don’t destroy those other pages. If she still wants to see them,
she’d better--much better.”

“You don’t know what’s in them,” Fenwick answered. Nor did he, but he
evidently considered they were not to be lightly treated.

“It doesn’t make any difference what’s in them. Not even if it were
the Black Mass.” She went on, up.

We went back into the library then, and Allis stood, watch in hand,
waiting. He was beginning to mean it, about breaking down the door,
I could see. Allis had had a good glimpse of the first page. Fenwick
had seen a little. None of the rest of us knew anything but those
three first words like a telephone call: “Jack Hilles speaking.”

Before Allis moved, Mrs. Medford came slowly through the drawing
room, holding the sheet of paper very carefully in her hand. A little
behind, Mrs. Conway’s white form gently stalked her.

Fanny Medford’s poor little head was held very high. “I suppose you
people have read the rest--and doubtless Mr. Fenwick has told you
what is in this.” She tapped the paper.

“Not one of us knows anything or has read a word,” Maud Allis
declared.

Allis frowned. “That’s not quite true, Maud. I saw a little--a few
sentences--of what Mrs. Medford took with her. I daresay Fenwick saw
as much. But no one has seen all of it except Mrs. Melford, and no
one has seen any of the other sheets. That is the exact state of the
case.”

“You will kindly give me the rest of the writing,” Mrs. Medford went
on, to Fenwick.

But Mrs. Conway stepped forward and slipped the sheets from Fenwick’s
grasp. He let her take them, though he looked at Allis anxiously. The
situation was becoming Mrs. Conway’s.

“I have them, you see.” She turned to Mrs. Medford. “And if you
insist, _you_ shall have them. Of course I wish you would let me
destroy them all, here and now. It isn’t true, you know, that the
dead communicate. They don’t.”

Mrs. Medford was shaking, but her voice was still her own. “They do.
I know they do. Jack talked to me through Mrs. Weale, who’s dead now.
But not this kind of thing. It’s wicked, it’s beastly, what you’ve
done!” she cried to Fenwick.

“But, Mrs. Medford, I don’t even know what’s there--except the first
sentences. I never knew your brother. I don’t believe this stuff, of
course.”

“Nobody believes anything, Fanny.” Allis corroborated him. “This
sort of thing has been shown up, time and again, for the most arrant
trash. It’s just our bad luck that something got written that was
upsetting for you.”

“You believe it--you know you do.” Her voice was half a choke in her
throat.

To my consternation, Allis did not deny it, at once and with passion.
“Fanny, don’t be absurd. You know perfectly well what my attitude to
these matters is--purely scientific skepticism.”

“I say that you believe those things of Jack. As for Mr.
Fenwick”--she disposed of him then and there with a look of
loathing--“I leave him to the rest of you.”

Maud Allis followed her out of the room.

Allis took out his handkerchief and wiped his forehead. “Any one of
you men feel like seeing her home?” he asked. “Fenwick and I would
seem to be out of the running.”

Mrs. Conway put out her hand. “Good-night, Mr. Allis. Of course I’m
going to take her home. What did you suppose I ordered my car for?”
She did not bid the rest of us good-night, but she seemed to address
us all in parting. “Naturally, I don’t know what’s in these papers.
But I take it, it is something pretty bad--about her brother. Mrs.
Medford may have to see them, since I promised her; but I guarantee
you they shall be destroyed without my, or anyone’s else, reading
them. It’s all nonsense, of course, but you see she half believes.
Truly, I’m the best person to see her through, because I can explain
it.”

“It’s just some foolish trick of muscles--and re-arranging all the
words in the dictionary,” burst in Fenwick, hotly.

“Yes.” She smiled. “But _what_ foolish trick? That’s what you can’t
explain to her. And I can. You may not think my explanation is
correct, but at least it begins at the beginning and sees you through
to the end. That is why I shall try to convince her. You open-minded
people can’t.”

“Even so,” Allis said, “I don’t see how you’re going to manage it.”

She had turned to go, but she stopped and answered him. “I’ve this
advantage, you see. You can’t tell her _why_ it happened. I can.
Malice accounts for everything.”

“There’s not an ounce of malice in this crowd,” Carter remarked.

“No, not among us. But the things you let in to your foolish minds
are all malice. Believe me, they’ve had a ripping time to-night. They
have to take what they can find--yes. It’s the way they use it that
counts.”

“But suppose whatever it is were true,” Miss Ford murmured. “Suppose
it was her brother, after all, getting through.”

“I’ve told you the dead can’t get through--not the real dead. It’s
only spirits pretending.”

“You’ll never get her to believe that,” Allis said ruefully. “None of
us could believe that.”

“Pardon me, I could,” Mrs. Conway threw back. “And if I can make Mrs.
Medford believe it, too, it will be the best way out of the mess
you’ve made.”

“Good luck go with you,” he called after her. But he seemed dazed.

When Maud Allis came back, Miss Ford made her adieux, and Carter left
with her. They had been, from first to last, outsiders, and perhaps
it was the most tactful thing they could have done. I prepared to
follow them, and Maud Allis, saying good-night to them, bade me
good-night, too.

“I’ve got to see Nora,” she said. “I promised her I would before she
went to bed. I meant to cut out from bridge. Probably I shall see
you again, Mr. Fenwick. Sorry you have to go, Mr. Gregory.” There
was certainly no urge to stay, in her voice. She was more done up
than she owned. Yet she had not seen those sheets that Fenwick had
written--any more than I had, or Mrs. Conway, or Genevieve Ford, or
Carter.

I let Carter and Miss Ford get away a little in front of me, thinking
that they were best by themselves, in the fellowship of their
detachment from it all. Whatever had happened to the rest of us had
left them unscathed. They had not been touched, apparently, by the
episode, except to see that Mrs. Medford’s exit was a cue for them
to break up the party. I lighted a cigarette in the vestibule, and
craned my neck to see them turn the corner. It was jerked back by a
clutch on my collar, and I dropped the cigarette.

“Come back in here, you idiot!” said Allis in my ear. “Did you really
think you were going?”

Yes, I really had thought so; but I went in again.

I found, when I reached the library (Allis locked the door behind us)
that he had furnished Fenwick with a precious drink. He offered me
none, and was taking nothing himself. Whiskey is medicine, in these
days.

“Fenwick and I need some one else to sit in with us,” Allis declared.
“I may have to tell Maud later. That’s neither here nor there. I’m
glad those two young people had the sense to go. If they hadn’t, I’d
have kicked them out.”

“Well, of course, I’m eaten alive with curiosity,” I admitted. “Only
it all sounded like the sort of thing that wouldn’t be mentioned
again unless necessary. I never saw a word of the stuff, remember.”

“I saw precious little of it, and Fenwick here saw no more than I
did.” Allis began to walk about with his hands in his pockets. “You
can see the effect it has had on Fenwick.”

Fenwick’s head was buried in his hands. “I wrote the damned stuff.
That’s what gets me.” I saw why Allis had fetched whiskey for him.

“We aren’t going to quote it for your benefit--even if we could,”
went on Allis. “But you can take it from us that it was unmitigated
filth. We judge by sample.”

“Then why did you give the rest of it to those women?” I shouted.
“Why didn’t you burn up what you had your hands on, at least?”

“Easy, now, easy.” But Allis was troubled. He made an eloquent
gesture over Fenwick’s bowed head. “We practically had to do what
Mrs. Conway said. I believe she _is_ the person to deal with Fanny
Medford. Evil spirits are the best way out--if she can take it. And
Mrs. Conway is a clever woman. But we three have got to sift the
matter. It seemed to be autobiographical, by the way--statement of
things done in the past. Buck up, Fenwick. It’s more my fault than
yours.”

“Your fault? You didn’t even write ‘Ask Fenwick,’” our friend
retorted. The whiskey was strengthening him a little.

Allis paid no attention. “I take it for granted that none of us now
present subscribes to Mrs. Conway’s theory. Very well. That’s that.
Fenwick wrote automatically a lot of stuff of which he and I have
seen a little. It all purported to be Jack Hilles speaking, and on
that basis it was Jack Hilles very much giving himself away. Of
course, it wasn’t Jack Hilles any more than it was the Secretary of
State. Mrs. Conway is right, at least, when she says the dead don’t
communicate.”

“Then this kind of thing just flowers naturally out of the rich soil
of my mind, I suppose?” Fenwick asked sarcastically.

Allis smiled faintly. “I wouldn’t say that. But you’ve knocked about
the world more than most of us, and you’ve seen more than your
share of exotic rottenness. Gregory and I would have had to go out
and hunt for it. You’ve had it thrust upon your notice. If your
subconscious stores it up, it isn’t your fault.”

“But what on earth should make me drag out horrors and attribute them
to a man I never laid eyes on, who died fighting for his country in
the Argonne?”

“That,” said Allis deliberately, “is where I come in.”

“You?” We both exclaimed.

Allis leaned against the chimney-piece, his hands still in his
pockets. “Well, yes. Of course Jack Hilles’ name was bound to appear
if any name appeared--after the way Fanny had gone on. But if that
sort of thing was dragged out of you, about Hilles, instead of
nice, sweet, comforting things, it was probably because my mind was
stronger than Fanny Medford’s.”

“Do you mean that you were thinking that kind of thing about Hilles
all the time?” Fenwick queried.

“No, I wasn’t _thinking_ those things about him,” Allis answered
slowly. “I merely _knew_ those things about him. That is--I never
knew he did anything so bad as what was written there, but I knew he
was a bad lot.”

“Then why didn’t you write the stuff?”

“Like Mrs. Conway, I’m not open-minded. I disbelieve it too utterly.
I’m prejudiced. But I don’t doubt my knowledge acted telepathically
on your more sensitive--what shall I say?--mental mechanism. It’s all
suggestion. Mrs. Medford involuntarily suggests Jack Hilles to you,
and I involuntarily suggest the kind of person I knew him to be.”

We were silent for a moment.

“It’s hideous, all the same,” I said finally. “He’s dead, after
all--in the Argonne.”

“But not fighting for his country,” Allis remarked quietly. “He was
shot--for other reasons. I’ve no particular business to know that for
a fact, but I do. Fanny Medford never knew the worst of Jack Hilles,
but she had no illusions about him until he went into the war. Then
he became a hero. When he was ‘killed in the Argonne’--which is all
_she_ knows about it--he was _a fortiori_ a hero; a super-hero, if
you like. You may have noticed that Fanny isn’t exactly impersonal in
her attitude to life.”

He went on, after a pause. “I hope no one saw anything in my
expression.... I was rather shaken by the glimpse I got. I never
thought even Jack Hilles went so far as that. I wonder if Fanny saw.
She accused me of believing it all. She must have meant she thought I
believed it on the score of Fenwick’s automatic writing. I believed
it on the score of knowing that Hilles was capable of anything. And
that, I perhaps didn’t conceal sufficiently--and all of it--I’m
banking heavily on Mrs. Conway to explain.”

“I still don’t see why I had to write the miserable stuff,” argued
Fenwick--though he seemed a little more at ease than he had been.

“Well, I can’t tell you that,” Allis replied. “I’m inclined to
believe that Mrs. Conway is wrong about people’s not being, more or
less, ‘psychic.’ Certainly, even she would have to admit that some
are more sensitive, readier vehicles than others. It looks to me as
though you were a corker, Fenwick!”

Fenwick brooded for a time in silence, while Allis and I smoked.
At last he spoke. “No, it’s too queer. Evil spirits would explain
everything, but I haven’t gone back to the Middle Ages yet. You
try to explain it, Allis, by arranging an intricate system of
mental telephone wires--installed in an instant, ready for the
emergency. That may be accurate, but it’s extremely complicated. Too
complicated, I’d say. I’m not contradicting you, you understand. But
for myself, I usually take the line of least resistance.” He rose and
faced us. His fingers twitched a little as he, in turn, lighted a
cigarette.

“Meaning--?” Allis queried.

“Meaning that if Jack Hilles was the kind of person you say he was,
the easiest place for that sort of screed to have come from is--Jack
Hilles.”

Allis’s lips folded themselves firmly. “If you choose to admit the
supernatural hypothesis, I suppose it _is_ easy. I was ruling out
impossibilities.”

“The fact that you haven’t proved a thing possible doesn’t mean
that you’ve proved it impossible, does it? How about you, Gregory?”
Fenwick turned to me.

I threw up my hands. “Oh, I’m with Allis. It sounds queer and
far-fetched and all, but anything is more reasonable than believing
the dead communicate in that way. Even Mrs. Conway is more
reasonable.”

“Well, I wish to God they had rigged up their wireless on Allis’s
roof instead of mine!” Fenwick exploded. He turned his back on us and
walked over to a dark window.

I tried to be judicial. “If Allis was thinking about the sort of
creature Jack Hilles really was, that in itself accounts for the
telepathy business.”

Allis glared at me. “I wasn’t thinking of Jack Hilles. I knew he
was a very bad lot, but I wasn’t thinking about it--not at all. I
was wondering if Carter and Genevieve Ford would pull it off. And,
anyhow, I couldn’t have thought that kind of thing about Hilles. It
just wouldn’t naturally have occurred to me. Whereas, it might have,
to Fenwick, with his background.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Ben Allis stopped, suddenly, and I felt the blood in my body, for
an instant, back up in its channels. For just as Allis finished
speaking, Fenwick drew back from his window and crumpled up against
the sofa. No, he did not faint. He was, rather, at bay there, against
the world; against Allis and me, who rushed to him at once. I did not
try to read that face, though it shouted at me silently. I turned my
head away. “Damn you all, damn you all!” Fenwick’s white lips were
saying. “And I thought I’d got rid of it forever. Oh, damn you both!”
Yet he did not seem to be standing outside his own curse.

Fenwick roused himself at the sound of a knock on the library door,
and we faced about. The knock saved us three from something pretty
awful.

It was Maud Allis, and in her hand she carried a ouija-board. “I
found Nora playing with this thing,” she said; “and after to-night it
was more than I could bear. Will you please burn it up now--so I can
see it burn?”

“You bet I will!” Allis broke it over his knee, and went to the fire
which had almost died out.

With one eye on Fenwick, slowly, very slowly, composing himself to
a normal posture and a normal expression, with a sense that I must
keep Maud off him, I drew her away in the direction of the door.
“I hope”--and I laid my hand on her wrist--“the thing hasn’t been
worrying Nora. She didn’t get any echoes, did she?”

“Oh dear, no. It had just been writing foolishness--probably the kind
of foolishness you would expect to come out of Nora’s subconscious.”

“Nothing about Jack Hilles?” I tried to laugh.

“I should hope not! Betty Dane’s cousin, they’re all in love with;
and their matinée heroes; and their school commencement. But I’ve put
her to bed and taken it away. I will not have my niece ouija-ing.”

Ouija was now burning brightly above the Cape Cod lighter. Ben Allis
called to his wife. “Maud, do get a taxi round at once for Fenwick.
He’s tired and doesn’t want to walk.”

“Certainly, I will. Did you people come to any conclusion?”

“Ben has the right of it, I’m sure. Telepathy.” I spoke quite loud.
“He’ll tell you all about it. We’re going.”

Maud went off to the telephone.

Fenwick’s voice cut in. “Thanks for thinking of the taxi, Allis. I
believe I do want one. Good-night.”

“Shall I come along with you?” I asked, thinking of Mrs. Conway’s
brave support of Fanny Medford.

Allis frowned, and Fenwick, though he had got himself in hand, seemed
to cringe a little before the frown. “No, thanks. I’m going straight
to bed. It’s needless to say, I suppose, that this thing shall go no
further, as far as I am concerned. I can’t say it has been a pleasant
evening, but it has been interesting. It’s funny, isn’t it”--he
spoke rapidly, but carefully--“that a party of friends can react so
differently? Mrs. Conway thinks it’s evil spirits; I think Hilles did
get through; and you and Allis think it was all communicated from
Allis’s subconscious to mine. But we all hope that Mrs. Conway will
convince Mrs. Medford.”

No; he could evidently take care of himself now. And he obviously
wanted to be alone. Mrs. Allis, returning, rallied him as she said
good-night.

“Your taxi is there already, I think, Mr. Fenwick. What do you think
of Belshazzar’s letter _now_? I’m sorry you had to get the letter.”

It was all right for Maud to carry things off lightly--probably she
felt it was her duty--but it didn’t help Allis and me so much as she
doubtless hoped.

“I think I can promise never to meddle with this sort of thing
again,” he said gravely. “I’m convinced it was the real thing. Your
husband thinks he was responsible. He’ll explain to you.”

Allis answered the plea that sounded faintly in Fenwick’s voice.
“Yes, Maud shall have my telepathy theory. I think she’ll agree.
Maud, do go to the door with Fenwick. There’s no fender here, and I
don’t like to leave ouija.”

Maud Allis, as you may have made out, was a good wife who never
argued an absurdity if her husband perpetrated it. She preceded
Fenwick to the hall.

Allis gripped my hand. “I shall tell Maud exactly what I said. You’ll
tell nobody anything.”

“Of course not. For Mrs. Medford’s sake, if nothing else.”

Allis relaxed his grip. “Yes--and Fenwick’s, too. I’ve been fond of
him for a long time. Perhaps he’ll never give himself away again.”

“Perhaps not,” I agreed. “Asia is a large continent. He may come to
believe it was Hilles communicating, you know.”

“Well, I rather hope he does. Fenwick’s got to live. But you and I
don’t believe it.”

“No, we don’t.”

“It’s queer,” Allis mused; “you and I are the only ones of the crowd
who know what happened; and the one thing we are most anxious for is
that everyone concerned--even Fenwick himself--should be convinced of
some explanation we know is wrong. We want Mrs. Medford to believe
Mrs. Conway; I want Maud to believe what I said here a while ago; and
I even want Fenwick to believe that the dead communicate. We’re a
scientific lot, aren’t we?”

“I’m not sure I wouldn’t rather believe any of those things than
believe what I do,” I said grimly. I remembered Fenwick’s face.

“Exactly. Poor science!”

Mrs. Allis returned, and I bade my host and hostess good night. This
time I did not go back again.


       [13] Copyright, 1922, by The Metropolitan Magazine Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Katharine Fullerton Gerould.




                           WINKELBURG[14]

                            By BEN HECHT

                       (From _The Smart Set_)


                                  I

There was never a man as irritating as Winkelburg. He was an
encyclopedia of misfortunes. Everything that can happen to a man had
happened to him. He had lost his family, his money and his health. He
was, in short, a man completely broken--tall, thin, with a cadaverous
face out of which shone two huge lustreless eyes. He walked with an
angular crawl that reminded one of the emaciated flies one sees at
the beginning of winter. That was Winkelburg to a dot--a creature
perversely alive, dragging itself across an illimitable expanse of
flypaper.

It was one of Winkelburg’s worst habits to appear at unexpected
moments. But, perhaps, any appearances he might have made would have
had this irritating quality of unexpectedness. One was never looking
forward to him, and thus the sight of his wan, uncomfortable smile,
his lustreless eyes, his tenacious crawl was invariably an irritating
surprise.

I will be frank. It was Winkelburg’s misfortune which first attracted
me. I listened to his story avidly. He talked in slow words and
there was intelligence in the man. He was able to perceive himself,
not only as a pain-racked, starving human, but he glimpsed with his
large, tired eyes his relation to things outside himself.

It appeared that the man had been lying in a hall bedroom for two
weeks dying. An embittered landlady to whom he owed three months
rent had tended him. I fancy she was torn between a hope that the
miserable fool would die and give her a chance to rent the room to
a more profitable customer and a more optimistic greed. He might
recover, get a job and pay her the three months rent he owed.

Winkelburg wrote to me about it. It was my first knowledge of the
man. He offered his experiences as material for one of the daily
stories I was writing for the _News_. His letter was a document. In
it he recounted in good English and in a few lines the history of his
life.

“I have had hard luck all my life,” he wrote. “I have no friends or
relatives. My health is broken and I am without money. I once was
somebody, but that doesn’t matter now. I am dying. Lying up here in
my room and hearing the noises in the street all day and all night
I got to thinking about things. I don’t mind dying, but to die all
alone in a cheap bedroom with nobody around is too much. So I got
dressed. It took me almost all day to dress on account of the pain. I
had twenty cents left. I finally managed to walk out of the house and
get on a street car. It was a torture. But I figured if I could reach
the County Hospital they would put me in a bed and give me treatment,
and, anyway, it would not be so bad to die in a hospital.”

Then he went on to relate his experience. He had arrived at the
hospital and been ushered into a receiving room. Here a group of
internes stood around cracking jokes. One of them finally advised
him to take his clothes off. He retired into one of the booths and
stripped. When he came out the room was empty. So Winkelburg crawled
up on a dirty table and lay there waiting. He waited for an hour.
After an hour an interne popped into the room and looked at him with
some surprise and inquired what the devil he was doing lying naked
on the table. Winkelburg, more dead than alive, moaned something in
reply. Whereupon the interne examined him. Winkelburg wrote:

“He moved my legs up and down and felt over me for a minute and then
said, ‘You’re all right. I’ll give you a prescription to fix you up.’
And he wrote out a prescription. I put my clothes on slowly and asked
him what I should do. ‘Go home,’ he said. I told him I couldn’t.
Then he asked, ‘Well, how did you come here?’ I told him it was a
torture. So he grinned and said, ‘Torture back, then.’ I am back in
my room now, in bed. I feel worse. I’ve been thinking about all this.
It doesn’t make me angry. The world is like that. It has no time for
its unfortunates. There are too many healthy ones to take care of.
This interne was possibly not a bad fellow. When he talked to me I
realized how it was. I was just one of a thousand poor fools, and he
was busy with his career and his plans. He didn’t mean to be cruel,
but that’s just human nature, don’t you think?”

I wrote the story, adding a few lugubrious details for good measure.
I drew a picture of Winkelburg lying on his back, staring at the
ceiling and thinking of the busy city whose noises floated in through
his window. The next day brought a flood of letters. Philanthropists
offered to care for Winkelburg. The hospital authorities denied the
incident described by Winkelburg, but offered to make amends and to
give him treatment and a bed.

A week later I received a letter of thanks from him. He was in the
hospital. Three weeks later another letter came. He had been given a
home by an elderly couple. Luck had turned. He had all he wanted. Two
more weeks brought another letter. He was living somewhere else now
and he would like to hear from me. And then he appeared in person. It
was the first time I had ever seen him.

He sat down beside my desk and I looked at him. Death stared out of
the man. And I noticed at once the curious kindliness of him. He
talked slowly and told me of his experiences. He was courteously
brief, and even better than that, he spoke without emotion.

“There is nobody to blame,” he said. “Not even myself. It is just
the way things go. And if I can’t blame myself, how can I blame
the world? The city is like that. I’m no good. I’m done. Worn out,
useless. People try to take care of the useless ones. There are
institutions. Well, I had two good homes and was in two institutions,
thanks to the thing you wrote. But they kicked me out. They said I
was a faker. Somehow I don’t appeal to charitably inclined people.”

Later I understood why. It was because of the man’s smile--a feeble,
tenacious grimace that seemed to be offering a sardonic reproof. It
could never have been mistaken for a courageous smile. Philanthropy
had taken Winkelburg up and then dropped him. Quickly and definitely.
Because of his smile. The secret of its aggravating quality was this:
in it Winkelburg accused himself of his uselessness, his feebleness,
his poverty. It was as if he were regarding himself continually
through the annoyed eyes of others and addressing himself with
the words of others--“You, Winkelburg, get out of here. You’re a
nuisance. You make me uncomfortable, because you’re poor and diseased
and full of gloom. Get out. I don’t want you around. Why the devil
don’t you die?”

And the aggravating thing was that people looked at Winkelburg’s
smile as into a mirror. They saw in it a shrewd reflection of their
own attitude toward the man. They felt that Winkelburg understood
what they thought of him. And they didn’t like that. They didn’t like
to feel that Winkelburg was aware that deep inside their minds they
were always asking, “Why doesn’t this Winkelburg die and have it
over with?” Because that made them out as cruel, heartless people,
not much different in their attitude toward their fellow-man from
predatory animals in their attitude toward fellow predatory animals.
And somehow, although they really felt that way toward Winkelburg,
they preferred not to believe it. At least, they disliked accusation
where there should have been only gratitude.

Not that Winkelburg was ungrateful. He was thankful, obliging and
properly humble. But his smile persisted. And his smile was a mirror
that would not let his benefactors escape the truth. And eventually
Winkelburg’s smile became for them one of those curious mirrors that
exaggerate images grotesquely.

Charitably inclined people as well as all other kinds of inclined
people prefer their Winkelburgs more egotistic. They prefer that
unfortunate ones be engrossed in their misfortunes and not go around
wearing sardonic, philosophical smiles.


                                 II

Winkelburg dragged along for six months. He was past fifty-five.
Each time I saw him I was certain I would never see him again. I was
certain he would die--drop dead while crawling across his flypaper.
But he would appear. I would pretend to be vastly busy. He would sit
and wait. His consideration was an affront. It said, “Oh, yes, I know
you are a very busy man. You are part of the world. But Winkelburg
has nothing to do. Nothing but wait. Wait until he dies. So don’t
hurry. I have plenty of time.”

He would never ask alms. I would have been relieved if he had.
Instead he would sit and smile, and his smile would say:

“Ah, my friend, you are afraid I am going to ask you for money. Don’t
worry, please. I would rather die of hunger than ask you. Because it
would interfere with our friendship. And I value your friendship more
than a bite of food. I won’t ask you for money. I won’t bother you
at all. Yes, yes, I agree with you. I ought to be dead. It would be
better for everybody.”

We would talk little. He would throw out a hint now and then that
perhaps I could use some of his misfortunes for material. For
instance, the time his two children had been burned to death. Or the
time he had fallen off a street car while in a sick daze and injured
his spine for life, and how he settled with the street-car company
for five hundred dollars, and how he had been robbed on the way to
the bank with the money a month later.

I refused consistently and somewhat curtly his offer of material.
This offended Winkelburg. He would pick up the day’s paper and sit
reading my story through with a show of critical deliberation. Then
he would put it down and look at me as if to say:

“This thing you’ve written about is all right in its way. But it must
be obvious to you that, from a purely literary point of view, the
material I have to offer is vastly superior.”

I saw that his vanity was piqued. I would not have minded this. In
fact it was a bit droll. But there was his smile. Winkelburg’s
smile rose above his vanity. When I had returned to the typewriter,
feigning industry in the hope that the man would pick himself up and
crawl away, I would catch a glimpse of the inevitable wan grimace
that came to his lips and the smile would say:

“Yes, yes, I understand. You refuse my material because you don’t
want to get involved with me. Because you don’t want me to have any
more claims on you than I have. Not that you’re afraid I’ll ask you
for money. But if I gave you something you’re afraid that it would
establish a closer relationship between us. I’m sorry, but you
shouldn’t feel that way.”

Toward the end Winkelburg’s visits grew more frequent. I gave
instructions that he shouldn’t be admitted, and that whenever he
called, “I was out.” Futile. There were three things that the rich
man couldn’t keep out with his high fence, says the poet--rain, death
and tomorrow. And Winkelburg was gifted with an almost similar aloof
tenacity. He crawled past barriers. He melted through walls. And
regardless of subterfuges and instructions, I would hear his dragging
step in the corridor leading to my desk.

He wished to discuss things. He had become suddenly garrulous.
He wished to talk about the city. About its institutions. About
politics. About people. About art. This phase of Winkelburg was the
most unbearable. He was willing to admit himself an outcast, a thing
on a scrap heap. He was reconciled to the fact that he would starve
to death, and that everybody who had ever seen him would feel it was
a good thing he had finally died.

But he made one plea. He wanted nothing except to talk and to hear
words in order to relieve the loneliness of his day. He would like
abstract discussions that had nothing to do with Winkelburg and the
Winkelburg misfortunes. His smile now said, “I am useless. Worn out
and better off dead. But never mind me. Never mind Winkelburg and
his troubles. My mind is still alive. It still thinks and works.
I wish that it didn’t. I wish it was crippled like Winkelburg is,
and that it crawled around like my body. But it doesn’t. So talk to
me as if it were a mind belonging to somebody else, as if it were
an impersonal machine able to pronounce ideas and to argue and to
appreciate what you say. Talk to me as if I weren’t this insufferable
Winkelburg, but somebody of whom you have never heard.”

I grew suspicious finally. I began to think there was something
vitally spurious about this whole Winkelburg business. And I said to
myself, “The man’s a downright fake. If anybody were as pathetic and
impossible and useless as this Winkelburg is he would shoot himself.
Winkelburg doesn’t shoot himself. So he becomes illogical ... unreal.”


                                 III

A woman I know belongs to the type that becomes charitable around
Christmas time. She makes a glowing pretense of aiding the poor. As
a matter of fact she probably does aid them, what with the baskets
of food, clothing and necessities she showers upon their hovels.
But the point is that she regards the poor as a sort of social and
spiritual asset. They afford her the opportunity of appearing in
the eyes of her neighbors as a magnanimous soul, of doing something
which reflects great credit upon her character. It is certain that
she would be unhappy if there were no poor, that Christmas wouldn’t
be Christmas without the glow of spiritual righteousness and the lift
of economic superiority the giving of gifts to deserving inferiors
inspires in her. But anyway, she “does good,” and if she panders to
her own egoism as much as she improves the physical comfort of her
charges--that is a complication it will hurt nobody to ignore.

I told this woman about Winkelburg. I became poignant and moving on
the subject of Winkelburg’s misfortunes, his trials, sufferings, and,
above all, his Spartan stoicism. It pleased me to do this. I felt
that I was making amends and that the thing reflected great credit
upon my character--in her eyes.

So she went to the room on the South Side where Winkelburg lived.
And they told her there that Winkelburg was dead. He had died a week
ago. She was upset when she came back and told me about it. She
had come too late. She might have saved him. She accused herself
sorrowfully and I listened with politeness. Her accusation was a
charmingly involved boast. Her sorrow over the matter was merely her
way of telling me all the wonderful things she would have done for
Winkelburg. Her regret that he was dead was obviously enough the
disappointment she felt at not being able to pander to her egoism by
showering poor Winkelburg with largesse.

It was a curious thing--but when she told me that Winkelburg was dead
I felt combatively that it was untrue. And now since I know certainly
that Winkelburg is dead and buried, I have developed a curious state
of mind. I look up from my desk every once in a while expecting to
see him. In the streets I sometimes find myself actually thinking:

“I’ll bump into him when I turn this corner.”

I have managed to discover the secret of this feeling. It is
Winkelburg’s smile. Winkelburg’s smile was the interpretation of the
world’s attitude toward him, including my own, I tell myself. And
thus whenever his name comes to my mind or a thought of him occupies
me his smile appears as if it were the thought in my head. I have
only to think, “He is better off dead,” and at once the image of
Winkelburg comes into my eye, repeating the words to me. This may
sound involved, but it is really very simple. Instead of thinking
of Winkelburg I find that I take the easier way of remembering
Winkelburg’s smile, and his smile somehow says for me everything I
would have thought.

And this, in a way, is Winkelburg’s revenge, that I am unable to
forget him and that I am unable to say “poor Winkelburg” without
Winkelburg smiling back at me and saying with a taunting, irritating
calm, “Yes, yes, he is better off dead.”


       [14] Copyright, 1922, by Smart Set Company, Inc.
            Copyright, 1923, by Ben Hecht.




                            THE TOKEN[15]

                       By JOSEPH HERGESHEIMER

                 (From _The Saturday Evening Post_)


What Epes Calef principally thought, walking sharply away from his
discharged responsibility at the Custom House, through the thin icy
light of late afternoon, was that he was glad that was finally done
with. It was, he assured himself again, with articulating lips. The
next time he went to sea, to the East, to Patagonia and Canton and
the Falklands, or lay in the Macao Roads with the Brahminy kites
perched high on the rigging, he would be first mate, perhaps even
master, of the _Triton_, and no longer a mere supercargo. No words
could adequately express how much he hated that position of barterer.
Very privately--in view of his father’s special characteristic--he
hadn’t considered it at all a necessary part of his training for
the commanding of Calef ships; others of his acquaintance, making
like him toward such a superlative destiny, had worked their way
progressively aft with no pause over kegs of Spanish dollars and
the ridiculous merchants of Co-Hongs and countinghouses. They had
always, from the first, been seamen, while he-- But he need bother no
longer, his seemingly endless wearisome apprenticeship, the tiresome
dickering, was over; and in the coming spring, before the lilacs had
bloomed in Salem, he would personally, individually, order the last
fast holding the _Triton_ to earth cast off.

He swore a little, in a manner at once of the sea and of vainglorious
youth. Epes Calef was not yet twenty, and his breath congealed in a
sparkling mist. He was, he reminded himself with a lifting pleasure,
home; the _Triton_ had docked at noon, but he had been so busy with
the infernal accounts and manifest, the wharfinger and harbor
master, that he had hardly dwelt upon his safe and happy return.
Neither, he suddenly realized, had he yet seen any member of his
family; even Snelling Pingre, their head clerk, had been able only
to wave briefly from a distance. His, Epes’, father was more often
than not at Derby Wharf on the return of one of his ships; either Ira
Calef, or Bartlett, the elder son. Now Bartlett, his thoughts ran
on, had always been splendidly suited to his appointed activity--an
application to the purely financial side of the Calefs’ wide trading
voyages.

With Bartlett in Salem gradually taking the place of their father,
and Epes a master on the sea, the fortunes and prestige of the
family would increase in the next generation and the next. But
this reflection, or rather its implication, suddenly changed the
substance of his thoughts. They settled on Annice Balavan--with
an unaccountable, an unreasonable sensation of amazement. Epes
recognized that he was about to marry her. He had made this a
possibility, no, inevitable, just before he had left on this last
voyage. He was in for it, he told himself, in a phrase not wholly
gracious, since he had given her the Calef token.

It was remarkable about that--it was an obang, really; a thin gold
coin of the East, almost as broad as his palm and stamped with
angular signs--because there could be no doubt that when a Calef gave
it to a woman, no matter who she was or what the circumstances, he
married her. It had come to Salem in the reticule of a ridiculous
Dutch girl to whom the obang had been given in the hotel of the
Dutch East India Company at Batavia by the first adventurous Calef.
And after that its tradition, its power, had fast animated it.
Epes’ attitude toward this, and to Annice Balavan, was consequently
fatalistic. Now, after nearly two years on the islands and continents
and wide waters of the world, he didn’t see how he had come to
give the token to Annice. He had, all at once, no great desire for
marriage, except to the _Triton_; but with a youthfully philosophical
sigh he accepted the impending consequences of his gift as inevitable
to life.

There was some consolation in the reflection that Annice was, it
was practically admitted, the prettiest girl in Salem, and there was
a permissible question if there were any better looking in Boston.
Her considerable part of the Balavan money, too, would be a material
assistance to the not inconsiderable Calef funds and ambitions.
It was, after all, Epes decided, a very sensible and advantageous
arrangement; the more so because he knew beforehand that Annice would
not insist on going to sea with him; everyone, in fact, connected
with a ship hated a woman, the master’s wife, on board. She didn’t
like the sea, and made no secret of her feeling; the air from it,
drawing in through Salem Harbor, took the crispness out of her
muslins and made her hair, she declared, look like strings. But that
was nonsense; her ashen-gold hair, even in its net, had the softest
and most delicate beauty imaginable. Very different it was from
Sumatra’s; but then, everything about Sumatra, the younger sister,
was unlike Annice; particularly the former’s exaggerated--Epes called
it that--passion for ships and the sea. She carried this to a most
unbecoming extent; positively her questions were a nuisance.

He passed the Essex House on the right, and then the Marine Store.
The light faded rapidly and it was growing noticeably colder,
frigid and still; the sky was a clear pale yellow that flickered
in the patches of metallic ice along the gutters, and footfalls,
voices, carried surprisingly. Unaccustomed, for a comparatively long
period, to winter, he was at once aware of its sting and yet found a
gratification, without specially heavy clothes, in disregarding it.
He had been hardened to both danger and exposure, and he accepted
them with a sense of challenge and victory. How little Salem, the
land, compared with the shifting sea, changed; here there was no
making or taking in of sail; it didn’t matter what happened in the
way of weather, the houses, the stone-laid streets, even commonly the
trees, were always placidly, monotonously the same. The life in them,
as well, went always over the old charted and recharted courses,
every morning resembled every other morning, each night all the
others. Why, take this latter voyage, twenty-five days from Bombay to
Liverpool----

He had reached Summer Street, and turned again, past Mechanics
Hall; soon he would be on Chestnut, and then wholly home. Where, he
wondered, after he was married to Annice, would he live? Maybe on
Bath Street, overlooking Washington Square, or close to the Ammidons.
Annice, he thought, would rather prefer that; there was at last a
movement away from Chestnut Street toward the square. It made no
difference to him; his home primarily--yes, his heart--would be on
the quarter-deck of his ship. His wife might arrange all the details
on shore. She would do it very well, too; Annice, in addition to her
beauty, was capable; she had a direct, positive mind.

He would get the preliminaries of that business over with as soon as
possible, and then, late in April, or in May-- Where, he speculated
already, would he set sail for? There were so many alternatives, so
many diverse cargoes to load and progressively discharge. Abruptly
he was swinging in between the hand-wrought iron fencing across the
Calef dwelling. It was an imposing square house of brick with a
square-looking classic portico, a tall elaborate Palladian window
above, and four great chimneys at the corners of the white-railed
captain’s walk that crowned the flattened roof. Epes found the front
door unsecured, and entered, calling in a voice that echoed in the
bare, dignified hall.

Instantly, from the floor above, his mother replied, but in a
voice strangely, almost unrecognizably emotional, and he heard her
equally disturbed and hurried approach. The darkly paneled and
carved stairway, bending above his head at the tall window over the
portico, hid her until she had almost reached him; and then with an
involuntary painful contraction of his heart he saw that she was in
deep mourning, and that her face was heavy, sodden with tears. Before
he could question her, her arms were about his shoulders and she was
sobbing again.

“Epes, Epes, I was afraid you weren’t coming back either.”

“What is it?” he stammered. “Is father----”

She drew slightly away from him, gazing with streaming eyes into his
questioning face. “Why, haven’t you-- But that is incredible!” She
was close to him again. “Bartlett is dead. It--it happened in New
York, from a torn finger and blood poisoning. In two days, Epes; we
hardly got there, saw him. Your father had to go to Boston, and is
just back; but he’ll see you almost at once, in the music room, he
said.”

How like his father that insistent formality was, Epes thought;
nothing, it seemed, was to shake the dignity, the aloofness of Ira
Calef. His manner positively carried with it a chill as palpable
as that now in the streets. He was, of course, both to the world
at large and to his family, the perfect shape of integrity; but
that, with his rigidly correct deportment, appeared to be his only
conception of what was owing, through him, to exterior circumstance
and people. All people--Clia, his wife, his two sons--had been
exterior to Ira Calef; it was always evident that he viewed, weighed
every possible development of living solely in the light of his own
unalterable convictions and wishes. They were, it was true, always
carefully studied, logical; nor were his decisions quickly formed,
in any heat, generous or bitter; it was the inflexible manner, the
finality and detachment of their announcement which made them appear
so unbearably arbitrary.

The music room, like the stair well, was entirely paneled, walls and
ceiling in dark wood, and the mahogany in it, the waxed floor, even
the windows with their multiplicity of small panes, held in replica
the withdrawn, almost morose effect given by Ira Calef himself. He
came presently, in a gait neither slow nor fast, into the music
room, where, without his mother, Epes was waiting. The other’s
show of welcome was, for him, unusual; he held Epes’ hand for more
than the strictly necessary moment, and at once indicated a chair
and the fact that Epes might sit. He was a big man, past sixty,
handsomely proportioned, with a handsome face evenly pallid except
for the discolorations hanging under eyes themselves almost without
a perceptible shading. They were, of course, gray, yet they were so
pale that but for their domineering focus they rather resembled clear
water slightly crystallized with ice. He made an adequate but brief
reference to Bartlett’s death, dwelling for a little on the collapse
of the boy’s mother; and then leaning back and deliberately, for the
time, shifting the conversation, asked Epes Calef for a detailed
account of what on his voyage as supercargo he had accomplished.

This Epes, to his considerable relief of mind, was able to explain
satisfactorily. The master of the _Triton_, Whalen Dove, had come on
board the ship at Gravesend, twenty miles down river from London,
and after they had been wind-bound for two weeks at Ramsgate they
had proceeded to Madeira for wine, put into Colombo after twenty
days, and had gone on almost immediately to the Coromandel Coast,
Pondicherry and Madras, where the cargo had been disposed of through
Lyss, Saturi & Demonte. Yes, the ship had come home by way of
Rotterdam. Lost Teneriffe above the clouds five degrees west. They
had made seventeen knots with the main skysail set, when a British
ship was under double-reefed topsails. But in a three-quarters gale,
west southwest, they carried away a mizzen topsail and the foresail
burst.

Ira Calef listened to this in an admirable silence that at the same
time conveyed the impression that he was exercising an unnecessary
amount of patience in the waiting for details of more importance.
Epes quickly recalled himself from his enthusiasm in the mere fact of
seamanship. There were close to two hundred cases of indigo in the
_Triton’s_ hold--186, to be precise; about a million pounds of Madras
sugar; 460 pieces of redwood; 709 bags of ginger; 830 bags of pepper;
22 chests of tea-- The duty, the elder decided, would be over twenty
thousand dollars.

“You didn’t like this,” he said unexpectedly to his son.

Epes met his cold gaze fairly. “No, sir,” he replied.

“Always the taste for mere ships.”

To this there was no permissible answer.

“I am sorry for that,” the other proceeded, “for, now that Bartlett
is dead, it will be needful for you to give up the sea as a career;
I shall require you to stay in Salem. There are plenty of good, even
faithful masters of ships; but after me you are the only remaining
Calef; and it won’t do for you to be knocking around the windy
reaches of the globe.” He stopped, entirely inattentive of Epes’
strained lips, his half-lifted hand.

A choking emotion, partly made up of incredulity and in part a
burning resentment, fast-rising rebellion, filled Epes Calef.
This--this wasn’t right, it wasn’t fair, it wasn’t possible. They
couldn’t take and, for all his past life, fix his every ambition and
hope and standard on the sea, and then in a sentence or two destroy
him, ruin everything he was and might be; for what his father had
just said amounted to no less. It was inhuman. It couldn’t be!
Evidently Ira Calef expected him to speak, to acquiesce, for his
regular eyebrows mounted ever so slightly. But the thing, the only
safety, for Epes now was to remain silent.

“I am not even, completely, certain of Salem,” the elder went on
in his level voice, after what had almost become an unbearable
pause. “I personally shall never live anywhere else; but it may be
necessary for you to move into Boston--for a number of years anyhow.
I am getting more and more absorbed in marine insurance; and the
opportunities for the study of that are moving away from us here. I
have spoken to Annice about all this, and since she is a sensible
girl with no fancy for a husband eternally below the horizon she is
delighted.”

“I see,” Epes said uncertainly.

Annice Balavan would be delighted with all that his father had just
said, especially with the Boston part, the larger society there. She
was a natural part of this new, incredibly horrible plan; instantly
he identified her with it, saw her moving radiant and content over
its monotonous bricks and floors and earth. Something within him,
automatic, brought him to his feet. The other glanced up, once.

“You are, of course, upset by the suddenness of the news of your
brother’s death,” he conceded. “If you like you may go to your room
with no further discussion at present. There isn’t a great deal
left to be said--more movements than words. The most advantageous
arrangements will be made for Annice and you; her mother has already
promised to furnish a Boston house for her in the new style. I am
pleased with the manner in which you appear to have accomplished your
duties on the _Triton_.”

In his room a fire of coals was burning in the grate, with a faintly
audible splitting and small rushes of gaseous flame. It cast a
perceptible ruddiness on the immediate oak flooring, while the rest
of the room was rapidly dimming; the windows, beyond which the
familiar limbs of the elms on the street were sharp and black, showed
only rectangles of cold gray; the yellow light had faded from the
sky. Epes stood irresolutely, with his gaze lowered, his brow drawn
with lines. He could just see his blue sea chest, sent up from the
ship earlier in the afternoon; and the brass disks of a nocturnal,
his chiefest treasure, hung, he knew, above the chest on the wall.
That old instrument of navigation, for finding at night, through the
North Star, the hour, seemed to challenge and mock his wretchedness
and impotence. That latter word most perfectly held the essence of
his tragic situation.

He could do nothing!

Epes slipped into a chair and attempted to combat this. A daring
resolution hovered about him, reckless, and yet, he told himself
fiercely, entirely justified; he might run away to sea; the sea, the
service, he loved. He could ship any day, from any port, as third,
probably second mate, and after a single voyage become first officer.
That was the reasonable thing to do. He understood that an appeal
to his father was worse than useless; the opening of any protest, a
difference of opinion, determination, would close Ira Calef to both
sympathy and attention. He would be simply, remotely unbending--the
eyebrows would climb, his mouth harden, a cutting phrase end the
conversation. His father, Epes had realized, was different from the
other pleasant fathers he knew; he had always been, well--inhuman.
That term in such a connection was new, presumptuous, but Epes in
his present mood defiantly allowed it. However, not until now had
he acutely suffered from the elder Calef’s disposition. Outside he
had heard the words “an India liver” applied to his father; yet even
Salem was cautious, deferential in its attitude there; Epes could
never remember an occasion when his father had been balked in a
decision, or even seriously contradicted.

He felt actually as though he hated that frozen parental figure; and
he almost blamed Bartlett for dying. That recalled the fact that
his brother was dead, that his emotion was neither appropriate nor
decent; but the threatened, overpowering wrong to him persisted in
dominating every other response. Yes, Epes repeated, he would run
away; that--very successfully--had been done before. He’d leave
everything, go with only the clothes in which he stood, leaving, out
of the sum due him from the _Triton_, payment for them. That act, he
recognized, must take him forever from his family, from, as long as
Ira Calef lived, his home, Salem. The other would never relent. He
thought for a moment of his mother’s helpless position; never had
he heard her raise her voice, oppose in any particular her husband.
He was not, it was true, unkind or discourteous to her, he merely
ignored the possibility of her having a single independent desire, a
fraction of personality or will. And during Epes’ life she had shown
no indication that he was wrong. What, Epes now wondered, was the
actuality beneath her calm demeanor; maybe she hated, detested Ira
Calef. This amazing speculation redirected his thoughts to Annice
Balavan.

Or rather, it drew his mind back to the token, the gage of the Calef
men. Its reputed, its proved force exerted a species of numbing magic
on him; his superstitious regard for it held his imagination as
though in chains. Epes had given the obang to Annice, and therefore
he was going to marry her; there was no escape from the girl who
possessed it. This instinct was so strong that it struck at all his
vague planning--Annice, if he knew her, would never consent to marry
a runaway sailor, third mate or first or master. No matter what he
might project, an unforeseen circumstance, accident, would betray him
and marry him to Annice Balavan.

He tried to throw this conviction off, to laugh it away for nonsense;
he derided himself unsparingly; rising, he told himself that he
would tramp down through the house and out at once; but instead he
sank back into his chair. Yet it might be that he could get away,
come back successful, rich, in a very few years--one good voyage
would secure that--and find Annice waiting for him. This seemed to
him an inspiration, and a hard, active spirit welled up within him.
After no more than one voyage to China. But again a disability, as
gray as the dusk without, flooded him; he couldn’t, when the moment
came, walk away in that manner from responsibility. No matter what
his father was like, he was incontrovertibly his father; already
Epes Calef saw his world as the deck of a ship, and the high order,
the discipline of that plane was the base of his being. There was,
of course, injustice on the sea; tyrannical captains; but the
injustice and tyranny could not be met with mutiny. For example, if
as a subordinate he were directed to take his ship onto rocks that
he could clearly see, what was there for him to do but that? How
could he question or penetrate the superior, the totally responsible
position?

There had been cases when a master, obviously insane or incapacitated,
had been restrained, held in his cabin against the next port inquiry,
by his principal officers; but even at the height of his desire Epes
couldn’t call his father insane. Still seeing his fate as a part of
the obsessing sea he told himself that figuratively he had been set
ashore on a sterile and deserted beach while his ship, having swung
about with her sails filling gloriously, left him for the rush of
free water. Accustomed to the open, to hour after hour, day after day,
month on month, on deck, he felt all at once that he couldn’t breathe
in his closed room the confined heat of the coals. Epes, for a little,
suffered acutely, in a constriction of nerves. His whole life was to
be like this!

A knock sounded at the door, and a servant entered with fresh
candles, which he proceeded to fix on the dressing stand, the
overmantel, and light. The illumination, at first uncertain, wan,
gained in steady brightness. It was time to dress for dinner. There
had been no opportunity for him to procure mourning, but he put on
his darkest, most formal clothes, and tied a severe black neckcloth.

The candelabra on the dining table showed his mother’s place to be
empty--she was not yet able to manage the casual--and the chair that
had been Bartlett’s was pushed against the wall. Ira Calef, seen to
extreme advantage at the ceremony of dinner, hardly spoke; he was
intent upon his codfish, with a green sauce; and he tasted critically
the brown sherry before him in a large goblet of fragile glass
flecked with gold. With this, it developed, he was dissatisfied; the
wine had, he said curtly, withered; sherry, upon opening, could not
withstand delay. He sent out the entire decanter with the order to
replace it with another bottling--the Tio Pepe of the _Saragon_. He
listed his cellar by the names of the vessels in which the various
importations had been made. During this process he maintained
an inflexible silence colored with his familiar suggestion of a
restraint that no immoderate cause could break. To Epes the sherry,
when it arrived, had no more warmth or flavor than was probable in
the celebrated muddiness of the Hugli River.

Selecting a cheroot blindly from the box held at his elbow, and
lighting it at the tendered spill, he retired mentally in the thin
veil of smoke that rose across his face.

“You will, of course, stop in at the Balavans’ this evening,” his
father said presently. Everything he uttered, Epes thought, took
subconsciously the form of a direction. Still he must, he supposed,
see Annice, if only for the announcement of his return.

The Balavans lived on the north edge of town, their terraced lawn
descended to navigable water--to the anchorage, in fact, of the now
vanished Balavan merchant fleet, and a deserted warehouse. And, shown
through the hall to a drawing-room against the dark, bare garden,
Epes found not Annice, as he had expected, but Sumatra. She was glad
to see him. She was an indifferent girl, and this was specially
noticeable; but he returned, inwardly and visibly, little if any of
her pleasure.

“Tell me every shift of the wheel,” she demanded, facing him from the
long stool of the spinet. “Be a human log.”

“I thought Annice was here,” he replied.

“She will be soon enough. Did the _Triton_ do anything really
stirring, outsail seven ships or part both chains in Table Bay? I
hope you came into Derby Wharf with the sheer poles coach-whipped and
cross-pointed Turks’-heads with double-rose props.”

“I assure you, Sumatra,” he told her stiffly, “that I haven’t any
idea of what you are talking about. And, what is more, I don’t think
you have.” With this he half turned from her.

He could still see her, though, a thickly set girl--was she sixteen
yet?--with a rosy, impertinent face and hair loosely confined in a
ribbon. Her name had been given her from the fact that a Balavan,
a master of ships, had in the eighteenth century discovered pepper
growing wild on the coast of Sumatra. But there was now, Epes told
himself, a far better reason--heaven knew she was peppery. Rather a
detestable child.

Far from being disconcerted by the brevity of his retort she replied
that she had heard it didn’t matter what he understood or didn’t
understand about the sea--“Now that you are to be a clerk.”

After the stress, the difficulty of his homecoming, and from Sumatra,
this was positively too much; and all the bitterness banked up by his
father’s unassailable situation fell upon her.

“All your life,” he asserted, “you have been a joke, with your
language like a crazy ship chandler. You have never been in the
least feminine or attractive, and you never can be, not by the width
of a finger nail. Part of it--being built like a sampan--you can’t
help; but that won’t help you, will it? But you might, at least, get
a vocabulary that ought to suit you better. All I say is, you’ll
notice, that it ought to. What suits you I shouldn’t try to guess.
That’s mostly what I think about you; but on this other subject,
where my private affairs, perhaps sorrows, are concerned, shut up.”

This ill-tempered, rasped conclusion came so abruptly that it
surprised even him. He glanced at her a shade regretfully, and
saw with a feeling of satisfaction that once, anyhow, he had
impressed, silenced her. Her head was bent, her face obscured by her
forward-swung hair; her slippers were very rigidly together.

“I suppose you are right,” she admitted after a long breath.
“Probably you won’t believe it, but I have never thought much about
myself or how I affected people. Yes, a lot of them--and you,
too--must think I am a joke. So few care for anything as I do for the
sea. It used to seem to me that perhaps you did; I was wrong though.”

“Didn’t I tell you to let me alone?” he cried, again furious. “How
do you know what I care for? What do you mean by daring to judge me,
you--you----”

“Aren’t you leaving the sea for your father’s counting-house?”
Sumatra calmly demanded of him.

“If I am it’s because my duty is there,” he replied miserably.

“You are the hell of a sailor,” she commented.

Ever since she could walk Sumatra had, on occasion, sworn; at times
it had amused Epes Calef, but now it only added to his dislike, his
condemnation of her. She should not, he told her severely, have been
encouraged to continue it. Her answer was the expressed reflection
that he might do better on shore; his delicacy was much too great for
salt water.

“Do you honestly hate me?” she asked unaccountably. “I mean, when you
are not in a rage.”

“No, I don’t hate you, in a rage or out of it,” he said coldly.
“Often you go beyond your years, and you presume a good deal; but
after a while you’ll make a good wife for the captain of a West India
lugger or some fellow trading with Bermuda Hundred.”

This was an adroit insult, and pleasurably he watched her flush. She
became so unhappy that he was magnanimously touched with remorse, and
said with a kindly condescension that it was too bad she hadn’t been
born a boy.

At that he had it swiftly proven to him that attitudes, interests,
vocabularies were misleading, for logical and wholly feminine tears
actually streamed over her healthy cheeks. It grew worse, for she
rose and came close to him, with clasped desperate hands.

“Don’t listen to him!” she begged. “He’s a horrid man of snow, even
if he is your father; and if you let him he’ll spoil your life. Tell
him that you have made up your mind to go to sea, and that nothing
can change it. You won’t be struck dead. He isn’t God with a stick of
lightning.”

“You don’t understand,” he stammered, backing away from her,
intolerably embarrassed. “I am not, as you seem to think, afraid of
my father. I have been over and over it all in my head. No, it’s
something different. You couldn’t understand,” he repeated. “No girl
could.”

“You are wrong,” she replied slowly. “I see all that you mean,
and--yes--I suppose I admire you for it. You can’t mutiny”--she
echoed his own phrase--“others could, but not a Calef. Yet you make
me furious, you are so helpless, so stupid. You will marry Annice and
grow fat and near-sighted, that’s what’ll happen to you.”

Annice, in the doorway, asked: “Well, why not?”

Disregarding Sumatra, Epes went forward to meet the girl who
possessed the Calef token. He had, in spite of his assertions,
forgotten how lovely she was, slender and palely gold; her gray-gold
hair was like a cloud in sifted sunlight, her skin had an even, warm
pallor that remotely suggested oranges, and her eyes were a cool
autumnal brown.

“Epes,” she continued, “how burned and well you look.”

She took his vigorous hands in hers, held them lightly for a second,
and then relinquished him.

“There is an ocean of things for us to talk about and arrange,” she
proceeded, from a divan; and her glance at Sumatra was a dismissal.

The younger girl made a profound curtsy to them both, surprisingly
graceful for her solidity of waist, and disappeared. Epes realized
that he ought to kiss Annice, but he felt awkward in the extreme.
She held her face delicately to him; it was like a tea rose. He was,
he supposed, fortunate; but no sensation of gladness accompanied
that supposition. It was so sad about Bartlett, she went on; and how
enormously his death had affected them. Wasn’t it unexpectedly sweet
of her mother to furnish their house--“in miraculous brocades and
hangings, with a French boudoir”?

Walking slowly home, the stars, very high above him, were like a
powdering of dry, luminous snow on the polished night. The cold
was so intense that his exposed face ached. What an odorous heat
there would be over the mooring at the Prince’s Ghat in Calcutta!
He remembered the firm, light pressure of the northeast trades, the
perpetual fleecy trades clouds about the horizon, the bonitos and
albacore in the deeply blue, sunny water. Lovely sailing.

Was it true that all that, for him, was already a thing of the
past? Epes couldn’t believe it, and yet--what other conclusion was
possible? Turning his thoughts to the past hour with Annice he tried,
in her, to find a recompense for what he was losing, but without
success. He was proud of her; in her way she was fine and beautiful.
Perhaps what he understood love to be came later; it might be
unreasonable to expect the whole measure of joy at once. Annice was
cool enough; indeed they had acted as though they had been married
for a year or more, as though they had been continuously together
instead of having been so lately separated by the diameter of the
world.

There was a light in the small room at the rear of the hall, used by
his father as an office; and as he laid aside his wraps the elder
appeared in the doorway, obviously desiring speech.

“I have seen Mr. Dove,” Ira Calef told his son; “and he corroborates
your report, with some added praise. I am very well pleased, Epes.
Your conduct this evening, too, was admirable. I did not quite
expect, at once, such a full comprehension of my intentions. The
fact is,” he proceeded in a general discursive manner, “that the
country is changing very rapidly. A great many men are blind to this,
and as a result they will have to suffer. It is not so with me. The
days of the colony are at last definitely at an end; from now on
not adventure but finance will be the ruling spirit. That is one of
the reasons why I am withdrawing you from the sea. Let other paid
men--good men, but essentially subordinate--undertake the gales and
half gales; it is important for you, a Calef, to be at the center of
affairs and safe.”

Epes’ expression was dull, unrevealing; everything that was being
said contradicted and outraged his every fiber. Safe! Good men, but
subordinate! He longed to shout--for all sailors, before and aft
the mast--a contradiction of his father’s cold patronizing periods.
He loathed the money sharks who on land, in houses, traded on the
courage and endurance and fidelity of ships’ masters and crews.
If Ira Calef was right, and they had grown unimportant, if their
greatness was doomed to vanish--why, then he wanted to go too.

All this filled his brain and throat, clamored for expression; but
not a word, not a protesting sound came from him. Suddenly he was
tired; Epes felt as though the leaden weight of his future already
rested on him. The other made an approving reference to Annice
Balavan; and perversely, for no discoverable reason, in place of the
golden vision of Annice he saw Sumatra, square, like a sampan--and
defiant.

When, for the time, Ira Calef had quite finished the expression of
his balanced judgments Epes rose with the shadow of an instinctive
bow.

“Very good, sir.” The sea phrase was spoken in a voice without
animation.

Above, close by his room, he was mildly surprised to find his mother.
It was evident that she had been waiting for him, and followed,
carefully closing the door behind them.

“How did you find Annice?” she asked.

But to his reply that Annice had seemed well enough she paid no
attention. With a quick, nervous gesture she pressed her handkerchief
against her eyes.

“And your father----”

Epes said nothing.

“Epes,” she cried, in a sudden realization of all that, it was now
clear, she wanted to say to him, “no matter how hard and unreasonable
he may seem, you mustn’t contradict him. It isn’t as though he were
going to do you harm. What he plans is right; he can see so much
farther than we can. And you will be very happy, I am sure, with
Annice. You’ll forget the sea?” her voice rose in inquiry.

“Never,” Epes answered.

Clia Calef shivered momentarily. “I was afraid of something like
that,” she admitted. “And that is why it is necessary for me to speak
to you. You must do what your father wants.”

This was, he thought, in view of his restraint, all unnecessary.
He regarded his mother, seated with her head blurred against the
candlelight, with a mature, unsympathetic attention. Women--the
characteristic feminine world--were very far outside the scope of his
interests and being. Even to his mother he could not explain, seek to
justify himself; his inner being had grown obdurate, solitary; life,
which had once, in the form of blue water, everywhere surrounded and
touched him, had retreated, flowed away, leaving him on that sandy,
meaningless beach. Why did she talk and talk?

“You have been wonderfully quiet,” she still went emotionally on; “I
could tell that from Ira’s manner. But I wasn’t sure. I’m not yet;
and for that reason, to save hideous trouble, I made up my mind to
tell you. There is a little strangeness about your father, and it
comes out when he is contradicted. Except for that he is splendid.
I don’t just know what it is, but contradiction makes him wretched;
he--he loses control of himself.” She was speaking faster, with
an obvious increasing difficulty. “I did it, once. We hadn’t been
married long, and it was in the garden. He had just come back from
the counting-house, and he was carrying a light cane, a wanghee. And,
Epes, he struck me with it. Oh, not very hard; not, really, too hard.
I didn’t say a word. I stood for a second, quite frozen, and then I
turned to walk out of the garden, to leave him, forever. I intended
to go, but it did hurt. I was confused, and instead of finding the
gate I walked into the geraniums and fainted. So, you see, I stayed.”

Epes Calef drew in an audible harsh breath.

“You mustn’t judge him!” she exclaimed eagerly. “I am sure it spoiled
a large part of his life. He carried me into the house, and neither
of us have referred to it since. Yes, it hurt him beyond speech; for
weeks he slept hardly at all. Epes, Epes, I can’t have it happen to
him again. He is your father and you must help. You love him, too, I
am certain; and what he arranges is always, always best.”

She was so tremulous, so self-effacing, that he felt he couldn’t bear
to hear another word. It was terrible, and as wrong as possible.

“He ought to be denied,” Epes said in a strong voice. “Now that you
have told me this I think it might be what he, what we all need;
perhaps I shall have to.”

“That is not for you to judge,” Clia Calef told him with a resumption
of dignity. “You would be very wicked indeed; and not only, perhaps,
harm Ira permanently, but me as well. I have to live with him, and
not you. Epes, you have the ignorance of youth; but if I can help it
I won’t have you upsetting our life.”

He was, he saw, literally nothing before her love for the man who had
struck her with his wanghee.

“It would spoil everything,” she half whispered to herself. “I have
tried hard, so long.”

Epes rose sharply. “You must go to bed,” he directed. “If you are not
careful you will be sick.” He was deathly sick. She clung to him.

“Promise me, promise you will do as he says.”

“I have already decided that,” he answered in his weary, dead voice.

Epes, with his hand under her arm, conducted her to her room. A wave
of warmth flowed into the hall as the door opened and shut, like the
soiled enervating breath of a hidden corruption.

It was a physical impossibility, in the temporarily empty days
following immediately Epes’ arrival home, for his spiritual darkness
to stay at its intensest; at least his state of mourning made it
unnecessary for him to go to the meaningless parties being then
crowded into the heart of the winter season. It was uncomfortable
for him at home, and he fell into the habit of lounging through the
afternoons in the more informal of the Balavans’ drawing-rooms.
There, in his special position and license, he was permitted to smoke
his cheroots and listen to the light easy run of Annice’s voice, so
much like the easy light tripping of her fingers over the keyboard
of the spinet. He was engaged in exactly this manner an hour or so
before Annice’s departure for one of the principal cotillons of the
year, at Hamilton Hall; and Annice, who had dressed early so that
she could be with him, was sitting erectly by an opposite wall.
Sumatra was present, too; a fact to which her elder sister repeatedly
called attention by urging the necessity of Sumatra’s changing for
the ball. Sumatra, Epes had learned, had been half permitted and half
coerced into going.

“I can get ready in twelve minutes,” she announced.

“I don’t doubt that,” Annice retorted; “but what will you look like
when it is done? In the first place your hair is like wire and takes
the longest while to be really possible----”

“It won’t matter,” said Sumatra; “Epes told me I couldn’t make myself
attractive, no matter how much we all tried.”

“Did you say that, Epes?” Annice asked. “It was rather tactless of
you, because, though you’d never guess it, Sumatra is crazy about
you. It might even be more than I am.”

Epes Calef gazed at Sumatra with a brutal indifference. She met his
eyes courageously, and in an even voice replied to her sister.

“I was once,” she corrected the other, “when I thought that Epes
belonged to the sea. But now he’s on land--” She made a gesture
of dismissal. “Epes, while I suspect he’s very good, is my great
disappointment. I don’t like good people.”

“What experience have you had with bad?” he asked cuttingly. “As
usual, you are just talking words. You are a regular sea lawyer.”

“Do get dressed, Sumatra,” Annice said.

“Something light and feminine,” Epes added; “with wreaths of flowers
for you to put your feet through.”

He couldn’t understand why, whenever he talked to Sumatra, he became
so vindictive. He had no particular desire to be nasty; it came up in
spite of him.

“Perhaps no one will ask me to dance.”

“If they do,” he advised her, “and it is near supper, don’t let go or
you’ll get no oysters.”

“Sumatra, get dressed,” Annice commanded.

“Maybe I won’t at all.”

“Do you mean you’ll go like you are?”

“It wouldn’t kill anyone, would it? I shouldn’t come home and cry if
I didn’t get an armful of favors; I can get along, for a few minutes
anyhow, by myself.”

This, Epes thought, promised to be amusing. Peppery Sumatra! Annice
glanced at him hastily.

“Please, Sumatra,” she entreated; “we simply can’t be late. I’ll give
you my white-ribbed Spanish stockings.”

The other serenely answered, “The feet would be too big.”

He had never noticed her feet, and to his considerable surprise they
were smaller, narrower than Annice’s.

“You are a lumpish, impossible child,” the elder said acrimoniously.
“Why I begged mother to let you start the cotillons I can’t imagine.
And when we get there you are not to hang about me.”

“I won’t; you’re not seaworthy. You are cut away too much through the
middle; you would go over in a good blow.”

Epes incautiously laughed.

“Be still,” Annice directed him; “she must not be encouraged in such
conduct.”

“Well,” he said pacifically, “you wouldn’t, Trinidad.” He often
substituted the West India island for that from which she was named,
reminding her of his matrimonial prediction.

“Yes, sampan,” Annice echoed him. “Will you or will you not get
dressed?”

“I will, when I have twelve minutes. It doesn’t, you know, take me
three hours.” Nevertheless, she rose. “You haven’t been specially
nice to me, have you?” she said slowly, carefully avoiding Epes
Calef. “You made pretty clear all you thought. I don’t believe I
could be like that.”

Suddenly she gazed full at Epes. “It might be your father in you,”
she concluded; “if I were you I shouldn’t encourage that--for
Annice’s sake. It would be so hard on her.”

“Thank you, but I can take care of myself,” Annice assured her
brightly; “and it would be nicer to omit the personal history.”

“All I say is wrong!” Sumatra declared.

“All,” Epes echoed her.

“I must be a sampan.”

“Must.”

“Square bowed, and only fit for rivers.”

“For rivers.”

“But even that is better than a desk,” she reminded him. She was
beside the door, and paused with a hand upon the frame, looking over
her shoulder. “What Annice told you was true,” she reiterated. “I had
a little picture hidden in a drawer, which I am now going up to tear
into bits.”

When she had gone Annice turned to him in a conciliatory manner.

“There is something I meant to tell you at once, this afternoon,
but it slipped from my mind. I hope you won’t be angry and I
can’t imagine how it happened. But the whole thing, of course, is
exaggerated; it must be all nonsense at bottom. Still I am sorrier
than words can say. Epes, somehow I’ve lost the token.”

He gazed, startled at her, with a stirring of the old Calef
superstition within him. However, he concealed it.

“That is too bad. We think it’s rather valuable, you know. Perhaps it
will turn up; there are so many places you might have left it.”

No, she replied; she knew how they felt about it, and she had left
it, she was certain, in the lacquer box on her dressing-case. It was
very mysterious and uncertain.

“Now,” she said with a smile, “you won’t have to marry me. The spell,
the charm is broken.”

This he repudiated in a form correct and stiff. The influence that
absurd East Indian coin exerted upon his thoughts was amazing. He
repeated, silently, her words--“Now you won’t have to marry me.” But
certainly they had no force, no reality. He was bound to her not by
an obang, but by honor. At the same time his feeling was undeniably
different; he regarded her from a more detached position. What was
that Sumatra had hinted--about crying over a scarcity of favors, and
taking three hours to dress? It didn’t matter to him, nothing did;
it only added to the general weariness, waste of existence. Epes
recalled the promised French boudoir in the threatened Boston house.
That was it--his life hereafter was to be passed in a little scented
room choked with brocade and hangings.

A maid appeared, enveloped Annice in a long cloak luxuriously lined
with sables, twisted a silvery veiling over her netted hair, over her
lovely regular features, her face with its indefinite suggestion of
golden oranges.

“I thought Sumatra would be late,” she declared in an abstracted
exasperation. Then through the veiling she gave him a metallic and
masked kiss. From the hall her voice sounded, fretful about her
carriage boots.

The carriage with Annice and Sumatra departed; he must go, too;
where, he didn’t know, it no longer mattered; home, he supposed.
There was a second stamping of hoofs before the Balavan dwelling, and
Mrs. Balavan, in street wraps, passed the drawing-room door. Epes
remembered that he had heard his mother speak of going to a ballad
soirée with her. Still he remained seated, after the hour of dinner,
and it was nearly nine before he left.

The light in his father’s office was, as usual, turned up, a thin
haze of tobacco smoke perceptible. Without the desire to go up to his
room Epes sat in a lower chamber. Snatches of the conversation--the
quarrel, really--between Sumatra and Annice returned to him. How
essentially different they were. Annice was far, far the lovelier.
She made a business of being beautiful. But at least that, in a wife,
was something; the majority of wives had far less. What a curious
double life it would be--two separate people with one name, in one
house. She could never, he was sure, mean more to him than she did
now. And it was clear that for her part her demand was no greater.

Sumatra would be the opposite--there was no end to what she expected,
fought for, insisted upon. Strangely enough, he couldn’t see her as
a wife--even for that coast-wise figure he had so often pictured--at
all. He was unable to discover what sort of man would suit her, but
certainly one armed with a belaying pin. He became conscious of
a clamor faintly heard from another part of Salem; it grew more
distinct, and he recognized that it was the confused alarms and
uproar of a fire. The fire evidently lay in the direction of Marlboro
Street; the noise increased rather than subsided; but even this
didn’t stir him until his father appeared.

“I shall have to neglect my duty this evening,” he explained; “there
are some questions of foreign exchange. But perhaps you will take my
place.”

Epes went silently out to the hall, where two leather buckets,
painted with the name Active Fire Club, were hanging. He secured
them, and a wool scarf, and went unexcitedly in search of the fire.
It was, as he had thought, in the vicinity of Marlboro Street, the
Baptist Church. The Fire Engine Exchange, he saw, to which generally
the men of the Calef family belonged, had secured the place of honor,
directly at the conflagration. Its reservoir was connected by hose
to another engine, and that latter to a third, which drew from the
source of their water. A pandemonium rose about Epes--the hoarse,
jeering shouts of the competing companies, authoritative voices
magnified by trumpets, the clatter of the hand pump, and the dull
roar of the unconquerable flames. A curtain of black smoke, ruddy at
its base and, above, poured with live cinders, rolled up across the
immaculate green sky and frosty stars.

The members of the Active Fire Club had formed their line for the
rapid orderly passing of buckets, and Epes had taken his place at the
end, when he saw a short, familiar feminine shape standing alone.
It was Sumatra, and it was extremely wrong of her to be there, like
that, so late.

He left his position hurriedly and laid a hand on her arm. How, he
demanded, had she got there, and why was she by herself?

“Oh, Epes!” she exclaimed with pleasure. “The cotillon nearly
killed me, it was so stupid; and then I heard the alarms, and James
Saltonstall wanted to come; and so, you see, here we--here I am.”

“Where is he? Why did he leave you?”

Before she could answer there was a louder opposed shouting of
voices:

“Suck him dry, Exchange!”

“Overwash them, Adams. Drown the damned silk stockings!”

Sumatra clutched his hand excitedly. “Don’t you see--they are trying
to burst the Exchange engine; we haven’t enough men to pump, because
some didn’t leave Hamilton Hall, and James is at the sweep. You must
go, too, Epes. Quick, quick, or it will be too late!”

His negative attitude settled into an active perversity; Epes Calef
made up his mind that he wouldn’t pump; they could knock the silly
engines into painted fragments for all him. Sumatra gave him a strong
impatient shove forward, but he resisted her.

“The fire will be over in a few more minutes,” he observed.

She damned the fire excitedly; it was the engine she cared about.
“I’ll pump, myself!” Sumatra cried.

He turned to her with a smile, but that was immediately lost as he
saw that she had every intention of fulfilling her threat. Sumatra
had started toward the profane companies of men when he caught her by
the shoulder.

He said coldly, “You’re crazy. Nobody ever heard of such a thing--a
girl pumping at a fire! You’d be talked about, insulted in songs all
over the country. Come home at once.”

She wrenched herself from his hold, and Epes was obliged to stand in
front of her with his arms outspread. Sumatra’s face grew crimson
with rage.

“Get out of my way!” she commanded him. “Do you think everyone is a
coward and a ninny like you? I’ll pump if I want to, and it doesn’t
matter who sings about it. I don’t care what the other fools of women
do.”

“No, you won’t,” he told her grimly.

She gave him a shove, and she was so strong that, unprepared, he
staggered. She nearly succeeded in evading him, but he caught her
with an arm around her vigorous waist. In an instant they were
fighting. Braced, with her hand crushing into his face, she tried to
break his hold; then Sumatra struck him in the eye. Infuriated, he
wanted to knock her head off, but he had to restrain himself to a
negative attack.

“I’ll throw you down and sit on you,” he gasped; “here, on the
street.”

By way of reply she kicked his shins until, through the hurt, he
could feel the blood sliding into his shoes. Shouts, which now,
in his rage, he heard but dimly, derisive and encouraging calls,
surrounded him. The girl, the little Amazon, was implored to crack
his coco; there were protesting cries of shame, but these were lost
in the larger approval and entertainment. By Jupiter, but she was
finishing him! This, Epes desperately told himself, was horrible
beyond words.

“Stop it!” he said savagely, again and again.

But through set teeth Sumatra replied that she’d pump if she chose,
and no--no l-l-land shark could stop her. At this there was a hurrah.
Her strength was amazing, and entirely wrong; she was like a maniac.
Then with a free arm he punched her directly and rudely in the
stomach. Sumatra settled against him limply; and holding her up,
dragging her with him past threatening faces wavering in the dark, he
succeeded in getting her around a corner to a deserted street.

She was still limp, struggling for breath; her face was pale and her
hair in torn disorder. Sumatra slowly recovered, and--amazingly--she
smiled. Epes’ anger, too, fled; he gazed at her, examining in dismay
her clothes with a feeling which might almost have been called
admiration. Yet he spoke severely.

“You ought to be in a cage,” he told her; “you’re just wild.”

However was she to fix her clothes, she replied; where could she go?
“I ought to go back to Hamilton Hall.”

To this he agreed, the Balavan house was far, inconveniently
situated; and they decided, since the Calefs and Balavans were now
practically one family, to stop at his dwelling for the repairing of
her clothes and spirit. He secured his buckets and they hurried back,
through a serene air like liquid ice, over Summer Street to Chestnut.
The light was still burning in Ira Calef’s office, and noiselessly
they turned into an opposite room.

Epes went on into the dining room, opening darkly beyond, leaving
Sumatra with candles on the floor before a tall mirror. There,
bearing a high silver candlestick and a following indeterminate
illumination, he discovered a bottle of champagne, tagged the ship
_Nautilus_ and the year, and gathered two high glasses and some ice.
He was tingling with excitement, a disturbance deeper than physical.
He felt oddly detached from his late life, the commonplace and
irresponsible; his mind was without images, thought--it was like a
whirling of crackling colored lights. He found his situation--the
uncorked champagne, the two glasses, the unsuspecting near
presence of his father, Sumatra, rearranged, entering the dining
room--extraordinary and invigorating. The wine foamed whitely
through the ice, turning into a silky clear amber that stung his
lips. Sumatra observed, sitting down, that she ought to go on to the
cotillon at once.

“What,” she demanded, “will James Saltonstall think?”

That, Epes replied, was of singularly small importance.

The rose flush had returned to her cheeks, her eyes were shining;
she was decidedly more attractive than he had admitted. But that, he
made up his mind, he’d never tell her. She sipped and sipped from her
glass; that in itself was unusual, startling. No, he corrected his
impression, it would have been in any other girl of Sumatra’s age,
but not in her. The most unexpected, inappropriate things seemed to
become her perfectly.

“I don’t want to go,” she added, so long after her other phrase that
he almost lost the connection. “We are so different,” Sumatra pointed
out; “I hardly ever do what I don’t want to. It’s a good thing for
your father I’m not you.”

“It wouldn’t make any difference,” he said, listlessness again
falling over him; “in the end it would be the same; you’d stay or go
as he said.”

“I would not.”

“Oh, yes, but you would.”

“He couldn’t make me,” she insisted; “not about that. It’s too
terribly important.”

Epes became annoyed. “Can’t you understand that, to my father,
nothing is important except what he wants?”

“Why argue?” she decided. “After all, I am not you. And yet, even as
it is, I believe if I were concerned, which I’m not, I could do what
I decided with him.”

He laughed. “Try, and if you are successful, why--why, I’d marry you
instead of Annice.”

The flush deepened painfully in her countenance; she regarded him
with startled eyes. For a moment there was a ridiculously tense
silence; and then, relaxing, she shook her head negatively.

“It wouldn’t be any good; you’d have no regard for me.”

“Regard for you!” he exclaimed. “If you did that I’d think more
of you than anything else on earth; more than I did of--of the
_Triton_.” His voice, his manner darkened. “But you mustn’t; there’s
a lot you don’t understand--my father, first of all. He can be very
nasty.”

“I’ve told you before, he’s only a man,” she reminded him. “I
shouldn’t be afraid.” Her direct gaze again challenged him, but Epes
shook his head dejectedly. Suddenly she laid a hand over his. “I
didn’t tear that picture up,” she whispered. Then with a sweep of her
arm she finished what had been in her glass, and rose. “Come on, he’s
still in the office.”

Epes Calef urged her in careful tones not to be a donkey; he tried,
here discreetly, to restrain her; but she went resolutely on, through
the front room into the hall. There would be a frightful row, but he
couldn’t desert Sumatra. However, in the passage she paused, with her
lips against his ear.

“Remember, better than the _Triton_, or it would kill me.”

Ira Calef looked up from his table, frowning slightly as she entered
the office, followed by Epes. The elder’s face was as white as marble
under the artificial light.

“Why, Sumatra,” he greeted her easily.

Epes tried to step between her and his father--disaster--but she held
him back, speaking immediately in a voice as level as, but a little
faster than, Ira Calef’s.

“I suppose you think it’s strange to see me here, so late, with Epes;
but it is stranger even than you imagine.” She put a hand over
Epes Calef’s mouth. “No,” she protested, “you promised to let me
speak. Mr. Calef,” said the incredible Sumatra, “perhaps I ought to
apologize to Mrs. Calef and you--Epes and I are married.”

Epes’ amazement, which he barely restrained, was no greater than his
father’s, but the latter’s was given, for him, full expression.

“Married!” he repeated in a voice slightly and significantly louder
than usual. “Why, that is outrageous! Nothing, nothing at all was
said to me. My plan was wholly different.”

He rose, beyond the table, with one hand resting beside a paper
weight of greenish glass. Epes’ eyes fastened upon this.

“It was, as you might guess, in a hurry,” Sumatra went on; “we
decided only today. You must remember that I am as much a Balavan as
Annice, and I suit Epes far better; I understand and agree with his
ambition.”

The man’s manner was colder than the night.

“What ambition?” he demanded.

“To go to sea, of course.”

“Epes isn’t going to sea,” he instructed her.

“He wasn’t, as your son,” she corrected him; “but married to me, yes.”

“No,” Ira Calef answered in a restrained, bitter temper that yet had
the effect of a shout.

“But he is,” Sumatra Balavan retorted. “He is, and now you can’t stop
him. It doesn’t matter what you want, I won’t have a husband fastened
like a sponge to the earth, and as soft as a sponge.” Her anger,
equal with Ira Calef’s, rose.

The room grew quiet. Epes’ attention was still concentrated on the
heavy rectangle of glass close by his father’s hand. With a sensation
like an enveloping breath of winter air he saw the other’s fingers
reach out and close about the paper weight. He hadn’t a second to
spare; but Sumatra, too, had seen the instinctive movement on the
table.

“I wish you would,” she told the man facing her with a set, icy
glare. “I’d have you dropped off the end of Derby Wharf. I’m not
your wife or son; there would be no reason for my protecting you,
hiding your beastliness from the world. Nothing could be better than
having you throw a paper weight at me.”

The shadows under Ira Calef’s eyes, on the deathly pallor of his
face, were like black smudges; a shiver passed over his rigidity.
His hand drooped; both hands held the edge of the table before him.
Epes, in a swift insight brushed with compassion, saw what was in his
father’s mind--the huddled light figure crushing the geranium border.

“Get out of here,” the elder said to Sumatra in strained, dry tones.
“Go, and take him with you.”

“To sea?” she insisted.

“If there is any salt water in hell.”

But, once more in the hall, she was pitiably shaken.

“What can we do?” she implored Epes, against him.

He reassured her that that was easy enough; a far different,
apparently trivial and ill-timed question occupied him.

“Sumatra,” he proceeded, “tonight Annice told me that she had lost
the obang, the Calef token. Did you find it?”

“No, Epes,” she replied, “I didn’t find it.” Her voice sank, died.
“I didn’t find it, Epes,” she repeated with difficulty. “I couldn’t,
very well, could I, when I had stolen it?”


       [15] Copyright, 1921, by The Curtis Publishing Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Joseph Hergesheimer.




                        THE RESURRECTION AND
                            THE LIFE[16]

                       By WILLIAM C. G. JITRO

                     (From _The Little Review_)


The low country of the lakes with its flowing blue waters, its sunken
gray and yellow earth and low skies, is beautiful; yet there have
been thrown down in it cities so mean, so cold, so dingy, and so
ugly that in them any beautiful thing is marvelous. The eyes strain
away out of the cities over the waters and the still, sandy marshes,
or turn up into the fathomless heights of the sky; and again and
again in springtime, when small clusters of fruit trees and rose
vines bloom here and there in the smoke with robins singing in the
new sticky foliage, one seeks such spectacles out to walk near them.
As for the cities’ polyglot people, they are so harsh, so cold and
silent, and so monotonous both in appearance and in their fierce
activity, that among them any one only beautiful or charming becomes
precious; a thrilling deed, a noble character, a great love, a
deathless faith, or even a passionate hatred, or profound despair is
something to set apart, to cherish in the mind, to hoard and love.

For they dream, the people of those gray and far-off cities by the
azure floods, as all must do or die; but their dreams are not good or
sweet or high or noble.

Once it was evening in winter in a city and the great blue darkness
had fallen upon the low plains, the waters, and the frozen marshes;
the darkness had grown gray and misty; and after that, as usual
within the city, it had become dead, cold, and dingy black. The long
misty streets with their feeble pale-blue lamps were dingy; and
though many hurrying people, rattling black gasoline motor vehicles,
and broken dirty tram-cars passed in them, yet they remained dreary.
One of the half dozen very long streets, which lie across the others
and meet in the lower center of the city like the spokes of a
half-wheel, was dark when I walked into it. It had large furniture
shops full of colored lamps; tobacco and shoe shops well lighted
up; and Jews’ shops with every sort of cheap glittering merchandise
to catch the eyes of the crowd of stupid whites and negroes who
occupied this quarter; yet it seemed bleak and dark. The people
hurried along silently in the shadows; old snow lay frozen in the dim
dirty corners; and the dust was thick. Over the roofs the sky seemed
particularly black, foggy and cold.

It was night.

For a time there was no sound except those of the vehicles flying
over the rough pavement, the pounding tram-cars that passed, and the
shoes of the hurrying people; but at last, at intervals above the
other sounds there became audible what seemed to be a voice raised in
shouting or speaking; and on coming to a place where two mean dark
side streets met I found on the pavement of one of them a short,
plump, gentle but very earnest and prepossessing negro of forty who
was urging upon passers the principles of Jesus’ teaching. He used
the inflection and diction of most negroes in this part of the world,
but he was neatly dressed and wore a greatcoat, though his head was
bare, for he had placed his round black hat against an iron hydrant
for the reception of coins. Four or five men who had turned aside
from the main street were listening to him; more, however, were
going into the half-screened drinking places all about. Besides,
the farther side of the street in which he stood contained a row of
little dark wooden buildings that held negro brothels.

It was a dusty winter night.

“You men, naow,” the negro was crying in a ringing, pleasing voice,
“you got to be good! You got to do as God says! It ain’t gwine do
you no good to pray to God if you don’t do as He says! Don’t you go
to fightin’ and killin’ and gamblin’ and then pray to God. It ain’t
gwine do you no good! First you got to quit yo’ fightin’, quit yo’
killin’, quit yo’ drinkin’, quit yo’ gamblin’, quit yo’ swarin’, quit
yo’ whore-mongerin’: God does not wish you to do these things! Then
you go to Him and pray! And he’s gwine hear what you say!”

The utterance of these words with such singular force in that
stirring melodious voice, and the face and form of this sturdy little
man made lovely by joy, faith, and good will, shone in that bleak
cold street, it seemed to me, like a work of glittering gold and
jewels amid gutter dust.

I drew nearer and listened to him say that he had come there because
he had been bidden by God to go among men and preach the Word, not
as preached in worldy churches but as the prophets of Israel and
the Apostles preached it long ago. Men must be truthful, kindly,
abstemious; then all would be well with them. They must understand
one another, sympathize with one another, love one another. That
was the Word. When all did so, then God’s kingdom would have come
on earth. Meantime the few who knew the truth and strove to live by
it would, even though they were lonely and cast out, become happy,
strong and courageous. Theirs would be a life unattainable by the
gross and careless, a life inconceivable by such, yet the life that
all men really desired, the life that was man’s heritage.

Aside, as it were, for the assurance of timid children, he
illustrated some of the workings of God’s plan. Once a man received
God into his heart and was trying earnestly to live according to
His will, God would not desert or neglect him either in this world
or any other. He himself was but a humble servant bidden to teach
and expound the Word. And since he strove to do this, even though
he never succeeded as he wished to, yet God had blessed him forty
years with health and strength and the means to live. “The servant am
worthy of his hire,” God had said, yet so merciful and kind was God
that, “Jes’ so long as you try the best you can, He’ll stand by you.
Money an’ things is the least, but He’ll see to them too. Ah don’t
have to worry. When Ah get out of money He send me means to get some.
Ah don’t owe nobody a cent tonight ’cept seventy-five cents fo’ coal,
and the man said the’ wasn’t no hurry fo’ that; but Ah’m goin’ to pay
him tomorrow night. And this week Ah was down to the Boahd of Public
Works and they said they’d put me to work next Wednesday mornin’
shovelin’ up ashes in the alleys. Ah’m gwine be there. So I get on.
Kase Ah’m tryin’ to do as God said. He’ll do jes’ the same by you. If
you wonder who I am to stand out here and tell you this, Ah’m Brothah
Frank Burns, Servant of the Lord, come to preach the Word like ole
Isaiah and Jeremiah and ole Jonah--an’ like ole Peter an’ Paul an’
Silas. They said what Ah’m tellin’ you naow! Kase that’s God’s Word
that’ll make you happy an’ strong an’ glad!”

Bright earnestness! Steadfast belief! But two grim city policemen,
coming through the dark street where the brothels are, making their
way swiftly in the gloom, hear the preacher’s voice and raise their
heads. They are not patrolling and have not their bludgeons, but
one immediately gives the other a package he has been carrying
and hurries across the street behind the speaker: a short, burly
man, pink-faced and contemptuous, active and strong, with the bold
insolence and cruelty of the police. The buttons and silver shield
glitter on the breast of his clean blue greatcoat; the forepiece and
shield shine on his heavy cap. Without a word he takes the speaker
from behind by arm and neck, jerks him violently backward, choking
him, and all but throws him to the pavement. “_Here! Here! Here!_” he
cries. “What are _you_ doing?”

Startled, the negro tries to keep his feet and twist his head so as
to see his assailant. He strives manfully to explain.

“Where’s your _per_mit?” asks the policeman.

“Judge tole me Ah didn’t need to have no _per_mit--”

“Git to hell out of here!”

The negro is thrown forward almost to his knees and flung about. Very
firmly he declares: “Ah’ve come here to speak the Word of the Lord
like the old prophets in de Bahble. Folks must know this. Judge he
tole me--”

At that the policeman fiercely tightens his hold, strikes him on the
head with his fist, and hurls him to his knees. The second officer,
a taller man, runs in. And the eager crowd that has gathered in the
dark during these few minutes of parley closes about to see. Again
and again the negro is thrown down, struck, and dragged in the dust.
He continues to gasp out his purpose. The dark cold street resounds
with the noise of the blows, the scuffle, the negro’s voice, and the
feet of newcomers running up to see. At length, tossing along in the
dark amid the crowd, the preacher is swept round a corner and pushed
roughly past a dark little medical school, a cross street, and a
long hospital with a dimly lighted colored statue of the Virgin in a
front gable. Over the way are a dark cold little park with bare trees
and a waterless basin, and beyond this some old public buildings.
The negro’s once neat clothes are twisted, half pulled from him, and
covered with dust and mud, the hand of the policeman chokes him,
but he continues to declare his purpose. The policeman, gripping
him behind, rushes him along; the other follows carrying the round
black hat and half entreating, half commanding the curious crowd to
keep off and go away. The captive is taken round another corner and
in through the dark basement door of a public building. The second
policeman follows and closes the door. Then all go away except me.

I wait for a time, and the tallest policeman comes out and goes off.
Soon after the burly attacker comes with his parcel and hurries up
the street as if to make up lost time. After an interval the little
preacher comes himself, alone and somewhat put to rights; goes
quietly back around the corner, past the hospital and medical school
and the park and on toward the corner where he was taken. But he
seems to consider his work for the night done, and does not stop. He
picks his way across the street of business and starts off northward
as if beginning a long journey. I follow him curiously for two
kilometers or more, but at last, concluding from the way in which he
looks about when he passes under the street lights that he suspects
that he is being followed, I turn off and go my way.

Next night, however, he is at his corner again, with a large crowd
about him this time, for it is the gay free night before the Sabbath
when the people have their wages for the week. Crowds are entering
and leaving the brothels; loud cheery talk sounds everywhere, in
the dark and in the cold blue light of the street lamps; and coins
fall steadily into the hat by the hydrant. A tall spectacled friend,
well dressed in fur cap and greatcoat with fur collar, accompanies
the preacher tonight and treats him disdainfully; but just as before,
with the same bright earnestness, the little man tells simply of his
“mission,” of God’s laws and God’s promises, and urges obedience to
God. Without dismay, even with some zest, he speaks of last night:
“Let ’em come an’ git me again;” he says, “Ah’ll be right back.
They’ll have to carry me though,” he adds quickly. “I ain’t gwine
to fight ’em. That’s what makes all the trouble, men, folks always
a-fightin’. You boys,” he cries earnestly, “don’t you ever go to
fightin’; don’t you ever go off to no war and kill folks. If they try
to make you, don’t you care. Let ’em do what they can, but don’t you
care. The Lord said, ‘Don’t do it!’ He does not wish you to do it!
An’ God’ll look after you. Jes’ you obey Him an’ don’t you worry!”

Introducing his companion, he assures his audience that this is
“a splendid speaker,” and listens eagerly to the other’s halting,
practiced: “Ah didn’t expect to be called on to speak yeah this
evenin’”; and interpolates quick, bright “Amen”s, “Yes, He will”s,
and “Bless his Name”s into the exhortation that follows.

That night they were not attacked or molested.

But at a gathering of negroes on a later night I see the same bright
strange little man standing unnoticed by himself at one side of
the hall, and I go to him and assure him of my sympathy and tell
him that I was present the night he was attacked. He passes over
that hastily; it was nothing; he has had many such experiences; but
when I ask him about himself he answers my questions obligingly,
though with some diffidence. He knows nothing of his parents except
that before the emancipation one or both were slaves; he has been
taught scarcely anything; and has done hard work all his life. In
his youth he joined a church and began to preach, but having come
soon afterward to see the quality of churches and to be aware of his
“mission,” he traveled “north” and began to go about working and
preaching. He belongs to no church and disapproves of all alike. He
has no property, permitting himself nothing but poverty and labor.
Already he is looked down upon as improvident by those who know
him. His wife has left him, not relishing her lot with him, for
they were forced always to lodge in the poorest parts of the towns
they visited. The intolerance and hate of white Americans for negro
people made their lives harder than they would otherwise have been.
Single rooms near small independent “mission houses,” when there was
one that suited, were their temporary homes; and from one such the
wife went at last to visit at the town of Nashville in the distant
State of Tennessee, and she has not come back. Her intention to do
so was vague at her departure. Her husband has suffered a great
deal through her desertion and has humbly and pitifully begged her
by letter to return, but he has borne her failure to do so and goes
on with his work. He is not loved, nor even much liked by anyone, I
find later; he and his preaching, his high standards, his belief,
his self-reliance and fearlessness, even his good temper, seem
disquieting to others, irritating, a bore, something to escape.

During that year he remained in the city by the floods preaching and
working at hard manual labor.

But the next winter, well toward the end, there was an epidemic of
pneumonia and my little apostle was stricken suddenly and removed to
a cheerless public hospital. There, gasping and choking so horribly
that it was almost impossible to watch him, he died the night of his
arrival. Nothing but a rickety screen of wood and cloth separated him
from a score of other sick men when he died. Next night, washed and
dressed in his usual neat clothes, with white linen and a gay colored
cravat, the beautiful plump little figure lay in a hideous black
coffin with tawdry white lining in the little gloomy mission house
that he had found somewhere off on the northern edge of the town. Two
or three people watched perfunctorily by the body; but though it was
almost spring and the day had been wet, the place grew cold as the
night waned, and became almost intolerably dismal and horrible.

The next day, when he was buried, was just such another old winter
day, really a wet spring day. The low dirty white sky was heavy with
the breath of the lakes; the air was thick with rain; and the filthy
snow melted in corners and mingled its muddy dirty water with that
which dripped in showers from the soaked and swollen black roofs.
The motor vehicles, tramcars and the thousands of feet splashed the
water onto the morose people, the buildings, and the shop windows.
The negro’s wife, not much affected, arrived from Nashville in time
to attend the service at the mission house and to go in the cortege
to the cemetery.

I left the service early, and riding on various trams and walking
part of the time, crossed the low flat scattered city to the great
out-of-the-way cemetery off on the western edge where he was to be
buried. This tract lay beyond a vast expanse of the dirty little
wooden houses of the city, which stand wall to wall along endless
monotonous streets; but it lies on the bank of a little winding
stream that is tributary to the great one by which the city stands.
High stone supports and black iron palings fence the burial place,
which stretches away out of sight among poor streets, low flat
fields, and woods. Large parts of its surface have been covered with
turf or diversified by small artificial mounds and slopes; but it
is flat still, and the turf is now gray and dead. The yellow sand
of the lake country shows through in places; and the square stones,
urns, painted iron benches, and unsubstantial looking tombs that
stand in clusters, are tiny. In making the mounds the trunks of many
of the trees were buried almost to the branches, and these trees
look fat, stubby, and short-legged in the gray mist. A heavy odor of
warm, salty grease hangs in the lower air, a suggestive stench from
a factory for reducing fats somewhere in the neighborhood. There are
winding macadam roads through the cemetery.

When I have waited a little while at a place which has recently been
added for the graves of poor people, the great black motor coach,
splashed with mud, appears suddenly out of the city and enters one
of the small stone gateways at the southeastern corner. There is a
stone lodge there, and a bell over the gates tolls briefly as the
coach comes in. Then the vehicle follows a road parallel to a lonely
bare wet red-paved street outside, in which long dingy trolley cars
pass at intervals; and comes quickly to where I am. The sand here
is entirely bare; the few old forest trees are neglected; and the
graves lie in long close rows. They have no stones, but there are
dead rotten flowers on some of the newest, fluttering forlornly from
cardboard frames wound with lead foil and adorned with letters of
crinkly purple paper. Some graves have been covered with white cotton
cloth fastened to the ground by pegs; but that is all. Ragged rotten
brown leaves lie in the hollows of the sand, where brown weeds stand;
and wet newspapers are blown about by the cold wind.

In this shabby somber place on the dun earth of the boundless lake
country, beside the harsh ugly city in which he has been an unwelcome
stranger, but under the great white sky, too, the body of the servant
of God is to be laid.

The coach stops in the muddy road, and the escort, all negroes
except the undertaker and his agile assistant, descend in the mist.
Those who are to carry the coffin gather uncertainly, and with the
assistance of the undertaker and his man take it down. Then an
irregular procession is formed, the bearers take off their hats, and
slowly and stumblingly all move off up the slope on a mat of tan jute
with two red stripes, that has been laid on the mud, and make their
way among the graves. Shabby, ordinary people in their greatcoats
and hats of different dull colors, with their umbrellas and rubber
storm shoes, no one of them is much moved as they creep with their
dead man like tiny worms on the yellow sand beneath the sky. When the
poor black coffin has been put down on the canvas bands of the wooden
frame around the grave, all stand back quietly while something that I
cannot hear at my distance is read or said. Some of the women sob out
then. The coffin descends slowly from sight into the damp yellow sand.

Out at a distance over the swampy fields beyond the stream, large
black crows flap noisily around a lone tree; from a tiny locomotive
on railway trackage far away white steam rises with a faint roar.
The mist in the air is rapidly turning to falling rain.

After a short pause the party straggles back to the coach, some who
have started first pausing to look at the other graves and the dead
flowers. A few remain for a moment by the open grave looking down.
But very soon all are again in their places and the coach is rolling
away among the slopes. It passes out at the stone gate and back into
the city. And then old German laborers, who have been waiting not far
off, approach the grave rheumatically and set aside the few flowers
that have been left on the pile of fresh sand, which is partly
covered by a green waxed cloth and evergreen branches. They put on
and screw down the lid of the new wooden overbox; earth is thrown
in; and before the early gloomy rainy nightfall the grave of Brother
Frank Burns, Servant of the Lord, is almost filled.

But I go from the place almost unmindful of the irony of what has
happened, almost unmindful of the night and the mist and the vastness
of the wet sky; so touching and agitating have been this fair bright
vain dream which I have glimpsed, and this pure and simple heart
which, dreaming, has been able to meet its destiny so calmly and so
bravely, has been able so undeniably and so thoroughly to conquer
life and to conquer death.


       [16] Copyright, 1922, by Margaret C. Anderson.
            Copyright, 1923, by William C. G. Jitro.




                      THE GOLDEN HONEYMOON[17]

                         By RING W. LARDNER

                      (From _The Cosmopolitan_)


Mother says that when I start talking I never know when to stop. But
I tell her the only time I get a chance is when she ain’t around, so
I have to make the most of it. I guess the fact is neither one of us
would be welcome in a Quaker meeting, but as I tell Mother, what did
God give us tongues for if He didn’t want we should use them? Only
she says He didn’t give them to us to say the same thing over and
over again, like I do, and repeat myself. But I say:

“Well, Mother,” I say, “when people is like you and I and been
married fifty years, do you expect everything I say will be something
you ain’t heard me say before? But it may be new to others, as they
ain’t nobody else lived with me as long as you have.”

So she says:

“You can bet they ain’t, as they couldn’t nobody else stand you that
long.”

“Well,” I tell her, “you look pretty healthy.”

“Maybe I do,” she will say, “but I looked even healthier before I
married you.”

You can’t get ahead of Mother.

Yes, sir, we was married just fifty years ago the seventeenth day of
last December and my daughter and son-in-law was over from Trenton
to help us celebrate the Golden Wedding. My son-in-law is John H.
Kramer, the real estate man. He made $12,000 one year and is pretty
well thought of around Trenton; a good, steady, hard worker. The
Rotarians was after him a long time to join, but he kept telling
them his home was his club. But Edie finally made him join. That’s my
daughter.

Well, anyway, they come over to help us celebrate the Golden Wedding
and it was pretty crimpy weather and the furnace don’t seem to heat
up no more like it used to and Mother made the remark that she hoped
this winter wouldn’t be as cold as the last, referring to the winter
previous. So Edie said if she was us, and nothing to keep us home,
she certainly wouldn’t spend no more winters up here and why didn’t
we just shut off the water and close up the house and go down to
Tampa, Florida? You know we was there four winters ago and staid five
weeks, but it cost us over three hundred and fifty dollars for hotel
bill alone. So Mother said we wasn’t going no place to be robbed. So
my son-in-law spoke up and said that Tampa wasn’t the only place in
the South, and besides we didn’t have to stop at no high price hotel
but could rent us a couple rooms and board out somewheres, and he had
heard that St. Petersburg, Florida, was _the_ spot and if we said the
word he would write down there and make inquiries.

Well, to make a long story short, we decided to do it and Edie said
it would be our Golden Honeymoon and for a present my son-in-law
paid the difference between a section and a compartment so as we
could have a compartment and have more privatecy. In a compartment
you have an upper and lower berth just like the regular sleeper, but
it is a shut in room by itself and got a wash bowl. The car we went
in was all compartments and no regular berths at all. It was all
compartments.

We went to Trenton the night before and staid at my daughter and
son-in-law and we left Trenton the next afternoon at 3.23 P. M.

This was the twelfth day of January. Mother set facing the front of
the train, as it makes her giddy to ride backwards. I set facing her,
which does not affect me. We reached North Philadelphia at 4.03 P. M.
and we reached West Philadelphia at 4.14, but did not go into Broad
Street. We reached Baltimore at 6.30 and Washington, D.C., at 7.25.
Our train laid over in Washington two hours till another train come
along to pick us up and I got out and strolled up the platform and
into the Union Station. When I come back, our car had been switched
on to another track, but I remembered the name of it, the La Belle,
as I had once visited my aunt out in Oconomowoc, Wisconsin, where
there was a lake of that name, so I had no difficulty in getting
located. But Mother had nearly fretted herself sick for fear I would
be left.

“Well,” I said, “I would of followed you on the next train.”

“You couldn’t of,” said Mother, and she pointed out that she had the
money.

“Well,” I said, “we are in Washington and I could of borrowed from
the United States Treasury. I would of pretended I was an Englishman.”

Mother caught the point and laughed heartily.

Our train pulled out of Washington at 9.40 P. M. and Mother and I
turned in early, I taking the upper. During the night we passed
through the green fields of old Virginia, though it was too dark to
tell if they was green or what color. When we got up in the morning,
we was at Fayetteville, North Carolina. We had breakfast in the
dining car and after breakfast I got in conversation with the man in
the next compartment to ours. He was from Lebanon, New Hampshire,
and a man about eighty years of age. His wife was with him and two
unmarried daughters and I made the remark that I should think the
four of them would be crowded in one compartment, but he said they
had made the trip every winter for fifteen years and knowed how to
keep out of each other’s way. He said they was bound for Tarpon
Springs.

We reached Charleston, South Carolina, at 12.50 P. M. and arrived at
Savannah, Georgia, at 4.20. We reached Jacksonville, Florida, at 8.45
P. M. and had an hour and a quarter to lay over there, but Mother
made a fuss about me getting off the train, so we had the darkey make
up our berths and retired before we left Jacksonville. I didn’t sleep
good as the train done a lot of hemming and hawing, and Mother never
sleeps good on a train as she says she is always worrying that I will
fall out. She says she would rather have the upper herself, as then
she would not have to worry about me, but I tell her I can’t take
the risk of having it get out that I allowed my wife to sleep in an
upper berth. It would make talk.

We was up in the morning in time to see our friends from New
Hampshire get off at Tarpon Springs, which we reached at 6.53 A. M.

Several of our fellow passengers got off at Clearwater and some at
Belleair, where the train backs right up to the door of the mammoth
hotel. Belleair is the winter headquarters for the golf dudes and
everybody that got off there had their bag of sticks, as many as ten
and twelve in a bag. Women and all. When I was a young man we called
it shinny and only needed one club to play with and about one game of
it would of been a-plenty for some of these dudes, the way we played
it.

The train pulled into St. Petersburg at 8.20 and when we got off the
train you would think they was a riot, what with all the darkeys
barking for the different hotels.

I said to Mother, I said:

“It is a good thing we have got a place picked out to go to and don’t
have to choose a hotel, as it would be hard to choose amongst them if
every one of them is the best.”

She laughed.

We found a jitney and I give him the address of the room my
son-in-law had got for us and soon we was there and introduced
ourselves to the lady that owns the house, a young widow about
forty-eight years of age. She showed us our room, which was light and
airy with a comfortable bed and bureau and washstand. It was twelve
dollars a week, but the location was good, only three blocks from
Williams Park.

St. Pete is what folks calls the town, though they also call it the
Sunshine City, as they claim they’s no other place in the country
where they’s fewer days when Old Sol don’t smile down on Mother
Earth, and one of the newspapers gives away all their copies free
every day when the sun don’t shine. They claim to of only give them
away some sixty-odd times in the last eleven years. Another nickname
they have got for the town is “the Poor Man’s Palm Beach,” but I
guess they’s men that comes there that could borrow as much from the
bank as some of the Willie boys over to the other Palm Beach.

During our stay we paid a visit to the Lewis Tent City, which is the
headquarters for the Tin Can Tourists. But maybe you ain’t heard
about them. Well, they are an organization that takes their vacation
trips by auto and carries everything with them. That is, they bring
along their tents to sleep in and cook in and they don’t patronize no
hotels or cafeterias, but they have got to be bona fide auto campers
or they can’t belong to the organization.

They tell me they’s over 200,000 members to it and they call
themselves the Tin Canners on account of most of their food being put
up in tin cans. One couple we seen in the Tent City was a couple from
Brady, Texas, named Mr. and Mrs. Pence, which the old man is over
eighty years of age and they had came in their auto all the way from
home, a distance of 1,641 miles. They took five weeks for the trip,
Mr. Pence driving the entire distance.

The Tin Canners hails from every State in the Union and in the summer
time they visit places like New England and the Great Lakes region,
but in the winter the most of them comes to Florida and scatters
all over the State. While we was down there, they was a national
convention of them at Gainesville, Florida, and they elected a
Fredonia, New York man as their president. His title is Royal Tin Can
Opener of the World. They have got a song wrote up which everybody
has got to learn it before they are a member:

    The tin can forever! Hurrah, boys! Hurrah!
      Up with the tin can! Down with the foe!
    We will rally round the campfire, we’ll rally once again,
      Shouting, “We auto camp forever!”

That is something like it. And the members has also got to have a tin
can fastened on to the front of their machine.

I asked Mother how she would like to travel around that way and she
said:

“Fine, but not with an old rattle brain like you driving.”

“Well,” I said, “I am eight years younger than this Mr. Pence who
drove here from Texas.”

“Yes,” she said, “but he is old enough to not be skittish.”

You can’t get ahead of Mother.

Well, one of the first things we done in St. Petersburg was to go
to the Chamber of Commerce and register our names and where we was
from as they’s great rivalry amongst the different States in regards
to the number of their citizens visiting in town and of course our
little State don’t stand much of a show, but still every little bit
helps, as the fella says. All and all, the man told us, they was
eleven thousand names registered, Ohio leading with some fifteen
hundred-odd and New York State next with twelve hundred. Then come
Michigan, Pennsylvania and so on down, with one man each from Cuba
and Nevada.

The first night we was there, they was a meeting of the New
York-New Jersey Society at the Congregational Church and a man from
Ogdensburg, New York State, made the talk. His subject was Rainbow
Chasing. He is a Rotarian and a very convicting speaker, though I
forget his name.

Our first business, of course, was to find a place to eat and after
trying several places we run on to a cafeteria on Central Avenue
that suited us up and down. We eat pretty near all our meals there
and it averaged about two dollars per day for the two of us, but the
food was well cooked and everything nice and clean. A man don’t mind
paying the price if things is clean and well cooked.

On the third day of February, which is Mother’s birthday, we spread
ourselves and eat supper at the Poinsettia Hotel and they charged us
seventy-five cents for a sirloin steak that wasn’t hardly big enough
for one.

I said to Mother: “Well,” I said, “I guess it’s a good thing every
day ain’t your birthday or we would be in the poorhouse.”

“No,” says Mother, “because if every day was my birthday, I would be
old enough by this time to of been in my grave long ago.”

You can’t get ahead of Mother.

In the hotel they had a cardroom where they was several men and
ladies playing five hundred and this new tangled whist bridge. We
also seen a place where they was dancing, so I asked Mother would she
like to trip the light fantastic toe and she said no, she was too old
to squirm like you have got to do now days. We watched some of the
young folks at it awhile till Mother got disgusted and said we would
have to see a good movie to take the taste out of our mouth. Mother
is a great movie heroyne and we go twice a week here at home.

But I want to tell you about the Park. The second day we was there we
visited the Park, which is a good deal like the one in Tampa, only
bigger, and they’s more fun goes on here every day than you could
shake a stick at. In the middle they’s a big bandstand and chairs
for the folks to set and listen to the concerts, which they give you
music for all tastes, from Dixie up to classical pieces like Hearts
and Flowers.

Then all around they’s places marked off for different sports and
games--chess and checkers and dominoes for folks that enjoys those
kind of games, and roque and horseshoes for the nimbler ones. I used
to pitch a pretty fair shoe myself, but ain’t done much of it in the
last twenty years.

Well, anyway, we bought a membership ticket in the club which costs
one dollar for the season, and they tell me that up to a couple years
ago it was fifty cents, but they had to raise it to keep out the
riffraff.

Well, Mother and I put in a great day watching the pitchers and she
wanted I should get in the game, but I told her I was all out of
practice and would make a fool of myself, though I seen several men
pitching who I guess I could take their measure without no practice.
However, they was some good pitchers, too, and one boy from Akron,
Ohio, who could certainly throw a pretty shoe. They told me it
looked like he would win the championship of the United States in
the February tournament. We come away a few days before they held
that and I never did hear if he win. I forget his name, but he was a
clean cut young fella and he has got a brother in Cleveland that’s a
Rotarian.

Well, we just stood around and watched the different games for two or
three days and finally I set down in a checker game with a man named
Weaver from Danville, Illinois. He was a pretty fair checker player,
but he wasn’t no match for me, and I hope that don’t sound like
bragging. But I always could hold my own on a checkerboard and the
folks around here will tell you the same thing. I played with this
Weaver pretty near all morning for two or three mornings and he beat
me one game and the only other time it looked like he had a chance,
the noon whistle blowed and we had to quit and go to dinner.

While I was playing checkers, Mother would set and listen to the
band, as she loves music, classical or no matter what kind, but
anyway she was setting there one day and between selections the woman
next to her opened up a conversation. She was a woman about Mother’s
own age, seventy or seventy-one, and finally she asked Mother’s name
and Mother told her her name and where she was from and Mother asked
her the same question, and who do you think the woman was?

Well, sir, it was the wife of Frank M. Hartsell, the man who was
engaged to Mother till I stepped in and cut him out, fifty-two years
ago!

Yes, sir!

You can imagine Mother’s surprise! And Mrs. Hartsell was surprised,
too, when Mother told her she had once been friends with her husband,
though Mother didn’t say how close friends they had been, or that
Mother and I was the cause of Hartsell going out West. But that’s
what we was. Hartsell left his town a month after the engagement
was broke off and ain’t never been back since. He had went out to
Michigan and become a veterinary, and that is where he had settled
down, in Hillsdale, Michigan, and finally married his wife.

Well, Mother screwed up her courage to ask if Frank was still living
and Mrs. Hartsell took her over to where they was pitching horseshoes
and there was old Frank, waiting his turn. And he knowed Mother as
soon as he seen her, though it was over fifty years. He said he
knowed her by her eyes.

“Why, it’s Lucy Frost!” he says, and he throwed down his shoes and
quit the game.

Then they come over and hunted me up and I will confess I wouldn’t of
knowed him. Him and I is the same age to the month, but he seems to
show it more, some way. He is balder for one thing. And his beard is
all white, where mine has still got a streak of brown in it. The very
first thing I said to him, I said:

“Well, Frank, that beard of yours makes me feel like I was back
north. It looks like a regular blizzard.”

“Well,” he said, “I guess yourn would be just as white if you had it
dry cleaned.”

But Mother wouldn’t stand that.

“Is that so!” she said to Frank. “Well, Charley ain’t had no tobacco
in his mouth for over ten years!”

And I ain’t!

Well, I excused myself from the checker game and it was pretty close
to noon, so we decided to all have dinner together and they was
nothing for it only we must try their cafeteria on Third Avenue.
It was a little more expensive than ours and not near as good, I
thought. I and Mother had about the same dinner we had been having
every day and our bill was $1.10. Frank’s check was $1.20 for he and
his wife. The same meal wouldn’t of cost them more than a dollar at
our place.

After dinner we made them come up to our house and we all set in the
parlor, which the young woman had give us the use of to entertain
company. We begun talking over old times and Mother said she was
a-scared Mrs. Hartsell would find it tiresome listening to we three
talk over old times, but as it turned out they wasn’t much chance
for nobody else to talk with Mrs. Hartsell in the company. I have
heard lots of women that could go it, but Hartsell’s wife takes the
cake of all the women I ever seen. She told us the family history of
everybody in the State of Michigan and bragged for a half hour about
her son, who she said is in the drug business in Grand Rapids, and a
Rotarian.

When I and Hartsell could get a word in edgeways we joked one another
back and forth and I chafed him about being a horse doctor.

“Well, Frank,” I said, “you look pretty prosperous, so I suppose
they’s been plenty of glanders around Hillsdale.”

“Well,” he said, “I’ve managed to make more than a fair living. But
I’ve worked pretty hard.”

“Yes,” I said, “and I suppose you get called out all hours of the
night to attend births and so on.”

Mother made me shut up.

Well, I thought they wouldn’t never go home and I and Mother was
in misery trying to keep awake, as the both of us generally always
takes a nap after dinner. Finally they went, after we had made an
engagement to meet them in the Park the next morning, and Mrs.
Hartsell also invited us to come to their place the next night and
play five hundred. But she had forgot that they was a meeting of the
Michigan Society that evening, so it was not till two evenings later
that we had our first card game.

Hartsell and his wife lived in a house on Third Avenue North and had
a private setting room besides their bedroom. Mrs. Hartsell couldn’t
quit talking about their private setting room like it was something
wonderful. We played cards with them, with Mother and Hartsell
partners against his wife and I. Mrs. Hartsell is a miserable card
player and we certainly got the worst of it.

After the game she brought out a dish of oranges and we had to
pretend it was just what we wanted, though oranges down there is like
a young man’s whiskers; you enjoy them at first, but they get to be a
pesky nuisance.

We played cards again the next night at our place with the same
partners and I and Mrs. Hartsell was beat again. Mother and Hartsell
was full of compliments for each other on what a good team they made,
but the both of them knowed well enough where the secret of their
success laid. I guess all and all we must of played ten different
evenings and they was only one night when Mrs. Hartsell and I come
out ahead. And that one night wasn’t no fault of hern.

When we had been down there about two weeks, we spent one evening as
their guest in the Congregational Church, at a social give by the
Michigan Society. A talk was made by a man named Bitting of Detroit,
Michigan, on How I was Cured of Story Telling. He is a big man in
the Rotarians and give a witty talk.

A woman named Mrs. Oxford rendered some selections which Mrs.
Hartsell said was grand opera music, but whatever they was my
daughter Edie could of give her cards and spades and not made such a
hullaballoo about it neither.

Then they was a ventriloquist from Grand Rapids and a young woman
about forty-five years of age that mimicked different kinds of birds.
I whispered to Mother that they all sounded like a chicken, but she
nudged me to shut up.

After the show we stopped in a drug store and I set up the
refreshments and it was pretty close to ten o’clock before we finally
turned in. Mother and I would of preferred tending the movies, but
Mother said we mustn’t offend Mrs. Hartsell, though I asked her had
we came to Florida to enjoy ourselves or to just not offend an old
chatterbox from Michigan.

I felt sorry for Hartsell one morning. The women folks both had an
engagement down to the chiropodist’s and I run across Hartsell in the
Park and he foolishly offered to play me checkers.

It was him that suggested it, not me, and I guess he repented himself
before we had played one game. But he was too stubborn to give up and
set there while I beat him game after game and the worst part of it
was that a crowd of folks had got in the habit of watching me play
and there they all was, looking on, and finally they seen what a fool
Frank was making of himself, and they began to chafe him and pass
remarks. Like one of them said:

“Who ever told you you was a checker player!”

And:

“You might maybe be good for tiddle-de-winks, but not checkers!”

I almost felt like letting him beat me a couple games. But the crowd
would of knowed it was a put up job.

Well, the women folks joined us in the Park and I wasn’t going to
mention our little game, but Hartsell told about it himself and
admitted he wasn’t no match for me.

“Well,” said Mrs. Hartsell, “checkers ain’t much of a game anyway, is
it?” She said: “It’s more of a children’s game, ain’t it? At least, I
know my boy’s children used to play it a good deal.”

“Yes, ma’am,” I said. “It’s a children’s game the way your husband
plays it, too.”

Mother wanted to smooth things over, so she said:

“Maybe they’s other games where Frank can beat you.”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Hartsell, “and I bet he could beat you pitching
horse-shoes.”

“Well,” I said, “I would give him a chance to try, only I ain’t
pitched a shoe in over sixteen years.”

“Well,” said Hartsell, “I ain’t played checkers in twenty years.”

“You ain’t never played it,” I said.

“Anyway,” says Frank, “Lucy and I is your master at five hundred.”

Well, I could of told him why that was, but had decency enough to
hold my tongue.

It had got so now that he wanted to play cards every night and
when I or Mother wanted to go to a movie, why one of us would have
to pretend we had a headache and then trust to goodness that they
wouldn’t see us sneak into the theater. I don’t mind playing cards
when my partner keeps their mind on the game, but you take a woman
like Hartsell’s wife and how can they play cards when they have got
to stop every couple seconds and brag about their son in Grand Rapids?

Well, the New York-New Jersey Society announced that they was going
to give a social evening too and I said to Mother, I said:

“Well, that is one evening when we will have an excuse not to play
five hundred.”

“Yes,” she said, “but we will have to ask Frank and his wife to go to
the social with us as they asked us to go to the Michigan social.”

“Well,” I said, “I had rather stay home than drag that chatterbox
everywheres we go.”

So Mother said:

“You are getting too cranky. Maybe she does talk a little too much
but she is good hearted. And Frank is always good company.”

So I said:

“I suppose if he is such good company you wished you had of married
him.”

Mother laughed and said I sounded like I was jealous. Jealous of a
cow doctor!

Anyway we had to drag them along to the social and I will say that we
give them a much better entertainment than they had given us.

Judge Lane of Paterson made a fine talk on business conditions and a
Mrs. Newell of Westfield imitated birds, only you could really tell
what they was the way she done it. Two young women from Red Bank sung
a choral selection and we clapped them back and they gave us Home to
Our Mountains and Mother and Mrs. Hartsell both had tears in their
eyes. And Hartsell, too.

Well, some way or another the chairman got wind that I was there and
asked me to make a talk and I wasn’t even going to get up, but Mother
made me, so I got up and said:

“Ladies and gentlemen,” I said. “I didn’t expect to be called on for
a speech on an occasion like this or no other occasion as I do not
set myself up as a speech maker, so will have to do the best I can,
which I often say is the best anybody can do.”

Then I told them the story about Pat and the motorcycle, using the
brogue, and it seemed to tickle them and I told them one or two
other stories, but altogether I wasn’t on my feet more than twenty
or twenty-five minutes and you ought to of heard the clapping and
hollering when I set down. Even Mrs. Hartsell admitted that I
am quite a speechifier and said if I ever went to Grand Rapids,
Michigan, her son would make me talk to the Rotarians.

When it was over, Hartsell wanted we should go to their place and
play cards, but his wife reminded him that it was after 9.30 P. M.,
rather a late hour to start a card game, but he had went crazy on the
subject of cards, probably because he didn’t have to play partners
with his wife. Anyway, we got rid of them and went home to bed.

It was the next morning, when we met over to the Park, that Mrs.
Hartsell made the remark that she wasn’t getting no exercise so I
suggested that why didn’t she take part in the roque game.

She said she had not played a game of roque in twenty years, but if
Mother would play she would play. Well, at first Mother wouldn’t
hear of it, but finally consented, more to please Mrs. Hartsell than
anything else.

Well, they had a game with a Mrs. Ryan from Eagle, Nebraska, and a
young Mrs. Morse from Rutland, Vermont, who Mother had met down to
the chiropodist’s. Well, Mother couldn’t hit a flea and they all
laughed at her and I couldn’t help from laughing at her myself and
finally she quit and said her back was too lame to stoop over. So
they got another lady and kept on playing and soon Mrs. Hartsell was
the one everybody was laughing at, as she had a long shot to hit the
black ball, and as she made the effort her teeth fell out on to the
court. I never seen a woman so flustered in my life. And I never
heard so much laughing, only Mrs. Hartsell didn’t join in and she was
madder than a hornet and wouldn’t play no more, so the game broke up.

Mrs. Hartsell went home without speaking to nobody, but Hartsell
staid around and finally he said to me, he said:

“Well, I played you checkers the other day and you beat me bad and
now what do you say if you and me play a game of horseshoes?”

I told him I hadn’t pitched a shoe in sixteen years, but Mother said:

“Go ahead and play. You used to be good at it and maybe it will come
back to you.”

Well, to make a long story short, I give in. I oughtn’t to of never
tried it, as I hadn’t pitched a shoe in sixteen years, and I only
done it to humor Hartsell.

Before we started, Mother patted me on the back and told me to do my
best, so we started in and I seen right off that I was in for it, as
I hadn’t pitched a shoe in sixteen years and didn’t have my distance.
And besides, the plating had wore off the shoes so that they was
points right where they stuck into my thumb and I hadn’t throwed
more than two or three times when my thumb was raw and it pretty near
killed me to hang on to the shoe, let alone pitch it.

Well, Hartsell throws the awkwardest shoe I ever seen pitched and
to see him pitch you wouldn’t think he would ever come nowheres
near, but he is also the luckiest pitcher I ever seen and he made
some pitches where the shoe lit five and six feet short and then
schoonered up and was a ringer. They’s no use trying to beat that
kind of luck.

They was a pretty fair size crowd watching us and four or five other
ladies besides Mother, and it seems like, when Hartsell pitches, he
has got to chew and it kept the ladies on the anxious seat as he
don’t seem to care which way he is facing when he leaves go.

You would think a man as old as him would of learnt more manners.

Well, to make a long story short, I was just beginning to get my
distance when I had to give up on account of my thumb, which I
showed it to Hartsell and he seen I couldn’t go on, as it was raw
and bleeding. Even if I could of stood it to go on myself, Mother
wouldn’t of allowed it after she seen my thumb. So anyway I quit and
Hartsell said the score was nineteen to six, but I don’t know what it
was. Or don’t care, neither.

Well, Mother and I went home and I said I hoped we was through with
the Hartsells as I was sick and tired of them, but it seemed like she
had promised we would go over to their house that evening for another
game of their everlasting cards.

Well, my thumb was giving me considerable pain and I felt kind of out
of sorts and I guess maybe I forgot myself, but anyway, when we was
about through playing Hartsell made the remark that he wouldn’t never
lose a game of cards if he could always have Mother for a partner.

So I said:

“Well, you had a chance fifty years ago to always have her for a
partner, but you wasn’t man enough to keep her.”

I was sorry the minute I had said it and Hartsell didn’t know what
to say and for once his wife couldn’t say nothing. Mother tried to
smooth things over by making the remark that I must of had something
stronger than tea or I wouldn’t talk so silly. But Mrs. Hartsell had
froze up like an iceberg and hardly said good night to us and I bet
her and Frank put in a pleasant hour after we was gone.

As we was leaving, Mother said to him: “Never mind Charley’s
nonsense, Frank. He is just mad because you beat him all hollow
pitching horseshoes and playing cards.”

She said that to make up for my slip, but at the same time she
certainly riled me. I tried to keep ahold of myself, but as soon as
we was out of the house she had to open up the subject and begun to
scold me for the break I had made.

Well, I wasn’t in no mood to be scolded. So I said:

“I guess he is such a wonderful pitcher and card player that you
wished you had married him.”

“Well,” she said, “at least he ain’t a baby to give up pitching
because his thumb has got a few scratches.”

“And how about you,” I said, “making a fool of yourself on the roque
court and then pretending your back is lame and you can’t play no
more!”

“Yes,” she said, “but when you hurt your thumb I didn’t laugh at you,
and why did you laugh at me when I sprained my back?”

“Who could help from laughing!” I said.

“Well,” she said, “Frank Hartsell didn’t laugh.”

“Well,” I said, “why didn’t you marry him?”

“Well,” said Mother, “I almost wished I had!”

“And I wished so, too!” I said.

“I’ll remember that!” said Mother, and that’s the last word she said
to me for two days.

We seen the Hartsells the next day in the Park and I was willing to
apologize, but they just nodded to us. And a couple days later we
heard they had left for Orlando, where they have got relatives.

I wished they had went there in the first place.

Mother and I made it up setting on a bench.

“Listen, Charley,” she said. “This is our Golden Honeymoon and we
don’t want the whole thing spoilt with a silly old quarrel.”

“Well,” I said, “did you mean that about wishing you had married
Hartsell?”

“Of course not,” she said, “that is, if you didn’t mean that you
wished I had, too.”

So I said:

“I was just tired and all wrought up. I thank God you chose me
instead of him as they’s no other woman in the world who I could of
lived with all these years.”

“How about Mrs. Hartsell?” says Mother.

“Good gracious!” I said. “Imagine being married to a woman that plays
five hundred like she does and drops her teeth on the roque court!”

“Well,” said Mother, “it wouldn’t be no worse than being married to a
man that expectorates towards ladies and is such a fool in a checker
game.”

So I put my arm around her shoulder and she stroked my hand and I
guess we got kind of spooney.

They was two days left of our stay in St. Petersburg and the next to
the last day Mother introduced me to a Mrs. Kendall from Kingston,
Rhode Island, who she had met at the chiropodist’s.

Mrs. Kendall made us acquainted with her husband, who is in the
grocery business. They have got two sons and five grandchildren and
one great-grandchild. One of their sons lives in Providence and is
way up in the Elks as well as a Rotarian.

We found them very congenial people and we played cards with them the
last two nights we was there. They was both experts and I only wished
we had met them sooner instead of running into the Hartsells. But
the Kendalls will be there again next winter and we will see more of
them, that is, if we decide to make the trip again.

We left the Sunshine City on the eleventh day of February, at 11
A. M. This give us a day trip through Florida and we seen all the
country we had passed through at night on the way down.

We reached Jacksonville at 7 P. M. and pulled out of there at 8.10
P. M. We reached Fayetteville, North Carolina, at nine o’clock the
following morning, and reached Washington, D. C., at 6.30 P. M.,
laying over there half an hour.

We reached Trenton at 11.01 P. M. and had wired ahead to my daughter
and son-in-law and they met us at the train and we went to their
house and they put us up for the night. John would of made us stay up
all night, telling about our trip, but Edie said we must be tired and
made us go to bed. That’s my daughter.

The next day we took our train for home and arrived safe and sound,
having been gone just one month and a day.

Here comes Mother, so I guess I better shut up.


       [17] Copyright, 1922, by The International Magazine
            Company (Cosmopolitan).
            Copyright, 1923, by Ring W. Lardner.




                     HE LAUGHED AT THE GODS[18]

                         By JAMES OPPENHEIM

                           (From _Broom_)


During the course of some psychological investigations I was making,
I found it necessary to visit an insane asylum near New York. The
building was no more than an ill-smelling barracks, very desolate;
but the young interne, who guided me through the place, finally took
me to a series of private rooms, which were homelike and pleasant
and had windows facing the fields and the hills. He told me by the
way that I must above all things see Dr. Farraday. Dr. Farraday, he
explained, knew a great deal about the human soul; so much so that
the young doctors often consulted him about puzzling and unusual
cases.

“He is the most interesting man here,” he told me.

“And what is he suffering from?” I asked.

He smiled. “You’ll have to get his own diagnosis,” he said.
“Between you and me, I think he has a high regard for our free
board and lodging. He has the sort of insanity of the hobo, of the
I-Won’t-Works. But he came to it too late in life to make freight
cars and hay-lofts at all attractive. He was too settled down to
wander the world, and too--well, insane to work.”

“Well!” I laughed, “I daresay there are many like him--only they are
quartered on relatives, or wives, or friends.... In ancient days that
form of insanity was highly honorable. It is, isn’t it, the insanity
of the artist?”

His answer was to knock at a door, and a deep and rather pleasing
voice cried, “Come in.” So we went in.

The light flooded brightly through the tall wide window, so that
at first I only saw a dark bulk coming toward us. But I noticed
the walls hung with many strange and brilliant drawings, all of a
symbolical nature, mythic animals and gods, stars and moons, and
landscapes that never were. When I was through blinking, and had my
man on the darker side of me, I saw him quite plainly. He was rather
bulky and large, swarthy and something about his face resembling the
face of a turtle.

His manner was very courteous, but a little absent. The young interne
excused himself, with a private wink at me, as much as to say: “I
won’t interfere”; and so we were left alone.

I offered him a cigar, which pleased him, and we sat in comfortable
armchairs by the window, and were soon plunged in scientific
discussion.... But I saw he was restless. I noticed, too, now, that
his clothes were ill-fitting, worn out, patched and rather dirty;
that his nails and fingers were sooted up with crayon and stained
with ink; that his cheeks and chin needed a shave and his hair was
rather longer than we wear it.

His restlessness increased. He rubbed his chin, gazed about
abstractedly, swung his leg back and forth in a too obvious rhythm.
And at last he spoke in a voice which did not seem his at all--a
voice which appeared to me to belong to some other person. The voice
he had used was quiet and cool, although sympathetic. This new voice
was personal, hot, and almost bitter.

“What is the use of all this talk?” he cried out. “It gets us
nowhere. Intellect! science! theory! brain-spinning! Young man, that
is our modern Devil. Kill him ... strangle him out of your soul. He
is the Devil of the ice, of the cold polar regions. Better a hundred
times the old Devil of the burning hell, for in fire there is also
God!”

For a moment I thought I was coming to psychic fisticuffs with him;
but I reflected, and at once swallowed my pride.

“I see,” I said, looking him in the eyes, “you knew this modern Devil
very well; perhaps intimately.”

He glanced at me.

“You sit there,” he cried, “a bit of ice yourself. I feel no warmth
from you; I am not a human being to you, but just another case.
Everywhere I look for Christ and find a Devil. But you scientists
will never save the world without love--yea, and hate, too. Fire
cleanses and resurrects, but the ice freezes and slays. You would
embalm me too in your waste places; and there is no healing in it.
Feel this asylum--chilly and cold and full of living death--and the
blasted crowd waiting for a great lover to cast out their demons. He
is late in coming; He is late in coming.”

The something that was strange in his voice, his manner and in his
words troubled me deeply.

“You are quite right,” I said simply. “Forgive me for my attitude.”

He looked at me attentively and spoke more softly.

“There is some hope for you, then,” he murmured. “Look,” and he
reached and brought a sheet of drawing paper from the little table
beside him.

He had drawn a picture in crayon, and done it very well. There was
a powerful man, with arms crossed on his chest, standing like a
Napoleon on an ice-sheathed rock, and out of the sky a lightning in
the form of a great serpent had leaped down and was about to fasten
his fangs into the man’s eyes.

“Wonderful!” I cried. “And it means?”

   “You tell me what it means,” he commanded.

It flashed intuitively across my mind that it meant: “He who sees too
much must be struck blind.” I told him and he was highly pleased: he
regarded me affectionately.

“This is the first human contact I have had in a long time,” he said.
“Except, of course, some of the lunatics....”

“But how,” I asked, “can a man see too much, and why is such a man
like Napoleon?”

“Ah,” he said, “when Christ was shown the kingdoms of the world
from a high mountain, he chose then between Cæsar and the Galilean.
Seeing, man--to see, to know--knowledge, they say, is power.... But
when one is blind then one sees truly ... sees inwardly. ‘They have
eyes, but they see not’....”

I felt his meaning, though, to use the word in his sense, I did not
see it.

“And what is the serpent?” I asked.

“The gods.”

“Then you believe in the gods?”

“I have always believed in them,” he said in his strange voice again,
“but I laughed at them. The great Dr. Farraday laughed at the gods.
Believed? Of course. The fool says in his heart, There is no God. And
the intellectual says in his heart, There are gods, and I laugh at
them.”

We sat in silence, smoking, and now and then I felt him trying to
pierce me with a look. At last he said:

“You are troubled, my friend.”

“Yes, I am troubled,” I admitted. “We are all troubled in these days.”

“The days of the great ice,” he murmured. “The second Glacial
Period.” He paused, then spoke abruptly. “I have a strange feeling
for you, very unusual. I am going to tell you something. You may
forget it as soon as you have heard it. You may say to yourself: ‘It
is the phantasy of an insane man.’ Or you may find it material for
analysis and so enrich your science. Or perhaps if I am not wholly
demented, you may take it into your being and find it a gift of the
gods.... It is a story--one of the few that have meaning for me. And
it is about a man I knew--oh, knew very well. Most intimately....
Perhaps it is the story of our age. Who knows?”

I looked at him. Our eyes met.

“Tell me,” I said.

And he told me....

“His name was Trudo. That name after all is as good as another....
I must tell you a little about his childhood ... not much ... it is
not very important. Trudo was a sensitive child; he couldn’t compete
with the boys; he was a coward and a stay-at-home. He felt everything
so intensely that he suffered incessantly. He could not fight, he
could not play ball. And his father, whom he worshipped, died. And
his mother was practical and embittered by her struggles and her
poverty. Trudo felt he was a worm. Yes, he was vermin. Until he made
a discovery.... If you couldn’t beat others with your fists or your
skill or your leadership, you could beat them with your mind. And
that was the beginning of the end for Trudo....

“He resolutely killed all his feelings. It can be done, you know. You
become like the snail. His body is soft and fragile; but he draws it
into his shell when there is danger of attack. This is what Trudo
did. And for the rest, he studied. He became a physician and a man of
research. He developed his intellect in a truly marvelous way. And he
rose, and was well on the path toward greatness.

“I won’t bore you with the details. They are the same for everyone
who succeeds. Think of your own successes. Merely imagine Trudo at
the top of his profession, living in a very fine house near Central
Park on a chaste side street. Respectability, luxury, the waiting
room with old masters on the wall, the tiled and shining laboratory,
the cushioned library, and so on, and so on.... It is not important,
is it?

“I pause a moment to speak of his wife. She was a very fine woman,
doubtless. Of one of the old New York families. If I mentioned the
name, you’d know all about it, I’m sure. And she was religious, in
a way, though her god was rather a crude one, a sort of hybrid,
not of the sphinx variety exactly, but a good respectable American
god. I am not cynical about it either. That god has given us much
of America.... Let me describe him in a word, a line: He was a
puritan who believed in hard work, righteousness and business. And
he believed in kindness and purity. You see my wife, don’t you? She
wanted me to be honest and upright, respectable and wealthy, and at
the same time lowly and obedient--down on my knees to her deity....
She found me then an anomaly: I was honest, I was wealthy, I was
upright; but I was proud and vain and consumed in myself. I had
no love in my heart. You know there was John Brown to prove that
a puritan can love like a blast of fire. But also, as you know, a
puritan can be a peak of ice.

“Now I must tell you a great joke. My patients thought me a second
Jesus. Actually. And why? Because I was remarkably intuitive. I could
pierce direct into their souls, and so I knew just what to say and
to do to make them feel I was in full sympathy with them. Is there
anything more devilish than that? I ask you. Think. To use the art
of love to serve merely one’s ambition and one’s egotism. To wear
the mask of Christ in order to be a great doctor. Good old American
bluff, isn’t it?”

He paused, and took a puff on his cigar. It was as if he had
forgotten my presence. Indeed he did not seem to realize that he had
dropped speaking of “Trudo” and was speaking directly of himself, in
the first person.

Then he went on, his voice growing warm and poignant.

“My wife warned me, often. She said I had slain my soul, and was
headed for a great crash. She pointed out how many of our great
business-men make forced marches on success and are killed or driven
insane or into a sanitarium before they are fifty. I agreed with her.
But what could I do? The greatest tragedy of my life was the fact
that it was a comedy. I knew all the facts, but I didn’t care a snap
of my fingers. I could not feel the tragedy. I was perfectly happy on
the ice--that is, if you can call it happy. Perhaps, to put it more
honestly, I was neither glad nor sad, but busy, alert and keen.

“Then the symptoms came. I will not enter into the details.
Palpitation of the heart, for instance--a very bad symptom, as you
know. You see, I had no heart; so it was just there that the gods
began to make mischief. Ah, yes, I knew then that the gods I had
laughed at were preparing a little doomsday for me. Man does not live
by intellect alone. If thou hast two loaves of bread, sell one, and
buy hyacinths for thy soul. Lord! I said those very words to myself
at the time. But of what avail?

“Obviously there was nothing I could do--except one thing. I could
put away Mammon--I could give up my practice, my fine house, my
scientific researches. But what modern successful man can do it? It
was exactly like the rich young man who went to Jesus. And Jesus
asked him if he could give up his wealth; leave all, and follow. And
the young man could not. That was I.

“No. My pride and revolt increase, if anything. And I even became
cold toward my wife. And this killed her. I looked on her dead face,
and not even then could I break through the ice, and drop one poor
tear of pity or self-pity.

“You see, I was utterly lost. And now with my wife dead, and no
children, and no true friends, you might have thought that it would
be easy to let go of the power of the world. But not so. Not so. The
decks were cleared for action, that was all. I was going to do a
great bit of scientific writing....

“Then the lightning struck me. Oh, it was so simple, so simple. I
was walking one night on a side-street on the lower west side. And
a prostitute accosted me. I had a sudden burning curiosity. I was
curious about the psychology of prostitution. I would go with this
woman, and study her. I had no desire. I was a puritan. I did not
want to touch her. Ugh! as a physician I knew too much about the
diseases of vice....

“She took me then to her dingy hall bedroom in a cheap lodging
house. I sat on the cot; she sat on a soap-box. And in the gaslight
I saw her; a very thin woman, a little tall, and perhaps tubercular.
Shining eyes and glowing cheeks. And she was very poor.”

He groaned, and stopped. Then he whispered:

“Now the story begins.... I began questioning her, when suddenly she
burst out on me:

“‘But you are not a human being. You are terrible. I feel as if the
Devil himself were in this room.’

“I was startled. I asked her:

“‘Who are you? Where do you come from?’

“‘I am a Russian,’ she said, ‘and a Jewess. My name is Losha.’

“‘But are not you in league with the Devil also?’

“‘No,’ she cried defiantly, rising before me and clenching her fists.
‘I am driven by need and loneliness; but you are only vain and
learned. You are a lost soul.’

“‘Yes.’ I admitted in my honest way, ‘I _am_ lost. What’s to be done
about it?’

“‘You know you are lost,’ she cried, ‘and yet ask me that? Oh, this
is terrible. This is the eternal damnation they talk about....’

“‘That doesn’t help me,’ I said. ‘Talk has never helped me. I can
talk myself.’”

She stared at me, and leaned toward me.

“‘You are right. Only an infinite love could help you.’

“That was the way we talked. And suddenly I forgot that I was the
questioner and had a great desire to tell her about myself. I
told everything, just as I have told you. It was amazing enough;
an ignorant sick woman of the gutter, one whose body was common
merchandise, and who had no life of her own, and I, the learned
scientist, the respectable and wealthy doctor.

“Three times I went to see her. And at the third the lightning passed
through me. She was weeping when I entered and would not rise from
the bed. Her face was buried in her hands.

“‘Why are you crying, Losha?’ I asked.

“‘I weep,’ she said, ‘because you are to be pitied more than I am. We
are both prostitutes. But the Devil in me is a god, and you have no
god.’

“I stood, silent, but quite calm. Then she rose slowly and flung her
arms about my neck. I had not expected it. She whispered passionately:

“‘I love you. I love you. I love you.’

“‘Why do you love?’ I asked.

“‘Because I am your lost soul.’

“And I saw the truth. I saw that what lay buried in me was not only
divine love, but also the great beast, and that this woman was both.
And first I felt a burning steal through my body, a hot and primal
fire, the smoky breath of hell itself, and for the first time I could
remember, I had the horrible cannibal lust to tear a human body limb
from limb. But while I was convulsed with this, something strangely
other came up and mingled with the lust. It was as if I saw the
Christ. It was holy and ecstatic and divine.... Yes, yes, yes, it was
love....

“You can imagine an earthquake that raises some monstrous buried
formation to the surface and buries what it finds there. That
happened to me.... It was like a conversion. But in my conversion
both Christ and the beast came up and tore asunder the great Dr.
Farraday--the fine intellect, the high-minded ego....

“In short, I went suddenly mad, and gave a great shriek, tearing off
my clothes and foaming at the mouth. I called Losha ‘the goddess’ and
prostrated myself before her. Then I shrieked aloud for the torture
and agony and had something very like a fit of epilepsy.

“She was terrified. She finally put me to bed, and soothed me. She
nursed me tenderly. I would lie quiescent for hours, in a fever. Then
the spell was on me. I saw great beasts, kings and gods. I was ground
by terrible passion and ecstasy. It was a death....”

He paused; then smiled sadly....

“You can imagine the sequel. I could not return to my house. It was
all ended. All my interest in my work, my position, my power and
place in the world, had vanished. Everything, but the emotions that
swept me, was quite unreal. And so I ruined myself.

“I married Losha. It seemed a simple matter. And we opened a little
stationery shop and kept it together.... And then I began to draw:
I became an artist. I was alive from head to foot, and yet quite
tormented--tormented by these terrible passions and ecstacies, these
perverted and glorious impulses which for years had festered in my
darkness, and which, when they came upon me, came more like monsters
than divinities....

“What can I say of Losha? She was the one woman whom I never knew. My
intuition failed me. I never understood. Was she ugly or beautiful?
stupid or wise? base or noble? I cannot tell. I only could know her
simple and undivided love, which never forsook me. It was those fires
in which I became as ashes.

“As ashes, ashes.... One cold morning she coughed a great big racking
spasm.... Then she whispered to me:

“‘Trudo, I love you.’

“And she died.... I closed the shop.... I did not need the shop. I
needed only my own soul, which began to dawn in me like the sun in
spring.... And being quite insane, I came here....”

We were silent. He fussed about among his papers and murmured: “I
suppose it isn’t much of a story.”

I smiled at him, but said nothing. Then he showed me a portrait he
had made of Losha.

She was dark and thin, even gaunt, and a look almost of madness in
the eyes.... The tears rolled down the Doctor’s cheeks....

A little later I said goodby to him. We stood, facing each other and
he held my hand.

“I am insane,” he said, “do not forget that. And out there--”
he waved his other hand in the direction of New York, “live the
sane ones. Losha is dead, and Dr. Farraday is dead. You know the
ancients,” he smiled quaintly, “thought the insane were close to the
gods. But that’s a fable, isn’t it?”

I closed the door on him very softly, troubled in spirit.


       [18] Copyright, 1921, by _Broom_.
            Copyright, 1923, by James Oppenheim.




                        IN THE METROPOLIS[19]

                       By BENJAMIN ROSENBLATT

                       (From _Brief Stories_)


She sat in a show window of a large department store.

“A prize to those who make her laugh,” read a conspicuous sign over
her head. An American flag was wrapped around her slim figure; a
sword which she clutched with both hands rested on her lap with its
point towards a placard announcing a bargain sale.

She sat motionless, her eyes wide open, her face hardly betraying a
trace of life.

All day long she sat there, while multitudes passing on the sidewalk
turned their heads towards her and wondered: “Is it a living woman
or a wax figure?” It was this puzzle which held the pedestrian, and
caused the manager of the store to chuckle at his own cleverness.
When he saw in the morning this bashful country girl shuffling into
the store and asking inaudibly for a job, he caught at the chance
for novelty in the advertising of his sale. Her features were so
immobile; she appeared, on the whole, so lifeless that his agile mind
had promptly pictured her in her present setting.

Unceasingly the crowd surged before the window. Newsboys with bundles
under their arms, messengers in uniform, girls with lunch boxes in
their hands, even trim-looking business men--all forgot their errands
for a few minutes, and directed their mingled breath towards that
window. Some of the boys stood for hours, sticking out their tongues,
puffing up their cheeks, grinning and grimacing in a vain effort to
get a smile from that grim apparition.

Though she was alone inside the window, still it seemed to her as if
she were thrown into that seething mass before her, as if jostled
and mercilessly kicked about. How strange everything! How confusing
to her!

In the morning, when she learned there was work for her at the store,
she was so happy that she thought of writing home at once about her
good luck. But in the evening, after her first day’s work, she was
so exhausted that the girls of the establishment who took her to
their boarding house, had to lead her under her arms. She walked and
wondered: the manager had said there was absolutely no work attached
to her job.

At the supper-table, the girls, good naturedly, poked fun at her; and
she grew livelier. Later, some of them had a romp, and decided that
the feet of the uncouth lass were surely more used to follow the cows
to pasture, than to dance.

The next morning the girls hurried feverishly. They paid little
attention to the “rustic clown.” Some had slept too late; they looked
anxious and careworn. Last evening’s warmth had all evaporated, and
the “wax figure” felt a strange chill and a sinking at the heart.

Again she took her seat in the show window. She was faint, not having
been in the mood for breakfast, and before long dizziness overtook
her. She felt as if she looked into some deep water from which a wave
suddenly emerged--a huge wave that roared, groaned, moved towards
her, striving to engulf her, to carry her away.

Still, she appeared on that second day conscious of things she had
not observed at first. The cars that thundered back and forth seemed
new, and she noted the elevated overhead. The crowds were again as
large and again as busy making “faces” which frightened her into
immobility, so that it became harder for the people to get her
attention, and most of them wondered: “Will she ever smile?”

In the afternoon it rained. The electric lights began to twinkle
early, and a sea of umbrellas moved, moved endlessly before the
motionless figure in the window.

She stared at the rumbling taxis that splashed hither and thither;
at the zig-zag drizzle, the steady downpour, and her eyes suddenly
filled. Thoughts of home were awakened within her by the rain. Her
brain and heart, hitherto as if congealed by the terror of the
strange world before her, now thawed and filled her with a gnawing
sadness and self-pity. How is it at home now? her thoughts ran. How
is it at home? It rains. There is the muddy road, the ruts and the
pools. Father is indoors now, back from the field. The gray dusk
falls. Mother sits with folded arms by the window and gazes longingly
out into the dark.

“Are you looking for me?” the figure in the window, forgetting
herself, suddenly wailed. “Mother, mother dear, take me to you. I
ain’t used to this; I’m so lonely and afraid.”

Her lips trembled visibly. A spasm shot across her face and
contracted it--and many of the crowd outside who made “mouths” at
her, burst into a triumphant hurrah. “She laughed!” roared a colored
man so loud that it reached the manager, who forthwith decided to
discharge the “figure.” “I get the prize,” yelled others. “I made her
laugh! I made her laugh!”


       [19] Copyright, 1921, by Brief Stories Publishing Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Benjamin Rosenblatt.




                       FROM THE OTHER SIDE OF
                            THE SOUTH[20]

                       By WILBUR DANIEL STEELE

                    (From _The Pictorial Review_)


The day had been dead hot. Under the weight of the afternoon one
would have thought it could never be cool again in the Mzab. But
immediately the sun had dipped behind the cliff that guards the
western rim of the oasis the thin air emptied itself, and the
night-chill, penetrating and treacherous, flowed over the dry bottom
of the _oued_.

The town stirred. Under my gallery there came and went a word-fight
between Berber muleteers from the north. After that I heard the
evening call of the muezzin dropping down from the mosque-tower on
the crowded hill, arid, sinuous, like the note of another wooden
well-wheel shrilling above the desert floor. Then somewhere under a
house arose the hollow voice of a tambour struck with a thumb, and a
man sang. In a rift of silence a wandering breeze threshed all the
date-fronds in the _oued_-bottom with a phantom of distant applause.
Nearer at hand a foot-scuffle in the dusk. A choked laugh. And all
around in the heavy shadows of that quarter the subdued giggling, the
rustling, and jewel-clanking of the women of dark delight.

“What’s wrong with the Ouled Naïl girls to-night?” I asked along the
gallery. Abd, son of Abdallah the Mozabite, rose to his feet on the
tiles near the stair, a white wraith.

“_Kain kairouan ja, sidi._” (There is a caravan come.)

Drums banged; women scurried. The momentous night was established and
stars sprinkled the sky, large and restless stars, always flickering
a little to the eye in that air without body.

I sat at an island crossroads of the western Sahara, where the pale,
blurred sand-courses, like the wakes of ships, come up the bald skin
of the globe from the green mysteries that lie months away on the
other side of the south.

“Abd!” I called, “where does the caravan come from, east or west?”

Abd was gone. On the tiles I heard the fall of a Christian boot.
Borak, the Englishman, came toward me in the shadows.

“I wonder you’re not out,” he said. “The caravan comes from the
south.”

“Not----!”

“Rather! This is a real one--like the old days again. Right away up
from under. You’d better have a look at the beggars; you’re romantic,
you know. Might not have another chance in a year.”

I put on my coat and went with him. Borak has been too long in
Africa, one part and another. He has forgotten that it is the Dark
Continent. As we walked he went on in his habitual vein of banter.

“It’s a tidy lot of heroes for you. You may imagine. Seven
‘moonlights’ on the trek, and I lay a pound sterling not a man in the
crowd has washed in the thirty weeks.”

“Thirty weeks!” I couldn’t help echoing it. “Lord!”

“There ought to be a story there, eh? As a matter of fact there
isn’t. I insist again that there’s more story, more poetry and
romance in the life of a Whitechapel coster than you’ll hear in a
year listening to these people. They lack imagination. They want the
mental whip of civilization; that’s it in a nutshell.”

I felt like saying “Bosh!” Borak is too dogmatic.

We were passing into the thick of the “low town,” and on our right
loomed the ugly oblong of the douane, the French custom-house that
stands at the converging of the deep-Sahara routes. Borak looked at
it and chuckled.

“Old Arnauld” (the customs official) “is in a fair pother. There’s
a frighful mixture in the trek, blacks and browns from a dozen
different basins down below, and you may imagine there’s a lack
of passports. So that’s Arnauld’s job; to divine. Or rather it’s
Bou Dik’s job, for the orderly has all the work. When I passed the
market coming to you Bou Dik was tackling an old chap who claims to
be Senegal but looks away east of that, a pot-bellied old swine,
black as a chimney-pot, solemn as an archbishop, and blind as a bat.
I gather all he wants is to be let pass quietly on his way to Holy
Mekka, where he hopes to die. Bou Dik, though, is full of wild and
horrid notions. He has crossed the trail lately of a dervish man
who has the word that Mouley Saa[21] is now booked to descend in
the guise of a blackamoor, and naturally, having a fat berth with
the Infidel, Bou Dik isn’t going to let the Deliverer into _his_
department--not if he can help it. So just now Bou Dik is death and
leprosy on niggers. I wish you could have heard the row.”

I was to hear it presently. We had arrived at a chain swung across
the black street and, ducking under it, we came into the open market
square. I had seen the place a hundred times, by sun and moon and
stars, and still familiarity had not quite worn off my first sense
of it as a haven between the winds, the anchorage of a remote white
port of call lost in the ocean of stone. To-night that illusion was
deepened a dozenfold. There is no other metaphor in speech so true
as “ships of the desert.” They were here. To-night I knew that I
had known before only the small fry of that dry sea world, only the
shore-huggers, the humble brotherhood of the coastwise trade. Here
to-night was the creature of the main, the deep-sea squadron, the
tall fleet.

From where we stood, clear to the further shore of dim arcades, the
ground was hidden under the mass of kneeling beasts and heaped bales,
a tumbled thing, monstrous in sleep. We picked our way through the
ruck, lighting matches from time to time when we found ourselves
trapped in blind alleys between bales and humps, or felt our way
barred by the hairy neck of a camel curving waist-high across the
night. Mountains whisked fat tails at us; sleeping legs sprawled from
beneath hills of cargo like dead men pinned under wreckage. Borak
took hold of my elbow.

“This way,” he said. “I hear the voice of Bou Dik.”

I heard it too, impassive, obstinate. There was a small fire of
brush-roots throwing a glow around a ring of specters in the center
of the field of ruin. The burnooses, all the same color of desert
dust, might indeed have been winding-sheets; the hooded faces, gaunt,
bone-built, played upon by the weak and tricky illumination from
beneath, might have been skulls. And in the midst of the communing
dead Bou Dik, enveloped in his red robe of authority, was the devil
himself presiding.

His voice had ceased. As we settled behind him a man got to his feet
on the side beyond the fire. With a gesture which had in it something
of the trained orator he put back the hood of his burnoose, baring
his strong neck and his round, blue-black, kinky-polled negroid head.

“Thou hast demanded, sidi, who is this man who is the father of my
father. Thou hast demanded whence he comes, whither he goes, what he
desires. Now I will tell thee all these things, I, Belkano, who am
not without power in the country which is under Kalgou.”

He spoke a quaint Arabic in which all the throat-sounds were brought
forward and softened--such a tongue, Borak told me, as black boys
pick up in the Mohammedan _zaouias_ at Sikasso and Timbuktu--quaint,
and yet more easily understood in the Mzab than dialects not so far
away, in Tunis, say, or the Moroccan uplands.

“The father of my father,” he said, “is a very great and holy man.”

In the pause that followed all the eyes turned upon the object
deposited at the speaker’s feet. It was discerned to be human.

“Black as a chimney-pot, solemn as an archbishop, blind as a bat.”
Like many of Borak’s observations, that one had everything in it but
the essential. The essential thing was the man’s enormous separation.
Whether it was the infirmity of his great age or whether it was his
“holiness” (which may account for many things), he was removed to a
distance which could not be measured. He lived on another planet. He
lived within another sky, the sky of his own skin.

There was something majestic in the completeness of his immobility.
Save for a faint, slow, rhythmical pulse of his swollen lower lip
there was nothing visibly alive in him. Not once did the dead
eyeballs, sustained in little cups of rheum, shift from the line of
dead ahead. From the first to the last of that audience he remained
in the attitude in which I imagine he must have been deposited, a
sphinx thing in ebony, content with memories. Memories gorgeous
or infernal. His lip fascinated me. I could not get my eyes away
from that pendulous and extraordinary tissue, throbbing with faint,
ordered convulsions in the orange light. It was as if the creature’s
heart, appalled by something under the black sky of skin, had broken
prison and escaped so far, only to be caught on the threshold and
hang there eternally, beating.

I had to shake myself. In a whisper, to Borak: “What’s that he was
saying? The tall one.”

“He says that his grandfather is bound on the pilgrimage to Mekka
because he is tremendously holy, and he is tremendously holy because
he has a huge sin on his soul. Not bad, eh? It has happened before.”

Bou Dik’s voice was heard. “What then is that sin?”

The dark orator looked around the circle beneath him.

“It is known in Andiorou and Adar. It is known in Damagarin country
and even in Manga country in the east.” He looked at Bou Dik. “Now I
will recount thee that history, sidi.”

His gaze returned to the fire. I shall not soon forget him as he
stood there against the stars of the desert night, tall, glossy,
vibrant, speaking out in a strong voice the story of the moribund
flesh beside him.

“Know thou then that it was in the years before the missionaries of
God (to whom be the prayer) and of his Prophet (be his bliss eternal
by the streams that never cease!) had brought to my tribe the Word
and the Flame of Islam. Glory to the One God!”

“Glory to the One God!” the echo rustled around the ring.

“In those days then the men of my people lived in darkness. They
performed no ablutions. Their prayers were to images made with their
hands. The strongest and bravest of the young men of that tribe was
Djeba, who was later called Djim, as I will recount to thee, sidi,
and who was to become the father of my father, and who is this man.
The young man who was next to Djeba in strength and courage was
Moa. These two were brothers of the milk. Of these two, each was
the other’s breath. When these two went into the bush to hunt, the
animals said to one another, ‘Strike if thou wilt amongst seven men,
but avoid the Brothers of the Milk!’ So lived Djeba and Moa in those
days. Djeba was the spear of Moa; Moa was Djeba’s shield.

“In those days then came a war-party from the south, from the country
of Gando under Sokoto, the country of braggarts and thieves. They
came out of the bush in the morning and moved toward the village,
casting their spears aloft and beating on drums. The warriors of
my people did not fail to answer them. They advanced out of the
stockade. Nikato, the Headman, was in the forefront, and at his two
shoulders went Djeba and Moa. That sunrise Djeba slew five of the
sons of Gandoland. Moa slew five. Neither cut nor bruise was on their
bodies. _Sing the Valor of the Brothers of the Milk!_”

The apostrophe rang out, absorbed, deep-throated, across the sleeping
caravan. My eyes went to the flesh on the ground. Into that dark
house had those words been able to penetrate? Had their ringing set
some hidden echo ringing? How could one say? The lip that was like
the man’s drawn heart pulsed in the same laggard, imperturbable
count; the dead eyeballs did not shift. But perhaps they were dead
only that they might see the better the sunlight of that vanished and
heroic myth.

“_Sing the Valor and the Victory of the Brothers of the Milk!_

“That war-party was beaten; its dead soiled the ground; its living
fled into the bush. That day the drums were beaten in the village
and muttons were killed; that night a feast was made. The young men
danced and the old men made sacrifice to their images.

“But the images of those days were idolatrous and had no power
over good and ill. _La illah il allah!_[22] Accordingly then it was
written that the survivors of that war-party, gathering again in
the bush and being drunk with the desire of revenge, fell once more
upon the village in the hour when the young men were full-fed and
their weapons away. So in that night many of my tribe were slain. The
stockades were thrown down; the houses were given to the flame. In
the light of that flame many virgins were desecrated, many old men
disemboweled, many children spun on spears. But those of good growth
and being were taken away. Djeba and Moa were taken away.

“How can I recount to thee, sidi, the days of that march? Am I then
another Errendi, that the words of my lamentation should fall like
burning oil on a new wound? But the history is well known in all the
country above the River, for my father’s brother, Ahmed ben Djeba,
he who had it out of the mouth of Djeba, has made it a chant at a
hundred feasts and sung it under a hundred council-trees. He has sung
the days of that going, the weeks, each week after the other through
the hotness of that bush-trail. He has told the tale of the moons. In
the roof of his mouth he has recalled the song of the lash that fell
on those men’s shoulders and made of their flesh the flesh of goats
that is hung on the stockade to cure. He has stirred the dung-heaps
to bring in memory the meat that was given them at evening before
they fell down to sleep. With his tongue he has made the clank of the
chain that bound them together, the heavy chain of iron that bound
together even those two who were bound by the strong bond of the
breast that gave them suck!

“Many among them died. When they died their bodies were cut from the
chain with swords. Djeba and Moa grew thin. When Djeba looked at Moa
he saw a skeleton that he did not know. When Moa looked at Djeba he
saw a thing which filled him with terror. At night each bade the
other farewell, saying, ‘In the morning I shall be dead.’ But they
were strong and they did not die. Only their minds became empty.

“Then they came at last to the banks of a great lake. This lake was
so great that when they had been sold to a white boatman and when
they had come out in the boat so far that they could no longer see
the bank behind them, then they could yet see no bank before, and the
water was all about them to the sky like the sand in the desert of
Djouf. To my father’s brother Djeba has recounted that they were more
than the length of a moon in that going, but it must be recalled that
his mind was empty, since no lake to be compared with that is in our
knowledge. A wind arose on that lake and water came into the boat.
They were athirst, but when they drank of that water it was sour and
their thirst consumed them tenfold after. What man is there master
of words sufficiently bitter to recount that going upon the lake of
those men who were captive?

“Then they came at last to the other bank of that lake, and they were
taken up swiftly into the bush of the country beyond, for there were
war-boats of other white men on the water. And on another day they
came to a great _ksar_ of a hundred shelters, and in the market-place
of that _ksar_ they were exposed for sale. They were nine. Nine men
left out of sevenscore strong men! What battle in the memory of the
tribes so disastrous as that going! What ambush so bloody as that
march of the companions of the Brothers of the Milk!”

For a moment after the outcry the orator’s lips closed over the
firelit sheen of his white teeth. I suppose that he (like his
paternal uncle) had recited this tropic saga a hundred times in the
villages of the black south. I doubt not that at this point he had
been accustomed to pause, to receive for a moment the sweet applause
of a groan.

“And so,” he resumed, “they were sold that day into labor. And of the
Brothers of the Milk, those whose eyes saw a single thing and whose
lips spoke the same, Moa was taken one way and Djeba another, and
their hearts died. Djeba, the blood-child of chieftains, was driven
like a bullock up into the bush by a white driver, and when his
weakness grew on him and he stumbled that driver struck him with a
thong.

“That country beyond the great lake is a fat country, full of
plantings of maize and cotton in the uplands where the bush is
cleared. It is known by the name of Djoja, and in extent it lies from
the banks of the lake into the interior many marches away. Djeba was
taken to a certain planting and thrown into a _dar_ in a stockade as
great as a small _ksar_. There he had the company of other captives
from the River, from the Camaroun, and from the River Greater than
the River in the south. Some there were who had been there so great
a time that they had forgotten their own tongues and knew only the
Djoja speech, and some had been born in that stockade.

“Then they were driven into the fields to labor. In his weakness the
sun beat upon the head of Djeba and made him forget. Then he was
driven back to the stockade, and the rain came through the thatch of
the _dar_ and wet his body and fever consumed his heart. But already
his heart was dead; only when he slept and saw Moa in a dream did he
live.

“And that driver said to him, ‘How art thou called?’ And he said,
‘Djeba.’ And the driver laughed and cried, ‘That is no name for a
black boy; I christen thee Djim; and Djim thou art!” And he went
away, still laughing as if he had turned a word of wit. So a hate
of him came into Djeba, and Djeba would have killed him, only that
he was a tall, great-bodied man, and Djeba, who had been worth five
warriors in his strength, was like a child in weakness now.

“That fever burned his heart and his bowels. He was given to eat of a
cous-cous made of sour maize and swineflesh. Then his stomach turned
over. He vomited. He said, ‘Now at last I am to die.’

“But then a woman came into that _dar_. She laid a hand on his head
and called him Djim, but the hand was cool, and the anger went from
his heart. She gave him milk to drink, and his pain ceased. His
sickness passed. In the darkness of that shelter that woman was like
the healing benignity of the moon when it has come an hour high in
the east. She spoke in tones of compassion, and he was made whole.

“‘Who then is that woman?’ he asked of the men, ‘and how is she
called?’

“‘She is Mis’us, and she lives in the _dar kebir_’ (the Big House).

“‘Is she then the woman of that driver?’ he asked.

“His companions laughed. ‘Nay, she is the woman of Maas Djo.’

“‘Who then is Maas Djo?’

“‘Maas Djo is the Maasa, the Headman. It is his silver with which
thou wert got.’

“‘Why then have I not seen this Headman?’

“‘For the reason that since thou hast come he has been gone with a
war-party to fight the Yankis to the north.’

“‘He has gone then to take other captives?’

“‘Nay he has gone to save those he has got.’ And then they recounted
to Djeba: ‘The war-parties of the Yankis who come from behind the
rivers of the north choke the trails. The bush never sleeps for the
sound of their drums. Their torches are amongst the settlements. The
long peace of the white men is broken; new confederations are formed;
terror is loosed abroad. The lust of booty and of blood is aflame in
the Yankis. It is said that they devour babes; it is known that when
they make prayer in their holy places their ablutions are performed
in the blood of a lamb. Such are they!’

“Then they recounted to Djeba how Maas Djo and the other Headmen, the
holders of plantings, all the young men, how they had gathered to the
war-drums in the trails, how they had chosen chiefs and gone away
into the bush, and how the sky above them was that day the color of
gore.

“And Djeba asked them, ‘Which is then the stronger?’ And they
answered, ‘The party of Maas Djo is the stronger. Mayhap even now it
has driven the Yankis back across their rivers. Mayhap to-morrow he
will return home!’

“But one amongst them who had been born into labor in that stockade
in Djoja and who was now an old man said, ‘Mayhap not.’ That same
man, who was called by the name of Moz, came into the _dar_ at night
and said in a low voice to Djeba, ‘The Yankis are like the leaves of
the pepper-tree; they are small, but their number is beyond count.
Hark thou well when the bush is sleeping and thou wilt hear their
powder-guns in the north.’

“Then Djeba harkened, but he heard no guns. Nevertheless he sharpened
his reaping-tool. But he was not yet strong from his sickness.

“From time to time that woman from the _dar kebir_ came to bring him
sweet milk and speak in tones of compassion. And it was written that
the heart of Djeba, the son of chieftains, should grow soft and meek.
But when that driver perceived Mis’us ministering to the captive’s
weakness he jeered with mocking laughter, and the woman cowered
before it as though she had been afraid and fled away to the Big
House. And Djeba’s hatred of that man grew like a pain.

“‘When I am stronger I will kill him,’ he said.

“So he grew stronger.

“On another night that man called Moz came in secret and said to
Djeba, ‘Hark thou well in the night, and before another moon has gone
thou wilt hear the drums of the tribesmen of the north.’ And when he
saw Djeba take up his reaping-tool he said, ‘Rather shouldst thou
sing for joy. For these men here who are ignorant _niggahs_ have
told thee things apart from the truth. Thou hast spoken to me of
they milk-brother who is called Moa, who was sold into the planting
of Maas Djoj Blaak. It has come to my knowledge that Moa has fled
from that planting, and with others from other plantings has gone to
fight in the war-parties of the Yankis, where they are received with
honors. Is it probable that such men eat babes? No, Djim, I repeat to
thee, these here are child-headed _niggahs_, who know not that the
Yankis come to set them free out of labor in the plantings. No, Djim,
rather shouldst thou sing for joy, for when thou see’st the Yankis
thou wilt see thy milk-brother in their train.’

“Then Djeba’s heart sang for joy.

“‘Again, again I shall see my brother!’ he cried. ‘Again our eyes
shall behold one thing and our breaths shall be one!’ And he said to
Moz, ‘Now I too will run away from the stockade and I will go to meet
Moa.’

“And Moz said, ‘But the driver will prevent thee.’

“And Djeba said, ‘No, for I will kill the driver before I go.’

“And Djeba waited, feeding his heart on the thought of Moa and on the
promise of the death of that white man who had laughed.

“There came an evening when he watched and saw the driver going out
of the stockade into the edge of the bush. So Djeba took up his sharp
reaping-tool and followed, creeping near the ground. He came near
to the driver. He saw him very clearly. The driver was dressed in
finery, with a hat like a deep drum fashioned of fur, and a tunic
of blue cloth with buttons of silver. Djeba saw him against the
light of dusk in the sky. But the driver was not alone. Mis’us was
there, where she had stolen for solitude. It was she that the driver
had followed, as the desert hyena slinks slavering after the lone
gazelle. The fear was in Djeba that if he struck the man, then the
woman would give the alarm and he would be taken again. He might
have struck both. But his heart was softened by the compassion of
the woman, and what was written in the book of the future he was not
given yet to read. Had he known! Had he but known to strike--the
driver afterward, perhaps--but the woman first.

“But while he hesitated, already it was too late. He saw the driver
step forward and grasp the woman’s arm, uttering words he could not
understand. He saw the woman, standing quietly, turn her head and
spit once and spit twice in the driver’s face.

“She continued to stand quietly, like stone. But the driver flung off
toward the stockade, laughing terribly in his deep chest.

“Then Djeba would have returned and waited another chance at the man.
But the thought of Moa was strong on him, and the bush was at his
back. So he said to himself, ‘I will return with Moa,’ and he crept
away.

“All that night he walked swiftly. He hid himself and slept in the
day and advanced by night again. He did not know where he went, but
the image and affection of his milk-brother were so powerful in
Djeba that it seemed he would come truly to Moa. Because of that he
remained strong. His stomach was empty but his heart was fed, and he
penetrated the bush with the swiftness of a panther. He would have
wished to speak with others and know his way, but if he saw slaves in
the fields then he saw with them a white driver, and he was afraid.

“There came a time when he saw a Senegal man working at the edge of a
maize-planting, and no driver was in sight. So he showed himself, and
he asked, ‘Where then are the Yankis?’ And the man answered him, ‘Go
thou to Tlaanta. I know nothing, but at Tlaanta all things are known.’

“‘Where then is Tlaanta?’ Djeba demanded. And the man said, ‘If thou
knowest not Tlaanta then indeed thou art an ignorant _niggah_. Turn
thy face to the north, and at nightfall thou wilt behold a great
_ksar_ which is Tlaanta, which is the chief place of Djoja, where all
things are known--”

(“Tlaanta.” Something queer was happening down in the subconscious
regions of my brain. “Tlaanta, the chief place of Djoja.” The reader
may laugh, but so firmly was my attention fixed in the picture of
some fabulous tropical mid-African scene that the familiar syllables,
blurred in the Arab utterance, touched still too lightly to make a
breach. “Tlaanta Djoja--” I glanced uneasily at Borak, as though he
could help. He returned my stare with a supercilious grin, as much
as to say, “My word! you’re not letting yourself be taken in by this
fantastic claptrap!” “_Tlaanta_, the chief place of _Djoja_”--“_Maas
Djo_”--“_Yankis_”--“_Moz_”--“_Djim_”--The equatorial forest-walls
were trying their hardest to topple over in my dull brain. But there
was no time. I had to get back to the saga unfolding in the strong
voice of the orator in that ember-lit Sahara night.)

“--And when the night fell Djeba saw before him in the sky a pillar
of light. And he came on a hill and saw a great settlement in flames.
And then all about him came people fleeing in confusion through the
dark bush, carrying on their heads their mills and cooking-pots and
crying, ‘The Yankis! The Yankis are come!’

“Then Djeba was glad. He went down toward burning Tlaanta. The flame
was in his face and his heart was hot, and he stood and called aloud
the name of his brother of the milk. But he saw no man. A lad ran out
of a shelter that took fire. Djeba caught that lad by the arm and
cried, ‘Where are the Yankis?’ And the lad screamed, ‘Gone! Gone!’
and he fell down with his eyes wide open, and Djeba saw that he was
dead.

“And Djeba said to himself, ‘If the Yankis are gone and Moa with
them, then it will be his thought to lead them to that planting where
I was a slave, to kill that driver and set me free.’ So he turned his
back on the burning _ksar_. He ran all through that night. Others ran
with him; other slaves freed by the war-party’s passage. They turned
this way and that in the darkness, chanting the war-chants of the
Yankis, and their paths through the bush were ruin. In the night they
pillaged and burned stockades, in the morning they marched in bands,
in the afternoon they slept along the trails. But by day and by night
their minds were turned with freedom, and when Djeba ran amongst them
demanding word of Moa their answers were without sense.

“There was a night when Djeba came upon a clearing. He saw a stockade
in flames. The light of those flames showed him the fields, and then
he recognized that planting and his spirit leaped with joy. He said,
‘Now Moa has come here seeking me, and his revenge is before my eyes!’

“And Djeba ran bounding across the fields and came into the flame of
the stockade, and he called Moa’s name. He shouted the war-call of
their tribe. He shouted the hunting-call that had been fixed between
the milk-brothers in the old days in the bush.

“Then it seemed to Djeba that he heard the answer to the
hunting-call, but in the crackling of the flames he could not say
whence it came. Then he bounded on in the stockade. In that circle of
fire he saw a man standing. It was a white man he had never seen. His
breast was black with blood, his head hung down, and he wept. Djeba
went toward him boldly.

“‘Tell me, then, where is Moa?’

“The man looked at him with dull, heavy eyes from which the tears ran
down, and for answer he said, ‘Where is my wife, boy? Where are my
servants? I am Maas Djo. I have come home.’

“Then Djeba perceived that the man was possessed, so he did not harm
him, but ran on. He leaped like a panther through all the stockade.
He bounded through the wall and stood in the lighted field, and there
was nothing there but his shadow. Then he ran toward the bush, and
there he saw a figure. He pursued, and the figure ran into the bush,
but Djeba was too swift, and overtook it, and he saw it was that
woman, who crouched like a terrified gazelle and watched his coming
with large eyes.

“And he said, ‘It is I.’

“When the woman heard that she trembled with relief and took hold of
his arm and whispered, ‘It is thou, Djim! I thought it was _he_. I
thought thou wert that drunken monster pursuing me still!’

“When he heard that, there came into Djeba’s mind the memory and the
hate of that driver. And he said, ‘Where is he now?’ And the woman,
grasping his arm more tightly at that instant, whispered, ‘Hush,
thou, and hark! He comes!’

“Then near them Djeba heard the fall of feet and he saw the man
advancing through the bush. He saw his shape plain and black against
the glow beyond the leaves; the shape of that fur hat he remembered,
in the form of a deep drum, tilted wildly; the shoulders thrust out
with that tunic of silver buttons, the elbows swaggering. And he saw
that the figure was drunk and lustful and that he came in cunning
silence amongst the leaves, and he knew that the time of his revenge
was at hand.

“So Djeba sprang through the leaves and caught the man’s neck in his
fingers. They fell down in the dark on the ground, and there they
fought. But Djeba’s powerful hands were about the man’s throat, and
the man lay quiet and breathed no more. Then Djeba went back, but the
terrified woman was gone.

“Then Djeba returned across the field toward the stockade, calling
Moa’s name again, and in the field near the stockade he saw lying the
body of a man. The man was despoiled of his clothes and naked, and
his head cut three-quarters from his trunk. And Djeba looked and saw
that it was that driver.

“Then Djeba said to himself, ‘The night is full of infernal
creatures, witches and _djinoun_. I have slain the driver in his
finery in the bush, and here he lies an hour dead and naked in the
field. The night is red with devil-work.’ A fear came on him and his
teeth knocked together. Nevertheless he went back to the bush, laid
hold of that other man’s feet, and pulled him through the bush to the
field, and there he looked at the face of the man he had slain.

“_He looked at the face of the man he had slain!_”

The syllables of the loud repetition went away across the sleeping
floor of the square and played among the invisible arcades, echoes
deep-toned, momentous, tragic. And in the glow of the embers I saw
the lip of that oblivious clay pulsing, pulsing, with the same
laggard and monotonous beat. I continued to stare at it. You may be
certain now that I stared. The short hairs at the back of my skull
stood up and pricked the skin. For the wonder of it. Even to that
Senegal orator himself the saga he repeated remained fabulous, an
epic of equatorial rivers. Chanted first by son and then by grandson
at a hundred feasts and under a hundred village council-trees and
grown into the body of mid-African legendry, not till this night
had it come to ears that heard; to eyes that saw with the eyes of
that ancient, moribund, blind, black wanderer. For now I knew that
I had heard the tale of that incendiary night on a “Djoja planting”
before, not once, but many, many times; not in the glow of a Sahara
camp-fire, but in the ember light of a Hancock County chimney-nook,
where my own grandmother Peyton used to sit before bedtime thirty
years agone, reciting a saga of her own.

The narrator’s voice was heard again, rushing, staccato.

“Then Djeba ran through the bush to find that woman, his one thought
that he might now slay her too. For he perceived now that she must
be a witch-doctress, thus by compassion to have blinded his eyes. He
ran with all his power. How long he ran, what man can say? Sometimes
he seemed to see that woman as a shadow in the bush before him and
sometimes as a bird flying before him through the trees. In him there
was no hunger save the hunger for her killing, no thirst save the
thirst for her blood, no weariness save the weariness of the damned
soul.

“And then there was a time when it seemed to Djeba that he was in
the midst of many men. He saw that they were white men and that they
moved in a thousand ranks. Ruin lay behind them and thunder ran
around. And he remembered the words of Moz: ‘The Yankis are like the
leaves of the pepper-tree; they are small, but their number is beyond
count.’ And when the nights came Djeba saw their camp-fires, and even
their fires were beyond count.

“A forgetfulness came on Djeba. He ran from fire to fire, crying,
‘Where is Moa?’ And those men mocked him, saying, ‘Moa what?’ But
Djeba screamed at them and ran on. Or sometimes they named him
_Samboh_, saying, ‘Hold, _Samboh_. Sit down with us now and sing!’
Then Djeba thanked them, and sat down with them and sang, and the
war-chant of the Yankis filled the sky.

“And after many days Djeba came with the war-party to the banks of
that lake, and there he beheld a bearded chieftain sitting on a
horse, and he fell down on his face and wept. And he implored, ‘That
I come again to my own country beyond this water, where Moa, my
brother, has returned, and where he awaits me in the village of my
tribe!’ And that chieftain heard.

“In after-days then was Djeba placed in a boat, together with many of
the River and the Cameroun, and he returned across that lake where
the waters lay to the sky like the sands in the desert of Djouf. Then
they made a village on the shore. But Djeba left them. He penetrated
the bush through which he had marched many years before, bound to
that chain. He penetrated the country of enemies and he passed
through. Then Djeba came to his own village again. There were old men
there who knew him when he spoke his name. They rejoiced and made a
feast. All night they feasted. And one of the old men said to Djeba,
‘Moa, thy brother of the milk was taken with thee. Where then is Moa?’

“And Djeba said, ‘I do not know.’ And he took none of the feast.

“And in the years afterward, when Djeba had taken wives and got
sons, there came into our country the missionaries of God (to whom be
the prayer) and of his Prophet (may his bliss never decrease)----

“_La illah il allah!_

“And they spoke the word of the Koran to Djeba, and Djeba’s heart
turned in his breast. And he said then, ‘My heart can no longer
contain a lie. Hark all to the truth. Moa, my brother of the
milk--which bond is sacred--Moa, my brother, him I slew with my own
hands in that land which is beyond the great water. I slew him, being
tricked by a witch-woman. And that witch-woman I was not able to
slay! That then is my sin!’

“That then is the sin of Djeba. I have spoken, I, Belkano, who am the
son of his son!”

In the hush that followed that deep-toned verbal signature my breath
whistled small in my throat.

“Lord! Lord! Oh, my Lord!”

Borak eyed me with a smirk and a grunt. The black fellow showed his
shining teeth again. He took another breath into his lungs.

“For the length of thirty Ramadans the father of my father has not
opened his mouth to any man in speech. Because of that sin, because
he would not look at any man, his eyes have become blind. He would
not hear, and his ears are deaf. Thus men know that he is holy. So
they come for many marches to touch his hand. Sometimes then his lips
are opened, and for their ears he will sing again that war-chant of
the Yankis. And then those men will give him offerings against his
pilgrimage, that he may see Holy Mekka and ease him of that sin and
die----”

The voice was rising.

“They give him offerings of broad copper! They throw down pieces of
silver before him! _They throw down gold!_”

I heard the wind going out of Borak’s chest at that; an obscure
thoracic collapse. A snort.

“At last! At last the plot unfolds. Now the old bird will render that
popular ditty entitled, ‘The Unwritten War-song of the Wild Yankis of
Yankisland,’ and the company will contribute. And strangely enough
the ringmaster’s eye is fastened unerringly on _you_.”

“For God’s sake, man----”

“Yes, but you’ll see,” he persisted. “You’ll note that his toe even
now is prodding the old one in the ribs.”

It was true. I saw the nudging and peremptory toe. I stared at that
lip hanging in the ember-light. I beheld a disorder and quickening of
that fleshy pulse. I heard an obedient sound issuing forth. It was a
very small, shallow, creaking sound. It emerged from that emotionless
mask of senility; it rose and fell in mechanical lengths of tone like
a bent wire and went away and was lost in the night of the packed
Sahara square. It was a queer chant.

“Cock and bull!” grunted Borak.

“For God’s sake, man, hush!”

I stared and I listened. Yes, it was a very queer chant indeed. The
short hairs were beginning to stand up again at the back of my skull.

On the ground, red with the firelight, a copper sou was tossed. I
saw another fall, and another. I took out my wallet and found a
hundred-franc note, and I let it flutter into the circle over the
shoulder of Bou Dik.

Borak got hold of me.

“_Lord!_ I say, now! What’s _that_ for?”

“To help and ease him of that ‘sin.’”

“But my dear simple chap--all that rigmarole----”

“Of the greatest of all African wars----”

He tilted his head at me with the absurdest suspicion about my wits.

“Come away!” he said.

I got up and went with him out into the black ruck of the camels. He
was groaning audibly over that squandered bank-note. “Man, man, and
you were really taken in by that beggar’s claptrap. Why--look you--in
that old chap’s day there weren’t enough white men in Central Africa
all put together----”

“Borak!” I said. “_Will_ you listen to that song!”

In the hollow of the market, above the grunt and snore of the
caravan, the thin war-chant of the “Yankis” wound on, repeating,
repeating,

    John B’own’s body lahs amoldin’ in the g’ave,
    John B’own’s body lahs amoldin’ in the g’ave,
    John B’own’s body lahs amoldin’ in the g’ave,
      But his soul goes mahchin’ on----

In that Sahara darkness where the pale courses come from beyond the
South I saw Atlanta burning. Sherman was on the march.


       [20] Copyright, 1922, by The Pictorial Review Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Wilbur Daniel Steele.

       [21] The Napoleonic Messiah of Mohammedan prophecy.

       [22] There is no god but God.




                           THE COFFIN[23]

                           By CLEMENT WOOD

                         (From _The Pagan_)


It stood in the middle of the sitting-room. It was all black, except
for the silver shine of the handles. There were flowers on the floor
beside it, vague blotches of dulled white and yellow. The burdened
odor of honeysuckle, a ground-clinging, unhealthy sweetness, came
to the man’s nostrils; there was a stiff, pungent scent, too, that
he could not place. On the mantel, more flowers; the glimmer of
the bracket lamp washed these feebly--its wick was so low that the
flame seemed next door to dying at any moment. Flowers filled the
stiff-backed chair beneath the lamp. There were two other chairs in
the room, both empty.

Thomas Rice loitered at the open doorway, taking in the sparse
furnishings. He had stood for ten minutes within the dining room,
while Aunt Teby Riggs, Charley’s own aunt on his mother’s side,
whispered harshly all he needed to know, and much that he did not.

“Won’t yer have just a bite, Mr. Rice?” she insisted stridently,
unable to keep her eyes off the twisted half of his face.

“I et my supper already, thank yer.”

“Just a mite of this chicken? Or a cup of somethin’ warm, to stay by
yer?”

“No ’m, Miss Riggs.” He fumbled uneasily with his sweaty felt hat,
drooping from his right hand; his coat hung limp over his arm. It was
a hot, stirless night; serving writs up the county tired feet and
spirit; and the final walk from Belle Ellen to Dolomite was a good
eight miles.

She indicated the crowded hat-rack. “Yer can find room.... Louella’s
eatin’ her supper now.” The shrill syllables rasped his ear.

Her disquieting footfall followed him to the sitting-room. Her arm
gestured past him. “They got it from undertaker Norton, in Bessemer,”
she volunteered chattily under her breath.

“Yes.”

The dining-room door creaked to at last. He stood, rubbing the ball
of his right thumb with his forefinger, as if to cleanse each of
invisible irritating dust from the felt hat. The hat was gone; its
absence was a momentary annoyance, a perceptible gap in things.

There were two chairs. Both were against the same wall, toward the
front of the house. The mantel, the chair with flowers, the two
empty chairs, and ... it.... His restless mind took an unconscious
inventory. Instinctively he put off thinking about what lay within it.

He took the farther chair. They were almost a room’s length apart,
and this one was slightly nearer what had been the man he had loved.
She--the woman that he despised--could hardly think that his mere
sitting there could poison the air for her.

His mind wandered on. Honeysuckles were great flowers for funerals.
That sharp, stiff odor--it was like the look of dahlias, stiff, waxy.
There were some in old man Lunsford’s side yard. Maybe these came
from there. He could afford to give away, especially if it cost him
nothing: flowers ... advice.... Butting into people’s business, with
his skinny little face and weedy little beard, like his own weedy
front yard.

The dining-room door creaked open. A firmer step thudded on the
carpet. She came into the room, a thin hand shading her eyes, to make
him out. Then she sat in the empty chair.

“Evenin’, Louella.” It was her house, now; decency demanded that much.

“Evenin’.” The word was spat out.

She sat stiff on the chair-edge, white hands folded upon black
skirt. Her eyes pointed straight down the room. She said no more; he
kept still. The odor of the kerosene-lamp swayed with that of the
honey-suckles, mingled with a soiled scent he at last imagined must
come from the middle of the room.

She had not meant to speak beyond this. But she should have made it
civil. Maybe she had been a bit short. “Aunt Teby tol’ me yer were
here.”

His answer was framed after a pause. “Yes. I saw her.”

There was nothing more to be said about it. Each nursed sullen
dislike.

The stolid minutes passed. Occasional remote noises entered, looked
about, left swiftly. A pan banged from the rear of the house; a horse
neighed listlessly; doors creaked open and shut with exaggerated
quietness. These subsided. The stillness of death spread from the
middle of the room to the house and the farm without.

He could watch her profile, in the lamp’s withdrawn glimmer. She
stared stonily down the room, away from him; there was no harm in
observing her unbeknown. Her hair was knotted in the back, a skimpy
knot; it lay flat and black above her forehead ... black, like her
dress. Her cheeks were thinner than he remembered seeing her have.
Her teeth stuck out, as always. They seemed the whitest thing in the
room; their stony inactivity held his imagination. He licked his lips
unconsciously.

There had not been a sound from the house for half an hour.
He stirred uncomfortably; the chair squeaked. “It doesn’t set
comfortable, to some,” she said, shortly.

“Not very.”

“Some folks think they’ve a right to be partic’lar.” Her tone was
sour, complaining.

He did not answer. Time drawled along; the tired minutes plodded
unendingly. Funny of Charley to want him and--her, who’d never teamed
a bit. Think of being married to such as her! Who wouldn’t die?...
Well, talk would make the night pass quicker.

He broke the icy silence. “Crowded tonight?” His right hand gestured
a vague circle.

“Yes. Two to a bed upstairs. Aunt Teby and Mary--cot in the kitchen.
Two of the boys in the dining room. Lucky yer don’t have to be fixed
for. Nowhere left.” She laughed without mirth.

His curious eyes travelled around. “Nothing to sleep on here.” They
returned to the middle of the room in fascination, as if he had
waited this excuse to revisit what was there. Afraid that she had
caught the morbid fancy, that there was a gruesome, yet possible,
couch, he hastened on. “Not that I can’t sleep in a chair, though.
But I reckon we won’t do much sleeping tonight.”

“No.” The spiteful warning that she would not trust herself asleep,
with him around, spoke in the sneering monosyllable.

In the hush that followed, his mind returned to the cold body lying
near. He fought against thinking of Charley Hawkins as a corpse; it
was of the young Charley, the chum of the years before the marriage,
that thoughts came. Memory after memory woke to life out of him,
with dizzying rapidity: memories remote from this musty, close room;
memories stained with vivid sunlight on fields of black-eyed Susans,
with shadow-dapple on the creek’s windings, with starry stretches of
windy night. A lively, vigorous Charley Hawkins had featured these
... a good looker, not like himself, his face spoiled from birth....

Yes, Charley had been a lively kid.... Baseball, a scrap, a hay-ride
to the river, especially whenever a girl was mixed up in it--Charley
was chain-lightning. There was that kid widow, Mamie Fagin. Just
one trick she had: when you kissed her--God! Her teeth against your
neck! The teeth were like Louella’s, he reflected, looking over at
Charley’s widow. Maybe Charley liked ’em with teeth that way; they
were always livelier to love.

His mind fondled Louella and the live Charley together for a moment,
then returned to earlier time. After Mamie, there had been her
unmarried sister, Gussie; Charley switched quick.... That scare, when
he confided that they were afraid he’d gotten the girl into trouble!
False alarm, of course.... And the three Bennet girls--not that they
were anything.... His mind lengthened the roll.

Muscles cramped with sitting in the one position, he rose awkwardly.
To cover the act, he walked over to the mantel, and smelled the
flowers. “Pretty,” he grudged.

The woman followed slowly, doing over her duty as guide of the
occasion. “Those were from Judge O’Rear’s; these, Miss Lunsford.” She
named the others, eager to talk, yet letting tone and look lash her
forced listener. Her manner was agitated; the hushed watching must be
getting on her nerves, he judged.

Silently she stood beside him, before that black thing in the middle
of the room. She must say something. Her hand reached out and touched
it. “Plush,” she said.

He nodded.

“The best undertaker Norton had.”

“It came from him?”

“Yes. He won’t have any shiftless funeral,” she concluded with
bitterness.

They went back to the chairs. The impulse to talk dominated her, and
Rice hitched his chair a few steps closer, so that their remarks
might be sufficiently low-voiced not to disturb--well, not to disturb
what lay in the plush-covered thing. Shivering slightly, she drew
hers a bit nearer.

“Shiftless,” she had said. He recalled that this was her favorite
adjective for him--and he Charley’s side-partner, even best man at
the wedding! Never a jaunt or a spree that they had not gone on
together, until Charley took a fancy to Louella. That was Charley’s
luck again; Tom had known Louella longer, fancied her first ...
been mad for her, finally. She was too quiet for Charley then; and
sometimes ... sometimes she hadn’t frowned at Tom, when he sat near
her, itching and miserable. Of course, if he had spoken, she would
have laughed ... with that twisted face of his!

So she and Charley had hitched up. At first, Charley had made him
come around ... insisted. She let him know soon enough and plain
enough, that this was no place for him. “Shiftless,” she’d called
him; she said he was too shiftless to marry.... No, she never
could have meant that, that he should have spoken. She would have
laughed.... Not that!

It got worse. She’d scold Charley sharply when he was around.
Her hints got too pointed; he’d had the good sense to stay away.
Everybody said she had a mean tongue--mean as garbroth.

The woman half faced him now; and her thoughts dwelt on the same
period as his. He had done his best to spoil Charley for her, this
dirty Tom “Grits.” He’d egged him on to drink, and fight, and gamble
... and chase women. Used to come up to their house and sit around in
the way; then tease Charley off into some devilment, when he wanted
to stay home. Too lazy, too backward, to open his lips to a girl;
he’d kept her fooling around, until she had really wanted--well,
not him ... something.... She’d shown him his place at last; out of
the door. A squint-faced loafer, a hanger-on around the sheriff’s
office.... Fine friend for her husband! Charley at least would work
regular. And now “Grits” sat there like a whipped dog, as he always
did when he saw her. Slinking cur of a man!

Something urged him to pretend sympathy for her; she had lost her
husband. “He didn’t suffer?”

“No. He was well and up Sunday; and now--and now--” She pressed her
forehead and cheeks fiercely against her cupped hands; her shoulders
trembled rhythmically.

“There, there.” He tried awkwardly to feign tenderness. Like as not
her tongue had whipped the man to death.

To death.... His thoughts opened unwillingly to Charley now--to
Charley dead. Queer thing, lying so close--couldn’t say a thing, do
a thing!... It wasn’t the Charley he had known; not the same at all.
Preachers must be right; the man he had known had gone--somewhere.
That thing--cold, uncanny, staring through closed eyelids, with hair
and finger-nails still alive, growing horribly--this foul thing was
all that was left. Served Louella right! This was what she had made
of Charley.

His fancy began to weave thoughts of the dead thing and the woman.
She was wrapped in introspection now; his eye measured her from
hair to barked black oxfords. One by one his mind stripped off
the garments of mourning, and what lay beneath the black shell: a
restless fancy cast her in intimate scenes with the man who was
gone. Morbidly the thoughts persisted, were embroidered. What if the
chill, dead, bristle-faced thing should hold her as husband holds
wife! A fit punishment.... Something deep within him lingered on the
details.

The after-midnight coolness slunk between them. She shivered,
wondering if he had felt it. He was her guest, after all. “I’ll get
your coat,” she whispered, leaning close. She got it, and a wrap to
throw around her own shoulders.

It seemed somehow warmer when their chairs were close, she thought.
Of course, Tom Rice couldn’t help being what he was born to be. And
she had thought a lot of him before she knew Charley. If he’d only
spoken!... And--to come here tonight, when he hadn’t been around for
five years ... of course, just because her dead man had wished it....

The friend watched her bent body, as sobs overcame her. The sneer
dissolved from his face. Poor thing! She wasn’t such a plain-looking
woman, even now; she had been decent-looking, as a girl. Even those
teeth; they might--they might at least thrill a man.

Rising silently, she flung herself on her knees beside what had
been her husband. Her weight ground the flowers into the carpet;
the smell of bruised honey-suckle eddied dizzyingly. With terrible
quietness she sobbed and sobbed. The unearthly vigil, on top of
the shut-mouthed hours when she had to preserve some calmness, and
arrange for the funeral, had been too much; the bars were down, the
hysteric flood burst through.

At last her agony shook Tom Rice. The woman would cry herself sick.
He walked to her side in the dimness; the lamp seemed weaker than
before. He stood, uncertain what to do or say. The sobbing pulsed on.

He knelt beside her, stroking her shoulders with nervous hand. A
twitch of repugnance bothered him at touching her. The stroking had
no effect at first; low words of endearment, caressing modulations,
came, and his touch became more soothing. The disgust wore off.
“There, there! I know it hurts. Don’t take on so. It won’t help.
There--”

She became sensible of his presence. Her overburdened heart
overflowed toward him; few men would have done what he was doing. She
turned to him, mouth open wordlessly, pale teeth showing. She clung
desperately to his shoulders, while the sobs twisted and wracked her.
His arms closed upon her; her head burned against his neck. He smelt
the odor of kerosene upon her, where she must have been fixing the
lamps; then the acrid newness of the mourning cloth. His body felt
unnaturally warm where she lay awkwardly bunched against him.

She tried to speak. “He was all I had.” Unnerved again, she threw
herself across the plush top, forcing her face into it. He looked
back longingly at his deserted chair. No, he had helped calm her; it
wasn’t such an unpleasant sensation, despite the smell of kerosene
and new goods ... and an unpleasant, dirtier odor that he had feared
at first came from the corpse, but now localized as coming from her
or her clothes. He knelt beside her again.

His touch quieted her; it made him restless. His mind throbbed now
with her; under any other circumstances, with a woman so close,
he could not hold her so unmovedly. The very vision of her under
other circumstances made him more restless; his touch upon her was
spasmodic, provocative.

Gradually he rose from his knees to a place beside her, sprawled over
the plush. His arm rounded her shoulders, and unconsciously drew
her toward him. Still sobbing, she threw herself against his bosom.
He began to kiss away the tears. The tang of the moist salt in her
eyes quickened him. Their lips met. He felt the pressure of those
insidious, insistent teeth--their touch tortured him.

As they clung, the lamp flared up once, then sputtered out. There was
the stinging odor of burnt kerosene and charred wick. They did not
notice it, nor the clinging sweetness of the bruised honeysuckle.

Tom Rice had one clear thought. The house was crowded; every other
room was filled. Out of the moist fervor of the moment the woman
realized that her head was against the flowers on the floor--the back
of her head, and not her face. She was too weakened from hysteric
sobbing to protest when she found herself lying along the soft
fragrant surface; nor did she longer wish to. He felt on the tense
skin of his neck the touch of those maddening teeth. Their lips met
again in the breathing darkness.

She stirred out of his arms, when the bony fingers of gray-bodied
dawn reached through the closed shutters and touched the crushed
flowers on which they still were.

“Come, dear,” she whispered softly, the gray pallor twisting her
plain face into a grotesque tenderness. She kissed his twisted cheek
with shy eagerness. He took it passively; the taut thrill of the past
hours had gone.

He watched her, as her fingers set the flowers to rights.
Meditatively he replaced the two chairs at the two ends of the front
wall, where they had first been. They should be found so.

The two watchers took up their almost ended vigil. Morning, and Aunt
Teby’s black coffee, should find them so--the morning of the funeral.


       [23] Copyright, 1921, by The Pagan Publishing Company.
            Copyright, 1923, by Clement Wood.




                    THE YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN
                             SHORT STORY

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922




                       ADDRESSES OF MAGAZINES
                      PUBLISHING SHORT STORIES


NOTE. _This address list does not aim to be complete, but is based
simply on the magazines which I have consulted for this volume, and
which have not ceased publication._

  Ace-High Magazine, 799 Broadway, New York City.
  Adventure, Spring and Macdougal Streets, New York City.
  Ainslee’s Magazine, 79 Seventh Avenue, New York City.
  All’s Well, Gayeta Lodge, Fayetteville, Ark.
  American Boy, 142 Lafayette Boulevard, Detroit, Mich.
  American Magazine, 381 Fourth Avenue, New York City.
  American Scandinavian Review, 25 West 45th Street, New York City.
  Arch, 32 Waverley Place, New York City.
  Argosy All-Story Weekly, 280 Broadway, New York City.
  Asia, 627 Lexington Avenue, New York City.
  Atlantic Monthly, 8 Arlington Street, Boston, Mass.
  Ave Maria, Notre Dame, Indiana.
  Black Cat, Book Hill, Highland Falls, New York.
  Black Mask, 25 West 45th Street, New York City.
  Blue Book Magazine, 36 South State Street, Chicago, Ill.
  Bookman, 244 Madison Avenue, New York City.
  Breezy Stories, 112 East 19th Street, New York City.
  Brief Stories, 714 Drexel Building, Philadelphia, Pa.
  Broom, 3 East 9th Street, New York City.
  Catholic World, 120 West 60th Street, New York City.
  Century, 353 Fourth Avenue, New York City.
  Chicago Tribune, Chicago, Illinois.
  Christian Herald, Bible House, New York City.
  Clay, 3325 Farragut Road, Broooklyn, N. Y.
  Collier’s Weekly, 416 West 13th Street, New York City.
  Cosmopolitan Magazine, 119 West 40th Street, New York City.
  Delineator, Spring ane Macdougal Streets, New York City.
  Designer, 12 Vandam Street, New York City.
  Detective Story Magazine, 79 Seventh Avenue, New York City.
  Dial, 152 West 13th Street, New York City.
  Double Dealer, 819 Baronne Street, New Orleans, La.
  Everybody’s Magazine, Spring and Macdougal Streets, New York City.
  Extension Magazine, 223 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, Ill.
  Follies, 25 West 45th Street, New York City.
  Freeman, 32 West 58th Street, New York City.
  Gargoyle, 7 rue Campagne, Paris 1, France.
  Good Housekeeping, 119 West 40th Street, New York City.
  Harper’s Bazar, 119 West 40th Street, New York City.
  Harper’s Magazine, Franklin Square, New York City.
  Hearst’s International Magazine, 119 West 40th Street, New York City.
  Holland’s Magazine, Dallas, Texas.
  Ladies’ Home Journal, Independence Square, Philadelphia, Pa.
  Liberator, 34 Union Square, East, New York City.
  Little Review, 24 West 16th Street, New York City.
  Live Stories, 35 West 39th Street, New York City.
  McCall’s Magazine, 236 West 37th Street, New York City.
  McClure’s Magazine, 80 Lafayette Street, New York City.
  MacLean’s Magazine, 143 University Avenue, Toronto, Canada.
  Magnificat, Manchester, N. H.
  Menorah Journal, 167 West 13th Street, New York City.
  Metropolitan, 432 Fourth Avenue, New York City.
  Midland, 3415 Iowa Street, Pittsburgh, Pa.
  Modern Priscilla, 85 Broad Street, Boston, Mass.
  Munsey’s Magazine, 280 Broadway, New York City.
  Open Road, 248 Boylston Street, Boston, Mass.
  Outlook, 381 Fourth Avenue, New York City.
  Pagan, 23 West 8th Street, New York City.
  Pearson’s, 34 Union Square, New York City.
  People’s Home Journal, 76 Lafayette Street, New York City.
  People’s Popular Monthly, 801 Second Street, Des Moines, Iowa.
  Pictorial Review, 216 West 39th Street, New York City.
  Popular Magazine, 79 Seventh Avenue, New York City.
  Queen’s Work, 625 North Vandeventer Avenue, St. Louis, Mo.
  Red Book Magazine, North American Building, Chicago, Ill.
  Reviewer, 809½ Floyd Avenue, Richmond, Va.
  Saturday Evening Post, Independence Square, Philadelphia, Pa.
  Saucy Stories, 25 West 45th Street, New York City.
  Scribner’s Magazine, 597 Fifth Avenue, New York City.
  Short Stories, Garden City, Long Island, N. Y.
  Smart Set, 25 West 45th Street, New York City.
  Snappy Stories, 35 West 39th Street, New York City.
  Sunset, 460 Fourth Street, San Francisco, Cal.
  Telling Tales, 799 Broadway, New York City.
  10-Story Book, 538 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, Ill.
  Today’s Housewife, Cooperstown, N. Y.
  Top-Notch Magazine, 79 Seventh Avenue, New York City.
  Town Topics, 2 West 45th Street, New York City.
  True Story Magazine, 119 West 40th Street, New York City.
  Wave, 5513 West Iowa Street, Chicago, Ill.
  Western Story Magazine, 79 Seventh Avenue, New York City.
  Woman’s Home Companion, 381 Fourth Avenue, New York City.
  Woman’s World, 107 South Clinton Street, Chicago, Ill.
  World Fiction, Houston Publishing Company, New York City.
  Young’s Magazine, 112 East 19th Street, New York City.
  Youth, 66 East Elm Street, Chicago, Ill.




                   THE BIOGRAPHICAL ROLL OF HONOR
                      OF AMERICAN SHORT STORIES

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922


NOTE. _Only stories by American authors are listed. The index figures
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 prefixed to the name of the author
indicate that his work has been included in the Rolls of Honor for
1914, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, and 1921 respectively. The
list excludes reprints._

  ADAMS, BILL (BERTRAM M. ADAMS). Born at Sevenoaks, England, February
    24, 1879, of Anglo-Irish parentage. Educated at elementary
    schools and Weymouth College. On father’s death went to sea in
    sail. Ill health brought him ashore. First story “The Bos’un of
    the Goldenhorn’s Yarn,” Adventure, January 20, 1922. Lives at
    Lindsay, California.
      Sailor’s Way.
      Twinkle-Bright.

  AIKEN, CONRAD (POTTER). Born at Savannah, Georgia, August 5, 1889.
    Harvard graduate. Married. Contributing editor to the _Dial_,
    1917. Author of “Earth Triumphant,” 1914; “Turns and Movies,”
    1916; “The Jig of Forslin,” 1916; “Nocturne of Remembered
    Spring,” 1917; “Charnel Rose,” 1918; “Scepticisms,” 1919;
    “House of Rust,” 1920; “Punch: the Immortal Liar,” 1921;
    “Priapus and the Pool,” 1921. Editor of “Modern American
    Poets,” 1922. Lives in England.
      Dark City.

  (8) ALLEN, JAMES LANE (__for biography_, _see__ 1921).
      Miss Locke.

  (345678) ANDERSON, SHERWOOD (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Contract.
      I’m a Fool.

  (34567) BABCOCK, EDWINA STANTON (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Strange Flower.

  (45) Beer, Thomas (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Casual.
      Rope.

  BELLAMY, FRANCIS RUFUS. Born at New Rochelle, New York, December 24,
    1886. Educated at Williams College and Cornell University. Has
    been farmer, book salesman and special correspondent. Author
    of “Balance,” 1917; “Flash of Gold,” 1922. Lives at Holliston,
    Mass.
      Talk.

  (78) BERCOVICI, KONRAD (_for biography_, _see_ 1920).
      Death of Murdo.
      Father and Son.
      Ghitza.
      Hazi, Wife of Sender Surtuck.
      Mincu.
      Murdo.
      Tanasi.
      When a Man Rules.

  BIGGS, JR., JOHN. Born at Wilmington, Delaware, October 6, 1895.
    Educated at Princeton and Harvard. Lawyer. First short story
    “Corkran of the Clamstretch,” Scribner’s Magazine, December,
    1921. Lives at Wilmington, Delaware.
      Wind Witch.

  BODENHEIM, MAXWELL.
      Insanity.

  BOOGHER, SUSAN M.
      Unknown Warrior.

  (3) BOOTH, FREDERICK. Born in Hamilton County, Indiana, October 16,
    1882. Lived on the farm and was a farmer until 1906. Educated
    in Indiana public schools and Earlham College, Richmond,
    Indiana. Has been engaged in book selling, carpentry, concrete
    and steel construction, newspaper and advertising work
    coincident with unceasing but slow creative effort, under
    material and psychic difficulties. Has a novel in preparation.
    Lives in New York City.
      Helpless Ones.

  BROWN, BERNICE. Born at Webster City, Iowa, 1890. Graduate of Wells
    College. Has been Associate Editor of Every Week and Fiction
    Editor of Collier’s Weekly. Lives in New York City.
      Miracle.

  (7) BRYNER, EDNA CLARE (_for biography_, _see_ 1920).
      Forest Cover.

  BUCK, OSCAR MACMILLAN. Born at Cawnpore, India, February 9, 1885.
    Educated in India and at Ohio Wesleyan University and Drew
    Theological Seminary. Has taught in Bareilly Theological
    Seminary in India. Now professor at Drew Theological Seminary,
    Madison, New Jersey. First short story, 1917. Joint author
    of “India Beloved of Heaven,” 1918. Especially interested in
    history of Asiatic peoples. Lives in Madison, New Jersey.
      “Kismet”--a Tale of Rohilkind.

  (5678) CABELL, JAMES BRANCH (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Candid Footprint.

  (5) CARVER, GEORGE. Born at Cincinnati, Ohio, December 19, 1888.
    Educated at University of Alabama, University of Chicago, and
    Miami University. College instructor at present, but has been
    mill worker, student, reporter and soldier. Chief interest:
    trying to find expression for ideas better suggested than
    described by the phrase: forlorn minstrels sighing for banished
    kings. First story “In a Moment of Time,” Stratford Journal,
    September, 1918. Lives at Harvey, Illinois.
      Singer.

  CHAPMAN, FRANCES NORVILLE. Born at Chillicothe, Missouri, December
    31, 1876. Educated at Chillicothe Normal School, and has
    studied music and languages in Chicago, Boston, and abroad. Has
    travelled extensively. First story “The Quality of Genius,” in
    the Cavalier, 1908. Lives at Brookline, Massachusetts.
      Prisoners of the Dead.

  (23458) COBB, IRVIN S. (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Alas, the Poor Whiffletit!

  COHEN, ROSE GOLLUP. Born in a Russian village, April 2, 1880. Came
    to America, 1892. Sweatshop and factory life, working fourteen
    hours a day. Health broke down when seventeen. Learned to read
    English from the Bible in a hospital. Has studied short story
    writing at Hunter College and Columbia University. Author of
    “Out of the Shadow,” 1918. First short story “Sifted Earth,”
    Touchstone, July, 1920. Lives in New York City.
      Natalka’s Portion.

  (7) CORLEY, DONALD.
      Book of Debts.

  CRAVEN, THOMAS JEWELL. Born at Salina, Kansas, age thirty-three.
    Graduate of Kansas Wesleyan University. First short story “Love
    in Smoky Hill,” Dial, January, 1922. Author of “Paint,” 1922.
    Chief interests literature and painting. Critic of æsthetics.
    Lives at Brookhaven, Long Island, New York.
      Love in Smoky Hill.

  (4568) DOBIE, CHARLES CALDWELL (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Vision.

  EHLERT, FAY. Born in New York City of Hungarian stock, April 12,
    1886. Married. Educated privately, and at Columbia College of
    Expression and University of Chicago. Chief interests drama,
    psycho-pathology, and the human “driftwood.” First story “The
    Undertow,” Pearson’s Magazine (N. Y.), November, 1921. Lives in
    Chicago, Illinois,
      Vow.

  (78) FINGER, CHARLES J. (_for biography_, _see_ 1920).
      Jade Piece.
      My Friend Julio.
      Shame of Gold.

  FITZGERALD, F. SCOTT. Born at St. Paul, Minnesota, September 24,
    1896. Educated at Princeton. First story “Babes in the Woods,”
    Smart Set, August, 1919. Author of “This Side of Paradise,”
    1920; “Flappers and Philosophers,” 1920; “The Beautiful and
    Damned,” 1922; “Tales of the Jazz Age,” 1922. Interested in
    play-writing. Lives in Minnesota.
      Two for a Cent.

  (48) FRANK, WALDO (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Candy Cigar and Stationery.
      John the Baptist.
      Murder.

  FREDERICK, JOHN TOWNER. Born on a farm near Corning, Iowa, February
    1, 1893. Public school education. Graduate of State University
    of Iowa. Instructor in English there, and later head of the
    English Department of the State Normal School, Moorhead,
    Minnesota. Two years of farming in Michigan. Now Assistant
    Professor of English, University of Pittsburgh. Married.
    Founder and editor of The Midland. Author of “Druida,” 1923.
    First short story “The Legacy,” Smart Set, October, 1921.
      Legacy.

  FREEDMAN, DAVID. Born in Roumania, April 26, 1898. Brought to America
    at the age of two. Graduate of the City College of New York.
    Has been editor of a weekly journal and superintendent of
    an orphan asylum. Chief interests bowling, mathematics and
    metaphysics. First short story “Mendel Marantz--Housewife,”
    Pictorial Review, April, 1922. Lives in Brooklyn, N. Y.
      Mendel Marantz--Housewife.
      Mendel Marantz Moves.
      Quest of Sarah.

  FURMAN, LUCY. Born in Henderson, Kentucky. Educated privately.
    Has been settlement worker in Kentucky mountains for over
    fifteen years. Author of “Stories of a Sanctified Town.” 1897;
    “Mothering on Perilous,” 1914; “Quare Women,” 1923. Chief
    interest Hindman Settlement School. Lives at Hindman Kentucky.
      Fourth of July.
      Quare Women.
      Taking the Night.

  (12345678) GEROULD, KATHARINE FULLERTON (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Belshazzar’s Letter.
      Nature of an Oath.

  GILKYSON, WALTER. Born at Phoenixville, Pennsylvania, December
    18, 1880. Educated at Swarthmore College and University of
    Pennsylvania. Lawyer. First story “The Illumined Moment,”
    Atlantic Monthly, April, 1921. Lives in Philadelphia,
    Pennsylvania.
      Spoken in Jest.

  (56) GOODMAN, HENRY (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Thomas.

  (3) GRAEVE, OSCAR. Born in New York City, 1885. Public school
    education. First story published in McClure’s Magazine about
    1910. Author of “The Keys of the City,” 1914; “Youth Goes
    Seeking,” 1919; “Brown Moth,” 1921. Lives in New York City.
      Headlines.

  HARRIS, FRANK. Born in Galway, Ireland, 1854. Emigrated to the United
    States in 1870. Educated at numerous American and European
    Universities. Married. Practised law in Kansas. Has been editor
    of London Evening News, Fortnightly Review, and Saturday
    Review. Author “Elder Conklin,” 1892; “The Bomb,” 1909; “The
    Man Shakespeare,” 1909; “Montes the Matador,” 1910; “The Women
    of Shakespeare,” 1911; “Unpath’d Waters,” 1913; “Vales of
    Isis,” 1914; “Contemporary Portraits,” (3 series) 1914, 1919,
    1921; “Great Days,” 1914; “Love in Youth,” 1914; “England or
    Germany,” 1915; “The Life and Confessions of Oscar Wilde,”
    1916. Editor of Pearson’s Magazine (N. Y.). Lives in New York
    City.
      Mad Love.

  (8) HART, FRANCES NOYES (_for biography_, _see_ 1921).
      American.

  (35) HAWES, CHARLES BOARDMAN. Born at Clifton Springs, New York.
    January 24, 1889. Educated at Bowdoin College. Editor of “The
    Open Road.” Author of “The Mutineer,” 1920; “The Great Quest,”
    1921. Lives at Gloucester, Massachusetts.
      Out of the Storm.
      Peter Ronco.

  (2568) HECHT, BEN (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Winkelburg.

  (567) HERGESHEIMER, JOSEPH (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Token.

  (123) HOPPER, JAMES MARIE. Born in Paris, July 23, 1876. Came to
    America in 1887. Educated at University of California. Has
    practised law, been newspaper reporter, college instructor,
    editor and war correspondent. Author of “Caybigan,” 1906;
    “Goosie,” 1910; “Freshman,” 1912; “What Happened in the Night,”
    1913. Lives at Carmel, California.
      Ship in the Bottle.

  HULL, ALEXANDER. Born at Columbus, Ohio, September 15, 1887. Educated
    at Muskingum College and University of Pennsylvania. Head of
    Music Department, Pacific College. Married. Musical composer.
    First story “The Lilac Scented Envelope,” All-Story Weekly,
    November 6, 1915. Lives at Newberg, Oregon.
      Bain’s Hole.

  HUNT, LIAN. Born at Glen Gardner, New Jersey. Spent childhood in
    Roanoke, Virginia. High school education. Special student at
    Columbia University. Lives at Port Washington, Long Island, New
    York.
      King of the Reef.

  JITRO, WILLIAM C. G. Born near Lansing, Michigan, December 29, 1890.
    Education by private study. Has been publishing stories under
    several signatures since 1910. Lives in Detroit, Michigan.
      Resurrection and the Life.

  KILMAN, JULIAN. Born at Drummondsville, Canada, March 26, 1878.
    Studied law at University of Michigan. Practised law at
    Buffalo. Now engaged in Bureau of Naturalization at Buffalo.
    First story “Dan Alders’ Revenge,” Short Stories, September,
    1914. Lives at Buffalo, New York.
      Laugh.

  (78) KOMROFF, MANUEL (_for biography_, _see_ 1921).
      Burning Beard.

  LANE, ROSE WILDER. Born at De Smet, Dakota Territory, December 5,
    1877. Public school education. Author of “Henry Ford’s Own
    Story,” 1917; “Diverging Roads,” 1919; (with Frederick O’Brien)
    “White Shadows In the South Seas,” 1919; “The Making of Herbert
    Hoover,” 1920. Lives at Mansfield, Missouri.
      Innocence.

  LARDNER, RING W. Born at Niles, Michigan, March 6, 1885. Educated in
    public schools and at Armour Institute of Technology. Married.
    Sporting writer and editor for American newspapers since
    1907. Author of “Bib Ballads,” 1915; “You Know Me, Al,” 1915;
    “Gullibles Travels,” 1917; “Own Your Own Home,” 1917; “Treat
    ’Em Rough,” 1918; “The Real Dope,” 1918; “My Four Weeks in
    France,” 1918; “The Young Immigrants,” 1919; “Symptoms of Being
    35,” 1921; “The Big Town,” 1921. Lives at Great Neck, New York.
      Golden Honeymoon.

  (4) LEE, JENNETTE (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Man Who Made Poetry Hum.

  MCPEAK, IVAL. Born near Fulton, Iowa, May 10, 1889. Educated at
    State University of Iowa. Engaged in public health publicity
    and education. First story “Long--Short--and a Long,” Midland,
    October, 1915. Lives in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
      Prairie Symphony.

  MAHONEY, JAMES. Born at Greeneville, Tennessee, September 7, 1893.
    Educated at Emory and Henry College, Virginia, and Columbia
    University. Teacher in Choir School, Cathedral of St. John the
    Divine, New York City. In French Ambulance Service during the
    war. Received the Croix de Guerre. Studied art in Paris. First
    story “The Showing Up of Henry Widdemer,” McCall’s Magazine,
    August, 1920. Fond of swimming. Has studied play writing with
    George Pierce Baker at Harvard. Lives at Bristol, Virginia.
      Taxis of Fate.

  MERWIN, SAMUEL. Born at Evanston, Illinois, October 6, 1874.
    Educated at Northwestern University. Married. Author (with H.
    K. Webster) “The Short Line War,” 1899; (with H. K. Webster)
    “Calumet K.”, 1901; “The Road to Frontenac,” 1901; “The Whip
    Hand,” 1903; “His Little Hour,” 1903; “The Merry Anne,” 1904;
    “The Road Builders,” 1905; “Comrade John,” 1907; “Drugging a
    Nation,” 1908; “The Citadel,” 1912; “The Charmed Life of Miss
    Austin,” 1914; “Anthony the Absolute,” 1914; “The Honey Bee,”
    1915; “The Trufflers,” 1916; “Temperamental Henry,” 1917;
    “Henry Is Twenty,” 1918; “The Passionate Pilgrim,” 1919; “Hills
    of Han,” 1920; “In Red and Gold,” 1921; “Goldie Green,” 1922.
    Editor of Success, 1909-11. Lives at Concord, Massachusetts.
      Axiom of Peter Bell Ivor.

  MONTROSS, LYNN. Born in Nebraska, October 17, 1895. Educated at
    University of Nebraska. Journalist. Member of American
    Expeditionary Force in France. First story “In the Dark,”
    Adventure, 1920. Author of “Town and Gown,” (with Lois Seyster
    Montross), 1923. Lives in Chicago, Illinois.
      Pagan.

  (235) MYERS, WALTER L. (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Summoned.

  NORDHOFF, CHARLES B. Born of American parents in London, February 1,
    1887. Graduate of Harvard. Free lance. First story “Savagery,”
    Harper’s Magazine, April, 1922. Author of “The Fledgling,”
    1919; (with James Norman Hall) “The Lafayette Flying Corps,”
    1920; (with James Norman Hall) “Faery Lands of the South Seas,”
    1921. Now in Tahiti.
      Savagery.

  (57) OPPENHEIM, JAMES (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      He That Laughed at the Gods.

  (27) PICKTHALL, M. L. C.
      Black Hand.
      Luck.
      Man They Pitied.
      Men Who Climbed.

  (12378) POST, MELVILLE DAVISSON (_for biography_, _see_ 1920).
      Mountain School Teacher.

  (6) RABENEL, BEATRICE (_for biography_, _see_ 1919).
      Great-Granduncle Sebastian.

  ROSEBORO, VIOLA. Born in Pulaski, Tennessee, 1857. Education by
    desultory reading. Writer, editor, critic and guide. Author of
    “Old Ways and New,” 1898; “The Joyous Heart,” 1903; “Players
    and Vagabonds,” 1904; “The Storms of Youth,” 1920. Fiction
    editor of McClure’s Magazine. Lives in New York City.
      Aaron Westcott’s Funeral.

  (2347) ROSENBLATT, BENJAMIN (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      In the Metropolis.

  (57) RUSSELL, JOHN (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Adversary.

  SAMUEL, MAURICE. Born in Roumania, February 8, 1895. Went to
    Manchester, England, in 1901. Educated at Manchester
    University. Emigrated to America, 1914. In the American army in
    France, during the war. Attached to the Morgenthau Commission
    to Poland 1919. Public stenographer in Paris, Berlin and
    Vienna. Returned to America in 1920. Author of “The Outsider,”
    1920; “The Masquerader,” 1922. Lives in New York City.
      Masquerader.

  SEIFERT, SHIRLEY L. Born in St. Peter’s, Missouri. Graduate of
    Washington University. Did secretarial work for the Red Cross
    and War Loan Organizations during the war. First story “The
    Girl Who Was Too Good Looking,” American Magazine, July, 1919.
    Lives in St. Louis, Missouri.
      Lady of Sorrows.

  (1234567) SINGMASTER, ELSIE (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Magic Mirror.

  SPEARS, RAYMOND S. Born at Bellevue, Ohio, August 2, 1876. Public
    school education. Married. Has been reporter, special article
    writer and forester. On staff of Adventure. Author, “Camping
    on the Great River,” 1912; “Camping on the Great Lakes,” 1913;
    “The Cabin Boat Primer,” 1913; “Trip on the Great Lakes,” 1913;
    “The River Prophet,” 1920; “Diamond Tolls,” 1920; “Driftwood,”
    1921. Lives at Little Falls, New York.
      Ripe Peach.

  (34578) SPRINGER, FLETA CAMPBELL (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Realities.

  (2345678) STEELE, WILBUR DANIEL (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Anglo-Saxon.
      From the Other Side of the South.
      “He That Hideth His Secret.”
      Mad.
      Man Who Sat.
      Marriage in Kairwan.

  (345678) VENABLE, EDWARD CARRINGTON (_for biography_, _see_ 1921).
      Reverend James E. Markison.

  (345678) VORSE, MARY HEATON (_for biography_, _see_ 1917).
      Halfway House.

  WALDO, SIDNEY. Born in Boston, December 14, 1883. Graduate of
    Harvard. Engaged in the building material business. First story
    “Footprints in Water,” Detective Story Magazine, March 30,
    1920. Lives at Brookline, Massachusetts.
      Sons and Brothers.

  WARREN, MAUDE (LAVINIA) RADFORD. Born at Wolfe Island, Canada.
    Educated at University of Chicago. Author “King Arthur and His
    Knights,” 1907; “The Land of the Living,” 1908; “Peter Peter,”
    1909; “The Main Road,” 1913; “Barbara’s Marriages,” 1915;
    “Robin Hood,” 1915; “Little Pioneers,” 1916; “The White Flame
    of France,” 1918. Lives at Ithaca, New York.
      On the Run.

  WATTS, MARY STANBERY. Born in Delaware County, Ohio, November 6,
    1868. Convent education. Married. Author of “The Tenants,”
    1908; “Nathan Burke,” 1910; “The Legacy,” 1911; “Van Cleve,”
    1913; “The Rise of Jennie Cushing,” 1914; “The Rudder,” 1916;
    “The Boardman Family,” 1918; “From Father to Son,” 1919. Has
    also written plays. Lives in Cincinnati, Ohio.
      Reward of Virtue.

  (5678) WILLIAMS, BEN AMES (_for biography_, _see_ 1918).
      Likeness of a Form.

  WOOD, CLEMENT. Born at Tuscaloosa, Alabama, September 1, 1888.
    Educated at University of Alabama and Yale. Married.
    Practised law, has been assistant city attorney and recorder
    of Birmingham, Alabama, and taught at several private
    schools. Vice-Principal Dwight School, New York, 1920-22.
    Author “Glad of Earth,” 1917; “The Earth Turns South,” 1919;
    “Jehovah,” 1920; “Mountain,” 1920; “Nigger,” 1922. Lives at
    Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
      Coffin.




                     THE ROLL OF HONOR OF FOREIGN
                      SHORT STORIES IN AMERICAN
                              MAGAZINES

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922


NOTE. _The index figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 prefixed to the
name of the author indicate that his work has been included in the
Rolls of Honor for 1914, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, and 1921
respectively. The list excludes reprints._


                     I. ENGLISH AND IRISH AUTHORS

  (12345678) AUMONIER, STACY.
    Accident of Crime.
    Miss Bracegirdle Does Her Duty.

  BARRINGTON, E.
    Mystery of Stella.

  (348) BERESFORD, J. D.
    Looking Glass.
    Soul of an Artist.

  (1235678) BLACKWOOD, ALGERNON.
    Dance of Death.
    Woman’s Ghost Story.

  BUTTS, MARY.
    Change.
    Speed the Plough.

  CHESTERTON, G. K.
    Temple of Silence.
    Vengeance of the Statue.

  (8) COPPARD, A. E.
    Black Dog.
    Broadsheet Ballad.

  CORKERY, DANIEL.
    By-Product.
    Colonel MacGillicuddy Goes Home.
    Ember.
    Price.
    Unfinished Symphony.

  (6) DE LA MARE, WALTER.
    Tree.

  (6) EDGINTON, MAY.
    Mary Gets Married.

  (1234568) GALSWORTHY, JOHN.
    Feud.
    Man Who Kept His Form.
    Santa Lucia.

  (28) GIBBON, PERCEVAL.
    By Consent.
    Saint Flossie.

  KAYE-SMITH, SHEILA.
    Mrs. Adis.
    Mockbeggar.
    Old Gadgett.

  KINROSS, ALBERT.
    Traitors.

  (47) LAWRENCE, D. H.
    Episode.
    Dick Collier.

  “MALET, LUCAS.”
    Conversion.

  MANSFIELD, KATHERINE.
    Fly.

  MAXWELL, W. B.
    Romance of It.

  MOORE, GEORGE.
    Peronnik the Fool.

  (456) MORDAUNT, ELINOR.
    Fighting Cocks.
    “Genius.”
    Heart of a Ship.
    Kelly O’Keefe.
    Parrots.

  (4) PERTWEE, ROLAND.
    Chap Upstairs.
    Empty Arms.
    Summer Time.

  (78) SINCLAIR, MAY.
    “Heaven.”

  (578) STEPHENS, JAMES.
    Hunger.

  (278) WALPOLE, HUGH.
    Conscience Money.
    Major Wilbraham.


                           II. TRANSLATIONS

  (47) ANDREYEV, LEONID.
    Luckiest Man in the World.

  ARTZYBASHEFF, MIKHAIL.
    Old Story.

  (5) BERTHEROY, JEAN.
    Reign of the Spirit.

  (67) BLASCO IBANEZ, VICENTE.
    Sunset.

  BOJER, JOHAN.
    Skobelef.

  BUNIN, IVAN.
    Gentleman from San Francisco.
    Kasimir Stanislavovitch.

  (5) MAUPASSANT, GUY DE.
    Story of a Wise Man.

  MORAND, PAUL.
    Roman Night.

  SADOVEANU, MICHAIL.
    Spring.

  SIWERTZ, SIGFRID.
    Leonard and the Fisherman.

  TIMMERMANS, FELIX.
    Beguine Symforosa.

  VALLE-INCLAN, RAMON DEL.
    My Sister Antonia.




                   THE BEST BOOKS OF SHORT STORIES
                               OF 1922


                           AMERICAN AUTHORS

      1. CABELL. Chivalry. McBride.
      2. CABELL. Gallantry. McBride.
      3. CLEMENS. Mysterious Stranger. Harper.
      4. COBB. Sundry Accounts. Doran.
      5. COLCORD. Instrument of the Gods. Macmillan.
      6. CRANE. Men, Women, and Boats. Boni & Liveright.
      7. FRANK. City Block. The author: Darien, Conn.
      8. GEROULD. Valiant Dust. Scribner.
      9. HURST. Vertical City. Harper.
     10. MELVILLE. Apple-Tree Table. Princeton.
     11. O’HIGGINS. Some Distinguished Americans. Harper.


                      ENGLISH AND IRISH AUTHORS

     12. BERESFORD. Signs and Wonders. Putnam.
     13. BLACKWOOD AND WILSON. Wolves of God. Dutton.
     14. CORKERY. Hounds of Banba. Huebsch.
     15. DAVEY. Pilgrim of a Smile. Doran.
     16. ELLIS. Kanga Creek. Brentano.
     17. HUXLEY. Mortal Coils. Doran.
     18. LAWRENCE. England, My England. Seltzer.
     19. MACHEN. House of Souls. Knopf.
     20. MANSFIELD. Garden Party. Knopf.
     21. MOORE. In Single Strictness. Boni & Liveright.
     22. MORRISON. Tales of Mean Streets. Boni & Liveright.
     23. TOMLINSON. London River. Knopf.
     24. WOOLF. Monday or Tuesday. Harcourt.


                             TRANSLATIONS

     25. ALEICHEM. Jewish Children. Knopf.
     26. CHEKHOV. Cook’s Wedding. Macmillan.
     27. GOLDBERG, _translator_. Brazilian Tales. Four Seas.
     28. GORKY. Through Russia. Dutton.
     29. HEIDENSTAMM. Charles Men. American-Scandinavian Foundation.
     30. MAUPASSANT. Boule de Suif. Knopf.
     31. MAUPASSANT. Mademoiselle Fifi. Knopf.
     32. NERVAL. Daughters of Fire. Brown.
     33. POPOVIC, _translator_. Jugo-Slav Stories. Duffield.
     34. SCHNITZLER. Shepherd’s Pipe. Brown.
     35. UNDERWOOD, _translator_. Famous Stories from Foreign
           Countries. Four Seas.




                       VOLUMES OF SHORT STORIES
                    PUBLISHED IN THE UNITED STATES

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922


NOTE. _An asterisk before a title indicates distinction. This list
includes single short stories, collections of short stories, and a
few continuous narratives based on short stories previously published
in periodicals. Volumes announced for publication in the autumn of
1922 are listed here, though in some cases they had not yet appeared
at the time this book went to press._


                         I. AMERICAN AUTHORS

  ABDULLAH, ACHMED. Alien Souls. McCann.

  ADAMS, ADELINE (MRS. ADELINE VALENTINE POND). *Amouretta Landscape.
        Houghton, Mifflin.

  ADAMS, SAMUEL HOPKINS. From a Bench in Our Square. Houghton, Mifflin.

  ANDREWS, MARY RAYMOND SHIPMAN. *His Soul Goes Marching On. Scribner.
    Yellow Butterflies. Scribner.

  BABBITT, ELLEN C. More Jataka Tales. Century.

  BEAUMONT, GERALD. Riders Up! Appleton.

  BESKOW, ELIZABETH MARIA. Christmas Homecoming. Augustana Book Concern.

  BRENNING, MARGARET. You Know Charles. Holt.

  CABELL, JAMES BRANCH. *Chivalry. McBride.
    *Gallantry. McBride.

  CLEMENS, SAMUEL LANGHORNE (MARK TWAIN). *Mysterious Stranger. Harper.

  COBB, IRVIN S. *Sundry Accounts. Doran.

  COHEN, OCTAVUS ROY. Assorted Chocolates. Dodd, Mead.
    Highly Colored. Dodd, Mead.

  COLCORD, LINCOLN. *Instrument of the Gods. Macmillan.

  “CONNELL, RICHARD.” Sin of Monsieur Pettipon. Doran.

  CORBIN, LILYAN STRATTON. Reno. Colyer.

  CORTHELL, ROLAND. On the Sidewalk. Cornhill.

  CRANE, HILLIS. Dawn. Augustana Book Concern.

  CRANE, STEPHEN. *Men, Women and Boats. Boni and Liveright.

  DERIEUX, SAMUEL A. Frank of Freedom Hill. Doubleday, Page.

  DICKSON, HARRIS. Old Reliable in Africa. Stokes.

  EDWARDS, HARRY STILLWELL. *Mam’selle Delphine. Holly Bluff Pub. Co.

  FERBER, EDNA. *Gigolo. Doubleday, Page.

  FISHER, LENA LEONARD. River Dragon’s Bride. Abingdon Press.

  FITZGERALD, F. SCOTT. *Tales of the Jazz Age. Scribner.

  FORD, SEWELL. Torchy as a Pa. Clode.
    Trilby May Crashes In. Harper.

  FRANK, WALDO. *City Block. The author (Darien, Conn.).

  FRENCH, JOSEPH LEWIS, _editor_. Great Pirate Stories. Brentano’s.

  GEROULD, KATHARINE FULLERTON. *Valiant Dust. Scribner.

  HARRISON, ELIZABETH. Misunderstood Children. Macmillan.
    Offero, the Giant. Macmillan.

  “HENRY, O.” (WILLIAM SIDNEY PORTER.) *Selected Stories. Doubleday,
        Page.

  HUNTINGTON, MRS. FLORA CLARKE. Handkerchief and the Sword. Authors
        and Publishers Corp.

  HURST, FANNIE. *Vertical City. Harper.

  KNAPP, SHEPHERD. Old Joe. Abingdon Press.

  KYNE, PETER BERNARD. Cappy Ricks Retires. Cosmopolitan Book Corp.

  LAW, FREDERICK HOUK, _editor_. Modern Essays and Stories. Century.

  LENK, MARGARETE KLEE. Patrick’s First Christmas. Augustana Book
        Concern.

  MCSPADDEN, JOSEPH WALKER, _editor_. Famous Mystery Stories. Crowell.

  MARQUIS, DON. Revolt of the Oyster. Doubleday, Page.

  MARSHALL, EDISON. Heart of Little Shikara. Little, Brown.

  MATTHEWS, BRANDER. Vignettes of Manhattan; Outlines in Local Color.
        Scribner.

  MAYO, KATHERINE. Mounted Justice. Houghton, Mifflin.

  MAYO, MARGERY. Russians Abroad. Stratford Co.

  MELVILLE, HERMAN. *Apple-Tree Table; and Other Sketches. Princeton.

  MORLEY, CHRISTOPHER. Plum Pudding of Divers Ingredients. Doubleday,
        Page.

  MUSSER, HOWARD ANDERSON. Jungle Tales. Doran.

  NICHOLSON, MEREDITH. Best Laid Schemes. Scribner.

  O’BRIEN, EDWARD J., _editor_. Best Short Stories of 1921. Small,
        Maynard.

  O’HIGGINS, HARVEY. *Some Distinguished Americans. Harper.

  PARKER, DUDREA. Pig Iron. Norman, Remington.

  PEARSON, ADELAIDE. Laughing Lion. Dutton.

  PENCE, RAYMOND WOODBURY, _editor_. Short Stories by Present Day
        Authors. Macmillan.

  RAMSAY, ROBERT L., _editor_. *Short Stories of America. Houghton,
        Mifflin.

  RINEHART, MARY ROBERTS. More Tish. Doran.

  RUSSELL, CHARLES M., _editor_. Rawhide Rawlins Stories. Montana
        Newspaper Assn.

  SOCIETY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES. O. Henry Memorial Award Prize Stories
        of 1921. Doubleday, Page.

  SQUIER, EMMA LINDSAY. Wild Heart. Cosmopolitan Book Corp.

  STOCK, RALPH. South of the Line. Doubleday, Page.

  STOVALL, DENNIS H. Spell of the Shang Kambu. Standard Pub. Co.

  STRINGER, ARTHUR. Twin Tales. Bobbs-Merrill.

  TARBELL, IDA M. He Knew Lincoln. Macmillan.

  TASSIN, ALGERNON. Rainbow String. Macmillan.

  TERHUNE, ALBERT PAYSON. Further Adventures of Lad. Doran.

  TILDEN, WILLIAM TATEM, 2d. It’s All in the Game. Doubleday, Page.

  WALKER, GUY MORRISON. Skeletons. Stratford.

  WILEY, HUGH. Lily. Knopf.


                    II. ENGLISH AND IRISH AUTHORS

  ATKEY, BERTRAM. Winnie O’Wynn and the Wolves. Little, Brown.

  BARRINGTON, E. *“The Ladies!” Atlantic Monthly Press.

  BECK, L. ADAMS. *Ninth Vibration. Dodd, Mead.

  BERESFORD, JOHN DAVYS. *Signs and Wonders. Putnam.

  BIBESCO, PRINCESS ELIZABETH. Balloons. Doran.

  “BIRMINGHAM, GEORGE A.” (JAMES OWEN HANNAY). Lady Bountiful. Doran.

  BLACKWOOD, ALGERNON _and_ WILSON, WILFRED. *Wolves of God. Dutton.

  BONE, DAVID W. *“Broken Stowage.” Dutton.

  CHESTERTON, GILBERT KEITH. *Man Who Knew Too Much. Harper.

  CORKERY, DANIEL. *Hounds of Banba. Huebsch.

  DAVEY, NORMAN. *Pilgrim of a Smile. Doran.

  DELL, ETHEL MAY. Odds, and Other Stories. Putnam.

  DRINKWATER, JOHN. Cotswold Characters. Yale.

  ELLIS, HAVELOCK. *Kanga Creek. Brentano’s.

  *English Short Stories from Fifteenth to Twentieth Century.
        (Everyman’s Library.) Dutton.

  EYTON, JOHN. Dancing Fakir. Longmans.

  HOWARD, F. MORTON. *Happy Rascals. Dutton.

  HUXLEY, ALDOUS. *Mortal Coils. Doran.

  JAMES, MONTAGU RHODES. *Five Jars. Longmans.

  KINROSS, ALBERT. *Truth About Vignolles. Century.

  KIPLING, RUDYARD. Selected Stories. Doubleday, Page.

  LAWRENCE, D. H. *England, My England. Seltzer.

  LYONS, A. NEIL. *Market Bundle. Dodd, Mead.

  MACHEN, ARTHUR. *House of Souls. Knopf.

  “MALET, LUCAS.” *Da Silva’s Widow. Dodd, Mead.

  MANSFIELD, KATHERINE. *Garden Party. Knopf.

  MERRICK, LEONARD. *To Tell You the Truth. Dutton.

  MONTMORENCY, JAMES EDWARD GEOFFREY DE. Never-Ending Road. Oxford
        University Press.

  MOORE, GEORGE. *In Single Strictness. Boni and Liveright.

  MORRISON, ARTHUR. *Tales of Mean Streets. Boni and Liveright.

  O’BRIEN, EDWARD J. _and_ COURNOS, JOHN, _editors_. Best British Short
        Stories of 1922. Small, Maynard.

  OSBOURNE, LLOYD. Wild Justice. Appleton.

  OWEN, H. COLLINSON. Adventures of Antoine. McCann.

  “ROHMER, SAX.” Tales of Chinatown. Doubleday, Page.

  “SAKI.” Reginald. McBride.

  TOMLINSON, H. M. *London River. Knopf.

  WOOLF, VIRGINIA. *Monday or Tuesday. Harcourt, Brace.


                          III. TRANSLATIONS

  “ALEICHEM, SHALOM.” (_Yiddish._) *Jewish Children. Knopf.

  CHEKHOV, ANTON. (_Russian._) *Cook’s Wedding. Macmillan.

  “FRANCE, ANATOLE.” (JACQUES-ANATOLE THIBAULT.) (_French._)
    *Count Morin, Deputy. Dodd, Mead.
    *Marguerite. Dodd, Mead.

  GOLDBERG, ISAAC, _translator_. (_Portuguese._) *Brazilian Tales. Four
        Seas.

  GORKY, MAXIM. (_Russian._) *Through Russia. Dutton.

  HEIDENSTAMM, VERNER VON. (_Swedish._) *Charles Men. 2 vols.
        American-Scandinavian Foundation.

  LEBLANC, MAURICE. (_French._) Eight Strokes of the Clock. Macaulay.

  MACKLIN, ALYS EYRE, _translator_. (_French._) Twenty-Nine Tales from
        the French. Harcourt, Brace.

  MAUPASSANT, GUY DE. (_French._) *Boule de Suif. Knopf.
    *Mademoiselle Fifi. Knopf.

  NERVAL, GERARD DE. (_French._) *Daughters of Fire. N. L. Brown.

  POPOVIC, PAVLE, _editor_. (_Jugo-Slav._) *Jugo-Slav Stories. Duffield.

  SCHNITZLER, ARTHUR. (_German._) *Shepherd’s Pipe. N. L. Brown.

  UNDERWOOD, EDNA WORTHLEY, _translator_. *Famous Stories from Foreign
        Countries. Four Seas.




                     ARTICLES ON THE SHORT STORY

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922

Authors of articles are printed in capital letters.

_The following abbreviations are used in this index_:

  _Book. (N. Y.)_      Bookman (New York)
  _Cath. W._           Catholic World
  _Cen._               Century
  _Corn._              Cornhill Magazine
  _Dial_               Dial
  _D. D._              Double Dealer
  _Eng. R._            English Review
  _Free._              Freeman
  _John._              John o’London’s Weekly
  _L. H. J._           Ladies’ Home Journal
  _Lib._               Liberator
  _L. Merc._           London Mercury
  _Nat. (N. Y.)_       Nation (New York)
  _Nat. (London)_      Nation (London)
  _New A._             New Age
  _New S._             New Statesman
  _N. Rep._            New Republic
  _N. Y. Times_        New York Times Review of Books
  _Post_               New York Evening Post Literary Review
  _Queen_              Queen
  _Scr._               Scribner’s Magazine
  _Wave_               Wave


  Adams, Adeline.
    By J. W. Krutch. Nat. (N. Y.) July 26. (115: 99.)

  Ade, George.
    By Thomas L. Masson. Book. (N. Y.) Oct., ’21. (54: 116.)

  AIKEN, CONRAD.
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. Free. Dec. 28, ’21. (4: 378.)
    Katherine Mansfield. Free. June 21. (5: 357.)

  ALDEN, RAYMOND M.
    Oscar Wilde. Post. Dec. 3, ’21. (2: 228.)

  ALDINGTON, RICHARD.
    James Joyce. Post. March 11. (2: 491.)

  American Short Story.
    By Brander Matthews. N. Y. Times. Sept. 17. (27: 2.)
    By Gilbert Seldes. Dial. April. (72: 427.)
    By Johan J. Smertenko. Nat. (N. Y.) (114: 779.)

  ANDERSON, JOHN D.
    Thomas Hardy. N. Y. Times. May 28. (10.)

  Anderson, Sherwood.
    Anonymous. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 23, ’21. (113: 602.)
    Anonymous. Nat. (London.) Feb. 4. (30: 695.)
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. July 13. (21: 457.)
    By C. E. Bechhofer. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 19. (21: 44.)
    By William Rose Benét. Post. Nov. 26, ’21. (2: 200.)
    By Mary M. Colum. Free. Nov. 30, ’21. (4: 281.)
    By J. W. Krutch. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 23, ’21. (113: 602.)
    By Robert Morss Lovett. N. Rep. Nov. 23, ’21. (28: 383.)
    By Robert Morss Lovett. Dial. Jan. (72: 79.)
    By Edwin Muir. Free. June 14. (4: 321.)
    By Albert Jay Nock. Free. Feb. 8. (4: 513.)
    By Forrest Reid. Nat. (London.) July 8. (31: 510.)
    By Paul Rosenfeld. Dial. Jan. (72: 29.)
    By Gilbert Seldes. N. Y. Times. Dec. 4, ’21. (10.)
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) Oct. 12, ’21. (113: 407.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. Feb. 18. (18: 565.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. July 22. (19: 443.)
    By T. K. Whipple. Post. March 11. (2: 481.)
    By Walter Yust. D. D. March. (3: 161.)

  Andreyev, Leonid.
    By Alexander Kaun. N. Rep. June 28. (31: 133.)

  ARNOLD, WILLIAM HARRIS.
    Robert Louis Stevenson. Scr. Jan. (71: 53.)

  Balzac, Honoré de.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 5. (21: 9.)
    By Desmond MacCarthy. New S. Dec. 10, ’21. (18: 288.)

  BARNES, DJUNA.
    James Joyce. D. D. May. (3: 249.)

  Baroja, Pio.
    By J. B. Trend. Nat. (London.) April 1. (31: 26.)

  Barrios, Eduardo.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  BATEMAN, MAY.
    John Galsworthy. Cath. W. March. (114: 732.)

  BEACH, JOSEPH WARREN.
    Thomas Hardy. N. Rep. Aug. 23. (31: 366.)

  BECHHOFER, C. E.
    Sherwood Anderson. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 19. (21: 44.)

  Beerbohm, Max.
    By Max Eastman. Lib. June. (5: 5.)
    By J. W. Krutch. Nat. (N. Y.) Oct. 12, ’21. (113: 413.) Post. Nov.
        19, ’21. (2: 186.)
    By Philip Littell. N. Rep. May 17. (30: 347.)
    By George Q. Moore. D. D. Jan. (3: 55.)

  BELGION, MONTGOMERY.
    Paul Jean Toulet. Free. Jan. 18. (4: 453.)

  BENET, WILLIAM ROSE.
    Sherwood Anderson. Post. Nov. 26, ’21. (2: 200.)

  Bercovici, Konrad.
    Anonymous. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 30, ’21. (113: 625.)
    By Padraic Colum. Dial. Dec., ’21. (71: 711.)
    By Johan J. Smertenko. Post. Nov. 19, ’21. (2: 183.)

  Bibesco, Elizabeth.
    By Clarence Day, Jr. N. Rep. March 22. (30: 115.)
    By Ludwig Lewisohn. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 261.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. March 4. (18: 621.)

  Blackwood, Algernon.
    Anonymous. Post. March 25. (2: 523.)
    By Alma Newton. N. Y. Times. April 2. (16.)
    By Kathleen Shackleton. John. Sept. 3, ’21. (612.)

  Blasco Ibáñez, Vicente.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Nov. 10, ’21. (20: 733.)

  Bone, David W.
    By Felix Riesenberg. Post. July 8. (2: 787.)

  BOYD, ERNEST.
    Gustave Flaubert. Post. Dec. 17, ’21. (2: 280.)

  BOYNTON, H. W.
    W. H. Hudson. Post. Feb. 4. (2: 398.)

  BRENNECKE, HENRY.
    E. T. A. Hoffmann. N. Y. Times. June 25. (15.)

  BROCK, A. CLUTTON.
    W. H. Hudson. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 24. (21: 542.)

  BROWN, HEYWOOD.
    Harvey O’Higgins. Book. (N. Y.) Oct., ’21. (54: 156.)

  BUELL, LLEWELLYN M.
    Robert Louis Stevenson. Scr. Feb. (71: 184.)

  Bunin, Ivan.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. April 20. (21: 256.)
    By J. W. Krutch. Nat. (N. Y.) July 26. (115: 99.)
    By J. Middleton Murry. Nat. (London.) June 24. (31: 444.)

  BURKE, KENNETH.
    Gustave Flaubert. Dial. Feb. (72: 147.)

  Cabell, James Branch.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 26. (21: 57.)
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) Dec. 7, ’21. (113: 664.)
    By Ben Ray Redman. Post. Dec. 17, ’21. (2: 276.)
    By Vincent Starrett. D. D. Nov., ’21. (2: 203.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. May 13. (19: 156.)
    By Cuthbert Wright. Free. Sept. 6. (5: 621.)

  CANBY, HENRY SEIDEL.
    Joseph Conrad. Post. Feb. 4. (2: 393.)
    John Russell. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 251.)

  CANE, MELVILLE H.
    Brander Matthews. Free. May 24. (5: 260.)

  Chambers, Robert W.
    Anonymous. Post. Dec. 3, ’21. (2: 227.)

  Chekhov, Anton.
    By Francis Hackett. N. Rep. March 1. (30: 23.)
    By Martha Harris. N. Y. Times. July 23. (27: 8.)
    By Alexander Kaun. Free. March 1. (4: 592.)
    By J. Middleton Murry. Nat. (London.) April 8. (31: 57.)
    By J. Middleton Murry. N. Rep. March 22. (30: 114.)
    By Allan Nevins. Post. Nov. 26, ’21. (2: 200.)
    By L. A. Sulveritsky. N. Rep. May 10. (30: 312.)
    By M. P. Willcocks. Eng. R. March. (34: 207.)
    By Jacob Zeitlin. Nat. (N. Y.) April 5. (114: 400.)

  Cobb, Irvin S.
    By Hildegarde Hawthorne. N. Y. Times. May 14. (14.)

  COLTON, ARTHUR.
    Short Story. Post. Oct. 1, ’21. (2: 49.)

  COLUM, MARY M.
    Sherwood Anderson. Free. Nov. 30, ’21. (4: 281.)
    Daniel Corkery. Free. Aug. 2. (5: 498.)

  COLUM, PADRAIC.
    Konrad Bercovici. Dial. Dec., ’21. (71: 711.)
    James Joyce. N. Y. Times. June 11. (10.)
    James Stephens. Dial. Nov., ’21. (71: 601.)

  Conrad, Joseph.
    By Henry Seidel Canby. Post. Feb. 4. (2: 393.)

  Coppard, A. E.
    By Ludwig Lewisohn. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 261.)

  Corkery, Daniel.
    By Mary M. Colum. Free. Aug. 2. (5: 498.)

  COWLEY, MALCOLM.
    Katherine Mansfield. Dial. Aug. (73: 231.)

  CRANE, CLARKSON.
    Gérard de Nerval. Free. Aug. 23. (5: 572.)

  Crane, Stephen.
    Anonymous. Free. Jan. 18. (4: 455.)

  CROCE, BENEDETTO.
    G. Flaubert. L. Merc. March. (5: 487.)
    Guy de Maupassant. L. Merc. May. (6: 61.)

  Davis, Richard Harding.
    Anonymous. Post. July 29. (2: 839.)

  DAWSON, N. P.
    Fannie Hurst. Post. April 15. (2: 579.)

  DAY, JR., CLARENCE.
    Elizabeth Bibesco. N. Rep. March 22. (30: 115.)

  Diaz-Garces, Joaquin.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  Dostoevsky, Fyodor.
    By Conrad Aiken. Free. Dec. 28, ’21. (4: 378.)
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 12. (21: 25.)
    By N. Bryllion Fagin. D. D. Dec., ’21. (2: 267.)
    By Edwin Muir. Free. Sept. 13. (6: 17.)
    By J. Middleton Murry. Nat. (London.) Dec. 24, ’21. (30: 505.)
    By William Lyon Phelps. N. Y. Times. Jan. 15. (8.)
    By Manya Gordon Strunsky. Post. March 18. (2: 505.)
    By Avrahm Yarmolinsky. N. Rep. Nov. 30. ’21. (29: 15.)
    By Avrahm Yarmolinsky. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (32: 115.)

  EASTMAN, MAX.
    Max Beerbohm. Lib. June. (5: 5.)

  EATON, WALTER PRICHARD.
    Brander Matthews. N. Y. Times. Jan. 8. (11.)

  English Short Story.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. July 6. (21: 440.)

  FAGIN, N. BRYLLION.
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. D. D. Dec., ’21. (2: 267.)

  Ferber, Edna.
    Anonymous. Book. (N. Y.) Jan. (54: 434.)

  FIELD, LOUISE MAUNSELL.
    Ellen Glasgow. N. Y. Times. July 30. (21.)
    Lucas Malet. N. Y. Times. July 9. (27: 21.)

  Flaubert, Gustave.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 5. (21: 12.)
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 15, ’21. (20: 833.)
    By Ernest Boyd. Post. Dec. 17, ’21. (2: 280.)
    By Kenneth Burke. Dial. Feb. (72: 147.)
    By Benedetto Croce. L. Merc. March. (5: 487.)
    By Austin Hay. N. Y. Times. Jan. 15. (6.)
    By Charles Leonard Moore. Post. Jan. 28. (2: 382.)
    By T. Sturge Moore. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 29, ’21. (20: 876.)
    By J. Middleton Murry. Dial. Dec., ’21. (71: 625.)

  FOOTNER, HULBERT.
    Arthur Machen. Post. June 17. (2: 736.)

  FORMAN, HENRY JAMES.
    D. H. Lawrence. Nat. (N. Y.) (27: 12.)

  FREEMAN, JOHN.
    Robert Louis Stevenson. L. Merc. April. (5: 617.)

  Freeman, Mary E. Wilkins.
    Anonymous. Post. July 22. (2: 823.)

  Fuller, Henry Blake.
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) Dec. 21, ’21. (113: 729.)
    By Carl Van Vechten. D. D. June. (3: 289.)

  FULLER, HENRY B.
    Hamlin Garland. Free. Nov. 9, ’21. (4: 210.)

  Galantière, Lewis.
    Marcel Schwob. Free. June 14. (330.)

  Galsworthy, John.
    By May Bateman. Cath. W. March. (114: 732.)

  Gana, Federico.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  Garland, Hamlin.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 31. (21: 554.)
    By Henry B. Fuller. Free. Nov. 9, ’21. (4: 210.)
    By Hildegarde Hawthorne. N. Y. Times. July 30. (27: 10.)
    By Robert Morss Lovett. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (15.)
    By Constance Lindsay Skinner. Post. Dec. 3, ’21. (2: 218.)
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 23, ’21. (113: 596.)

  GEROULD, GORDON HALL.
    Joseph Hergesheimer. Post. June 17. (2: 735.)

  Glasgow, Ellen.
    By Louise Maunsell Field. N. Y. Times. July 30. (21.)

  GORDON, VERA.
    Short Story. Free. Dec. 14, ’21. (4: 332.)

  HACKETT, FRANCIS.
    Anton Chekhov. N. Rep. March 1. (30: 23.)

  Hardy, Thomas.
    By John D. Anderson. N. Y. Times. May 28. (10.)
    By Joseph Warren Beach. N. Rep. Aug. 23. (31: 366.)
    By Llewelyn Powys. Dial. March. (72: 286.)

  Harris, Frank.
    By J. W. Krutch. Nat. (N. Y.) July 5. (115: 19.)

  HARRIS, MARTHA.
    Anton Chekhov. N. Y. Times. July 23. (27: 8.)

  Harte, Bret.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. March 16. (21: 169.)
    By H. M. Tomlinson. Nat. (London.) March 11. (30: 861.)

  HAWTHORNE, HILDEGARDE.
    Irvin S. Cobb. N. Y. Times. May 14. (14.)
    Hamlin Garland. N. Y. Times. July 30. (10.)
    Albert Kinross. N. Y. Times. May 7. (2.)

  Hawthorne, Nathaniel.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. April 6. (21: 225.)
    By Robert Lynd. New S. April 22. (19: 68.)

  HAY, AUSTIN.
    Gustave Flaubert. N. Y. Times. Jan. 15. (6.)

  Hearn, Lafcadio.
    By John S. Kendall. D. D. June. (3: 313.)
    By Lucile Rutland. D. D. Feb. (3: 96.)

  HENDERSON, ARCHIBALD.
    Jack London. N. Y. Times. April 16. (10.)

  Henry, O.
    Anonymous. Free. Jan. 11. (4: 431.)
    By George MacAdam. N. Y. Times. Aug. 6. (27: 5.)
    By Hyder E. Rollins. Post. March 18. (2: 505.)
    By Hyder E. Rollins. Post. Jan. 7. (2: 332.)
    By Hyder E. Rollins. Post. June 17. (2: 736.)
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 260.)

  HERFORD, OLIVER.
    “Say It with Asterisks!” L. H. J. June. (28.)

  Hergesheimer, Joseph.
    Anonymous. Book. (N. Y.) May. (55: 247.)
    By Gordon Hall Gerould. Post. June 17. (2: 735.)
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) Dec. 7, ’21. (113: 664.)

  HERRICK, ROBERT.
    Hugh Walpole. Post. Oct. 8, ’21. (2: 65.)

  Hoffmann, E. T. A.
    By Henry Brennecke. N. Y. Times. June 25. (15.)

  HOUGHTON, ELIZABETH.
    Katherine Mansfield. Post. June 17. (2: 737.)

  Hudson, W. H.
    Anonymous. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (32: 113.)
    By H. W. Boynton. Post. Feb. 4. (2: 398.)
    By A. Clutton Brock. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 24. (21: 542.)

  Hurst, Fannie.
    By N. P. Dawson. Post. April 15. (2: 579.)

  Huxley, Aldous.
    By Edward Shanks. L. Merc. June. (6: 212.)
    By George Stevens. Post. July 1. (2: 771.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. May 13. (19: 156.)

  Jacob, Max.
    By Pierre Robert. New A. May 18. (31: 32.)

  Jacobsen, Jens Peter.
    By Ben Ray Redman. Nat. (N. Y.) (115: 311.)

  James, Henry.
    Anonymous. Free. Feb. 8. (4: 526.)
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 22, ’21. (20: 849.)
    By Joseph Pennell. Cen. Feb. (103: 543.)
    By Gilbert Seldes. Dial. Oct., ’21. (71: 472.)

  Jammes, Francis.
    By Ben Ray Redman. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)

  Joyce, James.
    By Richard Aldington. Post. March 11. (2: 491.)
    By Djuna Barnes. D. D. May. (3: 249.)
    By Padraic Colum. N. Y. Times. June 11. (10.)

  KAUN, ALEXANDER.
    Leonid Andreyev. N. Rep. June 28. (31: 133.)
    Anton Chekhov. Free. March 1. (4: 592.)
    Vladimir G. Korolenko. Post. March 4. (2: 470.)

  KENDALL, JOHN S.
    Lafcadio Hearn. D. D. June. (3: 313.)

  Kinross, Albert.
    By Hildegarde Hawthorne. N. Y. Times. May 7. (2.)

  Korolenko, Vladimir G.
    By Alexander Kaun. Post. March 4. (2: 470.)
    By Avrahm Yarmolinsky. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 254.)

  KRUTCH, J. W.
    Adeline Adams. Nat. (N. Y.) July 26. (115: 99.)
    Sherwood Anderson. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 23, ’21. (113: 602.)
    Max Beerbohm. Nat. (N. Y.) Oct. 12, ’21. (113: 413.) Post. Nov. 19,
        ’21. (2: 186.)
    I. A. Bunin. Nat. (N. Y.) July 26. (115: 99.)
    Frank Harris. Nat. (N. Y.) July 5. (115: 19.)
    Katherine Mansfield. Nat. (N. Y.) July 26. (115: 99.)

  Larrain, Ines Echeverria de.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  Latorre, Mariano.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  Lawrence, D. H.
    By Henry James Forman. Nat. (N. Y.) (27: 12.)
    By Paul Rosenfeld. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (32: 125.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. June 24. (19: 326.)

  LE GALLIENNE, RICHARD.
    Oscar Wilde. Book. (N. Y.) Oct., ’21. (54: 162.)

  LEWISOHN, LUDWIG.
    Elizabeth Bibesco. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 261.)
    A. E. Coppard. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 261.)
    Virginia Woolf. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 261.)

  Lillo, Baldomero.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  LISLE, GEORGE.
    Robert Louis Stevenson. Corn. Dec., ’21. (706.)

  LITTELL, PHILIP.
    Max Beerbohm. N. Rep. May 17. (30: 347.)

  LITTELL, ROBERT.
    Katherine Mansfield. N. Rep. July 5. (31: 166.)

  London, Jack.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Nov. 3, ’21. (20: 709.)
    By Archibald Henderson. N. Y. Times. April 16. (10.)
    By Lewis Mumford. N. Rep. March 29. (30: 145.)
    By Carl Van Doren. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 260.)

  LOVETT, ROBERT MORSS.
    Sherwood Anderson. Dial. Jan. (72: 79.)
    Sherwood Anderson. N. Rep. Nov. 23, ’21. (28: 383.)
    Hamlin Garland. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (15.)

  LYND, ROBERT.
    Nathaniel Hawthorne. New S. April 22. (19: 68.)

  MACADAM, GEORGE.
    O. Henry. N. Y. Times. Aug. 6. (27: 5.)

  MACCARTHY, DESMOND.
    Honoré de Balzac. New S. Dec. 10, ’21. (18: 288.)
    Leo Nikolaevich Tolstoi. New S. July 15. (19: 417.)

  Machen, Arthur.
    By Hulbert Footner. N. Y. Post. June 17. (2: 736.)
    By Albert Jay Nock. Free. Aug. 2. (5: 502.)
    By Paul Jordan Smith. Wave. June. (35.)

  Malet, Lucas.
    By Louise Maunsell Field. N. Y. Times. July 9. (27: 21.)
    By Charles Leonard Moore. Post. July 8. (2: 794.)

  Mansfield, Katherine.
    By Conrad Aiken. Free. June 21. (5: 357.)
    Anonymous. Nat. (London.) March 25. (30: 949.)
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. March 2. (21: 137.)
    Anonymous. Times. (London.) July 27.
    By Malcolm Cowley. Dial. Aug. (73: 230.)
    By Elizabeth Houghton. Post. June 17. (2: 737.)
    By J. W. Krutch. Nat. (N. Y.) July 26. (115: 99.)
    By Robert Littell. N. Rep. July 5. (31: 166.)
    By Edward Shanks. Queen. March 25. (360.)
    By Rebecca West. New S. March 18. (18: 678.)

  MASSON, THOMAS L.
    George Ade. Book. (N. Y.) Oct., ’21. (54: 116.)

  MATTHEWS, BRANDER.
    American Short Story. N. Y. Times. Sept. 17. (27: 2.)

  Matthews, Brander.
    By Melville H. Cane. Free. May 24. (5: 260.)
    By Walter Prichard Eaton. N. Y. Times. Jan. 8. (11.)

  Maugham, W. Somerset.
    Anonymous. Nat. (London.) Jan. 14. (30: 593.)
    Rebecca West. New S. Nov. 5, ’21. (18: 140.)

  Maupassant, Guy de.
    By Benedetto Croce. L. Merc. May. (6: 61.)
    By T. R. Ybarra. N. Y. Times. Jan. 22. (1.)

  Mauriac, Francois.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. March 9. (21: 152.)

  Melville, Herman.
    By Carl Van Vechten. D. D. Jan. (3: 9.)

  Middleton, Richard.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. July 20. (21: 472.)

  Milanesi, Guido.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 17. (21: 532.)

  MONAHAN, MICHAEL.
    Oscar Wilde. D. D. Nov., ’21. (2: 229.)

  MONTENEGRO, ERNESTO.
    Eduardo Barrios. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Joaquin Diaz-Garces. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Federico Gana. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Ines Echeverria de Larrain. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Mariano Latorre. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Baldomero Lillo. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Pedro Prado. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Fernando Santivan. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)
    Augusto Thomson. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  MOORE, CHARLES LEONARD.
    Gustave Flaubert. Post. Jan. 28. (2: 382.)
    Lucas Malet. Post. July 8. (2: 794.)

  MOORE, GEORGE Q.
    Max Beerbohm. D. D. Jan. (3: 55.)

  MOORE T. STURGE.
    Gustave Flaubert. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 29, ’21. (20: 876.)

  Morand, Paul.
    By J. Middleton Murry. Nat. (London.) April 29. (31: 161.)

  MUIR, EDWIN.
    Sherwood Anderson. Free. June 14. (321.)
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. Free. Sept. 13. (6: 17.)

  MUMFORD, LEWIS.
    Jack London. N. Rep. March 29. (30: 145.)

  MURRY, J. MIDDLETON.
    Ivan Bunin. Nat. (London.) June 24. (31: 444.)
    Anton Chekhov. N. Rep. March 22. (30: 114.)
    Anton Chekhov. Nat. (London.) April 8. (31: 57.)
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. Nat. (London.) Dec. 24. ’21. (80: 505.)
    Gustave Flaubert. Dial. Dec., ’21. (71: 625.)
    Paul Morand. Nat. (London.) April 29. (31: 161.)

  Nerval, Gérard de.
    By Clarkson Crane. Free. Aug. 23. (5: 572.)
    By Ben Ray Redman. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)

  NEVINS, ALLAN.
    Anton Chekhov. Post. Nov. 26, ’21. (2: 200.)

  NEWTON, ALMA.
    Algernon Blackwood. N. Y. Times. April 2. (16.)

  NOCK, ALBERT JAY.
    Sherwood Anderson. Free. Feb. 8. (4: 513.)
    Arthur Machen. Free. Aug. 2. (5: 502.)

  O’Higgins, Harvey.
    By Heywood Brown. Book. (N. Y.) Oct., ’21. (54: 156.)

  OSBOURNE, LLOYD.
    Robert Louis Stevenson. Post. Dec. 24, ’21. (2: 297.)

  PENNELL, JOSEPH.
    Henry James. Cen. Feb. (103: 543.)

  PHELPS, WILLIAM LYON.
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. N. Y. Times. Jan. 15. (8.)

  Pirandello, Luigi.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. April 13. (21: 243.)

  Poe, Edgar Allan.
    By Raymond A. Preston. Post. July 22. (2: 830.)
    By Theodore Stanton. Post. July 22. (2: 830.)

  POWYS, LLEWELYN.
    Thomas Hardy. Dial. March. (72: 286.)

  Prado, Pedro.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  PRESTON, RAYMOND A.
    Edgar Allan Poe. Post. July 22. (2: 830.)

  REDMAN, BEN RAY.
    James Branch Cabell. Post. Dec. 17, ’21. (2: 276.)
    Jens Peter Jacobsen. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)
    Francis Jammes. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)
    Gérard de Nerval. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)
    Arthur Schnitzler. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)

  REID, FORREST.
    Sherwood Anderson. Nat. (London.) July 8. (31: 510.)

  Riesenberg, David W.
    David W. Bone. Post. July 8. (2: 787.)

  ROBERT, PIERRE.
    Max Jacob. New A. May 18. (31: 32.)

  ROLLINS, HYDER E.
    O. Henry. Post. March 18. (2: 505.)
    O. Henry. Post. Jan. 7. (2: 332.)
    O. Henry. Post. June 17. (2: 736.)

  ROSENFELD, PAUL.
    Sherwood Anderson. Dial. Jan. (72: 29.)
    D. H. Lawrence. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (32: 125.)

  Russell, John.
    By Henry Seidel Canby. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 251.)

  RUTLAND, LUCILE.
    Lafcadio Hearn. D. D. Feb. (3: 96.)

  Santivan. Fernando.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  Schnitzler, Arthur.
    By Ben Ray Redman. Nat. (N. Y.) Sept. 27. (115: 311.)

  Schwob, Marcel.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 19. (21: 37.)
    By Lewis Galantière. Free. June 14. (330.)

  SELDES, GILBERT.
    American Short Story. Dial. April. (72: 427.)
    Sherwood Anderson. N. Y. Times. Dec. 4, ’21. (10.)
    Henry James. Dial, Oct., ’21. (71: 472.)

  SHACKLETON, KATHLEEN.
    Algernon Blackwood. John. Sept. 3, ’21. (612.)

  SHANKS, EDWARD.
    Aldous Huxley. L. Merc. June. (6: 212.)
    Katherine Mansfield. Queen. March 25. (360.)
    H. G. Wells. L. Merc. March. (5: 506.)

  Short Story.
    By Vera Gordon. Free. Dec. 14, ’21. (4: 332.)
    By Orlo Williams. Times. (London.) May 3.

  SKINNER, CONSTANCE LINDSAY.
    Hamlin Garland. Post. Dec. 3, ’21. (2: 218.)

  SMERTENKO, JOHAN J.
    American Short Story. Nat. June 28. (114: 779.)
    Konrad Bercovici. Post. Nov. 19, ’21. (2: 183.)

  SMITH, PAUL JORDAN.
    Arthur Machen. Wave. June. (35.)

  Somaré, Enrico.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 24. (21: 544.)

  STANTON, THEODORE.
    Edgar Allan Poe. Post. July 22. (2: 830.)

  STARRETT, VINCENT.
    James Branch Cabell. D. D. Nov., ’21. (2: 203.)

  Stephens, James.
    By Padraic Colum. Dial. Nov., ’21. (71: 601.)

  Sternheim, Carl.
    Anonymous. Nat. (London.) Dec. 17, ’21. (30: 478.)

  STEVENS, GEORGE.
    Aldous Huxley. Post. July 1. (2: 771.)

  Stevenson, Robert Louis.
    By William Harris Arnold. Scr. Jan. (71: 53.)
    By Llewellyn M. Buell. Scr. Feb. (71: 184.)
    By John Freeman. L. Merc. April. (5: 617.)
    By George Lisle. Corn. Dec., ’21. (706.)
    By Lloyd Osbourne. Post. Dec. 24, ’21. (2: 297.)
    By Henry Van Dyke. Scr. Aug. (72: 161.)

  STRUNSKY, MANYA GORDON.
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. Post. March 18. (2: 505.)

  SULVERITSKY, L. A.
    Anton Chekhov. N. Rep. May 10. (30: 312.)

  Tarkington, Booth.
    Anonymous. Book. (N. Y.) Nov., ’21. (54: 218.)
    Anonymous. N. Y. Times. June 25. (22.)

  Thomson, Augusto.
    By Ernesto Montenegro. Post. Dec. 10, ’21. (2: 259.)

  TOLSTOI, COUNTESS SOPHIE.
    Leo Nikolaevich Tolstoi. Free. May 17, 31; June 14, 28; July 12,
        26. (5: 229, 277, 325, 372, 421, 467.)

  Tolstoi, Leo Nikolaevich.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. July 13. (21: 456.)
    By Desmond MacCarthy. New S. July 15. (19: 417.)
    By Countess Sophie Tolstoi. Free. May 17, 31; June 14, 28; July
        12, 26. (5: 229, 277, 325, 372, 421, 467.)
    By T. R. Ybarra. N. Y. Times. June 4. (5.)

  TOMLINSON, H. M.
    Bret Harte. Nat. (London.) March 11. (30: 861.)

  Toulet, Paul Jean.
    By Montgomery Belgion. Free. Jan. 18. (4: 453.)

  TREND, J. B.
    Pio Baroja. Nat. (London.) April 1. (31: 26.)
    Miguel de Unamuno. Nat. (London.) Nov. 19, ’21. (30: 316.)

  Turgenev, Ivan.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 8, ’21. (20: 813.)

  TYNAN, JOSEPH L.
    Oscar Wilde. Free. July 5. (5: 395.)

  Unamuno, Miguel de.
    By J. B. Trend. Nat. (London.) Nov. 19, ’21. (30: 316.)

  VAN DOREN, CARL.
    Sherwood Anderson. Nat. (N. Y.) Oct. 12, ’21. (113: 407.)
    James Branch Cabell. Nat. (N. Y.) Dec. 7, ’21. (113: 664.)
    Hamlin Garland. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 23, ’21. (113: 596.)
    O. Henry. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 260.)
    Joseph Hergesheimer. Nat. (N. Y.) Dec. 7, ’21. (113: 664.)
    Jack London. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 260.)

  VAN DYKE, HENRY.
    Robert Louis Stevenson. Scr. Aug. (72: 161.)

  VAN VECHTEN, CARL.
    Henry Blake Fuller. D. D. June. (3: 289.)
    Herman Melville. D. D. Jan. (3: 9.)

  Von Heidenstam, Verner.
    Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. April 20. (21: 257.)

  Walpole, Hugh.
    Anonymous. Nat. (N. Y.) Nov. 30, ’21. (113: 625.)
    By Robert Herrick. Post. Oct. 8, ’21. (2: 65.)

  Wells, H. G.
    By Edward Shanks. L. Merc. March. (5: 506.)

  WEST, REBECCA.
    Sherwood Anderson. New S. Feb. 18. (18: 564.)
    Sherwood Anderson. New S. July 22. (19: 443.)
    Elizabeth Bibesco. New S. March 4. (18: 621.)
    James Branch Cabell. New S. May 13. (19: 156.)
    Aldous Huxley. New S. May 13. (19: 156.)
    D. H. Lawrence. New S. June 24. (19: 326.)
    Katherine Mansfield. New S. March 18. (18: 678.)
    W. Somerset Maugham. New S. Nov. 5, ’21. (18: 140.)

  WHIPPLE, T. K.
    Sherwood Anderson. Post. March 11. (2: 481.)

  Wilde, Oscar.
    By Raymond M. Alden. Post. Dec. 3, ’21. (2: 228.)
    By Richard Le Gallienne. Book. (N. Y.) Oct., ’21. (54: 162.)
    By Michael Monahan. D. D. Nov., ’21. (2: 229.)
    By Joseph L. Tynan. Free. July 5. (5: 395.)

  Willcocks, M. P.
    Anton Chekhov. Eng. R. March. (34: 207.)

  WILLIAMS, ORLO.
    Short Stories. Times. (London.) May 3.

  Woolf, Virginia.
    By Ludwig Lewisohn. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 261.)

  WRIGHT, CUTHBERT.
    James Branch Cabell. Free. Sept. 6. (5: 621.)

  YARMOLINSKY, AVRAHM.
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. N. Rep. Nov. 30, ’21. (29: 15.)
    Fyodor Dostoevsky. N. Rep. Sept. 27. (32: 115.)
    Vladimir Korolenko. Nat. (N. Y.) March 1. (114: 254.)

  YBARRA, T. R.
    Guy de Maupassant. N. Y. Times. Jan. 22. (1.)
    Leo Tolstoy. N. Y. Times. June 4. (1.)

  YUST, WALTER.
    Sherwood Anderson. D. D. March. (3: 161.)

  ZEITLIN, JACOB.
    Anton Chekhov. Nat. (N. Y.) April 5. (114: 400.)




                   INDEX OF SHORT STORIES IN BOOKS

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922

_The following abbreviations are used in the index_:

  _Adams_             Adams. Amouretta Landscape.
  _Aleichem_          Aleichem. Jewish Children.
  _Anderson B._       Anderson. Triumph of the Egg.
  _Andrews C._        Andrews. His Soul Goes Marching On.
  _Arlen_             Arlen. Romantic Lady.
  _Barrington_        Barrington. “Ladies!”
  _Beck_              Beck. Ninth Vibration.
  _Beresford_         Beresford. Signs and Wonders.
  _Bibesco_           Bibesco. I Have Only Myself to Blame.
  _Blackwood A._      Blackwood. Wolves of God.
  _Bone_              Bone. “Broken Stowage.”
  _Brazil_            Goldberg. Brazilian Tales.
  _Cabell B._         Cabell. Line of Love.
  _Cabell C._         Cabell. Chivalry.
  _Cabell D._         Cabell. Gallantry.
  _Chekhov H._        Chekhov. Cook’s Wedding.
  _Clark_             Clark. Manual of the Short Story Art.
  _Cobb D._           Cobb. Sundry Accounts.
  _Connolly B._       Connolly. Tide Rips.
  _Corkery_           Corkery. Hounds of Banba.
  _Crane A._          Crane. Men, Women and Boats.
  _Drinkwater_        Drinkwater. Cotswold Characters.
  _Everyman_          English Short Stories. (Everyman’s Library.)
  _Frank_             Frank. City Block.
  _Gorky C._          Gorky. Through Russia.
  _Henry C._          Henry. Selected Stories from O. Henry.
  _Howard_            Howard. Happy Rascals.
  _Hurst C._          Hurst. Vertical City.
  _Huxley_            Huxley. Mortal Coils.
  _Kinross_           Kinross. Truth About Vignolles.
  _Law B._            Law. Modern Essays and Stories.
  _Lyons_             Lyons. Market Bundle.
  _Machen_            Machen. House of Souls.
  _Macklin_           Macklin. Twenty-Nine Tales from the French.
  _McSpadden D._      McSpadden. Famous Mystery Stories.
  _Mansfield B._      Mansfield. Garden Party, and Other Stories.
  _Matthews_          Matthews. Vignettes of Manhattan: Outlines In
                        Local Color.
  _Morrison_          Morrison. Tales of Mean Streets.
  _Nicholson_         Nicholson. Best Laid Schemes.
  _O’Brien E._        O’Brien. Best Short Stories of 1921.
  _Prize C._          Prize. O. Henry Memorial Prize Stories of 1921.
  _Ramsay_            Ramsay. Short Stories of America.
  _Tarbell_           Tarbell. He Knew Lincoln.
  _Twain_             Twain. Mysterious Stranger.
  _Underwood B._      Underwood. Famous Stories from Foreign Countries.
  _Woolf_             Woolf. Monday or Tuesday.


                         I. AMERICAN AUTHORS

  ADAMS, ADELINE.
    Amouretta Landscape. Adams. 1.
    Artist’s Birthday. Adams. 228.
    Bits of Clay. Adams. 45.
    “C’est Une Taupe.” Adams. 96.
    Face Called Forgiveness. Adams. 198.
    Marquis Goes Donkey-Riding. Adams. 168.
    Speaking of Angels. Adams. 141.
    Their Appointed Rounds. Adams. 105.
    Young Lady In Blue. Adams. 57.

  ALLEN, MARYLAND. (MRS. EDWARD TYSON ALLEN.)
    Urge. Prize C. 45.

  AMES, JOSEPH B.
    Lion and the Mouse. Law B. 253.

  ANDERSON, SHERWOOD. (1876- .) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    Brothers. Anderson B. 102; O’Brien E. 3.
    Door of the Trap. Anderson B. 116.
    Dumb Man. Anderson B. 3.
    Egg. Anderson B. 46.
    I Want to Know Why. Anderson B. 5.
    Man In the Brown Coat. Anderson B. 97.
    Man With the Trumpet. Anderson B. 268.
    Motherhood. Anderson B. 168.
    New Englander. Anderson B. 134.
    Other Woman. Anderson B. 33.
    Out of Nowhere Into Nothing. Anderson B. 171.
    Seeds. Anderson B. 21.
    Senility. Anderson B. 93.
    Unlighted Lamps. Anderson B. 64.
    War. Anderson B. 161.

  ANDREWS, MARY RAYMOND SHIPMAN. (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    His Soul Goes Marching On. Andrews C.

  ANONYMOUS.
    The Pipe. McSpadden D. 110.

  ATHERTON, GERTRUDE. (1857- .)
    Pearls of Loreto. Ramsay. 161.

  BEER, THOMAS. (1889- .) (_See 1920._)
    Mummery. Prize C. 66.

  BENET, WILLIAM ROSE. (1886- .)
    Chinaman’s Head. Law B. 230.

  BERCOVICI, KONRAD. (1882- .) (_See 1921._)
    Fanutza. O’Brien, E. 13.

  BURT, MAXWELL STRUTHERS. (1882- .) (_See 1921._) (_See 1918, 1920,
        1921._)
    Experiment. O’Brien E. 28.

  CABELL, JAMES BRANCH. (1879- .) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    Actors All. Cabell D. 111.
    Adhelmar at Puysange. Cabell B. 35.
    April’s Message. Cabell D. 139.
    Castle of Content. Cabell B. 173.
    Casual Honeymoon. Cabell D. 63.
    Conspiracy of Armaye. Cabell B. 145.
    Ducal Audience. Cabell D. 303.
    Heart of Gold. Cabell D. 247.
    In Necessity’s Mortar. Cabell B. 113.
    In the Second of April. Cabell D. 171.
    In Ursula’s Garden. Cabell B. 203.
    Love at Martinmas. Cabell D. 39.
    Love-Letters of Falstaff. Cabell B. 63.
    Porcelain Cups. Cabell B. 229.
    Rhyme to Porringer. Cabell D. 91.
    Scapegoats. Cabell D. 275.
    Semper-Idem. Cabell B. 257.
    Simon’s Hour. Cabell D. 3.
    Story of the Choices. Cabell C. 99.
    Story of the Fox-Brush. Cabell C. 247.
    Story of the Heritage. Cabell C. 185.
    Story of the Housewife. Cabell C. 127.
    Story of the Navarrese. Cabell C. 221.
    Story of the Rat-Trap. Cabell C. 73.
    Story of the Satraps. Cabell C. 159.
    Story of the Scabbard. Cabell C. 195.
    Story of the Sestina. Cabell C. 15.
    Story of the Tenson. Cabell C. 45.
    “Sweet Adelais.” Cabell B. 87.
    Wedding Jest. Cabell B. 9.

  CATHERWOOD, MARY HARTWELL.
    Windigo. Ramsay. 191.

  CHITTENDEN, GERALD.
    Victim of His Vision. Prize C. 84.

  CHOPIN, KATE. (1851-1904.)
    At the ’Cadian Ball. Ramsay. 149.

  COBB, IRVIN SHREWSBURY. (1876- .) (_See 1918, 1920 and 1921._)
    Alas, the Poor Whiffletit. Cobb D. 341.
    Cater-Cornered Sex. Cobb D. 57.
    Darkness. Cobb D. 11. O’Brien E. 52.
    It Could Happen Again Tomorrow. Cobb D. 157.
    Mr. Lobel’s Apoplexy. Cobb D. 300.
    Plentiful Valley. Cobb D. 392.
    Ravelin’ Wolf. Cobb D. 212.
    Short Natural History. Cobb D. 104.
    Tale of Wet Days. Cobb D. 424.
    “Worth 10,000.” Cobb D. 246.

  COLCORD, LINCOLN. (ROSS.) (1883- .) (_See 1921._)
    An Instrument of the Gods. O’Brien E. 82.

  CONNOLLY, JAMES BRENDAN. (1868- .) (_See 1920._)
    Beejum’s Progress. Connolly B. 128.
    His Three Fair Wishes. Connolly B. 3.
    Munition Ship. Connolly B. 151.
    Not Down In the Log. Connolly B. 75.
    Port In France. Connolly B. 178.
    Rakish Brigantine. Connolly B. 200.
    Rolling on to Athens. Connolly B. 219.
    Sugar Ship. Connolly B. 101.
    What Price for Fish? Connolly B. 48.

  COOPER, COURTNEY RYLEY. (1886-) _and_ CREAGAN, LEO F.
    Martin Gerrity Gets Even. Prize C. 113.
    “Craddock, Charles Egbert.” (Murfee, Mary Noailles.) (1850-1922.)
    Taking the Blue Ribbon at the County Fair. Ramsay. 42.

  CRAWFORD, F. MARION. (1854-1909.)
    Upper Berth. McSpadden D. 139.

  CREAGAN, LEO F. (_See_ COOPER, COURTNEY RYLEY, _and_ CREAGAN, LEO F.)

  CRAM, MILDRED. (1889- .)
    Stranger Things. Prize C. 127.

  CRANE, STEPHEN. (1870-1900.)
    Dark-Brown Dog. Crane A. 149.
    Desertion. Crane A. 141.
    Duel That Was Not Fought. Crane A. 129.
    End of the Battle. Crane A. 87.
    Episode of War. Crane A. 105.
    Experiment In Misery. Crane A. 113.
    Four Men In a Cave. Crane A. 183.
    Mesmeric Mountain. Crane A. 193.
    Open Boat. Crane A. 23.
    Pace of Youth. Crane A. 161.
    Reluctant Voyagers. Crane A. 59.
    Snake. Crane A. 201.
    Tent In Agony. Crane A. 177.
    Upturned Face. Crane A. 97.

  DERIEUX, SAMUEL ARTHUR. (1881-1922.) (_See 1920._)
    Comet. Prize C. 156.
    Durand, Ralph.
    Hi-Brasil. Law B. 300.

  FERBER, EDNA. (1887- .) (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    “Gay Old Dog.” Clark. 124.

  FINGER, CHARLES J. (1871- .) (_See 1921._)
    Lizard God. O’Brien E. 109.

  FRANK, WALDO. (1890- .) (_See 1921._)
    Accolade. Frank. 13.
    Altar of the World. Frank. 219.
    Beginning. Frank. 301.
    Candles. Frank. 175.
    Charity. Frank. 199.
    Ecclesia Sanctæ Teresæ. Frank. 283.
    Faith. Frank. 77.
    Hope. Frank. 167.
    John the Baptist. Frank. 137.
    Journey’s End. Frank. 243.
    Murder. Frank. 29.
    Table. Frank. 59.
    Under the Dome: _aleph._ O’Brien E. 130. Frank. 99.
    Under the Dome: _tan_ Frank. 119.

  FREEMAN, MARY E. WILKINS. (1862- .) (_See 1918, 1920, and 1921._)
    On the Walpole Road. Ramsay. 136.

  GARLAND, HAMLIN. (1860- .) (_See 1918, and 1920._)
    Among the Corn-Rows. Ramsay. 88.

  GEROULD, KATHARINE FULLERTON. (1879- .) (_See 1918 and 1921._)
    French Eva. O’Brien E. 142.

  GLASGOW, ELLEN. (ANDERSON GHOLSON.) (1874- .) (_See 1921._)
    Past. O’Brien E. 168.

  GLASPELL, SUSAN (KEATING). (MRS. GEORGE CRAM COOK.) (1882- .) (_See
        1920 and 1921._)
    His Smile. O’Brien E. 194.

  GREEN, ANNA KATHARINE. (ANNA KATHARINE GREEN ROHLFS.) (1846- .) (_See
        1921._)
    Thief. McSpadden D. 266.

  HALLET, RICHARD MATTHEWS. (1887- .) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    Harbor Master. O’Brien E. 207.

  HAMILTON, GERTRUDE BROOKE.
    Spurious One. Clark. 109.

  HART, FRANCES NOYES. (1890- .) (_See 1921._)
    Green Gardens. O’Brien E. 240.

  HARTE, FRANCIS BRET. (1839-1902.) (_See 1918, 1920, and 1921._)
    Luck of Roaring Camp. Ramsay. 29.

  HEERMANN, ELIZABETH ALEXANDER.
    Fifty-Two Weeks for Florette. Prize C. 169.

  “HENRY, O.” (WILLIAM SYDNEY PORTER.) (1862-1910.) (_See 1918, 1920
        and 1921._)
    Brief Début of Tildy. Henry C. 50.
    Caballero’s Way. Henry C. 182.
    Cop and the Anthem. Henry C. 103; Clark. 157.
    Cosmopolite In a Café. Henry C. 118.
    Duplicity of Hargraves. Henry C. 1.
    Furnished Room. Henry C. 83.
    Gift of the Magi. Henry C. 149.
    Handbook of Hymen. Henry C. 156.
    Last Leaf. Henry C. 141.
    Let Me Feel Your Pulse. Henry C. 242.
    Lickpenny Lover. Henry C. 57.
    Makes the Whole World Kin. Henry C. 91.
    Making of a New Yorker. Ramsay. 273. Henry C. 111.
    Manmon and the Archer. Henry C. 125.
    Municipal Report. Henry C. 224. Ramsay 280.
    Pendulum. Henry C. 64.
    Retrieved Reformation. Henry C. 41.
    Roads of Destiny. Henry C. 16.
    Roads We Take. Henry C. 77.
    “Rose of Dixie.” Henry C. 211.
    Squaring the Circle. Henry C. 97.
    Transients In Arcadia. Henry C. 70.
    Trimmed Lamp. Henry C. 169.
    Unfinished Story. Henry C. 133.
    World and the Door. Henry C. 196.

  HURST, FANNIE. (1889- .) (_See 1918, 1920 and 1921._)
    Back Pay. Hurst C. 57.
    Guilty. Hurst C. 179.
    Roulette. Hurst C. 219.
    She Walks In Beauty. Hurst C. 1; O’Brien E., 253.
    Smudge. Hurst C. 143.
    Vertical City. Hurst C. 107.

  IRVING, WASHINGTON. (1783-1859). (_See 1918._)
    Adelantado of the Seven Cities. McSpadden D. 86.

  JACKSON, CHARLES TENNEY. (1874- .)
    Man Who Cursed the Lilies. Prize C. 29.

  KERR, SOPHIE. (1880- .)
    Wild Earth. Prize C. 193.

  KNIFFIN, HARRY ANABLE.
    Tribute. Prize C. 229.

  KOMROFF, MANUEL. (_See 1921._)
    Little Master of the Sky. O’Brien E. 288.

  LEWIS, ORLANDO FAULKLAND. (1873- .)
    Get-Away. Prize C. 234.

  LINN, JAMES WEBER. (1876- .)
    Girl at Duke’s. Ramsay. 213.

  LONDON, JACK. (1876-1916.) (_See 1918, 1920 and 1921._)
    Love of Life. Ramsay. 231.

  LONGSTRETH, T. MORRIS.
    Prunier Tells a Story. Law B. 148.

  MARSHALL, EDISON. (1894- .) (_See 1920._)
    Heart of Little Shikara. Prize C. 1.

  MARTIN, HELEN R. (1868- .)
    Ellie’s Furnishing. Ramsay. 105.

  MATTHEWS, JAMES BRANDER. (1852- .) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    At a Private View. Matthews. 21.
    Before the Break of Day. Matthews. 73.
    Candle In the Plate. Matthews. 323.
    Decoration-Day Revery. Matthews. 45.
    Glimpse of the Under World. Matthews. 189.
    Interview with Miss Marlenspuyk. Matthews. 161.
    In the Little Church Down the Street. Matthews. 3.
    In Search of Local Color. Matthews. 57.
    In the Midst of Life. Matthews. 145.
    In the Watches of the Night. Matthews. 357.
    Irrepressible Conflict. Matthews. 263.
    Letter of Farewell. Matthews. 175.
    Men and Women and Horses. Matthews. 337.
    Midsummer-Midnight. Matthews. 87.
    Rehearsal of the New Play. Matthews. 295.
    Solo Orchestra. Matthews. 277.
    Speech of the Evening. Mathews. 117.
    Spring Flood In Broadway. Matthews. 225.
    Spring In a Side Street. Matthews. 35.
    Thanksgiving-Day Dinner. Matthews. 131.
    Twenty-Ninth of February. Matthews. 11.
    Vigil of McDowell Sutro. Matthews. 241.
    Vista In Central Park. Matthews. 107.
    Wall Street Wooing. Matthews. 205.

  MOTT, FRANK LUTHER. (_See 1921._)
    Man With the Good Face. O’Brien E. 300.

  MUMFORD, ETHEL WATTS. (1878- .)
    “Aurore.” Prize C. 243.

  NICHOLSON, MEREDITH. (1866- .) (_See 1918._)
    Arabella’s House Party. Nicholson. 115.
    Campbells Are Coming. Nicholson. 74.
    Girl With the Red Feather. Nicholson. 34.
    Susiness of Susan. Nicholson. 3.
    Third Man. Nicholson. 167.
    Wrong Number. Nicholson. 197.

  O’BRIEN, FITZ-JAMES. (1828-1862.) (_See 1918 and 1921._)
    Diamond Lens. McSpadden D. 172.

  O’SULLIVAN, VINCENT. (1872- .) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    Master of Fallen Years. O’Brien E. 321.

  ROBBINS, LEONARD H. (1877- .)
    Mr. Downey Sits Down. Prize C. 258.

  ROBERTS, CHARLES G. D. (1860- .)
    Do Seek Their Meat from God. Everyman. 278.

  SLOSSON, ANNIE TRUMBULL. (1838- .)
    Local Colorist. Ramsay. 301.

  SMITH, FRANCIS HOPKINSON. (1838-1915.)
    Arrival of a True Southern Lady. Ramsay. 123.

  STEELE, WILBUR DANIEL. (1886- .) (_See 1918, 1920 and 1921._)
    Dark Hour. Clark. 184.
    Marriage in Kairwan. Prize C. 273.
    Shame Dance. O’Brien E. 337.

  SULLIVAN, ALAN. (1868- .)
    Essence of a Man. Everyman. 283.

  TARBELL, IDA M. (1857- .)
    He Knew Lincoln. Tarbell.

  THAYER, HARRIET MAXON. (1889- .) (_See 1921._)
    Kindred. O’Brien E. 362.

  THOMPSON, MAURICE.
    Ben and Judas. Ramsay. 66.

  TOWNE, CHARLES HANSON. (1877- .) (_See 1921._)
    Shelby. O’Brien E. 386.

  TUPPER, TRISTRAM.
    Grit. Prize C. 293.

  “TWAIN, MARK.” (SAMUEL LANGHORNE CLEMENS.) (1835-1910.)
    Extract from Captain Stormfield’s Visit to Heaven. Twain. 223.
    Fable. Twain. 281.
    Horse’s Tale. Twain. 147.
    Hunting the Deceitful Turkey. Twain. 307.
    McWilliamses and the Burglar Alarm. Twain. 315.
    My Platonic Sweetheart. Twain. 287.
    Mysterious Stranger. Twain. 3.

  VORSE, MARY (MARVIN) HEATON. (MARY HEATON VORSE O’BRIEN MINOR.) (_See
        1920 and 1921._)
    Wallow of the Sea. O’Brien E. 401.

  WALKER, BEATRICE.
    Greater Love Hath No Man. Clark. 169.

  WAYNE, ROBERTA.
    Getting up to Date. Law B. 239.

  WHITE, WILLIAM ALLEN. (1868- .)
    By the Rod of His Wrath. Ramsay. 257.


                    II. ENGLISH AND IRISH AUTHORS

  ARLEN, MICHAEL.
    Consuelo. Arlen. 101.
    Fay Richmond. Arlen. 43.
    Romance of Iris Poole. Arlen. 131.
    Romantic Lady. Arlen. 3.

  BARHAM, RICHARD HARRIS. (1788-1845.)
    Spectre of Tappington. McSpadden D. 1.

  BARLOW, JANE. (1860- .)
    Mrs. Martin’s Company. Everyman. 208.

  BARRINGTON, EMILIE ISABEL WILSON. (MRS. RUSSELL BARRINGTON.)
    Bluestocking at Court. Barrington. 189.
    Darcy’s of Rosing. Barrington. 235.
    Diurnal of Mrs. Elizabeth Repys. Barrington. 1.
    Golden Vanity. Barrington. 91.
    My Lady Mary. Barrington. 57.
    Mystery of Stella. Barrington. 23.
    Walpole Beauty. Barrington. 159.

  BECK, L. ADAMS.
    Building of the Taj Mahal. Beck. 257.
    Fire of Beauty. Beck. 227.
    Hatred of the Queen. Beck. 191.
    “How Great Is the Glory of Kwarmon!” Beck. 273.
    Incomparable Lady. Beck. 173.
    Interpreter. Beck. 73.
    Ninth Vibration. Beck. 3.
    “Round-Faced Beauty.” Beck. 293.

  BERESFORD, JOHN DAVYS. (1873- .)
    Appearance of Man. Beresford. 8.
    As the Crow Flies. Beresford. 96.
    Barrage. Beresford. 38.
    Barrier. Beresford. 50.
    Cage. Beresford. 16.
    Convert. Beresford. 54.
    Difference of Temperament. Beresford. 86.
    Enlargement. Beresford. 20.
    Hidden Beast. Beresford. 34.
    Introvert. Beresford. 44.
    Miracle. Beresford. 74.
    Negligible Experiment. Beresford. 68.
    Night of Creation. Beresford. 102.
    Perfect Smile. Beresford. 26.
    Reference Wanted. Beresford. 92.
    Signs and Wonders. Beresford. 12.
    Young Strickland’s Career. Beresford. 80.

  BIBESCO, ELIZABETH.
    An Ordinary Man. Bibesco. 39.
    As It Was In the Beginning. Bibesco. 109.
    Ball. Bibesco. 146.
    Cyclamen. Bibesco. 51.
    Dream. Bibesco. 57.
    Farewell. Bibesco. 61.
    Fragment of a Correspondence. Bibesco. 153.
    Gesture. Bibesco. 46.
    I Have Only Myself to Blame. Bibesco. 11.
    Old Story. Bibesco. 112.
    Pilgrimage. Bibesco. 124.
    Successor. Bibesco. 94.
    Three Love Letters. Bibesco. 86.
    Tomorrow. Bibesco. 24.
    Tout Comprendre. Bibesco. 67.
    “Web.” Bibesco. 31.

  BLACKWOOD, ALGERNON (1869- .) (_See 1920 and 1921_) _and_ WILSON,
        WILFRED.
    Call. Blackwood A. 137.
    Chinese Magic. Blackwood A. 27.
    Confession. Blackwood A. 237.
    Decoy. Blackwood A. 169.
    Egyptian Sorcery. Blackwood A. 151.
    Empty Sleeve. Blackwood A. 211.
    First Hate. Blackwood A. 74.
    Lane That Ran East and West. Blackwood A. 259.
    Man Who Found Out. Blackwood A. 192.
    Running Wolf. Blackwood A. 52. Law B. 55.
    Tarn of Sacrifice. Blackwood A. 86.
    Valley of the Beasts. Blackwood A. 113.
    “Vengeance Is Mine.” Blackwood A. 279.
    Wireless Confusion. Blackwood A. 230.
    Wolves of God. Blackwood A. 1.

  BONE, DAVID WILLIAM. (1874- .)
    Errors of Judgment.
    Merchants’ Cup.
    “Real” Cashmiri Shawl.

  CANTON, WILLIAM. (1845- .)
    Song of the Minister. Everyman. 258.

  CORKERY, DANIEL.
    Aherns. Corkery. 105.
    Bye-Product. Corkery. 169.
    Colonel MacGillicuddy Goes Home. Corkery. 125.
    Cowards. Corkery. 55.
    Ember. Corkery. 11.
    On the Heights. Corkery. 37.
    Price. Corkery. 197.
    Seamas. Corkery. 71.
    Unfinished Symphony. 153.

  CUNNINGHAM, ALLAN. (1785-1842.)
    Haunted Ships. Everyman. 114.

  DEFOE, DANIEL. (1659-1731.) (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    In Defence of His Right. Everyman. 54.

  DE LA MARE, WALTER. (1873- .)
    Creatures. Everyman. 311.

  DELONEY, THOMAS. (1543-1600.)
    Sir Simon Eyer. Everyman. 38.

  DEQUINCEY, THOMAS. (1785-1859.)
    Levana and Our Ladies of Sorrow. Everyman. 131.
    Savannah-La-Mar. Everyman. 129.

  DICKENS, CHARLES. (1812-1870.) (_See 1918 and 1921._)
    Old Man’s Tale about the Queer Client. Everyman. 184.

  DRINKWATER, JOHN. (1882- .)
    Joe Pentifer and Son. Drinkwater. 47.
    Pony, the Footballer. Drinkwater. 35.
    Rufus Clay, the Foreigner. Drinkwater. 27.
    Simon Rod, the Fisherman. Drinkwater. 19.
    Thesiger Crowne, the Mason. Drinkwater. 11.

  GALSWORTHY, JOHN. (1867- .) (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    Spindleberries. Everyman. 360.

  GASKELL, MRS. ELIZABETH STEVENSON. (1810-1865.) (_See 1918._)
    Half-Brothers. Everyman. 220.

  GOLDSMITH, OLIVER. (1728-1774.)
    Disabled Soldier. Everyman. 96.

  GOVE, MRS. CATHERINE GRACE FRANCES (MOODY). (1799-1861.)
    Dorathea. Everyman. 171.

  HARDY, THOMAS. (1840- .) (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    Three Strangers. Everyman. 339.

  HAWKSWORTH, JOHN. (1715-1773.)
    Story of Melissa. Everyman. 84.

  “HOPE, ANTHONY.” (ANTHONY HOPE HAWKINS.) (1863- .)
    House Opposite. Clark. 33.
    Prince Consort. Everyman. 332.

  HOWARD, FRANCIS MORTON.
    End of a Love Affair. Howard. 100.
    End of a Perfect Day. Howard. 219.
    In a Good Cause. Howard. 27.
    Man Whom Nobody Loved. Howard. 124.
    Matter of Crafts. Howard. 1.
    Reverse of the Medal. Howard. 58.
    Rival Queens. Howard. 172.
    Rough Justice. Howard. 196.
    Solution of a Problem. Howard. 79.
    Violin Performance. Howard. 149.

  HUDSON, W. H. (-1922.) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    Story of a Piebald Horse. Everyman. 302.

  HUXLEY, ALDOUS.
    Gioconda Smile.
    Green Tunnels.
    Nuns at Luncheon.
    Tillotson Banquet.

  KINROSS, ALBERT. (1870- .)
    Behind the Lines. Kinross. 255.
    Eve Damer. Kinross. 167.
    Forbidden Fruit. Kinross. 59.
    Honest Living. Kinross. 113.
    Profiteer. Kinross. 293.
    Truth about Vignolles. Kinross. 3.

  LEE, CHARLES.
    Mr. Sampson. Everyman. 262.

  LYONS, A. NEIL. (1880- .)
    Absentee. Lyons. 146.
    Big Red Blot. Lyons. 34.
    Brotherhood. Lyons. 138.
    Brown Girl Spoils the Picture. Lyons. 9.
    Brown Milk. Lyons. 59.
    Cony Pit Corner. Lyons. 261.
    Degenerate. Lyons. 314.
    Fortunate Boots. Lyons. 102.
    Frights. Lyons. 174.
    German from Perhaps. 109.
    Granfer Hallenden’s Sunday. Lyons. 273.
    Guinea. Lyons. 27.
    His Majesty’s Cure. Lyons. 235.
    Houp La! Lyons. 295.
    Jim Jam. Lyons. 218.
    Joke for a Horse. Lyons. 87.
    Just Ginger. Lyons. 285.
    Laughing Soldier. Lyons. 204.
    Lucy’s Holiday. Lyons. 155.
    Man in the Grey Hat. Lyons. 132.
    Mrs. Pearmint’s Auction Sale. Lyons. 43.
    Mr. Ap Elwes. Lyons. 191.
    Mr. Rummery’s Celebration. Lyons. 303.
    Naval Wife. Lyons. 278.
    Pair of Nut-Crackers. Lyons. 250.
    Parafark. Lyons. 179.
    Persuasion. Lyons. 163.
    Picture. Lyons. 257.
    Poor Old Ambrose. Lyons. 51.
    Private Jupp’s Mission. Lyons. 81.
    Representing the Platoon. Lyons. 67.
    St. Winefride’s Shrine. Lyons. 116.
    Strawberries and Cream. Lyons. 183.
    Stuck to the Wire. Lyons. 94.
    Tale of a Comet. Lyons. 242.
    Terrorist. Lyons. 19.
    Tibsey. Lyons. 266.
    Three-Pun-Ten. Lyons. 210.
    Waggoner’s Dream. Lyons. 125.
    Zenobia. Lyons. 167.

  M’GOVAN, JAMES.
    Veiled Portrait. Everyman. 246.

  MACHEN, ARTHUR. (1863- .) (_See 1921._)
    Fragment of Life. Machen. 1.
    Great God Pan. Machen. 167.
    Inmost Light. Machen. 245.
    White People. Machen. 111.

  MANSFIELD, KATHERINE. (MRS. J. MIDDLETON MURRY.) (_See 1921._)
    At the Bay. Mansfield B. 1.
    Bank Holiday. Mansfield B. 231.
    Daughters of the Late Colonel. Mansfield B. 83.
    Garden Party. Mansfield B. 59.
    Her First Ball. Mansfield B. 190.
    Ideal Family. Mansfield B. 231.
    Lady’s-Maid. Mansfield B. 248.
    Life of Ma Parker. Mansfield B. 140.
    Marriage à la Mode. Mansfield B. 151.
    Miss Brill. Mansfield B. 182.
    Mr. and Mrs. Dore. Mansfield B. 116.
    Singing Lesson. Mansfield B. 201.
    Stranger. Mansfield B. 211.
    Voyage. Mansfield B. 168.
    Young Girl. Mansfield B. 130.

  MITFORD, MARY RUSSELL. (1787-1855.)
    Freshwater Fisherman. Everyman. 137.

  MORRISON, ARTHUR. (1863- .) (_See 1918._)
    All That Messuage. Morrison. 224.
    Behind the Shade. Morrison. 77.
    Conversion. Morrison. 207.
    In Business. Morrison. 113.
    Lizerunt. Morrison. 1.
    On the Stairs. Morrison. 154.
    Poor Stick. Morrison. 195.
    Red Cow Group. Morrison. 130.
    Squire Napper. Morrison. 164.
    That Brute Simmons. Morrison. 61.
    Three Rounds. Morrison. 91.
    To Bow Bridge. Morrison. 51.
    Without Visible Means. Morrison. 33.

  QUILLER-COUCH, SIR ARTHUR THOMAS. (1863- .) (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    Pair of Hands. Everyman. 290.

  RHYS, ERNEST. (1859- .)
    Green Knight. Everyman. 1.

  RICH, BARNABY.
    Apolonius and Silla. Everyman. 20.

  ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL. (1828-1882.)
    Hand and Soul. Everyman. 195.

  SCOTT, SIR WALTER. (1771-1832.) (_See 1918._)
    Tapestried Chamber. Everyman. 101.

  “SPECTATOR, THE.”
    Story of an Heir. Everyman. 64.

  STEELE, RICHARD. (1672-1729.)
    Wedding of Jenny Distaff. Everyman. 68.

  STERNE, LAWRENCE. (1713-1768.)
    Le Fevre. Everyman. 72.
    Maria. Everyman. 79.

  STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS. (1850-1894.) (_See 1918, 1920 and 1921._)
    Markheim. Everyman. 230.

  STRICKLAND, AGNES.
    Love Quarrel. Everyman. 153.

  WALPOLE, HUGH SEYMOUR. (1884- .) (_See 1920 and 1921._)
    Bachelors. Everyman. 321.

  WILSON, JOHN. (“CHRISTOPHER NORTH.”) (1785-1854.)
    Grizel Cochrane. Everyman. 178.

  WILSON, WILFRED. (_See_ BLACKWOOD, ALGERNON _and_ WILSON, WILFRED.)

  WOOLF, VIRGINIA.
    Haunted House. Woolf. 3.
    Kew Gardens. Woolf. 83.
    Society. Woolf. 9.
    String Quartet. Woolf. 71.
    Unwritten Novel. Woolf. 45.


                          III. TRANSLATIONS

  AHARONEAN, AWETIS. (1886- .) (_Armenian._)
    Chai. Underwood. 41.
    In Prison. Underwood B. 53.

  ALBUQUERQUE, JOSE MEDEIROS E. (_Portuguese._)
    Vengeance of Felix. Brazil. 107.

  “ALEICHEM, SHALOM.” (SHALOM RABINOVITZ.) (1859-1916.) (_Yiddish._)
    Another Page from the “Song of Songs.” Aleichem. 89.
    Boaz the Teacher. Aleichem. 143.
    Dead Citron. Aleichem. 119.
    Elijah the Prophet. Aleichem. 33.
    Esther. Aleichem. 178.
    Getzel. Aleichem. 38.
    Greens for “Shevuous.” Aleichem. 79.
    Isshur the Beadle. Aleichem. 131.
    Lost “L’Ag Berner.” Aleichem. 50.
    Murderers. Aleichem. 58.
    On the Fiddle. Aleichem. 210.
    Page from the “Song of Songs.” Aleichem. 9.
    Passover In a Village. Aleichem. 20.
    Pity for the Living. Aleichem. 99.
    Pocket-Knife. Aleichem. 187.
    Spinning-Top. Aleichem. 153.
    Tabernacle. Aleichem. 106.
    This Night. Aleichem. 241.
    Three Little Heads. Aleichem. 71.

  ASSIS, JOAQUIM MARIA MACHADO DE. (_Portuguese._)
    Attendants’ Confession. Brazil. 43.
    Fortune-Teller. Brazil. 65.

  BARTSCH, RUDOLF HANS. (_Austrian._)
    Little Blanchefleure. Underwood B. 9.

  BERNARD, TRISTAN. (1866- .) (_French._)
    Last Visit. Macklin. 3.

  BINET-VALMER. (1875- .) (_French._)
    When She Was Dead.... Macklin. 199.

  BIRABEAU, ANDRE. (_French._)
    Barber’s Miracle. Macklin. 15.

  BIZET, RENE. (1887- .) (_French._)
    Good Old Sort. Macklin. 27.

  BOUTET, FREDERIC. (_French._) (_See 1918._)
    Force of Circumstances. Macklin. 37.

  CECH, SVATOPLUK. (1846-1908.) (_Czech._) (_See 1920._)
    Exchange. Underwood B. 31.

  CHEKHOV, ANTON PAVLOVICH. (1861-1904.) (_Russian._) (_See 1918, 1920
        and 1921._)
    Adventure. Chekhov H. 241.
    Art. Chekhov H. 263.
    Bird Market. Chekhov H. 233.
    Boys. Chekhov H. 117.
    Chameleon. Chekhov H. 207.
    Children. Chekhov H. 23.
    Classical Student. Chekhov H. 79.
    Cook’s Wedding. Chekhov H. 1.
    Day In the Country. Chekhov H. 105.
    Dependents. Chekhov H. 213.
    Fish. Chekhov H. 253.
    Grisha. Chekhov H. 47.
    Home. Chekhov H. 63.
    Incident. Chekhov H. 95.
    In Passion Week. Chekhov H. 151.
    Kashtanka. Chekhov H. 173.
    Old House. Chekhov H. 139.
    Oysters. Chekhov H. 55.
    Runaway. Chekhov H. 33.
    Shrove Tuesday. Chekhov H. 129.
    Sleepy. Chekhov H. 11.
    Swedish Match. Chekhov H. 275.
    Vanka. Chekhov H. 87.
    Whitebrow. Chekhov H. 161.
    Who Was to Blame? Chekhov H. 225.

  DELARUE-MARDRUS, LUCIE. (1880- .) (_French._) (_See 1918._)
    Inheritance. Macklin. 65.

  DESCAVES, LUCIEN. (1861- .) (_French._)
    Day Out. Macklin. 73.

  DOLORES, CARMEN. (_Portuguese._)
    Aunt Zeze’s Tears. Brazil. 139.

  DUVERNOIS, HENRI. (1873- .) (_French._)
    Fez. Macklin. 79.

  “ERCKMANN-CHATRIAN.” (_French._) [EMILE ERCKMANN (1822-1899) _and_
        LOUIS GRATIAN CHARLES ALEXANDER CHATRIAN (1826-1890).] (_See
        1918._)
    Mysterious Sketch. McSpadden D. 34.

  FARRERE, CLAUDE. (1876- .) (_French._)
    Turret. Macklin. 89.

  FISCHER, MAX (1882-) _and_ FISCHER, ALEX. (1883-). (_French._)
    Army Time. Macklin. 47.

  FRAPIE, LEON. (_French._)
    Pockets. Macklin. 103.

  GAUTIER, HUGUETTE. (_French._)
    First Short Dress. Macklin. 111.

  GAUTIER, THEOPHILE. (1811-1872.) (_French._) (_See 1918 and 1921._)
    Mummy’s Foot. McSpadden D. 248.

  “GORKI, MAXIM.” (ALEXEI MAXIMOVICH PYESHKER.) (1868 or 1869- .)
        (_Russian._) (_See 1918, 1920 and 1921._)
    Birth of a Man. Gorky C. 1.
    Cemetery. Gorky C. 105.
    Dead Man. Gorky C. 257.
    Gubin. Gorky C. 45.
    Icebreaker. Gorky C. 17.
    In a Mountain Defile. Gorky C. 187.
    Kalinin. Gorky C. 225.
    Nilushka. Gorky C. 75.
    On a River Steamer. Gorky C. 125.
    Woman. Gorky C. 151.

  HERMANT, ABEL. (1862- .) (_French._)
    Wrist-Watch. Macklin. 141.

  HIRSCH, CHARLES-HENRY. (1870- .) (_French._)
    Isaac Levitski. Macklin. 149.

  HOFFMANN, ERNEST THEODOR WILHELM (AMADEUS). (_German._) (1776-1822.)
        (_See 1918._)
    Deserted House. McSpadden D. 58.

  JALOUX, EDMOND. (1878- .) (_French._)
    Fugitive. Macklin. 161.

  KIELLAND, ALEXANDER L. (_Norwegian._)
    Point of View. Underwood B. 121.

  LEVEL, MAURICE. (_French._) (_See 1918 and 1920._)
    Debt-Collector. Macklin. 171.

  MACHARD, ALFRED. (1887- .) (_French._) (_See 1918._)
    Major Six Stripes. Macklin. 181.

  MACORLAN, PIERRE. (1883- .) (_French._)
    Philanthropist. Macklin. 191.

  MARGUERITTE, PAUL (1860- .) _and_ MARGUERITTE, VICTOR (1866- .)
        (_French._)
    Poum and the Zouave. Macklin. 209.

  MARGUERITTE, VICTOR. (1866- .) (_French._)
    Whipper-Snapper. Macklin. 219.

  MAUPASSANT, HENRI RENE ALBERT GUY de. (1850-1893.) (_French._) (_See
        1918 and 1921._)
    Horla. McSpadden D. 210.

  MIKSZATH, KOLOMAN. (1849- .) (_Hungarian._) (_See 1920._)
    King’s Clothes. Underwood B. 99.

  MILLE, PIERRE. (1864- .) (_French._) (_See 1918._)
    Number Thirteen. Macklin. 229.

  “MULTATULI.” (EDWARD D. DEKKER.) (1820-1887.) (_Dutch._)
    Saidjah. Underwood B. 73.

  NETTO, COELHO. (_Portuguese._)
    Pigeons. Brazil. 121.

  PAIVARINTA, PIETARI. (_Finnish._)
    My Traveling Companion. Underwood B. 135.

  PETOFI, ALEXANDER. (1823-1849.) (_Maygar._)
    Elopement. Underwood B. 65.

  PREVOST, MARCEL. (1862- .) (_French._)
    My Brother Guy. Macklin. 239.

  ROSEGGER, PETRI. (1843- .) (_Austrian._)
    When the Bright Nights Were. Underwood B. 113.

  ROSNY, AINE, J. H. (1856- .) (_French._)
    Champion. Macklin. 265.

  SCHEFFER, ROBERT. (1863- .) (_French._)
    Mother. Macklin. 283.

  TINAYRE, MARCELLE. (_French._)
    Home-Coming. Macklin. 293.

  VEBER, PIERRE. (1869- .) (_French._)
    Widow Foigney. Macklin. 301.

  VRCHLICKY, JAROSLAV. (1853-1912.) (_Czech._) (_See 1920._)
    Abisag. Underwood B. 83.

  “WILLY, COLETTE.” (MADAME de JOUVENEL.) (1873- .) (_French._)
    Gitanette. Macklin. 55.




                          MAGAZINE AVERAGES

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922


_The following table includes the averages of distinctive stories
in certain American periodicals published from October, 1921, to
September, 1922, inclusive. One, two and three asterisks are employed
to indicate relative distinction. “Three-asterisk stories” are of
somewhat permanent literary value. The list excludes reprints._

  =================================================================
                         |         |    NO. OF    |   PERCENTAGE
                         | NO. OF  |  DISTINCTIVE | OF DISTINCTIVE
       PERIODICALS       | STORIES |    STORIES   |     STORIES
       (OCT.-SEPT.)      |PUBLISHED|   PUBLISHED  |    PUBLISHED
                         |         +----+----+----+-----+-----+----
                         |         |  * | ** | ***|  *  |  ** | ***
  -----------------------+---------+----+----+----+-----+-----+----
  Asia                   |    10   |  9 |  6 |  1 |  90 |  60 |  10
  Atlantic Monthly       |    26   | 23 | 16 |  7 |  88 |  62 |  27
  Broom                  |    23   | 20 | 16 | 10 |  87 |  69 |  43
  Century                |    42   | 39 | 32 | 17 |  93 |  76 |  40
  Collier’s Weekly       |   109   | 18 |  3 |  1 |  17 |   3 |   1
  Delineator             |    40   | 11 |  4 |  3 |  28 |  10 |   8
  Dial                   |    22   | 22 | 21 | 14 | 100 |  95 |  64
  Double Dealer          |    21   | 12 |  8 |  2 |  57 |  38 |  10
  Everybody’s Magazine   |    66   |  9 |  2 |  1 |  14 |   3 |   2
  Good Housekeeping      |    44   |  6 |  3 |  1 |  14 |   7 |   2
  Harper’s Magazine      |    44   | 39 | 23 | 14 |  89 |  52 |  32
  Hearst’s International |    63   | 18 |  4 |  1 |  29 |   6 |   2
  Ladies’ Home Journal   |    42   |  8 |  3 |  2 |  19 |   7 |   5
  McClure’s Magazine     |         |    |    |    |     |     |
    (March-September)    |    46   | 13 |  2 |  1 |  28 |   4 |   2
  Metropolitan           |    87   | 17 |  9 |  6 |  19 |  10 |   7
  Pictorial Review       |    65   | 44 | 31 | 22 |  66 |  48 |  33
  Red Book Magazine      |   115   | 27 |  4 |  2 |  24 |   4 |   2
  Saturday Evening Post  |   245   | 34 | 14 |  7 |  14 |   6 |   3
  Scribner’s Magazine    |    52   | 37 | 19 |  7 |  71 |  37 |  14
  Smart Set              |   127   | 44 |  9 |  5 |  35 |   7 |   4
  World Fiction          |         |    |    |    |     |     |
    (August-September)   |    22   | 21 | 11 |  5 |  95 |  50 |  23
  -----------------------+---------+----+----+----+-----+-----+----


_The following tables indicate the rank, during the period between
October, 1921, and September, 1922, inclusive, by number and
percentage of distinctive short stories published, of eighteen
periodicals coming within the scope of my examination which have
published an average of 15 per cent or more of distinctive stories.
The lists exclude reprints, but not translations._


                            BY PERCENTAGE

     1. Dial                                      100%
     2. World Fiction (August-September)           95%
     3. Century                                    93%
     4. Asia                                       90%
     5. Harper’s Magazine                          89%
     6. Atlantic Monthly                           88%
     7. Broom                                      87%
     8. Scribner’s Magazine                        71%
     9. Pictorial Review                           66%
    10. Double Dealer                              57%
    11. Smart Set                                  35%
    12. Hearst’s International                     29%
    13. McClure’s Magazine (March-September)       28%
    14. Delineator                                 28%
    15. Red Book Magazine                          24%
    16. Metropolitan                               19%
    17. Ladies’ Home Journal                       19%
    18. Collier’s Weekly                           17%


                              BY NUMBER

     1. Pictorial Review                           44
     2. Smart Set                                  44
     3. Century                                    39
     4. Harper’s Magazine                          39
     5. Scribner’s Magazine                        37
     6. Red Book Magazine                          27
     7. Atlantic Monthly                           23
     8. Dial                                       22
     9. World Fiction (August-September)           21
    10. Broom                                      20
    11. Hearst’s International                     18
    12. Collier’s Weekly                           18
    13. Metropolitan                               17
    14. McClure’s Magazine (March-September)       13
    15. Double Dealer                              12
    16. Delineator                                 11
    17. Asia                                        9
    18. Ladies’ Home Journal                        8


_The following periodicals have published during the same period
ten or more “two-asterisk stories.” The list excludes reprints,
but not translations. Periodicals represented in this list during
1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, and 1921 are represented by the
prefixed letters_ a, b, c, d, e, f, _and_ g, _respectively._

    1. abcdefg  Century                               32
    2.  bcdefg  Pictorial Review                      31
    3. abcdefg  Harper’s Magazine                     23
    4.      fg  Dial                                  21
    5. abcdef   Scribner’s Magazine                   19
    6.          Broom                                 16
    7.   cdef   Atlantic Monthly                      16
    8. abcde    Saturday Evening Post                 14
    9.          World Fiction (August-September)      11


_The following periodicals have published during the same period five
or more “three-asterisk stories.” The list excludes reprints, but not
translations. The same signs are used as prefixes as in the previous
list._

     1.   bcdefg  Pictorial Review                    22
     2.  abcdefg  Century                             17
     3.       fg  Dial                                14
     4.  abcdefg  Harper’s Magazine                   14
     5.           Broom                               10
     6.    cdef   Atlantic Monthly                     7
     7.  abcdef   Scribner’s Magazine                  7
     8.  abc e    Saturday Evening Post                7
     9.  a c ef   Metropolitan                         6
    10.          World Fiction (August-September)      5
    11.    def   Smart Set                             5

_Ties in the above list have been decided by taking relative rank in
other lists into account._




                   INDEX OF SHORT STORIES PUBLISHED
                        IN AMERICAN MAGAZINES

                  OCTOBER, 1921, TO SEPTEMBER, 1922


_All short stories published in the following magazines, and
newspapers, October, 1921, to September, 1922, inclusive, are
indexed_:

     All’s Well
     American Magazine
     American Scandinavian
     Asia
     Atlantic Monthly
     Bookman
     Broom
     Catholic World
     Century
     Chicago Tribune (Syndicate Service)
     Clay
     Collier’s Weekly
     Cosmopolitan
     Delineator
     Dial
     Double Dealer
     Everybody’s Magazine
     Freeman
     Good Housekeeping
     Harper’s Bazar
     Harper’s Magazine
     Hearst’s International Magazine
     Ladies’ Home Journal
     Leslie’s Weekly
     Liberator
     Little Review
     McCall’s Magazine
     McClure’s Magazine
     Menorah Journal
     Metropolitan
     Midland
     Modern Priscilla
     New York Tribune
     Outlook
     Pagan
     Pearson’s
     Pictorial Review
     Red Book Magazine
     Saturday Evening Post
     Scribner’s Magazine
     Smart Set
     Sunset Magazine
     Wave
     Woman’s Home Companion
     World Fiction
     Youth

_Short stories of distinction only, published in the following
magazines during the same period, are indexed_:

     Ace-High Magazine
     Adventure
     Ainslee’s Magazine
     American Boy
     American Hebrew
     Arch
     Argosy All-Story Weekly
     Ave Maria
     Beautiful Womanhood
     Black Cat
     Black Mask
     Blue Book Magazine
     Breezy Stories
     Brief Stories
     Christian Herald
     Designer
     Detective Story Magazine
     Extension Magazine
     Follies
     Gargoyle
     Holland’s Magazine
     Jewish Forum
     Live Stories
     MacLean’s Magazine
     Magnificat
     Munsey’s Magazine
     Open Road
     People’s Home Journal
     People’s Popular Monthly
     Popular Magazine
     Queen’s Work
     Reviewer
     Saucy Stories
     Short Stories
     Snappy Stories
     Telling Tales
     10-Story Book
     Today’s Housewife
     Top-Notch Magazine
     Town Topics
     True Story Magazine
     Wayside Tales
     Western Story Magazine
     Woman’s World
     Young’s Magazine

_Certain stories of distinction published in the following magazines
during this period are indexed, because they have been specially
called to my attention_:

     Jewish Daily News
     Junior League Bulletin
     New York Nation
     Photoplay

_I have considered several other magazines without finding any
stories of distinction. One, two, or three asterisks are prefixed
to the titles of stories to indicate distinction. Three asterisks
prefixed to a title indicate the more or less permanent literary
value of the story, and entitle it to a place on the annual “Rolls
of Honor.” Cross references after an author’s name refer to previous
volumes of this series. (H.) after the name of an author indicates
that other stories by this author, published in American magazines
between 1900 and 1914, are to be found indexed in “The Standard
Index of Short Stories,” by Francis J. Hannigan, published by Small,
Maynard and Company, 1918. The figures in parentheses after the title
of a story refer to the volume and page number of the magazine.
In cases where successive numbers of a magazine are not paged
consecutively, the page number only is given in this index._

The following abbreviations are used in the index:

  _Adv._              Adventure
  _Ain._              Ainslee’s Magazine
  _Am._               American Magazine
  _Am. B._            American Boy
  _Asia_              Asia
  _Atl._              Atlantic Monthly
  _A. W._             All’s Well
  _B. C._             Black Cat
  _Blue_              Blue Book Magazine
  _Book._             Bookman (N. Y.)
  _Br. St._           Brief Stories
  _Broom_             Broom
  _Cath. W._          Catholic World
  _Cen._              Century
  _Chic. Trib._       Chicago Tribune (Syndicate Service)
  _Clay_              Clay
  _Col._              Collier’s Weekly
  _Cos._              Cosmopolitan
  _Del._              Delineator
  _Des._              Designer
  _Detective_         Detective Story Magazine
  _D. D._             Double Dealer
  _Dial_              Dial
  _Ev._               Everybody’s Magazine
  _Ext._              Extension Magazine
  _Fol._              Follies
  _Free._             Freeman
  _Gargoyle_          Gargoyle
  _G. H._             Good Housekeeping
  _Harp. B._          Harper’s Bazar
  _Harp. M._          Harper’s Magazine
  _Hear._             Hearst’s International Magazine
  _Hol._              Holland’s Magazine
  _J. D. N._          Jewish Daily News
  _J. For._           Jewish Forum
  _Jun. L. B._        Junior League Bulletin
  _Les. W._           Leslie’s Weekly
  _L. H. J._          Ladies’ Home Journal
  _Lib._              Liberator
  _Lit. R._           Little Review
  _L. St._            Live Stories
  _McC._              McClure’s Magazine
  _McCall_            McCall’s Magazine
  _MacL._             MacLean’s Magazine
  _Men. J._           Menorah Journal
  _Met._              Metropolitan
  _Mid._              Midland
  _Mod. P._           Modern Priscilla
  _Mun._              Munsey’s Magazine
  _Nat. (N. Y.)_      New York Nation
  _N. Y. Trib._       New York Tribune
  _O. R._             Open Road
  _Outl._             Outlook
  _Pag._              Pagan
  _Pearson_           Pearson’s
  _P. H. J._          People’s Home Journal
  _Photo._            Photoplay
  _Pict. R._          Pictorial Review
  _Pop._              Popular Magazine
  _P. P. M._          People’s Popular Monthly
  _Red Bk._           Red Book Magazine
  _Scan._             American Scandinavian Review
  _Scr._              Scribner’s Magazine
  _S. E. P._          Saturday Evening Post
  _Sh. St._           Short Stories
  _Sn. St._           Snappy Stories
  _S. S._             Smart Set
  _Sun._              Sunset Magazine
  _10-St._            10-Story Magazine
  _Tod._              Today’s Housewife
  _Top._              Top-Notch Magazine
  _T. T._             Telling Tales
  _Wave_              Wave
  _Way. T._           Wayside Tales
  _W. F._             World Fiction
  _W. H. C._          Woman’s Home Companion
  _W. St._            Western Story Magazine
  _W. W._             Woman’s World
  _Youth_             Youth
  (_161_)             Page 161
  (_2 : 161_)         Volume 2, Page 161
  (_See 1915_)        See “Best Short Stories of 1915”


                         I. AMERICAN AUTHORS


  A

  ABBOTT, ELEANOR HALLOWELL. (MRS. FORDYCE COBURN.) (1872- .) (_See
        1915, 1918, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Gift of the Probable Places. L. H. J. Jan. (5.)
    Ye Greate Astonishments. L. H. J. Dec. ’21. (3.)

  ABDULLAH, ACHMED. (ACHMED ABDULLAH NADIR KHAN EL-DURANI
        EL-IDRISSYEH.) (“A. A. NADIR.”) (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Affair of the Chinese Vase. Col. Oct. 22, ’21. (7.)
    *Affair of the Nauratama Amulet. Col. Dec. 10, ’21. (7.)
    *Affair of the Shiva Natarajah. Col. Dec. 24, ’21. (7.)
    **Black Poppies. T. T. Nov., ’21. (10 : 12.)
    **Matter of Face. McCall. June (8.)
    *Most Just Among Moslems. Cos. July. (97.)
    *Tale the Drum Told. Cos. Aug. (95.)
    *Vase of Ancient Precepts. T. T. Oct., ’21. (9 : 204.)

  ADAMS, ADELINE.
    **Marquis Goes Donkey-Riding. Atl. April. (129 : 474.)

  “ADAMS, BILL.” (BERTRAM M. ADAMS.) (1879- .)
    *Amos Tregenna. Adv. Aug. 10. (157.)
    *Bosun of the Goldenhorn’s Yarn. Adv. Jan. 20. (86.)
    *Debt at Sea. Adv. March 10. (55.)
    ***Sailors’ Way. Des. March. (20.)
    *Time Comes. Adv. May 20. (35.)
    ***Twinkle-Bright. Adv. Sept. 30. (98.)

  ADAMS, FRANK R. (1883- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1921._)
    Gentlemen Once. Cos. July. (81.)
    Jongleur of Hollywood. Cos. Sept. (39.)
    Mrs. You. Cos. Oct. ’21. (26.)
    Two of Them. Cos. Aug. (83.)

  ADAMS, SAMUEL HOPKINS. (1871- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Isle O’Dreams. Red Bk. Aug. (46.)
    *Plooie of Our Square. Col. Oct. 29. ’21. (7.)
    Town That Wasn’t. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (81.)

  ADDINGTON, SARAH.
    Jill Fools the Jack of Hearts. L. H. J. June. (14.)
    Mrs. Dumpty’s Dilemma. L. H. J. Sept. (20.)

  AIDLINE-TROMMER, ELBERT.
    **Ten Percent. Nat. (N. Y.) June 28. (114 : 774.)

  AIKEN, CONRAD POTTER. (1889- .)
    ***Dark City. Dial. April. (72 : 345.)
    **Soliloquy on a Park Bench. Dial. June. (72 : 601.)

  AIKEN, RALPH.
    Their Wedding Anniversary. Les. W. March 25. (134 : 406.)

  ALBERT, ROSE.
    Alley Rat. Pag. (Dec.-Jan.) (29.)

  ALDIS, MARY REYNOLDS. (MRS. ARTHUR T. ALDIS.) (1872- .) (_See 1916._)
    *Mosque of the Empress. Dial. March. (72 : 273.)

  ALDRICH, BESS STREETER. (“MARGARET DEAN STEVENS.”) (1881- .) (_See
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_See 1916 under_ Stevens, Margaret Dean.)
    Man Who Dreaded to Go Home. Am. Nov., ’21. (46.)
    Mother Gets Back on the Job. Am. Feb. (31.)
    Nell Cutter’s White Elephant. Am. April. (42.)
    Present Generation. Am. May. (56.)
    What God Hath Joined. Am. Sept. (47.)
    Woman Nell Cutter Was Afraid Of. Am. Jan. (10.)

  ALEXANDER, SANDRA. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Synthetic Sapphires. Met. July. (51.)

  ALLEN, GRACE.
    Letty’s Hill of Understanding, G. H. June. (29.)

  ALLEN, JAMES LANE. (1849- .) (_See 1916, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Miss Locke. Cen. March. (103 : 676.)

  ANDERSON, FREDERICK IRVING. (1877- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Follansbee Imbroglio. S. E. P. July 29. (17.)
    Half-Way House. Am. May. (48.)
    Man Killer. Chic. Trib. March 12.
    Whispering Gallery. S. E. P. Sept. 2. (10.)
    Wild Honey. S. E. P. Nov. 26, ’21. (6.)

  ANDERSON, SHERWOOD. (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Contract. Broom. Dec., ’21. (1 : 148.)
    ***I’m a Fool. Dial. Feb. (72 : 119.)

  ANDERSON, WILLIAM ASHLEY. (1890- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919,
        1920._) (_H._)
    Desert Decides. Ev. Jan. (25.)

  ANDREWS, MARY RAYMOND SHIPMAN. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    **His Soul Goes Marching On. G. H. Oct., ’21. (8.)
    *Prince Tatters. Scr. Aug. (72 : 138.)
    Wandering Jewels. Col. July 8. (4.)
    *Winged Sandals. Scr. Oct., ’21. (70 : 402.)

  ANGELL, HILDEGARDE.
    *Subject to Approval. McC. June. (80.)

  ANONYMOUS.
    Episode In Commutation. Outl. Oct. 19. ’21. (129 : 262.)
    Happily Ever Afterward. McCall. March. (11.)

  AULD, LILLIAN.
    Standing By. Les. W. May 6. (134 : 600.)

  AUSTIN, MARY (HUNTER). (1868- .) (_See 1918, 1921._)
    **Papago Kid. Book. June. (55 : 359.)

  AVERY, STEPHEN MOREHOUSE. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Surf. L. H. J. June. (10.)
    Who Is Sylvia? McCall. Sept. (14.)


  B

  BABCOCK, EDWINA STANTON. (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    *Depths Unsounded. Harp. M. Nov., ’21. (143 : 758.)
    *He That Hath Ears. Pict. R. Nov., ’21. (11.)
    *Prince of Tuckermuck. Hol. April. (11.)
    ***Strange Flower. Pict. R. June. (8.)

  BACHMANN, ROBERT. (_See 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    This Old Gazook Thought His Dog Could Lick a Wildcat. Am. May. (42.)

  BACON, JOSEPHINE DASKAM. (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1921._)
    Disciplining Bill. Col. Oct. 22, ’21. (3.)
    Efficiency and Bill. S. E. P. May 20. (8.)
    Farmer Bill. Col. March 25. (8.)
    In the Case of Bill. Chic. Trib. Nov. 27, ’21.

  BACON, VIRGINIA CLEAVER.
    *Path-Treader. Scr. Aug. (72 : 187.)

  BAILEY, (IRENE) TEMPLE. (_See 1915, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Little Frogs. W. H. C. Jan. (7.)

  BALMER, EDWIN. (1883- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Glass Room. Met. March. (13.)
    Homan. Met. Dec., ’21. (27.)
    Keeban. Met. Nov., ’21. (7.)
    Mother’s Thrilling Adventure with the Radio. Am. Sept. (31.)
    Queer. Met. Feb. (29.)
    Search For The “Grand Marais.” Am. July. (31.)
    That Girl of Lazy Lekart’s. McCall. Sept. (5.)
    Wave Length, Seven Hundred. Met. Sept. (21.)

  BANKSON, RUSSELL ARDEN.
    Nip Cat Sing Some. Sun. March. (20.)
    Pay Dirt. Sun. May. (12.)

  BANNING, MARGARET CULKIN.
    Sauce for the Gander. Met. March. (26.)
    With Luxury Tax. Met. Feb. (12.)

  BARNARD, LESLIE GORDON. (_See 1920._)
    *Twilight. Mod. P. Dec., ’21. (14.)

  BARRETT, RICHMOND BROOKS. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Art for Art’s Sake. S.S. April. (103.)
    Sins of the Father. S.S. May. (39.)

  BARRIE, CASWELL.
    Out of the Night. Met. Oct., ’21. (34.)

  BARROWS, FRANKLYN.
    Jimmy and the Ultimatum. Am. Jan. (28.)
    Ryan’s Decision. Ev. Jan. (156.)

  BARTLETT, FREDERICK ORIN. (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Cliff Dwellers. S. E. P. June 24. (20.)
    Cubs. Del. Nov., ’21. (16.)
    His Mother’s Son. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (37.)
    Without End. Del. April. (10.)

  BARTLEY, NALBRO. (1888- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1921._)
    Dizzy. McCall. April. (5.)

  BARTON, BRUCE. (1886- .) (_See 1921._)
    Secret Society of Wives. W. H. C. April. (15.)
    Spring of Eternal Youth. W. H. C. Oct., ’21. (12.)

  BATCHELOR, HAZEL DEYO.
    Romance. S. S. May. (83.)

  BEACH, REX. (ELLINGWOOD) (1877- .) (_See 1919, 1921._)
    White Brant. Cos. Sept. (85.)

  BEARD, WOLCOTT LE CLEAR. (1867- .) (_See 1915, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    *Wedding Gift. McC. Sept. (66.)

  BEAUMONT, GERALD. (_See 1921._)
    Bull Baiters. Red Bk. June. (54.)
    Christmas Handicap. Red Bk. Jan. (48.)
    Elephant. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (62.)
    Gambling Chaplain. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (32.)
    Golden Moment. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (62.)
    Miracle. Red Bk. May. (38.)
    Mud and 95. Red Bk. Sept. (60.)
    Oh, Susanna! Red Bk. March. (48.)
    Ol’ Joe Slump. Red Bk. July. (87.)
    Star. Red Bk. April. (38.)
    Thoroughbreds. Red Bk. Feb. (41.)
    When Johnny Comes Marching Home. Red Bk. Aug. (71.)

  BEER, THOMAS. (1889- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Addio. S. E. P. Oct. 29, ’21. (16.)
    *Balliol. S. E. P. May 13. (12.)
    *By Parables. S. E. P. Aug. 26. (16.)
    ***Casual. Pop. July 20. (106.)
    *Citizens of Hidj. S. E. P. March 18. (14.)
    Don Carlos Vittori. S. E. P. Jan. 21. (10.)
    **Enemy. Cen. May. (104 : 30.)
    *Fifty and Fifty. Harp. M. Sept. (145 : 467.)
    *Lips. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (12.)
    ***Rope. S. E. P. March 25. (12.)
    *Tact. S. E. P. July 1. (8.)

  BEHRMAN, S. N. (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921_) _and_ NICHOLSON,
        J. K.
    *Holiday. S. S. June. (89.)
    Rupert Goes on the Loose. S. S. March. (53.)

  BELGION, MONTGOMERY.
    La Dame de Carreaux. Pearson. March. (29.)

  BELLAMANN, HENRY.
    Man Who Was Lonely. D. D. Dec., ’21. (2 : 239.)

  BELLAMY, FRANCIS RUFUS. (1886- .)
    ***“Talk.” Harp. M. Dec., ’21. (144 : 35.)

  BENET, STEPHEN VINCENT. (1898- .) (_See 1916, 1920._)
    *Goobers-à la Française. Del. Aug. (5.)
    Mad Americans. Met. Jan. (12.)

  BENTINCK, RICHARD. (_See 1919._)
    Goldfish Bowl. Sun. Nov., ’21. (20.)

  BENTON, MARGARET. (_See 1921._)
    God Gives Husbands. Am. April. (25.)
    World that Judith Found. W. H. C. Aug. ’21. (17.)

  BERRANGER, CLARA.
    Spun Gold. Met. April. (40.)

  BERCOVICI, KONRAD. (1882- .) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    ***Death of Murdo. Pict. R. July. (12.)
    ***Father and Son. Cen. March. (103 : 668.)
    ***Ghitza. (_R._) Pearson. July. (30.)
    ***Hazi, Wife of Sender Surtuck. Broom. Dec., ’21. (1 : 162.)
    ***Mincu. Pict. R. March. (12.)
    ***Murdo. Pict. R. Dec. ’21. (16.)
    ***Tanasi. Cen. June. (104 : 163.)
    ***When a Man Rules. Pict. R. May. (12.)
    *Yahde, the Proud One. (_R._) Pearson. May. (18.)

  BIGGERS, EARL DERR. (1884- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1921._)
    Heart of the Loaf. S. E. P. Aug. 5. (5.)
    Letter to Australia. S. E. P. Feb. 11. (8.)
    Meet the Wife. S. E. P. May 27. (8.)
    Prodigal Father. S. E. P. Dec. 31, ’21. (3.)
    Trooping with Ellen. S. E. P. April 8. (5.)
    “X” Goes Off to School. Col. Sept. 9. (5.)

  BIGGS, JR., JOHN. (1895- .)
    *Corkran of the Clamstretch. Scr. Dec., ’21. (70 : 737.)
    ***Wind Witch. Scr. March. (71 : 343.)

  BISHOP, JOHN PEALE.
    *Resurrection. Book. Aug. (55 : 577.)

  BLANCHARD, EDWIN H. (_See 1921._)
    Minnie. S. S. Oct., ’21. (91.)

  BODENHEIM, MAXWELL. (1893- .) (_See 1920._)
    ***Insanity. Dial. Dec., ’21. (71 : 671.)

  BOOGHER, SUSAN M. (_See 1919, 1920._)
    **Clothes. Pict. R. Sept. (12.)
    ***Unknown Warrior. Jun. L. B. Jan.

  BOOTH, ALICE.
    Young Love and the H. K. G. H. Sept. (26.)

  BOOTH, AUGUSTIN.
    Ania Zinina. S. S. May. (69.)

  BOOTH, FREDERICK. (1882- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1920._)
    ***Helpless Ones. Broom. Dec., ’21. (1 : 99.)

  BOULTON, AGNES. (MRS. EUGENE G. O’NEILL.) (1893- .) (_See 1920,
        1921._)
    **Fixin’ Road. Hol. Aug. (41 : 7.)

  BOYD, JAMES. (1866- .) (_See 1921._)
    *Bars. Pict. R. Aug. (24.)
    **Elms and Fair Oaks. Scr. Nov., ’21. (70 : 620.)
    *Out of the Mist. Pict. R. Jan. (16.)
    **Superman. Harp. M. March. (144 : 423.)
    **Uan the Fey. Atl. June. (129 : 790.)
    *Verse on the Window. L. H. J. Aug. (10.)

  BOYD, NANCY.
    Sentimental Solon. Met. Oct., ’21. (15.)

  BOYLE, JACK. (_See 1921._)
    Eye of the Temple. Red Bk. March. (43.)
    In Imperial Yellow. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (48.)
    Little Mother. Red Bk. July. (49.)
    Through Eternity. Red Bk. Feb. (52.)
    Without Mercy. Red Bk. June. (76.)

  BRADLEY, MARY HASTINGS. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Longest Way Round. W. H. C. Jan. (19.)

  BRADY, MARIEL. (_See 1916, 1917._)
    Revolt. Mod. P. Jan. (10.)

  BRANDE, DOROTHEA.
    Happiest Time. S. S. May. (124.)
    There’s No Such Thing as Chance. W. H. C. Nov., ’21. (26.)

  BRAY, LOUISE WHITEFIELD.
    Mis’ Mercy. W. H. C. Sept., ’21. (7.)

  BRERETON, CHARLES V.
    Casco, the Goat Getter. Sun. Feb. (37.)
    Casco Goes Wild. Sun. Dec., ’21. (37.)
    Christian Pro Tem. Sun. May. (26.)
    Last Cartridge. Sun. July. (37.)
    Man’s Best Friend. Sun. March. (23.)
    Next Came Casco. Sun. Nov., ’21. (41.)
    Two-Log Trail. Sun. June. (5.)

  BRODY, CATHARINE. (_See 1921._)
    Consequences. S. S. June. (33.)

  BROOKS, CAROLINE.
    Feet of Madame. S. S. Jan. (63.)

  BROOKS, JONATHAN. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Henry Gets an Assist. S. E. P. May 13. (36.)
    My Auto Biography. Col. Jan. 7. (14.)
    Oil In the Can. Col. Aug. 26. (3.)
    Pharaoh’s Son. Col. May 13. (11.)
    Ring Bone. Met. Dec., ’21. (30.)
    Toes Up. Col. Oct. 1, ’21. (3.)
    Under the Hood. Col. May 27. (9.)
    Wrong Green. Col. Sept. 9. (13.)

  BROOKS, PAUL. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Illegitimate Genius. S. S. Nov., ’21. (121.)

  BROWN, BERNICE. (1890- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1921._)
    Man Who Married a Dumb-bell. Col. Dec. 10, ’21. (3.)
    ***Miracle. Cen. Aug. (104 : 507.)
    Stephen Douglas d’Artagnan. Col. May 6. (13.)

  BROWN, CAMBRAY. (_See 1921._)
    Barnaby’s Fox Hunt. Harp. M. Jan. (144 : 265.)
    Imperfect Parallel. Harp. M. Feb. (144 : 350.)

  BROWN, KATHARINE HOLLAND. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._)
    *Mother. W. H. C. Dec., ’21. (21.)
    *Right Hunch. Scr. Dec., ’21. (70 : 715.)

  BROWN, ROYAL. (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    And That’s That. Red Bk. Oct. ’21. (48.)
    Bull In a China Shop. Am. Dec. ’21. (29.)
    Moonlight and the Dump. McCall. May. (6.)

  BRUBAKER, HOWARD. (1892- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Two Birds. Col. Oct. 1, ’21. (7.)

  BRUNO, GUIDO. (1884- .) (_See 1915, 1920._)
    Alma. Pearson. Oct., ’21. (47 : 165.)

  BRYNER, EDNA CLARE. (_See 1920._)
    ***Forest Cover. Book. Jan. (54 : 454.)

  BUCK, OSCAR MACMILLAN. (1885- .) (_See 1920._)
    ***“Kismet”--a Tale of Rohilkund. Asia. Aug. (22 : 595.)

  BUCKLEY, F. R.
    Gold-Mounted Guns. Red Bk. March. (91.)

  BULGER, BOZEMAN. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Flight of Sadie. Ev. April. (99.)

  BULGER, BOZEMAN, _see_ RUNYON, DAMON, _and_ BULGER, BOZEMAN.

  BURKE, KENNETH. (_See 1920._)
    David Wassermann. Lit. R. Autumn, ’21. (24.)

  BURNET, DANA. (1888- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
    Minnow. Book. April. (55 : 152.)
    Pity. Pict. R. April. (10.)
    Reggie. S. E. P. April 29. (6.)
    Spider’s Web. Hear. Dec., ’21. (9.)
    Wandering Daughters. Hear. July. (26.)

  BURT, MAXWELL STRUTHERS. (1882- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._)
    **Inheritors. Pict. R. Nov., ’21. (14.)
    Inhibiting Wattles. Red Bk. May. (58.)

  BURT, WILL.
    *Things That Live Under the Floor. McC. May. (97.)

  BUTLER, ELLIS PARKER. (1869- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Liar. Sun. March. (12.)
    *Martin Forgot. Del. July. (18.)
    Sane Hearts. Pict. R. Jan. (24.)
    Sheer Silk. Pict. R. Dec., ’21. (18.)
    Short Skirts. Pict. R. Feb. (26.)
    Sic Semper Susans! Pict. R. March. (23.)
    *Use Common Sense. Mun. July. (210.)

  “BYRNE, DONN.” (BRYAN OSWALD DONN-BYRNE.) (1888- .) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    By Ordeal of Justice. Hear. Oct., ’21. (10.)
    *Dramatis Personæ. Scr. Aug. (72 : 147.)
    Happy Ending. Hear. April. (11.)
    Thing Called Gratitude. Hear. Jan. (41.)
    Triangle. Ev. Sept. (85.)
    *Wisdom Buildeth Her House. Cen. Dec., ’21. (103 : 161.)


  C

  CABELL, JAMES BRANCH. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    ***Candid Footprint. Cen. May. (104 : 3.)

  CAMP, (CHARLES) WADSWORTH. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Defiance. Col. Dec. 24, ’21. (3.)

  CAMPBELL, EVELYN.
    Happiness. Ev. May. (164.)

  CANFIELD, DOROTHY. (DOROTHEA FRANCES CANFIELD FISHER.) (1879- .)
        (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Colonel Sharp. Outl. April 12. (130 : 595.)
    *Great Love. Outl. Feb. 8. (130 : 219.)
    *“Old Man Warner.” Outl. Jan. 11. (130 : 56.)
    *Uncle Giles. Outl. Feb. 22. (130 : 306.)
    *Yankee Mother In Israel. Outl. May 3. (131 : 22.)

  CARNE, MARY A.
    Fetters of Gold. Cath. W. Sept. (115 : 756.)

  CARROLL, GRACE IRENE.
    Katrinka’s Belated Childhood. Cath. W. May. (115 : 230.)

  CARVER, GEORGE. (1888- .) (_See 1918, 1920._)
    ***Singer. Mid. March. (8 : 95.)

  CARY, LUCIAN. (1886- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1921._)
    Dashing Stranger. McCall. Sept. (10.)
    Don’t Go Near the Water. Red Bk. Aug. (62.)
    Glass Husbands. Harp. B. Nov., ’21. (44.)
    Once a Flirt. McCall. Oct., ’21. (14.)
    Way These Things Happen. McCall. Aug. (7.)
    What Galatea Said. Ev. July. (98.)

  CASTLE, EVERETT RHODES. (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
    Tip. S. E. P. April 29. (14.)

  CAVENDISH, JOHN C. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Convert. S. S. Dec., ’21. (119.)
    Reformed Man. S. S. June. (119.)

  CHAMBERLAIN, LUCIA. (_See 1917, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Passion in the Park. Met. Nov., ’21. (11.)

  CHAMBERS, ROBERT W(ILLIAM). (1865- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1919, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Clinch’s Dump. McCall. Feb. (7.)
    Cup and Lip. McCall. March. (12.)
    Drowned Valley. McCall. Dec., ’21. (11.)
    Forest and Mr. Sard. McCall. April. (8.)
    Her Highness Intervenes. McCall. July. (4.)
    Jewel Aflame. McCall. Jan. (7.)
    On Star Peak. McCall. Oct., ’21. (9.)
    Place of Pines. McCall. June. (9.)
    Private War. McCall. Nov., ’21. (5.)
    Twilight of Mike. McCall. May. (10.)

  CHAPMAN, EDITH. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    *Finale. Pag. Oct.-Nov., ’21. (32.)
    *Growing Pains. Mid. April. (8 : 127.)
    **Ivory Tower. D. D. Nov., ’21. (2 : 211.)
    Polished Surfaces. D. D. May. (3 : 244.)
    *Psychosis. Youth. Jan. (1 : 16.)

  CHAPMAN, FRANCES NORVILLE. (1876- .) (_See 1916, 1921._)
    ***Prisoners of the Dead. Atl. Feb. (129 : 232.)

  CHASE, AMANDA MATHEWS. (_See 1915 under_ MATHEWS, AMANDA.)
    *Patrick Mulligan, Ghost. Pearson. April. (5.)

  CHASE, MARY ELLEN. (1887- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Upland Pastures. Atl. May. (129 : 651.)

  CHASE, STUART. (1888- .)
    *Neophyte. Lib. July. (11.)

  CHATFIELD, MARION LANGDALE.
    Spring Hills. W. H. C. April. (13.)

  CHILD, RICHARD WASHBURN. (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Blackmail. Mod. P, Oct., 21. (14.)
    Completely Indispensable. Col. April 22. (5.)
    His Wife’s Love Affair. Hear. March. (11.)
    Justice. Pict. R. Jan. (14.)
    Keeper of the Portcullis. Red Bk. Sept. (77.)
    Man with the Metal Face. S. E. P. April 1. (12.)
    Man Who Talked. Col. Jan. 28. (3.)
    Much Stranger. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (53.)
    *Story for a Certain Lady. Hear. Jan. (10.)
    Unburnt. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (10.)

  CHURCHILL, DAVID. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *House Selzjiord. Pict. R. March. (14.)

  CLARK, (CHARLES) BADGER. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Gumbo Lily. Scr. March. (71 : 309.)
    Lovely Day! Sun. Nov., ’21. (30.)
    Matters of Religion. Sun. April. (36.)
    Scat. Sun. July. (19.)
    Wise Man. Sun. Jan. (34.)

  CLARK, VALMA. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Judgments of West Paradise. McCall. July. (10.)
    Purple Patch. D. D. Feb. (3 : 68.)

  CLARKE, KENNETH B. (_See 1915._)
    Reading Sign. Chic. Trib. Jan. 1.

  CLAUSEN, CARL. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Breadth of a Hair. Pict. R. Nov. ’21. (23.)
    Ninth Way. S. E. P. May 13. (26.)

  CLINE, LEONARD LAWSON.
    Glunz. S. S. July. (51.)

  COATES, ROBERT M.
    *Sun Rises in Darkness. Broom. July. (2 : 275.)

  COBB, IRWIN S(HREWSBURY). (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Alas, The Poor Whiffletit! Pict. R. March. (5.)
    **Old Ben Alibi. Cos. Sept. (25.)
    **“--That Shall He Also Reap.” S. E. P. July 15. (16.)
    *“Worth 10,000!” S. E. P. Dec. 24, ’21. (12.)

  CODE, GRANT HYDE.
    **Diving the Bridge. Scr. June. (71 : 731.)

  COHEN, BELLA. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    **Deena’s Dowry. Free. Feb. 15. (4 : 535.)
    **Iron Horse. Red Bk. Feb. (90.)

  COHEN, OCTAVUS ROY. (1891- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Bent Twig. Ev. Sept. (138.)
    Chocolate Grudge. S. E. P. Nov. 12, ’21. (17.)
    Common Stock. S. E. P. July 22. (14.)
    Completely Done in Oils. Chic. Trib. April 2.
    *End of the Road. Photo.
    Fish Eyes. S. E. P. May 6. (12.)
    Homespun Silk. S. E. P. June 17. (20.)
    Music Hath Harms. S. E. P. Nov. 26, ’21. (14.)
    Pressto Change! S. E. P. March 18. (12.)
    Then There Were Nine. S. E. P. Sept. 30. (18.)
    When Knighthood Was in Dutch. McCall. Nov., ’21. (15.)
    Widow’s Bite. S.E.P. Feb. 18. (12.)

  COHEN, ROSE GOLLUP. (1880- .)
    ***Natalka’s Portion. Pict. R. Jan. (8.)

  COLCORD, LINCOLN (ROSS). (1883- .) (_See 1915, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Servant and Master. Am. March. (11.)

  COLLINS, CHARLES. (_See 1920._)
    Barbarous Age. Pict. R. Feb. (24.)
    Muse and the Midget. Harp. B. Feb. (32.)
    Up Stage and Down. S. E. P. April 15. (32.)

  COLLINS, HARRISON.
    *Erant Enim Piscatores. Atl. Dec., ’21. (128 : 814.)

  COMFORT, WILL LEVINGTON. (1878- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_See also in 1920_ COMFORT, WILL
        LEVINGTON, _and_ DOST, ZAMIN KI.)
    Big Meadow. McCall. Nov., ’21. (9.)
    *Black Horse. Ev. Feb. (99.)
    *Haunted Valley. Met. March. (30.)
    *Loose Tiger. Met. July. (21.)
    *Man Who Meant Something. W. W. Oct., ’21. (9.)
    *Silent Spring. Met. April. (30.)
    *Sob Stuff. McCall. Oct., ’21. (11.)

  CONDON, FRANK. (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Good Intentions. Col. Dec. 3, ’21. (5.)
    Park Your Car Here. April 8. (5.)
    Wild Gossoon. Col. Oct. 8, ’21. (7.)

  CONNELL, RICHARD. (_See 1921._)
    Honor Among Sportsmen. S. E. P. Feb. 4. (18.)
    Mr. Pottle and Culture. S. E. P. Oct. 8, ’21. (8.)
    Mr. Pottle and Pageantry. S. E. P. Jan. 14. (10.)
    Mr. Pottle and the South-Sea Cannibals. Cen. Oct., ’21. (102 : 922.)
    Nose for News. S. E. P. Aug. 12. (12.)
    Once a Sloganeer. S. E. P. April 29. (12.)
    One-Man Dog. Col. Feb. 25. (3.)
    *Reputation. Cen. Aug. (104 : 539.)
    Scout Wong. S. E. P. March. 18. (8.)
    Terrible Epps. S. E. P. Dec. 10, ’21. (12.)
    Where Is the Tropic of Capricorn? S. E. P. Nov. 26, ’21. (8.)

  CONNOLLY, JAMES BRENDON. (1868- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Race It Blew. Col. Nov. 26, ’21. (9.)

  COOK, AMELIA B.
    Fragrance of Yesterday. Hear. Dec., ’21. (41.)

  COOKE, GRACE MACGOWAN (1863- ) _and_ MACGOWAN ALICE (1858- ). (_See
        1915, under_ COOKE, GRACE MACGOWAN; _1916, 1917, under_
        MACGOWAN, ALICE, _“H” under both heads, 1921 under_ MACGOWAN,
        ALICE _and_ COOKE, GRACE MACGOWAN.)
    In-Bad the Failer. McC. April. (22.)

  COOPER, COURTNEY RYLEY. (1886- .) (_See 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Almost Human. Hear. June. (61.)
    Condemned. Red Bk. July. (63.)
    Drifters. Red Bk. May. (63.)
    Friendship. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (57.)
    Hate. Red Bk. Feb. (75.)
    Vengeance. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (67.)

  COOPER, H. S. (_See “H.”_)
    Three Manuels. Col. Aug. 19. (7.)
    Trail of the Rustler. Col. Sept. 16. (9.)

  CORLEY, DONALD. (_See 1920._)
    ***Book of the Debts. Scr. Aug. (72 : 179.)
    **Figs. Pict. R. July. (8.)
    **Ghost Wedding. Pict. R. Sept. (8.)
    *God from the Shelf. Harp. M. Jan. (144 : 234.)
    *Pelleas Night. Broom. Dec., ’21. (1 : 176.)

  CORNELL, V. H. (_See 1915, 1920._) (_H._)
    Come Back, Youth. S. E. P. Aug. 19. (10.)

  “CRABB, ARTHUR.” (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Super-Woman. G. H. May. (28.)

  CRAM, MILDRED R. (1889- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Amulet. Pict. R. June. (6.)
    *Common Ground. Blue. July. (38.)
    Dryad. Harp. B. Jan. (66.)
    Eva Tonnelle. Harp. B. July. (60.)
    *Gaudy Little Fish. Hear. Oct., ’21. (13.)
    Happiest Girl In the World. Harp. B. March. (54.)
    **Precious Certitude. Harp. B. April. (80.)
    Sacred Pastures. Harp. B. Nov., ’21. (27.)

  CRANE, CLARKSON. (_See 1916, 1920, 1921._)
    **Fall of Soissons. Dial. May. (72 : 498.)

  CRANE, MIFFLIN. (_See 1919, 1920._)
    Right Makes Might. S. S. May. (117.)

  CRAVEN, THOMAS JEWELL. (1889- .)
    ***Love In Smoky Hill. Dial. Jan. (72 : 1.)

  CURTIS, EDITH R.
    Something Ere the End. S. S. Aug. (117.)

  CURTIS, MARGUERITE.
    Joseph’s Coat. S. E. P. April 29. (10.)
    Shining Column. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (34.)

  CURTISS, PHILIP (EVERETT). (1885- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Sumac and Goldenrod. L. H. J. Feb. (8.)

  CURWOOD, JAMES OLIVER. (1878- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Message to His Master. Cos. Oct., ’21. (70.)


  D

  DALLETT, MORRIS. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Pursuit. S. S. Jan. (53.)

  DANE, YARDLEY.
    *Requiscat. S. S. Aug. (70.)

  DAVIS, CHARLES BELMONT. (1866- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Ethics of Nelson Cole. Scr. Jan. (71 : 23.)

  DAVIS, J. FRANK. (_See 1917, 1918, 1919._)
    Bill Titus Comes Back. Red Bk. March. (73.)
    Cranked In Gear. Red Bk. April. (85.)
    Fallen Arches. Red Bk. May. (77.)
    No Dramatis Personæ. Chic. Trib. April 9.

  DAY, JR., CLARENCE. (_See 1915, 1916, 1921._)
    Quick Ripplers. Met. Feb. (33.)

  DAY, CURTISS LA Q. (_See 1919._)
    Son of a Sidewalk. Sun. Jan. (46.)

  DAY, HOLMAN FRANCIS. (1865- .) (_See 1915, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Jode’s People. Col. June 24. (7.)

  DEAN, WILLIAM HARPER. (_See 1921._)
    Horseshoe for Luck. L. H. J. Jan. (8.)
    Pompadour Days. L. H. J. Oct., ’21. (16.)

  DE JAGERS, DOROTHY. (_See 1916, 1920._)
    Average Woman. S. E. P. April 8. (10.)
    Special Case. S. E. P. July 29. (9.)
    Tears, Idle Tears. S. E. P. Sept. 23. (6.)

  DELANO, EDITH BARNARD. (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1920, 1921._) (_See
        “H” under_ BARNARD, EDITH _and_ DELANO, EDITH BARNARD.)
    *Nor Iron Bars. L. H. J. Sept. (10.)
    Provided For. Chic. Trib. Jan. 8.
    **Rosellen. L. H. J. May. (10.)
    Somebody’s Sweetie. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (25.)
    *Sycamore Tree. W. W. Jan. (7.)

  DE LEON, WALTER. (_See 1921._)
    Blessed Meek. Ev. Sept. (113.)
    Broken-Hearted Success. Ev. Oct., ’21. (49.)
    Dicky’s Continuity. Ev. Feb. (33.)
    Her Majesty Molly. S. E. P. Sept. 23. (10.)
    Lovely Bounder. Ev. Jan. (76.)
    Short Vamps. Ev. March. (37.)
    Sweet and Sour. Ev. June. (171.)
    Turtle Doves. Ev. Nov., ’21. (129.)

  DERIEUX, SAMUEL A. (1881-1922.) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._)
    An Act of God. Am. March. (29.)
    Billy Thompson’s Plan for Revenge. Am. July. (46.)
    Comet. Am. Dec., ’21. (38.)
    Invisible Huntsman. Am. June. (28.)
    Joe Goes After the Doctor. Am. Nov., ’21. (51.)
    Old Shad’s Chippendale. Del. July. (14.)
    Sixth Shot. Red Bk. July. (78.)

  DERRY, SELMA.
    White Playground. Wave. Jan. (9.)

  DEUTSCH, HERMANN BACHER. (_See 1916._)
    Apogee. D. D. Jan. (3 : 45.)

  DICKENSON, EDWIN C. (_See 1918, 1921._)
    Border Stuff. W. H. C. Nov., ’21. (23.)

  DICKEY, BASIL.
    Bad News. Ev. May. (115.)

  DICKSON, HARRIS. (1868- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Cannie the Uncanny. Col. May 6. (11.)
    Moccasin Slough. Col. Aug. 12. (3.)
    Trapping of Judge Pinkham. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (24.)

  DINGLE, CAPTAIN.
    Ocean Magic. S. E. P. Sept. 30. (10.)

  DIVINE, CHARLES. (_See 1917, 1921._)
    Snake-charmer of Kairwan. Ev. June. (82.)
    Street of Sapphire Doors. Sun. April. (32.)
    Symbolic Shoes of Mr. Bullis. S. S. June. (112.)

  DOBIE, CHARLES CALDWELL. (1881- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._)
    ***Vision. Cen. Jan. (103:415.)

  DODD, LEE WILSON. (1879- .) (_See “H.”_)
    Little Rufo. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (86.)

  DONNELL, ANNIE HAMILTON. (1862- .) (_See 1915, 1920._) (_H._)
    Last Straw. McCall. Oct., ’21. (13.)

  DOUGLAS, FORD. (_See 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Fraternal Spirit. S. S. April. (29.)
    Majesty of the Law. S. S. July. (31.)
    Mr. Worthington’s Black Eye. S. S. Nov., ’21. (63.)

  DOUNCE, HARRY ESTY. (_See 1917, 1919, 1920._)
    Cobblestone Flies Up. Col. Aug. 26. (7.)
    Trapped. Ev. May. (58.)

  DRAGO, HARRY SINCLAIR.
    Rain. Met. April. (53.)

  DREHER, CARL.
    Fifth Decade. S. S. Feb. (115.)

  DUGANNE, PHYLLIS. (_See 1919, 1920._)
    Amateur Rebel. L. H. J. Feb. (6.)
    Fulla--Pep! L. H. J. April. (8.)
    Vanishing Girl. L. H. J. Jan. (6.)

  DUNBAR, OLIVIA HOWARD. (OLIVIA HOWARD DUNBAR TORRENCE.) (1873- .)
        (_See 1915, 1919._) (_H._)
    *Classic Pattern. Scr. Feb. (71:218.)
    *Home of Her Own. Scr. Jan. (71:89.)

  DUNN, JOSEPH ALLAN. (1872- .) (_See 1915, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Crimson Corpuscle. McC. Aug. (17.)

  DUTTON, LOUISE ELIZABETH. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Magic Music. S. E. P. Feb. 18. (28.)
    One Night in June. Met. April. (9.)
    Spooning. S. E. P. Feb. 11. (24.)

  DWYER, JAMES FRANCIS. (1874- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Camp o’ Sunset Glory. Del. May. (10.)

  DYER, WALTER ALDEN. (1878- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Dog Doctor. Del. June. (14.)


  E

  EASTMAN, REBECCA LANE HOOPER. (MRS. WILLIAM FRANKLIN EASTMAN.) (1877-
        .) (_See 1915, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Gentleman with Plaid Eyes. Scr. July. (72:60.)
    Idyl of Madison Square. McC. Sept. (49.)

  EDGINGTON, HARTLEY.
    His Fourth Born. Sun. Feb. (20.)

  EDSON, C. L.
    Smartest Man In America. S. S. May. (96.)

  EHLERT, FAY. (1886- .)
    *Punishment. Pearson. Jan. (48:25.)
    Undertow. Pearson. Nov., ’21. (47:208.)
    ***Vow. Pearson. Feb. (29.)

  ELDRIDGE, PAUL. (_See_ 1918, 1919, 1920.)
    Back to Methusaleh. S. S. Dec., ’21. (73.)

  ELLERBE, ALMA MARTIN ESTABROOK. (1871- .) _and_ ELLERBE, PAUL LEE.
        (_See 1915 under_ ESTABROOK, ALMA MARTIN; _1917 under_ ELLERBE,
        ALMA ESTABROOK; _1919, 1920, 1921 under_ ELLERBE, ALMA MARTIN
        ESTABROOK, _and_ ELLERBE, PAUL LEE.) (_See “H” under_ ELLERBE,
        PAUL LEE.)
    Down But Not Out. Col. April 22. (15). April 29. (13.)
    **“Some People Say They are Married.” Cen. April. (103:846.)

  ELLIOTT, FRANCIS PERRY. (1861- .)
    Surgeon’s Knife. L. H. J. July. (12.)

  EMBREE, ALICE.
    Price of Paint. G. H. Aug. (50.)

  ENGLAND, GEORGE ALLAN. (1877- .) (_See 1916, 1919, 1921._) (_H_.)
    Sauce. Ev. March. (131.)

  ESTY, ANNETTE. (_See 1921._)
    Immune. Cath. W. July. (115:527.)
    *“Rights.” Scr. July. (72:37.)

  EVANS, IDA MAY. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    His Wife’s Money. Cos. July. (69.)
    Out of the Golden Pack. Chic. Trib. Aug. 27.
    To Him That Hath. S. E. P. March 11. (24.)
    Voice of Blanche Perkins. S. E. P. June 17. (18.)
    Way a Girl Treats Her Father. S. E. P. Sept. 23. (14.)
    Yellows. G. H. Nov., ’21. (52.)

  EVERMAN, PAUL.
    Oh, Ballyhoo! Ev. March. (171.)


  F

  FAGIN, N. BRYLLION.
    **Dream. Am. H. Nov. 11, ’21. (42:695.)

  FARAGOH, FRANCIS EDWARDS.
    *Chop Suey. Lib. Nov., ’21. (15.)

  FARNHAM, MABEL.
    Virginia, Aged Ten Years. Cath. W. Jan. (114:520.)

  FARRAR, JOHN. (CHIPMAN.) (1896- .)
    *Edge of Cobbler’s Wood. Book. Dec., ’21. (54:342.)

  FERBER, EDNA. (1887- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Afternoon of a Faun. Col. Nov. 12. ’21. (3.)

  FINCH, ANITA.
    *Tennessee Baby. McC. April. (90.)

  FINGER, CHARLES J. (1871- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    **Hyenas. A. W. Feb. (2:43.)
    *Incongruity. A. W. Nov., ’21. (R.) (1:255.)
    ***Jade Piece. D. D. April. (3:176.)
    ***My Friend Julio. Cen. July. (104:323.)
    **Romero Hotel. Youth. Jan. (1:3.)
    ***Shame of Gold. Cen. March. (103:749.)

  FITZGERALD, FRANCIS SCOTT KEY. (1896- .) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    **Curious Case of Benjamin Button. Col. May 27. (5.)
    Popular Girl. S. E. P. Feb. 11. (3.)
    ***Two For a Cent. Met. April. (23.)

  FITZ-HUGH, MILDRED.
    King’s Son. Ev. March. (84.)

  FLEMING, BOYD.
    When Romance Flirted. Am. Sept. (53.)

  FOHN, M. POWELL.
    Wishes That Were Granted. S. S. May. (107.)

  FOLSOM, ELIZABETH IRONS. (1876- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._)
    **In the Audience. Met. Feb. (23.)

  FOOTE, JOHN TAINTOR. (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Economic Independence. S. E. P. Dec. 10, ’21. (3.)
    Shame On You. S. E. P. Oct. 8, ’21. (5.)
    Song of the Dragon. S. E. P. Nov. 12, ’21. (3.)
    White Grouse. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (6.)

  FORRESTER, IZOLA L. (_See 1918 under_ FORRESTER, IZOLA L. _and_ PAGE,
        MANN; _see 1921 under_ FORRESTER, IZOLA L., _see “H,” under_
        FORRESTER, IZOLA L.)
    “Beloved Son of ----.” Del. June. (11.)

  FOSTER, CHARLES C.
    *“My Son, My Son Absalom!” McC. Aug. (104.)
    On Stony Lonesome. McC. Sept. (87.)
    Tie that Binds. McC. Aug. (106.)

  FOSTER, JULIA B. (_See “H.”_)
    Wild-Feather Pillow. Sun. Sept. (5.)

  FOSTER, MAXIMILIAN. (1872- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1920._) (_H._)
    Between Friends. S. E. P. Sept. 23. (18.)
    Bubbles. S. E. P. Jan. 7. (8.)
    Bucket Boob. S. E. P. June 17. (14.)
    Knock-Out. S. E. P. Feb. 4. (8.)
    My Wife’s Money. S. E. P. March 25. (5.)
    Tape. S. E. P. April 15. (12.)

  FOXHALL, GEORGE.
    Blood Will Tell. Col. July 22. (7.)

  FRAENKEL, H. E.
    *Yellow Quilt. Lib. Dec., ’21. (11.)

  FRANK, WALDO. (1890- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1921._)
    ***Candy Cigar and Stationary. Broom. Jan. (252.)
    ***John the Baptist. Dial. Sept. (72:312.)
    ***Murder. Broom. June. (2:220.)

  FRAZER, ELIZABETH. (_See 1915, 1916, 1920._) (_H._)
    Two-Job Girl. S. E. P. June 10. (32.)

  FREDERICK, JOHN TOWNER. (1893- .) Associate Professor Quinby of the
        English Department. S. S. Jan. (108.)
    ***Legacy. S. S. Oct., ’21. (119.)
    *Mirage. S. S. July. (119.)

  FREEDMAN, DAVID. (1898- .)
    *Intellectual Lover. Pict. R. July. (6.)
    ***Mendel Marantz--Housewife. Pict. R. April. (12.)
    ***Mendel Marantz Moves. Pict. R. June. (10.)
    ***Quest of Sarah. Pict. R. Aug. (14.)

  FREEMAN, MARY E(LEANOR) WILKINS. (1862- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917,
        1918, 1920._) (_H._)
    *Mother-Wings. Harp. M. Dec. ’21. (144:90.)
    *Return. W. H. C. Aug., ’21. (21.)

  FUESSLE, KENNETH.
    Wife of a Man of God. S. S. Oct., ’21. (31.)

  FURMAN, LUCY. (_See “H.”_)
    ***Fourth of July. Atl. July. (130:68.)
    ***Quare Women. Atl. May. (129:594.)
    ***Taking the Night. Atl. June. (129:756.)


  G

  GALE, ZONA. (1874- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *For Show. Del. July. (5.)
    **Simon and the Thief. Cen. Jan. (103 : 337.)

  GARRETT, GARET. (1878- .) (_See 1917, 1920, 1921._)
    *Goose-Man. Cen. Sept. (104 : 669.)
    House a Wop Built. McC. June. (65.)

  GATLIN, DANA. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Girl In the Scandal. Cos. Oct., ’21. (83.)
    Its Triteness Recommends It. Chic. Trib. Nov. 6, ’21.

  GAUL (HARRIET) AVERY. (_See “H.”_)
    Billboard. McC. May. (104.)

  GAUSS, MARIANNE. (_See 1915, 1920._) (_H._)
    Sweet Violet. McC. May. (52.)

  GEER, GERTRUDE MARSHALL.
    Boston Calling. Atl. Aug. (130 : 207.)

  GELZER, JAY. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    In Time of Storm. G. H. July. (31.)
    New York Gets Margy Frances. G. H. Aug. (36.)
    Something to Remember. G. H. May. (81.)
    Sunday Wives. Hear. April. (25.)

  GEROULD, KATHERINE FULLERTON. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Belshazzar’s Letter. Met. June. (15.)
    ***Nature of an Oath. Scr. Aug. (72 : 208.)

  GERRY, MARGARITA SPALDING. (1870- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Indirect Lighting. Harp. M. Oct., ’21. (143 : 602.)

  GIBBS, GEORGE. (1870- .) (_See 1919._) (_H._)
    Face In the Fog. Mod. P. Feb. (14.)
    False Pretenses. Mod. P. Sept. (10.)

  GILBERT, GEORGE. (1874- .) (_See 1916 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Son Who Looked Down On His Father. Am. Sept. (20.)

  GILBERT, KENNETH.
    Burden of Procyon. Sun. April. (10.)
    Debt of the Wilderness. Sun. Jan. (32.)
    Great Feud of Talking River.
    Am. Nov., ’21. (38.)
    Outlaw. Met. Oct., ’21. (17.)
    Patriarch of the Peak. Sun. Aug. (21.)

  GILKYSON, WALTER. (1880- .) (_See 1921._)
    **Empty Bottles. Scr. Feb. (71 : 234.)
    ***Spoken in Jest. Atl. April. (129 : 506.)

  GINGER, BONNIE R. (_See 1915, 1919._) (_H._)
    Decoy. Cen. Oct., ’21. (102 : 899.)
    One-Piece Pattern. McCall. May. (14.)
    Working With a Will. Ev. April. (87.)

  GIZYCKA, ELEANOR.
    Polonaise. Harp. B. Dec., ’21. (23.)

  GLENN, MENDEL G.
    *His Last Sermon. J. For. Nov. ’21. (4 : 1051.)

  GODFREY, WINONA. (1877- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Dauntless Lysander. Chic. Trib. Jan. 15.

  GOLD, MICHAEL.
    *Password to Thought--to Culture. Lib. Feb. (14.)

  GOLDMAN, RAYMOND LESLIE. (_See 1917, 1918._)
    *House of the Crying Child. Met. April. (48.)

  GOLDRICK, HATTIE B.
    Perennials. Pict. R. Feb. (12.)

  GOODHUE, STODDARD.
    Accusing Voice. Ev. April. (145.)
    First Stone. Ev. March. (72.)
    Magic Wheel. Ev. Feb. (43.)
    Test-tube Necromancy. Ev. Jan. (145.)

  GOODLOE, ABBIE CARTER. (1867- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Her Story. Hol. May. (16.)
    **Palmore. Scr. May. (71 : 576.)

  GOODMAN, HENRY. (_See 1921._)
    **Berth. Clay. Spring. (1 : 3.)
    *In His Cups. Clay. Summer No. (36.)
    ***Thomas. Mid. May. (8 : 145.)

  GRAEVE, OSCAR. (1885- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***Headlines. S. S. April. (55.)

  GRANGER, HENRY FRANCIS.
    “Gee! Let’s Go!” Ev. Sept. (23.)

  GRANT, BRUCE.
    Sob Stuff. Youth. Jan. (1 : 49.)

  GREENE, OLIVE WARD. (_See 1919._)
    Lantern. Met. April. (27.)

  GREGORY, FRANCIS _and_ KILMAN, JULIAN.
    **Pull-Up. D. D. April. (3 : 197.)


  H

  HAAREM, PAUL J.
    Man Who Sought Experience. Sun. Feb. (65.)

  HAGEDORN, HERMANN. (1882- .) (_See 1915_) _and_ LANG, LINCOLN.
    Devil’s Twins. Met. May. (27.)

  HALE, LOUISE CLOSSER. (1872- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919._) (_H._)
    Good Time Evans’ Best Time. Harp B. Sept. (48.)

  HALL, AMANDA BENJAMIN. (_See 1921._)
    Dancing Days. S. S. Oct., ’21. (107.)
    Taggard Tries Them Out. S. S. March. (59.)

  “HALL, ELIZA CALVERT.” (MRS. ELIZA CAROLINE (CALVERT) OBENCHAIN.)
        (1856- .) (_See “H.”_)
    Horoscope. W. H. C. Jan. (17.)

  “HALL, HOLWORTHY.” (HAROLD EVERETT PORTER.) (1887- .) (_See 1915,
        1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Boots That Didn’t Fit. Am. June. (43.)
    Duke and the Ducats. S. E. P. July 22. (6.)
    Four Sides of the Triangle. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (23.)
    Girl Who Could Cry Real Tears--and Finally Did. Am. Feb. (25.)
    Good Egg. S. E. P. Sept. 2. (12.)
    Great Man’s Son. Am. Nov., ’21. (21.)
    In Code. Col. Feb. 18. (3.)
    Lost--Two Purses and Two Hearts. Am. Oct., ’21. (44.)
    Macartney. Col. May 6. (5.)
    No Postcards. McCall. Sept. (7.)
    Right Crowd. McCall. April. (6.)
    Saturday Money. S. E. P. Jan. 7. (5.)
    That Other Woman. Am. March. (23.)
    White-Collar Beggar. Del. May. (5.)
    Why Violet Kennard Left the Stage. Am. April. (49.)

  HALL, WILBUR. (JAY.) (_See 1915,1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,1921._)
    Bible ’Bo. S. E. P. Oct. 15, ’21. (10.)
    Gentle Criminal. S. E. P. April 22. (12.)
    Happy Ending. Sun. Sept. (24.)
    His Own Territory. S. E. P. Dec. 31. ’21. (6.)
    Shirt Sleeves. S. E. P. Aug. 12. (16.)
    Three Wise Hombres. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (86.)
    Wanted Immediately. S. E. P. Aug. 26. (12.)

  HAMBY, WILLIAM HENRY. (1875- .) (_See 1916, 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Unwritten Law and the Prophets. Sun. Dec., ’21. (19.) Jan. (37.)

  HAMILTON, DOROTHY M.
    Two On the Same Floor. Pag. Oct.-Nov., ’21. (13.)

  HAMILTON, GERTRUDE BROOKE. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Handful of Moonlight. G. H. June. (44.)
    Mothered. G. H. March. (56.)

  HAMILTON, H. M. (_See 1921._)
    Phantom Caravel. Les. W. Nov. 12, ’21. (133 : 658.)
    Spawn of the Sea. Les. W. Oct. 22, ’21. (133 : 550.)

  HAMOT, ESSE B.
    Funny About Wives! Am. Aug. (51.)

  HAMPTON, EDGAR LLOYD. (_See 1915,1920, 1921._)
    Talisman of Wo Gee. Sun. Feb. (12.)

  HANNA, JAMES K. (_See “H.”_)
    Cousin May. Red Bk. Feb. (71.)
    Henri’s Niece. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (67.)
    Insomnia. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (44.)
    Noma. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (76.)
    Tip from Fogarty. Red Bk. Jan. (66.)
    Twenty-fourth Figure. Red Bk. March. (83.)

  HARDING, BEATRICE.
    World and the Lover. Sun. Feb. (40.)

  HARDY, ARTHUR SHERBURNE. (1847- .) (_See 1916, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Needless Serpent. Harp. M. Nov., ’21. (143 : 715.)
    *Rebecca. Atl. Oct., ’21. (128 : 525.)

  HARRIS, CORRA (MAY WHITE). (1869- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1920._) (_H._)
    Don Quixote. McCall. Jan. (15.)
    My Aunt Clarinda’s Orphan. L. H. J. Oct., ’21. (10.)
    Pageant Widow. L. H. J. April. (10.)

  HARRIS, FRANK. (1856- .) (_See “H.”_)
    *“Extra Eight Days.” Pearson. March. (9.)
    *Fit of Madness. Pearson. April. (15.)
    *Gambler’s Luck. (R.) Pearson. Nov., ’21. (47 : 226.)
    Gambler’s Luck. Pearson. Jan. (48 : 22.)
    *Love Is My Sin. (R.) Pearson. Dec., ’21. (47 : 253.)
    ***Mad Love. (R.) Pearson. Oct., ’21. (47 : 170.)

  HARRIS, KENNETT. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Bung Starter. S. E. P. March 18.(5.)
    Concerning Joe and Jemima. S. E. P. Aug. 5. (9.)
    Father Was Right. S. E. P. Feb. 25. (5.)
    Sensitive Soul. Red Bk. Sept. (42.)
    To One Thing Constant Never. S. E. P. Dec. 17, ’21. (8.)

  HART, FRANCES NOYES. (1890- .) (_See 1921._)
    ***American. Pict. R. Nov., ’21. (12.)
    Aunt Rita. L. H. J. May. (8.)
    Concerning Dearly Beloved--. L. H. J. June. (18.)
    *Delilah. Pict. R. Dec., ’21. (26.)
    Light Magic. McCall. Aug. (8.) Sept. (15.)
    O Young Lochinvar! L. H. J. Sept. (14.)
    Penelope and the Poet. L. H. J. Aug. (12.)
    *Philip the Gay. L. H. J. Feb. (3.)
    *Prince Rides By. L. H. J. April. (3.)
    *There Was a Lady. S. E. P. Feb. 18. (10.)

  HARTMAN, LEE FOSTER. (1879- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920._) (_H._)
    Honest Luella. Hear. May. (39.)
    **Out of the Air. Harp. M. Sept. (145 : 490.)
    *Parrot. Red Bk. Jan. (53.)
    **Poppies of Wu Fong. Harp. M. Nov., ’21. (143 : 739.)

  HATCH, LEONARD. (_See 1916, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    “My Heart Leaps Up--.” Outl. Nov. 23, ’21. (129 : 477.)

  HAWES, CHARLES BOARDMAN. (1889- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919._)
    **Man on the Raft. O. R. Feb. (9.)
    ***Out of the Storm. O. R. Dec., ’21. (5.)
    ***Peter Ronco. O. R. Oct., ’21. (29.)
    **Zenk. O. R. Nov., ’21. (4.)

  HEARN, LAFCADIO. (1850-1904.) (_See “H.”_)
    **Chemise of Margarita Pareja. D. D. Oct., ’21. (2 : 128.)

  HECHT, BEN. (1896- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1921._)
    *Adventure of the Broken Mirror. Harp. B. Sept. (64.)
    At the Feet of the Goddess. S. S. Nov., ’21. (99.)
    ***Winkelburg. S. S. March. (77.)

  HEFFERNAN, DEAN L.
    He Was Serving Two Masters--One of Them Golf. Am. Oct. ’21. (11.)

  HELLMAN, SAM.
    Outguesser. S. E. P. June 3. (10.)
    Shoshone Catapult. S. E. P. July 29. (12.)
    Tiny Skims the Cream. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (14.)
    Twosome at Tuara. S. E. P. Aug. 26. (6.)

  HENRIKSON, CARL I. (_See 1915, 1916._)
    **Keeping House in Boytime. P. P. M. June. (6.)
    **Music in Boytime. P. P. M. April. (7.)

  HEPBURN, ELIZABETH NEWPORT.
    Doctor’s Wife. G. H. July. (36.)

  HERGESHEIMER, JOSEPH. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Tea Houses. S. E. P. March 4. (8.)
    *Tide Runner. S. E. P. Dec. 3, ’21. (5.)
    ***Token. S. E. P. Oct. 22, ’21. (12.)
    **Traveler’s Repose. S. E. P. April 8. (8.)
    *Wasps. S. E. P. May 13. (5.)

  HERRICK, ELIZABETH. (_See 1915, 1917, 1919._) (_H._)
    Matter With Peter. Scr. April. (71 : 465.)
    Wall Dog. Scr. Sept. (72 : 315.)

  HERRICK, ROBERT. (1868- .) (_See 1916._) (_H._)
    *Weakest Link. Mun. March. (215.)

  HEWES, ROBERT E. (_See 1919, 1920._)
    Maria San Ramon. Met. July. (55.)

  HEWES, WILLIAM G.
    Two Gentlemen of Venice. D. D. Sept. (4 : 111.)

  HICKS, JANE. (_See 1921._)
    *Justice on Rattlesnake. McC. Aug. (39.)
    Pi-Anna Gentleman. Del. Feb. (5.)

  HOPPER, ELSIE VAN DE WATER.
    *Flight of the White Herons. Scr. Nov., ’21. (70 : 593.)

  HOPPER, JAMES. (MARIE.) (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Bond. G. H. Sept. (69.)
    From the Dregs. Les. W. Dec. 3, ’21. (133 : 766.)
    Glass Cage. G. H. May. (34.)
    *In the Fog. Les. W. Jan. 14. (134 : 46.)
    **Jerrup. Cen. Aug. (104 : 580.)
    *Nonpareil. S. S. May. (5.)
    Quick Readjustment. Les. W. Feb. 18. (134 : 222.)
    Santa O’Toole. Les. W. Dec. 17, ’21. (838.)
    ***Ship In the Bottle. G. H. Jan. (10.)
    Soldadera. Les. W. Oct. 8, ’21. (133 : 481.)

  HORN, R. DE S. (_See 1920._)
    Flying Norseman. Col. Sept. 2. (10.)
    Jinx of the Shandon Belle. Col. Sept. 30. (9.)

  HOROWITZ, NATHAN.
    Sabbath. J. For. Oct., ’21. (4 : 994.)

  HORTON, KATE E. (_See 1918._)
    Romance With a Capital “R.” McCall. Aug. (11.)

  HUGHES, RUPERT. (1872- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
        (_H._)
    From the Ground Up. Cos. Oct., ’21. (21.)

  HULL, ALEXANDER. (1887- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    ***Bain’s Hole. Scr. April. (71 : 418.)
    “Stick Around, Bill!” Sun. Aug. (36.)

  HUMPHREYS, M.
    **Baby. Pearson. April. (9.)

  HUNT, FRAZIER. (1885- .) (_See 1916, 1921._) (_H._)
    Me for Manila. Col. Oct. 29, ’21. (13.)

  HUNT, LIAN.
    *Gift of the Yellow Gods. W. F. Sept. (57.)
    ***King of the Reef. Pict. R. Jan. (10.)

  HUNTING, EMA SUCKOW. (1885- .) (_See 1920._)
    True Love. Mid. June. (8 : 204.)

  HUSSEY, L. M. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Eva Bianca’s Faithful Lover. S. S. April. (113.)
    Good Church People. S. S. May. (89.)
    **Grand Gesture. S. S. March. (111.)
    Man-Woman. S. S. Feb. (83.)
    *Mother. S. S. June. (105.)
    *Old Woman of Mole Street. S. S. July. (97.)
    *Romance of a Little Man. S. S. Dec., ’21. (85.)
    Spell. S. S. Jan. (97.)

  HUTCHISON, JAMES L.
    Johansen. Ev. Sept. (121.)


  I

  IRWIN, INEZ HAYNES. (INEZ HAYNES GILLMORE.) (1873- .) (_See 1915
        under_ GILLMORE, INEZ HAYNES; _1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920
        under_ IRWIN, INEZ HAYNES.) (_See “H” under_ GILLMORE, INEZ
        HAYNES.)
    Alice. Met. March. (48.)
    Barbara. Met. Sept. (31.)
    Bridegroom’s Father. W. H. C. April. (5.)
    Captain Intervenes. McCall. April. (9.)
    Constance. Met. Jan. (24.)
    Eternal Triangle. Chic. Trib. Oct. 9, ’21.
    Flapper Who Found Herself. Chic. Trib. May 21.
    Fredericka. Met. Nov., ’21. (28.)
    Patty. Met. Oct., ’21. (9.)
    Hester. Met. May. (16.)
    Re-enter Mama. McCall. Jan. (8.)

  IRWIN, WALLACE. (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Buttermilk Maid. S. E. P. Nov. 5, ’21. (5.)
    Her Own Life. Red Bk. June. (49.)
    Life of Jeremiah Bartlett. S. E. P. Oct. 1, ’21. (8.)
    Magic Circle. S. E. P. Feb. 18. (5.)
    Real Story. S. E. P. April 15. (18.)

  IRWIN, WILL(IAM HENRY) (1873- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Gate Opens. S. E. P. Aug. 5. (14.)
    Green Magic. Chic. Trib. Aug. 13.
    **Hoppy Strikes Twelve. S. E. P. Dec. 3, ’21. (8.)
    Out of the Ruins. S. E. P. Dec. 10, ’21. (8.)


  J

  JACKSON, CHARLES TENNEY. (1874- .) (_See 1916, 1918, 1920._) (H.)
    *Horse of Hurricane Reef. Sh. St. Sept. 10. (101.)
    **Man Who Cursed the Lilies. Sh. St. Dec. 10, ’21. (163.)

  JAY, MAE FOSTER. (_See 1918, 1919._)
    It’s An Ill Wind--. Sun. Dec., ’21. (48.)

  JITRO, WILLIAM C. G. (1890- .)
    ***Resurrection and the Life. Lit. R. Spring. (49.)

  JOHNSON, ARTHUR. (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
        (_H._)
    *Adelaide’s Lion. Harp. M. Sept. (145 : 435.)

  JOHNSON, JAMES WOOD. (1896- .)
    *Moonlight. W. F. Aug. (51.)

  JOHNSON, OLIVE MCCLINTIC. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Doublin’ Bank. Col. April 22. (13.)
    Relief of Truckrow. Col. Jan. 14. (7.)

  JOHNSON, OWEN. (MCMAHON.) (1878- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1921._) (_H._)
    Breaking Into Society. Hear. June. (53.)
    One Dance After Another. Hear. April. (30.)
    Sentimental Plunge. Hear. Oct.,’21. (18.)
    Sinfulness of Skippy. Hear. July. (61.)
    Something Young. Hear. Jan. (46.)

  JOHNSTON, CALVIN. (_See 1915, 1917, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    One-Man World. S. E. P. June 3. (22.)
    *Tollhouse. Pop. July 7. (110.)

  JONES, CARTER BROOKE.
    Lindaman. S. S. Sept. (37.)
    Semper Fidelis. S. S. June. (117.)

  JONES, THANE MILLER.
    **Drudge. Scr. May. (71 : 614.)

  JORDAN, ELIZABETH. (GARVER.) (1867- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Billy Makes It Beautiful. Mod. P. June. (12.)
    Blakes Meet Their Problem. Chic. Trib. April 23.
    Farrand’s Last Role. Chic. Trib. Aug. 6.
    Their Treasures Here Below. Chic. Trib. Feb. 26.

  JOSEPHSON, MATTHEW.
    *Precious Rage. D. D. Aug. (4 : 75.)
    Woeful Peregrination. D. D. July. (4 : 25.)


  K

  KAHLER, HUGH MACNAIR. (1883- .) (_See 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Crackling of Thorns. S. E. P. Nov. 12, ’21. (8.)
    Deadfall. S. E. P. Aug. 12. (8.)
    Helpless Holiday. Col. Feb. 11. (3.)
    Hero. S. E. P. July 29. (6.)
    In a Hundred Years. S. E. P. July 1. (5.)
    Inside. S. E. P. April 8. (14.)
    Play. S. E. P. May 6. (8.)
    Pocket Snake. S. E. P. Nov. 26, ’21. (12.)
    Relativity. S. E. P. Jan. 7. (10.)
    Some Mischief Still. S. E. P.
    June 10. (14.)
    Tenth Law. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (18.)
    Torch. L. H. J. June. (6.)

  KELLAND, CLARENCE BUDINGTON. (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Call In the Night From the
    “Devil’s Bowl.” Am. Oct., ’21. (39.)
    Case of the Rival Familiars.
    Pict. R. April. (22.)
    Doctor Uses a Strange Weapon. Am. Dec., ’21. (23.)
    Dust In the Eye. S. E. P. Jan. 28. (14.)
    Hardwood Honeymoon. S. E. P. Feb. 25. (10.)
    Harum-scarum. Ev. July. (55.)
    Masquerade of Justice. Pict. R. May. (24.)
    Scattergood Remembers the Days of His Youth. Am. April. (31.)
    Squire Truman Turns a Plank. S. E. P. June 17. (10.)
    Till the Joint Cracked. S. E. P. May 20. (22.)
    Wimmin Is Wimmin. S. E. P. April 8. (28.)

  KEMBLE, EDWARD WINDSOR. (1861- .) (_See “H.”_)
    *William. Scr. April. (71 : 497.)

  KEMPTON, KENNETH PAYSON.
    Lowered Lights with Music. Met. Nov., ’21. (15.)

  KENNEDY, EDITH.
    *Glamour. Atl. July. (130 : 26.)

  KENNON, HARRY B. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Billy’s First Love. A. W. Dec., ’21. (2 : 14.)
    No Story. A. W. Oct., ’21. (1 : 235.)

  KENYON, CAMILLA E. L. (_See 1917,1918, 1919, 1920._) (_H._)
    Candor of Augusta Claire. Scr. June. (71 : 741.)
    Not Told On the Stand. Red Bk. Sept. (92.)

  KERR, ANNIE B.
    Wednesdays. Outl. July 12. (131 : 449.)

  KERR, SOPHIE. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_See “H” under_ UNDERWOOD, SOPHIE KERR.)
    Apricot Flowers. McCall. Feb. (10.)
    High Corrosive. S. E. P. Dec. 10, ’21. (18.)
    Price of Pearls. S. E. P. May 27. (11.)
    Probability and Error. Chic. Trib. July 2.
    There Was a Great Camp Meeting. S. E. P. June 10. (5.)
    “Tigers Is Only Cats.” W. H. C. Feb. (14.)

  KEYES, FRANCES PARKINSON. (MRS. HENRY WILDER KEYES.) (1885- .)
    Cherry Blossoms. Del. April. (12.)
    Court End of Town. Del. May. (12.)
    Dogwood In Rock Creek Park. Del. June. (5.)
    Lafayette Square. Del. March. (6.)
    Meridian Hill. Del. Sept. (8.)
    Sheridan Circle. Del. Nov., ’21. (4.)

  KILBOURNE, FANNIE. (“MARY ALEXANDER.”) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1920,
        1921 under_ KILBOURNE, FANNIE, _and 1917, under_ ALEXANDER,
        MARY.)
    Feminine Slant. Red Bk. March. (68.)
    His Gift. L. H. J. Feb. (14.)
    Mr. Flint of “The Footlight.” Red Bk. Jan. (70.)
    Peyton and Peyton. L. H. J. April. (6.)
    Putting One Over on Mother. Am. July. (51.)
    Sincerely--by Request. W. H. C. Nov., ’21. (9.)
    What the Professor Saw in Elaine. Am. Nov., ’21. (29.)

  KILMAN, JULIAN. (1878- .) (_See 1921._)
    ***Laugh. D. D. Oct., ’21. (2 : 131.)
    *Quaint Tale of Jem Creedle. Br. St. April. (13.)

  KILMAN, JULIAN. (_See_ GREGORY, FRANCIS, _and_ KILMAN, JULIAN.)

  KIMBALL, MARIE.
    *Lucile. Pearson. Dec., ’21. (47 : 248.)

  KIRK, R. G. (_See 1917, 1921._)
    Friends of the Greyhound. Cos. Oct., ’21. (53.)
    Fur Chaser. S. E. P. March 11. (8.)
    Gun-Shy. S. E. P. Oct., 22, ’21. (10.)
    Holder-Down. S. E. P. March 18. (3.)
    MacRonan. Met. Nov., ’21. (23.)
    Scrapper O’Doon. S. E. P. July 22. (10.)
    Skull Cracker. S. E. P. Sept. 2. (6.)

  KIRKLAND, WINIFRED MARGARETTA. (1872- .) (_H._)
    Mother of His Children. Scr. Nov., ’21. (70 : 605.)

  KLAHR, EVELYN GILL. (_See 1915, 1917._) (_H._)
    Nurses. W. H. C. Nov., ’21. (22.)

  KLOOMOK, ISAAC.
    *Her Death. Clay. Spring. (1 : 34.)
    **Still Waters. Clay. Summer No. (18.)

  KNISTER, RAYMOND.
    **Mist-Green Oats. Mid. Aug.-Sept. (8 : 254.)
    **One Thing. Mid. Jan. (8 : 1.)

  KOLLOCK, ADELE FORCE. (_See 1918._)
    Old Hugh Kenyon Regains His Youth. Am. March. (42.)

  KOMROFF, MANUEL. (1890- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    ***Burning Beard. Dial. March. (72 : 259.)

  KORNGOLD, RALPH. (_See 1921._)
    *Doubter. A. W. July. (2 : 121.)

  KRAUS, HARRY. (_See 1920._)
    Birthmark. S. S. Aug. (37.)

  KUMMER, FREDERIC ARNOLD. (1873- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Missing Ancestors. Hear. Feb. (41.)
    Woman to Woman. Hear. July. (49.)

  KYNE, PETER BERNARD. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1921._) (_H._)
    Brothers Under Their Skins. Cos. Oct., ’21. (42.)
    Curious Tribe of McFee. Cos. Sept. (95.)
    It Shall Be Done! Cos. Aug. (74.)
    Point! Cos. July. (36.)


  L

  LADD, JANE.
    *Orange Butter Dish. Tod. March. (4.)

  LANE, JEREMY.
    Prince Four. McC. Aug. (44.)

  LANE, ROSE WILDER. (1877- .) (_See 1919 under_ O’BRIEN, FREDERICK
        _and_ LANE, ROSE WILDER.)
    ***Innocence. Harp. M. April. (144 : 577.)

  LANG, LINCOLN. (_See_ HAGEDORN, HERMANN, _and_ LANG, LINCOLN.)

  LANIER, HENRY WYSHAM. (1873- .) (_See “H.”_)
    Circumstantial. Col. Oct. 15, ’21. (11.)

  LARDNER, RING W. (1885- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Battle of the Century. S. E. P. Oct. 29. ’21. (12.)
    Caddy’s Diary. S. E. P. March 11. (12.)
    ***Golden Honeymoon. Cos. July. (59.)
    Some Like Them Cold. S. E. P. Oct. 1, ’21. (17.)

  LARSON, EMMA MAURITZ. (_See 1915, 1916, 1919._) (_H._)
    Greenhorn. W. H. C. Oct., ’21. (17.)

  LARSON, MABEL CURTIUS. (_See 1920._)
    Wings of Youth. W. H. C. Feb. (19.)

  LAUFERTY, LILIAN. (_See 1919, 1921._)
    Running Water. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (71.)

  LAWRENCE, EMMA. (MRS. JOHN S. LAWRENCE.) (_See 1921._)
    Floor of Heaven. Atl. Aug. (130 : 157.)
    *Gone Away. Atl. Sept. (130 : 372.)
    **Jury. Atl. Oct., ’21. (128 : 458.)
    *Yellow Roses. Atl. Nov., ’21. (128 : 634.)

  LEA, FANNY HEASLIP. (MRS. H. P. AGEE.) (1884- .) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    After My Fashion. McCall. July. (6.)
    “All Ashore That’s Going Ashore.” G. H. Oct., ’21. (26.)
    Contact. McCall. March. (9.)
    Good Hunting. Del. Oct., ’21. (10.)
    It Gives a Lovely Light. G. H. March. (10.)
    Love-in-a-Mist. Chic. Trib. Feb. 19.
    Mothers. G. H. Aug. (22.)

  LEACH, PAUL R. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    From the High Places. Col. Oct. 15, ’21. (3.)
    Still in the Service. Col. July 1. (13.)
    Way to a Man’s Heart. Col. June 3. (9.)

  LE BOUTILLIER, CORNELIA GEER. (1894- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919
        under_ GEER, CORNELIA THROOP; _1920 under_ LE BOUTILLIER,
        CORNELIA GEER.)
    Banter. W. H. C. Feb. (22.)

  LEE, JENNETTE. (BARBOUR PERRY.) (1860- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917,
        1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Island Window. Harp. M. Aug. (145 : 295.)
    ***Man Who Made Poetry Hum. Scr. July. (72 : 109.)

  LEE, MUNA. (_See 1915, 1920, 1921._)
    Embarkation to Cytherea. S. S. Aug. (127.)
    Small-Town Episode. S. S. May. (111.)

  LENGEL, WILLIAM C. (_See 1921._)
    Song He Was Ashamed Of. Met. May. (40.)

  LEONARD, ORVILLE H. (_See 1921._)
    *Bad Ike. W. St. Dec. 17, ’21. (108.)
    *Green Gold. W. St. Oct. 15, ’21. (72.)
    *Last of the Vigilantes. W. St. Dec. 10, ’21. (47.)
    *Same Breed. W. St. Aug. 12. (48.)
    Seein’ It’s Christmas. W. St. Dec. 24, ’21. (51.)
    *Strain of Two Deserts. W. St. July 1. (51.)
    *Well Matched Pair. W. St. March 11. (87.)
    *Young and Spry. W. St. Nov. 19, ’21. (44.)

  “LESSING, BRUNO.” (RUDOLPH BLOCK.) (1870- .) (_See 1916, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    All In a Night. Hear. June. (70.)
    Business Before Matrimony. Hear. March. (37.)
    Christmas Episode. Hear. Dec., ’21. (49.)
    Envy--A Parable. Hear. Jan. (48.)
    Humorous Story of Natzi. Hear. Oct., ’21. (50.)
    Lapidowitz Dines Out. Hear. July. (77.)
    Love and Crime. Hear. April. (37.)
    Wedding Present. Hear. May. (24.)
    What Nicolo Never Knew. Hear. Nov., ’21. (46.)

  LETHBRIDGE, OLIVE.
    Sheik’s Wife. McCall. April. (10.)

  LEVICK, MILNES. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    **Echo from Another Century, S. S. Dec., ’21. (81.)

  LEWIS, ADDISON. (1889- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
    People First--Blouses Second. Col. Feb. 11. (7.)

  LEWIS, CHARLOTTE E.
    Intelligibles. G. H. July. (49.)

  LEWIS, LLOYD D. (_See_ MACARTHUR, CHARLES G. _and_ LEWIS LLOYD D.)

  LEWIS, ORLANDO FAULKLAND. (1873- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Alibi. Red Bk. March. (64.)
    Back Draft. Red Bk. July. (59.)
    Crime Is Crime. Red Bk. June. (98.)
    Day of Judgment. Red Bk. Oct. ’21. (86.)
    Man Smith. Red Bk. May. (55.)
    Return of Ainsworth. Col. Jan. 28. (7.)
    Twenty Minutes. Red Bk. April. (43.)

  LEWIS, OSCAR.
    *Essie Compton Letters. S. S. July. (104.)

  LIEBE, HAPSBURG. (_See 1915, 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Beyond the River. Col. March 25. (9.)

  LINDSAY, DONALD. (_See 1920._)
    *Bondage. Pag. Dec.-Jan. (18.)

  LISTER, WALTER B. (_See 1921._)
    Helpmeet. S. S. Sept. (48.)

  LIVINGSTON, ARMSTRONG. (_See 1918._)
    Beyond the Horizon. Met. Jan. (31.)
    God’s Machinery. Met. Feb. (24.)

  LIVINGSTON, DOROTHY.
    Love-Vine. Scr. Feb. (71 : 209.)

  LOCKWOOD, SCAMMON. (_See 1916, 1920, 1921._)
    Done by Statistics. Les. W. May 20 (134:664.)
    Revenge. Les. W. April 8. (134:472.)

  LOFTING, HILARY.
    Blanco Loop. Met. March. (25.)

  LONG, E. WALDO. (_See 1921._)
    Four Words to the Wise. Am. Feb. (40.)

  LONG, HANIEL.
    **Abdication of Young Rome. Wave. June. (3.)
    **Amirace In Rhidago. D. D. April. (3:187.)
    *Antonia and Dionigi. Wave. Feb. (19.)
    *City of the Chameleons. Free. April 26. (5:151.)
    *Paragraphs Concerning the Princess Vehana. Broom. Dec., ’21. (1 :
        138.)
    **Professor of Dreams. Cen. July. (104 : 355.)

  LOOS, ANITA. (_See 1918._)
    Death Mates. S. S. March. (35.)

  LOVELACE, MAUD _and_ DELOS.
    Borghild’s Clothes. Mod. P. April. (12.)

  LOVEWELL, REINETTE. (_See 1920._)
    Letters That Break a Man. Am. July. (25.)

  LOWRY, ROBERT P.
    **Ghost on the Wire. Scr. Aug. (72 : 153.)

  LUBITZ, BEATRICE.
    *Shorter Course. Arch. March. (1.)

  LUTHER, MARK LEE. (1872- .) (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    Cheerful Giver. Mod. P. May. (12.)

  LYLE, JR., EUGENE P. (1873- .) (_See 1915, 1916._) (_H._)
    Ring-Tailed Galliwampus. S. E. P. July 15. (12.)
    Velvet Glove Stuff. S. E. P. Sept. 16. (16.)

  LYMAN, CHESTER L. (_See 1918._)
    Nothing But the Truth. McC. April. (14.)

  LYONS, EUGENE.
    **Mud. Pearson. July. (37.)


  M

  MACARTHUR, CHARLES G. _and_ LEWIS, LLOYD D.
    Hang It All. S. S. Dec., ’21. (43.)

  MCBLAIR, ROBERT. (_See 1919._)
    Bread Caster. W. H. C. Oct., ’21. (19.)
    *“One of the Beautiful Few.” Mid. Jan. (8 : 27.)

  MCCALLUM, MELLA RUSSELL. (_See 1916._)
    Tangle-Garden. Met. July. (56.)

  MCCLOY, WILLIAM C.
    Buddha Pearl. Ev. Dec., ’21. (101.)

  MCCLURE, JOHN. (_See 1916, 1917, 1920._)
    *Margotte. Br. St. May. (41.)
    *Wraith of Pompilius. S. S. Sept. (84.)

  MCCULLOUGH, HENRY.
    Precursors. D. D. Dec., ’21. (2 : 264.)

  MCCUTCHEON, GEORGE BARR. (1866- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Which Twitchcomb. Chic. Trib. June 4.

  MCELLIOTT, MABEL. (_See 1921._)
    Vamp. S. S. Oct., ’21. (75.)

  MACFARLANE, PETER CLARK. (1871- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Love and Learn. Chic. Trib. May 14.
    Princess of the Purple Star. Red Bk. Aug. (83.)

  MCGIBENY, DONALD. (_See 1920._)
    Santa Claus Pasha. Pict. R. Dec., ’21. (14.)

  MACHARG, WILLIAM BRIGGS. (1872- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Correspondent. Hear. June. (35.)
    Myself--Loris. Hear. May (16.)
    Wine. Hear. March. (8.)

  MACKAY, CLAUDE.
    Little Lincoln. Lib. Feb. (24.)

  MCKEON, RICHARD.
    Shift of Emphasis. S. S. Feb. (99.)

  MCNAMARA, BERNARD J.
    Fra Innocenzo’s Crucifix. Cath. W. April. (115 : 85.)

  MCNUTT, WILLIAM SLAVENS. (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    Camera Joe. Col. Sept. 23. (3.)
    Cocky Lewis. Col. Aug. 5. (3.)
    Don’t Be a Sap. McC. June. (70.)
    Do Your Stuff. Col. March 18. (3.)
    Heirs of the Kingdom. Col. May 20. (3.)
    His Good Name. Col. July 22. (3.)

  MCPEAK, IVAL. (1889- .) (_See 1915._)
    ***Prairie Symphony. Mid. Sept.-Oct. (7 : 335.)

  MAGUIRE, ROBERT.
    Or Forever After. D. D. Feb. (3 : 90.)

  MAHONEY, JAMES. (1893- .) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    ***“Taxis of Fate.” Cen. Nov., ’21. (103 : 132.)

  MANGHAM, HERBERT J.
    His Public. S. S. Aug. (56.)

  MANNING, MARIE. (MRS. HERMAN E. GASCH.) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Late for Dinner. Harp. M. April. (144 : 622.)

  MARIN, LUIS MUNOZ.
    Finis. S. S. June. (77.)

  MARKEY, CORINNE HARRIS.
    “Terms to be Arranged.” W. H. C. Aug., ’21. (25.)

  MARKEY, GENE. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Anglophile. Ev. May. (173.)
    **Antiques. Book. Feb. (54 : 555.)
    Cinderella Game. McCall. June. (14.)
    Darling Dilettante. Harp. B. Dec., ’21. (46.)
    Irony. Wave. June. (23.)

  MARKS, JEANNETTE A. (1875- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918._) (_H._)
    *Old Man. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (6.)

  MARQUAND, J. P. (_See 1921._)
    Different from Other Girls. L. H. J. July. (8.)
    Eight Million Bubbles. S. E. P. Jan. 28. (8.)
    How Willie Came Across. S. E. P. July 8. (5.)
    Land of Bunk. S. E. P. Sept. 16. (5.)
    Only a Few of Us Left. S. E. P. Jan. 14. (3.)

  MARSDEN, GRIFFIS. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
   Out of Nothing. Pag. Oct.-Nov., ’21. (20.)

  MARSH, GEORGE T. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    McCleod’s Partner. Red Bk. Jan. (37.)

  MARSHALL, ANDREW.
    Felicitas. McC. April. (73.)

  MARSHALL, EDISON. (1894- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920, 1921._)
    *Furs. Red Bk. April. (75.)

  MARSHALL, RACHEL _and_ TERRELL, MAVERICK. (_See 1917._)
    From the Diary of Ninea Sru. Sun. Oct., ’21. (44.)

  MARTIN, HUGH S.
    Man from Headquarters. Ev. April. (50.)
    Missing Plans. Ev. June. (52.)
    Pearls of Novgorod. Ev. Aug. (123.)
    Vengeance. Ev. July. (113.)

  MASON, ELMER BROWN. (_See 1915, 1920._) (_H._)
    Soviet In Ward Eleven. McC. April. (54.)

  MASON, GRACE SARTWELL. (1877- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._)
    Certain Something. Red Bk. May. (86.)

  MASON, LAURA KENT. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Wife’s Side. S. S. Sept. (107.)

  MATTER, JOHN.
    Team Work. Met. June. (56.)

  MAURY, REUBEN H.
    *Man Who Could Shovel. Red Bk. Aug. (76.)
    One Minute On the 600. Red Bk. May. (90.)
    Success. Red Bk. Sept. (65.)

  MEANS, E(LDRED). K(URTZ). (1878- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    *Hoodoo Sermon Text. Mun. Oct., ’21. (129.)
    *Trouble-Scooter. Mun. March. (334.)

  MELLETT, BERTHE KSVATVOLD. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1921._)
    Allison Shoots a Line. Col. Dec. 3, ’21. (9.)
    Glad Eyes. Del. Oct., ’21. (15.)
    Kidnapping of Puppy Losher. Col. April 29. (7.)
    Miss Bolivar. Del. Dec., ’21. (15.)
    No Bomb in Gilead. Del. Aug. (12.)
    Party Was a Knockout. Col. Jan. 21. (7.)
    Retreat. Col. June 24. (11.)
    Sabine Woman. Col. July 15. (7.)
    Weakly Bugle. Col. Feb. 18. (7.)

  MEZQUIDA, ANNA BLAKE. (_See 1915, 1920._)
    Dancing Feet. Ev. Nov., ’21. (28.)
    Judge Not! Am. May. (21.)

  MERWIN, SAMUEL. (1874- .) (_See 1915, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    “Armagedeon.” S. E. P. Feb. 25. (12.)
    ***Axiom of Peter Bell Ivor. S. E. P. April 1. (8.)
    Breathing Time. S. E. P. March 4. (13.)
    Gold One. Chic. Trib. April 16.
    It’ll Always Be Something. S. E. P. Jan. 21. (14.)
    Slack Wire. S. E. P. Feb. 11. (13.)
    Tone. S. E. P. Oct. 29, ’21. (13.)
    Washington Avenue. S. E. P. Oct. 15. ’21. (5.)

  MESSIER, ARTHUR J.
    “It’s a Long, Long Road--.” Mod. P. March. (16.)

  METTA, V. B.
    *Lover of Balkis. Pearson. May. (36.)

  MILLER, ALICE DUER. (1874- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Morning After. S. E. P. July 29. (5.)
    Return to Normalcy. S. E. P. April 22. (3.)
    Revolt of the Bookkeeper. S. E. P. July 8. (8.)

  MILLER, HELEN TOPPING. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Cakie. S. E. P. Sept. 2. (30.)
    Road That Leads Back. McCall. Feb. (11.)
    Velvet Feet. McC. July. (64.)
    Yellow Streak. Am. Jan. (20.)

  MILLER, THOMAS SAMSON. (_See “H.”_)
    House of McLeod. McC. April. (94.)
    Ivory Poacher. McC. March. (37.)

  MILLER, WARREN H. (1876- .) (_See 1919, 1921._)
    Crash Dive. McC. May. (74.)

  MILLS, DOROTHY CULVER. (_See 1918, 1919, 1921._)
    John Jordan’s Fan. S. E. P. Sept. 2. (16.)

  MILN, LOUISE JORDAN.
    Sword of Chastity. Met. May. (31.)

  MINNIGERODE, MEADE. (_See 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Chinese Flotsam. Outl. Nov. 2, ’21. (129 : 348.)
    “He Laughs Best--.” Col. May 13. (13.)
    *Quite So! Outl. Dec. 28, ’21. (129 : 701.)

  MIRZA, YOUKL BENJAMIN. (1888- .)
    **Faith of My Fathers. Asia. Feb. (22 : 100.)

  MITCHELL, RUTH COMFORT. (MRS. SANBORN YOUNG.) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    “Nary Christmas.” W. H. C. Dec., ’21. (19.)

  MONTAGUE, KATE BIGELOW.
    Red Veil. Sun. June. (21.)

  MONTROSS, LYNN. (1895- .)
    Dry as Dust. S. S. July. (93.)
    ***Pagan. S. S. Aug. (65.)

  MOON, LORNA.
    **Feckless Maggie Ann. Cen. April. (103 : 377.)
    *Silk Both Sides. Cen. Dec., ’21. (103 : 191.)
    **Sinning of Jessie MacLean. Cen. July. (104 : 385.)

  MOONEY, RALPH E. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Polysynthetic Football. S. E. P. Sept. 16. (12.)

  MORAVSKY, MARIA. (1890- .) (_See 1919, 1920._)
    **For Justice’s Sake. Ev. Aug. (67.)

  MORESBY, L.
    Coming Queen. Atl. Jan. (129 : 73.)

  MORFORD, DAVIS.
    Trap. Red Bk. Sept. (51.)

  MORLEY, CHRISTOPHER (DARLINGTON). (1890- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1921._)
    **Continuity. Scr. June. (71 : 753.)
    Worst Christmas Story. Book. Dec., ’21. (54 : 303.)

  MOROSO, JOHN ANTONIO. (1874- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    For Love of the Mutt. McCall. Dec., ’21. (13.)
    *Last Alarm. Am. B. April. (4.)

  MORRIS, GOUVERNEUR. (1876- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Boy in the East. Cos. July. (53.)
    Don’t Marry an Actor. Cos. Aug. (69.)
    *His Wonders to Perform. Cos. Sept. (69.)

  MORRISON, JAMES M.
    Tale of the Lion. Sun. March. (30.)

  MORROW, T. M.
    *Vengeance. Lib. Nov., ’21. (30.)

  MORTLAND, MARJORIE ANNE.
    Love Charm. S. S. Feb. (91.)

  MOSHER, JOHN CHAPIN. (_See 1920._)
    **Princess Takes a Potion. Broom. July. (2 : 296.)

  MOTT, LAWRENCE. (1881- .) (_See “H.”_)
    Pilot of the Flying Star. Sun. Dec., ’21. (27.)

  MOYER, FRANK W. H.
    Sondheim’s Hunch. Sun. Feb. (78.)

  MUILENBURG, WALTER J. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1921._)
    **Ways of His Fathers. Mid. March. (8 : 81.)

  MUNYAN, ARTHUR T.
    Victoria. S. S. Sept. (123.)

  MYERS, WALTER L. (1886- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918._)
    ***Summoned. Mid. Feb. (8 : 41.)

  MYGATT, GERALD. (_See 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    As You Were. Col. July 29. (7.)
    Two Can Play. S. E. P. Feb. 25. (20.)
    Young Man with No Brains. Col. July 8. (7.)


  N

  NEIDIG, WILLIAM JONATHAN. (1870- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Hardener’s Heat. S. E. P. Sept. 9. (8.)

  NEILL, ESTHER WAGGAMAN. (1874- .) (_See “H.”_)
    Celeste. Cath. W. June. (115 : 382.)

  NESBITT, HELEN.
    Miss Ann Interferes. W. H. C. Aug., ’21. (14.)

  NEWELL, MAUDE WOODRUFF. (_See 1916, 1918._)
    Girl Who Was Tired of Being Poor. Am. June. (48.)

  NEWMAN, OLIVER PECK.
    Under the Dome. Met. Jan. (33.)

  NICHOLL, LOUISE TOWNSEND. (_See 1919._)
    **Horse Pride. Scr. May. (71 : 607.)
    **Smoke. D. D. Oct., ’21. (2 : 147.)

  NICHOLSON, J. K. _and_ BEHRMAN, S. N.
    Piano. S. S. Aug. (25.)

  NICHOLSON, J. K. (_See_ BEHRMAN, S. N. _and_ NICHOLSON, J. K.)

  NICHOLSON, MEREDITH. (1866- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Hand on the Shoulder. Chic. Trib. June 25.
    Nuttina. Red Bk. April. (71.)

  NOEL, ANNIE WEBSTER. (_See “H.”_)
    **Friendly Neighbors. Atl. Oct., ’21. (128 : 501.)
    Stopping. G. H. Aug. (67.)

  NORDHOFF, CHARLES B. (1887- .)
    ***Savagery. Harp. M. April. (144 : 545.)

  NORRIS, KATHLEEN. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920._)
        (_H._)
    Real Thing. G. H. Dec., ’21. (10.)
    Rose’s Tiny Laddeen. Cos. Sept. (59.)
    Second Choice. G. H. Feb. (29.)
    True Believer. McCall. Dec., ’21. (5.)
    Unbecoming Conduct of Annie. Cos. Aug. (30.)

  NORTON, ROY. (1869-1917.) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919._) (_H._)
    *To the Lights. Blue. April. (1.)
    *Way of the Waves. Pop. July 7. (182.)
    *Woman On the Beach. Cos. Oct., ’21. (32.)


  O

  OEMLER, MARIE CONWAY. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918._) (_H._)
    **Fear. Pearson. Feb. (24.)

  OLIVER, OWEN. (_See 1915, 1920, 1921._)
    Sack. Chic. Trib. July 9.

  O’MALLEY, ELEANOR. (_See 1921._)
    Little House. S. S. Nov. 21. (109.)

  O’NEILL, HUGH. (_See “H.”_)
    Restless Riata. S. E. P. Oct. 29, ’21. (10.)

  OPPENHEIM, JAMES. (1882- .) (_See 1920._)
    Bert Beamish and the Sacred Cow. Col. March 11. (13.)
    *Dolly of Logan Square. Ev. Aug. (23.)
    ***He Laughed at the Gods. Broom. Nov., ’21. (1 : 46.)
    *Shagan. Ev. Dec., ’21. (17.)

  OSBORNE, WILLIAM HAMILTON. (1873- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Double Trouble, Delaware. S. E. P. Oct. 1, ’21. (14.)
    Road Closed: Detour. Chic. Trib. Oct. 16, ’21.
    Sensational Disclosure. S. E. P. May 27. (30.)

  OSBOURNE, LLOYD. (1868- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Our Consul at Jampoke. Red Bk. March. (31.)

  O’SHASNAIN, BRIAN P.
    *Coming of the Danes. Cath. W. Feb. (114 : 655.)

  ONSLEY, CLARE.
    “Of the House of Faith.” Pag. Oct.-Nov., ’21. (5.)


  P

  PAEZ, CATALINA V. (_See 1916._)
    *Thicker Than Water. Cath. W. Nov., ’21. (114 : 236.)

  PAINE, RALPH DELAHAYE. (1871- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Four Stars of Destiny. Red Bk. Aug. (92.)

  PAKE, MARIE.
    Pluck of a Little Woman. Am. March. (48.)

  PANGBORN, GEORGIA WOOD. (1872- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Carnoc. Des. March. (8.)
    *Peak. Des. May. (14.)
    Purple Lady. Chic. Trib. Aug. 20.
    Snow In the Pass. Chic. Trib. Dec. 25, ’21.
    *Two of a Kind. Des. June. (14.)

  PARK, J. EDGAR. (1879- .)
    Our Christmas Criminal. W. H. C. Dec., ’21. (14.)

  PARKER, AUSTIN.
    On Wings of Vengeance. Col. Sept. 16. (5.)

  PARKER, SIR GILBERT. (1862- .) (_See 1915._) (_H._)
    **After the Ball. Scr. May. (71 : 565.)

  PARKER, LOCKIE.
    **After the Murder. Dial. Nov., ’21. (71 : 556.)
    **Minnie. Mid. May. (8 : 169.)

  PARSONS, MARION RANDALL.
    Red Gods and Mr. Norton. S. S. Oct., ’21. (57.)

  PATERSON, ISABEL. (_See 1921._)
    Many Waters. Del. Jan. (15.)
    Perfect Wife. McCall. March. (14.)

  PATTULLO, GEORGE. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Ledger of Life. S. E. P. March 4. (10.)
    Old Granite Face. S. E. P. Feb. 4. (14.)
    ’Tain’t Right. S. E. P. April 22. (6.)
    Tar and Feathers. S. E. P. Sept. 23. (3.)
    Thumbs Down. S. E. P. Dec. 10, ’21. (14.)

  PAYNE, WILL. (1855- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Musham’s Essay. Chic. Trib. July 16.

  PEARCE, THEODOCIA. (_See 1920._)
    Mother Kind. L. H. J. June. (20.)

  PECK, LELAND W.
    Yellow. Sun. Jan. (28.)

  PELLEY, WILLIAM DUDLEY. (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Birds of Passage. Sun. April. (20.)
    *Gamble Terrible. Sun. May. (5.)
    Money to Burn. Mod. P. Aug. (10.)
    *Three Fingers of Hooch. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (48.)
    *Woman-Hater. Red Bk. April. (89.)

  PERRY, CLAY. (_See 1920._)
    Jimmie Does Justice. Met. June. (47.)

  PERRY, LAWRENCE. (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Air Hackman. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (53.)
    David Harmon’s Quarterback. Col. Nov. 12, ’21. (11.)
    Out of the Deep. Col. Oct. 29, ’21. (8.)
    Quarter-Million Note. Red Bk. May. (43.)
    You Never Can Tell. S. E. P. June 24. (12.)

  PERRY, MONTANYE. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    “--And Sealing Wax.” W. H. C. Sept., ’21. (21.)

  PETERKIN, JULIA M.
    Green Walnuts. Reviewer. March. (2 : 319.)
    *Merry-go-Round. S. S. Dec., ’21. (69.)
    Roots Work. Reviewer. March. (2 : 324.)

  PETRIE, VASHTI.
    Good Scout. W. H. C. Aug., ’21. (19.)

  PHARO, EUGENE M.
    Professor of Suicide. S. S. Sept. (99.)

  PHILLIPS, DOROTHY S. (_See 1921._)
    Betsy and Her Family Circle. McCall. Dec., ’21. (12.)
    Girl Who Took Too Much Advice. Am. Dec., ’21. (50.)
    If I Ever Get a Chance to Hurt a Man. G. H. July. (69.)

  PHILLIPS, ETHEL CALVERT.
    Christmas Light. L. H. J. Dec., ’21. (16.)

  PHILLIPS, MICHAEL JAMES. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Petulant Madelon. McC. March. (53.)

  PICKTHALL, MARJORIE L(OWRY). C(HRISTIE). ( -1922.) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Abiding City. Red Bk. July. (46.)
    *Angels’ Shoes. McC. Aug. (15.)
    ***Black Hand. Cen. Oct., ’21. (102 : 803.)
    *Bull. McCall. July. (12.)
    *Chinaman’s House. P. H. J. March. (9.)
    *Earthquake. Red Bk. Aug. (89.)
    *Faith. Del. May. (17.)
    *Fighters. Red Bk. April. (68.)
    *Gipsy’s Weather. McC. June. (21.)
    ***Luck. Cen. June. (104 : 186.)
    ***Man They Pitied. Cen. Nov., ’21. (103 : 11.)
    ***Men Who Climbed. Red Bk. June. (46.)
    *Pebble. MacL. Nov. 1, ’21. (9.)
    *Saga of Kweetchel. Cen. Feb. (103 : 533.)
    *Stove. Red Bk. May. (68.)
    Stronger Than the Law. Col. Sept. 9. (9.)
    *Swordsmiths. Del. March. (11.)
    *White Magic. Red Bk. Feb. (62.)

  PIERCE, FRANK RICHARDSON.
    Acid Test. Ev. April. (159.)
    “One Smart Pup.” Am. Aug. (21.)

  PITT, CHART. (_See 1917, 1918, 1921._)
    In the Claws of the Wild. Sun. Dec., ’21. (35.)

  PORTER, HAROLD EVERETT. (_See_ “HALL, HOLWORTHY.”)

  PORTER, REBECCA N. (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    For the Benefit of the Belgians. Scr. June. (71 : 705.)

  PORTOR, LAURA SPENCER. (LAURA SPENCER PORTOR POPE.) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1917, 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Giovanni. Harp. M. March. (144 : 499.)
    In Praise of Hesitancy. Outl. Oct. 5, ’21. (129 : 167.)
    *Romance. Harp. M. Dec., ’21. (144 : 105.)

  POST, MELVILLE DAVISSON. (1871- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Diamond. Red Bk. June. (93.)
    *End of the Road. Hear. Nov., ’21. (37.)
    *Great Cipher. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (76.)
    *Inspiration. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (67.)
    ***Mountain School Teacher. Pict. R. Dec., ’21. (10.) Jan. (6.)
    *Triangular Hypothesis. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (82.)
    Woman on the Terrace. Pict. R. March. (8.)

  PULVER, MARY BRECHT. (1883- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Black Mountain. Ev. May. (67.)
    Boys. S. E. P. April 22. (10.)
    Elizabeth. S. E. P. Dec. 3, ’21. (13.)
    Octagon Top. Del. Dec., ’21. (10.)
    Outlaw. S. E. P. Nov. 12, ’21. (12.)
    *Visit. Pict. R. April. (14.)
    Woman Named Kate. S. E. P. May 6. (24.)

  PUNSHON, E. R.
    Scared Stiff. Ev. Dec., ’21. (135.)

  PUTNAM, NINA WILCOX. (1888- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Galloping Tiger. S. E. P. April 29. (24.)
    Linger Longer Lingerie. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (8.)
    Say It With Flowers. S. E. P. April 22. (24.)
    Society Seeks Its Own Level. S. E. P. July 8. (12.)
    Uprising Generation. S. E. P. April 15. (28.)


  R

  RABELL, DU VERNET. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Ex-Champion and the Lady. McC. April. (59.)

  RAMOS, ELEANOR.
    *Captains. S. S. Nov., ’21. (85.)

  RAMOS, ELEANOR, _and_ ROBERTS, W. ADOLPHE.
    Music. S. S. July. (83.)

  RANKIN, KATHERINE.
    Skyrockets. McCall. May. (15.)

  RAPHAELSON, SAMPSON. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    *Day of Atonement. Ev. Jan. (44.)
    Duel for Lydia. Hear. March. (21.)
    *Happiness of Rebecca. Hear. Feb. (48.)
    Lizette. Ev. April. (37.)
    White Roses and Red. Met. Sept. (51.)

  RAVENEL, BEATRICE WITTE. (1870- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Clonmoyle Returns. Ain. May. (61.)

  RAVENEL, BEATRICE.
    ***Great-Granduncle Sebastian. Harp. M. July. (145 : 177.)
    *Hate Story. Harp. M. Aug. (145 : 366.)

  RAY, MARIE BEYNON. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Great Simpleton. Harp B. March. (62.)
    “Prologue to Adventure.” Harp.B. June. (54.)
    Their Beautiful Woman. Harp. B. July. (42.)
    Very Shiny Girl. Harp. B. Feb. (60.)

  RAYMAN, LOUIS A.
    Red Sholem’s Kaddish. J. D. N. Oct.-Nov., ’21.

  REDINGTON, HELEN. (_See 1921._)
    Her Family. Ev. Feb. (135.)
    New House. Ev. Sept. (16.)

  REELY, MARY KATHARINE. (_See 1917, 1918, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Hands. Mid. April. (8 : 113.)

  REESE, LOWELL OTUS. (1866- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._)
    Midnight Sons. Col. Nov. 5, ’21. (7.)
    Spiders. S. E. P. Oct. 8, ’21. (9.)

  RHODES, HARRISON (GARFIELD). (1871- .) (_See 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Thomas Robinson and the Servant Problem. S. E. P. Nov. 19, ’21.
        (14.)
    Thomas Robinson Sees Life. S. E. P. Jan. 14. (8.)

  RHYS, M. THORNTON.
    Les Illusions. Pag. Dec.-Jan. (37.)

  RICHTER, CONRAD. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._) (_H._)
    “Over the Hill to the Rich House.” Outl. Sept. 6. (132 : 25.)

  RILEY, A. DALE.
    *Between Asia. Nov., ’21, (21 : 918.)

  RINEHART, MARY ROBERTS. (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920._) (_H._)
    Midsummer Knight’s Dream. S. E. P. Dec. 17. ’21. (3.) Dec. 24. ’21.
        (18.)
    Tish Plays the Game. S. E. P. March 4. (3.)

  “RISSAKOFF, ARKADY.” (JOHN BERRY.) (_See 1916 under_ BERRY, JOHN.)
    *Revenge of Sarras. 10-St. Jan. (24.)

  ROBBINS, LEONARD H. (1877- .) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Sightseers. W. H. C. Feb. (17.)

  ROBERTS, CHARLES GEORGE DOUGLAS. (1860- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Citadel in the Grass. S. E. P. July 8. (20.)
    Star-Nose of the Under Ways. Sun. May. (20.)

  ROBERTS, ISABEL J.
    *Ship o’ Dreams. Scr. March. (71 : 363.)

  ROBERTS, WALTER ADOLPHE. (1885- .) (_See 1920._)
    Minister of Education and Fine Arts. S. S. March. (125.)

  ROBERTS, W. ADOLPHE. (_See_ RAMOS, ELEANOR, _and_ ROBERTS, W.
        ADOLPHE.)

  ROCHE, MAZO DE LA. (_See 1915, 1916, 1919, 1920._) (_See “H” under_
        DE LA ROCHE, MAZO.)
    *Adopting Granfa. W. H. C. Feb. (11.)

  ROE, VINGIE E. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Bucky. Sun. March. (5.)
    Miss Putty Face. Chic. Trib. March 19.
    Silvershine. Pict. R. March. (10.)

  ROGERS, ELLEN.
    Lunch Table Liaison. S. S. Dec., ’21. (97.)

  ROOF, KATHARINE METCALF. (_See 1915, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Perfume of the Night. Way. T. April. (104.)

  ROSEBORO’, VIOLA. (1857- .) (_See 1915._)
    ***Aaron Westcott’s Funeral. McC. May. (37.)

  ROSENBLATT, BENJAMIN. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***In the Metropolis. Br. St. Dec., ’21. (11.)

  ROULET, MARIE ANTOINETTE DE. (_See 1921._)
    Dedication. Cath. W. March. (114 : 322.)

  ROURKE, CONSTANCE MAYFIELD.
    **Porch. Dial. Oct., ’21. (71 : 418.)

  ROWLAND, HENRY C(OTTRELL). (1874- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Heavenly Bodies. Red Bk. Sept. (82.)
    Paying Up. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (53.)
    Two Pigs. Am. Sept. (41.)

  RUNYEN, ALFRED DAMON (1840- .) _and_ BULGER, BOZEMAN. (_See “H”
        under_ RUNYEN, ALFRED DAMON.)
    Old Hardhead. Hear. July. (36.)

  RUSH, EARL MARVIN.
    Shell of Jules Duvet. Del. March. (16.)

  RUSSELL, MAJOR C. E. (1860- .)
    False Alibi. McC. Aug. (108.)

  RUSSELL, JOHN. (1885- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    ***Adversary. (R.) Pearson. Jan. (48 : 11.)
    *Pagan. Hear. July. (19.)
    *Winning Hand. Red Bk. Jan. (75.)
    *Witch Girl. Hear. April. (19.)

  RUSSELL, VIOLET.
    *Lake of Sorrow. Pearson. Feb. (7.)
    *Mysterious Hound. Pearson. March. (21.)
    *Scathach of the Shadows. Pearson. Jan. (48 : 28.)

  RUTHVEN, MADELINE.
    *West Salem. Pearson. Jan. (48 : 30.)

  “RUTLEDGE, MARYSE.” (MARYSE RUTLEDGE HALE.) (“MARICE RUTLEDGE.”)
        (MARIE LOUISE GOETCHIUS.) (MARIE LOUISE VAN SAANEN.) (1884- .)
        (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918 under_ VAN SAANEN, MARIE LOUISE;
        _1920 and 1921 under_ “RUTLEDGE, MARYSE.”) (_See “H” under_
        GOETCHIUS, MARIE LOUISE.)
    Big Game. S. E. P. April 8. (18.)
    Going On. S. E. P. Oct. 22, ’21. (18.)


  S

  SABIN, EDWIN L(EGRAND). (1870- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917._)
    He Didn’t Know He Was Licked. Col. Jan. 28. (13.)

  SACHS, EMANIE N. (_See 1921._)
    Mame’s Daughter. S. S. July. (111.)

  SAGMASTER, WALTER E.
    “Keats.” S. S. April. (51.)

  ST. JOHNS, ADELA ROGERS.
    Tramp. Cos. Aug. (43.)

  SAMALMAN, ALEXANDER.
    Business and Sentiment. Pearson. Dec., ’21. (47 : 260.)
    *Hole In the Wall. Pearson. April. (21.)
    Moishe. Pearson. Feb. (19.)

  SAMPTER, JESSIE E.
    *Plow Deep. Men. J. Aug. (8 : 213.)

  SAMUEL, MAURICE. (1895- .)
    ***Masquerader. Men. J. April. (8 : 108.)

  SANGSTER, MARGARET ELIZABETH, JR. (1894- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Little Lonely Tree. G. H. Jan. (24.)

  SANTEE, ROSS.
    Home. Les. W. Nov. 26, ’21. (133 : 730.)
    Night In Town. Les. W. Feb. 25. (134 : 259.)
    “Old Rattlesnake.” Les. W. Oct. 1, ’21. (133 : 446.)
    Payson Rodeo. Cen. May. (104 : 41.)
    “Quits.” Les. W. Jan. 21. (134: 82.)
    Shorty Buys a Hat. Les. W. April 22. (134 : 536.)

  SANTMYER, HELEN.
    *Old Lilac Tree. Mid. June. (8 : 185.)

  SAPHIER, WILLIAM. (1883- .) (_See 1920._)
    **Silversmith. Wave. Feb. (5.)
    **Trinkets. Broom. Jan. (284.)

  SAWYER, ELEANOR ECOB.
    Unencumbered Bachelor. McC. July. (88.)

  SAWYER, RUTH. (MRS. ALBERT C. DURAND.) (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    In the House that Jack Built. G. H. April. (30.)

  SAXBY, CHARLES. (_See 1916, 1917 1918, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Fulfiller. Chic. Trib. Jan. 22.

  SCHMIDT, OSCAR F.
    Atuona Storms the Bastille. Scr. Aug. (72 : 219.)

  SCHRADER, ATREUS VON.
    Backlash. Les. W. Jan. 7. (134 : 10.)
    Black Pearl. Les. W. March 4. (134 : 298.)
    Death of the Pearl. Les. W. June 10. (134 : 760.)
    Flower of Death. Les. W. March 18. (134 : 370.)
    Price. Les. W. April 1. (134 : 438.)
    Scourge. Les. W. April 29. (134 : 567.)
    Ular-Sawa. Les. W. May 13. (134 : 632.)
    Vengeance of Rana. Les. W. March 11. (134 : 334.)
    Writ In Water. Les. W. April 15. (134 : 504.)

  SCOGGINS, C. E. (_See 1919, 1920._)
    Charles Frederic Goes Easy. S. E. P. April 22. (14.)
    Ingenious Senor ’Oogis. Red Bk. Jan. (56.)
    Man Who Never Smiled. S. E. P. Sept. 30. (8.)
    Song In the Night. S. E. P. May 20. (12.)

  SCOTT, R. T. M.
    Emerald Earrings. Les. W. Feb. 4. (134 : 150.)

  SEABROOK, C. R.
    Alibi. S. S. Sept. (63.)

  SEDGEWICK, JOHN HUNTER. (_See 1921._)
    Mister Bowdoin. S. S. Dec., ’21. (93.)

  SEIFERT, SHIRLEY L. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    ***Lady of Sorrows. Broom. Jan. (218.)
    Philandering Among the Roses. Scr. Dec., ’21. (70 : 746.)
    Pretty Things. G. H. Jan. (48.)
    Ring Out the Old. Met. June. (58.)
    Sweetest of Memories. G. H. Nov., ’21. (29.)
    Villa Claudia. Del. Aug. (9.)

  SELIGMANN, HERBERT J.
    **Idyll. Dial. Feb. (72 : 183.)

  SEVERN, WRAY WADE.
    Beppo’s Bond. Met. Sept. (61.)

  SHAWE, VICTOR. (_See 1917, 1919, 1920._)
    When Finn Meets Finnigan. S. E. P. June 3. (8.)

  SHELTON (RICHARD) BARKER. (_See 1916, 1917, under_ “OXFORD, JOHN
        BARTON.”) (_See 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921, under_ SHELTON,
        RICHARD BARKER.) (_H._)
    Background. Col. June 17. (13.)
    Flesh of My Flesh. Chic. Trib. Feb. 12.
    Schedule. Sun. June. (17.)
    Stage of Lies. Col. Aug. 5. (7.)

  SHOLL, ANNA MCCLURE. (_See 1916, 1918, 1921._) (_H._)
    Wedding Dress. W. H. C. Nov., ’21. (13.)

  SHORE, VIOLA BROTHERS. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Mary Mary. S. E. P. March 18. (40.)
    On the Shelf. S. E. P. July 22. (20.)

  SIMMONS, LAURA. (_See 1916._) (_H._)
    *Loaf and a Fish. Cath. W. Dec., ’21. (114 : 381.)

  SIMPSON, ROBERT. (_See 1920._)
    Word of Dougall Dall. McC. Aug. (74.)

  SINBERG, GEORGE.
    English English. McC. April. (86.)

  SINCLAIR, BERTRAND W.
    Golden Fleece. Met. June. (17.)
    Tide of Adventure. Met. May. (9.)

  SINGER, MARY. (_See 1921._)
    “Devotedly Yours.” Am. Jan. (39.)

  SINGMASTER, ELSIE. (ELSIE SINGMASTER LEWARS.) (1879- .) (_See 1915,
        1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Belated Autumn. Hol. March. (7.)
    *Benefactor. Hol. June. (15.)
    *God In the Machine. Outl. Aug. 2. (131 : 568.)
    ***Magic Mirror. Pict. R. Nov., ’21. (26.)
    *Mommy. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (12.)

  SLADE, CHRISTINE JOPE. (_See 1921._)
    Marriage Mask. Sun. July. (12.)
    Peter Passes. S. E. P. Nov. 19, ’21. (16.)

  SMITH, GORDON ARTHUR. (1886- .) (_See 1916, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Cynthia. Harp. M. June. (145 : 87.)
    King. S. E. P. Oct. 29, ’21. (5.) Nov. 5, ’21. (15.)
    Merry Wives. S. E. P. May 27. (20.)
    *Postage Stamp. S. E. P. Dec. 31, ’21. (10.)
    They are Wonderful Little People. S. E. P. July 1. (12.)

  SMITH, W. EDSON. (_See 1915, 1921._) (_H._)
    Letting Go of a Lady. Scr. Sept. (72 : 333.)

  SNEDDON, ROBERT W. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Mountebank. Sn. St. Aug. 20. (31.)
    *Trixie. L. St. June. (61.)

  SOLIS-COHEN, JUDITH.
    Last Magazine. J. For. Jan. (5 : 39.)

  SOLOMON, DAVID R.
    You Wonderful Girl. Hear. June. (49.)

  SOLON, ISRAEL. (_See 1919._)
    **Black Jack Kerrigan. Broom. April. (18.)
    *Ich Liebe Dich. D. D. Nov., ’21. (2 : 185.)

  SPADONI, ADRIANA. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918._) (_H._)
    **Cecco Remains. Cen. Oct., ’21. (102 : 880.)
    **Thing of Beauty. Cen. Dec., ’21. (103 : 203.)
    *Wedding-Dress of Signorina Tonelli. Cen. Feb. (103 : 513.)

  SPEARE, DOROTHY.
    Courting. Red Bk. July. (82.)
    Gimme Girl. Met. July. (11.)
    Men Are Such Fools! Pict. R. July. (10.)
    Stuck-Up Boy. Met. Sept. (26.)

  SPEARS, RAYMOND SMILEY. (1876- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Button, Button, Who’s Got the Button? Les. W. Nov. 19, ’21. (133 :
        694.)
    Desert. Scr. Aug. (72 : 233.)
    ***Ripe Peach. Scr. Feb. (71 : 163.)

  SPINA, GREYE LA.
    *Seat on the Platform. Photo.

  SPITZER, MARIAN.
    Six Greatest Moments. S. S. May. (47.)

  SPRAGUE, BESSE TOULOUSE.
    Old Maid Caroline. McCall. July. (11.)

  SPRINGER, FLETA CAMPBELL. (1886- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1921._)
        (_See 1917 under_ CAMPBELL, FLETA.) (_H._)
    ***Realities. Harp. M. Jan. (144 : 187.)

  SPROELMLE, KATHERINE.
    Heavy Husband. Harp. B. May. (36.)

  SQUIER, EMMA LINDSAY. (_See 1921._)
    At Sunset in the Meadow. G. H. Sept. (38.)
    Boat On the Stream. G. H. Feb. (15.)
    Ethel. G. H. Oct., ’21. (141.)
    Flute. G. H. Dec., ’21 (47.)
    Helen of Chinatown. Hear. June. (26.)
    Hidden Trail. Hear. July. (57.)
    Joe Martin, Gentleman. G. H. April. (38.)
    Luigi, Servant of Fate. G. H. June. (72.)
    My Friend the Princess. G. H. Oct., ’21. (33.)
    Third Day of the Moon. G. H. March. (24.)
    White Wish. G. H. May. (72.)

  STANLEY, MARY VALENTINE.
    **Old Pearl Necklace. Outl. May 31. (131 : 207.)

  STARRETT, VINCENT. (_See 1918, 1920, 1921._)
    Decadence and John Fenderson. Wave. Jan. (25.)
    Elixir of Death. Wave. June. (39.)
    *How Rafael Carried His Head. D. D. Oct., ’21. (2 : 158.)
    Story That Might Have Been. Way. T. Oct.,’21. (576.)

  STEELE, DIANA.
    Substitute for Santa. Del. Dec. ’21. (7.)

  STEELE, WILBUR DANIEL. (1886- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Anglo-Saxon. Harp. M. Aug. (145 : 316.)
    ***From the Other Side of the South. Pict. R. Aug. (12.)
    ***“He That Hideth His Secret.” Harp. M. Feb. (144 : 281.)
    ***Mad. Piet. R. July. (14.)
    ***Man Who Sat. Piet. R. Sept. (6.)
    ***Marriage In Kairwan. Harp. M. Dec., ’21. (144 : 16.)

  STEFFENS (JOSEPH) LINCOLN. (1866- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Battle of Celayo. Col. March 11. (3.)

  STETSON, CUSHING. (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    Fireman’s Story. Col. April 15. (11.)

  “STEVENS, MARGARET DEAN.” (_See_ ALDRICH, BESS STREETER.)

  STEVENSON, PHILIP E.
    Beryl’s Forward Pass. Met. July. (47.)

  STEWART, DONALD OGDEN.
    Secret of Success. S. S. Nov., ’21. (77.)

  STOCKING, HELEN.
    Portrait of a Lady. Pearson. April. (30.)

  STODDARD, WILLIAM OSBORN. (1835- .)
    *How Lincoln Came to School No. 300. Atl. Feb. (129:205.)

  STONE, ELINORE COWAN.
    *What Do We Wear? Cen. Sept. (104 : 716.)
    “Storm, Ethel.” (See 1917, 1920.)
    *Pig In the Poke. Chic. Trib. Jan. 29.

  STREET, JULIAN (LEONARD). (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Jazz Baby. S. E. P. July 15. (6.)

  STREETER, EDWARD. (1891- .) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary. Met. Dec., ’21. (13.)
    **Over a Dead Man’s Chest. Met. Jan. (21.)

  STRIBLING, T. S. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    *Magnificent Pompalone. Ev. Dec. ’21. (167.)

  STRINGER, ARTHUR. (JOHN ARBUTHNOTT.) (1874- .) (_See 1915, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Black Sauriol. Chic. Trib. Oct. 2, ’21.
    Outlaw. Chic. Trib. Sept. 24.

  STROBEL, MARION. (_See 1921._)
    Her First Hallelujah. S. S. Oct., ’21. (101.)
    Wife Triumphant. Ev. Aug. (61.)

  STRODE, HUDSON.
    Painter of Ghosts. Chic. Trib. Sept. 3.

  STURGE-JONES, MARION.
    *Mrs. Crocker and Gertie Folwell. S. S. Aug. (73.)

  SUCKOW, RUTH. (_See 1921._)
    *Daughter. S. S. May. (21.)
    *Homecoming. S. S. Nov., ’21. (39.)
    *Just Him and Her. S. S. Jan. (35.)
    *Mame. S. S. Dec., ’21. (107.)
    *Pilgrim and a Stranger. S. S. Jan. (111.)
    **Rural Community. Mid. July. (8 : 217.)
    *Top of the Ladder. S. S. Dec., ’21. (35.)
    *Wanderers. S. S. Set. (51.)

  SULLIVAN, ALAN. (1868- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918._) (_H._)
    Ladder in the Jungle. Ev. July. (151.)
    *Ladies’ Chain. MacL. Dec. 1, ’21. (16.)
    Spirit of the Beast. Ev. May. (107.)
    Spirit of the Man. Ev. June. (29.)
    *Wetherell’s Romance. MacL. March 1. (20.)

  SWAIN, JOHN D. (_See 1918, 1920._) (_H._)
    *In the Observation Ward. P. P. M. May. (5).
    Man With One Talent. S. S. Nov., ’21. (49.)

  SYNON, MARY. (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Backwash. G. H. March. (18.)
    **Bougainvillea. Scr. Nov., ’21. (70 : 539.)
    *Croupier. Red Bk. March. (53.)
    *Money Orders. G. H. April. (55.)
    Thirty Pieces of Silver. McCall. Nov., ’21. (8.)
    *Thrill-Chaser. G. H. Feb. (45.)
    Wreckage. G. H. June. (22.)


  T

  TAGGARD, GENEVIEVE.
    *Engaged. Lib. Sept. (5.)
    *Sun-Child. Asia. Oct., ’21. (21 : 867.)

  TARKINGTON, (NEWTON) BOOTH. (1869- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Doormat’s Revolt. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (37.)
    *Fascinating Stranger. McCall. Aug. (5.)
    *Ladies’ Ways. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (33.)
    *Renfrew and the New Generation. Red Bk. June. (65.)
    *Two Hearts That Beat as One. Red Bk. April. (31.)
    *Willamilla. Red Bk. Nov., ’21. (33.)
    *You. Red Bk. Aug. (39.)

  TAYLOR, MARY IMLAY. (1878- .) (_See 1917._) (_H._)
    Making of a Hero. Del. Sept. (10.)

  TEARNEY, EDWARD.
    Truth of It. S. S. Feb. (35.)

  TEICHNER, MIRIAM.
    Also Twin Beds. S. S. Aug. (33.)
    Letter. S. S. Feb. (107.)

  TERHUNE, ALBERT PAYSON. (1872- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Bootlegerdemain. S. E. P. May 6. (14.)
    Clockwork. Red Bk. Feb. (80.)
    Eagle’s Wings. Pict. R. April. (24.)
    False Colors. S. E. P. March 18. (16.)
    Fellow Sinners. S. E. P. Aug. 19. (14.)
    Guard. L. H. J. May. (13.)
    Heavier Weight. S. E. P. Jan. 28. (12.)
    Hero Stuff. L. J. H. Oct., ’21. (26.)
    Indian Summer. Chic. Trib. Oct. 30, ’21.
    In Strange Company. L. H. J. March. (14.)
    Juggernaut. L. H. J. Feb. (16.)
    Lochinvar Luck. S. E. P. Nov. 19. ’21. (10.)
    Old Dog--New Tricks. L. H. J. April. (19.)
    Samson and One Philistine. S. E. P. March 25. (10.)
    Stone Grower. S. E. P. Nov. 5, ’21. (10.)
    Stowaway. L. H. J. Nov., ’21. (20.)
    Test of Lochinvar Bobby. S. E. P. May 13. (16.)
    Tracker. L. H. J. Dec., ’21. (30.)

  TERRELL, MAVERICK. (_See_ MARSHALL, RACHEL, _and_ TERRELL, MAVERICK.)

  TERRILL, LUCY STONE. (_See 1915, 1921._) (_H._)
    Abiding Gift. S. E. P. Sept. 16. (8.)
    Darned Little Bolshevik. S. E. P. April 15. (8.)
    Day Dust. S. E. P. Dec. 24, ’21. (7.)
    Pepper Tree Prayers. Sun. Oct., ’21. (27.)
    That Name Mary. S. E. P. July 15. (10.)

  THADDEUS, VICTOR.
    De Profandis. S. S. Sept. (115.)
    Mr. Ballinger’s Home. S. S. Aug. (103.)
    Superman. S. S. July. (80.)

  THAYER, MABEL DUNHAM. (_See 1917, 1920._)
    Peggy’s Mother. L. H. J. May. (14.)

  THAYER, MABEL DUNHAM _and_ WELLS, STEWART.
    Fatted Prodigal. Ev. Oct., ’21. (85.)

  THIERRY, EDWARD M.
    Dead Elephants. Ev. Nov., ’21. (115.)

  THOMAS, DOROTHY.
    Corabel’s Man. McC. July. (53.)
    Deselee’s Preacher. McC. March. (44.)
    House That Jeff Built. McC. Sept. (26.)
    Randolph Ghost. McC. April. (70.)
    Sue’s Morals. McC. May. (90.)

  THOMAS, GLORY.
    Crystal in the Attic. Scr. Oct., ’21. (70 : 429.)

  THOMPSON, RUTH PLUMLY.
    Swinderella. Am. Aug. (31.)

  TITUS, HAROLD. (1888- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    To Beat the Banshee. Del. Feb. (12.)

  TOMPKINS, JULIET WILBOR. (JULIET WILBOR TOMPKINS POTTLE.) (1871- .)
        (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Cricket. W. H. C. Dec., ’21. (17.)

  TOOHEY, JOHN PETER. (1880- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Woman In Her Thirties. Am. Oct., ’21. (29.)

  TORREY, GRACE. (_See 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Survivals. Chic. Trib. Dec. 18, ’21.

  TRAIN, ARTHUR (CHENEY). (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Bloodhound. S. E. P. June 10. (10.)
    Liberty of the Jail. S. E. P. April 15. (14.)
    Old Duke. Del. Sept. (5.)
    Perfect Treasure. Mod. P. Nov., ’21. (14.)

  TRAIN, ETHEL KISSAM (MRS. ARTHUR TRAIN). (1875- .) (_See 1916, 1917,
        1920, 1921._)
    Rule of Three. Chic. Trib. Nov. 20, ’21.

  TRAPROCK, WALTER E.
    My Northern Exposure. Met. Sept. (46.)

  TRIEM, PAUL ELLSWORTH. (_See 1915._) (_H._)
    Mrs. Perkinson Sets a Trap. Am. Aug. (42.)

  TUPPER, TRISTRAM. (_See 1921._)
    Language of the Angels. S. E. P. June 3. (3.)
    Lord Byron’s Limp. Met. Sept. (16.)

  TURNBULL, AGNES SLIGH. (_See 1920._)
    His Thousandth Case! Am. Feb. (11.)
    Twelve Young Gideons. Am. April. (10.)
    Wall of Silence. Am. June. (21.)
    *When the Children Came Home. Am. Dec., ’21. (8.)

  TURNER, GEORGE KIBBE. (1869- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920._) (_H._)
    Bumped. S. E. P. May 20. (26.)
    Joan of Arc Smith. S. E. P. June 10. (8.)
    L’Alouette, or Silken Vengeance. S. E. P. April 1. (14)
    Piracy In Reverse. S. E. P. Feb. 18. (15.)
    Prompt Profits From Pernambucos. S. E. P. Nov. 19, ’21. (5.)
    Secret Movements. S. E. P. June 17. (8.)
    Settled in Full. S. E. P. March 25. (8.)
    Whereas, the Women. S. E. P. July 22. (12.)

  TURNIPSEED, JESSIE WINSTON.
    Onions and Vamps. Del. Aug. (8.)

  TYLER, C. VERE.
    *Artist’s Mother. S. S. March. (101.)


  U

  UELAND, BRENDA. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Ho Star! Met. May. (55.)

  UPPER, JOSEPH. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Transition. S. S. Sept. (91.)


  V

  “VAIL, LAWRENCE.” (_See 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920._)
    Confessions of a Misogynist. S. S. Feb. (65.)
    Ideal Woman. S. S. Dec., ’21. (103.)
    Life of a Hero. S. S. May. (17.)

  “VAKA, DEMETRA.” (DEMETRA KENNETH BROWN.) (1877- .) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1921._) (_H._)
    **Lady of the Mended Glove. Asia. Aug. (22 : 601.)
    **Mohammed--Her Conqueror. Asia. June. (22 : 434.)

  VAN DE WATER, VIRGINIA (BELLE) TERHUNE. (1865- .) (_See 1916, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Across the Tracks. Hear. Feb. (27.)

  VAN DYKE, HENRY. (1852- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919._) (_H._)
    To Avenues and Out. Scr. Dec., ’21. (70 : 653.)

  VAN HISE, ALICE RING.
    “It’s the Life of the Mind that Counts.” W. H. C. Jan. (23.)

  VAN VORST, MARIE. (_See 1915 under_ VORST, MARIE VAN.) (_H._)
    Dawes--and Further. Met. June. (21.)

  VENABLE, EDWARD CARRINGTON. (1884- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1921._)
    Angela. Scr. June. (71 : 714.)
    ***Reverend James E. Markison. Scr. Jan. (71 : 81.)

  VORSE, MARY (MARVIN) HEATON. (MARY HEATON VORSE O’BRIEN MINOR.) (_See
        1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Halfway House. Harp. M. Oct., ’21. (143 : 557.)
    **Hero. Lib. Aug. (17.)
    “Men are Beasts.” W. H. C. Sept., ’21. (19.)
    Poor Old Edna. Del. Dec., ’21. (8.)


  W

  WAAGE, C. M.
    *When the Gods Died. Cath. W. Dec., ’21. (114 : 333.)

  WALDO, SIDNEY. (1883- .) (_See 1921._)
    *Mrs. Melvin: Judge and Jury. B. C. July. (5.)
    ***Sons and Brothers. Pict. R. Feb. (14.)

  WALLACE, FREDERICK WILLIAM.
    **Tea from China. MacL. July 15. (9.)

  WARREN, MAUDE (LAVINIA) RADFORD. (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917,
        1918, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Girl Who Wanted a Fairy Prince. L. H. J. Nov., ’21. (10.)
    ***On the Run. Cen. Jan. (103 : 388.)

  WATTS, MARY S(TANBERY). (1868- .) (_See 1915._) (_H._)
    ***Reward of Virtue. Harp. M. May. (144 : 707.)

  WEAVER, JOHN VAN ALSTYNE. (_See 1921._)
    Enamel. Met. June. (11.)

  WEBSTER, HENRY KITCHELL. (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918._)
        (_H._)
    Flashlight. Chic. Trib. Sept. 17.
    Sister Anne. Chic. Trib. April 30.
    $10,000 Beauty. Chic. Trib. July 23.

  WEIMAN, RITA. (1889- .) (_See 1915, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Law Unto Ourselves. Cos. July. (87.)

  WEITZENKORN, LOUIS. (1893- .) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Millicent. Chic. Trib. March 26.
    Tricks. Chic. Trib. Dec. 11, ’21.

  WELLES, HARRIET OGDEN DEEN. (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Painted Canyon. Scr. July. (72 : 42.)
    *Runaway Blimp. Scr. Dec., ’21. (70 : 689.)

  WERNER, CARL AVERY.
    Pockets. Am. May. (60.)

  WESTON, GEORGE. (T.) (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Cold Molasses. S. E. P. Dec. 17, ’21. (10.)
    Girl with Money. S. E. P. Aug. 26. (10.)
    Golden Eggs. S. E. P. April 15. (24.)
    Maggot of Misty Mountain. S. E. P. Aug. 19. (5.)
    Old Rip. S. E. P. Sept. 30. (16.)
    One Clever Idea a Day. S. E. P. Oct. 8, ’21. (14.)
    Sent On Approval. S. E. P. Jan. 14. (14.)

  WHARTON, MABEL H. (_See 1918._)
    Accommodating?--I’ll Say He Is! McC. Aug. (62.)

  WHITE, ETHEL.
    Extra Half-Ounce. Met. Dec., ’21. (25.)
    Third Eye. Met. March. (54.)

  WHITE, NELIA GARDNER. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Wife Who Was Old at 35. Am. May. (30.)

  WHITMAN, STEPHEN FRENCH. (1880- .) (_See 1915, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    *Two Roses. Red Bk. Jan. (27.)

  WHITTEMORE, C. W.
    *Last Lot. Pearson. May. (28.)
    *“Odd Stick.” Pearson. Sept. (19.)

  WIDDEMER, MARGARET. (MARGARET WIDDEMER SCHAUFFLER.) (_See 1915, 1917,
        1918, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Little Queens. Col. March 4. (11.)
    Once to Every Married Man. Col. June 10. (11.)

  WILBER, W. C. (_See 1921._)
    Real Womanly Woman. S. S. Oct., ’21. (49.)

  WILCOXSON, ELIZABETH GAINES. (_See 1917, 1918._) (_H._)
    Five Jacobs. Met. Oct., ’21. (25.)

  WILEY, HUGH. (1894- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Black Angel. S. E. P. Jan. 28. (16.)
    Manchu Blood. S. E. P. March 25. (14.)
    *Mates Adrift. S. E. P. March 4. (24.)
    Red Tape Cutter. S. E. P. Sept. 2. (36.)
    Single, Double, Trouble. S. E. P. May 27. (24.)
    Survival of Sin. S. E. P. Aug. 19. (12.)
    Three and Out. Sun. Sept. (12.)
    Tide of Fortune. S. E. P. Jan. 7. (12.)
    Wildcat Joss. Sun. Aug. (12.)
    Wildcat Thirteen. S. E. P. Oct. 15, ’21. (12.)
    Wishbone Luck. Sun. July. (5.)

  WILKINS, LORA PUTNAM.
    **Hero. Pearson. May. (8.)

  WILLIAMS, BEN AMES. (1889- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Commandment with a Promise. Col. Feb. 4. (3.)
    *Folly. Col. May 13. (5.) MacL. May 15. (24.)
    *In Danger of the Judgment. Col. Feb. 25. (7.)
    *Judgment. MacL. March 15. (18.)
    ***Likeness of a Form. Col. Nov. 26, ’21. (3.)
    *Man Who Lied. Col. April 15. (7.)
    *Name In Vain. Col. Dec. 17, ’21. (3.)
    *None Other Gods. Col. Nov. 5, ’21. (3.)
    *One Crowded Hour. S. E. P. May 6. (5.)
    *Shabath. Col. Jan. 14. (3.)
    *Sixth Thing. MacL. May 1. (18.)
    *--That Ye Be not Judged. MacL. April 1. (17.)
    *Thief’s Wage. Col. April 1. (5.)
    *Thus Shall Israel Be Cleansed. Col. March 18. (7.)
    **Use for Clods. S. E. P. June 24. (14.)
    *What Doth It Profit--. MacL. April 15. (21.)

  WILLIAMS, HENRY SMITH. (1863- .) (_See “H.”_)
    Long Chords of Mazeppa. Am. June. (63.)

  WILLIAMS, JOHN D. (_See “H.”_)
    **Man With the Ironic Mask. Scr. May. (71:556.)

  WILLIAMS, OSCAR.
    *Gaslight. D. D. Sept. (4 : 125.)

  WILLSIE, HONORE (MCCUE). (_See “H.”_)
    Breaking the Blue Roan. Ev. Dec., ’21. (5.)
    Find the Maverick. Ev. Nov., ’21. (39.)
    Pinto Stallion. Ev. Oct., ’21. (17.)
    Swimming Master. Red Bk. June. (88.)

  WILLSON, DIXIE.
    Girl in the Dust. Del. Dec., ’21. (16.)

  WILSON, HARRY LEON. (1867- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919._) (_H._)
    *Gentle Annie. S. E. P. Jan., ’21. (3.)

  WILSON, JOHN FLEMING. (1877- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Man Who Was Taboo. Hear. May. (33.)

  WILSON, MARGARET. (1882- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1921_, under “Elderly
        Spinster.”)
    *Gift of God. Asia, Dec., ’21. (21 : 987.)

  WILSON, MARGARET ADELAIDE. (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Calling Doves. W. H. C. Sept., ’21. (9.)
    Sidewinder’s Mouth. McC. Sept. (81.)

  WINCHESTER, MURRAY.
    *Battle of Five Shots. Pearson. May. (13.)

  WINLOCK, HERBERT E.
    *Hadji Hamid and the Brigand. Scr. March. (71 : 287.)

  WINSLOW, HORATIO. (_See 1915, 1916, 1917._)
    Not So Dusty. S. E. P. July 8. (10.)

  WINSLOW, THYRA SAMTER. (1889- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    *Birthday. S. S. March. (83.)
    For a Man of Your Age. S. S. Sept. (71.)
    *Hilda Bingham. S. S. Jan. (83.)
    Story of Julia Newton. S. S. Feb. (49.)
    Waldie. S. S. June. (59.)
    Young. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (28.)

  WISBY, HROLF.
    Lotus Bride. Ev. April. (25.)

  WITWER, HARRY CHARLES. (1890- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
    Fighting Blood. Col. June 17. (3.)
    4th Musketeer. Cos. Sept. (51.)
    Gall of the Wild. Col. Sept. 2. (5.)
    Kick In the Rabbit’s Foot. Col. April 29. (3.)
    Knight in Gale. Col. July 1. (5.)
    Knight That Failed. Col. Sept. 23. (7.)
    Lady of Lions. Col. Nov. 19, ’21. (3.)
    Man Who Wouldn’t Be King. Col. March 4. (7.)
    “Six-Second Smith.” Col. July 15. (3.)
    Some Punches and Judy. Col. Aug. 12. (7.)
    They Do Come Back. Col. Jan. 21. (3.)
    Two Gentlemen and Verona. Cos. Aug. (59.)
    Two Stones with One Bird. Col. July 29. (3.)

  WOLFF, JR., WILLIAM ALMON. (1885- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Dull Edge of the Knife. Col. Aug. 19. (13.)
    Little Road. L. H. J. Jan. (10.)
    Profit and Loss. Col. July 29. (12.)
    Right About Face. Col. Sept. 30. (5.)
    Sinister Cousin. Chic. Trib. Dec. 4, ’21.
    Time Out! Ev. Nov., ’21. (76.)

  WOLJESKA, HELEN. (_See 1915, 1920._) (_H._)
    Freewoman. S. S. Oct., ’21. (89.)

  WOOD, CLEMENT. (1888- .)
    ***Coffin. Pag. Dec.-Jan. (5.)

  WOOD, JULIA FRANCIS. (_See 1918, 1919._) (_H._)
    Their Own Lives. W. H. C. Oct., ’21. (13.)

  WOODROW, MRS. WILSON. (NANCY MANN WADDEL WOODROW.) (_See 1915,
        1921._) (_H_.)
    Rose Royale. Met. Dec., ’21. (16.)

  WOOLLEY, EDWARD MOTT. (1867- .) (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    Keys to Ausable. Red Bk. Nov. ’21. (81.)
    Pirate Exploration Company. Red Bk. July. (68.)

  WORMSER, GWENDOLYN RANGER. (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    **Devil’s Leap. Col. March 11. (7.)

  WORTS, GEORGE FRANK. (1892- .) (_See 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    Fresh Water Methods. Col. Dec. 17, ’21. (7.)
    Furnace for Your Foe. Col. Feb. 4. (7.)
    Little Ice Devils. Col. Nov. 19, ’21. (11.)
    Nothing but the Best. Col. May 20. (12.)
    “Oh, Michael, How Could You?” Col. Nov. 26, ’21. (7.)
    Ship to Catch a Sailor. Col. Dec. 31, ’21. (9.)
    Soup and Fish. Ev. June. (135.)

  WRATH, CALEB. (_See 1921._)
    Keys of the City. McC. July. (81.)

  WRIGHT, CUTHBERT.
    Midwinter Night’s Dream. S. S. March. (121.)
    *Photograph of Jesus Christ. Gargoyle. July.

  WYNN, ALICE GORTON.
    Cajans. D. D. Jan. (3 : 21.)


  Y

  YATES, DORNFORD. (_See 1921._)
    Tameless Terror. Met. Oct., ’21. (36.)

  YATES, L. B. (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Flowers of Fancy. Red Bk. Feb. (66.)
    This Man’s War. S. E. P. Sept. 23. (16.)

  YOUMANS, ELEANOR WILLIAMS.
    Man Who Wanted a Dog That Would Kill. Am. Oct., ’21. (22.)

  YUST, WALTER. (_See 1921._)
    **Belles-Lettres. Youth. Jan. (1 : 41.)


                    II. ENGLISH AND IRISH AUTHORS



  A

  ARLEN, MICHAEL. (_See 1921._)
    Tea at the Ritz. S. S. Dec., ’21. (127.)

  ARMSTRONG, MARTIN.
    *Poets and the Housewife. Broom. May. (112.)

  ARNOLD, EDWIN L. (_See 1915._)
    Cupidity of Syad. Les. W. Dec. 31, ’21. (910.)

  ATKEY, BERTRAM. (1880- .) (_See 1919, 1921._)
    Even That Which He Hath. Ev. March. (23.)
    Winnie and the Dunoon System. S. E. P. March 11. (5.)
    Winnie and the Poison Runner. S. E. P. Dec. 17, ’21. (14.)
    Winnie and the Rajah. S. E. P. Oct. 22, ’21. (15.)

  AUMONIER, STACY. (1887- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._)
    ***Accident of Crime. S. E. P. March 11. (20.)
    ***Miss Bracegirdle Does Her Duty. Pict. R. Sept. (10.)

  AUSTIN, FREDERICK BRITTEN. (1885- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *One Night In Venice. Hear. March. (29.)
    **Red Shawl. Hear. Feb. (8.)
    S. O. S. Red Bk. Sept. (46.)


  B

  BAILY, F(RANCIS). E(VANS). (1887- .) (_See 1921._)
    Felicia the Fortunate. Hear. Feb. (37.)
    Iris, the Sun-Kissed. Hear. Jan. (12.)
    Not Even Eve. Hear. Nov., ’21. (14.)
    Vingie Darling. S. E. P. Sept. 30. (14.)

  BARRINGTON, EMILIE ISABEL WILSON. (MRS. RUSSELL BARRINGTON.) (_See
        1921._)
    ***Mystery of Stella. Atl. March. (129 : 311.)

  BECHHOFER, C. E. (_See 1921._)
    *Fifth Bull. S. S. Feb. (39.)

  BECK, L. ADAMS. (_See 1920, 1921._)
    **Flute of Krishna. Asia. Jan. (22:28.)
    **Loveliest Lady of China. Asia. Oct., ’21. (21 : 843.)
    **Round-Faced Beauty. Atl. Dec., ’21. (128 : 750.)
    Wisdom Which Is One with Love. Asia. Sept. (22 : 733.)

  BELL, J(OHN). J(OY). (1871- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Culvert. Chic. Trib. March 5.

  BENNETT, ARNOLD. (1867- .) (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    *Yacht. Harp. B. Aug. (38.)

  BENNETT, ROLF.
    *Patterson’s Luck. Met. Dec., ’21. (37.)
    Trick That Was Trumped. Met. May. (43.)

  BERESFORD, JOHN DAVYS. (1873- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***Looking Glass. Ev. May. (25.)
    ***Soul of an Artist. Broom. Nov., ’21. (1 : 56.)

  BIANCO, MRS. FRANCESCO. (_See_ WILLIAMS, MARGERY.)

  BIBESCO, ELIZABETH. (_See 1921 under_ BIBESCO, PRINCESS ANTOINE.)
    *Ordinary Man. (R.) A. W. Jan. (2 : 31.)
    **Quickening Spirit. Book. March. (55 : 6.)

  BLACKWOOD, ALGERNON. (1869- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***Dance of Death. Pearson. Aug. (32.)
    ***Woman’s Ghost Story. Pearson. June. (32.)

  BOTTOME, PHYLLIS. (MRS. FORBES DENNIS.) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Angel of the Darker Brink. Del. Nov., ’21. (8.)

  BUTTS, MARY.
    ***Change. Dial. May. (72 : 465.)
    ***Speed the Plough. Dial. Oct., ’21. (71 : 399.)


  C

  CAINE, WILLIAM. (1872- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918._)
    **Three Kings. S. S. Dec., ’21. (63.)

  CANNAN, GILBERT. (1884- .) (_See 1920._)
    *Fur Coat. S. S. Dec., ’21. (21.)

  CHESTERTON, GILBERT KEITH. (1874- .) (_See 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Hole In the Wall. Harp. M. Oct., ’21. (143 : 572.) MacL. Oct. 1,
        ’21. (12.)
    **House of the Peacock. Harp. B. Jan. (36.)
    ***Temple of Silence. Harp. M. May. (144 : 783.) MacL. May 1. (24.)
    ***Vengeance of the Statue. Harp. M. June. (145 : 10.) MacL. June.
        (35 : 10.)

  CHOLMONDELEY, MARY. (_See 1916, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    **End of the Dream. Pict. R. Oct., ’21. (21.)

  CLIFFORD, MRS. W. K. (LUCY LANE CLIFFORD.) (_See 1916, 1917, 1920._)
        (_H._)
    *Joyce. Scr. Sept. (72 : 293.)

  COPPARD, ALFRED EDGAR. (1878- .) (_See 1921._)
    ***Black Dog. Met. Feb. (9.)
    ***Broadsheet Ballad. Dial. March. (72 : 235.)

  CORKERY, DANIEL.
    ***By-Product. Free. May 3. (5 : 176.)
    ***Colonel MacGillicuddy Goes Home. Free. April 19. (5 : 128.)
    ***Ember. Free. May 24. (5 : 247.)
    ***Price. Free. April 5. (5 : 80.)
    ***Unfinished Symphony. Free. March 15. (5 : 8.)

  COWARD, NOEL.
    I’ll Leave It to You. Met. Nov., ’21. (38.)

  CRACKANTHORPE, HUBERT.
    **Fellside Tragedy. D. D. Dec., ’21. (2 : 252.)


  D

  DAWSON, CONINGSBY (WILLIAM). (1883- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1920._)
        (_H._)
    Christmas Outside of Eden. G. H. Dec., ’21. (17.)
    Wrong Stop. G. H. Oct., ’21. (52.)

  DEEPING (GEORGE) WARWICK. (1877- .) (_See 1920._) (_H._)
    *Wisdom of Mr. Yen. Mun. April. (402.)

  DE LA MARE, WALTER (JOHN). (1873- .) (_See 1919._)
    ***Tree. Cen. Aug. (104 : 483.)

  DESMOND, SHAW. (1877- .) (_See 1919, 1920._)
    **Gallows-Tree. Scr. April. (71 : 481.)

  DOYLE, SIR ARTHUR CONAN. (1859- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918._) (_H._)
    **Adventure of the Mazarin Stone. Hear. Nov., ’21. (6.)
    **Bully of Brocas Court. Hear. Dec., ’21. (6.)
    *Problem of Thor Bridge. Hear. Feb. (6.) March. (14.)
    *Trapped. Hear. April. (8.)

  DUDENEY, MRS. HENRY E. (1866- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
        1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Embrace. Harp. M. Feb. (144 : 303.)
    **Feast. Harp. M. Jan. (144 : 216.)

  DURAND, RALPH.
    *Hi-Brasil. Pict. R. April. (8.)


  E

  EDGINTON, MAY. (_See 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *King of the Earth. McCall. Jan. (6.)
    ***Mary Gets Married. S. E. P. Nov. 5, ’21. (12.)
    *Soul and the Almanac. Chic. Trib. Oct. 23, ’21.


  F

  FARNOL, (JOHN) JEFFERY. (1878- .) (_See 1917._) (_H._)
    *Cupboard. Way. T. April. (1.)

  FLOWER, (WALTER) NEWMAN. (1879- .) (_See 1921._) (_H._)
    *Lady in Lavender. S. E. P. March 18. (22.)

  FRIEDLAENDER, V. H. (_See 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
    *Risk. Scr. Oct., ’21. (70 : 464.)
    *Top Dog. Harp M. March. (144 : 442.)
    **Wrong Horse. Harp. M. July. (145 : 242.)


  G

  GALSWORTHY, JOHN. (1867- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***Feud. Del. Feb. (7); March. (13.)
    ***Man Who Kept His Form. Del. Oct., ’21. (8.)
    ***Santa Lucia. Del. April. (5.)

  GEORGE, W. L. (1882- .) (_See 1917, 1920, 1921._)
    *Eileen. Chic. Trib. June 25.

  GIBBON, PERCEVAL. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***By Consent. Red Bk. Aug. (98.)
    **Deal in Exchange. S. E. P. July 1. (23.)
    **Gold that Glitters. Pop. Jan. 20. (63 : 109.)
    *Good Uncles. S. E. P. April 1. (18.)
    *Looters. Chic. Trib. Feb. 5.
    *Man of Principle. S. E. P. April 8. (20.)
    *Man Who Remembered. Mun. May. (75 : 598.)
    ***Saint Flossie. S. E. P. Dec. 3, ’21. (10.)
    **When America Goes East. S. E. P. May 20. (14.)

  GRIMSHAW, BEATRICE. (_See 1915, 1916, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Isles of Peace. Red Bk. Oct., ’21. (72.)
    Something Lost. Red Bk. April. (57.)
    Woman in the Cage. Chic. Trib. Sept. 10.


  H

  HACKETT, FLORENCE. (1884- .)
    *My Surprise. Pearson. Jan. (48:11.)
    **Streal. W. F. Sept. (111.)

  HARRINGTON, KATHERINE. (MRS. ROLF BENNETT.) (_See 1920, 1921._)
    Matter of Luck. Les. W. Nov. 5, ’21. (133 : 622.)

  “HAY, IAN.” (JOHN HAY BEITH.) (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1917._)
    Cure. Met. May. (13.)
    Fowl Play. Met. March. (18.)

  HERBERT, A. P. (_See 1919, 1921._)
    *War that Ended War. W. F. Sept. (30.)

  HORN, HOLLOWAY. (1886- .) (_See 1921._)
    Sting. Harp. B. Oct. ’21. (69.)

  HOWARD, FRANCIS MORTON. (1880- .) (_See 1921._)
    *Kind Assistance. Sh. St. Oct. 25, ’21. (71.)

  “HOWARD, KEBLE.” (JOHN KEBLE BELL.) (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    Saint In Pajamas. Hear. March. (25.)


  K

  KAYE-SMITH, SHEILA.
    **Good Wits Jump. Harp. M. March. (144 : 483.)
    ***Mrs. Adis. Cen. Jan. (103 : 321.)
    ***Mockbeggar. Harp. M. Feb. (144 : 331.)
    Old Gadgett. Harp. M. Aug. (145 : 342.)

  KENNEY, ROWLAND. (_See 1920._)
    **Nailed. Dial. Dec., ’21. (71 : 639.)

  KINROSS, ALBERT. (1870- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1921._) (_H._)
    **Elysian Fields. Atl. Jan. (129 : 33.)
    **Profiteer. Cen. Nov., ’21. (103 : 28); Dec., ’21 (103 : 290).
    ***Traitors. S. S. April. (93.)


  L

  LANCASTER, G. B. (_See 1915, 1916, 1918._) (_H._)
    *Big Punch. Met. March. (40.)
    *Lone-Patrol Sangar. Sh. St. June 25. (119.)

  LAWRENCE, DAVID HERBERT. (1885- .) (_See 1915, 1917, 1919, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    ***Episode. Dial. Feb. (72 : 143.)
    **Fragment of Stained Glass. (_R._) Pearson. March. (7.)
    ***Sick Collier. (_R._) Pearson. Feb. (10.)


  M

  MACHEN, ARTHUR. (1863- .) (_See 1917, 1919._)
    **Marriage of Panurge. Wave. Jan. (2.)
    **Secret Glory. Wave. Feb. (41.)

  “MALET, LUCAS.” (MARY ST. LEGER HARRISON.) (_See 1921._)
    ***Conversion. W. F. Aug. (64.)

  MANSFIELD, KATHERINE. (MRS. J. MIDDLETON MURRY.)
    ***Fly. Cen. Sept. (104 : 743.)

  MAUGHAM, W. SOMERSET. (1874- .) (_See 1921._)
    **Fear. Cen. March. (103 : 712.)
    *His Majesty’s Representative. McC. May. (25.)
    *Honolulu. Ev. Oct., ’21. (4.)
    **Philosopher. McC. April. (20.)
    *Sullivan. McC. May. (89.)

  MAXWELL, WILLIAM BABINGTON. (_See 1917, 1919, 1921._) (_H._)
    Day a Wife Remembers. Hear. Oct., ’21. (41.)
    **Getting Rid of M. Met. April. (59.)
    If She Really Loved Him. Hear. May. (25.)
    ***Romance of It. Outl. June 21. (131 : 347.)

  MAYNARD, THEODORE.
    *Uncounted Gifts. Ext. Dec., ’21. (14.)

  MOORE, GEORGE. (1853- .)
    ***Peronnik the Fool. Dial. Nov., ’21. (71 : 497.)

  MORDAUNT, ELINOR (EVELYN MAY). (_See 1915, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920,
        1921._)
    ***Fighting Cocks. Pict. R. May. (14.)
    *Fountain. Met. Oct., ’21. (31.)
    ***“Genius.” Cen. Nov., ’21. (103 : 102.)
    ***Heart of a Ship. Met. July. (16.)
    ***Kelly O’Keefe. Met. April. (19.)
    ***Parrots. Met. June. (30.)


  N

  NEWTON, WILFRID DOUGLAS. (1884- .) (_See 1915, 1920, 1921._)
    At the Ave Maria Breeze. Chic. Trib. June 18.

  NIVEN, FREDERICK (JOHN). (1878- .) (_See 1921._)
    *Sheriff “Baby.” W. St. July 8. (112.)


  O

  OPPENHEIM, E(DWARD) PHILLIPS. (1866- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1921._) (_H._)
    Boxes of Gold. Red Bk. June. (80.)
    Green-Eyed Accomplice. Red Bk. Dec., ’21. (27.)
    Honor of M. Lutarde. Red Bk. March. (77.)
    Kiss of Judas. Red Bk. Jan. (32.)
    Leeds Bank Robbery. Red Bk. Feb. (36.)
    Michael’s Wedding Gift. Red Bk. Aug. (58.)
    Mr. Senn’s Past. Hear. June. (19.)
    Mystery Advertisement. Red Bk. Sept. (73.)
    Three Malefactors. Red Bk. April. (52.)
    Unfamiliar Triangle. Red Bk. July. (91.)
    Winds of Death. Red Bk. May. (81.)


  P

  PERTWEE, ROLAND. (_See 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
    ***Chap Upstairs. S. E. P. May 13. (10.)
    **Cinderella. S. E. P. Feb. 4. (10.)
    ***Empty Arms. L. H. J. March. (10.)
    *In the Heart of Youth. Hear. April. (24.)
    *On Armistice Night. Hear. Jan. (31.)
    *Pond With Weeds. Hear. Dec., ’21. (18.)
    ***Summer Time. L. H. J. Sept. (15.)
    Ties That Bound. Hear. Nov., ’21. (36.)

  PHILLPOTTS, EDEN. (1862- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1920,
        1921._) (_H._)
    *Devil’s Hunting Horn. Chic. Trib. May 7.
    *“Grey Lady” Drive. Way. T. May. (50.)
    *Tankerabogus. Chic. Trib. July 30.

  PORTERFIELD, ALEXANDER.
    *Desiderata. Harp. M. July. (145:148.)
    *Many Intentions. Harp. M. Jan. (144:152.)
    *New Steps to Parnassus. Harp. M. Oct., ’21. (143:614.)
    *Old Guard Dies. S. E. P. July 22. (16.)
    *Philanderer. Harp. M. Aug. (145:348.)
    *True Nelson Touch. Harp. M. Dec., ’21. (144:64.)
    *Youth Will Be Served. Harp. M. Nov., ’21. (143:696.)

  POWYS, LLEWELYN.
    *Brown Satyr. Pearson. March. (11.)


  R

  “ROHMER, SAX.” (ARTHUR SARSFIELD WARD.) (1883- .) (_See 1915, 1916,
        1917, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Dyke Grange Mystery. Chic. Trib. May 28.
    *Dr. Kreener’s Last Experiment. Detective. Feb. 4. (42.)


  S

  SABATINI, RAFAEL. (1875- .) (_See 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    *Captain Blood’s Dilemma. Adv. Oct. 20, ’21. (148.)
    *Hostage. Adv. Oct. 10, ’21. (31:143.)
    *Poachers. Met. Jan. (9.)

  ST. MARS, F. (1883-1921.) (_See 1915, 1921._)
    Seba Dines. Ev. Dec., ’21. (47.)
    Silver Giant. Ev. April. (169.)
    Wonder City. Ev. Aug. (155.)

  SHANKS, EDWARD (BUXTON). (1892- .)
    **“Battle of the Boyne Water.” Cen. Feb. (103:492.)

  SINCLAIR, MAY. (_See 1915, 1917, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***“Heaven.” Pict. R. June. (12.)

  SINGLETON, A. H.
    *Hairy Mary. Atl. May. (129 : 623.)
    **Jack the Robber. Atl. Feb. (129 : 174.)
    **Larry. Atl. March. (129 : 364.)

  SNELL, EDMUND.
    Amber Goddess. Met. Feb. (21.)

  SOUTAR, ANDREW. (1879- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919._)
    **Golden Toys. Red Bk. Jan. (86.)

  STACPOOLE, HENRY DE VERE. (1865- .) (_See 1916, 1918, 1920, 1921._)
        (_H._)
    *Deaf Mute. Pop. April 7. (149.)
    *Luck. Pop. Jan. 7. (184.)
    *Story of Gombi. Pop. Feb. 7. (184.)

  STEPHENS, JAMES. (1882- .) (_See 1915, 1918, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    ***Hunger. Broom. Nov., ’21. (1 : 3.)

  STERN, G. B. (MRS. GEOFFREY LISLE HOLDSWORTH.) (1890- .)
    *One Year to Live. Fol. July. (55.)


  T

  TERRILL, G. APPLEBY.
    Bristol Eyes. S. E. P. Nov. 26, ’21. (16.)
    Hotel Remember. S. E. P. May 13. (52.)


  W

  WALLACE, EDGAR. (1875- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920._)
        (_H._)
    Barons of the Nimble. S. E. P. June 3. (12.)
    Cinema Picture. McC. March. (67.)
    Lamp That Never Went Out. McC. April. (100.)
    Limp of the Clan Chen. Ev. Oct., ’21. (100.)
    Student of Men. McC. June. (89.)

  WALPOLE, HUGH. (1884- .) (_See 1915, 1920, 1921._)
    **Come Out of the Kitchen. Pict. R. April. (6.)
    ***Conscience Money. Pict. R. May. (22.)
    **Dance. Pict. R. June. (14.)
    ***Major Wilbraham. Chic. Trib. Nov. 13, ’21.
    **Night-Raiders. Pict. R. Sept. (15.)
    *Poodle. Pict. R. Aug. (22.)
    **Saladin and the Black Bishop. Pict. R. July. (24.)

  WENNERBERG, FREDERICK.
    *Passing of McCartenay. Cath. W. Aug. (115 : 646.)

  WEYMAN, STANLEY JOHN. (1855- .)
    *Two Pages. Pearson. April. (18.)

  WILLIAMS, MARGERY. (MRS. FRANCESCO BIANCI.) (_See 1921._)
    *Cupboard on the Stairs. Hol. March. (9.)
    *Little Wooden Doll. Harp. B. Aug. (70.)
    *Spring Fire. S. S. July. (63.)

  WODEHOUSE, PELHAM GRENVILLE. (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
        1919, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
    Bertie Changes His Mind. Cos. Aug. (101.)
    Heel of Achilles. Chic. Trib. June 11.
    Long Hole. McC. March. (59.)
    Metropolitan Touch. Cos. Sept. (99.)
    Purity of the Turf. Cos. July. (103.)

  WRAY, ROGER. (_See 1917._)
    Lascivious Bird. S. S. Jan. (79.)

  WYLIE, I(DA). A(LENA). R(OSS). (1885- .) (_See 1916, 1917, 1918,
  1919, 1921._)
    **Greatness and Jamey Pobjoy. G. H. Nov., ’21. (16.)
    *Release. G. H. April. (16.)


                          III. Translations



  A

  ALBERT-JEAN. (_French._)
    Battle of Flowers. Broom. Sept. (3 : 133.)

  ALBUJAR, ENRIQUE LOPEZ. (_Spanish._)
    **Knight of Death. W. F. Aug. (87.)

  ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN. (1805-1875.) (_Danish._)
    Two Brothers. Scan. July. (10 : 412.)

  ANDREYEV, LEONID NIKOLAEVICH. (1871-1919.) (_Russian._) (_See 1916,
        1917, 1920._) (_See “H” under_ ANDREIEFF.)
    ***Luckiest Man in the World. W. F. Aug. (57.)

  ARTZYBASHEFF, MIKHAIL. (_Russian._) (_See 1915._)
    ***Old Story. W. F. Sept. (39.)

  AVERTCHENKO, ARCADIJI. (_Russian._) (_See 1915, 1916, 1919._)
    **Silent Man. W. F. Aug. (113.)


  B

  “BERTHEROY, JEAN.” (BERTHE CARIANNE LE BARILLIER.) (1860- .) (_See
        1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_French._)
    Armistice Anniversary. N. Y. Trib. Aug. 27.
    Black Dress. N. Y. Trib. March 12.
    Cecilia at Seventeen. N. Y. Trib. April 9.
    Change of Heart. N. Y. Trib. Oct. 9, ’21.
    *Eve Eternal. N. Y. Trib. June 25.
    Her Double Life. Les. W. Jan. 28. (134:115.)
    Minstrel In the Orange Grove. N. Y. Trib. Nov. 13. ’21.
    New Year’s and Old Letters. N. Y. Trib. Jan. 1.
    Placid Little Lake of Love. N. Y. Trib. Feb. 5.
    ***Reign of the Spirit. N. Y. Trib. May 14.

  BINET-VALMER. (_See 1918, 1919, 1920_.) (_French._)
    His Deliverance from Evil. N. Y. Trib. Jan. 29.
    Spy Who Was True. N. Y. Trib. July 2.

  BIRO, LAJOS. (_Hungarian._)
    **Great-Grandmother. Free. Feb. 22. (4:561.)

  BIRO, LUDWIG. (_Hungarian._)
    **Marie. Free. Nov. 16, ’21. (4:223.)

  BIZET, RENE. (_See 1920._) (_French._)
    *Captain of the Louison. N. Y. Trib. June 11.
    *Return of the Chouan. N. Y. Trib. Feb. 19.

  BLASCO IBANEZ, VICENTE. (1867- .) (_See 1920, 1921; see 1919 under_
        IBANEZ, VICENTE BLASCO.) (_Spanish._)
    ***Sunset. Atl. Nov., ’21. (128:599.)

  BOJER, JOHAN. (1872- .) (_See 1921._) (_Norwegian._)
    **Kari Aasen In Heaven. Book. Dec., ’21. (54:327.)
    **Light. Cen. June. (104:215.)
    ***Skobelef. Scan. July. (10:416.)

  BONDIER-BAKKER, INA. (_Dutch._)
    *Change. W. F. Aug. (95.)

  BOUTET, FREDERIC. (_See 1917, 1918, 1920, 1921._) (_French._)
    Blue Gloves. N. Y. Trib. Oct. 23, ’21.
    Brown Roof in the Village. N. Y. Trib. April 23.
    Failure of Success. N. Y. Trib. Aug. 20.
    *From a Far Country. N. Y. Trib. Feb. 26.
    **Halpherson’s Experiment. Les. W. Dec. 10, ’21. (133:802.)
    Like Father, Like Son. N. Y. Trib. Jan. 22.
    Little Painted Steer. Les. W. Dec. 24, ’21. (878.)
    Muses. N. Y. Trib. Sept. 17.
    “Or Something Just As Good.” N. Y. Trib. Nov. 20, ’21.
    **Portrait. Les. W. Oct. 15, ’21. (133:518.)
    Price of the Butler’s Silence. N. Y. Trib. March 26.
    *Simpleton. N. Y. Trib. May 28.
    Suzy’s Marriage. N. Y. Trib. July 9.
    Two Christmas Presents. N. Y. Trib. Dec. 25, ’21.

  BRUNO-RUBY, J. (_See 1920._) (_French._)
    Hotel Mouse. N. Y. Trib. Sept. 24.
    Judgment of Solomon. N. Y. Trib. July 30.

  BUNIN, IVAN. ALEKSIEEVITCH. (1870- .) (_See 1916._) (_Russian._)
    ***Gentleman from San Francisco. Dial. Jan. (72:47.)
    ***Kasimir Stanislavovitch. Dial. July. (73:42.)


  D

  DELARUE-MARDRUS, LUCIE. (_See_ MARDRUS, LUCIE DELARUE.)


  E

  EHRENBOURG, ELIE. (_Russian._)
    **Jack of Diamonds. Broom. Jan. (229.)

  EHRENBOURG, ILYA. (_Russian._)
    Vitrion. Broom. Sept. (3:83.)

  EJE, ANDERS. (1879- .) (_Swedish._)
    *Episode. W. F. Aug. (104.)

  ETLAR, CARIT. (JOHAN CARL CHRISTIAN BROSBOLL.) ( -1900.) (_Danish._)
    *Haltekok. W. F. Aug. (77.)


  G

  GAULOT, PAUL. (_French._)
    Love Test by Proxy. N. Y. Trib. June 4.
    *Thinker’s Secret. N. Y. Trib. April 2.

  GINISTY, PAUL. (_See 1921._) (_French._)
    *Climax of Terror. N. Y. Trib. Feb. 12.
    Ghostly Mirror. N. Y. Trib. Dec. 11, ’21.
    *Marina’s Stratagem. Les. W. Oct. 29, ’21. (133:590.)

  GLOSSMAN, BORIS. (_Yiddish._)
    *It Is Maariv Time. Men. J. Oct. ’21. (7:230.)
    *Resurgam. Men. J. Dec., ’21. (7:287.)

  GOLDSCHMIDT, MEIR. (_Danish._)
    **Henrik and Rosalie. Scan. July. (10:423)

  GUNNARSSON, GUNNAR. (1889- .) (_Danish._) (_See 1916_)
    **--For Tomorrow You Die. W. F. Aug. (19.)


  H

  HARAUCOURT, EDMOND. (1856- .) (_See 1918, 1920, 1921._) (_H._)
        (_French._)
    *Miracle of the Bridge. N. Y. Trib. Oct. 2, ’21.

  HELTAI, JENO. (_Hungarian._)
    **Death and the Doctor. W. F. Sept. (116.)

  HIRSCHFELD, GEORG. (1873- .) (_German._)
    *Changing Places. W. F. Sept. (70.)


  I

  IBANEZ, VICENTE BLASCO. (_See_ BLASCO IBANEZ, VICENTE.)


  J

  JALOUX, EDMUND. (_French._)
    Passionate Angler. N. Y. Trib. March 19.


  L

  LARBAUD, VALERY. (_French._)
    **Hour with the Face. Free. April 12. (5:103.)

  LATZKO, ANDREAS. (_See 1921._) (_Austrian._)
    **Double Patriot. Free. July 5. (5:392.)

  LEBLANC, MAURICE. (1864- .) (_See 1915._) (_H._) (_French._)
    At the Sign of Mercury. Met. July. (25.)
    Case of Jean Louis. Met. Dec., ’21. (38.)
    Footprints In the Snow. Met. June. (25.)
    In the Dining Car. Met. March. (43.)
    Lady With the Hatchet. Met. May. (45.)
    On the Top of the Tower. Met. Oct., ’21. (12.)
    Tell-Tale Film. Met. Jan. (36.)
    Water Bottle. Met. Nov., ’21. (35.)

  LUCATELLI, LUIGI. (_Italian._)
    *Bibi. S. S. Aug. (96.)
    *Diogenes. S. S. Sept. (90.)
    *History of an Idiot. S. S. Aug. (99.)
    *How Asmodeo Ribelli Did Not Make His Fortune. S. S. Sept. (88.)
    *Little Victim. S. S. Aug. (95.)
    *Man for the Ages. S. S. Aug. (101.)
    **Petitioner. S. S. Aug. (98.)
    *Pierino. S. S. Sept. (87.)
    *Sentiment. S. S. Sept. (89.)
    Signor Saverio’s Nose. S. S. June. (57.)
    *Signora Dora’s Little Economics. S. S. Aug. (97.)
    Teodoro Nasica. S. S. July. (75.)


  M

  MARDRUS, LUCIE DELARUE. (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_French._)
    Burglar and the Cat. N. Y. Trib. Aug. 6.
    Lesson of the Eglantine. N. Y. Trib. March 5.
    Lesson of the Fire. N. Y. Trib. May 21.
    *Lottery Ticket. N. Y. Trib. Jan. 15.
    Old Maid’s Marriage. N. Y. Trib. Dec. 4, ’21.
    *On the Other Side of the Mirror. N. Y. Trib. Oct. 30, ’21.
    *Sorcerer. N. Y. Trib. April 16.

  MAUPASSANT, HENRI RENE ALBERT GUY DE. (1850-1893.) (_See 1918._)
        (_H._) (_French._)
    ***Story of a Wise Man. Hear. May. (11.)

  MILLS, PIERRE. (1864- .) (_See 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._)
        (_French._)
    Day’s Work Along the Marne. N. Y. Trib. Dec. 18, ’21.
    *Heroine of the Wilderness. N. Y. Trib. Oct. 16, ’21.
    *Poilu Who Said He Was Deaf. N. Y. Trib. Nov. 27, ’21.

  MOLNAR, FRANZ. (1879- .) (_See 1916._) (_Hungarian._)
    **Coal-Thieves. Free. Oct. 26, ’21. (4:151.)
    **Snow-Man. Cen. Sept. (104:649.)

  MORAND, PAUL. (_See 1921._) (_French._)
    ***Roman Night. Broom. Feb. (291.)

  MULLER, ANDRE. (_French._)
    Double Retribution. Pearson. May. (26.)


  O

  OHANIAN, ARMEN.
    Dancer of Shamakha. Asia. April. (22:251.)


  P

  PAOLIERI, FERDINANDO. (1878- .) (_Italian._)
    *Ambush. W. F. Sept. (102.)

  PERET, BENJAMIN. (_French._)
    *At 125 Boulevard St. Germain. Broom. Aug. (3:31.)

  PICARD, HELENE. (_French._)
    Crimes of King Myrrhus. N. Y. Trib. April 30.

  PILNIAK, BORIS. (_Russian._)
    **At the Doors. Broom. Aug. (3:57.)

  PUAUX, RENE. (_French._)
    *Miracle. Del. Jan. (16.)


  R

  RAMEAU, JEAN. (_See 1919, 1920._) (_French._)
    In Quest of the Knife. N. Y. Trib. July 16.

  REGIS, ROGER. (_See 1916, 1920._) _(H._) (_French._)
    Feathered Love Affair. N. Y. Trib. Aug. 13.

  RHAIS, ELISSA. (_French._)
    **Kerkeb. W. F. Aug. (39.)

  RICHE, DANIEL. (_See 1920._) (_French._)
    Girl In the Picture. N. Y. Trib. July 23.
    Her Husband by Proxy. N. Y. Trib. May 7.
    When It Was Tit for Tat. N. Y. Trib. Sept. 3.

  ROSNY, AINE, J. H. (_See 1920, 1921._) (_French._)
    Half-breed’s Gratitude. Les. W. Feb. 11. (134:191.)
    Ingrate in the Office Chair. N. Y. Trib. Jan. 8.
    Out of the Great Beyond. N. Y. Trib. Sept. 10.

  ROSTAND, MAURICE. (_French._)
    *Man I Killed. Hear. Feb. (31.)


  S

  SADOVEANU, MIHAIL. (_Rumanian._)
    ***Spring. W. F. Aug. (81.)

  SIVLE, PER. (1857-1904.) (_Norwegian._)
    *Helpless. Scan. Aug. (10:477.)

  SIWERTZ, SIGFRID. (_Swedish._)
    ***Leonard and the Fisherman. Scan. July. (10:403.)

  SODERBERG, HJALMAR. (_Swedish._)
    Fur Coat. Hear. Dec., ’21. (45.)
    *Kiss. W. F. Sept. (100.)
    **Wages of Sin. Scan. June. (10:361.)

  SRAMEK, PRANA. (_Czech._)
    **He Deceived Her. Broom. May. (2:137.)

  SZEP, ERNO. (_Hungarian._)
    *Teacher’s Fiddle. Free. Dec. 21, ’21. (4:343.)


  T

  TIMMERMANS, FELIX. (_Flemish._)
    ***Beguine Symforosa. Dial. April. (72:365.)

  TOLSTOY, ILYA. (_See 1920._) (_Russian._)
    *Masha.


  V

  VALDAGNE, PIERRE. (_See 1918, 1919, 1920, 1921._) (_French._)
    In the Park. N. Y. Trib. Nov. 6, ’21.

  VALLE-INCLAN, RAMON DEL. (1870- .) (_Spanish._)
    ***My Sister Antonia. W. F. Aug. (29.)

  VELY, ADRIEN. (_French._)
    Fairy Grisette Falls in Love. N. Y. Trib. June 18.

  VIVANTI, ANNIE. (1873- .) (_Italian._)
   *Berangere’s Engagement. W. F. Aug. (117.)

  VON HOFMANNSTHAL, HUGO. (_German._)
    **Lucidor. Dial. Aug. (73:121.)


  W

  WAHLENBERG, ANNA. (_Swedish._)
    **Gate of Honor. Scan. Dec. ’21. (9:789.)

  WILDENVEY, HERMAN. (1886- .) (_Norwegian._)
    In an Old Garden. W. F. Sept. (121.)




                         Transcriber’s Note:

Footnotes were renumbered sequentially and were moved to the end
of each story. Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside
down, unprinted or partially printed letters and punctuation,
were corrected. Final stops missing at the end of sentences and
abbreviations were added.

The entry in the Contents for “Addresses of American Magazines
Publishing Short Stories” was not included in the book by the
publisher. Words may have multiple spelling variations or
inconsistent hyphenation in the text. These were unchanged, as were
jargon, dialect, obsolete and alternative spellings. Except as noted
below, misspelled words were not corrected.

The following were changed:

     ‘out’ to ‘our’ ... in our town ...
     ‘lesses’ to ‘lesser’ ... all the lesser poets ...





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1922, AND THE YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


