The Project Gutenberg eBook of Book-plates of To-day
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Book-plates of To-day

Editor: Wilbur Macey Stone

Release date: April 3, 2016 [eBook #51643]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Curnow, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY ***

Transcriber's Note

Illustration captions in {braces} have been added by the transcriber
for the convenience of the reader.




       BOOK-PLATES _of_ TO-DAY


     Edited By WILBUR MACEY STONE


               NEW YORK
          TONNELÉ & COMPANY
                 1902


  Copyrighted 1902 by Tonnelé & Co.




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Amy Ivers Truesdell.}]




TABLE OF CONTENTS


  Book-plate of Mrs. Amy Ivers Truesdell, in colors.
    Designed by Jay Chambers.                             Frontispiece

  Book-plate of Arnold William Brunner, in colors.
    Designed by Thomas Tryon.                                 Facing 3

  American Designers of Book-plates: William Edgar
    Fisher. By W. G. Bowdoin.                                        3

  Book-plate of William Frederick Havemeyer, from the
    copper. Designed by Thomas Tryon, engraved by E. D.
    French.                                                   Facing 9

  Nineteen Book-plates by British Designers.                         9

  Book-plate of T. Henry Foster, in colors. Designed by
    Jay Chambers.                                            Facing 19

  The Artistic Book-plate. By Temple Scott.                         19

  Book-plate of Miss Henrietta M. Cox, in colors.
    Designed by Thomas Tryon.                                Facing 23

  Thirty-two book-plates from various sources.                      23

  Book-plate of Robert Fletcher Rogers, in colors.
    Designed by Homer W. Colby.                              Facing 33

  Book-plates and the Nude. By Wilbur Macey Stone.                  33

  Book-plate of Willis Steell, in colors. Designed by
    Thomas Tryon.                                            Facing 39

  The Architect as a Book-plate Designer. By Willis
    Steell.                                                         39

  Book-plate of William A. Boland, in colors. Designed by
    Homer W. Colby.                                          Facing 45

  A Check-list of the Work of Twenty-three Book-plate
    Designers of Prominence. Compiled by Wilbur Macey
    Stone.                                                          45




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Arnold William Brunner.}]




AMERICAN DESIGNERS _of_ BOOK-PLATES: WM. EDGAR FISHER

By W. G. BOWDOIN


The book-plate designers of to-day are legion because they are many.
Almost every one who can draw, and many who cannot, have ventured into
the field of book-plate designing; and the result has been that many
of the book-plates that are current have little to commend them to
critical observers. The present increasing interest in these little
bits of the graver's art has greatly encouraged the production of
them, and new ones arise daily. It is desirable, therefore, if we are
to have book-plates at all, that they shall be as artistic as may be;
and it is important, from an art standpoint, to all those who are
about to adopt the use of these marks of ownership that they shall
have, as they may have, the artistic flavor about them.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Library of the Studio Club.} By Wm.
    Edgar Fisher]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Winifred Knight.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]

Most of our leading designers have hitherto been grouped in the
eastern section of our country, or at least not much further west than
Chicago. Some few designs, it is true, have been produced in
California, but for the most part the book-plates of note have been
marked with an eastern geographical origin.

In William Edgar Fisher we have a designer who has strikingly departed
from geographical conditions of book-plate designing heretofore
prevailing, and in faraway Fargo, North Dakota, has set up his studio
from whence have come designs that are fresh, original and very
pleasing. Mr. Fisher loves to work in a pictorial field. He makes a
plate that tells a story, and in his best plates there is artfully
placed something bookish that harmonizes with the design-form
selected; and, because of art coherence and harmony in design that go
hand in hand, his plates are more than satisfactory. The general
eastern notion in regard to North Dakota is that nothing artistic can
come out of the State, but the work done there by Mr. Fisher quickly
dispels such an idea. The plates he has drawn are acknowledged as
highly meritorious by the best American masters of book-plate
designing. In all the plates from the hand of this artist that are
here grouped, and which may be regarded as quite typical of him, there
are only two that do not contain a book as a detail somewhere in the
finished plate.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Maie Bruce Douglas. Book-plate of Mary
    N. Lewis.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]

One of the exceptions is the plate of the Studio Club that gains
infinitely by the omission of a book in the plate as produced. The
grouping of the five observers (symbolic of the members of the Studio
Club) around the feminine portrait is most charming, and to the writer
it appears one of the happiest of recent productions in appropriate
book-plates.

Mr. Fisher's feminine figures that he introduces into many of his
plates are likewise exceedingly effective. This is particularly the
case when to the charms of femininity he has added those of symbolism,
as in the case of the plate for Miss Winifred Knight, in which the
graceful female masker appears at the shrine of the idealized god Pan,
who writes, it may be something oracular, in her proffered album. The
figure is gracefully posed and the lines of the arms and neck are
marked by pleasant curves.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of John Charles Gage. Book-plate of
    Elizabeth Allen. Book-plate of Leila H. Cole. Book-plate of
    Elizabeth Langdon.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]

In the plate of Maie Bruce Douglas, Mr. Fisher may have been
influenced by Hans Christian Andersen. At any rate, whether or not
this is so, he has neatly and most effectively grouped the old-time
jester with his cap and bells, the pointed shoes from whence came our
modern samples, and the maiden with the quaintness of head-dress and
drapery, that at least suggests the fairy and the incidental sacred
stork, making this plate with its shelf of books and the panel of
repeated heraldic shields very attractive even to the chance observer.

In the plates for the Misses Mary N. Lewis, Elizabeth Langdon, Leila
H. Cole and Elizabeth Allen there are several diverse methods shown in
which convention has been pleasingly utilized. The vine and tree forms
that are motifs are very effective, and in all of these we see
suggestions of treatment similar to that which stands out perhaps a
little more pronouncedly in the plate of Miss Douglas. Costume
quaintness, charm of pose, graceful outline, the tendency toward
lecturn detail and delicacy of touch, are in each instance here seen
to be characteristic of the artist.

The plate of John Charles Gage has in it the atmosphere of the
monastery. Two friars are busy with a folio manuscript that has been
beautifully illuminated. The one reads the lessons for the day from
the book of hours. The other has a pleasing bit of gossip that he is
telling to his brother friar as he reads, and the reader hears with
eagerness with his ears while he reads without absorption with his
eyes.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Samuel H. Hudson. Book-plate of Silvanus
    Macy Jr.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]

Into the plate of Samuel H. Hudson the atmosphere of the monastery is
also introduced. The cordelier sits absorbedly reading his matins.
Through the open window of the monkish cell is seen the morning
medieval landscape whose charms exercise no influence upon the
solitary recluse, solitary save for the monkey who plays sad havoc
with the vellum volume that lies upon the cell floor and the
destruction of which the Franciscan is too absorbed to notice. The
monkey as a foil for the ascetic in this plate shows that Mr. Fisher
has a strong appreciation of the most delicate humor, which here crops
out most delightfully. The border makes the plate a trifle heavy, but
this can easily be excused because of the charm of the plate
otherwise.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Stanley Shepard.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]

The dog is given a prominent place in the plate of Miss Lula Thomas
Wear. He dominates even the books, and it may be that the owner
prefers her dachshund to her library, although it is evident that her
books have some place in her esteem.

The design on the plate of Stanley Shepard suggests a derivation from
an old print. The caravel rides upon the waves according to the
conception of the old-time engravers. The anchor, the sword fish of
the deep sea, and the sea-stars all suggest the ocean voyager who has
deep down in his heart a love of books.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Edna B. Stockhouse.} By Wm. Edgar
    Fisher]

In contrast with the plate of Mr. Shepard's appears that bearing the
name of Silvanus Macy, Jr. The love of hunting stands out right boldly
here, and in the fox hunt does Mr. Macy undoubtedly revel. He could
not have such a book-plate otherwise, and live with it every day, let
it be in all his books and have it stand for him as it does, unless it
was fairly representative of the man's personality. That is what makes
a book-plate so eminently interesting, aside from the art work put
upon it. Books appeal to all sorts and conditions of men, as the work
of Mr. Fisher's here grouped clearly indicates.

The plate from the books of Miss Edna B. Stockhouse is a trifle
shadowy in motif notwithstanding which there can be no doubt the owner
loves books. The face in the book-plate reads. There is also a love of
the beautiful in ceramics indicated as an incident in the plate. No
wonder the head wears an aureole.

The "Bi Lauda" plate is that of a secret society at Wellsville,
N. Y., and we, therefore, forgive if we cannot forget its poverty of
bookish design.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Wm. Edgar Fisher.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]

In the personal plate of the designer, of all those here reproduced,
we catch glimpses of the artist's own personality. We see him as a
book-lover and something of his inspiration is spread out before us.
He goes reading along, carrying reserve volumes in case the one that
engages his attention in the portraiture is happily finished. Mr.
Fisher has been producing book-plates only since 1898, since which
time he has to his credit some forty examples of work in this field.
He is perhaps happiest in his rendition of the plate pictorial, and he
has sometimes tinted his plates most charmingly. Mr. Fisher prepared
for Cornell at Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass. At Cornell he studied
architecture for two years, with especial attention to drawing. He
also studied, for six months, at the Art Institute, Chicago, Ill.,
whither he went from Cornell. He has been largely self-taught in the
matter of designing, but his work indicates that his teacher was a
good one. He has privately but carefully studied the work of the best
modern pen-and-ink draughtsmen, and from this he has formed his
personal style. The methods and craftsmanship of reproduction were the
subject of special study on his part while he was with one of the
large Chicago engraving houses. Anything that comes from his hand will
be sure of the most kindly reception, so long as his work is
maintained at the present high standard.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Bi Lauda. Book-plate of Lula Thomas
    Wear.} By Wm. Edgar Fisher]




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of William Frederick Havemeyer.}]




NINETEEN EXAMPLES OF DECORATIVE BOOK-PLATES BY MODERN BRITISH
DESIGNERS

From THE LONDON "STUDIO"


  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Charles Holme.} By J. W. Simpson]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Frank Lynn Jenkins.} By Byam Shaw]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Théodule, Comte de Grammont.} By R.
    Anning Bell]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of P. C. Konody.} By Walter Essie]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Edward Morton.} By E. H. New]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of J. W. Simpson.} By J. W. Simpson]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Katie Black. Book-plate of R. C.
    Book-plate of Edy. Book-plate of K. D.} Four Designs by Gordon
    Craig]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Hugh Giffen McKinney.} By J. Williams]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of R. Mullineux Walmsley.} By J. Williams]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of W. S. George.} By W. B. Pearson]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Kenneth N. Bell.} By S. A. Lindsey]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Therese Alice Mary Jackson.} By Enid M.
    Jackson]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate, no name.} By Anna Dixon]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of A. H. V.} By Arthur H. Verstage]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Robert M. Mann.} From Drawing after
    Etching
      By D. Y. Cameron]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Edith A. Kingsford.} By Harold Nelson]




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of T. Henry Foster.}]




THE ARTISTIC BOOK-PLATE

By TEMPLE SCOTT


A book-plate, in its simplest expression, is a printed indication of
the ownership of a book. It may take the form of the unadorned
visiting card, or it may be embellished with heraldic and other
designs explanatory of the owner's name, ancestry, tastes, or
predilections. Primarily, however, it is intended to fix ownership.
How far it satisfactorily serves its purpose, is, perhaps, of little
moment to the average book-collector; for the book-plate has emerged
from the stage of practical utility and become a thing in itself, so
to speak. It has taken its place beside the many _articles de vertu_
which are godsends to the weary of brain and heart, inasmuch as they
become the objects of a passion so delightful in its experience, as to
make us forget the little trials and worries of life that make
pessimists of us in this "bleak Aceldama of sorrow." Nay, they may
even become the one sun, shining and irradiating for us all the dark
places of our wanderings, and cheer us with the hopes for newer and
finer acquisitions than we already have.

When, however, we come to a consideration of the _artistic_
book-plate, we enter upon a new field of enquiry entirely. It
indicates that a simple usage of a necessary and harmless convention
has developed into a complex expression--an expression not merely of
the individual to whom the book belongs, but also of the artist whose
business it is to give pictorial form to the desires and wishes and
tastes of his patron.

From the crude, if sufficient, paste-board stuck on the end-paper, to
the heraldic display, was, surely, no very far cry. In the countries
of the Old World, where pride of ancestry touches the worthy and
unworthy alike, it was to be expected that so valuable an opportunity
for flaunting the deeds of "derring do" of one's forefathers as a sign
of one's own distinction, such as the book-plate offers, was certainly
not to be neglected. So we find that the coats of arms which once
served as inspirations, and which once had a genuine meaning to their
owners and retainers, now do service in the more peaceful realms of
Bookland. And, assuredly, there are certain books in a library, which
are more worthily acknowledged after this ancient and martial fashion.
We cannot but believe that a Froissart from the press of Caxton or
Wynkyn de Worde, would be handled with more reverence if one saw on
the verso of its front cover a glorious display of the arcana of
heraldry, in all its magnificence of mysterious meaning. This feeling
would also be aroused in turning the leaves of, say, Philippe le
Noir's edition of the "Gesta Romanorum" (1532), or of Hayton's "Lytell
Cronycle" from the shop of Richard Pynson, or of Mandeville's
"Voyages and Travailles," issued by T. Snodham in 1625, or of Pliny's
"Historia Naturalis" from the Venetian press of Nic. Jenson in 1472,
or of Rastell's "Pastyme of People," "emprynted in Chepesyde at the
Sygne of the Mermayd" in 1529. To these and their like a book-plate of
heraldic story comes as a fitting and graceful complement.

But the average mortal of this work-a-day world and age has not the
means wherewith to acquire such treasures of the bibliophile. Nor,
perhaps, has he the necessary pedigree with which to adorn them, if
acquired; though on this latter consideration, we suspect that the
Herald's College in the purlieus of Doctors' Commons, and the more
amenable, though not less expensive Tiffany on this side of the
Atlantic, would, no doubt, prove excellent aids to a full
satisfaction.

But we are not here dealing with the pomp and glorious circumstance of
Heraldry. In dealing with the artistic book-plate, we are considering
a matter which concerns itself not with past stories or past
individuals, but with the present tale and the particular living
personage who has the laudable and humble ambition to distinguish his
copy of a book from his friend's copy of the same book. A taste in
books may be easily whitewashed, but a taste in a book-plate flares
its owner's heart right into the eyes of the demurest damsel or the
simplest swain. It may be that our collection is but a series of
Tauchnitz editions carefully garnered on a European tour, or a handful
or two of Bohn's Library, accumulated from our more studious days, or
a treatise on golf, chess, gardening and photography, or a history of
the state or town in which we live--it matters little what--these are
the treasures we most prize, and we wish to hold them. Now, how best
shall the collector mark them as his own?

He writes his name on the title-page. Ugh! What a vandal's act! The
man who could so disfigure a book deserves to have it taken from him,
and his name obliterated. He who could find it in his heart to write
on title-pages could surely commit a murder. We'd much rather he
turned a leaf down to mark the place where he had left off in his
reading; though to do that is bad enough, in all conscience. Nor does
he save his soul by writing on the fly-title, or even end-paper.
Moreover, this will not save his book either. A visiting card can
easily be taken out--it looks too formal, nondescript, meaningless,
common, to inspire any respect in a would-be thief. But an artistic
book-plate! Ah! that's another thing altogether.

An artistic book-plate is the expression in decorative illustration of
the proprietor's tastes, made by an artist who has sympathetically
realized the feeling intended. It should objectify one, and only one,
salient characteristic, either of temperament, habit, disposition, or
pleasure, of its owner. If it does less, it is not individual; if it
does more, it is not satisfying.

Now each one of us has some characteristic trait that is not common to
us all--then let that be the aim of the artist to embody in decorative
form. And let that embodiment be simple and direct--the simpler and
more direct it is, the more will it appear; and the more beautiful it
is the more will it soften the kleptomaniacal tendencies of the
ghoulish book-hunter. For nothing touches him so nearly to the finer
impulses of nature than the contemplation of beauty; and he would be
less than human did he fail to respond. We would even go to the length
of giving as an admirable test of the book-plate artist's powers, the
lending of a book (whose loss would give no qualms) containing the
plate. If it come not back, there's something the matter with your
plate; or, you can libel your friend as a beast of low degree, which
suggests a good way of finding out your friend's true character. But
then, there's no limit to the powers of a beautiful book-plate.

Now there are a great many coy people who don't care to wear their
hearts on their sleeves; these would naturally feel indisposed to post
themselves thus before the public eye, be the book-plate never so
beautiful. To these we would say: Give us what you prize best--your
home, your wife, your sweetheart, your motto (though that's giving
yourself away too), your baby, anything that is truly yours. (Babies
are quite _à propos_, and should be characteristic, though it does not
always follow. Some babies have a habit of taking after quite other
people.) The idea is, to embody something individual, something
special and particular.

If he can afford a large library, or is a collector of the works of
one or two authors, there's a way out of the difficulty for the coy
person, by having the book-plate represent the characteristic of the
author and have his name as an addition. That may be taking a
liberty--but authors are accustomed to that; and, besides, you are
appreciating them, and that should exorcise the spirit of an indignant
"classic" from the four walls of your library. Have the original of
the design framed on the wall; it may save you a lot of explanation
should the spook even get "mad." You can always lay the blame on the
artist. Of course, this means a book-plate for each author; but as
book-plates are not, after all, such very expensive luxuries, this
consideration need be a matter of but small moment.

Yet another idea is to have an artistic treatment of a representation
of your library, your "den." That sounds very inviting and certainly
can hurt no one's feelings. If you don't happen to possess a special
apartment, give an apartment such as you would like to possess. Or
show your favorite chair, or nook, or greenwood tree, or running
brook, or garden plot. There are thousands of ways in which to fashion
a book-plate, and an artistic book-plate, too. We thus can see what an
advance the modern artistic book-plate is on the old style article--so
formal, so characterless, so inchoate and so amorphous.

Indeed the artistic book-plate is a genuine inspiration, or it may be
made so. How charming, or delight-giving, or valuable, or intoxicating
it is, depends largely on the artist. But it also depends on the
individual who desires it. It should be planned with care and executed
with feeling. It should be like no other book-plate in the sense that
it possesses some _flavor_ that is private and personal. It should be
as much an indication of the owner's taste as is his library--and no
man can hide his nature from the friend who has had access to that.
There are many things a book-plate should not be--but these may be
summed up in the advice--it should not be a mask. You may order your
books by the hundredweight from your bookseller, but that won't stand
you in any stead when your friend handles them and turns to you for a
criticism, or an opinion. You may also commission your artist for a
book-plate; but you are in a worse plight if you fail in the more
direct explanation you will be required to make to the insistent
inquiries as to its meaning or appositeness. No! Be it ever so humble,
let it be yours. It may be a poor thing, but it is your own; but it
may be also a very rich thing, and your own also.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of James Dick.} By J. W. Simpson]




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Henrietta M. Cox.}]




THIRTY-TWO EXAMPLES OF BOOK-PLATES _from_ PRIVATE COLLECTIONS _and
Other Sources_


  [Illustration: {Book-plate of the Worcester Art Museum.} From Steel
    Engraving By E. D. French]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of the Authors' Club Library.} By Geo.
    Wharton Edwards]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Theodore Brown Hapgood Jr.} By T. B.
    Hapgood, Jr.]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Eaton.} By Charles Selkirk]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Frances Louise Allen.} By T. B. Hapgood,
    Jr.]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of David Turnure.} By Louis H. Rhead]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of A. Squire.} By B. G. Goodhue]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of William Snelling Hadaway.} By W. S.
    Hadaway]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Edwin Allis de Wolf.}]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of John B. Larner.} From Steel Engraving
      By E. D. French]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Constance Grosvenor Alexander.} By
    H. E. Goodhue]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Amy M. Sacker.} By H. E. Goodhue]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Udolpho Snead.} By B. G. Goodhue]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Barreau de Bruxelles.} By Fernand
    Khnopff]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Hans Thoma.} By Hans Thoma]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of May v. Feilitzsch.} By Bernhard Wenig]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Max Ostenrieder.} By Julius Diez]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Charles E. Eldred.} By Charles E.
    Eldred, of English Navy]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Richard Butler Glaenzer.}]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Reginald C. Vanderbilt.}]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Alice Hillingdon. Book-plate of Mildred
    Chelsea. Book-plate of Sarah Isabel Wilson. Book-plate of Clementine
    F. A. Walsh.} From Steel Engravings by Wm. Phillips Barrett]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Anthony, Earl of Shaftesbury. Book-plate
    of Constance Derby. Book-plate of Alice Stanley. Book-plate of
    Gladys de Grey.} From Steel Engravings by Wm. Phillips Barrett]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of George Louis Beer. Book-plate of Lewis
    W. Hatch. Book-plate of Irving and Sissie Lehman. Book-plate of Julian
    Pearce Smith.} Four designs by Thomas M. Cleland]




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Robert Fletcher Rogers.}]




BOOK-PLATES AND THE NUDE

By WILBUR MACEY STONE


  [Illustration: Book-Plate of Mr. Carl Schur]

Lovers of the beautiful have been burdened with endless talk and
writing and many quarrels on the nude in art, and now I have the
temerity to open a new field of battle and throw down the gauntlet for
strife. The Eternal Feminine is a prominent factor in the picture
book-plates of the day, and she is showing some tendencies to appear
minus her apparel. Question: is it wise and in good taste?

Of course, to start with, I am quite free to admit that good taste is
a movable feast and is much influenced by the point of view. Your
taste is good if it agrees with mine; otherwise it is bad taste or no
taste. At any rate, there are a few things we can agree upon, I think.
For instance, that there is a wide distinction between the nude and
the naked. Also, that the human form divine is most beautiful, but
that to remain most beautiful it must deviate not one jot or tittle
from the divine, for any deviation is to tend to the earthy and gross,
which is vulgar and--bad taste. We can also agree, I think, that
partially draped figures can be, and often are, sensual and repulsive
beyond the frankly nude, and this without the direct intent or
knowledge of the artist.

    "A hair perhaps divides the false and true,
    Yes; and a single slip were the clue--"

But above all things a nude figure should never carry the idea of a
consciousness of its nudity! Also, clothing or drapery used simply to
hide portions of the figure is execrable and more suggestive than any
entire absence of clothing; while to add, as I have seen done, a hat
and French-heeled shoes to a nude figure is abominable beyond
condemnation.

But all this is of broad application and is sawing upon the same old
and frayed strings. Abstractly, a beautiful nude is as beautiful on a
book-plate as in a portfolio or in a frame, and some of the most
beautiful book-plates I have ever seen have been nudes. Nevertheless,
to me the nude seems out of place and in questionable taste on a
book-plate; the simple matter of repetition is enough to condemn it.

The partially draped figures by R. Anning Bell are chaste and
beautiful, and one never thinks of them other than as clothed; so they
can hardly be considered in this discussion. Many of the book-plates
by Henry Ospovat contain partly draped figures which are always
beautifully drawn, pure and a constant delight. But really, I think it
would jar me to meet even an angel--the same one, mind you--in each of
a thousand volumes. Emil Orlak, in Austria, has made some fairly
pleasing nudes, but they lack that purity of conception without which
they are common. Armand Rassenfosse, of Belgium, has etched a number
of dainty, faultlessly drawn and really most beautiful nudes, but many
of them have been ruined by the needless addition of shoes and fancy
head-dresses. Pal de Mont, of Antwerp, has a plate by Edmond van Oppel
which he probably thinks a work of art, but which is surely the height
of vulgarity; while in "Composite Book-Plates" is a design by Theodore
Simson containing a large figure of a nude woman with her hair done in
a pug, seated in a grove amid dandelions and poppies, and diligently
reading a book. The figure is treated in broad outline, which is ill
adapted to the subject, and it lacks that refinement without which
nothing is beautiful. She is absolutely at variance with her
environment, and the whole is a _tour de force_ quite unforgivable.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Robert H. Smith.} By H. Nelson]

Miss Labouchere, in her volume on ladies' plates, shows a rather
amusing pair of designs for Miss Nellie Heaton. These plates both bear
the legend, "Gather ye roses while ye may." In the first, the
designer, Mrs. Baker, has a fair creature in all the glory of entire
nudity plucking blossoms from a rose-vine. In the other, she used the
same design throughout, but has fully clothed the figure. Evidently
Miss Heaton protested.

These designs by a woman call to mind the fact that among the
book-plates of over one hundred and fifty women designers with which I
am familiar, I know of but one other nude. This other is by Miss Mary
Florence, and is of a large full-length angel entirely undraped.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Arthur Guthrie.} By H. Ospovat]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of H. v. W.} By A. Rassenfosse]

Fritz Erler, a German designer of much strength, has made a number of
symbolic book-plates. All, I believe, have the feminine as motif, and
in several the figures are nude. The design for Emil Gerhäuser is
inoffensive and well-drawn, but surely is not beautiful, and lacks a
good excuse for existence. In a generally pleasing decorative
arrangement for Robert H. Smith, Harold Nelson, an English designer,
shows a rather attenuated nude maiden looking with envy at a gorgeous
peacock on the opposite side of the design; while the peacock in turn
seems to say, "Why don't you grow some feathers?"

We naturally expect to find well-drawn, if not always pleasing, nudes
in the French school. Henry André, one of the best known French
designers of book-plates, uses the nude quite freely in his work; in
some instances pleasingly, but in one or two with marked vulgarity.
Octave Uzanne has the most pleasing nude plate that I have ever seen.
It is designed by Guérin, and represents a tortoise bearing the
implements of the artist, and coaxed along by the hot torch of
knowledge in the hand of a light-winged cupid. By Sherborn, the great,
I have seen but one nude in a book-plate, and that a poor thing but
innocuous, for Mr. Harris Fahnestock of New York. Mr. E. D. French has
made but one nude that I have seen, that for Mr. E. H. Bierstadt; the
design shows a nude shepherd boy piping to his flock. The plate Mr.
French engraved for Mr. De Vinne, from the design by Geo. Fletcher
Babb, has nude termini for bearers, and is elegant and beautiful, an
ideal plate.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of John & Jessie Hoy.} By H. Ospovat]

American artists have essayed the nude but little in book-plate
design, perhaps through wisdom, perhaps through fear; but the fact
remains that they have thereby avoided the perpetration of at least
some crimes. Judging by the examples we have been able to cite, and
they are representative, it would seem that the best advice we can
give those tempted to use the undraped beautiful in their book-plates
is--don't.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Al Mockel.} From Drawing after Etching
    by A. Rassenfosse]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Octave Uzanne.} After Etching by Guérin]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Emil Gerhäuser.} By Fritz Erler]




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Willis Steell.}]




THE ARCHITECT AS A BOOK-PLATE DESIGNER

By WILLIS STEELL


  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Frank Jean Pool.} By Thomas Tryon]

Among the book-plate designers of the present day the architect may,
if he choose, take a high place. He is one whose studies have led him
through the paths of artistic training where his eye and hand have
learned to see color and form and balance of parts, and while the
usual media of his profession are wood, stone, terra cotta and iron,
there are many by-paths through which he must travel to appreciate the
value of his pencil lines upon the flat.

No more delightful by-way than the book-plate route will open before
him, hedged in as it is by purely artistic shrubbery and leading
constantly to pretty and even beautiful designs in which the genius of
architecture has played a great part. Moreover, all his preceding
journey through the hard conventional country to which architecture at
first seems limited, has equipped him thoroughly to give expression to
his fancy. That the gift of imagination is among his endowments should
be taken for granted, however, if the architect is to succeed in the
line of drawing book-plates.

Fancy and imagination being in his mental equipment the architect can
"rest" his mind in no more delightful fashion than by giving them full
scope in this gem-like art. His experience, his collections of
drawings, the work of others of his craft which he has studied, all
tend to render his fund of information large, and if he has the key to
book-plate art, inexhaustible, since nothing comes amiss to the pen of
one whose facile fancy can grasp a good motive and direct it to a
purpose other than that originally intended.

  [Illustration: JAMES SEYMOUR TRYON
      By Thomas Tryon]

In the early days of art the architect was not only a designer of
buildings but was also a sculptor and sometimes a decorative painter.
He was called upon by his patrons to design whatever was needed at the
moment, and these men were "all-round" artists, the day of
specialization and the speculator not having dawned.

Buonarotti is an awesome name to call up, but this great painter,
sculptor, architect and builder touched nothing that he did not adorn,
and in many of the hundreds of crayon sketches and cartoons that he
left behind him, the feeling of the book-plate artist is clear. Had
Lorenzo the Magnificent wanted a book-plate for use in his library,
the great Michael Angelo could have filled the want from his own
notes, with very little of either suppression or expansion. It may
seem strange to think of this Titan of art, the creator of the
sweeping "Last Judgment" turning his pencil to the delicate lines, the
imperceptible nuances demanded by a book-plate, yet it may be
repeated, in his work may be found a myriad of suggestions for these
gem-like products.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Annah M. Fellowes.} By Thomas Tryon]

Buonarotti was not, however, first and last an architect. Painter and
sculptor also, these sides of his artist soul would have been drawn on
for the book-plate. Therefore the statement that not every architect
can design so fanciful and dainty a work as a book-plate becomes a
truism patent to everybody. The architect's profession calls for a
two-fold nature, the one side tending toward that of the engineer with
its eminently practical and very necessary tables of stress and
strain, its mathematical calculations for loads and disposition of
carrying walls, while the other side leans to a nice discernment of
color and proportion. The laying out of vistas and the arrangement of
surfaces and lines, so that the eye is aided in receiving the best
impression from all points of view. Of this turn of mind is the one
who can and does design book-plates. The very practical architect, if
he wishes the glory, which is doubtful, has one of his draftsmen make
the design and then signs the drawing and gets the glory. It would be
amusing if such an one through some luck charm received constant
application for such work. His draftsmen would change and his drawings
be as dissimilar as the men who drew them. Possibly the signature
would lead the long-suffering public to think him very versatile.

It is not of this class of architect that we write. It is of him who
is half painter or sculptor, and who loves his pen and pencil and
delights in the personal expression of his ideals. He finds that his
way of seeing things is more to his liking than any way of any other
man. He sees the infinite beauty of nature and loves her shifting
pictures in the clouds. Then too, he must have the ability to clearly
comprehend the half-formed ideas of him whose plate he undertakes to
draw. This is not always an easy matter. There are but few in the
world who can formulate their ideas, much less invent a picture
without first seeing it. Here the architect has, perhaps, an advantage
over the purely imaginative artist, since the average man does not
know the difference between the Classic period and the Gothic, the
Napoleon era and the modern German renaissance.

Of the architects who have obtained unquestioned recognition in this
exquisite art, Thomas Tryon is among those whose work is especially
prized. His adaptation of architectural forms to the confined space of
the book-plate shows the work of a man who has command of his tools
and knowledge, and despite the narrow confines of the field his work
is not at all "cabined or cribbed." The illustrations accompanying
this essay are taken rather at random from among Mr. Tryon's designs,
but they will convey to those unfamiliar with his work, a fair idea of
its scope and treatment. His first design was a plate for his father,
an ornate armorial design, the name being set up in type at the base.
The plate for Miss Annah M. Fellowes is quite elaborate. A long-haired
and bewhiskered knight stands before us in a suit of rich armor, his
right hand bearing his sword and helmet, and his left resting upon his
shield. His helmet is surmounted by a pair of spreading wings. The
design is backed by a rambling rose bush on which is hung the motto
ribbon.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Loyall Farragut.} By Thomas Tryon]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of George Elder Marcus.} By Thomas Tryon]

Mr. Frank Pool is obviously a lover of the drama. In an oval window
set in masonry, is a Roman gentleman, laurel crowned, reading from a
large volume, while at the upper right and left sides are comedy and
tragedy masks from which hang a gracefully festooned wreath. Palms,
ribbon and name plate finish the design. For Mr. Farragut, the son of
our old admiral, Mr. Tryon has made a very "salt water" arrangement of
arms. The shield is surmounted by a quaint ship and the bearers are
dolphins, which on one side encircle a trident and on the other a
sword. The conventional acanthus leaves give body and decoration to
the whole. Perhaps one of the most distinctively beautiful of Mr.
Tryon's designs is the fleur-de-lis for Mr. Marcus. In this the artist
has blended most delightfully the natural and the heraldic flower and
has produced a gem of which one never tires. For his sister and her
children Mr. Tryon has made a light and airy design, distinctively
feminine and graceful. The main feature of the design is an ornate
cypher of the letters S T. On the ribbon below the name is shown. This
is changed to the names of Mrs. Stone's three daughters for their
individual use. The plate reproduced here is that of one of Mrs.
Stone's daughters. The design for "The Boys Club" is surmounted by the
American eagle perched upon the globe, and the flag of our country is
draped over the tablet bearing the lettering. This plate has been
reproduced both by photo-process and copper plate.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Rachel Norton Tryon Stone.} By Thomas
    Tryon]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Library of the Boys Club.} By Thomas
    Tryon]

Of the three color plates reproduced the first was made for Mr. A. W.
Brunner, and has for "piece de resistence" a very ingenious monogram
set in an oval frame. For bearers there are two graceful palms and the
keystone is surmounted by a pile of books and a classic student's
lamp. The base of the design is relieved by a pleasing arrangement of
acanthus leaves. The plate for Miss Cox is a seal-like design,
dignified yet dainty, and would be entirely in place in all kinds of
volumes. The plate for Mr. Steell quite speaks for itself and makes
the sportsman feel wildly for the trigger of his gun. The buck and doe
silhouetted against the yellow of evening and the reflection in the
stream are a delight.

Three of Mr. Tryon's designs have been engraved by Mr. E. D. French.
The famous Sovereign plates being two, and one for Mr. Havemeyer being
the third. This plate for Mr. Havemeyer is indicative of the owner's
collection of Washingtoniana, and is surrounded by several of the
well-known portraits of the father of his country, while at the top is
a small view of Mount Vernon. The portraits and view are interwoven
with foliage and ribbon and form a frame in which Mr. Havemeyer's arms
are displayed. The "Sovereign" plates, which were made in 1895 for the
library of Mr. M. C. D. Borden's yacht, are of great richness, the
first or "crown" design being especially so. This one did not please
the owner, who had a second one made surmounted by an eagle instead of
a crown. This is simpler in treatment and not so decorative as the
earlier design. These plates were both cut on the copper by Mr. French
who treated them in a very sympathetic manner and brought out in clear
relief the ideas of the designer.

Mr. Tryon's production has not been great, reckoned by the number of
plates made, but as his work is never done hurriedly or slightingly it
carries an air of finished dignity and worth that gives it lasting
qualities. As he usually has one or two plates in hand to which he
adds a few lines and a few thoughts from time to time, we may still
expect pleasant surprises in this miniature art from his workshop.

  [Illustration: {Book-plate, no name.}]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of the Library of the Harvard Union.} By
    B. G. Goodhue]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of M. A. de Wolfe Howe.} By B. G. Goodhue]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Barrett Wendell.} By E. D. French]

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of Harvard University Library, Lowell
    Memorial Library of Romance Literature.} By B. G. Goodhue]




  BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY
    TONNELÉ & COMPANY
        NEW YORK

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of William A. Boland.}]




A CHECK-LIST of the WORK of TWENTY-THREE BOOK-PLATE DESIGNERS of
PROMINENCE

Compiled by WILBUR MACEY STONE


It was thought that interest and value would be added to this book by
the inclusion of lists of the book-plates made by the more prominent
artists whose work is reproduced here. These lists are the nearest
complete of any that have ever been published, and as they have been
verified in many instances by the artists themselves, and in others
carefully collated from the actual book-plates, they may be relied
upon as highly accurate. The sundry notes, bibliographical and
otherwise, by which the individual lists are prefaced, are in no way
exhaustive, but just a cursory gathering to relieve the bareness of
the lists and to give some little additional assistance to the
amateur. The lists are arranged alphabetically under the artists'
names as follows:

    William Phillips Barrett
    Robert Anning Bell
    D. Y. Cameron
    Thomas Maitland Cleland
    Gordon Craig
    Julius Diez
    George Wharton Edwards
    Fritz Erler
    William Edgar Fisher
    Edwin Davis French
    Bertram G. Goodhue
    Harry E. Goodhue
    T. B. Hapgood, Jr.
    Harold E. Nelson
    Edmund H. New
    Henry Ospovat
    Armand Rassenfosse
    Louis Rhead
    Byam Shaw
    Joseph W. Simpson
    Hans Thoma
    Thomas Tryon
    Bernhard Wenig


WILLIAM PHILLIPS BARRETT

In Great Britain every family of rank has its arms suitably emblazoned
on its harnesses, carriages, table-plate, dining-chairs, and, of
course, in its library. When a new coach is ordered, or a new set of
harnesses, the coach-builder or the harness-maker furnish the proper
trimmings. So milord's stationer fixes up the family letter-paper
_and_ the family book-plate. Somebody has to lick into some semblance
of artistic unity the records of prowess of our medieval ancestors. In
the workshops of Messrs. "Bumpus Limited," Mr. William Phillips
Barrett performs this more or less genial task. He has signed some
ninety to one hundred designs, which were cut by the workmen in the
Bumpus establishment. Mr. Barrett's designs are not wholly without
merit, but they so apparently lack the spark of vitality and their
execution is in many cases so hard and mechanical that one is inclined
more to pity than to praise. In the pages of the London Ex Libris
Journal, that industrious encourager of the ordinary and banal in
book-plate design, Mr. Barrett's work is exploited at length. Vol.
II., page 81, et seq.


    1896

    Lady Gerard
    Hon. E. Byng
    Mr. Jack Cummings
    Lord Manners
    Lady Sarah Wilson
    Lady Charles Bentinck
    H. Somers Somerset, Esq.
    Lady K. Somerset


    1897

    J. Watson Armstrong, Esq.
    Lady Angela Forbes
    Mrs. Panmure Gordon
    Hon. Mrs. Charles Harbord
    Miss Beatrice Dudley Smith
    The Marchioness of Headfort
    Miss Audrey Battye
    Lady Beatrix Taylour
    Miss Rachel Duncombe
    J. S. Forbes, Esq.


    1898

    Lady Maud Warrender
    Lady de Trafford
    Hon. Marie Hay
    The Countess Mar and Kellie
    Mrs. Brocklebank
    The Viscountess Wolseley
    Robertson Lawson, Esq.
    Baron Königswarter
    Baroness Königswarter
    Miss Van Wart
    Reginald Nicholson, Esq.
    Lady Sybil Carden
    The Countess of Lathom


    1899

    The Duchess of Bedford
    Miss Eadith Walker (Australia)
    The Countess of Wilton
    The Viscountess Chelsea
    Mrs. Duff
    J. E. Ballie, Esq.
    Lord Bolton
    Lady Margaret Levett
    Miss Howell
    Basil Levett, Esq.
    Mrs. Harcourt Powell
    Lady Ampthill
    J. & E. (Mr. and Mrs. Muller)
    Bishop Lefroy of Lahore
    Mrs. McCalmont
    Miss Gabrielle de Montgeon


    1900

    Her Royal Highness Princess Victoria of Great Britain
    The Earl of Lathom
    The Duke of Beaufort
    Hon. Mrs. Gervase Beckett
    The Countess of Gosford
    The Marchioness of Bath
    Mrs. Lee Pilkington
    Freda and Winifreda Armstrong
    Mrs. Wernher
    Miss Freda Villiers
    Miss Muriel Dudley Smith
    Lord Kenyon
    Lady Savile Crossley
    Hon. Hilda Chichester
    Lady Dickson-Poynder
    Sir John Dickson-Poynder
    Gervase Beckett, Esq.
    Canon Stanton
    The Duke of Portland
    Mrs. Alfred Harmsworth
    Mrs. Arthur Wilson
    J. Hutchinson, Esq.
    Hon. Mrs. G. Kenyon
    Captain Noble
    Edward Hubbuck, Esq.
    R. L. Foster, Esq.
    Royal Naval and Military
    Will Watson Armstrong
    Masonic Supreme Council, 33° (Large and small)
    The Earl of Shaftesbury
    Miss Barclay (Wood block Armorial)
    H. A. Harben, Esq.


    1901

    Ivor Fergusson, Esq.
    Harold Harmsworth, Esq.
    Lord Haddo
    Lady Mary Cayley
    Mrs. Sheridan (Frampton Court)
    The Marchioness Anglesey
    Sir Charles Cust
    The Countess of Derby
    Lady Hillingdon
    Lady Alice Stanley
    Lady Clementine Walsh
    R. C. Donaldson-Hudson, Esq.


ROBERT ANNING BELL

Robert Anning Bell, Director of the Art School of the Liverpool
University, is the most prolific designer of artistic picture-plates
in Great Britain. His work has long been the envy of amateurs, and no
collection can claim to be representative without some examples of his
work. His book-plates have been reproduced and commented on in almost
all published articles on the general subject. The book-plate number
of the "Studio," Simpson's "Book of Book-plates," Bowdoin's "Rise of
the Book-plate," Zur Westen's "Ex Libris" (Leipzig, 1901), all show
examples. His work is characterized by dignity and grace, is in good
drawing, and has an average of excellence unsurpassed. The list is
complete to July 1, 1902.

     1 Walter George Bell
     2 Rainald William Knightley Goddard
     3 G. R. Dennis
     4 Barry Eric Odell Pain
     5 Jane Patterson (circular)
     6 Jane Patterson (rectangular)
     7 Christabel A. Frampton
     8 Frederick Brown
     9 Matt. Gossett
    10 Arthur Trevithin Nowell
    11 Edward Priolean Warren
    12 Frederick Leighton (small)
    13 Frederick Leighton (large)
    14 Arthur Melbourne Sutthery
    15 Juliet Caroline Fox Pym
    16 Yolande Sylvia Mina Noble Pym
    17 Florence and William Parkinson
    18 Nora Beatrice Dicksee
    19 Felsted School
    20 Arthur E. Bartlett
    21 The Hon. Mabel de Grey
    22 Geraldine, Countess of Mayo
    23 Walter E. Lloyd
    24 George Benjamin Bullock-Barker
    25 George Benjamin Bullock-Barker
    26 Thomas Elsley
    27 University College, Liverpool
    28 Rowland Plumbe
    29 Rennell Rodd
    30 Alicia, Lady Glomis
    31 H. E. John Browne
    32 Barham House
    33 Cecil Rhodes
    34 Mander Bros.
    35 Hon. Harriet Borthwick
    36 Beatrice Patterson
    37 Walter Drew
    38 Walter Raleigh
    39 Théodule, Comte de Grammont
    40 Joshua Sing
    41 Alice Emma Wilkinson
    42 James Easterbrook
    43 Theodore Mander
    44 W. H. Booth
    45 Hector Munro, 1897
    46 Margaret Wilton
    47 L. and M. S.
    48 Gardner S. Bazley
    49 Ex Libris Sodalium Academicorum Apud Lyrpul
    50 Roberti A. S. Macfie
    51 Richard T. Beckett
    52 Edmund Rathbone, 1898
    53 Croy Grammont, 1898
    54 A. J. Stratton
    55 John Duncan
    56 Helen Woollgar de Gaudrion Verrall
    57 C. Kohn
    58 C. J. R. Armandale
    59 Wm. Renton Prior
    60 H. and O. Lewis
    61 Herbert Lyndon
    62 Johanna Birkenruth
    63 Fanny Dove Harriet Lister
    64 Mary Josephine Stratton
    65 Louise Frances Foster
    66 Caleb Margerison
    67 Ellis Roberts
    68 Marie Clay
    69 Fanny Nicholson
    70 L. and E. Stokes
    71 Alfred Cecil Gathorne Hardy


D. Y. CAMERON

D. Y. Cameron is one of the most prominent artists in the so-called
"Glasgow School of Designers." His plates are nearly all etchings and
are decidedly his own in subjects and treatment. They are most
excellent productions. His work has been most fully exploited in
Simpson's "Book of Book-plates," Vol. I., No. 4. There are eleven
designs listed in Fincham, and the "Studio" Book-plate number
reproduces four.

    Donald & Grace Cameron Swan
    Robert M. Mann
    John Roberton
    John Maclaren
    Roberta Elliot S. Paterson
    Joanna Cameron
    Jeanie Ure MacLaurin
    Katherine Cameron
    J. Craig Annan
    James Arthur
    John Macartney Wilson
    James Henry Todd
    James J. Maclehose
    Robert G. Paterson
    R. Y. Pickering, 1895
    R. Y. Pickering (another design)
    John A. Downie
    Beatrice H. MacLaurin
    Sir James Bell, Bart.


THOMAS MAITLAND CLELAND

Mr. Cleland is a young man who has an innate appreciation for
decorative effect and, what is more to the purpose, an ability to
apply it. For some years past his skill in typographic arrangement has
added much to the products of several of our more advanced publishers;
by more advanced I mean those with a knowledge and belief that it is
good business to offer to the public books that delight the eye as
well as the mind. Mr. Cleland has done many decorative bits by way of
head- and tail-pieces and initials. There are also to his credit a
baker's dozen of book-plates. These last are intensely decorative, and
to class them as pictorial really does them injustice. They are
thoroughly conventional and quite medieval in feeling.

    Sara Stockwell Clark
    Herbert Wood Adams
    Laura Gaston Finley
    Elmer Bragg Adams
    Lewis W. Hatch
    Angus Frederick Mackay
    Julian Pearce Smith
    Irving and Sissie Lehman
    Louis and Bertha Stillings
    Alice and Arthur Cahn
    Rubie La Lande de Ferrière
    Maurice M. Sternberger
    George Louis Beer


GORDON CRAIG

"The Page" has been so much exploited in the public press that it
seems supererogation to write anything more about it or Gordon Craig,
one the embodiment of the other. Mr. Craig is very much of an
all-round young man; brought up in the atmosphere of the theater and
of books and pictures, he has dabbled in all to some purpose. He has a
clear-cut individuality that differentiates him and his--work, I was
going say, but perhaps play would be better, for Mr. Craig is one of
those inconsequential chaps that seem to take things as they come and
be chipper and happy and youthful-hearted with all. His book-plate
work is of the meat-ax variety and inspired by the rough wood-cuts of
the early engravers. His work has the air of the poseur that is as
balm to the heart of the dilettante.

    James Pryde, 1898
    M. P. (Margaret Palgrave)
    Ellen Terry (large), map
    Ellen Terry (small), map
    K. D. (Mrs. Kitty Downing), 1900
    Katie Black
    E. T., 1899 (Ellen Terry)
    James Corbet
    V. C. (Vincent Corbet)
    R. C. (Robin Craig)
    H. F. (Helen Fox)
    C. M. (Carl Michaelis)
    Nina (Lady Corbet)
    B. (Beatrice Irwin)
    C. D. (Charles Dalmon)
    W. H. Downing
    M. M. (Maud Meredith)
    A. L. (Aimée Lowther)
    William Winter
    Roche (Charles E. Roche), 1900
    S. B. B. (S. B. Brereton)
    C. (Christopher St. John)
    G. C. (Gordon Craig)
    Edy (Edith Craig)
    J. D. (John Drew)
    L. W., 1897 (Lucy Wilson)
    Oliver Bath, 1899
    E. D. L. (monogram) (Edie Lane)
    G. C., 1898 (Gordon Craig)
    Martin Shaw
    Miss Norman
    Lucy Wilson
    E. C. (Edith Craig)
    Ellen Terry
    Ellen Terry
    Marion Terry
    Cissie Loftus
    Evelyn Smalley
    Edith Craig
    C. B. P. (Mrs. Brown-Potter)
    Tommy Norman
    Jess Dorynne
    Jess Dorynne
    Rosie Craig
    G. C. (Gordon Craig)
    Gordon Craig
    Gordon Craig
    Gordon Craig
    Mrs. Enthoven
    Audrey Campbell
    M. Tolemache
    G. Tolemache
    J. B. R. (Madam Bell-Rauche)
    M. Fox
    Anna Held
    Pamela Colman Smith
    Katie Dunham
    Haldone McFall
    N. F. D. (Mrs. Dryhurst)


JULIUS DIEZ

The work of Julius Diez is rich with the flavor of medievalism and
full decorative effect. The example shown in this book, the plate for
Max Ostenrieder, is a little masterpiece and an ideal book-plate. Mr.
Diez has done others much more elaborate, and with well-drawn and well
thought-out motifs, but none to excel the bit referred to.

    Bayerischer Kunstgewerbe-Verein
    Gustav Euprius
    Max Ostenrieder
    Gustav Wolff
    Richard Hildebrandt
    August Drumm
    Luise Riggaur
    Joseph Flokmann
    Dr. Jul. Fekler
    Julie von Boschinger
    Georg Hirth
    Adolf Beermann
    Julius Diez
    Paul Scharff
    Elise Diez
    Georg Buchner
    Franz Langheinrich
    Paul Meyer


GEORGE WHARTON EDWARDS

Mr. Edwards has made a large number of very excellent book-cover
designs and has decorated several volumes throughout. One of the most
beautiful of the latter is Spenser's Epithalamion, published by Dodd,
Mead & Company. Mr. Edwards has done a few other book-plates in
addition to those listed here, but these are all he wishes to stand
sponsor for.

    Harvard University, Arnold Arboretum, 1892
    Grolier Club
    Author's Club Library
    George Washington Cram
    Tudor Jenks
    G. W. Drake


FRITZ ERLER

Fritz Erler has been one of the leading contributors to that prince of
German art periodicals, "Jugend," since its beginning. His book-plates
are characterized by the same imaginative spirit and weirdness that
appear in all his work. His work is often reproduced in soft tints
with excellent effect. In the third volume of "Jugend" there was a
double page given to prints of Mr. Erler's book-plates.

    Carl Mayr
    Arthur Scott
    T. Neisser
    Hugo Wolf
    C. Schoenfield
    Sigmund Schott
    M. Souchon
    S. Fuld
    Albert Schott
    Ulrich Putze
    Max Mayr
    Toni Neisser
    M. von B.
    M. von B.
    E. Gerhäuser
    H. Marx
    Gustav Eberius Liebermann


WILLIAM EDGAR FISHER

Mr. Fisher's work is fully described in the leading article in this
book by Mr. Bowdoin. The list of plates is in chronological order and
is complete to July 1, 1902.

     1 William Edgar Fisher
     2 William Edgar Fisher
     3 William Edgar Fisher
     4 Winifred Knight
     5 William Lincoln Ballenger
     6 Stanley Shepard
     7 William A. Brodie
     8 Silvanus Macy
     9 Edna B. Stockhouse
    10 Leila H. Cole
    11 C. A. W. (C. A. Wheelock)
    12 Lula Thomas Wear
    13 Gertrude T. Wheeler
    14 Guild of the Holy Child, Peekskill, N. Y.
    15 Elizabeth Langdon
    16 John Charles Gage
    17 Sallie A. Richards
    18 Albert Edgar Hodgkinson
    19 Samuel N. Hudson
    20 John Elliot Richards
    21 Ellen E. Langdon
    22 Maria Page Barnes
    23 Maie Bruce Douglas
    24 Sara Grace Bell
    25 Edward A. Wilson
    26 Peyton C. Crenshaw
    27 Marion Maude Lindsey
    28 Chauncey E. Wheeler
    29 Bi Lauda (secret society)
    30 Mary N. Lewis
    31 Elizabeth Allen
    32 The Studio Club
    33 (Dr.) I. N. Wear
    34 William Chauncey Langdon
    35 Charles S. Young
    36 Frederic H. Church
    37 John M. Harrison
    38 Les Chats Noirs
    39 George H. Phelps
    40 Mary Speer
    41 Julia Locke Frame
    42 John D. Farrand
    43 Lucy P. Winton
    44 Winifred Knight
    45 Mary Cheney Elwood
    46 Ernest Orchard
    47 Reta L. Adams
    48 Edward C. Brown
    49 Adeline Cameron
    50 T. Frank Fisher
    51 Edna B. Stockhouse
    52 John Le Droit Langdon
    53 W. J. Awty
    54 Henry McLallen
    55 William Edward Ramsay
    56 David S. Calhoun
    57 Walter W. Wait


EDWIN DAVIS FRENCH

The book-plates of Edwin Davis French are the most esteemed of those
of our present American engravers. His work is decidedly the vogue
among those who can afford the best, and is much prized by collectors.
There has rarely been an article on book-plates published in the past
five years or more that has not contained a eulogy of his work, and
there have been reproductions galore, both from the original coppers
and by half-tone. There is no American designer whose work is so
eagerly sought by the collector or for which larger returns are asked
in exchanges. Mr. French usually designs the work he engraves, but in
several instances he has cut plates from the designs of others. Such
instances are noted in the list. Mr. French's work is characterized by
daintiness of design and great beauty of execution. He is
unquestionably a master of the graver in decorative work. In the
following list those numbered 133 and below are from Mr. Lemperly's
well-known list, and credit is hereby rendered him therefor. The rest
of the list is made up from various sources and has been very
carefully compared and is believed to be accurate and complete, with
the few exceptions noted, to July 1, 1902.

    174 Adams, Ruth
    141 Allen, Charles Dexter, 1899
          _a_ with portrait
          _b_ with book-case
          _c_ with one club emblem changed
    170 Alexander, Amy B.
    187 Adams, Frances Amelia, 1901
    199 Adams, Edward Dean, 1902
    207 Adams, Ernest Kempton, 1902
     44 Alexander, Charles B., 1895
     11 Andrews, William Loring, 1894
     76 Andrews, William Loring, Compliments of, 1896
    195 Adriance Memorial Library, Poughkeepsie, 1902
    111 Armour, George Allison, 1898
     98 Author's Club (designed by Geo. Wharton Edwards), 1897
     10 Avery, In Memoriam, Ellen Walters, 1894
    142 Bakewell, Allan C.
     43 Bakewell, A. C., 1895
     36 Bates, James Hale, 1894
     53 Barger, Samuel F., 1895
     17 Baillie, W. E., 1894
     20 Blackwell, Henry, 1894
     16 Bierstadt, Edward Hale, 1894
     42 Bernheim, A. C., 1895
     60 Biltmoris, Ex Libris (designed by owner, George W. Vanderbilt),
          1895
     67 Bar of the City of New York, Association of the (Chas. H.
          Woodbury's library, 1895), 1896
    118 Bar of the City of New York, Association of the (the John E.
          Burrill Fund, 1897), 1896
    119 Bar of the City of New York, Association of the (Gift of James
          C. Carter)
     69 Biltmoris, Ex Libris (like 60, but smaller), 1896
     87 Bliss, Catherine A., 1896
    104 Burke, Edward F., 1897
    133 Bradshaw, Sidney Ernest, 1898
      1 Brainerd, Helen Elvira, 1892
      4 Brainerd, Helen Elvira, 1894
    124 Brown, Georgette (adapted from Parisian trade-card 18th century)
          _a_ with border
          _b_ without border
    176 Borden, M. C. D.
    177 Borden, M. C. D. (small)
    139 Boas, Emil L.
     80 Borland, Harriet Blair, 1896
    166 Buck, John H. (designed by Miss Marion Buck)
    171 Bullock, James Wilson, 1900
    180 Barnes, John Sanford
     65 Bull, William Lanman, 1895
    147 Blackwell, Henry (monogram), 1899
    150 Blackwell, Henry, Compliments of, 1900
     91 Carnegie, Lucy Coleman, 1897
     96 Candidati, 1897
      7 Chew, Beverly, 1894
     47 Chew, Beverly, 1895
     41 Church, E. D., 1895
     59 Champaign Public Library, 1895
      8 Clark, Charles E., M. D., 1894
      9 Clark, Charles E., M. D. (smaller), 1894
     18 Colonial Dames of America
     28 Coutant (Dr.), Richard B., 1894
     66 Clough, Micajah Pratt, 1896
     83 The John Crerar Library, Chicago, 1896
     97 Connell, William, 1897
    100 Child Memorial Library (Harvard), 1897
    125 Cox, Jennings Stockton, 1898
     51 Clough, Micajah P.
    156 Cheney, Alice S., 1900
    167 Chamberlain, Elizabeth (The Orchards), 1900
    145 Cushing
     22 Deats, Hiram Edmund, 1894
    131 Dana, Charles A. (designed by A. Kay Womrath), 1898
     70 Dows, Tracy, 1896
     56 De Vinne, Theo. L. (designed by George Fletcher Babb), 1895
     84 Denver Club, The (designed by Cora E. Sargent), 1896
    143 Duryee, George Van Wagenen and Margaret Van Nest, 1899
     46 Ellsworth, James William, 1895
     88 Emmet, The Collection of Thos. Addis, M. D., New York Public
          Library, 1896
      2 French, Mary Brainerd, 1893
      3 French, Edwin Davis (Volapük), 1893
      5 E. D. F. (French, Edwin Davis), 1893
          _a_ E. D. F., without enclosing frame
          _b_ with frame
          _c_ Edwin Davis French
     19 Foote, Charles B., 1894
    168 Foot, Margaret H., 1900
    198 Furman, Dorothy, 1902
     21 Grolier Club, The, 1894
     29 Goodwin, James J., 1894
     30 Goodwin, Francis, 1894
     32 Godfrey, Jonathan, 1894
     64 Goodrich, J. King, 1895
     89 Gray, Adelle Webber, 1897
    110 Goldsmith, Abraham, 1898
    121 Goldsmith, James A., 1898
     49 Goodwin, James J., 1895
    136 Gale, Edward Courtland, 1899
    185 Gage, Mabel Carleton (design by owner), 1901
    202 Gray, John Chipman, 1902
    181 Harvard, Society of the Signet (designed by B. G. Goodhue)
    186 Harvard Union (designed by B. G. Goodhue), 1901
          _a_ 1901
          _b_ In Memoriam Henry Baldwin Hyde
    184 Harbor Hill (Mrs. Clarence McKay)
     38 Haber, Louis I, 1894
    106 Hartshorn, Mary Minturn (designed by Miss E. Brown), 1897
     55 Havemeyer, William Frederick (designed by Thomas Tryon), 1895
     73 Herter, Christian Archibald, 1896
    149 Horsford, Cornelia
    155 Hopkins (Maj.), Robert Emmet
     23 Holden, Edwin B., 1894
     24 Holden, Edwin B. (smaller)
     61 H(olden), E(mily), (Miss), 1895
     25 Holden, Alice C., 1894
     26 Holden, Edwin R., 1894
    164 James, Walter B., M. D.
     33 Kalbfleish, Charles Conover, 1894
     90 O. A. K(ahn), 1897
     94 Kingsbury, Edith Davies (designed by Lilian C. Westcott), 1897
    113 Lambert, Samuel W., 1898
     85 Lamson, Edwin Ruthven (designed by E. H. Garrett), 1896
    173 Larner, John B.
     35 Lawrence, Emily Hoe, 1894
      6 Leggett, Cora Artemisia, 1894
     15 Lefferts, Marshall Clifford, 1894
     39 L. B. L(öwenstein), 1895
    105 Lefferts, Mollie Cozine, 1897
    102 Lemperly, Paul, 1897
    169 Loveland, John W. and Lee Partridge
    159 Livermore, John R.
    172 Little, Arthur West
    192 Long Island Historical Society, 1900
          _a_ Storrs Memorial Fund, 1900
          _b_ Ecclesiastical History
    148 K. D. M. (Mackay, Mrs. Clarence) (small monogram with crest)
     58 Marshall, Frank Evans, 1895
     37 Mausergh, Richard Southcote, 1895
     95 Marshall, Julian, 1897
    188 Merriman, Roger Bigelow
     40 Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1895
          _a_ Cruger mansion
          _b_ new building
     54 Messenger, Maria Gerard, 1895
     85 Messenger, Maria Gerard, 1896
          _a_ gift-plate with book-pile
          _b_ with view of Pleasantville library
     74 Morgan, A. J., 1896
     92 McCarter, Robert H., 1896
    115 Medicis, Ex Libris (Cushing), 1898
     45 McKee, Thomas Jefferson
    151 Messenger, Maria Gerard and Elizabeth Chamberlain (The
          Orchards), 1899
     68 V. E. M(acy)
          _a_ V. E. M.
          _b_ Macy, Valentine Everit and Edith Carpenter, 1896
    140 Moore, Louise Taylor Hartshorne
    128 Nimick, Florence Coleman, 1898
    163 New York Yacht Club, The (after sketch by the late Walter B. Owen)
     12 Oxford Club, The, Lynn, 1894
     57 Osborne, Thomas Mott and Agnes Devens, 1895
     62 Odd Volumes, The Club of, 1895
     13 Players, The (designed by Howard Pyle), 1894
     50 Pyne, M. Taylor, 1895
     63 Pine, Percy Rivington, 1895
     81 Plummer, Mary Emma, 1896
    107 Pyne, M. Taylor, 1897
    204 Pyne, R. Stockton, 1902
    108 Princeton University, Library of, 1897
    132 Prescott, Eva Snow Smith, 1898
    160 Porter, Nathan T., 1900
    189 Phillips, William (design arranged from 16th century armorial
          by P. de Chaignon la Rose), 1901
     14 Reid, Whitelaw, 1894
     34 Rowe, Henry Sherburne, 1894
    103 Ranney, Henry Clay and Helen Burgess, 1897
    191 Richards, Walter Davis, 1825-1877, 1901
    158 Robinson, C. L. F.
     99 Sabin, Ruth Mary, 1897
    109 Sampson, Florence de Wolfe 1898
     52 Sherwin, Henry A., 1895
     77 Sedgwick, Robert, 1896
     82 Sherwin, Henry A. (similar to 52, but smaller), 1896
    117 Sherwood, Samuel Smith, 1898
    129 Scripps, James Edmund, 1898
    101 Skinner, Mark, Library
    134 Stickney, Edward Swan (Chicago Historical Society), 1898
    112 Stratton, A. Dwight, 1898
     93 Stearns, John Lloyd, 1897
     71 Sovereign (designed by Thomas Tryon) (crown), 1896
     79 Sovereign (designed by Thomas Tryon) (eagle), 1896
    193 Society of Colonial Wars, Connecticut, 1901
    179 Sherman, William Watts (design by B. G. Goodhue), 1901
     78 Taylor, Chas. H., Jr. (designed by E. B. Bird), 1896
    135 Talmage, John F.
    152 Treadwell Library (Mass. General Hospital) (designed by B. G.
          Goodhue)
    127 Thorne, Katherine Cecil Sanford, 1898
    122 Twentieth Century Club (designed by Mrs. Evelyn Rumsey Carey), 1898
    157 Union League Club
    154 University Club, Cleveland
     48 Vail, Henry H., 1895
    116 Vassar Alumnae Historical Association, 1898
    196 Varnum (Gen.), James M.
    128 Van Wagenen, Frederick W., 1898
     31 Warner, Beverly, M. A., 1894
    114 Wendell, Barrett, 1898
    126 Williams, E. P., 1898
    130 Wood, Arnold, 1898
    137 Wood, Ethel Hartshorne
    182 Worcester Art Museum, 1901
    144 A. W. (Arnold Wood), 1899
    146 Williams, John Skelton
    161 Wodell, Silas
    175 Woodward, S. Walter, 1900
    178 Whitin, Sarah Elizabeth
    120 Winthrop, Henry Rogers, 1898
     75 Willets, Howard, 1896
     27 Woodbury, John Page, 1894
     72 (Yale) The Edward Tompkins McLaughlin Memorial Prize in English
          Composition, 1896


BERTRAM G. GOODHUE

Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue is a Boston architect who has made several
book-plates of merit. One made for a department of Harvard University
is particularly rich in decorative effect, and a design of which one
would not grow weary. Others of Mr. Goodhue's designs are treated in
broad line and might have been reproduced very effectively by wood
engraving.

    A. Squire
    Udolpho Snead
    Rachel Norton
    Harvard University Library, Lowell Memorial Library of Romance
      Literature
    H. I. K. (H. I. Kimball)
    Library of the Harvard Union
    Society of the Signet, Harvard
    Treadwell Library, Mass. General Hospital
    M. A. de Wolfe Howe
    William Watts Sherman


HARRY E. GOODHUE

The few book-plates designed by Harry E. Goodhue are mostly of the
"girl and book" type. In the plate for Jessy McClellan the young woman
appears to be sorry she "done it," or else is quite discouraged at the
idea of lifting her folio romance into her lap. Mr. Goodhue's most
pleasing design is that for Constance Alexander, shown on page 27.

    Amy M. Sacker
    Constance Grosvenor Alexander
    Jessy Trumbull McClellan
    June Eldredge
    Juliet Armstrong Collins


T. B. HAPGOOD, Jr.

Mr. Hapgood is a decorative designer in Boston, and his work on the
covers of various periodicals and catalogs is well known. Plate No. 5
was submitted in competition and took second prize. It has never been
reproduced. No. 1 was reproduced in "The Red Letter," No. 2 in the
book-plate number of "The Studio," as was also No. 4. No. 14 has not
been reproduced. No. 15 was originally made as a printer's mark and
was so used. It was later altered to serve as a book-plate.

     1 Rev. George Fred Daniels, 1896
     2 Norris Hastings Laughton, 1897
     3 A. F. Skenkelberger, 1897
     4 Theodore Brown Hapgood, Jr., 1897
     5 Society of Mayflower Descendants in Mass., 1897
     6 Rufus William Sprague, Jr., 1898
     7 Frances Louise Allen, 1898
     8 Andrew C. Wheelwright, 1898
     9 Andrew C. Wheelwright, 1898
    10 Richard Gorham Badger, 1898
    11 Thursday Club, 1899
    12 North Brookfield Free Public Library, 1900
    13 Edwin Osgood Grover, 1900
    14 Harriet Manning Whitcomb, 1900
    15 Carl Heintzemann


HAROLD E. NELSON

Many of the figures in the book-plates by Harold Nelson are of the
attenuated pre-Raphaelite type, but there are others one can believe
really once lived. The frontispiece to the book-plate number of "The
Studio" is a beautiful decorative bit by Mr. Nelson, and makes us
quite willing to forgive him some of his more eccentric designs. The
plate referred to is enhanced in beauty by a few lines of gold
judiciously used. The musical plate on page 18 of this volume is a
pleasing one.

    Mary L. Oldfield
    Edith A. Kingsford
    Robert H. Smith
    Fanny Nelson
    Ellen Maguire
    Edward Lomax
    Ernest Scott Fardell, M.A.
    Ernest Scott Fardell, M.A.
    Geoffery Parkyn
    A. Ludlow
    James Wilmar
    Bedford College Library
    Horace Shaw
    Harold Edward Hughes Nelson
    Lady Literary Society
    Mark Nelson
    Evelyn Wynne Parton
    A. A. Wood
    Maude Burton
    Marion H. Spielmann
    Alfred Anteshed
    Jane Nelson
    Leopold d'Estreville Lenfestey


EDMUND H. NEW

The book-plate designs by Mr. New are in a class by themselves. No one
else has worked quite the field occupied by this artist. Mr. New has
used architecture for the motifs of a series of unusually pleasing
plates. He has treated in a most decorative way whole buildings as
well as details, doorways, and so forth. His plates are particularly
adapted to the dignified old houses that contain the libraries for
which they were made. Mr. New has not limited himself to this field,
as he has done a number of designs with no architectural suggestion.
His work in book illustration and decoration is of a most delightful
quality, and is well known to all lovers of black and white. A number
of his book-plate designs were reproduced and commented upon in
Simpson's "Book of Book-plates," Vol. II., No. I. The book-plate
number of "The Studio" also showed some of his designs. The list is in
chronological order and complete.

    Herbert New
    Rev. Richard R. Philpots
    Rees Price (wood cut)
    Montague Fordham (wood cut)
    C. Elkin Mathews
    Dr. Edmundi Atkinson
    Edward Morton
    Frederic Chapman
    William and Catherine Childs
    Beatrice Alcock
    Arthur Fowler
    No. 1 Highbury Terrace
    Julia Sharpe
    Herbert B. Pollard
    William Malin Roscoe (three sizes), 1897
    Edward Evershed Dendy
    J. G. Gardner-Brown
    Phil. Norman
    Edward Le Breton Martin
    Roberti Saundby, M. D., LL. D. (two sizes), 1900
    George Lewis Burton
    George Cave, 1900
    Alexander Millington Sing (two sizes)
    Peter Jones
    Edward Alfred Cockayne


HENRY OSPOVAT

Henry Ospovat is a young Russian artist residing in London. He has
done some superb decorative work for the sonnets and poems of
Shakespeare published by John Lane. His book-plates are precious bits
of decoration worthy the adoration of all lovers of the beautiful.
There have been only a few reproductions of them. The book-plate
number of "The Studio" shows several and Fincham's "Artists and
Engravers" lists two.

    Arthur and Jessie Guthrie, 1898
    James and Maud Robertson, 1898
    John and Jessie Hoy, 1898
    Arthur Guthrie, 1898
    Walter Crane
    Charles Rowley
    James Hoy
    James Hoy
    Frank Iliffe Hoy
    John and Jessie Hoy (second design)
    George Moore
    A. Emrys Jones
    Fred Beech
    J. H. Reynolds
    T. C. Abbott
    Frank and Marie Hoy


ARMAND RASSENFOSSE

Armand Rassenfosse is a resident of Liege, therefore, presumably, a
Belgian and a subject of the German Empire. But as stone walls do not
always a prison make, so frontiers do not always mark the nationality
of art and letters. Mr. Rassenfosse is distinctly French in his
feeling and artistic point of view. Perhaps I should rather say
Parisian, for it is of the Latin Quartier and the Beaux Arts that his
work breathes. His designs are almost entirely of nude femininity and
his method of expression the etching. He has made some eight or ten
charming bits, full of life and chic--I was going to say, frou-frou,
but that would be a misnomer, for his models are innocent of gowns or
lingerie. Their spirit and beauty of execution is high, but as
book-plate designs--well, it's a bit like champagne for breakfast.

    Alex. von Winiwarter
    Alfred Lavachery, 1890
    M. R. (Marie Rassenfosse)
    A. R. (Armand Rassenfosse)
    Alb. Mockel
    H. v. W. (Hans von Winiwarter)
    Three designs without names
    D'Alb. Neuville


LOUIS RHEAD

The illustrator of "Pilgrim's Progress" and the "Idylls of the King"
needs no introduction to the average book-lover, and the hearts of the
poster-collectors throb at his name. Mr. Rhead is an American of
English birth and a resident of one of the suburbs of greater Gotham.
His decorative work has been long and favorably known, and his
book-plates can but add to his reputation. He has done but fifteen,
and two of these are yet to be reproduced, but some examples of his
work are in most collections.

    Gertrude Tozier Chisholm
    James Henry Darlington
    Samuel Moody Haskins
    Le Roy W. Kingman
    Frank J. Pool
    Louis Rhead (symbolic)
    Louis Rhead (fishing)
    Katharine Rhead
    W. H. Shir-Cliff, 1897
    Jean Irvine Struthers
    Stephen S. Yates
    David Turnure
    Ivy Club (Princeton University)
    Rector Kerr Fox
    George Weed Barhydt


BYAM SHAW

The one or two book-plate designs by Mr. Shaw that have been published
show a magnificent imaginative conception and makes the lover of the
beautiful ardently wish for "more." The one for Isabella Hunter, on
page 216 of Vol. I. of the "International Studio," is at the head of
its class. Mr. Shaw's other line-drawings and his paintings have a
richness and weirdness of design that is very attractive.

    C. E. Pyke-Nott
    Frank Lynn Jenkins
    Isabella R. Hunter
    Laurence Koe
    Mr. Claye


JOSEPH W. SIMPSON

Mr. Simpson, of Edinburgh, is a young Scotchman of infinite ambition
and generous talent. He is not only a clever designer of book-plates,
but he has a magazine to exploit his schemes and theories of art. This
is reputed to be a quarterly, but it is erratic, like its sponsor, and
issues "once in a while." Mr. Simpson's designs are full of feeling
and rich in treatment. About twenty-five of these have seen the light
and are prized by the lovers of modernity.

    Robert Bateman, 1897
    Kris Allsopp, 1897
    Kris Allsopp, 1897
    J. A. Whish, 1898
    James Dick, 1898
    F. N. and A. W. Hepworth, 1898
    Cissie Allsopp, 1898
    J. W. Simpson
    Charles Holme
    Julio Guardia
    K. E., Graf zu Leiningen-Westerburg, 1898
    Maud H. Scott, 1898
    A. Gaston Masson
    Geo. May Elwood
    T. F. M. Williamson, 1899
    (Gordon) Craig
    Mabel Waterson
    Fiffi Kuhn
    Maisie Phillips
    Samuel Linsley
    Pauline Stone
    T. N. Foulis
    Joseph W. Simpson
    W. M. Stone


HANS THOMA

Hans Thoma is a painter of national reputation in Germany who has
thought it not beneath his dignity to do book-plate designs. This by
way of recreation or to strengthen his line for more pretentious
efforts. His designs are along classic and dignified lines. His own
personal plate is a weird one; on it is a nude youth bearing the torch
of knowledge and riding a gruesome dragon.

    Dr. S. Herxheimer, 1898
    Hans Thoma
    Adolph von Gross, 1896
    Dr. Henry Thode
    August Rasor
    Martin Elersheim
    S. Herrheimer
    Sofie Küchler
    Hermann Levi
    Dr. Otto Fiser
    Luisa Countess Erdödy
    R. Spier
    J. A. Beringer
    Karl and Maria Grunelius


THOMAS TRYON

Mr. Tryon's work has been described at length in another part of this
book and a large part of his designs reproduced.

    William Frederick Havemeyer (engraved by E. D. French), 1892
    James Seymour Tryon, 1892
    Arnold William Brunner, 1893
    Frank Jean Pool, 1893
    "Sovereign," Crown design (engraved by E. D. French), 1896
    "Sovereign," Eagle design (engraved by E. D. French), 1896
    Annah M. Fellowes, 1896
    George Elder Marcus, 1897
    Loyall Farragut, 1898
    Mary Tryon Stone, 1900           }   same
    Janet Tryon Stone, 1900          } design in
    Rachel Norton Tryon Stone, 1900  } different
    Mary Tryon Stone (2d), 1900      }   sizes
    J. C. M. (Miss J. M. Cox), 1901
    Library of the Boys' Club, 1902
    Willis Steell, 1902


BERNHARD WENIG

Bernhard Wenig is a comparatively newcomer in the field of book-plate
design, but he has already established for himself an enviable
reputation in Germany, and his work is meeting with a growing
appreciation by collectors in this country. Mr. Wenig's general manner
is that of the old engraved wood block, bold and more or less crude of
line, but full of virility. Most of his work is reproduced in black on
white, but in a few instances he has used a color or two with good
effect. His choice of subjects is varied, but the studious bookman of
the middle ages seems to be uppermost in his heart and mind. Mr. Wenig
has made one plate for a child, a small boy, that is among the best
half-dozen of designs for children.

    Baroness May v. Feilitzsch
    Bernhard Wenig, 1897
    Anton Wenig, 1897
    Joh. Nep. Eser, 1899
    E. W. J. Gärtner, 1900
    Richard Schulz, 1900
    Mathilde Schulz
    Heinrich Stümcke
    Karl Emich, Graf zu Leiningen-Westerburg, 1901
    Günter Otto Schulz
    Gertrud Schulz
    Dr. Adolph Brenk
    Carl Selzer
    Lorenz Wenig
    Countess Sofie du Moulin
    Max H. Meyer
    Dr. Fr. Weinitz
    H. von Sicherer
    Hugo Schmid
    Julie Speyer
    Louis King
    Claire von Frerichs
    Franz Menter
    L. Frankenstein
    Dr. Hans Lichtenfelt
    Heinrich and Hedwig Brelauer
    Fr. Schade
    F. Schaffener
    G. Drobner
    H. R. C. Hirzee
    Wolfgang Quincke
    Alfred Misterck
    Ludwig Stivner
    Max Landmann
    Hans Jaeger
    Dr. Louis Merck
    Richard Jaeger
    Rosalie Eeginbrodt
    Georg Ortner
    Melaine Dorny
    Anna Furstin
    Ludwig Klug
    Doris von Heyl
    Frieherr Max Heyl
    Carl R. Peiner
    David von Flansemann
    Paulus Museum, Worms
    (Mrs.) Hedwig Smidt
    Wilhelm Karl Herams
    (Mrs.) Julie Wassermann
    Dr. C. Schonborn
    Maria von Ernst
    Wolfgang Quincke
    Walther Frieherr von Seckendorff
    Wilhelm von Schon

  [Illustration: {Book-plate of W. S.}]




Transcriber's Note

Minor punctuation errors have been repaired.

Printer errors and inconsistencies have been amended as follows:

    Page 28--Bernard amended to Bernhard--By Bernhard Wenig

    Page 36--Gerhaeuser amended to Gerhäuser--The design for Emil
    Gerhäuser is inoffensive ...

    Page 43--portaits amended to portraits--The portraits and view
    are interwoven ...

The final chapter, the check-list of works, contained a number of
errors and inconsistencies in the names. Where there were other
mentions of the name in the book, the transcriber has made amendments
for consistency, as follows:

    Page 45--Bernard amended to Bernhard--Bernhard Wenig

    Page 49--Pierce amended to Pearce--Julian Pearce Smith

    Page 51--F. amended to E.--E. Gerhäuser

    Page 51--Lulu amended to Lula--12 Lula Thomas Wear

    Page 58--Jomes amended to James (second instance)--James Hoy

    Page 61--Havermeyer amended to Havemeyer--William Frederick
    Havemeyer (engraved by E. D. French), 1892

    Page 61--Fellows amended to Fellowes--Annah M. Fellowes, 1896

The following are likely to be errors, but as they appear only once in
this book, they are preserved as printed. This list may not be
exhaustive.

    Page 58--Dr. Edmundi Atkinson should probably be Dr. Edmund
    Atkinson

    Page 62--Rosalie Eeginbrodt should probably be Rosalie
    Eigenbrodt

    Page 62--Melaine Dorny should probably be Melanie Dorny

    Page 62--Frieherr Max Heyl should probably be Freiherr Max Heyl

    Page 62--Carl R. Peiner should probably be Carl R. Reiner

    Page 62--Dr. C. Schonborn should probably be Dr. C. Schönborn

    Page 62--Walther Frieherr von Seckendorff should probably be
    Walther Freiherr von Seckendorff

    Page 62--Wilhelm von Schon should probably be Wilhelm von Schön

The frontispiece illustration has been moved to follow the title page.
Other illustrations have been moved where necessary so that they are
not in the middle of a paragraph.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOK-PLATES OF TO-DAY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


