The Project Gutenberg eBook of Little men of space
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Little men of space

Author: Frank Belknap Long

Release date: December 27, 2023 [eBook #72517]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: King-Size Publications, Inc, 1953

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE MEN OF SPACE ***





                          little men of space

                         By Frank Belknap Long


                 The children were very young--and the
              crisis they were called upon to face would
             have driven most adults into a straitjacket.

    _As befits a former protégé of the late great Howard Phillips
    Lovecraft, Mr. Long is a master of the horror story. More, he is
    well aware that the deepest terror may not always stem from the
    infinitely large. Sometimes the infinitely small can be even worse._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                  Fantastic Universe June-July 1953.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The children were coming home. Elwood could see them from the cottage
doorway, shouting and rejoicing in the bright October sunlight. They
carried lunch baskets and--as they came tripping toward him across
the lawn--he was ready to believe that nothing in life could be quite
as enchanting as the simple wonder of childhood itself with its
light-hearted merriment and freedom from care.

He was ready to forget the laundry bills and the scuffed shoes, the
father-and-son problems, all the tormenting lesser difficulties which
could demolish parenthood as an exact science and turn it into a madcap
adventure without rhyme or reason.

Mary Anne was in the lead. She squealed with delight when she caught
sight of her father's entranced face, as if by some miracle he had
become all at once a gift-bestowing snowman quite as remarkable as the
hollow dolls, one within the other, which she had received from him as
a goodwill offering on her last birthday.

Eleven-year-old Melvin was more circumspect. In his son's eyes John
Elwood represented all the real values of life in so far as they could
be translated into model locomotives and bridge-building sets. But he
knew his father to be a man of dignity who could not be easily cajoled.
It was best to let his sister try first and when she failed....

For an instant as he stared Elwood found himself secretly envying his
son. At a quarter-past eleven Melvin had a firm grasp of elementary
physics. His feet were firmly planted on the ground and he wasn't
serious-minded enough yet to make the tragic mistakes that come with
adult unsureness.

Not the kind of mistakes which he, James Seaton Elwood, had made with
the moon rocket, for instance. Or the mistake which he was making now
by whimsically comparing the ages of his son and daughter to the moving
hands of a clock.

How absurd it was to think of Mary Anne as a quarter-past seven when
her budding feminine intuition made her as ageless as the Sphinx. All
children were ageless really and it was absurd to imagine that they
could be made to conform to any logical frame of reference, scientific
or otherwise.

Children were illogically imaginative, with a timelessness which gave
them an edge on adults when it came to solving problems that required a
fresh approach to reality. What was it Wordsworth had said? _Trailing
clouds of glory...._

"Daddy, Mr. Rayburn let us out early--so we could have a picnic. It
would have been fun if Melvin hadn't spoiled everything. He ate up all
of the peanut butter sandwiches himself."

"Tattle tale!"

"He got in a fight too. Freddy Mason didn't want to fight but Melvin
started it!"

"I _did_n't!"

"You _did_! You know you did!"

"That's a lie!"

Elwood lowered his eyes and saw that both of his children were now
as close to him as they could ever be. Mary Anne was tugging at his
sleeve, begging him to take her part, and Melvin was appealing to him
in man-to-man fashion, his contemptuous masculinity acting as a foil to
his sister's feminine wiles.

It was a grave crisis and Elwood recognized it as such. Ordinarily he
would have shunned a cut-and-dried solution but for once he had no
choice.

       *       *       *       *       *

When children fall out, when you are backed into a corner and your
authority totters, there is only one sure way to save yourself--_Occupy
their minds with something else_.

"You're spoiling the surprise, kiddies," Elwood said, striving to sound
embittered. "It's been a lonesome hard day for me but I kept telling
myself you'd soon be home to share my triumph. I suppose I shouldn't
say this--but your mother just doesn't understand me the way you do."

"What is it, daddy?" Mary Anne asked, a sudden warm solicitude in her
gaze.

"Yeah, Pop, tell us!" Melvin chimed in.

"The rocket is just about completed," Elwood said.

He felt Mary Anne's hand tighten on his sleeve and realised with
elation that she was a scientist's daughter to her fingertips. He was
gratified quite as much by the sudden hiss of Melvin's indrawn breath.

"Come along--I'll show you!" he said.

Elwood derived the most intense pleasure from showing groups of
visiting dignitaries--scientific big shots for the most part--through
his basement laboratory. But when the dignitaries happened to be his
own children his elation knew no bounds.

Down the basement stairs they trooped, Melvin to the right of him, Mary
Anne to the left. A door opened with a gentle click, a light came on
and Melvin let out a yell which resounded through the house.

"You've got the blast reflector set up. _Pop!_"

The rocket stood out, silver on black at its base, with a dull shine
where it tapered to catch and hold the light.

It was not large as rockets go. It was barely five feet in height, a
miracle of technical craftsmanship wrought by the unerring skill and
scientific knowhow of a very practical man with a family to support.
But it had been built with an eye to beauty as well and as the light
glimmered and danced on its sloping vanes it seemed as gracefully
poised for flight as some half-mythical bird cast in metal by a
long-vanished elfin race.

As gracefully poised and as shiningly beautiful....

It was Mary Anne who broke the spell. "Daddy, will it really go to the
moon?"

Elwood looked down at his daughter and patted her tousled red-gold
hair. "How many times must I tell you it isn't an experimental model?"
he chided. "It was designed for actual space flight."

"But daddy--"

"If you've any more silly notions you'd better get rid of them right
now. You may never get another chance. Yesterday Melvin and I discussed
the details as fellow-scientists. Suppose you tell her just how much
the Government is contributing, son."

"Forty thousand dollars!" Melvin said promptly, rolling the figure over
his tongue as though it had some mysterious magic of its own which
could elevate him to man's estate--if he repeated it often enough.

"A research grant," Elwood added as if thinking aloud for his own
benefit. "I had a tough time persuading them to let me do all the
construction work right here in my own laboratory. I've probably cut
more yards of official red tape than any odd duck since Archimedes."

He smiled a little ruefully. "In case you're interested--I've had to
pay through the nose for the technical assistance I've been getting.
Those owl-faced characters you've seen drifting in and out won't work
for peanuts."

"But all of the rockets in the stereo-cineramas are much bigger!" Mary
Anne protested. "Why is that, daddy?"

"We've just about seen the end of the huge outmoded, stratosphere
observation-type rockets," Elwood replied, including both children in
his glance. "In the future observation rockets will be much smaller and
there is little to be gained by attempting to send a large rocket to
the moon. The cost would be a thousand times as great."

"But daddy, how could such a little rocket ever get as far as the moon."

"Perhaps the worst mistake an individual or a society can make is to
confuse size with power," Elwood said. "There is a tiny bee which, in
proportion to its size, can travel faster than our cleverest flight
specialists in their jet planes."

"But daddy--"

"Don't look so incredulous, honeybunch. You remind me of your mother.
Melvin knows just how much progress we've made in atomic research since
Eniwetok. Tell her, son."

"The primitive hydrogen bomb tested at Eniwetok laid the groundwork for
the storage of vast amounts of nuclear power in blast compartments a
few inches square," Melvin said pridefully. "We can now power a very
small rocket designed for space flight with the equivalent of fifty
million tons of TNT."

"You left out one vital consideration, Melvin," Elwood said. "The
automatic-control factor."

"Pop's right," Melvin said, confronting his sister almost accusingly.
"The power won't be released all at once."

"It will be released in successive stages," Elwood corroborated.
"We hope eventually to regulate the stages--or steps, as they are
called--in such a way that other rockets, identical in design, will
build up velocities approaching the speed of light."

       *       *       *       *       *

Elwood picked up an odd-looking instrument from the work-bench against
which he had been leaning. As he fingered it idly he enjoyed his
daughter's stunned acceptance of his accomplishment, realising more
than ever what an important contribution he had made to man's eventual
conquest of the stars.

That conquest would come in good time. Even now enough atomic potential
had been stored in the rocket to carry it to Alpha Centauri--and back.
The blast mechanism had to have an overload to function at all. But
only a tiny fraction of the potential would be needed to make the moon
flight an accomplished fact.

The rocket wouldn't be traveling at anything like the speed of light.
But just as soon as a few more complicated technical details had been
worked out....

Elwood felt suddenly very tired. His back ached with stiffness and his
eyelids throbbed. Fortunately he knew the reason for his weariness and
refused to become alarmed. He had simply been driving himself too hard.
But with the rocket so near completion he couldn't afford to let even a
draft of cold wind blow upon him and increase his chances of becoming
really ill.

"If it's all right with you, kiddies," he said, "I'm going upstairs to
bed. I'm practically out on my feet."

"Aw, Pop, it isn't six o'clock yet!" Melvin protested.

Instantly Mary Anne came to his rescue. "Daddy, you're not getting
enough rest!" she said, her eyes darting to the rocket and then to her
brother in fierce reproach.

"I ought to turn in early when I can," Elwood said. "If your mother
wasn't at Aunt Martha's I'd have to sit up half the night convincing
her I've got enough practical sense left to shave and bathe myself and
take in the mail."

"Goodnight, daddy!" Mary Anne said.

"Goodnight, kids. Thanks for being patient and giving me a break."

"Pop, can I stay down here and look it over?"

"Sure, Melvin, stay as long as you like. I don't mind your puttering
around a bit with the tools so long as you don't touch the rocket."
Elwood's face grew suddenly strained. "Promise me you won't."

"He won't!" Mary Anne promised.

She waited for her father's footsteps to echo hollowly on the floor
above before she turned her ire full upon Melvin. "If I was a boy I'd
be more considerate of daddy than you are!" she exclaimed, accusingly.
"You don't care how tired he gets."

"You're not a boy," Melvin retorted. "You never could be. What's the
sense in fooling yourself?"

"You just repeat everything he tells you," Mary Anne flared. "You're
not so smart!"

"I'm smart enough to know that rocket could be sent further than the
moon--right now."

Mary Anne gasped. "You're crazy. Daddy knows what he's doing."

"Sure he does. If he sent it as far as it could go it would disappear
in space. He couldn't prove anything and he'd be in real trouble.
They'd say he got rid of it because it wouldn't work and kept the forty
thousand dollars for himself."

"The Earth-child is right!" a tiny voice said. "That rocket can and
must carry us to our home planet. It is our last remaining hope."

For an instant Melvin felt as if he had swallowed a goldfish. Something
flopped in his throat, coldly and horribly, and though the voice rang
clear in his ears it seemed to come from deep inside his head.

"He hears us!" the voice said. "Before he sees us we'd better train the
beam on him. All Earth-children are emotional but the males are the
hardest to control."

It was Mary Anne who screamed in protest. She stood as if frozen,
staring down with swiftly widening eyes at the three tiny men who had
come striding into the room through the wall. They had come in with a
blaze of light behind them, a shimmering of the wall itself that seemed
to go right through to the other side.

Mary Anne could have crushed them simply by raising her foot and
bringing it down dead center above them. But their eyes warned her to
be still.

_Do not scream again, Earth-child_, the eyes warned. _We are not as
ugly as we seem to you and your fright is very distasteful to us._

Horribly ugly they seemed to Mary Anne. They were no larger than the
white ivory pawns on the chessboard in her father's library but they
did not resemble pawns in the least. They were wrinkled and old-looking
and the cheapest doll she had would have cried with shame to be dressed
as they were.

She could have made out of an old handkerchief a better dress, with
more tucks and seams to it--and no Jack-in-the-Box could have popped up
to shiver and sway with such toothless, evil-eyed malice.

A child can escape from a monster of the toymaker's craft simply by
drawing a line between the real and the imaginary. But Mary Anne could
not escape from the little men facing her. There was no line to be
drawn and she knew it.

The little men were alive, and they were staring at her now as she had
never been stared at before. As if she were a stick of wood about to be
thrown into a blazing fire which had been kindled for Melvin as well.

Totally bald they were, with skins so shriveled that their small,
slitted eyes were buried in a maze of wrinkles. Most pitiful of all
was the fact that their skins were mottled brown and green--colors so
enchanting when associated with budding leaves or the russet-and-gold
splendors of an autumn landscape.

The little men were alive and they were warning her to be quiet. Just
to make sure that she would not move or attempt to scream again they
spoke to her again inside her head.

"We're going to use the beam on you too. But you won't be hurt if you
don't try to wake up your father."

She could hardly keep from screaming when she saw what they were doing
to her brother. The tallest of the three--they were not all of the same
height--was turning Melvin slowly about in a blaze of light.

He was the thinnest of the three too--so thin and tall that she
automatically found herself thinking of him as Tall-Thin. The light
came from a tiny glowing tube which Tall-Thin was clasping in hands as
small and brightly shining as the penpoints in her school stationery
set.

She knew by the way she felt that Melvin wanted to scream too--to
scream and struggle and fight back. But he couldn't even move his head
and shoulders. He was all stiffened up and he turned as she'd seen him
do in dreams when they'd been quarreling and she had wanted to punish
him for making faces at her--to punish him by skipping away across the
room and laughing because he couldn't follow her.

She was sorry now she'd ever dreamed of Melvin in that way even when
he was mean to her. She felt even sorrier when she heard her brother
shriek. It wasn't much of a shriek--just a thin little cry that came
out muffled.

Melvin had almost lost the power of speech and it was awful to watch
him trying to move his lips. He was completely turned now, staring down
at the little men, and his eyes were shrieking for him.

"Don't make them mad, Melvin!" Mary Anne pleaded. "They'll kill you."

Instantly Tall-Thin turned and trained his gaze on Mary Anne, his face
twitching with impatience. "Dealing with the immature is a nuisance,"
he complained and Mary Anne heard the words clearly even though she
knew they were not meant for her. Deep inside her head she could hear
Tall-Thin speaking to his companions.

As if sensing something disturbing in that the second-tallest of
the three spoke in reply--spoke for the first time. "They'll hear
everything we say. It would be so much more convenient if we could talk
to them without giving them the power to hear in return every word we
utter."

"That cannot be avoided, Rujit," replied Tall-Thin. "When we read their
minds we awaken extra-sensory faculties which would ordinarily remain
dormant in them."

"And rudimentary."

"And rudimentary." Tall-Thin agreed. "It's like stimulating a low-grade
energy circuit with a high-grade charge. The low-grade circuit will
remain supercharged for a brief period."

"Would it not be safer to kill them at once?"

"Unnecessary killing is always unpleasant," Tall-Thin said.

"We should be emotionally prepared for it," Rujit countered. "We would
not have survived and become great as a race if we had not conquered
all such squeamishness in ourselves. We must be prepared to nullify all
opposition by instant drastic action--the most drastic action available
to us at any given time."

Rujit paused for an instant to transfix Tall-Thin with an accusing
stare. Then he went on quickly, "In an emergency it is often very
difficult to decide instantly how necessary an action may be. To take
pleasure in killing unnecessarily is therefore a survival attribute of
a very high order."

"I would as soon kill the Earth-children as not." Tall-Thin said. "But
the slightest emotional unpleasantness militates against survival.
Every act we perform must be dictated by reason. Our moral grandeur as
a race is based on absolute logic--not on blind instinct. Even in an
emergency _we_ are wise enough to determine how necessary an action may
be. So your argument falls to pieces."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tall-Thin straightened, his parchment-dry face crinkling with rage.
"This isn't the first time you've questioned my wisdom and authority,
Rujit!" he said and his voice was like the hiss of a snake uncoiling in
the long grass of a jungle clearing.

Rujit stiffened as if invisible fangs had buried themselves in his
flesh. His cheeks could hardly have been called ruddy to begin with but
their pallor suddenly became extreme. He took a quick step backward, a
look of horror coming into his eyes.

"You _wouldn't_! No, _no_, Hilili!"

"The choice is no longer mine alone."

"But I was just thinking out loud!"

Tall-Thin clicked off the beam, leaving Melvin still standing
large-eyed and motionless against the wall. He raised the tube which
had projected the beam until it was pointing directly at Rujit.

"I'm going to step up the beam," he said.

"But why? _Why_, Hilili? For the love you bear me--"

"I bear you no love."

"But you are my biogenetic twin, Hilili. We have been closer than
ordinary brothers from birth."

"It does not matter. It does not concern me. Family relationships
militate against survival when reason falters in a single member of a
family group."

Tall-Thin's voice hardened. "We came to this planet for one purpose--to
colonize it for the good of all. We numbered thousands and now we are
reduced to a pitiful remnant--just ourselves. Thanks to the stupidity
of a few."

"I was never one of the stupid ones!" Rujit protested. "I advised our
immediate return. The unknown and hideous diseases which decimated
us like _migs_, the atmospheric gases which rotted our ships so
insidiously that we were not aware of the damage until they exploded
in flight--remember, I kept insisting that we could not survive such
hazards for long!"

"Your sound judgment in that respect was more than offset by your
wilful insistence we explore the entire planet," Tall-Thin countered.
"Our ships were so numerous that they were observed in flight and we
might have been destroyed completely when death and disaster struck.

"As might have been expected the very shape of our ships made them
conspicuous. Fiery disks they must have seemed to the Earth dwellers,
so terrifying that they would have eventually found a way to fathom the
mystery, and strike back. A perishing remnant of an advanced race has
never yet succeeded in killing two billion primitives armed with Class
C-type weapons."

"But how could I have known it then?"

"Ignorance is never an excuse!" Tall-Thin's voice was a merciless rasp.
"A well-organized logical mind does not make such mistakes. Now we are
facing utter disaster unless we can get back to our home planet and
warn _The Twenty_ that it would be sheer madness to attempt to colonize
this planet again without better disease-preventing safeguards and
atmosphere-resisting metals. Such safeguards can and must be worked
out."

Tall-Thin paused, watching Melvin as if apprehensive that the praise he
was about to bestow would be held against him to the detriment of his
vanity.

"Unfortunately only two of us can go in this rocket, which has
miraculously come into our possession. The primitive who constructed
it, this Earth-child's progenitor, must have an almost Class B-type
mind. Only two of us, understand?"

"But--"

"The survival of the wisest. I'm afraid I shall have to extinguish
you, Rujit."

The tube lit up again, so brightly that Tall-Thin's hand was blotted
out by the glare. Equally blotted out was Rujit's face but the rest
of him did not vanish immediately. One arm disappeared but not the
other--and there was a yawning dark gap between his knees and his waist.

It might not have seemed so horrible if Rujit had not shrieked first.
The shriek had an outward-inward quality, echoing both inside the heads
of the children and in the room as actual sound.

Even Tall-Thin seemed shaken by it, as if in a race that had outgrown
the need for physical speech there could be nothing more unnerving than
anguish so expressed.

Yet both the shriek and the almost instant blotting out of Rujit's face
were eclipsed in point of horror by the fading of the little man's
legs. They faded, kicking and protesting and spasmodically convulsed,
faded in a ruby red glow that lingered for an instant in the still air
like a slowly dissolving blood clot, then as slowly vanished.

It was at that moment Mary Anne ceased to think as a child. She dug her
knuckles into her mouth to keep from screaming but the undaunted way in
which her mind worked was a tribute to her forgetfulness of self. _If
he should do that to Melvin!_

Tall-Thin must have sensed the loathing in her mind, for he turned
with a grimace of rage and trained the beam full upon her, taking care
however to alter the tube's destructive potential with a quick twist of
his thumb.

"A primitive would have been sorely tempted to kill you, Earth-child,"
he said. "Fortunately for you we have a high and undeviating code of
ethics."

Back and forth over the children Tall-Thin played the beam, as if to
make sure there would be no further unpleasantness from that source.

Then he clicked off the tube again, and turned to his remaining
companion--a little man who apparently believed that silence and good
order were the foundation of all things.

In a more primitive society he would have been considered a stooge but
there appeared to be no such cultural concept in Tall-Thin's scale of
values. He spoke with the utmost respect, as if anyone who agreed with
him automatically became as exalted as himself.

"The primitive who constructed this rocket had a remarkable mind," he
said. "_We_ could not have constructed it for every culture, no matter
how primitive, has resources peculiar to itself."

"That is very true, Hilili!"

Mary Anne tried to turn her head to look at Melvin but her neck felt
as stiff as when she'd had the mumps and everyone had felt sorry for
her. She was sure that the little men did not feel in the least sorry
and all she could do was stare in helpless anger as they turned and
scrambled into the rocket.

Finally she did manage to turn her head, just far enough to see what
Melvin was doing.

Melvin wasn't moving at all. His head was lowered and he was thinking.
She knew that he was thinking by the look in his eyes. Melvin was
silently thinking and as she stared she ceased to be afraid.

She sat very still, waiting for Melvin to speak to her. Suddenly he
did, deep inside her head.

The little men had come from far, far away. They had come from a big
cloud of stars in the sky called the Great Nebula in Andromeda. Nearly
everything in the universe curved and they had come spinning along the
biggest curve of all in hundreds and hundreds of punched-out disks that
glowed in the dark like Roman candles.

The cow pasture Melvin and she played in was--she knew what it was but
she waited for Melvin to say it--rocket proving-ground. It was their
own secret playing place but daddy called it a rocket proving-ground.

Daddy wouldn't send the rocket to the moon from his laboratory in
the cellar. He'd take it out to the proving-ground and ask even the
President of the United States to watch it start out for the Moon.

The President would come because her daddy was a very important and
wonderful man. He didn't have much money but he'd be rich and famous
if the rocket reached the moon.

Most men as wonderful as her daddy were poor until they did something
to make people stand up and shout. The little men didn't want her
daddy to become rich so that he could send Melvin through college and
she could go to college too. The little men didn't want her to learn
domestic housekeeping and make the handsomest man in all the world
happy.

The little men wouldn't--couldn't--take the rocket out to the
proving-ground. It would start off blazing and go straight up through
the roof into the sky. It would blow the cellar apart and the cottage
would come tumbling down in ruins. Melvin would be killed and her
daddy....

She had never been so terrified in all her life and if Melvin hadn't
started thinking she would have burst out crying.

Melvin was thinking something now about the cottage. Water came in from
the sea. It did too--she remembered daddy complaining about it when
he went down to stoke the furnace. Water in the cellar and the ground
underneath all soft and soggy.

Salt-marsh seepage. Why, it was like quicksand down below the
solid strata. The words came quick and clear from Melvin thinking.
_Solid strata._ Even the solid strata wasn't all solid. There were
_porosities_ in it--like a sponge. If something very heavy went down
through the cellar floor it would go right on sinking.

_Auxiliary fuels_, came from Melvin thinking. _They're in the auxiliary
fuel-chamber now. Hot steam in the turbines, pushed right through
the heat exchanger. The atomic charge won't go of at all if the heat
exchanger works fast enough._

_They don't know as much about the rocket as Pop does_, came from
Melvin. _The atomic part is the big important part. They came at night
and studied that. But the heat exchanger--they didn't take the trouble
to study it. Now they're worried about it. Why should an atomic rocket
have auxiliary fuels?_

Daddy could have told them. You had to have auxiliary fuels in a rocket
if you were going to send it to the moon. The rocket's trajectory would
have to be modified by small readjustments that could only be made by
auxiliary fuels.

Melvin, think hard! Think hard and fast, and in the right way!

_They're stopping now to puzzle it out_, came from Melvin. _Their minds
work differently from ours. They fasten on the big important things
first. The small things they sometimes overlook. They can't help it.
Their minds are constructed that way._

_Mustn't let trivialities distract us._ That's what they were thinking.
That's what they were thinking, and they were going to make a mistake.

_They're going to move the wrong dial. I'm going to help them move
the wrong dial. I want them to move the wrong dial. They must move the
wrong dial...._

It began with a faint humming sound--nothing more. But something that
couldn't have come from Melvin at all showered Mary Anne's mind with
thoughts and emotions that were like a screaming inside her head.

A continuous terrified screaming that made her want to slap her hands
to her ears to shut out the sound.

The screaming stopped the instant the rocket began to vibrate. It
stopped as abruptly as a jet of steam issuing from a suddenly clogged
pipe.

The humming changed to a droning and the rocket vibrated so furiously
that Mary Anne grew dizzy just watching it. With the dizziness came a
terrible fear that the rocket would explode. It was like being bound to
a chair, helpless, and knowing you couldn't possibly escape. She saw
herself being blown up with the cottage, with Melvin screaming for her
to save him.

But nothing like that happened. The cottage shook a little. She was
hurled forward, then to her knees. But the blast of heat which fanned
her face was no worse than the blast from a furnace door swinging
quickly open and shut.

Straight down through the floor the rocket sank with its base glowing
white hot. There were a sizzling and a hissing and she could see
flames dancing through the steam which kept rising in clouds until
water gushed up in torrents and put the fire out.

She shut her eyes then and clenched her hands tight.

She sat very still, waiting for Melvin to come to her. She felt a great
and overwhelming need to lean on someone, to be consoled by a firm
masculine voice speaking out bold and clear.

The bursting strangeness was gone from inside her head. She could move
again. She refused to try but she knew that she could whenever she
wanted to. Her thoughts were her own now--not Melvin's or Tall-Thin's.

She started to cry, very softly, and she was still crying when Melvin
reached her side, helped her to her feet.

"Mary Anne, I could see them moving around inside the rocket. I could
even make them do what I wanted them to do. It happened as soon as
they turned that ray on me. I couldn't move but I knew what they were
thinking."

"So did I, Melvin," Mary Anne sobbed. "I knew what _you_ were thinking
too."

"Yeah. We seemed to be talking together there for a minute. But not the
way we're talking now."

Mary Anne nodded. "I knew what you were thinking and they knew what
we...." Mary Anne stopped. "_Melvin!_ You fooled them! Inside the ship
they didn't hear us talking together. If they had heard us they would
not have made a mistake and turned the wrong dial."

"Yeah, I know. I tried to throw up a mental block when we talked about
the auxiliary fuel-chamber and what would happen if the heat exchanger
worked fast enough. I guess it worked. The mental block, I mean...."

"You bet it worked, Melvin. You're wonderful, Melvin."

"You didn't think so when you told Pop about the sandwiches."

"I didn't mean to be a nasty, Melvin."

"All right--skip it. Funny thing--I could never read anybody's thoughts
before. It only lasted for a few minutes. I couldn't do it now."

"They must have done something to us, Melvin."

"I'll say they did. What's Pop going to think when he comes down here
tomorrow and sees the rocket gone?"

"I'm afraid he's going to be awfully mad, Melvin."

There is perhaps no more striking illustration of the prophetic faculty
at work in the world than when it appears full-blown in the occasional
understatements of children.

The next morning, Elwood didn't merely hurl the magazine at his son. He
pointed first to the article, tapping furiously with his forefinger at
Melvin's photograph while his breakfast grew cold at his elbow.

"Melvin, I warned you to keep your hands off that rocket. I warned you
not to touch it or jar it in any way. But you had to putter around
until you did something to the heat exchanger dial. It's conduct like
that which makes me realize how mistaken these journalist monkeys can
be. A genius! You're no more of a genius--"

"Pop, you've got to believe me!" Melvin protested. "The little men
are--"

"_Little men!_ My son is not only a genius"--Elwood stressed the word
with a biting sarcasm which was not lost on Melvin--"but a first-class
liar! Here, read this article again. It was published two months
ago--but I guess you didn't read it over often enough. It may shame
you into going into a corner and giving yourself a thorough mental
overhauling."

       *       *       *       *       *

Elwood tossed the magazine then--straight across the table at the
disturbed Melvin.

"If he's a liar so am I!" Mary Anne gasped in angry protest.

"For a dozen years now flying saucer rumors have been all over the
place," Elwood said, glaring at both of his children. "I suppose it's
only natural you should chatter occasionally about little men. All
children do. But to use such imaginary companions as an excuse for an
act of wanton destructiveness...."

Melvin picked up the magazine almost automatically. Solely to bolster
his sagging self-esteem--even the innocent and falsely accused can feel
guilty at times--he stared at his own photograph and the somewhat
baroque caption which surmounted it.

                       YOUNG SCIENTIFIC AMERICA

    Can genius be inherited? The distinguished accomplishments in
    nuclear physics and space-flight theory by the father of the boy
    who has won the most coveted annual award available to American
    youth for all-around scientific achievement strengthens the
    arguments of those who believe that the bright mysterious torch of
    genius can be passed on from father to son. But when interviewed
    the youthful winner of the Seabury Medal modestly disclaimed....

"If I saw a little man do you know what I'd do?" came in bitter
reproach from the original holder of Melvin's inherited torch.

And then, in rhetorical response, "I'd make it my fight--a fight forced
upon me against my will. I'd consult a good psychiatrist immediately."

"I throw myself on your mercy!" a tiny voice said. "I am unarmed, I am
alone--and I am the last of my kind remaining alive on your planet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Melvin stopped reading abruptly, flushing guiltily to the roots of his
hair. He had been wishing that his father _could_ see a little man and
now he was being punished for his thoughts in the cruelest possible way.

The winner of the Seabury Medal knew that insanity was rare in
childhood but to hear imaginary voices....

"Hilili thought he had extinguished me," the voice went on, "but by
exerting my will to the utmost I managed to waver back. I beg you to be
merciful!"

The voice became almost pathetic in its tragic pleading. "You need
no longer fear me for I will soon die. Injured and weakened as I am
the disease organisms so fatal to my race are certain to kill me very
quickly now."

Melvin looked up then--and so did Mary Anne.

The little man stood on a bright mahogany sideboard, gleaming with all
the primitive appurtenances of a Class C-type breakfast. A tray of
buttered toast, crisply brown, rose like the Great Pyramid of Cheops at
his back, and he was leaning for support against the coffee percolator
that mirrored his wan and tormented face in wavy and distorted lines.

It was easy to see that death was already beckoning to Rujit with a
solemn and pontificial bow.

"_Pop!_" Melvin gasped, leaping to his feet.

John Elwood did not answer his son. However much he may have wanted to
communicate there are few satisfactory avenues of communication that
remain open to a man lying flat on his stomach on the floor in a dead
faint.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE MEN OF SPACE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


