The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pictorial history of the war for the Union, volume 2 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pictorial history of the war for the Union, volume 2 (of 2)
        A complete and reliable history of the war from its commencement to its close ... together with a complete chronological analysis of the war

Author: Ann S. Stephens

Release date: August 4, 2024 [eBook #74187]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Benjamin W. Hitchcock, 1866

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR FOR THE UNION, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***


[Illustration: PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR FOR THE UNION]




                           PICTORIAL HISTORY
                                 OF THE
                           WAR FOR THE UNION.
                        A COMPLETE AND RELIABLE
                          =History of the War=
                                FROM ITS
                       COMMENCEMENT TO ITS CLOSE:
    GIVING A GRAPHIC PICTURE OF ITS ENCOUNTERS, THRILLING INCIDENTS,
  FRIGHTFUL SCENES, HAIR BREADTH ESCAPES, INDIVIDUAL DARING, DESPERATE
 CHARGES, PERSONAL ANECDOTES, ETC., GLEANED FROM EYE-WITNESSES OF, AND
PARTICIPANTS IN, THE TERRIBLE SCENES DESCRIBED—A TRUTHFUL LIVING REFLEX
  OF ALL MATTERS OF INTEREST CONNECTED WITH THIS THE MOST GIGANTIC OF
                            HUMAN STRUGGLES.
      TOGETHER WITH A COMPLETE CHRONOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE WAR.


                        BY MRS. ANN S. STEPHENS.


            EMBELLISHED WITH OVER TWO HUNDRED ILLUSTRATIONS.


                              TWO VOLUMES.

                                VOL II.


                               NEW YORK:
             BENJAMIN W. HITCHCOCK, No. 14 CHAMBERS STREET,
                    PUBLISHER Of SUBSCRIPTION BOOKS.

                                 1867.




         Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866,

                        BY BENJAMIN W. HITCHCOCK,

 In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States for the
                      Southern District of New York.




                                    TO

                              MAJOR-GENERAL

                           WILLIAM T. SHERMAN,

 ONE OF THE BEST MEN AND BRAVEST PATRIOTS THAT EVER FOUGHT FOR A GRATEFUL
                                 COUNTRY,

                            THESE VOLUMES ARE

                         RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.

                                                        ANN S. STEPHENS.

NEW YORK, _January, 1886_.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
 The Position of the Contending Forces in May, 1862                   15
 The March of the Army of the Potomac to White House, Va.             16
 General McClellan and the Government                                 17
 Stonewall Jackson’s Raid in the Shenandoah: Retreat of Gen. Banks    19
 The Investment and Occupation of Corinth, Miss., May, 1862           21
 Occupation of Norfolk, Va., by General Wool’s troops                 27
 Destruction of the rebel iron-clad Merrimac                          28
 Battle of Hanover Court House, Va., May 28, 1862                     29
 „ Fair Oaks, Va., May 31 and June 1, 1862                            33
 „ Seven Pines, Va., June 1, 1862                                     36
 „ Cross-Keys, Va., June 8, 1862                                      38
 The Seven Days’ Battles—Battle of Oak Grove, Va.                     40
 Battle of Gaines’ Mill, Va., June 26, 1862                           41
 Change of Base of the Army of the Potomac                            45
 Battles of Allen’s Farm and Savage’s Station, Va.                    46
 Battle of Nelson’s Farm, Va., June 30, 1862                          48
 „ Malvern Hill, July 1, 1862                                         49
 Evacuation of Pensacola, May 9, 1862                                 52
 Capture of Forts Pillow and Randolph—Occupation of Memphis, June
   4–6, 1862                                                          55
 New Combinations—Battle of Cedar Mountain, Va.                       58
 Battle of Manassas, or Bull Run                                      61
 „  Chantilly                                                         63
 Movements of McClellan                                               64
 Battle of South Mountain, Md., Sept. 14, 1862                        65
 Surrender of Harper’s Ferry, Sept. 15, 1862                          69
 Battle of Antietam, Sept, 17, 1862                                   70
 McClellan’s Army on the Potomac, October, 1862                       82
 Operations in Kentucky, June to September, 1862                      87
 Battle of Richmond, Ky., Aug. 30, 1862                               90
 Bragg’s Invasion—Battle of Munfordsville, Ky., Sept. 14–16, 1862     93
 Battle of Perryville, Ky., Oct. 8, 1862                              94
 „ Iuka, Miss., Sept. 19, 1862                                        96
 „ Corinth, Miss., Oct. 3–4, 1862                                     99
 Gen. Burnside takes command of the Army of the Potomac, Nov. 10,
   1862                                                              104
 Advance of the Army of the Potomac, Nov. 20, 1862                   106
 Burnside’s Army before Fredericksburg                               107
 Battle of Fredericksburg, Va., Dec. 13, 1862                        109
 Operations in Tennessee—Battle of Murfreesboro’, Dec. 31, 1862      111
 North Carolina at the close of 1862                                 119
 Battle of Pocotaligo Bridge, S. C., Oct. 22, 1862                   122
 Battle of Baton Rouge, La., Aug. 6, 1862                            123
 Operations in Missouri in 1862                                      123
 Naval Operations in 1862                                            126
 Battle of Drury’s Bluff, Va., May 15, 1862                          126
 Naval Operations on the Mississippi, May to December, 1862          127
 Hooker’s Campaign in Virginia, Jan. 26, 1863                        130
 General Stoneman’s Cavalry Raid, May 1, 1863                        131
 Hooker’s Advance to Kelly’s Ford, on the Rapidan                    134
 Battle of Chancellorsville, Va., May 1–4, 1863                      136
 The Second Day’s Fight, May 2                                       139
 The Third Day’s Fight, Sunday, May 3                                144
 Sketch of the Life of Stonewall Jackson                             146
 The Rebel Invasion in Maryland and Pennsylvania                     149
 Capture of General Milroy’s Army at Winchester, Va., June 14, 1863  152
 Capture of Martinsburg, Va., June 14, 1863                          153
 Attack on Carlisle, Pa., July 1, 1863                               154
 Battle of Gettysburg, Pa., July 1–3, 1863                           156
 The Vicksburg Campaign, December, 1862-July, 1863                   166
 Repulse of General Sherman’s Army, Jan. 3, 1863                     171
 Capture of Fort Hindman, Ark., Jan. 10–11, 1863                     173
 Sketch of the Life of Rear-Admiral D. D. Porter                     176
 Sketch of the Life of Major-General John A. McClernand              179
 Expedition of the ram “Queen of the West”                           181
 The Vicksburg Canal                                                 182
 Expedition down the Coldwater, April 2, 1863                        184
 Passing the Vicksburg Batteries, April 16–22, 1863                  186
 Capture of Grand Gulf, Miss., April 29-May 3                        187
 Bombardment of Haines’ Bluff, April 29, 1863                        189
 Capture of Fort Gibson, Miss., May 1, 1863                          190
 Grierson’s Raid from Mississippi to Louisiana, April 17-May 2,
   1863                                                              192
 Battle of Raymond, Miss., May 12, 1863                              196
 Capture of Jackson, Miss., May 14, 1863                             199
 Battle of Baker’s Creek, or Champion Hill, Miss.                    202
 Battle of Big Black Bridge, Miss., May 17, 1863                     205
 Capture of Haines’ Bluff, May 18, 1863                              207
 Bombardment and Assault of Vicksburg, May 19–23, 1863               209
 Capture of Vicksburg, July 4, 1863                                  221
 Battle at Helena, Ark., July 4, 1863                                222
 Morgan’s Raid in Indiana, Kentucky and Ohio, July 3–26, 1863        226
 The Draft Riots in New York City, July 13–15, 1863                  232
 Operations in Tennessee in 1863                                     249
 Battle of Fort Donelson, Tenn., Feb. 3, 1863                        249
 Battle near Franklin, Tenn., March 5, 1863                          251
 Colonel Streight’s Expedition into Georgia, May 3, 1863             254
 Capture of Hoover’s Gap by Colonel Wilder’s Brigade                 255
 Colonel Wilder’s Expedition from Manchester to Anderson, Tenn.      258
 Advance of General Rosecrans against Chattanooga                    260
 The Battle of Chickamauga, Tenn., Sept. 19, 1863                    261
 Sketch of Major-General George H. Thomas                            267
 Operations in North Carolina in 1863                                268
 Expedition against Rocky Mount, N. C., July 24, 1863                271
 Operations in South Carolina in 1863                                272
 Attack on Fort Sumter, April 7, 1863                                273
 Capture of the rebel iron-clad Atlanta, June 17, 1863               276
 Siege of Charleston, S. C., commenced July 3, 1863                  277
 Attack on Morris Island, S. C., July 10, 1863                       278
 Assault on Fort Wagner, S. C., July 11, 1863                        279
 Bombardment of Fort Sumter, S. C., August 17–23, 1863               280
 The “Swamp Angel”                                                   281
 Operations in Arkansas—Capture of Little Rock, July 1, 1863         286
 Operations in Southern Virginia in 1863                             290
 The Siege of Suffolk, April 11-May 3, 1863                          290
 The Siege of Knoxville, Tenn., Nov. 17-Dec. 6, 1863                 294
 Operations in Tennessee, Sept. 20-Dec. 31, 1863                     297
 Battle of Lookout Mountain, Nov. 24, 1863                           301
 Sherman’s Advance against Mission Ridge, Nov. 24, 1863              303
 Battle of Missionary Ridge. Nov. 25, 1863                           305
 Battle of Ringgold, Ga, Nov. 28, 1863                               309
 Department of the Gulf in 1863                                      310
 Operations on the Teche and Atchafalaya rivers, Fla.                315
 Battle of Irish Bend, La., Apr. 13, 1863                            315
 Attack on Port Hudson, La., May 27, 1863                            319
 Assault of Port Hudson, La., June 14, 1863                          321
 Surrender of Port Hudson, July 9, 1863                              327
 Miscellaneous Naval Operations in 1863                              329
 The Field of Operations in January, 1864                            331
 Sherman’s Expedition against Meridian, Miss.                        332
 General Smith’s Expedition from Memphis, Tenn., Feb. 11, 1864       333
 The Red River Expedition, March 10-May 16, 1864                     334
 Battle of Sabine Cross-Roads, April 8, 1864                         337
 Battle of Pleasant Hill, La., April 9, 1864                         340
 Operations in Georgia: Battle of Tunnel Hill, Feb. 22, 1864         348
 Reconnoissance and Battle at Rocky Face Ridge, Feb. 25, 1864        350
 Capture of Union City. Tenn., March 25, 1864                        350
 Attack on Paducah, Ky., March 26, 1864                              351
 Capture of Fort Pillow, Tenn., April 12, 1864                       353
 Operations in Florida in 1864                                       355
 Battle of Olustee. Feb. 20, 1864                                    357
 Battle at Bachelor’s Creek, N. C., Feb. 1, 1864                     359
 Capture of Plymouth, N. C., Apr. 19, 1864                           359
 Destruction of the rebel iron-clad Albemarle                        362
 Capture of Fort Fisher and Wilmington, N. C.                        363
 Kilpatrick’s Cavalry Raid toward Richmond, Feb. 28-March 5, 1864    374
 Operations in Arkansas in 1864                                      377
 Invasion of Missouri, September, 1864                               379
 Operations in Georgia: General Sherman’s March to Atlanta           381
 Capture of Rome, Ga., May 19, 1864                                  384
 Battle of Kenesaw Mountain June 14, 1864                            389
 Battle of Little Kenesaw, June 24, 1864                             392
 Battle before Atlanta, July 22, 1864                                394
 Stoneman’s Cavalry Expeditions in July, 1864                        396
 The Siege of Atlanta, and its Capture                               398
 Hood’s Campaign in Alabama and Tennessee                            404
 Battle of Allatoona, Ga., October 5, 1864                           407
 Preparations for Sherman’s Grand March                              408
 The Burning of Rome, Ga., November 11, 1864                         408
 The Destruction of Atlanta, November, 1864                          409
 The Battle of Franklin, Tenn., November 30, 1864                    411
 The Battle of Nashville, Tenn., December 15–17, 1864                413
 Continuation of the Siege of Charleston in 1864                     418
 Operations in Middle and Western Virginia in 1864                   419
 Battle of Piedmont, Va., June 5, 1864                               421
 Battle of Opequan Creek, Va., Sept. 19, 1864                        428
 Battle of Fisher’s Hill, Va., Sept. 21, 1864                        430
 Battle of Cedar Creek, Va., Oct 19, 1864                            431
 Sketch of the Life of Major-General Sheridan                        432
 Battle of Morristown, Tenn., Nov. 13, 1864                          434
 Stoneman’s Raid into Western Virginia, Dec. 12–20, 1864             434
 Expeditions at the close of 1864                                    440
 Rebel Privateers—the Alabama, the Florida, and the Shenandoah       442
 The St. Albans Raid, Oct. 19, 1864                                  446
 Advance of the Army of the Potomac, May 3, 1864                     449
 Battle of the Wilderness, Va., May 5–7, 1864                        451
 Battle of Spottsylvania, May 8–12, 1864                             456
 Sketch of the Life of General Sedgwick                              457
 Battle of Coal Harbor, Va., June 1–3, 1864                          464
 General Grant’s Change of Base, June 12–15, 1864                    468
 Operations on James River, Va., May 4–10, 1864                      469
 Battle of Fort Darling, Va., May 12–16, 1864                        473
 Assaults on the Intrenchments at Petersburg, Va., June 8–18, 1864   475
 Engagement on the Weldon Railroad, near Petersburg, Va.             478
 Engagements at Reams’s Station, Stony Creek, etc., June 22–29,
   1864                                                              479
 Sherman’s March from Atlanta to Savannah, Nov. 16—Dec. 22, 1864     480
 Capture of Fort McAllister, Ga., Dec. 13, 1864                      488
 Capture of Savannah, Ga., Dec. 21, 1864                             489
 Grand Naval Combat in Mobile Bay—Capture of Forts Morgan, Powell
   and Gaines                                                        490
 Sherman’s March from Savannah to Goldsboro’, N. C., Jan.-March,
   1865                                                              493
 Battle of Averasboro’, March 15–16, 1865                            494
 Battle of Bentonsville, March 20, 1865                              495
 Capture of Charleston, S. C., Feb. 18, 1865                         496
 Gen. Schofield’s March to Goldsboro’: Battles at Kingston, N. C.,
   Mch. 7–10, 1865                                                   499
 The Siege of Petersburg, Va., June 15, 1864                         501
 Explosion of Pleasants’ Mine, and Battle before Petersburg, July
   29, 1864                                                          503
 The “Dutch Gap Canal” projected by General Butler                   504
 The War Summer of 1865                                              505
 Battles on the Weldon Railroad, Va., August, 1864                   505
 Battle of Reams’s Station, Va., Aug. 28, 1864                       506
 Battle of Chapin’s Bluff, Va., Sept. 28, 1864                       509
 Army of the James: Battle before Richmond, Oct. 7, 1864             511
 Battle of Hatcher’s Run, Oct. 27, 1864                              512
 Close of the Campaign: Battle of Five Forks, Va., April 1–3, 1865   517
 Sheridan’s Expedition in the Shenandoah Valley, Feb. 27-March 19,
   1865                                                              519
 Expedition against St. Mark’s, Fla., March 4–12, 1865               521
 Stoneman’s Expedition in North Carolina, March 20-Apr. 13, 1865     523
 General Wilson’s Expedition in Alabama, March 22-Apr. 20, 1865      525
 Capture of Mobile and the Rebel Fleet, April 12-May 4, 1865         526
 Evacuation of Richmond and Petersburg, April 3, 1865                532
 Surrender of General Lee and his Army, April 9, 1865                534
 Sketch of the rebel General Lee                                     538
 Assassination of President Lincoln, April 14, 1865                  541
 Sketch of the Life of Abraham Lincoln                               547
 The Attempt to Assassinate Secretary Seward, April 14, 1865         548
 The Inauguration of President Johnson, Apr. 15, 1865                549
 The Close of Sherman’s Campaign. Surrender of General Johnston      552
 Farewell Address of General Sherman to his Army                     554
 History of the Birkenhead Rams, built for the Pacha of Egypt        556
 The Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln, Jan. 1, 1863    558
 Proclamation of Secretary Seward announcing the Adoption of the
   Constitutional Amendment Abolishing Slavery                       560
 List of Vessels captured by the Confederate Navy during the War     561




                        INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.
                               VOLUME II.


                                                                    PAGE
 ILLUSTRATED TITLE,                                                    1
 UNION HEROES,                                                        53
 UNION HEROES,                                                        77
 BATTLE OF MURFREESBORO’,                                            117
 CAPTURE OF A BATTERY BY GENERAL ROUSSEAU,                           117
 HOUSE USED FOR CONFINEMENT OF REBEL SYMPATHIZERS AT ST. LOUIS,      177
 UNION HEROES,                                                       197
 UNION HEROES,                                                       219
 ANDREWS LEADING THE RIOTERS,                                        235
 PROVOST GUARD ATTACKING THE RIOTERS,                                269
 CONFEDERATE GENERALS,                                               287
 BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE,                                         307
 PURSUIT TO RINGGOLD, GA.,                                           307
 CAMP SCENE.—ASSORTING THE MAIL,                                     325
 CAMP SCENE.—THE NEWS DEPOT,                                         325
 CONFEDERATE GENERALS,                                               345
 VIEW OF PARROTT GUN BURST ON BOARD THE SUSQUEHANNA AT THE ATTACK
   ON FORT FISHER,                                                   367
 CONFEDERATE GENERALS,                                               385
 GENERAL HOSPITAL AT SAVANNAH, GA.,                                  405
 CONFEDERATE GENERALS,                                               425
 CONFEDERATE GENERALS,                                               447
 BATTLE OF COAL HARBOR, VA.,                                         465
 HOOD’S HEADQUARTERS AT ATLANTA,                                     485
 SHERMAN’S HEADQUARTERS AT ATLANTA,                                  485
 CHARGING A BATTERY ON THE WELDON RAILROAD,                          507
 CAPTURE OF A RAILROAD TRAIN,                                        507
 CONFEDERATE PORTRAITS,                                              527




                               PORTRAITS.


                                 UNION.

                                                                    PAGE
 ANDREWS, GEO. L., Brig.-Gen.,                                       219
 AUGUR, C. C., Maj.-Gen.,                                            197
 GRANT, U. S., Lieut.-Gen.,                                           13
 GRAHAM, LAWRENCE P., Brig.-Gen.                                      77
 GILLMORE, Q. A., Maj.-Gen.,                                          53
 HARNEY, W. S., Brig.-Gen.,                                          197
 JOHNSON, ANDREW, President U. S.,                                   550
 KEITH, Brig.-Gen.,                                                   77
 MARCY, R. B., Inspector-Gen.,                                       197
 MEADE, GEO. G., Maj.-Gen.,                                           53
 MEAGHER, T. F., Brig.-Gen.,                                          77
 MEIGS, M. C., Maj.-Gen.,                                            219
 MILROY, ROBT. H., Maj.-Gen.,                                        197
 MITCHELL, O. M., Maj.-Gen.,                                         197
 RICKETTS, JAMES B., Brig.-Gen.,                                      77
 ROUSSEAU, L. N., Maj.-Gen.,                                          53
 SHERMAN, W. T., Maj.-Gen.,                                           43
 SHERIDAN, PHILIP H., Maj.-Gen.,                                     433
 SHEPLEY, GEO. F., Brig.-Gen.,                                       219
 SLOCUM, H. W., Maj.-Gen.,                                            53
 STONE, CHAS. P., Brig.-Gen.,                                        219
 STONEMAN, GEO., Maj.-Gen.,                                           53
 THOMAS, GEO. H., Maj.-Gen.,                                         267
 WARD, J. H. H., Brig.-Gen.,                                          77
 WHITE, JULIUS, Brig.-Gen.,                                          219


                              CONFEDERATE.

 BEAUREGARD, P. G. T., Maj.-Gen.,                                    345
 BRAGG, BRAXTON, Maj.-Gen.,                                          287
 BOWEN, Maj.-Gen.,                                                   425
 BRANCH, L. O’B., Brig.-Gen.,                                        385
 BUCKNER, SIMON B., Maj.-Gen.,                                       447
 BORHAM, L., Brig.-Gen.,                                             527
 CHEATHAM, B. F., Maj.-Gen.,                                         447
 COLQUET, Brig.-Gen.,                                                385
 CRITTENDEN, G. B., Brig.-Gen.,                                      385
 COOPER, SAMUEL, Brig.-Gen.,                                         527
 DAVIS, JEFFERSON,                                                    97
 EWELL, RICHARD S., Lieut.-Gen.,                                     287
 FLOYD, JOHN B., Maj.-Gen.,                                          385
 GARNETT, RICH. B., Brig.-Gen.,                                      287
 HARDEE, WM. J., Lieut.-Gen.,                                        447
 HOOD, Maj.-Gen.,                                                    447
 HAMPTON, WADE, Maj.-Gen.,                                           425
 HANSOM, ROGER, Brig.-Gen.,                                          425
 HILL, A. P., Maj.-Gen.,                                             287
 JOHNSON, B. T., Brig.-Gen.,                                         385
 JOHNSTON, JOS. E., Lieut.-Gen.,                                     287
 JACKSON, “STONEWALL,” Lt.-Gen.,                                     137
 JOHNSTON, A. S., Maj.-Gen.,                                         447
 LEE, FITZHUGH, Maj.-Gen.,                                           287
 LONGSTREET, JAMES, Lieut.-Gen.,                                     287
 LEE, ROBERT E., General,                                            539
 LOVELL, MANSFIELD, Maj.-Gen.,                                       385
 MAFFITT, J. N., Capt.,                                              527
 MAGRUDER, J. B., Maj.-Gen.,                                         287
 MARSHALL, H., Maj.-Gen.,                                            425
 MASON, JAMES M.,                                                    527
 MORGAN, JOHN H., Maj.-Gen.,                                         345
 MCCULLOCH, BENJ., Maj.-Gen.,                                        345
 POLK, L. K., Maj.-Gen.,                                             345
 PILLOW, G. J., Maj.-Gen.,                                           425
 PRICE, STERLING, Maj.-Gen.,                                         345
 RAINS, G. J., Brig.-Gen.,                                           385
 RHETT, THOS. S., Brig.-Gen.,                                        385
 STEPHENS, ALEXANDER H.,                                             157
 STUART, J. E. B., Maj.-Gen.,                                        345
 STEWART, GEORGE, Gen.,                                              425
 SMITH, G. W., Maj.-Gen.,                                            425
 SEMMES, RAPHAEL, Capt.,                                             527
 SLIDELL, JOHN,                                                      527
 SMITH, E. KIRBY, Lieut.-Gen.,                                       345
 TOOMBS, ROBERT, Maj.-Gen.,                                          447
 TWIGGS, DAVID E., Maj.-Gen.,                                        447
 VAN DORN, EARL, Maj.-Gen.,                                          425
 ZOLLICOFFER, F. K., Maj.-Gen.,                                      345

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT-GENERAL U.S. GRANT.]




                         THE WAR FOR THE UNION.


The month of May, 1862, found the great armies of the Union threatening
the forces of the rebellion at all points. A firm determination filled
every northern bosom. Many a glorious battle field had taught the
soldiers on both sides how to fight and how to endure. Unbounded heroism
filled the whole nation. Never on this earth had so broad and glorious a
country groaned under a harvest of iron. The defeat of Bull Run, instead
of disheartening the people, fired them with new courage and that
unconquerable resolution, which is the best part of National heroism.

New Orleans had been captured by the invincible Farragut, by a series of
brilliant naval victories. He was then a commodore, but has since been
raised by these really wonderful exploits to the highest rank in the
navy.

The sea coast had been blockaded from Fortress Monroe to the Rio Grande.
Generals Butler and Burnside had carried their fleets in safety to
Hatteras Inlet, and had set up the old flag upon the shores of the
Carolinas. General Hunter had established himself in Florida. The Army
of the West, moving southward along the banks of the Mississippi, aided
by the gunboat flotilla of Commodore Foote, had captured Island Number
Ten, fought and won the great battle of Pittsburg Landing, and led by
General Halleck, had invested Corinth. In the East, General McClellan,
at the head of the Army of the Potomac, was moving up the Peninsula, in
the advance upon Richmond. The whole nation watched his movements with
anxious hopefulness, inspired by his successes in the West, backed by
General Scott’s high recommendation. This history has already recorded
the siege and capture of Yorktown, and the victory of Williamsburg, and
has touched upon the engagement of West Point. The latter took place on
the 7th of May, and was but one of the many lesser battles, which formed
a stormy prelude to the terrible Seven Days’ Fights, among the swamps
before the city of Richmond. Its purpose was the establishment of the
Union arms at West Point, which would necessarily force the Rebels to
abandon all their works on the Peninsula, between Yorktown and that
place. Its success crowned the triumph that had meanwhile been achieved
at Williamsburgh. It lasted from about ten o’clock in the morning, till
about three o’clock in the afternoon, and ended in the repulse of the
Rebels, who were thus, at all points, retiring before the gallant
soldiers of the Union. The losses at the battle of West Point, as
reported by General Franklin, were forty-nine killed, one hundred and
four wounded, and forty-one missing.




                       THE MARCH TO WHITE HOUSE.


The narrative, terminating at the close of the first volume of this
history, with the battle of West Point, now concerns itself with the
onward march of the Army of the Potomac. On the 9th of May, General
McClellan effected a junction with the forces under the command of
General Franklin, at West Point; and hence, partly by land and partly by
water, the whole army moved up the Pamunkey river towards a place called
White House, twelve miles distant. The roads at this time were in a bad
condition for travel, owing to heavy rains; and therefore the advance
was made but slowly. It was not until the 16th inst., that General
McClellan established his headquarters at White House, where he
organized a permanent depot for supplies. These coming up the York river
by water, could be landed at West Point and brought hence by railroad.
From White House the march continued toward the Chickahominy river. No
material opposition was anywhere encountered. The rebels were massing
their forces beyond the Chickahominy, in front of Richmond, and
preparing for the desperate, decisive struggle.

On the 20th of May the left wing of the Union Army reached the
Chickahominy, at a point called Bottom’s Bridge. The bridge had been
destroyed by the enemy, but the stream was immediately forded by General
Casey’s troops, and the bridge was rebuilt. In the mean while the centre
and the right wing were advanced to the river above, driving the rebels
out of the village of Mechanicsville. The lines now extended from
Mechanicsville, on the right, to Seven Pines, on the left, the latter
being a strong position on the Bottom’s Bridge road, on the further side
of the Chickahominy.




                 GENERAL M’CLELLAN AND THE GOVERNMENT.


Here the advance was stayed. As early as the 10th of May, General
McClellan, well assured of the strength of his foe, and of the nature
and place of the opposition that would be made by the rebels, had
represented to the War Department the comparative numerical weakness of
his army, and the necessity for its reinforcement. Much correspondence
now ensued, between him and the President, on this subject. It was
General McClellan’s desire to rest his army on the James river, to
receive his reinforcements by that channel, and to move on Richmond from
that quarter. On the other hand, it was the opinion of the President,
and the Secretary-of-War, that his army ought to rest upon the Pamunkey,
receive reinforcements by land, if at all, and move on Richmond by means
of bridges across the Chickahominy. General McDowell, at the head of
between 35,000 and 40,000 men, was, at this time, in the neighborhood of
Fredericksburg. The proper disposition of this force was also a point in
controversy between General McClellan and the authorities at the
capital. The former requested that McDowell’s troops might be sent to
him, and sent by water. The latter dreaded to send them, lest, by so
doing, they might uncover the City of Washington, and expose it to a
rebel raid. On the part of General McClellan it was urged that no such
apprehension need be entertained; that the bulk of the enemy’s forces
were massed for the defence of Richmond; that to conquer the rebels
there, would be the surest method of securing the safety of Washington;
that the presence of McDowell’s corps would so strengthen his hands as
to make victory certain; that, should the rebels attempt a raid on
Washington, their route would be by way of Gordonsville and Manassas, on
which they could readily be checked; and, finally, that the coming of
McDowell’s troops by land would render their timely arrival less certain
than it would be in the event of their coming by water, while it would
equally render them unavailable for the defense of Washington. The
opinion of the Government, however, prevailed; and, in the end, the plan
of General McClellan’s campaign was materially changed. He had designed
to approach Richmond by the east and south. Resting on the Pamunkey, his
purpose was now to approach it by the north. This change in the plan of
the campaign necessitated the division of his army by the Chickahominy
river, and the bridging of that river in many places. On the 18th of May
the Secretary-of-War notified him that General McDowell’s corps would be
sent forward by land from Fredericksburg, to form a junction with the
right wing of the Array of the Potomac. Awaiting this reinforcement,
General McClellan employed himself in strengthening his position, and in
building the necessary bridges across the Chickahominy. On the 24th of
May he was notified that the critical position of General Banks’ troops,
consequent upon a sudden raid, by Stonewall Jackson, up the Valley of
the Shenandoah river, had occasioned the recall of General McDowell, and
that the Army of the Potomac must proceed without reinforcements.

General McClellan has been bitterly censured for his alleged
slothfulness and hesitation, at this juncture; nor can it be denied that
his advance towards Richmond was made slowly and with extreme caution.
It must be remembered, however, that to march through sloughs of mire,
in the face of a powerful and well intrenched foe, is far less easy than
to advance on paper, and conquer enemies with printers’ ink. This is not
a partisan history—its design is simply to record facts and to do
justice. Subsequent events have shed much light upon General McClellan’s
Peninsular Campaign. That he had not over-estimated the power of the
rebel forces, was conclusively shown in the bloody and terrible seven
days’ battles. That he was obliged to deviate from his own chosen plan
is evident, and is not denied: yet that plan was the same which was
ultimately adopted by General Grant, in the final campaign of the war.
Richmond when finally taken, was approached from the east and south, and
not from the north. General McClellan may have been overcautious; but
his tactics were wise, and his patriotism stainless.

The following is the language of General McClellan’s Report, as to
several essential points: “The land movement obliged me to expose my
right in order to secure the junction; and as the order for General
McDowell’s march was soon countermanded, I incurred great risk, of which
the enemy finally took advantage, and frustrated the plan of my
campaign. Had General McDowell joined me by water, I could have
approached Richmond by the James, and thus avoided the delays and losses
incurred in bridging the Chickahominy, and would have had the army
massed in one body, instead of being necessarily divided by that
stream....

“In view of the peculiar character of the Chickahominy, and the
liability of its bottom land to sudden inundations, it became necessary
to construct between Bottom’s Bridge and Mechanicsville, eleven new
bridges, all new and difficult, with extensive by-way approaches.

“The entire army could, probably, have been thrown across the
Chickahominy immediately after our arrival, but this would have left no
force on the left bank to guard our communications or to protect our
right and rear. If the communication with our supply depot had been cut
by the enemy, with our army concentrated upon the right bank of the
Chickahominy, and the stage of water as it was for many days after our
arrival, the bridges carried away, and our means of transportation not
furnishing a single day’s supplies in advance, the troops must have gone
without rations, and the animals without forage, and the army would have
been paralyzed.

“It is true I might have abandoned my communications and pushed forward
toward Richmond, trusting to the speedy defeat of the enemy and the
consequent fall of the city, for a renewal of supplies; but the
approaches were fortified, and the town itself was surrounded with a
strong line of intrenchments, requiring a greater length of time to
reduce than our troops could have dispensed with rations.

“Under these circumstances, I decided to retain a portion of the army on
the left bank of the river until our bridges were completed.”




            STONEWALL JACKSON’S RAID: RETREAT OF GEN. BANKS.


While the Army of the Potomac was thus occupied in bridging the
Chickahominy, and while General McClellan and the President were in
correspondence, the rebels did not remain idle. On the 23rd of May
commenced the well-remembered raid, up the valley of the Shenandoah,
which was the occasion of a serious panic at Washington, and even
further north than New York; which prevented the junction of McDowell’s
and McClellan’s forces; and which involved the splendid retreat of
General Banks from Strasburgh to Winchester, and thence to Williamsport
on the Potomac river. The distance is fifty-three miles, and the retreat
was accomplished in forty-eight hours. The Army of the Shenandoah,
commanded by General Banks, consisted of about six thousand men, while
the forces of the rebel raiders numbered upwards of twenty thousand, and
were led by the brilliant and dashing Stonewall Jackson. The advance of
the rebels was made up the valley, to the westward of the Blue Ridge,
and the first point attacked was Front Royal. Here the enemy encountered
the First Maryland Regiment, Col. Kenly, which was attacked with great
fury, and driven back towards Strasburgh. Col. Kenly fought with
wonderful valor, and was heartily sustained by his men. The fighting,
indeed, was of almost unexampled severity, but the regiment was soon
overpowered by numbers. Colonel Kenly, when asked to surrender, shot the
rebel who thus summoned him to yield: and finally, when overpowered,
broke his sword in halves, to avoid surrendering it. He was shot, but
only wounded, and was placed in an ambulance. In that ambulance he was
subjected to much suffering, for want of surgical aid.

As soon as General Banks received news of this disaster at Front Royal,
and knew that General Jackson was advancing in force, he perceived his
danger and ordered a retreat. And now commenced a race between the two
armies, for the town of Winchester. Had Jackson reached that point
first, he would have intercepted the little band of Union soldiers, cut
off their supplies, and forced their surrender. But the celerity and
courage of General Banks’s forces proved their salvation. They retired,
indeed, in the face of superior numbers; but they retired fighting. At
Newtown, at Kernstown, and at Winchester they were closely pushed by the
pursuing foe; but, at every point of attack, the enemy was checked and
held at bay. The severest encounter took place at Winchester. General
Gordon’s brigade was here engaged, and gained great honor by its
gallantry and coolness. The regiments constituting it were the Second
Massachusetts, Lieut-Col. Andrews; the Third Wisconsin, Col. Ruger; the
Twenty-seventh Indiana, Col. Colgrove; and the Twenty-ninth
Pennsylvania, Col. Murphy. The stability with which this brigade opposed
itself to overwhelming numbers undoubtedly saved General Banks’ Army.
General Gordon thus describes its final retreat:

“I fell back slowly, but generally in good order. The Second
Massachusetts in column of companies moving by flank, the Third
Wisconsin in line of battle moving to the rear. On every side above the
surrounding crest surged the rebel forces. A sharp and withering fire of
musketry was opened by the enemy from the crest upon our centre, left
and right. The yells of a victorious and merciless foe were heard above
the din of battle, but my command was not dismayed. The Second
Massachusetts halted in a street of the town to reform its line, then
pushed on with the column, which, with its long train of baggage-wagons,
division, brigade, and regimental, was making its way in good order
towards Martinsburgh.

“My retreating column suffered serious loss in the streets of
Winchester: males and females vied with each other in increasing the
number of their victims by firing from the houses, throwing
hand-grenades, hot water, and missiles of every description. The hellish
spirit of murder was carried on by the enemy’s cavalry, who followed to
butcher, and who struck down with sabre and pistol the helpless soldier
sinking from fatigue, unheeding his cries for mercy, indifferent to his
claims as a prisoner of war.

“This record of infamy is preserved for the females of Winchester. But
this is not all: our wounded in hospital, necessarily left to the
mercies of our enemies, I am credibly informed were bayoneted by the
rebel infantry. In the same town, in the same apartments, where we, when
victors on the field of Winchester, so tenderly nursed the rebel
wounded, we were even so more than barbarously rewarded.”




               THE INVESTMENT AND OCCUPATION OF CORINTH.
                            MAY 12–30, 1862.


The decisive battle of Pittsburgh, on Monday, April 7th, terminated in
the retreat of the vast army of rebels, which fell back to Corinth.
During the latter part of the same week, Gen. Halleck arrived on the
field to assume the chief command of the Federal Army. The success of
Gen. Pope’s division at New Madrid, and at Island No. 10, placed his
superb army of about twenty thousand strong, at Halleck’s disposal;
and they were now ordered to join the grand army under the
commander-in-chief. They were assigned position at Hamburgh, four
miles above Pittsburgh Landing, fronting on the extreme left of the
Federal lines. Several changes were now made in the organization of
the Federal army. The divisions of Sherman and Crittenden were added
to Grant’s _corps d’armée_. This gave Grant eight divisions. The
reserve of Grant’s forces were composed of the divisions of Gen. Lew.
Wallace, Crittenden, and McClernand; the former command of the latter
being conferred upon Brig.-Gen. John A. Logan. While McClernand was
placed in command of this reserve, Gen. Thomas was placed in chief
command of the remaining divisions of Grant’s forces.

In the field position, Grant’s forces constituted the right, Buell’s the
centre, and Pope’s the left.

The first advance was ordered on April 29, the entire army moving toward
the common centre, Corinth. Wallace held the extreme right. McClernand
moved along the lower Corinth road, to a point one and a half miles west
of Monterey. Sherman moved directly for a hill commanding Monterey, and
occupied it on the morning of the 30th of April.

Every thing on the route indicated the haste with which the enemy had
retreated, after his defeat. Gun carriages, caissons, wheels, tents, and
all the apparatus of war, broken or burned, strewed the whole line of
march.

On the same day Gen. Wallace dispatched a force to cut the Ohio and
Mobile railroad at Bethel, south of Purdy, in order to sever the rebel
communication to the northward. Three battalions of cavalry, and one of
infantry, under command of Col. Morgan L. Smith, executed this
commission. They found the rebels in position near Purdy, in a piece of
woods. While the infantry and a detachment of cavalry engaged the enemy,
Colonel Dickey, with two battalions of cavalry moved to the railroad.
They destroyed a bridge a hundred and twenty feet in length, and the
conductor, engineer, and four others were taken prisoners.

Buell struck direct from Pittsburgh Landing toward Corinth, while Pope’s
division pushed forward from Hamburgh towards the lower point.

On the 3d of May, a reconnoissance in force toward Farmington was
ordered. The country is uneven and difficult to penetrate, and both time
and caution were necessary. Generals Paine and Palmer of Pope’s command,
were detailed for this important duty. The regiments selected were the
Tenth, Sixteenth, Twenty-second, Twenty-seventh, Forty-second and
Fifty-first Illinois Volunteers, Tenth and Sixteenth Michigan
Volunteers, Yates’ Illinois Sharpshooters, Houghtaling’s and Hercock’s
batteries, and the Second Michigan cavalry. The column proceeded about
five miles on the Farmington road, where they encountered the enemy’s
cavalry pickets. A skirmish ensued, in which the rebels lost eight
killed, and the same number of their wounded, were made prisoners. The
enemy was compelled to fall back, after a second skirmish, and at 3
o’clock, p. m., the vanguard came up from a swamp they had crossed, and
the fight commenced in earnest. The enemy was strongly posted on an
elevated piece of ground which was flanked by a part of the force, and
the rebels were obliged to fall back half a mile, yielding their former
position to the Federals, who pressed them closely. The two regiments of
infantry having secured a position commanding the left flank of the
rebels, poured upon them such a destructive fire, that their infantry
abandoned their artillerists. The latter, finding themselves forsaken,
hastily withdrew their guns to a new position, from which they were soon
dislodged, and fled with all speed to Corinth. General Pope’s advance
was thus put in possession of Farmington.

This successful movement of General Pope’s advance was a cause of great
annoyance to the rebels, and on the 9th of May they came out in
overwhelming force to drive him back. The enemy numbered about
thirty-five thousand, under command of Bragg, Price, Van Dorn, and
Ruggles. General Pope had been specially directed not to engage the
enemy in force. Under these circumstances he was obliged to encounter
the shock of this large body, with only a single brigade, which,
however, was advantageously posted. The enemy threw forward five or six
regiments, with artillery, to engage this brigade, holding their immense
reserve in readiness to attack the Federal reinforcements, which they
supposed would be brought on the field. After five hours of desperate
resistance, General Pope withdrew his advance, with a loss of forty
killed, and about one hundred and twenty wounded. The rebels, surprised
by the obstinate resistance of this small force, and their sudden
retreat, made no pursuit, but fell back to their own intrenchments,
after having suffered a much greater loss.

Three different “parallels” were constructed along the Federal lines,
from the time of the first investment to the occupation of Corinth. The
construction of these works compelled the rebels to fall back further
upon their centre, until the last was completed.

On the 17th of May a brilliant engagement took place, under the command
of General W. T. Sherman which resulted in the capture of a position
known as Russell’s house, the place being owned and occupied by a
gentleman of that name. The possession of this ground being important to
the Federal advance, General Sherman directed General Hurlbut to take
two regiments and a battery of artillery up the road to Russell’s house.
General Denver with an equal force, composed of the Seventieth and
Seventy-second Ohio, and Barrett’s battery, took a different road, so as
to arrive on the enemy’s left, while his front was engaged. General
Morgan L. Smith, with his brigade, and Bouton’s battery, were directed
to follow the main road, and drive back a brigade of the enemy that held
the position at Russell’s. General Smith conducted his advance in a very
handsome manner, the chief work as well as the loss falling upon his two
leading regiments, the Eighth Missouri and the Fifty-fifth Illinois. The
firing was very brisk, but the enemy’s pickets were driven steadily back
till they reached their main position at Russell’s, where they made an
obstinate resistance. At first the Union artillery worked to a
disadvantage, owing to the nature of the ground, but then finally
succeeded in gaining an elevation whence they shelled the house, when
the enemy immediately retired in confusion, leaving the field in
possession of the victors. The Federal loss was ten killed, and
thirty-one wounded. The enemy left twelve dead on the ground.

Preparations were constantly progressing for the final assault, which
was appointed for the 28th of May. Occasional skirmishes took place in
which the rebels always lost ground, as the great body of the Federal
forces slowly but surely closed around them. On the morning of the 28th,
General Pope sent Colonel Elliott to cut the line of the Mobile and Ohio
Railroad. This was accomplished with great skill. On the same day the
whole army slowly advanced to the point of attack. On the left, the
division under General Pope approached so near the rebel lines as to
discover that the retreat of the enemy had begun.

It was nine o’clock on the morning of Wednesday the 28th, before Pope
opened on the left and began the reconnoissance, which soon became
general, as was evinced by rapid firing in McKeon’s division, and
further to the right in Sherman’s. The right and center had encountered
no enemy until they had reached the swamp and pushed through it toward
the creek. Pope, on the contrary, met a determined resistance, and at
night his line was but little further advanced than the third parallel
of the center and right. Operating in an open space of some miles in
extent he had not been able to advance his lines with the rapidity of
Buell and Thomas. But the engagement began when the right and center
reached the swamp, and while yet the left was striving to obtain the
same position. There was no distinguishing anything. Along the whole
line where the fight was raging, sharp reports, shouts, commands, and
cheers, were heard, but nothing could be seen, save occasionally the
white smoke rising from the leveled weapons which had just been
discharged. The ambulances were slowly filled. The wounded soldiers were
brought from the swamps, and the surgeons gathered around them. Cries of
pain, curses, and groans, mingling with the wilder shouts of the excited
combatants, who were hidden by the woods, arose distinctly. This style
of skirmishing was kept up during the whole day. The combatants on the
right and center maintained their original position, and Thomas and
Buell bivouacked where they had fought—in the damp, miry swamps. The
night was spent in preparations for an advance in the morning.

The resistance of the rebels to Pope’s advance was more stubborn, and
the conflict during the day was more determined, more exciting, and
resulted in greater loss than in both the other corps. He was opposed
both by infantry and artillery. The crossing at the creek was defended
by a battery of rifled guns, which Pope had found exceedingly effective,
and he was content, when night came, to rest in the plain, and make his
preparations for reducing the battery at early dawn. The troops of the
three divisions bivouacked on the field, where they had stood mostly
inactive the whole day, Hamilton’s left resting on the Farmington road.

The position obtained at Russell’s House on the 17th, had been strongly
intrenched as a base for the operations of W. T. Sherman’s division on
the 28th. On that day he was ordered to advance and secure a log-house
standing on a ridge, giving a near and commanding position. The place
was then held by the enemy—supposed to be in strong force.

The house was a double log-building standing on a high ridge on the
southern end of the large field to which the Union pickets had advanced.
The enemy had taken out the chinks and removed the roof, making it an
excellent block house, from which he could annoy the Union pickets, in
security. The large field was perfectly overlooked by this house, and by
the ridge along its southern line of fence, which was covered by a dense
grove of heavy oaks and underbrush. The main Corinth road runs along the
eastern fence, while the field itself, three hundred yards wide, by five
hundred long, extended far to the right into the low land of Phillip’s
creek, densely wooded and impassable to troops or artillery. On the
eastern side of the field, the woods were more open. The enemy could be
seen at all times, in and about the house and the ridge beyond, but the
Federal pickets could not appear on that side of the field without
attracting a shot.

General J. W. Denver, with his brigade and the Morton battery of four
guns, was ordered to march from the Union lines at eight A. M., keeping
well under cover as he approached the field; General Morgan L. Smith’s
brigade, with Barrett’s and Waterhouse’s batteries, was ordered by
Sherman to move along the main road, keeping his force well masked in
the woods to the left; Brigadier-General Veatch’s brigade moved from
General Hurlbut’s lines through the woods on the left of and connecting
with General Morgan L. Smith’s, and General John A. Logan’s brigade
moved down to Bowie Hill Cut of the Mobile and Ohio Railroad, and thence
forward and to the left, connecting with General Denver’s brigade on the
extreme right.

Two twenty-pound rifled guns of Silfversparre’s battery, under the
immediate supervision of Major Taylor, chief of artillery, were moved
silently through the forest to a point behind a hill, from the top of
which could be seen the house and ground to be contested. The guns were
unlimbered, loaded with shell and moved by hand to the crest. The house
was soon demolished by Major Taylor’s battery, when the troops dashed
forward in splendid style, crossed the field, drove the enemy from the
ridge and field beyond, into another dense and seemingly impenetrable
forest. When the enemy reached the ridge, he opened with a two-gun
battery on the right, and another from the front and left, killing three
of General Veatch’s men. The Union artillery soon silenced his, and by
ten A. M. the Federals were masters of the position. Generals Grant and
Thomas were present during the affair and witnessed the movement, which
was admirably executed both by the officers and men.

The enemy, evidently annoyed at this unexpected repulse, sallied out in
some force to regain the lost position, but they were repulsed after a
brisk fire of musketry and artillery. The new position won was near
Corinth, and the work of intrenching went on during the night of the
28th. On the morning of the 29th, a line of defences was constructed,
which gave the Federals a powerful foothold within thirteen hundred
yards of the enemy’s main works.

The whole division of Sherman lay in a slightly curved line, facing
south; his right resting on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad, near a deep
cut known as Bowie Hill Cut, and his left resting on the main Corinth
road, at the crest of the ridge, there connecting with General Hurlbut,
who, in turn, on his left, connected with General Davies, and so on down
the whole line to its extremity. So near was the enemy, that the sound
of his drums and sometimes of voices in command could be heard, while
the rumble of the railroad cars, coming and going to and from Corinth
was easily distinguished. For some days and nights, cars had been
arriving and departing frequently. On the night of the 29th, they had
been more active than usual, and Sherman’s suspicions were aroused.
Before daybreak on the 30th, he instructed the brigade commanders and
the field officer of the day, to feel forward as far as possible, but
all reported the enemy’s pickets still in force in the dense woods to
his front. About six A. M., a curious explosion, sounding like a volley
of large siege pieces, followed by others singly, and in twos and
threes, arrested attention. Soon after a dense smoke arose from the
direction of Corinth. Sherman immediately put in motion two regiments of
each brigade by different roads, and soon after followed with the whole
division, infantry, artillery and cavalry. To his surprise, the enemy’s
chief redoubt was found within thirteen hundred yards of the inner line
of intrenchments, but completely masked by the dense forest and
undergrowth. Instead of a continuous line of intrenchments encircling
Corinth, his defenses consisted of separate redoubts, connected in part
by a parapet and ditch, and in part by shallow rifle-pits; the trees
being felled to afford a good field of fire to and beyond the main road.

General Morgan L. Smith’s brigade moved rapidly down the main road,
entering the first redoubt of the enemy at seven A. M., May 30th. It was
completely evacuated, and he pushed on into Corinth and beyond, to
College Hill, there awaiting Thomas’ orders and arrival. General Denver
entered the enemy’s lines at the same time, seven A. M., at a point
midway between the wagon and railroads, and proceeded on to Corinth,
about three miles from his camp; and Colonel McDowell kept further to
the right, near the Mobile and Ohio Railroad. By eight A. M., all
Sherman’s division was at and beyond Corinth.

On the whole ridge extending from Sherman’s into Corinth, and to the
right and left could be seen the abandoned camps of the enemy; flour and
provisions were scattered about, everything indicating a speedy and
confused retreat. In the town itself, many houses were still burning,
and the ruins of warehouses and buildings containing commissary and
other stores were yet smouldering; but there still remained piles of
cannon balls, shells and shot, sugar, molasses, beans, rice, and other
property, which the enemy had failed to carry off or destroy.

The enemy had for some days been removing their sick, and their valuable
stores, and had sent away on railroad cars a part of their effective
force on the night of the 28th. But, of course, even the vast amount of
their rolling stock could not carry away an army of a hundred thousand
men.

The rebels were, therefore, compelled to evacuate the place, and began
the march by ten o’clock on the night of the 29th—the columns filling
the roads leading south and west all night; the rear-guard firing the
train which led to the explosion and conflagration, that gave the first
intimation that Corinth was evacuated.




                       OCCUPATION OF NORFOLK, VA.


While these events were happening, before Richmond and in the valley of
the Shenandoah, the rebels were not idle elsewhere.

On the evening of the 10th of May, General Wool verified his opinion as
to the easy capture of Norfolk, by landing his troops at Ocean View,
under the direction of Captain Cram, and commenced his march upon the
city.

The route lay through pine woods and over roads in only tolerable
condition. The infantry regiments being first landed, started at once
upon their march, the principal object being to secure the bridge across
Tanner’s Creek, which would be a shortening of the route by several
miles. The leading regiments under General Weber, reached the bridge
about one o’clock, and found it burning, it having been fired by a small
force of rebels then on the opposite bank. They had also planted a
couple of small guns, with which they now opened fire upon our advance.
General Mansfield considered that this effort to beat back our approach
could not be resisted without artillery and a larger force; and started
on a return to hurry forward the batteries and a reinforcement. General
Wool in the mean time decided to push forward, and led the column by a
roundabout route toward Norfolk.

In spite of the heat of the day, the Union troops reached the entrenched
camp at about half past four o’clock, and were in possession at twenty
minutes before five. The entrenchments were strongly fortified with
earthworks, on the top of which were found twenty-nine pieces of
artillery. When just about to enter the city the troops were met by a
flag of truce. The Mayor of the city, who had come out under the flag,
was met by General Wool and Secretary Chase. They entered a cottage by
the road side, for the purpose of conferring together, and there the
Mayor of Norfolk informed General Wool of the purport of his visit,
explaining that he had come to surrender the city into the hands of the
United States, and to ask protection for the persons and property of the
citizens. General Wool’s reply was that the request was granted in
advance. He then immediately took possession of the city, and appointed
Brigadier-General Egbert L. Viele to be Military Governor, with
directions to see that the citizens were protected in all their civil
rights.

At this point it is necessary to look backward for a few days at the
doings of the rebels, in order to explain the burning of the Merrimac.




                      DESTRUCTION OF THE MERRIMAC.


Commodore Tatnall, early in May, received orders to take up his position
upon the James river, in such a way as would entirely prevent the Union
forces from ascending it. On the next day he was ordered to endeavor to
protect Norfolk, too, which placed him in his original position.

On the day following, Commodore Hollins reached Norfolk with orders from
the rebel Secretary of the Navy, Honorable S. R. Mallory, to communicate
with Commodore Tatnall and such officers as he might select, in regard
to the best disposition to be made of the rebel steamer Virginia—better
known at the North as the Merrimac.

On the 8th of May the Union forces attacked the Sewell’s Point battery;
and Commodore Tatnall immediately undertook its defence, with the
Merrimac. Six of our vessels, including the Monitor and Naugatuck, were
actively engaged in the bombardment of the rebel batteries on Sewell’s
Point and Craney Island. The Merrimac evinced a decided disinclination
to come out into the roadstead; and, as the National vessels were
equally disinclined to go up to her, the combat ceased.

The Monitor had orders to engage the Merrimac, in only such a position
as would enable the Union iron-clad, and other vessels engaged, to run
her down.

The demonstration had one good effect; that of ascertaining the fact
that the number of guns, at the principal work on Sewell’s Point, was
greatly reduced, and the force of men posted there comparatively small.
On the 10th of May the rebels learned that a large force of Union men
were marching rapidly upon Norfolk, and later in the day that the Union
troops occupied the city. They at once endeavored to put in force a
design to get up the river, and aid in the defence of Richmond, trusting
to be able to do this before the Union officers should learn of their
intention. Before daybreak the next morning, however, it was found that
the Merrimac was not fit for action; and the rebel flag-officer in
command determined, with the concurrence of the first and
flag-lieutenants, to land the crew at Craney Island, the only means of
retreat left open to them; and, as it was otherwise impossible to
prevent the Merrimac from falling into our hands, to destroy her before
we could capture her. The vessel was accordingly put ashore, near the
main land, the crew was landed, and in a few minutes sheets of flame
rose into the air fore and aft of the proud rebel iron-clad. For more
than an hour she burned fiercely; tongues of fire licked her sides and
shot up livid streams of light through the dense smoke, and at 5 o’clock
on the morning of May 11th, with a loud report, like a roar of baffled
rage, agony, and mortification, she blew up, scattering her ruins far
and wide; and the morning sun shone down on nothing of the Merrimac save
wreck and smoke.




                   THE BATTLE OF HANOVER COURT-HOUSE.
                             MAY 23, 1862.


On Wednesday, May 28th, one of the most brilliant achievements was
consummated which distinguished the great, patriotic war for the Union.

For several days previously to the above date, the rebels, returning
from their raid up the Shenandoah valley, had been extending their
pickets towards Old Church, throwing forces upon McClellan’s right
flank, and otherwise indicating that they meant mischief. These threats
of battle were answered by his suddenly throwing out a heavy Union
force, between Hanover and Richmond, which cut off their communications
by the Virginia Central, and the Richmond and Petersburg railroads. By
this means the Union army totally dispersed the enemy, in two short,
sharp engagements, cleared its flank, and disabled the rebel railroad
operations. But a more important work was ahead; and the force selected
for it was General G. W. Morrell’s division, of General F. J. Porter’s
Fifth Provisional Army Corps. At midnight of Monday, orders were given
to each regiment to be in light marching trim, for the morning. The
reveille beat at 3 A. M. A drenching rain was pouring down, so that not
so much as a cup of coffee could be heated; and there was nothing but
cold rations to give the required strength for the prospective march.

The soldiers marched in silence for some six or eight miles; and then
the whisper gathered breath, and passed from man to man, “Where are we
going?” Pocket compasses were consulted, and it was discovered that
slowly, though gradually, the division was bearing more and more to the
right. Few in the column had any idea of the object in view; but no
questions were asked.

At 10 o’clock, the dismal, overhanging clouds had disappeared almost
entirely, and through their broken masses poured down the rays of a
brilliant sun, that soon became almost tropical in its intense heat. The
head of the column was suddenly turned to the right; a course due north
was pursued for a short time; and then, where the roads intersected each
other, a battery was planted, a regiment being detailed to support it.
Again the brigades moved rapidly onward. At the halt, the Virginia
railroad was reported to be but a mile and a half westward; and, in
obedience to orders received, the Twenty-second Massachusetts, Colonel
Gore, marched northward to disable the railroad, and subsequently joined
the main body a few miles above.

The design in view was to capture a large body of rebels, known to have
been at Hanover Court House on the Sunday before, and which had then
consisted of the Seventh, Twelfth, Eighteenth, Twenty-third,
Thirty-third, and Thirty-eighth, North Carolina troops. Each regiment
was represented as numbering one thousand men: and it was further stated
that the enemy intended to strongly reinforce the position.

The Union division reached a point about two miles north of the
intersection of the roads, when the advance guard, composed of cavalry;
the Twenty-fifth New York Infantry, Colonel Johnson, and a section of
artillery, discovered the pickets of the enemy. Without an instant’s
delay the skirmishers opened fire, when the enemy slowly withdrew for
two miles—the Twenty-fifth in rapid pursuit, keeping ahead even of
Benson’s Light Battery, which was in front. It was in an open field,
near the house of Doctor King, that the rebels drew up in line of
battle. Colonel Johnson pressed boldly forward, engaged them at close
range, and for fifteen minutes, before any support arrived, made hot
work for both sides. The rebels had sheltered themselves behind the
house, and in support of two of their own field pieces; but they were
speedily driven from that protection. A force of the enemy which
approached on the right of the Twenty-fifth, coming from the woods,
succeeded in taking prisoners a portion of company G, which they
immediately carried to their rear. A section of Manin’s Massachusetts
Battery, followed by a portion of Griffin’s Regular Battery now came to
the Assistance of Colonel Johnson, and speedily fixed the attention of
the rebels, who continued to pour in a sharp shower of grape and shell
from their twelve-pound howitzers.

But now a turn in affairs took place which was as great a surprise as it
was a disaster to the rebels. From their determined stand it was clearly
perceived that they supposed the force before them to be our only
strength; and they evidently considered that it would be short work to
repulse and capture the small body of men so heroically attacking them.
But General Butterfield had already ordered the Eighty-third
Pennsylvania, Colonel McLane and the Seventeenth New York, Colonel
Lansing, to the timber on the left of the enemy’s flank; and before they
could suspect the blow that threatened them, our reinforcements appeared
in the wheat field on their left. The vitality of the movement was clear
to them as soon as perceived; and surprised, then confused, they wavered
at the first well-directed volley poured in on them. Their ranks broke;
and, turning, they fled confusedly, in every direction. A second volley
picked off their men at the guns. Forward, at the double-quick, and with
a loud, hearty yell, went the brave Seventeenth. The cannon were
abandoned without spiking them, and our victorious troops pursued the
retreating enemy to Hanover Court-House. Within an hour sixty prisoners
were brought in. Beyond this point the enemy still fled; and the cavalry
continued in hot pursuit. At the Court-House the regiments stopped, as
the enemy had abandoned it just in time to escape the net so skilfully
set for his capture.

At Peake’s Station orders were received from General Porter for the
Twenty-second Massachusetts to move up the railroad, several hundred
feet of which they had previously torn up. All other regiments,
including the Forty-fourth and the battery below, were ordered to move
with all possible rapidity, as it was expected that much more sharp
fighting remained to be done ahead. They had but just moved forward when
a mounted cavalry picket in hot haste rode up and informed General
Martindale that a large force of rebels had arrived by rail, and was
already hurrying on for an attack upon the rear, evidently hoping to get
us between two fires. The Second Maine regiment, in the rear, was faced
about, and stationed at the point where the rebel attack was expected.
But they advanced under shelter of the timber. The Forty-fourth New
York, Colonel Stryker, was ordered to the left of Martin’s battery; the
Twenty-fifth regiment, attending on the wounded, having been sent for,
arrived and took up a position on the left of the battery, before which
the rebels had already appeared. The Forty-fourth started to deploy in
the woods to the left, with a view to protect one of the hospitals which
was in that direction; but the enemy attacking our right flank made it
necessary to have them recalled. They returned to their former position;
and engaged their opponents vigorously.

The fight waxed hot and furious. Six rebel infantry regiments were in
plain sight. Colonel Johnson was severely wounded, and soon after had
his horse shot under him; Adjutant Houghton received a flesh wound in
the leg, and Major Chapin of the Forty-fourth was severely wounded in
the chest, and the leg. Adjutant Knox, and Lieutenant Fox were both
wounded. The enemy pressed fiercely upon the Union lines; their fire was
poured in with relentless fury, and their whole strength was put out to
crush the patriotic force. But in vain, for though losing severely at
every onslaught, the three heroic columns stood their ground with an
unflinching bravery that has won for them the highest meed of praise.
They would not yield an inch. Finally the Second Maine was out of
ammunition, and Colonel Roberts appealed for a chance to charge with the
bayonet.

During all the time this furious fight was raging the brigades in the
advance were returning on the double-quick.

The Eighty-third Pennsylvania and Sixteenth Michigan were thrown in on
the left. The Sixty-second Pennsylvania, Colonel Black, was sent into
the timber on the left; the Ninth Massachusetts, Colonel Cass, was
placed on the left of the Eighty-third. The Fourteenth New York relieved
the Second Maine, and was joined by the Thirteenth New Jersey, from
Colonel Warren’s brigade.

Griffin’s battery, which now came thundering in, commenced throwing
shell and shrapnell, on the instant after taking position.

The fresh regiments pressed forward. On the enemy’s left, the
Sixty-second was doing such execution as forced the rebels to fall back
before its destructive fire. The whole advancing columns came on with a
steady rush; the enemy was thrown into confusion, and under cover of the
forest, beat a disordered and precipitate retreat.

The victory was won, hardly, bravely, and nobly won; and the results
were more than the victors had hoped for.

The spoils were over six hundred men; a large number of guns; and a
railway train, captured by General Stoneman.

It is worthy of remark that in this engagement the flag of the
Forty-fourth New York was pierced by forty-four bullets. The regiment
behaved nobly—as did every one engaged. Too much praise cannot be
awarded to both officers and men. The following is from a newspaper
account of the day.

“General McClellan came up the next morning and was most
enthusiastically received by the men. He grasped General Porter by the
hand most cordially and congratulated him. Turning to General
Butterfield, who was near, he put one hand on his shoulder and said some
words that we on the outside could not hear. That they were well merited
compliments for brave and gallant deeds, the faces of both showed most
plainly. Our brigade was satisfied and confident that under fire, as
well as elsewhere, we have the right man in the right place.”

The result of this fight was the firm establishment in position of the
right wring of McClellan’s army, which took position without waiting the
cooperation of McDowell, and entered upon that scene of bloody days
which ended in the retreat to Harrison’s Landing.




                        BATTLE OF FAIR OAKS, VA.
                           MAY 31 AND JUNE 1.


On the 29th and 30th of May the National pickets were many times
fiercely attacked by detachments of the rebels, endeavoring to ascertain
the precise situation of the Federal troops. They were repulsed with
considerable loss. There were indications that the enemy was approaching
in great force, for the cars coming out from Richmond had been running
all the previous night. On the morning of the 30th, General Keyes,
stationed at Seven Pines, was informed of the threatening aspect of
affairs; and together with Gen. Casey, at once made every possible
preparation to repel all sudden attacks, well knowing that the enemy
could assail with double or treble the numbers of the Union forces.

General Keyes in his official report, says: “The camp I selected, and
which was the next day approved by Major-Gen. McClellan, stretches
across the Williamsburgh road between Bottom’s Bridge and Seven Pines,
and is distant about a mile from the latter. I caused that camp to be
fortified with rifle-pits and breastworks extending to the left about
eight hundred yards, and terminating in a crotchet to the rear. Similar
works, about three hundred yards further in advance, were constructed on
the right, extending towards the Richmond and West Point Railroad.

“Having been ordered by Gen. McClellan to hold the Seven Pines strongly,
I designed to throw forward to that neighborhood two brigades of Casey’s
division, and to establish my picket-line considerably in advance, and
far to the right.”

In the mean time the rebel preparations were of the most powerful
description, and seemed to promise to them undoubted success. General
Hill, with a force of 16,000 men, was to march from Richmond, along the
Williamsburg road, towards Seven Pines. General Longstreet, with 16,000
more, was to support his right wing; and General Huger with a third
16,000, was appointed to protect his left flank, prepared to fall upon
the right wing of the Federal troops. General Smith, with still another
16,000 men, was to make a detour through the woods, for the purpose of
cutting off the retreat of Casey’s division. Such was the generalship of
the rebel officers that often with really inferior numbers, they so
massed their troops as to be superior in numbers upon the battle-field.

Throughout the night of the 30th of May, there was a raging storm, the
like of which few who listened to its roar and fury could remember ever
to have experienced. The thunder roared without intermission; torrents
of rain drenched the earth; while the whole sky was on fire with an
unceasing blaze of lightning. It was from the peltings of this storm,
saturated with rain, which had penetrated the camps, and turned their
hard field-beds into pools of mud, that the Federal troops rose, to face
an advancing army of six or seven times their own number. The tempest
had gradually died away, toward daybreak, but a lowering sky seemed to
increase the gloom of the dreary landscape. Nor were the men, after a
night of unrest, any brighter than the aspect of surrounding nature. The
roads flooded by rain, were almost impassable; and the waters of the
Chickahominy, overflowing its banks, were encroaching upon the swamps.

About an hour before noon it was announced that a large body of the
rebels had been seen approaching, on the Richmond road. Picket-firing
commenced almost immediately, and was instantly followed by the shriek
of several shells from the enemy’s artillery, which came tearing through
the air, in the neighborhood of General Peck’s headquarters—proving that
the enemy was advancing on General Casey’s division.

The troops were, on the instant, summoned to arms. Every man at work on
the intrenchments was dispatched to his regiment; the artillery was
harnessed up, the batteries placed in position; and the One Hundred and
First Pennsylvania Volunteers, was sent down the road, to check the
advancing foe and to support the pickets.

Up to this moment it was supposed that nothing more was impending than
one of those sharp skirmishes in which the troops had so often engaged.
The Pennsylvania troops marched briskly onward, little imagining that
they were throwing themselves on the bayonets of an army of 16,000 men;
till, to their horror and consternation, as they emerged from the
forest, they found themselves face to face with an overwhelming force. A
volley of bullets swept, with devastating effect, upon their ranks
dealing death on every side, and scattering one-fifth of their number
dead or wounded upon the field. It was a moment in which flight was
valor; for in fifteen minutes they would inevitably have been
surrounded, and every man cut down or made a prisoner.

General McClellan was, at the time, severely criticised for that
sentence in his dispatch to Secretary Stanton which read, “Casey’s
division, which was the first line, gave way, unaccountably and
discreditably.” The retreat of this handful of men, after first losing
one-fifth of their number, does not reflect upon their heroism. General
Casey says in his official report,—

“In my humble opinion, from what I witnessed on the 31st, I am convinced
that the stubborn and desperate resistance of my division saved the army
on the right of the Chickahominy from a severe repulse, which might have
resulted in a disastrous defeat. The blood of the gallant dead would cry
to me from the ground on which they fell, fighting for their country,
had I not said what I have to vindicate them from the unmerited
aspersions which have been cast upon them.”

It is gratifying to be able to add that General McClellan subsequently
owned that he had been mistaken in this particular, and did justice to
those brave soldiers.

Five thousand men in an almost open field could do but little to repel
the advance of two divisions of the enemy, each numbering 16,000 men.
Onward the rebels marched, till within a few yards of Stuart’s battery,
when the brave artillerists delivered their last fire, before, at their
commander’s order, they retired. The Federals now retreated about a
quarter of a mile, toward their second line; and the rebels having
paused to secure the captured cannon, again advanced, still pouring in,
upon the retreating Union troops, volley after volley of bullets and
shells. But the latter maintained their ground for upwards of three
hours, without a single regiment arriving to their assistance. After a
short conflict, of awful fierceness, the rebels succeeded in taking the
redoubt; and General Casey’s devoted little band, fearfully mutilated,
exhausted and bleeding, retreated through General Couch’s troops drawn
up in line half a mile behind them; and thus sheltered, once more
reformed their wasted, broken ranks.

The rebels resumed their march on General Couch’s line, at four o’clock,
having halted a moment at the deserted camp.

General Couch having formed his line, already eight thousand strong, was
at this moment being reinforced by General Heintzelman’s corps of 16,000
men, with which he advanced to meet in front the combined forces of
Generals Hill and Longstreet, numbering together 32,000, and a division
of 16,000 under General Smith, which was marching upon his flank.

The ground was rather favorable than otherwise; a few slight
intrenchments had been hastily thrown up, and General Couch’s line was
formed to the north of the Williamsburg road. The design of the rebels
was to make their strongest assault upon General Couch’s right wing,
which intent, as soon as perceived, was partly frustrated by his sending
troops to strengthen the point of attack. Again the roar of battle
thundered forth upon the hot, heavy air; dense clouds of smoke shut out
the sky from friend and foe; the ground was literally red with blood,
and the field was covered with the dead, dying, and wounded. The whiz of
bullets and the appalling, horrible scream of shells kept up a shrill
accompaniment to the uninterrupted roar of cannon. General Peck, with
two Pennsylvania regiments, passed through an open space, swept with a
shower of balls, and poured in a destructive fire on the enemy. It was
impossible to resist the advance of the rebels, who greatly outnumbered
the Federals; but the courage displayed on both sides was equal.

The brave soldiers of the Union slowly retired, in good order,
stubbornly contesting every foot of ground they passed over. At about 5
o’clock they were joined by General Birney, with a brigade of General
Kearney’s division. General Sumner was on the other side of the
Chickahominy, encamped at New Bridge. He had, at 3 o’clock in the
afternoon, received orders to cross and march to the aid of the troops,
which were in imminent peril of being overwhelmed. But it required a
long time to cross the river, swollen to overflowing by recent rains;
and it was five miles to the scene of conflict. But, pressing through
rain and mud, with indefatigable energy they struggled forward, till the
heroes at Seven Pines were gladdened by the sight of them, and all along
the lines ran the shout, “It is General Sumner!”

Almost at the same moment the rebels were thrown into great confusion,
on seeing their Commander-in-Chief, General J. E. Johnston struck by a
fragment of shell, and hurled from his horse.

Taking advantage of a moment so disastrous to the rebels, General
Sumner’s men advanced on the double-quick. They had succeeded in
bringing up a battery, which was instantly planted; and they carried
real fighting guns, 12-pound howitzers. With these they poured in a
rapid and destructive fire upon the enemy. General Sumner, his gray hair
streaming on the wind, a picture to inspire heroism, reverence and
admiration, rode up and down the lines, shouting encouragement to his
brave soldiers. The rebels charged twice, well and bravely; and twice
they were repulsed. A third charge was feebly attempted, but overwhelmed
by the destruction dealt upon their ranks by the Union men, they broke,
turned, and fled wildly, leaving their dead and wounded on the field.
The Federals, bayonet in hand, and led by General Sumner, pursued the
routed foe, driving them as far as Fair Oaks Station.




                       THE BATTLE OF SEVEN PINES.
                             JUNE 1, 1862.


During the night all the Union artillery was brought safely through the
marshes and swamps; and was posted for duty, it being well understood
that the enemy would, on the following day, throw out all his remaining
force, to drive back the Federal troops, and compel them to cross the
Chickahominy. Throughout the night was heard the sound of axes, felling
trees to protect the rebels from the advance of their foes; and the
words of command from the rebel officers were distinctly heard by our
soldiers.

The attack was not made at so early an hour as had been anticipated by
our officers; it was six o’clock when the enemy first gave signs of
their intended movement, and our pickets were driven in. They halted in
our front and taunted our line to advance. General French, whose brigade
was in front, declined the challenge, and the rebels rushed forward. The
battle opened at once, furiously. The enemy fought rapidly and
skilfully, adopting tactics which General French construed into a feint
to draw him on. At intervals they suspended fire, appeared to be driven
back, but continued to send forward new forces—their capacity for
reinforcements, as on the previous day, appearing to be inexhaustible.
As upon Saturday, both sides fought with equal and determined bravery.
When the contest had lasted two hours and a half, with still increasing
fury, General Richardson ordered Howard’s brigade to the front; the
enemy also again reinforced, and the volume of his fire increased.
Meantime our batteries were shelling the forests furiously; and a
vigorous bayonet charge, by the Fifth New Hampshire, scattered the
enemy, who had appeared in a skirt of the woods, like dry leaves before
the autumn wind. General Howard, who had cheered on his brave men in the
thickest of the fray, was at length disabled, and carried to the rear;
his brother, Lieutenant Howard, also fell wounded; and Colonel Cross of
the Fifth New Hampshire took command. The enemy having begun to fall
back, Colonel Miller, of the Eighty-first Pennsylvania, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Masset, a talented young man, and a brave officer, of
the Sixty-first New York, were killed instantly. The Fifth New Hampshire
charged again. Colonel Cross at their head was wounded in the forehead
with a fragment of shell, but bravely resisted its effect till he was
ham-strung by a musket ball, when he allowed himself to be carried to
the rear. As he was borne away he was cheered by hearing a shout of
triumph that rent the air; and he knew that the Federals had won the
day. Colonel Parker then took command of the brigade, and fought till
the enemy were completely repulsed. The battle was at an end; the rebels
did not again appear that day, nor did they even venture to post their
pickets within view of the Federal line.

Major W. W. Cook, of the Fifth New Hampshire was disabled in the same
manner as his Colonel. All the officers engaged, both in the fight of
Sunday and of Saturday, bore themselves with unflinching bravery.
Sedgwick displayed a coolness and courage invaluable in keeping up the
spirits of his men; the firmness of Gorman filled the soldiers in his
command with enthusiasm, and the quick judgment of General Burns at a
most critical moment of the action, had a decidedly inspiriting effect
upon his troops. When the balls were flying around them like hail,
several horses and three battery teams stampeded, and for an instant the
whole line of battle seemed to waver; when General Burns, comprehending
the situation at a glance, called out with admirable coolness, “Steady,
men, steady!” The effect was like magic. The Zouaves uttered a long
loud, hearty series of yells that might have been heard at Richmond; and
before they had realized that they had even wavered, the entire lines
had dressed up compactly, and were dealing murderous discharges on the
enemy. Captain Sedgwick, Assistant Adjutant-General to General Sedgwick,
and Lieutenant Stone, his Aid-de-Camp; Captain G. H. Wicks, Assistant
Adjutant-General to General Burns; and Lieutenants Blakeney and Camblos
are entitled to honorable mention. Colonel Cochrane, Colonel Neill,
Colonel Sully, and Colonel Senter showed themselves to be brave soldiers
and efficient officers.

The loss of men on both sides was very great. Capt. Achnuff, of the One
Hundred and Sixth Pennsylvania, Capt. Marke, First California, Lieut.
Camblos and Gen. Burns, and Lieut. Donelson of the First California,
were wounded.

General McClellan was wherever duty called him; in the fight of Sunday
he was in the field, and rode along the entire battle line, greeted with
enthusiastic cheers from every mouth. In the battle of Sunday, Gen.
Pettigrew and Col. Champ Davis of South Carolina, and Col. Long of the
regular army, were taken prisoners.

On Sunday night, the gallant troops of the Union army again slept on the
battle-field; while around them lay the mangled, stiff, and gory dead,
with upturned, pallid faces, on which the heavens smiled down in mute
approval of the dauntless courage that had dared death and won the
victory in a noble cause!




                       THE BATTLE OF CROSS-KEYS.
                             JUNE 8, 1862.


At six o’clock on the morning of the 8th of June, the Virginia forces,
under General Fremont, commanding the mountain department in West
Virginia, left Harrisonburgh, and advanced about seven miles, attacking
the rebels near a place called Union Church. The advance was led by
General Cluseret, his brigade consisting of the Sixtieth Ohio and Eighth
Virginia, afterwards supported by the Garibaldi Guard. The battle
commenced at about nine o’clock, and was prosecuted with great fury on
both sides. The rebels, consisting of Stonewall Jackson’s command, had
the advantage of position.

General Fremont was early on the ground, and was often exposed to the
fire of the enemy. On one occasion, a shell from a rebel battery struck
the ground within a few feet of the spot on which he stood. The Union
line of battle was a mile and a half in length. General Schenck led the
right wing. His forces were disposed as follows: at his left was the
Eighty-second Ohio, Colonel Cantwell; next came the Fifty-fifth Ohio,
Colonel Lee; Seventy-third, Colonel Smith; Seventy-fifth, Colonel
McLean, while the Thirty-second Ohio, Colonel Ford, held the extreme
right. The centre, under the command of the intrepid Milroy, had the
Third Virginia, Lieutenant-Colonel Thompson commanding, on the left;
next the Fifth Virginia, Colonel Zeigler; the Second Virginia, Major J.
D. Owens commanding; while the Twenty-fifth Ohio, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, formed the right. Between Milroy’s right
and Schenck’s left lay the Sixtieth Ohio, Colonel Trimble, and Eighth
Virginia, Colonel Loeser, commanded by Colonel Cluseret, in addition to
the Garibaldi Guards, of Blenker’s division. General Stahl’s brigade,
consisting of the Eighth, Forty-first, and Forty-fifth New York, and
Twenty-seventh Pennsylvania, with the invincible band of Bucktails, that
survived the slaughter of Friday previous, formed the left. General
Bohlen’s brigade was to support Stahl, while the remainder of Blenker’s
division was a reserve.

The battle lasted until about three o’clock in the afternoon, when, by
the misinterpretation of an order, the left wing of the Union forces
fell back, exposing the centre, and necessitating a retrograde movement
along the whole line. The enemy, intent only upon getting off, made no
further advance; and the worn and wasted ranks of the patriots reposed
at night upon the field of combat. Early next morning the Union line of
battle was reformed, Schenck taking the centre, and Milroy the right,
and an advance was commenced, in the direction of Port Republic. As the
National forces approached this point, which is on the Shenandoah river,
a dense smoke was seen rising ahead, and it was soon found that the
rebels had retired across the river, and burned the only bridge by which
it was possible to pursue them. Thus did Stonewall Jackson, after a
successful raid up the Valley, slip through the fingers of the Union
commanders, and make good his escape—though not without severe loss. The
Union losses were upwards of six hundred in killed, wounded, and
missing. The men behaved with great gallantry in this fight. Generals
Milroy and Cluseret especially distinguished themselves.




                        THE SEVEN DAYS’ BATTLES.


                          BATTLE OF OAK GROVE.
                             JUNE 25, 1862.

Time passed on, days lengthening into weeks, and no decisive step was
taken, that is, no engagement of great moment with the enemy took place,
for circumstances rendered it impossible. The Chickahominy, already so
high as to render crossing it impracticable, was still further swollen
by heavy rains on the nights of June 3d, 4th and 7th, till finally it
flooded all the bottoms to the height of four or five feet, rendering
the country, for the time, impassable for either artillery or cavalry.
General McClellan meanwhile continued to urge upon the War Department at
Washington the necessity for reinforcing his army; and continued to push
on the construction of bridges across the river. It was his wish to
place the two wings of the army, separated only by the river, in the
most direct communication with each other. On the 10th and 11th June,
General McCall’s troops commenced landing at the White House. On the
25th, the bridges and intrenchments being at last completed, an advance
of the picket lines was ordered, preparatory to a general movement
forward. The advance was begun by Heintzelman’s corps, at about 9
o’clock on the morning of the 25th, the object in view being to gain
possession of a spot called Oak Grove, which had long been disputed
ground. The enemy was in strong force all along the line, and stubbornly
resisted the advance of the Union regiments, obliged at first to push
forward cautiously, and with great difficulty through the heavy swamps.
The rebel pickets were routed, and a brisk engagement opened with their
supports. The battle soon became general, and it was impossible to
distinguish any thing but smoke, and mounted officers dashing to and fro
along the line. It was as easy to distinguish the firing of the enemy
from our own, as it is to distinguish the sound of two voices from each
other: for they were armed with Harper’s Ferry muskets, we carried
Springfield and Enfield guns. The firing of our soldiers was sharp and
ringing, that of the enemy slow and dull; but on both sides heavy. In
this fight, General Sickles commanded in turn each regiment of his
brigade, encouraging his men, and leading, and inspiring them with his
own fiery ardor. The fire rapidly extended over Hooker’s entire line to
Hinks’s flanking regiment, ever increasing in intensity, as
reinforcements of the enemy joined those already engaged. The Union men
behaved splendidly. General Hooker’s division merited and obtained great
praise. At 5 o’clock the fighting was over; the enemy was entirely
driven from their camps in front of redoubt No. 3; and the brave
soldiers rested on their laurels, having achieved a dearly bought
victory.

Our loss was very heavy. The rebel loss was not so severe.


                        BATTLE OF GAINES’ MILL.
                             JUNE 26, 1862.

During the night information was received that Stonewall Jackson, having
returned from his raid down the Valley of the Shenandoah, was rapidly
moving down the peninsula between the Pamunkey and the Chickahominy with
the intention of attacking McClellan’s right flank. This alarming
intelligence put a stop, for a time, to any idea of an immediate advance
toward Richmond. Our right wing consisted of the divisions of McCall,
Morrell, and Sykes. At 12 o’clock on the morning of the 26th of June,
the approach of the enemy was perceived. The position of the Union
troops was a strong one; extending along the left bank of Beaver Dam
Creek, the left resting on the Chickahominy, and the right in thick
woods beyond the upper road from Mechanicsville to Coal Harbor.
Seymour’s brigade held the left of the line; and Reynolds’ the right;
the artillery occupied positions commanding the roads, and the open
ground across the creek.

At three o’clock in the afternoon the rebels advanced impetuously, but
were bravely resisted by General Reynolds; and after a severe struggle
forced back with heavy loss. A rapid artillery fire, with skirmishing,
was maintained along the front, while the enemy about two hours later
massed his troops for another effort, but was again repulsed with severe
slaughter, by General Seymour. At nine o’clock, p. m., the engagement
was at an end, with entire success to the Union arms, while the enemy
retired slowly and humbled by defeat.

During the night General Porter led a portion of the Union troops across
the Chickahominy, Seymour’s brigade covering the movement; and in the
darkness it was successfully accomplished. The enemy appeared in front
of our new line about noon of the 27th, at which time we were prepared
to receive him. In this engagement the rebels were two to one of the
Union army; their force numbered seventy thousand; and that of the
Federals thirty-five thousand. The loss of the latter under the
tremendous fire of the enemy was appalling. At three o’clock in the
afternoon the engagement had become so general and so severe that the
whole second line and all the reserves were moved forward to meet the
overwhelming number of the enemy, and to sustain the first line under
the desperate assaults on the front. Slocum’s division was brought into
action to guard the weak points of our line, the moment it arrived on
the field. On the left the rebels were repulsed with heavy loss; while
on the right Sykes’ regulars did signal service in repelling many severe
attacks. The position of the Union troops was becoming very critical;
and, most of them under arms for two days, and greatly exhausted, were
being severely harassed by the masses of fresh troops constantly brought
against them. To have the line pressed at any one point now, would have
been fatal; and it was absolutely necessary, General Porter being
required to hold his position till nightfall, to divide Slocum’s
division, and send even single regiments if no more could be spared, to
protect the points in the most danger from the enemy.

The peril of the army was hourly becoming more imminent.

At five o’clock the brigades of French and Meagher, Richardson’s
division, third corps, were ordered to the support of General Porter.

At six o’clock the enemy again attacked in great force, but failed to
break the unwavering line of Union soldiers.

At seven o’clock they rushed forward with increased fury, and finally
gained the woods held by Porter’s left. A general confusion followed,
with more determined assaults from the enemy, forcing Porter’s men from
the position they had so nobly held, to a hill in the rear overlooking
the bridge. It was now approaching night, and the hearts of the Union
troops were heavy with dire apprehension, when the French and Meagher
brigades appeared, sternly driving before them the stragglers who were
thronging in disorder toward the bridge. They advanced boldly to the
front, and by their steady bearing and their brave example so animated
the sinking troops that they rallied, reformed behind the welcome
reinforcement, and again advanced up the hill prepared to repulse any
attack of the enemy. But what had renewed their courage had filled the
rebels with dismay; having been many times in the course of the
engagement repulsed with severe slaughter, and now hearing the shouts of
the fresh troops, the enemy failed to follow up his advantage; and in
the gathering gloom of night the rescued regiments made good their
retreat, crossed the bridge in safety, and destroyed it behind them.

In this battle the rebels captured twenty-two guns, three of which were
lost by being run off the bridges in the final withdrawal. It is due to
the artillery to say that not until the last successful charge of the
rebels were the cannoneers driven from their pieces, or struck down, and
their guns captured. The batteries of Diedrich, Ranahan, and Grimm took
position in front of General Smith’s line and aided by the First
Connecticut artillery, with a battery of siege guns, drove back the
rebels in front of General Porter.

[Illustration: MAJOR-GENERAL W. T. SHERMAN.]


                          THE CHANGE OF BASE.

The weary hours of the sultry night following the battle of Gaines’ Mill
were heavy laden to the soldiers of the army of the Potomac.—While the
rear guard was taking positions to beat back the advance of the foe on
the next day, the main body of the army continued a retreat which every
man felt to be ignominious; and rolled backward, like a mighty stream
turned from its source, toward the James river.

On the evening of June 27th General McClellan assembled his corps
commanders at his headquarters, and informed them of the proposed change
in his base of operations, his reasons, his choice of route and method
of execution.

General Keyes was directed to move his corps across White Oak swamp, and
to seize strong positions on the opposite side, in order to cover the
passage of the troops and trains—a movement which he executed the
following morning.

General McClellan spent the day at Savage’s Station, directing the
withdrawal of the trains and supplies of the army. Orders were given to
load the wagons with all the ammunition, provisions, and necessary
baggage of officers and men that could be placed on them, and to destroy
all property which could not be transported with the army.

A proper number of surgeons and attendants, with a bountiful supply of
rations and medical stores were left with the sick and wounded who could
not be removed.

A herd of beef cattle numbering twenty-five hundred head was transferred
in safety to the James river, by the Chief Commissary, Colonel Clark.

The enemy opened on General Smiths’ division from Garnett’s Hill, from
the valley above, and from Gaines’ Hill on the opposite side of the
Chickahominy, while General Franklin was in the act of withdrawing his
command from Golding’s farm. A short time after, a Georgia regiment made
an attempt to carry the works about to be vacated, but were instantly
repulsed by the Twenty-third New Jersey and Forty-ninth Pennsylvania
Volunteers, on picket duty, aided by a section of Mott’s battery.

General Porter’s corps was moved across White Oak swamp, and was so
placed as to strengthen General Keyes’ right.

McCall’s division, on the night of the 28th, was conveyed across the
swamp to aid in covering the remaining trains and troops.

During the same night General Sumner withdrew his troops to a point on
the railroad near Savage’s Station; and Heintzelman and Smith took up
positions in his close vicinity. The divisions of Sedgwick and
Richardson were already there on the railroad facing Richmond; the first
line of Richardson’s division being held by General French, and the
second supported by General Caldwell.

General Slocum’s division of Franklin’s corps was ordered to Savage’s
Station, to be held in reserve.


             BATTLES OF ALLEN’S FARM AND SAVAGE’S STATION.

Early on the morning of Sunday, June 29, it was observed by the keen and
watchful eye of General Franklin that the enemy had reconstructed the
bridges across the Chickahominy, and were advancing in large force on
Savage’s Station. He instantly communicated the fact to General Sumner.

At 9 A. M. the enemy furiously attacked General Sedgwick’s right, but
was signally repulsed. They next attacked General Richardson on the
left, attempting to carry the position of Colonel Brooks. Hazzard’s
battery, afterwards replaced by Pettit’s, was served with disastrous
effect on the enemy. The Fifty-third Pennsylvania poured in a steady
fire on the enemy, compelling them to retreat in disorder. Three times
the enemy renewed the attack, and three times they were completely
repulsed.

At half past 12 A. M., General Sumner, having united his forces with
those of General Franklin, assumed command.

It was about eleven o’clock when the rebels first made their appearance,
and commenced their attack by throwing shells into General Sumner’s
lines. Orders had been given to Generals Sumner, Franklin, and
Heintzelman to hold their position until dark: the latter was ordered to
hold himself in readiness to retreat as soon as night fell. Sumner’s and
Franklin’s commands were drawn up in line of battle in a large open
field to the left of the railroad. General Brooks with his brigade held
the wood to the left of the field, bearing himself with true soldierly
heroism, and though wounded he retained his command. At 4 P. M., the
rebels attacked on the Williamsburg road, but were gallantly met by the
brigade of the brave General Burns, supported and reinforced by two
lines in reserve and by the New York Sixty-ninth, Hazzard’s and Pettit’s
batteries again doing most valuable service. The conflict continued to
rage with unabated fury till eight o’clock at night. The enemy deeming
their force irresistible, came dashing down now upon this portion of the
line, and then upon that, but were invariably repulsed at every point,
often with severe slaughter. When night closed upon the combatants the
Union soldiers remained unshaken at their posts, and the rebels were
driven from the field, with broken, disordered lines, from their
unsuccessful conflict.

Under cover of the darkness these indomitable men, after their hard
day’s fight, from which they had gained only the ability to retreat,
fell back, resuming their unsatisfactory march, and crossed the White
Oak Swamp in good marching order before the morning’s dawn. By the
morning of the 30th they had crossed White Oak Bridge and burnt the
bridge after them, General French, with his brigade acting as
rear-guard. The scene along the line of this precipitate, and apparently
unnecessary retreat beggars all description. Notwithstanding every
effort made by General McClellan, and his personal staff, the roads were
blocked with wagons, and the greatest difficulty was found in keeping
the trains in motion.

The following is an extract from General McClellan’s official report,
and gives in few words an accurate description of the state of affairs
in his army at this point:

“The engineer officers whom I had sent forward on the twenty-eighth to
reconnoitre the roads had neither returned nor sent me any reports or
guides. Generals Keyes and Porter had been delayed—one by losing the
road, and the other by repairing an old road—and had not been able to
send any information. We then knew of but one road for the movement of
the troops and our immense trains.

“It was, therefore, necessary to post the troops in advance of this road
as well as our limited knowledge of the ground permitted, so as to cover
the movement of the trains in the rear.

“I then examined the whole line from the swamp to the left, giving final
instructions for the posting of the troops and the obstructions of the
roads toward Richmond, and all corps commanders were directed to hold
their positions until the trains had passed, after which a more
concentrated position was to be taken up near James river.

“Our force was too small to occupy and hold the entire line from the
White Oak swamp to the river, exposed as it was to be taken in reverse
by a movement across the lower part of the swamp, or across the
Chickahominy below the swamp. Moreover, the troops were then greatly
exhausted and required rest in a more secure position.

“I extended my examinations of the country as far as Haxall’s, looking
at all the approaches to Malvern, which position I perceived to be the
key to our operations in this quarter, and was thus enabled to expedite
very considerably the passage of the trains, and to rectify the
positions of the troops.

“Every thing being then quiet, I sent aids to the different corps
commanders to inform them what I had done on the left, and to bring me
in formation of the condition of affairs on the right. I returned from
Malvern to Haxall’s, and having made arrangements for instant
communication from Malvern by signals, went on board of Captain
Rodgers’s gunboat, lying near, to confer with him in reference to the
condition of our supply vessels, and the state of things on the river.
It was his opinion that it would be necessary for the army to fall back
to a position below City Point, as the channel there was so near the
southern shore that it would not be possible to bring up the transports,
should the enemy occupy it. Harrison’s Landing was, in his opinion, the
nearest suitable point. Upon the termination of this interview I
returned to Malvern Hill, and remained there until shortly before
daylight.”


                        BATTLE OF NELSON’S FARM.
                             JUNE 30, 1862.

Up to this time the rebels had felt no doubt of their ability utterly to
destroy the Army of the Potomac, lying, as they supposed, at their
mercy. Greatly to their surprise and disgust they now awoke to the fact
that their prey was escaping them, and would soon be marshalled on the
banks of the James, safe under the protection of the Federal gunboats.
Maddened with rage and disappointment, they pursued hotly, and it soon
became evident that another battle was inevitable. On the morning of the
30th, General Heintzelman ordered the bridge at Brackett’s Ford to be
destroyed, and trees to be felled across that road and the Charles City
road. General Sumner had been ordered to take position at a place known
as Glendale, and sometimes as “Nelson’s Farm.” A line of battle was
formed, with Meade’s brigade on the right; Seymour’s on the left, while
Reynolds’ was held in reserve, commanded by Colonel S. G. Simmons of the
Fifth Pennsylvania. Randall’s regular battery was placed on the right;
Kernis’ and Cooper’s batteries opposite the centre, and Diedrich’s and
Kannahan’s batteries of the artillery reserve on the left—all in front
of the infantry line.

A little before one o’clock the rebels opened a fierce fire upon the
divisions of Smith and Richardson and Naglee’s brigade at White Oak
swamp bridge. Under cover of this fire, which continued throughout the
day, they sent an infantry force across the creek. The Federal
artillery, under Captain Ayers, was directed with deadly effect, but the
Union forces in return suffered great loss, especially Richardson’s
division. Hazzard’s battery was forced to retire, but not till it had
lost many gunners, and Captain Hazzard himself was mortally wounded.

At two o’clock a large force of rebels was reported advancing by the
Charles City road; and in half an hour afterward the attack was made on
General Slocum’s left, and the thunder of war heralded the enemy’s
advance as he pressed boldly on in the face of a heavy fire. The battle
raged without interruption for two hours; but at length the rebels were
compelled to fall back before the dreadful storm of death poured in upon
them by both artillery and infantry. Having formed a dense column, in
large force, comprising the divisions of Longstreet and Hill, the enemy
made a furious charge upon General McCall’s division, which was received
with a shower of canister that tore its way through their ranks, leaving
gaps on every side. They unhesitatingly closed up, and with desperate
fury rushed forward again, forcing the devoted band who had so bravely
withstood them, to fall back before their overwhelming numbers. There
was no running; the patriot troops retired slowly in good order, boldly
disputing the ground as they fell back. The rebels numbered three to one
of the Federals. It was now considerably past sundown, and the darkness
of night was rapidly succeeding twilight. Reinforcements from the
retreating line were sent back, to aid in presenting a successful
resistance to the advancing enemy, and our gallant heroes, weary, worn,
sleepless and hungry, awaited the next attack from the powerful and
exultant foe.

Generals Sedgwick, Sumner, and Hooker, added new laurels to their
well-won fame, in this battle. The latter being on McCall’s left, by
moving to his right, repulsed the rebels bravely, and with great
slaughter to their well-filled ranks. Generals Sumner and Sedgwick, in
the rear, drove back the enemy with artillery and infantry. The rebels
then vigorously renewed the attack on Kearney’s left, but were repulsed
with severe loss.

General Sumner says of this battle, that it was the most severe action
since the battle of Fair Oaks, and adds, “The enemy was routed at all
points, and driven from the field.”


                      THE BATTLE OF MALVERN HILL.
                             JULY 1, 1862.

Led by General Franklin, the Union troops, during the night succeeding
the battle of Nelson’s Farm, retreated toward a point called Malvern
Hill. The dawn of the morning of July 1st saw the army massed on this
hill, engaged in selecting positions for their batteries. The point
selected for resisting the further advance of the rebels on this day was
on the left and centre of our lines, resting on Malvern Hill; the right
meanwhile curving backward through a wooded country toward a point below
Haxall’s, on the James river. A heavy swell of pasture land, about a
mile and a half by three-fourths of a mile in area, was the spot called
Malvern Hill. It was well cleared of timber; and several intersecting
and converging roads ran across it. The ground sloped gradually toward
the north and east, leaving clear ranges for artillery in those
directions, and in front were many defensible ravines. It was evident
from the enemy’s position that the attack would come from the direction
of Richmond and White Oak swamp; and of necessity strike the left wing
of the Union troops. For this reason the lines at that point were
strengthened by massing the troops, and collecting the principal part of
the artillery.

The left of the lines was held by Porter’s corps, with the division of
Sykes on the left and Morrell on the right; the artillery of the
divisions and the artillery of the reserve being disposed in such a
manner that a concentrated fire of some sixty guns could, be brought to
bear on any point on the front or left.

After much praiseworthy exertion, Colonel Tyler had succeeded in getting
ten of his siege guns in position on the highest point of the hill. To
the right of General Porter was placed General Couch’s division, and
next to him came Kearney and Hooker; then Smith and Slocum, and further
to the right, the remainder of Keyes’ corps, extending backward in a
curved line that reached almost to the river. The flank was well
protected; a Pennsylvania corps was held in reserve. Along the entire
front the line was very strong; and by slashing the timber plentifully
and barricading the roads, the right was held as secure as possible.

The flotilla on James river, in command of Commodore Rogers, was so
placed that the gunboats protected the army’s flank, and commanded the
approach from Richmond.

It was about ten o’clock in the morning when the enemy made his first
appearance, attracting the attention of the Union troops by light
skirmishing and occasional artillery as far to the right as General
Hooker’s division. It was an hour of deep anxiety to the Union troops,
and the heart of every man beat eagerly and anxiously, but fearlessly,
when, at two o’clock in the afternoon a large body of rebels was seen
approaching directly in front of Heintzelman’s corps, but beyond the
reach of our guns. The preparations made at once to meet its advance
proved unnecessary, for it disappeared; and it was generally supposed
that it retired by the rear, and, later in the day, participated in the
attack made on our left.

About three o’clock the battle began in earnest; a heavy fire of
artillery was poured in on Kearney’s left and Couch’s division, which
was speedily followed up by a sharp attack of infantry on Couch’s front.
The heroic Unionists were prompt to answer, and a roar of artillery
replied to that of the enemy. The infantry of Couch’s division remained
lying on the ground till the advancing column of rebels was within short
musket range, and then, springing to their feet, sent a death-dealing
volley into their ranks, that broke the attacking force and drove them
in disorder back over their own ground. The Union army availed
themselves of the opportunity by following up the advantage; and they
pursued the enemy till the right of its line had advanced some seven or
eight hundred yards, and rested upon a thick clump of trees that gave
them a stronger and more effective position.

The whole line was now carefully surveyed during the lull of a few
minutes that followed, while the Union soldiers waited eagerly for the
next attack. The rebels now gathered their utmost strength to strike
their heaviest blow. At six o’clock they suddenly opened a destructive
fire upon Couch’s and Richardson’s divisions; and at the same time
followed column after column of infantry from the woods, charging
desperately, and evidently intending to take the field.

General McClellan’s report, in describing this part of the battle is as
follows: “Brigade after brigade, formed under cover of the woods,
started at a run to cross the open space and charge our batteries, but
the heavy fire of our guns, with the cool and steady volleys of our
infantry, in every case sent them reeling back to shelter, and covered
the ground with their dead and wounded. In several instances our
infantry withheld their fire until the attacking column, which rushed
through the storm of canister and shell from our artillery, had reached
within a few yards of our lines. They then poured in a single volley,
and dashed forward with the bayonet, capturing prisoners and colors, and
driving the routed columns in confusion from the field.”

The position of Porter and Couch was every moment becoming more
critical, as everything depended upon the successful resistance of what
was felt to be the enemy’s final assault. Sickles and Meagher were
ordered to withdraw their brigades, as soon as it was considered
prudent, and to reinforce the part of the line which was being so hardly
pressed. Certain regiments of Porter’s and Couch’s division had entirely
expended their ammunition, and their places were at once filled from the
Sickles and Meagher brigades; and batteries from the rear were pushed
forward to supply the place of those who were exhausted. The enemy was
slow to acknowledge himself beaten, and, until dark, persisted in
unwearied efforts to take the position so tenaciously held by the
patriots. Despite his vastly superior numbers, however, he was
continually repulsed as often as he attacked, till darkness ended the
battle of Malvern Hill, though artillery firing continued up to nine
o’clock.

The loss sustained by General McClellan’s army, in the course of those
bloody engagements that marked the retreat from the Chickahominy to
Harrison’s Landing was very heavy. McClellan himself computed the loss
at upwards of 15,000 men. The stubborn resistance and gallant courage of
the Union soldiers, at Malvern Hill, preserved the army from sad
discomfiture, if not destruction. The withdrawal to Harrison’s Landing
was, however, regarded with great disfavor by many Union officers, and
to the people of the North was the occasion of much criticism and
regret. Gloom succeeded cheerful hope, in the bosoms of many patriots,
at this juncture, and it was not until good news arrived from the west
and southwest, that confidence in the success of the Union arms was
again revived. The Army of the Potomac, meanwhile, took a short season
of rest, preparatory to new movements.




                        EVACUATION OF PENSACOLA.
                              MAY 9, 1862.


On the night of the 9th of May, the rebels, believing that an attack was
about to be made by the Union fleet, under Captain, now Commodore
Porter, set fire to the Pensacola Navy Yard, Fort McRea, the Naval
Hospital, Warrington, and Pensacola itself. General Arnold, divining
their destructive object, immediately opened fire from Fort Pickens, and
kept up a heavy bombardment, for five hours, thus preventing the rebels
from fulfilling their plan, which contemplated the destruction of the
entire town. A demand was then made for the surrender of Pensacola, and,
Mayor Bode complying, the Union forces took possession of the place,
capturing a quantity of valuable lumber, many thousand dollars’ worth of
oil, and rebel arms and equipments. The enemy, however, had succeeded in
destroying a good deal of property, and had then retired, about one
thousand strong, led by General Bragg, to a camp, five miles outside of
Mobile.

On the 12th of May, immediately following the occupation of this point,
President Lincoln issued a proclamation, announcing the ports of
Beaufort, Port Royal, and New Orleans, to be open to commerce under the
laws of the United States.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES ROUSSEAU. MEADE. GILLMORE. SLOCUM.
STONEMAN.]




      CAPTURE OF FORTS PILLOW AND RANDOLPH: OCCUPATION OF MEMPHIS.
                            JUNE 4–6, 1862.


During the time that Major-General McClellan was conducting his army in
its retreat towards the James river, much, that was of great moment to
the country, was taking place in other directions. The rebels had fled
from Corinth, leaving it in the possession of the Federal troops, under
General Halleck. Forts Pillow and Randolph now became an easy prey,
having been flanked, and, to a great degree, surrounded, by National
troops, and having already had a large portion of their garrisons
withdrawn, to aid General Beauregard in his unsuccessful defence of
Corinth. In this condition the rebels speedily decided that flight was
the only safe course left to them, and, on the 4th of June, having
previously destroyed every thing that could not be removed, they
evacuated the two forts.

All obstructions to the navigation of the river having been now removed,
the National fleet, on the morning after the Federals had taken
possession of the heights, descended the river to Memphis, and cast
anchor, about two miles above the city. The fleet consisted of the five
gunboats, Benson, Saint Louis, Carondelet, Cairo, and Louisville; and
the four rams, Lancaster, Monarch, Number Three, and Queen of the
West—the rams being under command of Colonel Charles Ellet, Jr. The
rebel gunboats had also assembled at that point, from above and below—to
dispute the further passage of the stream—making a formidable fleet,
which consisted of the iron-clads, Little Rebel, Jeff Thompson, Sumter,
Beauregard, Bragg, Price, Lovell, and Van Dorn. The rebel fleet was
under the command of Commodore E. Montgomery.

It was late in the evening when the Federal fleet anchored for the
night; and some of the most eager of the officers, seeing there were no
batteries to pass, were anxious to push on to Memphis at once, and were
clamorous in asking why they must remain simply within view of the
wished-for haven during the whole night.

But the prudence of Captain Davis (in command of the whole National
fleet) was amply justified, when the morning came. The whole rebel
fleet, under full head of steam, was then discovered by two Federal
vessels which were lying close to the shore. These two Union gunboats
had steamed cautiously down the river, to reconnoitre the enemy’s
position; and having been satisfied with regard to it, had, as
cautiously, but with all possible speed, steamed back again to rejoin
the fleet. The rebels having seen them, and perceived the haste they
made to return, supposed them fleeing in terror, and sent some shots
after them, which passed harmlessly, falling into the water beyond.
Captain Davis lost no time in preparing his advance to meet the foe. He
immediately signalled all his gunboats. In such a case as this
transports and mortar-boats were utterly useless. The rams, ready, of
course, to render all possible assistance, constituted an independent
fleet; and were, therefore, left solely to the command of Colonel Ellet,
who was in no way subject to orders from Captain Davis, but was required
to report himself only to the Navy Department.

Then began one of the most exciting as well as fearful fights that can
be witnessed in warfare. Majestically the Union and the rebel fleets
approached in line of battle. When within a mile of each other, the
combatants opened fire; and for an hour, the thunder of cannon, the
flash of fire, and clouds of smoke filled the air. Each moment the two
fleets approached nearer and nearer, till, in a brief time they were but
a few hundred yards apart, while broadside after broadside, following in
rapid succession, was poured in from the black-mouthed cannon upon
either side. The combat had begun at a very early hour of the morning,
and while it continued to rage the sun of a glorious day in June broke
slowly through the crimson splendor of the eastern sky, and looked
warmly down upon a scene, the like of which had long been too familiar
to his gaze.

The river, like a sheet of molten silver, lay smiling beneath the summer
sky, placidly reflecting its hues and colors and changes, while the
sweet morning air rapidly grew thick, dense, and sulphurous with the
smoke that hung like a great dark cloud, growing darker and darker, and
shutting out the sun.

An incessant roar of cannon, with flash and smoke, followed in rapid
succession, and with deafening effect, while the shot and shell that
rattled and clattered against the armed ships’ sides rebounded again,
and breaking the face of the smooth river sank beneath its quiet waters.

The guns had long since awakened the people of the city, who now crowded
in a vast throng down to the edge of the bluffs, upon which Memphis is
built. The levee was literally swarming, and black with human beings,
straining their sight to peer through the dense overhanging clouds of
smoke that was shutting the combatants out of view.

A momentary lull now occurred in the fierce thunder of the battle.
Intense anxiety was felt, on both sides, the Union men being hopeful in
the strength of their own heroism, as they always were. In this case
even from the first, they had been encouraged, by seeing the rebel
gunboats, gradually, and almost imperceptibly, fall back, as the Union
vessels closely pressed upon them. Suddenly, a strange looking craft
steamed around a bend in the river, and with extraordinary speed came up
to the assistance of the Union gunboats. Soon another similar looking
vessel followed, and as the rebels caught sight of them, alarm and
surprise seem to paralyze their efforts. For a moment they hesitated.
Then turning slowly they began to fall back on the current of the river.
Onward, with almost lightning-like rapidity, steamed the Monarch and the
Queen of the West. Their gallant commanders had needed no stronger
summons than the booming of the cannon to bring them into the heart of
the combat. With extraordinary speed the Queen of the West plunged
between the National gunboats, and having previously selected her
victim, rushed into the midst of the rebel rams, and drove furiously
upon the Beauregard. The pilot of the Beauregard adroitly avoided the
coming foe, swung round, and so escaped the collision. But the Queen,
determined not to lose the power she had crowded on for the destruction
of the Beauregard, plunged forward upon the rebel ram Price, which
received the advance with a well-directed fire. But the apparently
invulnerable Union vessel, which shook shot and shell from her armed
sides as though they had been drops of water, struck her opponent
amidships with such a crushing, fatal blow as immediately stove in the
Price’s wheel-house, splintered her ribs of iron and oak, like glass,
and crushed her side. All was thus over with the Price, which, barely
able to reach the margin of the shore, sunk beneath the waves, a
complete wreck. Again the Queen of the West challenged the Beauregard;
and, head to head, these tremendous iron-clads drove furiously against
each other. Again the rebel avoided the death-stroke, and avenged
himself by a heavy blow against the Queen’s side, which stove in a
gaping hole, that speedily disabled the brave ship for further contest.
But, scorning to draw away, the dismantled Queen still held her place,
to view the combat, and to watch the avenger of her injuries. She had
not long to wait. The Monarch, furious at the disaster of her consort,
plunged directly into the Beauregard, and stove in the rebel’s bows. The
rushing flood of the mighty river poured in; and, in another moment, the
crushed vessel sank beneath the waters of the Mississippi.

In the mean time the gunboat Benton had dealt destruction upon the rebel
vessel Lovell: as the wreck settled down, the waters opened to receive
their prey, and then rolled calmly over the spot where it had
disappeared forever. Many of the wretched crew sank in the wreck; some
fifty or more, wounded and scalded, plunged into the river; and a few of
them were rescued by boats sent by the Union flotilla to their relief,
as they struggled in the waters. The greater number of the unfortunate
beings were swept by the rapid current to the same watery grave which
had engulfed so many of their fellows. One after another the enemy’s
boats were crippled. The Jeff. Thompson was forced to run ashore; and
her crew escaping over her bows disappeared in the woods. Hardly had
they escaped, when a shell was thrown on board, and exploding, set the
ship on fire. For the wounded there was no escape; and they writhed in
maddening agony, till a spark at length reached the magazine, and the
ship, with a terrific explosion, was blown into innumerable fragments.
The Bragg and the Sumter were also forced ashore, crippled and disabled.
Their crews escaped into the woods. Of all the rebel fleet the Van Dorn
alone escaped, being so swift in her speed down the river, that the
fastest runners could not overtake her and so relinquished the hopeless
pursuit. The Union fleet now came to anchor in front of the city of
Memphis, and sent in a demand for its surrender. The city, having no
means of defense, was at once occupied by the Federal troops.

Immediately upon the surrender of the city, the stars and stripes were
placed over the post-office by order of Colonel Ellet.

Colonel G. N. Fitch was appointed Provost-marshal of the city; and the
Mayor showed his natural good sense by cooperating with him in every way
to maintain peace and good order.

The only loss to the Union fleet, in this fierce naval encounter, was
the injury to the Queen of the West, and a wound to her brave commander,
Colonel Ellet. This wound, at the time it was received, had not
prevented Colonel Ellet from continuing at his duties, and it was hoped
that it would prove slight; but it grew more and more serious until it
resulted in the death of one of the most brilliant and heroic men—to
whom the nation owes the capture of the city of Memphis. Colonel Ellet
died at Cairo, on the 21st of June, 1862.

Memphis, of course, became one of the most important Union posts on the
Mississippi river.


            NEW COMBINATIONS. BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN, VA.
                            AUGUST 7, 1862.

On the 23rd of July, 1862, Major-General H. W. Halleck arrived at
Washington, whither he had been summoned from the west, to assume the
chief command of all the armies of the United States. It was felt by the
government that there ought now to be a military head of affairs.
McClellan was still on the James river. On assuming command, General
Halleck visited General McClellan at Harrison’s Landing, and took
counsel with him, as to future movements. But the respective plans of
the two generals did not coincide; and, of course, the policy of General
Halleck prevailed. McClellan wished for reinforcements, and desired once
more to advance against Richmond, by way of the Peninsula. General
Halleck, however, ordered him to evacuate the Peninsula, and join his
forces to those of the Army of Virginia. The latter had, meantime, been
formed, by the consolidation of the forces under Banks, McDowell, and
Fremont, its command being intrusted to General Pope. This officer took
the field on the 27th of July, being charged to protect the city of
Washington, guard the valley of the Shenandoah against further rebel
raids, and, by bold advances against Richmond from the north, to
distract the attention of the foe from the projected movement of
McClellan’s forces, from Harrison’s Landing to Acquia Creek. The Army of
Virginia consisted, at this time, of twenty-eight thousand men, and was
stationed in the vicinity of Culpepper and Fredericksburg, on the
northern bank of the Rapidan river.

It was the 7th of August when General Pope learned that the rebels were
crossing the Rapidan, in great force. Those of his troops which had been
dispersed for the sake of observation, received orders to rally
immediately at Culpepper. Crawford’s brigade of Banks’s corps was,
during the forenoon of the next day, dispatched towards Cedar Mountain,
in order that it might, so far as possible, retard the movements of the
enemy. General Banks, on the evening of the 8th, had arrived from Hazel
river; and early on Saturday morning he was sent forward with his corps
of seven thousand men to join General Crawford.

The rebels had already, on Thursday, the 7th of August, stationed
themselves on an eminence near Culpepper Court House, called Cedar
Mountain; having crossed the Rapidan under command of General Stonewall
Jackson. General Sigel, by forced marches, was hastening to the support
of General Banks.

About five o’clock in the afternoon the rebels assailed General Banks
with a destructive fire of both artillery and infantry. General
Crawford’s brigade was conspicuous in the battle. It consisted of the
Tenth Maine, Twenty-eighth New York, Forty-sixth Pennsylvania, and Fifth
Connecticut. The enemy’s batteries were stationed on Cedar Mountain,
considerably above the positions occupied by the Union troops. The two
forces were about a mile from each other: and the battle was waged by
artillery alone. The rebels rapidly increased the number of their
batteries, and concentrated a fire of terrible severity upon the Union
troops.

At last, at six o’clock, the order was given to charge, and the troops
sprang forward, at the full run, with bayonets ready for a desperate
charge. Before they had proceeded far the enemy opened a most
destructive fire upon them, from his batteries. A wake of the dead and
the wounded was left in their track as they pressed heroically forward
under the terrific fire of the rebels. But at length retreat became
inevitable, and the brave patriots reluctantly retired.

Night terminated a most unequal conflict. General Pope’s official
account gave the number of General Banks’ troops at seven thousand;
while the rebel accounts stated that the enemy on this occasion were
fifteen thousand strong. Both parties claimed the victory; but assuredly
it did not belong to the Union troops, though they might well feel
satisfied with their own conduct. They had held at bay a force
outnumbering their own two to one.

Generals Banks, Pope, and Sigel held a conference at about midnight.
They had selected for the night bivouac a hill which overlooked the
battle-field. Suddenly, while they conferred as to their future
movements, the party were put to a flight by an unexpected shower of
bullets from some rebel pickets, who had, unawares, crept quite near
them.

Sunday morning dawned upon the two armies, and saw each one in the same
position which it had occupied on the previous night; but both the Union
and rebel army had suffered too severely to renew the fight immediately.
Monday was a melancholy day; and was spent in the sad duty of bringing
in the dead and wounded. The rebels were slowly retreating, and left
many of their dead upon the field. They were pursued, as far as the
banks of the Rapidan, by General Buford with a column of cavalry. The
National loss on Saturday was fifteen hundred; that of the rebels was
much less.

Dispatches of General Lee had been captured by the Federals, and it was
ascertained by these documents that the rebel general proposed to
destroy General Pope’s small army before he could get reinforcements;
and the great strength of Lee’s army, as compared with that of the
Union, was indeed appalling. Already that immense army was crossing the
Rapidan, and by the 18th of August its whole line confronted the forces
under General Pope.

General Pope was obliged to retreat as far as the Rappahannock, where
his army took a position beyond the north fork of the river.

The enemy continued to advance, and on the morning of the 20th, drove in
the Union pickets and made an effort to cross the river at Kelly’s Ford.
It was of the greatest importance to General Pope to retain
communication with Fredericksburg, for by that way he was eagerly
looking for reinforcements; and, therefore, his army bravely resisted
the efforts of the rebels to cross the river, keeping up the resistance
for two days. But the rebels slowly began to gain their object; and
ascending the river, endeavored to turn the right of the Union army
under General Sigel. At Sulphur Springs, they effected a crossing. The
position of the Union army at this time was very perilous. General Sigel
had orders to resist the rebels at every point below Sulphur Springs,
and was at the same time expected to extend his line toward Warrenton.
General Lee sent a large detachment of his men up the river, keeping the
great ranks of the rebel army in front of General Pope’s line.

There remained one of three things for General Pope to do; to retire by
Fredericksburg, and thus lose direct communication with Washington; to
abandon the line of the Rappahannock, by falling back on Warrenton; or
to bring his whole force to bear upon the rebel flank and rear, then
marching up the river. He chose to fight. The attack was made on the
23rd, in the morning, after a heavy rain, which had raised the
Rappahannock several feet, carrying away the bridges, and rendering the
fords impassable. General Sigel was ordered to attack the rebels at
Sulphur Springs; and he did so, driving them back over the river. They
destroyed the bridges behind them. He then moved down to Waterloo
Bridge, whence General Pope’s line extended to Warrenton.

Further advances of the enemy were perceived on the afternoon of this
day. A large force of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, belonging to
Stonewall Jackson’s command, were seen in the valley between Blue Ridge
and Bull Run mountains, steadily marching toward Rectortown. General
Pope now abandoned his line of communication with Fredericksburg, and
made no attempt to oppose the rebels crossing at the Rappahannock
Station.

General Pope, however, deserves great praise for having, during eight
days, resisted this advance of an overwhelmingly large army, But finding
it impossible to withstand it on that line any longer, he chose a new
position, well adapted for defence, extending his army from Warrenton to
Gainesville.

Reinforcements for General Pope’s army had by this time arrived, so that
his numbers were increased to fifty-five thousand. But the rebel army
numbered one hundred thousand. Day after day, for about a week, raids,
skirmishes, battles, surprises, marches and counter-marches rapidly
followed each other; and the rebels succeeded in seizing Manassas
Junction, where they captured a large amount of stores.

A junction was now effected by the strong forces of the rebel Generals
Jackson and Longstreet, at a point east of the Bull Run mountains.

Just before this junction General Pope had attacked Jackson at Manassas;
and the engagement was a very fierce one. The conflict raged
desperately, and it was difficult to decide which side would win the
day; but after a long and deadly fight the patriots were beaten back
towards Gainesville. The rebel loss in this battle was very severe—more
so than that of the Union army: but the exact numbers cannot be stated,
for no official report of the disasters was allowed to be published. The
National troops lost six thousand men. During this time General Halleck
had sent many dispatches to General McClellan ordering reinforcements to
be sent to General Pope: which orders could not, at first, be obeyed,
for the reason that General McClellan’s troops, after their long
fighting during the retreat, were not in a suitable condition to go into
battle.

General McClellan, however, used all possible diligence in sending on
reinforcements, and telegraphed General Halleck on the morning of the
29th, “Franklin’s corps is in motion; started about six o’clock, A. M. I
can give him but two squadrons of cavalry. I should not have moved him
but for your pressing orders of last night.”

Quick dispatches passed between General Halleck and General McClellan
till the 30th; by which it appeared clearly that General McClellan’s
army was in no condition to send reinforcements to the aid of General
Pope; and that he deserved neither the accusations of tardiness,
cowardice, or treason, which were hurled against him. On the 29th and
30th the main body of the rebel army, under General Lee, was pressing
forward through the mountains, elated with what they claimed as
victories, strengthened by strong supports under Longstreet, and
confident that they were pursuing a resistless march for the invasion of
the North. And they had good right to feel elated; for the men who
pushed forward, while they were poorly fed, half-starved, scantily
clothed, with bare feet, torn and bleeding, were not made of stuff to
anticipate defeat.

The corps of Generals Sumner and Franklin had now arrived to the
assistance of General Pope, who could not refrain from bitter complaints
that they had not reached him sooner; but he was prompt in preparations
to resist the enemy’s advance upon Washington.

The rebel army rapidly gathered all its force before the forces of
General Pope. The centre was commanded by Colonel Lee; the right by
Longstreet; and the left by Jackson. The Union troops spread out in a
line that confronted the enemy; the Union batteries crowned the hill
which they had occupied in the disastrous battle of Bull Run. The more
advanced portion of the line at Grovetown was composed of the corps of
Generals Porter, Sigel, and Reno; General Heintzelman held the right,
and General McDowell the left.

Already the pickets of the combatants, so close as to almost blend with
each other, had engaged in a brisk skirmish; but this was lost sight of
in the destructive, murderous fire of artillery which, from opposite
heights, hurled forward missiles dealing swift death upon the infantry
alike of patriots and rebels.

The Union forces on both right and left advanced in small numbers, at
about one o’clock, to dislodge the enemy’s sharpshooters, who were
gradually forced to fall back; but at the same time the Federal army was
driven back by the enemy’s artillery. Porter, who supported King’s
division, was ordered to advance by the road, and attack the enemy on
the left. He took a position which covered the front of Reno and
Sigel—the latter being near the centre, and next to Heintzelman.
Rickett’s division was detached from McDowell’s corps to aid in the
movement of General Porter, but when the rebel column pressed upon the
Union left he was speedily returned to his former position.

Porter advanced upon the enemy, who was behind breast works, at about
four o’clock, and a furious fire from the rebels was immediately opened
upon him. Pressing forward till they came within musket range, they
fought fifteen minutes with the utmost desperation. A second and third
line advanced from the woods, endeavoring with all their strength to
press back the enemy, but the efforts of the patriots proved
ineffectual. The rebels were plainly getting the advantage, and as the
smoke from the continuous firing died away, the Union soldiers in ever
increasing numbers could be seen scattering away toward the woods. Sigel
received the men of Porter’s repulsed columns, and they were reformed in
the rear. It was about five o’clock, and the rebels were exultantly
advancing along the whole line. Jackson, notwithstanding he had suffered
much from Porter’s advance, came down heavily on Sigel’s left. Milroy’s
brigade received him bravely, and he was boldly repulsed. Supports were
being continually pushed forward to the assistance of both sides, and
the battle raged furiously. But the rebels continued to gain the
advantage, and pressed forward in concentrated masses. The Federals were
mowed down as grass before the scythe: but they still dealt dreadful
destruction upon the enemy, till they were finally compelled to retreat,
which they did slowly and in good order.

It was eight o’clock before the guns ceased to thunder forth from their
fearful mouths, but the groans of the wounded and dying still continued,
and made the air alive with a noise far more terrible than the thunder
of war.

It was a most complete victory to the rebels, and a bloody battle to
all. The loss on both sides was very heavy; but that of the Union much
greater than the enemy.

Shortly after midnight the whole Federal army had crossed Bull Run. No
time was lost in posting batteries to command the bridge; and the rear
guard bivouacked till daylight at a point two miles before reaching
Centreville. Jackson at the same time led his troops to the north of
Centreville, endeavoring to turn the Federals’ right, that their
connection with Washington might thus be cut off. General Pope,
anticipating such a movement, had drawn back his troops to Germantown,
where, on September 1st, he fought a sharp engagement with the rebels,
fiercely repulsing them. General Kearney was repelled in this
engagement. As the darkness gathered around the combatants, he rode
forward to reconnoitre, and passing the Union pickets, approached so
close to the enemy that a rifleman’s bullet pierced his body, and he
fell to the earth, dead. Here, also, fell Colonel George W. Pratt, of
New York, while leading his regiment of Ulster county boys in its first
charge. A more accomplished mind, or braver spirit, never yet was given
to a country.

The Army of Virginia was ordered to withdraw to Alexandria on the 2nd of
September, a movement which made it necessary for General Burnside to
evacuate Fredericksburg.

Falmouth Station, containing large quantities of commissary stores, was
destroyed. Three bridges across the Rappahannock met a similar fate; and
Acquia Creek was shortly afterward abandoned, when the forces removed to
Alexandria.

At Alexandria, also, were concentrated the shattered divisions of the
splendid Army of the Potomac, awaiting the arrival of Pope’s Army of
Virginia.




                        MOVEMENTS OF M’CLELLAN.


On the 3rd of August, General Halleck issued an order to General
McClellan, directing him to remove his army from Harrison’s Landing to
Acquia creek. This order was received by McClellan on the 4th inst., and
though protesting against this change of plan as impolitic and
sacrificial, that officer took immediate measures to obey the unwelcome
command. To retire under the eyes of a vigilant foe, was not, however,
either a safe or an easy task; and it was not until the 14th of August
that the general movement of the Army of the Potomac commenced. The
occasion was, to the last degree, critical. Lee, as we have seen, had
been imperiling the Army of Virginia, under Pope, since the 7th of
August. Step by step that commander had yielded ground. The Capital of
the Republic was considered to be in jeopardy. Party feeling ran high.
Congress was divided. General Pope, on assuming command had issued a
very spirited address to his soldiers, giving them the assurance of
certain victory, and reflecting, with unmistakable sarcasm, upon
McClellan’s campaign. Then came the discomfiture of Pope, which, of
course, gave assurance to the partisans of McClellan. The tardiness of
the latter in reaching Acquia creek, and reinforcing the army of Pope,
was, in some quarters, confidently ascribed to a desire for that
general’s defeat. Danger and difficulty of transportation were in some
measure the causes of this tardiness. The movement which commenced at
Harrison’s Landing on the 14th of August, continued during ten days. On
the 24th inst., McClellan’s headquarters were established at Acquia
creek. From that point he held frequent communication with General
Halleck at Washington, and thence, also, he detached the corps of
Generals Franklin and Sumner to cooperate with General Pope—the latter
receiving these reinforcements on the 30th of August. At this juncture,
McClellan was detached from the remains of his army, and transferred to
the command of the defences of Washington. He arrived at the Capital on
the 1st of September. On the following day, the Army of Virginia, led by
Pope, was ordered to fall back upon the defences of Washington. This it
did, closely pursued by the bold and reckless enemy. The rebels
disappeared, however, on the following day, and it soon became evident
that they were operating in another direction,—that, in fact, they were
making up towards Leesburgh, on the south side of the Potomac. On the
7th of September, General Pope having been relieved of his command,
General McClellan left Washington, leading an army to oppose whatever
movement against that city might be intended by the rebel General Lee.
His advance was made along the north bank of the Potomac, his left wing
resting upon that river, his right upon the Baltimore and Ohio railroad.
General Banks, meanwhile, was left in command of the defences around
Washington. On the 8th, the rebels, who had crossed the Potomac into
Maryland, were in the vicinity of Frederick, the main body being in
front of McClellan’s advancing forces. Skirmishes now became frequent;
but it was not till the 14th of September, that any serious collision
occurred. That day, however, witnessed the desperate and important.




                     BATTLE OF SOUTH MOUNTAIN, MD.
                          SEPTEMBER 14, 1862.


At the point known as Turner’s Gap, the South mountain is about one
thousand feet in height, its general direction being from northeast to
southwest. At a depression of about four hundred feet in depth the
national road from Frederick to Hagerstown crosses the South mountain at
right angles, through Turner’s Gap. On the north side of this road, the
mountain is divided into two crests or ridges by a narrow valley, which
is quite deep at the pass, but becomes only a slight depression at about
a mile to the north. There are two country roads, overlooking the
principal road, the one on the right, the other on the left; the latter
is known as the old Sharpsburgh road, and is nearly parallel to the
principal road, and about a half mile distant from it. When it reaches
the crest of the mountain it bends off to the left. The other road,
which is called the “Hagerstown road” passes up a ravine in the
mountains about a mile from the direct road, and heading toward the left
along the first crest, enters the turnpike near the summit of the pass.
There it was that General McClellan’s army encountered the enemy, and
contested the pass called Turner’s gap, where the rebels in very strong
force resisted them bravely. The following is General McClellan’s
account of his army’s position, when about to fight the battle of South
mountain.

On the night of the 13th the positions of the different corps were as
follows:

Reno’s corps at Middletown, except Rodman’s division at Frederick,
Hooker’s corps on the Monocacy, two miles from Frederick. Sumner’s corps
near Frederick. Banks’ corps near Frederick. Sykes’s division near
Frederick. Franklin’s corps at Buckeystown. Couch’s division at
Licksville.

The orders from headquarters for the march on the 14th were as follows:

Thirteenth, half past eleven, P. M.—Hooker to march at daylight to
Middletown. Sykes to move at six, A. M. after Hooker, on the Middletown
and Hagerstown road.

Fourteenth, one, A. M.—Artillery reserve to follow Sykes, closely.

Thirteenth, forty-five minutes past eight, P. M.—Turner to move at
seven, A. M.

Fourteenth, nine, A. M.—Sumner ordered to take the Shookstown road to
Middletown.

Thirteenth, forty-five minutes past six, P. M.—Couch ordered to move to
Jefferson with his whole division.

On the fourteenth, General Pleasanton continued his reconnoissance.
Gibson’s battery and afterward Benjamin’s battery (of Reno’s corps) were
placed on high ground to the left of the turnpike, and obtained a direct
fire on the enemy’s position in the gap.

General Cox’s division, which had been ordered up to support General
Pleasanton, left its bivouac, near Middletown, at six, A. M. The First
brigade reached the scene of action about nine, A. M. and was sent up
the old Sharpsburgh road, by General Pleasanton, to feel the enemy and
ascertain if he held the crest on that side in strong force. This was
soon found to be the case; and General Cox having arrived with the other
brigade, and information having been received from General Reno that the
column would be supported by the whole corps, the division was ordered
to assault the position. Two twenty-pounder Parrotts of Simmons’ battery
and two sections of McMullen’s battery were left in the rear in position
near the turnpike, where they did good service during the day against
the enemy’s batteries in the gap. Colonel Scammon’s brigade was
deployed, and, well covered by skirmishers, moved up the slope to the
left of the road with the object of turning the enemy’s right, if
possible. It succeeded in gaining the crest and establishing itself
there, in spite of the vigorous efforts of the enemy, who was posted
behind stone walls and in the edges of timber, and the fire of a battery
which poured in canister and case-shot on the regiment on the right of
the brigade. Colonel Crooke’s brigade marched in columns at supporting
distance. A section of McMullan’s battery, under Lieutenant Croome,
(killed while serving one of his guns,) was moved up with great
difficulty, and opened with canister at a very short range on the
enemy’s infantry, by whom (after having done considerable execution) it
was soon silenced and forced to withdraw.

One regiment of Crooke’s brigade was now deployed on Scammon’s left, and
the other two in his rear, and they several times entered the first line
and relieved the regiments in front of them when hard pressed. A section
of Sumner’s battery was brought up and placed in the open space in the
woods, where it did good service during the rest of the day.

The rebels made several ineffectual attempts to retake the crest,
advancing with great boldness, but were on each occasion completely
repulsed. Pretty hot fighting had now been going on for about six
hours—the battle having began at six o’clock in the morning. About noon,
a lull occurred in the contest, lasting nearly two hours; during which
the rebels had withdrawn their batteries considerably to the right, and
formed columns on both the Union army’s flanks; while the rest of the
Union forces were coming up.

General Wilcox’s division was the first to arrive, and took position on
the right, having, however, sent one regiment to the extreme left to
assist that point against the rebels, who were moving against it.

The division of General Sturgis supported General Wilcox; that of
General Rodman was divided, the brigade of Colonel Fairchild being
posted on the extreme left; and that of Colonel Hanlan (under General
Rodman’s own supervision), on the right.

The enemy continued to make strong efforts to regain the crest;
attacking, chiefly, the right of the Union column under General Cox.
This division was exposed to a fire directly in front, and also to the
rebel batteries on the other side, through which runs the Hagerstown
main road. At four o’clock all the reinforcements were in position, and
the order was given to either silence or take the rebel batteries, by
advancing the whole line upon them. The advance was made with loud
shouts and cheers, and the enemy’s desperate resistance was met with
fierce assaults on the part of the Federals. The rebels charged on the
advancing lines with yells of rage, but meeting such determination from
the opposing ranks, they retreated, and fell back in wild confusion.

Wilson’s division suffered the greatest loss; the General gives the
highest praise to the conduct of the Seventeenth Michigan in this
advance. That regiment had been organized less than a month; but every
man met the enemy like a veteran warrior. The Forty-fifth Pennsylvania
also signalized themselves by their bravery in the same noble charge.

The batteries across the gap still kept up a constant shower of shot and
shell upon the Union lines.

General Sturgis’ division, at about twilight, was moved forward to the
front of General Wilcox’s position; and about dark the enemy made a
sudden, sharp attack upon it; but was almost instantly driven back.
Again, at seven o’clock, the rebels made another effort to regain their
lost ground; and for an hour sharp firing was kept up between the two
sides. They were finally repulsed, and retreated under cover of the
night.

In this engagement Major-General Reno was killed, and General Cox was
placed in command. In General Reno, the country lost one of its very
best general officers. In recording the sad occurrence, General
McClellan says, “He was a skillful soldier, and a brave and honest man.”

The firing ceased entirely about ten o’clock, while the troops slept on
their arms, ready to renew the fight when the morning of another day
should dawn upon the battle-field. During the night the enemy retired
from the front of the Union army, leaving their dead strewn over the
field, and abandoning the wounded to their fate.

The right of the column had been actively engaged under General Hooker,
while these operations were going forward on the left. Hooker’s corps
left the Monocacy early in the morning, and at one o’clock reached the
Catoctin creek. As it approached the battle-ground, the greatest
enthusiasm was manifested for its gallant commander. General Cox, in his
report, gives the following list of his casualties in this well-fought
and bravely-won battle; and bestows merited commendation on both
officers and men:

“Early in the engagement Lieutenant-Colonel R. B. Hayes, commanding the
Twenty-third Ohio, was severely wounded in the arm whilst leading his
regiment forward. He refused to leave the field for some time, however,
till weakness from loss of blood compelled him. Major E. M. Carey of the
Twelfth Ohio, was shot through the thigh late in the action, in which he
had greatly distinguished himself by his gallantry and cool courage.
Captains Skiles and Hunter, and Lieutenants Hood, Smith, Naughton and
Ritter of the Twenty-third Ohio, and Captains Ligget and Wilson of the
Twelfth Ohio, were also wounded in the engagement.

“Lieutenant Croome, commanding a section of McMullen’s battery, was
killed whilst serving a piece in the place of the gunner who had been
killed.

“In the Kanawha division the casualties were five hundred and
twenty-eight, of which one hundred and six were killed, three hundred
and thirty-six wounded, and eighty-six missing, of all of which a full
list will be immediately forwarded.

“I take pleasure in calling attention to the gallantry and efficiency
displayed in the action by Colonels Scammon and Crooks, commanding the
brigades of the division. The manner in which their commands were
handled reflected great credit on them, and entitles them to the highest
praise. I beg leave, also, to mention my indebtedness to Captain E. P.
Fitch, Captain G. M. Barcom, and Lieutenants J. W. Conine, and S. L.
Christie, of my personal staff, for the devotion and courage displayed
by them in the laborious and hazardous duties of the day; also to
Brigade-Surgeon W. W. Holmes, medical director of the division, for his
tireless activity and efficiency in his department. The conduct of both
officers and men was every thing that could be desired, and every one
seemed stimulated with the determination not to be excelled in any
soldierly quality.

“I cannot close this report without speaking of the meritorious conduct
of First Lieutenant H. Belcher, of the Eighth Michigan, a regiment
belonging to another division. His regiment having suffered severely on
the right, and being partly thrown into confusion, he rallied about one
hundred men and led them to the front. Being separated from the brigade
to which he belonged, he reported to me for duty, and asked a position
where he might be of use till his proper place could be ascertained. He
was assigned a post on the left, and subsequently in support of the
advanced section of Simmons’s battery, in both of which places he and
his men performed their duty admirably.”




                      SURRENDER OF HARPER’S FERRY.
                          SEPTEMBER 15, 1862.


Every patriot in the land was filled with astonishment when he read of
the surrender of Harper’s Ferry. This surrender was made by Colonel D.
T. Miles, an officer who had received imperative orders to hold this
important post, to the last extremity. A natural desire to show all
possible gentleness, in judging the act of one no longer living, forbids
us to criticise motives, or censure an act which proved a great loss to
the country, and which was one that history cannot well defend.

The position of Harper’s Ferry, at the junction of the Potomac and
Shenandoah rivers, and on the Ohio and Baltimore railroad, gave it great
military importance. General Wool had directed Colonel Miles to fortify
Maryland Heights, which is the key to Harper’s Ferry, and to hold the
post till McClellan’s arrival. The Heights, however, were left
unfortified, and Colonel Thomas H. Ford, of the Thirty-second Ohio, was
entrusted by Colonel Miles with discretionary power, for the abandonment
of that important position. As soon as he was attacked, therefore, which
occurred on the 13th of September, Colonel Ford withdrew from the
Heights, and retreated to the Ferry. This movement rendered the position
at the Ferry untenable. The Heights were immediately occupied by the
enemy, who, on the 14th, commenced cannonading the works at Harper’s
Ferry. General McClellan was, at this time, rapidly approaching to the
relief of the garrison, which he had been assured by a messenger from
Colonel Miles, could hold out two days longer. But though the victory at
South Mountain had assured the coming of reinforcements, on the morning
of the 15th, after withstanding an attack which lasted from daybreak
till seven o’clock, he caused the white flag to be hoisted in token of
the surrender of his position. But the firing did not immediately cease,
and within the next half hour Colonel Miles was shot, and mortally
wounded. The reasons, whatever they may have been, for thus needlessly
yielding to his country’s foes the possession of so important a post,
went with him to the grave. Eleven thousand five hundred and
eighty-three men were thus captured by the enemy. At eight o’clock on
the 15th of September, the rebels took possession of Harper’s Ferry. A
military commission, held long afterwards at Washington, to inquire into
the conduct of the war, exempted all Colonel Miles’ subordinate officers
from blame, excepting Colonel T. H. Ford, and Major Baird of the One
hundred and Twenty-sixth New York regiment, who were severely censured.

The gallantry of General Julius White, in such defence of Harper’s Ferry
as was made, deserves to be recorded and honorably remembered.




                          BATTLE OF ANTIETAM.
                          SEPTEMBER 17, 1862.


The victors of South Mountain slept upon the field of battle, on the
night of September 14th. On the morning of the 15th, at early dawn, the
Union pickets were pressed forward, and it was found that the dejected
rebels had retired under cover of the night. An immediate pursuit was
ordered. The army moved forward at once, in three columns. The first,
containing the main force of cavalry, and led by Generals Pleasanton,
Sumner, Hooker and Mansfield, advanced along the national turnpike road,
by way of Boonsboro’. The second, led by Generals Burnside and Porter,
moved by the old Sharpsburgh road. The third, led by General Franklin,
went by Pleasant Valley, to occupy Robersville, and relieve Harper’s
Ferry. The latter had not gone far, however, when the cessation of
firing in the direction of the Ferry, gave notice that Colonel Miles had
yielded his post. Still, in all directions, the advance pressed onward.
It soon became evident that the rebels were taking up a strong position
in front, and that a general battle was impending. General McClellan
immediately went forward, examined the ground, to direct the formation
of the Union line of battle. The rebels had fortified themselves on the
west bank of Antietam creek, where they displayed their infantry,
cavalry and artillery, in large force. The Union corps were massed on
and near the Sharpsburgh road. During the 15th and 16th, both armies
manœuvred for advantages of position; but the general battle—one of the
most important that was fought during the war—did not commence until
daybreak of the 17th. At this time, the relative positions of the
combatants were as follows: Hooker, with his corps, consisting of
General Rickett’s, Meade’s and Doubleday’s divisions, had crossed
Antietam creek on the afternoon of the previous day; and, after some
sharp skirmishing with the enemy, had gained the desired position, and
bivouacked for the night. General Mansfield’s corps consisting of the
divisions of William and Green, had crossed the creek during the night,
and taken up position, a mile in rear of General Hooker. On the right of
the turnpike, near the creek, was posted a division of General Sumner’s
corps, under command of General Richardson; and, on the left, in line
with Richardson, a division of General Porter’s corps, under command of
General Sykes. The batteries of Captain Taft, Langrel, Von Kleiner, and
of Lieutenant Weaver, each of twenty-pounder Parrott guns, were placed
in front of the Sharpsburgh turnpike. Captain Weed’s three-inch, and
Lieutenant Benjamin’s twenty-pounder batteries were on the crest of the
hill, in the rear and right of bridge number three that crossed the
creek; and the division of General Couch with General Franklin’s corps,
in front of Brownsville, in Pleasant Valley,—with a large force of the
enemy directly in front.

The position of the enemy was a very favorable one. It is thus described
by General McClellan:

“The masses of his troops were still concealed behind the opposite
heights. Their left and centre were upon and in front of the Sharpsburgh
and Hagerstown turnpike, hidden by woods and irregularities of the
ground; their extreme left resting upon a wooded eminence near the cross
roads to the north of J. Miller’s farm: their left resting upon the
Potomac. Their line extended south, the right resting upon the hills to
the south of Sharpsburgh, near Shaveley’s farm.

“The bridge over the Antietam, described as No. 3, near this point, was
strongly covered by riflemen protected by rifle-pits, stone fences,
etc., and enfiladed by artillery. The ground in front of this line
consisted of undulating hills, their crests in turn commanded by others
in the rear. On all favorable points the enemy’s artillery was posted,
and their reserves, hidden from view by the hills, on which their line
of battle was formed, could manœuvre unobserved by our army, and from
the shortness of their line could rapidly reinforce any point threatened
by our attack. Their position, stretching across the angle formed by the
Potomac and Antietam, their flanks and rear protected by these streams,
was one of the strongest to be found in this region of country, which is
well adapted to defensive warfare.”

At dawn of the 17th, skirmishing by the Pennsylvania reserves opened the
battle for the day. General Hooker’s entire corps was soon engaged. The
right of General Pickett’s line, and the left of General Meade’s
reserve, opened fire at about the same moment. A battery was pushed
forward into the middle of an open field, where some of the deadliest
struggles of the bloody battle subsequently took place. For half an
hour, the line did not swerve a hair’s-breadth from the right to the
left. At the close of the half hour, the enemy began to fall slowly
back. Their first receding movement inspired the brave patriots before
them. Forward! was the cry; and the whole line moved forward, with a
cheer and a rush; while the rebels in full retreat, running over
corn-fields, crossing roads and leaping fences, fled before them.

Close upon the footsteps of the foe, passing over the dead and
wounded—for these the rebels were compelled to leave in their
wake—followed the soldiers of the Union, till at length the enemy
disappeared within a wood. Still the Federals pressed on, and gallantly
threw themselves upon the cover; when suddenly, from out the gloom and
shadow of the trees, was hurled a fearful volley of fire, that caused
their undaunted front to waver, bend and break, and sent them,
panic-stricken, many yards back. But, almost instantly closing up their
shattered lines, they quickly recovered from this temporary confusion;
and, though they could not attempt another advance, their ammunition
being expended, those who were left to oppose the advancing masses of
the enemy retreated in good order, very slowly, their ranks so thinned
that, where brigades had been, scarcely regiments remained—little more
than a brigade, where had been a whole victorious division. A
contemporary account of the battle speaks as follows of the unexpected
reverse, there and then encountered by the gallant patriots.

“In ten minutes, the fortune of the day seemed to have changed; it was
the rebels now who were advancing, pouring out of the woods in endless
lines, sweeping through the corn-field from which their comrades had
just fled. Hooker sent in his nearest brigade to meet them, but it could
not do the work. He called for another. There was nothing close enough,
unless he took it from his right. His right might be in danger if it was
weakened, but his centre was already threatened with annihilation. Not
hesitating one moment, he sent orders to Doubleday: ‘Give me your best
brigade instantly.’

“The best brigade came down the hill to the right on a run, went through
the timber in front swept by a storm of shot and bursting shell and
crashing limbs, over the open field beyond and straight into the open
corn-field, passing as they went the fragments of three brigades
shattered by the rebel fire and streaming to the rear. They passed by
Hooker, whose eyes lighted as he saw these veteran troops, led by a
soldier whom he knew he could trust. ‘I think they will hold it,’ he
said.

“General Hartsuff took his troops very steadily, but, now that they were
under fire, not hurriedly, up the hill from which the corn-field begins
to descend, and formed them on the crest. Not a man who was not in full
view—not one who bent before the storm. Firing at first in volleys, they
fired then at will with wonderful rapidity and effect. The whole line
crowned the hill and stood out darkly against the sky, but lighted and
shrouded ever in flame and smoke. They were the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Massachusetts and another regiment—old troops all of them.

“There, for half an hour, they held the ridge, unyielding in purpose,
exhaustless in courage. There were gaps in the line, but it nowhere
bent. Their General was severely wounded, early in the fight, but they
fought on. Their supports did not come—they determined to win without
them. They began to go down the hill and into the corn; they did not
stop to think that their ammunition was nearly gone; they were there to
win that field, and they won it. The rebel line for the second time fled
through the corn and into the woods. I cannot tell how few of Hartsuff’s
brigade were left when the work was done; but it was done. There was no
more gallant, determined, heroic fighting, in all this desperate day.
General Hartsuff is very severely wounded, but I do not believe he
counts his success too dearly purchased.

“The crisis of the fight at this point had arrived. Rickett’s division,
vainly endeavoring to advance and exhausted by the effort, had fallen
back. Part of Mansfield’s corps was ordered to their relief, but
Mansfield’s troops came back again, and their General was mortally
wounded. The left nevertheless was too extended to be turned, and too
strong to be broken. Rickett sent word he could not advance, but could
hold his ground. Doubleday had kept his guns at work on the right, and
had finally silenced a rebel battery that for half an hour had poured in
a galling enfilading fire along Hooker’s central line. There were woods
in front of Doubleday’s hill which the rebels held, but so long as those
guns pointed toward them they did not care to attack.

“With his left, then, able to take care of itself, with his right
impregnable, with two brigades of Mansfield still fresh and coming
rapidly up, and with his centre a second time victorious, General Hooker
determined to advance. Orders were sent to Crawford and Gordon—the two
Mansfield brigades—to move forward at once, the batteries in the centre
were ordered to advance, the whole line was called on, and the General
himself went forward.

“To the right of the corn-field and beyond it was a point of woods. Once
carried and firmly held, it was the key of the position. Hooker
determined to take it. He rode out in front of his furthest troops on a
hill, to examine the ground for a battery. At the top he dismounted and
went forward on foot, completed his reconnoissance, returned, and
remounted. The musketry fire from the point of woods was all the while
extremely hot. As he put his foot in the stirrup a fresh volley of rifle
bullets came whizzing by. The tall, soldierly figure of the General, the
white horse which he rode, the elevated place where he was, all made him
a dangerously conspicuous mark. So he had been all day, riding often
without a staff-officer or an orderly near him—all sent off on urgent
duty—visible everywhere on the field. The rebel bullets had followed him
all day, but they had not hit him, and he would not regard them.

“Remounting on this hill, he had not ridden five steps when he was
struck in the foot by a ball. Three men were shot down at the same
moment by his side. The air was alive with bullets. He kept on his horse
a few minutes, though the wound was severe and excessively painful, and
would not dismount till he had given his last order to advance. He was
himself in the very front. Swaying unsteadily on his horse, he turned in
his seat to look about him. “There is a regiment to the right. Order it
forward! Crawford and Gordon are coming up. Tell them to carry those
woods and hold them—and it is our fight!”

“It was found that the bullet had passed completely through his foot.”

General Hooker being disabled, General Meade was placed in command of
Hooker’s Corps. Gordon and Crawford were sent to the woods, where they
fought slowly against a rebel force far outnumbering their own; General
Sedgwick’s division was rapidly moving to the aid of Crawford and
Gordon, who required the coming assistance, for rebel reinforcements
were constantly arriving. Observing that the struggle for the works was
about to recommence, General Sumner sent the divisions of French and
Richardson to the left of Crawford. General Sedgwick, with the eye of
practiced generalship, quickly saw, as he moved his troops in column
through the rear of the woods, that, with so broad a space as was
between him and the nearest division, he stood in danger of being
outflanked, if the rebel line were completed. Under a dreadful fire he
was obliged to order the Thirty-fourth New York to move by the left
flank, and the consequence was that the regiment broke. The enemy, not
slow to perceive his advantage, came round on the weak point, and
obliged Crawford to give way on the right. The routed troops poured
through the ranks of Sedgwick’s advance brigade, causing great
confusion, and forcing it back on the second and third lines; still the
enemy’s fire grew hotter, while they steadily advanced upon the
disordered Union forces. General Sedgwick, wounded in the shoulder, the
leg, and the wrist, still bravely kept his seat, nor thought of leaving
the field while any chance remained of saving it. But the position could
not be held; and General Sumner, having in vain attempted to stop the
confusion and disorder, himself withdrew the division to the rear,
abandoning the field to the enemy.

While the conflict to the right was hotly raging, General French was
pushing the rebels severely on the left. This division crossed Antietam
creek, in three columns, and marched a mile, to the ford. Then, facing
to the left, it moved direct upon the enemy. The division was assailed
by a brisk artillery fire, but it steadily advanced, driving back the
rebel skirmishers, to a group of houses on a piece of land called
Roulette’s farm, where the Federals encountered the rebel infantry in
large force, but soon drove them from their position. The brigade of
General Kimball was next pushed forward, by General French, in obedience
to orders received from his corps commander. This brigade drove the
enemy before it, to the crest of the hill; but the rebels were there
encountered in much stronger force, protected in a natural rifle-pit
formed by a sunken road running in a northwesterly direction. Beyond
this, in a corn-field, there was yet another body of rebels; and, as the
Union line came forward, a severe fire was poured upon them from the
corn-field and from the rifle-pit. When the Federals reached the crest
of the hill, volleys of musketry burst from both lines, and the fight
raged hotly, and with dreadful carnage. An effort of the enemy to turn
the left of the line was met and signally repulsed by the Seventh
Virginia, and One Hundred and Thirty-second Pennsylvania Volunteers: on
being foiled in this effort, the rebels assaulted the Union front, but
were again driven back with severe loss, the Unionists capturing three
hundred men and several stands of colors. Another attack was made on the
right of French’s division, but was met by the Fourteenth Indiana and
Eighth Ohio Volunteers, and by a storm of canister from Captain
Tompkins’ battery, First Rhode Island Artillery. The enemy now gave up
all attempts to regain this ground; and the division, which had been
under very hot fire for more than four hours, and had expended nearly
all its ammunition, took position below the crest of the heights which
they had so nobly won. During this time, Richardson’s division had been
engaged on the left. General Richardson was badly wounded in the
shoulder. General Meagher’s brigade fought so as to increase its well
deserved reputation for courage, and strewed the ground with the foe,
till its ammunition gave out, and its brave leader was disabled by a
wound, and by having his horse shot under him. The Irish brigade was
then ordered to give place to that of General Caldwell; and the second
line was formed by General Brooks’ brigade.

The ground over which Generals Richardson’s and French’s divisions were
fighting was very irregular, intersected by numerous ravines, hills
covered with growing corn, inclosed by stone walls, behind which the
enemy could advance unobserved upon any exposed point of our lines,
Taking advantage of this, the enemy attempted to gain the right of
Richardson’s position in a corn-field near Roulette’s house, where the
division had become separated from that of General French’s. A change of
front by the Fifty-second New York and Second Delaware volunteers, of
Colonel Brooks’s brigade, under Colonel Frank, and the attack made by
the Fifty-third Pennsylvania volunteers, sent further to the right by
Colonel Brooks to close this gap in the line, and the movement of the
One Hundred and Thirty-second Pennsylvania and Seventh Virginia
volunteers of General French’s division before referred to, drove the
enemy from the corn-field and restored the line.

The brigade of General Caldwell, with determined gallantry, pushed the
enemy back opposite the left and centre of this division, but sheltered
in the sunken road, they still held our forces on the right of Caldwell
in check. Colonel Barlow, commanding the Sixty-first and Sixty-fourth
New York regiments of Caldwell’s brigade, seeing a favorable
opportunity, advanced the regiments on the left, taking the line in the
sunken road in flank, and compelled them to surrender, capturing over
three hundred prisoners and three stands of colors.

The whole of the brigade, with the Fifty-seventh and Sixty-sixth New
York regiments of Colonel Brooks’s brigade, who had moved these
regiments into the first line, now advanced with gallantry, driving the
enemy before them in confusion into the corn-field beyond the sunken
road. The left of the division was now well advanced, when the enemy,
concealed by an intervening ridge, endeavored to turn its left and rear.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES GRAHAM. WARD. MEAGHER. RICKETTS. KEITH.]

Colonel Cross, Fifth New Hampshire, by a change of front to the left and
rear, brought his regiment facing the advancing line. Here a spirited
contest arose to gain a commanding height, the two opposing forces
moving parallel to each other, giving and receiving fire. The Fifth
gaining the advantage, faced to the right and delivered its volley. The
enemy staggered, but rallied and advanced desperately at a charge. Being
reinforced by the Eighty-first Pennsylvania, these regiments met the
advance by a counter charge. The enemy fled, leaving many killed,
wounded, and prisoners, and the colors of the Fourth North Carolina, in
the victors’ hands.

Another column of the enemy, advancing under shelter of a stone wall and
corn-field, pressed down on the right of the division; but Colonel
Barlow again advanced the Sixty-first and Sixty-fourth New York against
these troops, and with the attack of Kimball’s brigade on the right,
drove them from this position.

On the left of this part of the line, the Union troops having driven
back a determined attack of the enemy, the rebels made a rush upon the
front, but were fiercely repulsed by two regiments under Colonel Barlow,
who followed them through the corn-field and into the orchard beyond. A
building called Riper’s house was a strong point here; and Colonel
Barlow’s advance gave the Union men possession of it, and they at once
occupied it. A section of Robertson’s horse battery now arrived, and in
good time, for Richardson’s division up to that juncture had been
without artillery; and subsequently Captain Graham, First Artillery,
commanding a battery of brass guns, arrived, and taking a position on
the crest of the hill, soon silenced the enemy’s guns in the orchard.
Heavy firing began immediately; and while directing the firing of
Captain Graham’s battery, the gallant Richardson was mortally wounded.
The place of General Richardson was supplied by General Hancock. Colonel
Bunke, of the Sixty-third New York, commanding General Meagher’s
brigade, was ordered to the centre.

The battle raged with uninterrupted fury; and on right and left, rebels
and Unionists strewed the ground with gory corpses. The groans and cries
of the wounded and dying filling up every interval of the battle’s roar.
Dark and darker grew the aspect of affairs. The different battle-fields
were shut out from each other’s view, but all were visible from a centre
hill, from which General McClellan, during the whole day, with his
field-glass held to his eyes, watched eagerly and anxiously the fighting
of the several brave corps under his command.

The afternoon was waning; and things looked very black for the Army of
the Union. At three o’clock General McClellan issued an order to General
Burnside to push forward his troops with all possible vigor, and carry
the enemy’s position on the heights. General Burnside replied that he
would advance up the hill as far as he could, before being stopped by a
battery, placed directly in his path. Upon hearing this, General
McClellan ordered Burnside to flank the battery, storm it, and carry the
heights.

The advance was made most gallantly, the enemy utterly routed, and the
heights carried triumphantly. Night was now approaching, and the enemy
was receiving strong reinforcements from Harper’s Ferry. General
Burnside’s troops were attacked on the left flank, and obliged to retire
to a lower line of hills, near the bridge and the question as to whether
the well-won position on the heights could be maintained, became a
problem of vital importance. Burnside’s brigades were in close columns,
and would not give way before a bayonet charge; and the enemy hesitated
to dash in on the dense masses of Union soldiers. Then suddenly the
rebel left gave way, scattering over the field, but the rest stood firm,
and poured forth a heavy fire upon the Federals. More infantry came up,
and General Burnside found himself outnumbered, outflanked, and
compelled to yield up the position he fought so bravely to win. He no
longer attacked; but, with unfaltering firmness, defended himself, and
sent to General McClellan for help.

McClellan already knew of the sore strait to which Burnside was reduced,
for his glass had not been turned away from the hard-pressed left of the
field; but to send assistance was out of his power. In the valley,
Porter’s fifteen thousand troops were impatient to join the fight; but
when the two Generals, McClellan and Porter, looked into each other’s
faces, each read in the other’s eyes, “They are the only reserves of the
army—they cannot be spared.” As an answer to General Burnside’s desire
for reinforcements, the Commander-in-Chief was obliged to reply:

“Tell General Burnside this is the battle of the war. He must hold his
ground till dark at any cost. I will send him Miller’s battery. I can do
nothing more. I have no infantry.” Then as the messenger was riding away
he called him back. “Tell him if he _cannot_ hold his ground, then the
bridge, to the last man!—always the bridge! If the bridge is lost, all
is lost.”

Till Burnside’s message reached McClellan, no one anticipated that the
battle could be concluded on that day; and few expected how near was the
peril of total defeat. But suddenly and unexpectedly, the rebels halted,
instead of pushing forward, and following up the advantage gained in
recapturing the hill. As the twilight deepened into darkness, the
fierce, wrathful cannonading ceased, and the long, desperately-contested
battle of Antietam was over. For fourteen hours nearly two hundred
thousand men, and five hundred pieces of artillery had been engaged in
this memorable battle. The Army of the Potomac, notwithstanding the
moral depression consequent upon its late severe reverses, had achieved
a great victory over an army elated by recent successes; and, on the
night of September 17th, the soldiers of the Union slept in peace and
triumph on a field won by dauntless bravery, and covered with the dead
and wounded, friends and foes, patriots and rebels.

On both sides the casualties among officers in the battle of Antietam
was unusually numerous. Among the rebel killed were Brigadier-Generals
Starke and Branche, and among their wounded were Major-General Anderson,
Brigadier-Generals Anderson, Lawton, Wright, Ripley, Amistead and
Ransome.

The Union army was called upon to mourn the loss, among many other
valuable officers, of Brigadier-General Isaac P. Rodman, of Rhode
Island. He had left the quiet pursuits of business, and volunteered in
defence of the Government. He entered the service in one of the
regiments of his native State as Captain, and was quickly promoted to a
Colonelcy, and led his regiment in General Burnside’s North Carolina
expedition. He was made a Brigadier for services at Roanoke and Newbern,
and was mortally wounded while acting as division commander at Antietam.
The loss of the Federal army in this terrible battle bears ample
testimony to its courage and endurance. From the official records the
total loss in killed was two thousand and ten; missing, one thousand and
forty-three; total, twelve thousand and sixty-nine. The combined loss at
South Mountain, Antietam and Harper’s Ferry, was twenty-six thousand
three hundred and ninety-four.

The report of General McClellan estimates the rebel loss in Maryland at
thirty thousand men.

General Burnside, whose corps was stationed on the left of the Federal
lines, testified before the investigating committee of Congress, that at
half-past eight o’clock in the evening of the 17th, he went over to
McClellan’s headquarters, and urged the renewal of the attack, saying
that with five thousand fresh troops to place beside his own, he was
willing to commence the attack in the morning. As his corps had
maintained the most critical position during the battle, and had
defended the salient points with remarkable bravery and endurance, while
suffering heavy loss, it may not be amiss to record his testimony in
this place.

General Franklin, whose corps occupied a position on the right of the
Federal lines, also gave testimony before the Commission in the
following terms:

“When General McClellan visited the right in the afternoon, I showed him
a position on the right of this wood, which I have already mentioned, in
which was the Dunker church, which I thought commanded the wood; and
that if it could be taken, we could drive the enemy from the wood, by
merely holding this point. I advised that we should make the attack on
that place the next morning from General Sumner’s position. I thought
there was no doubt about our being able to carry it. We had plenty of
artillery bearing upon it. We drove the enemy from there that afternoon,
and I had no doubt we could take the place the next morning, and I
thought that would uncover the whole left of the enemy.”

No advance was made by the Federal forces on the 18th, which passed away
without any engagement. General McClellan was waiting for reinforcements
under Generals Couch and Humphreys, then on their way, and in the mean
time, had ordered an attack on the 19th. A reconnoissance of the Federal
cavalry advanced to the Maryland shore of the Potomac on the evening of
the 19th, where they skirmished with the rear guard of the rebels, and
captured six guns. General Lee had safely withdrawn his army to the
Virginia shore, and was slowly conducting his retreat to the banks of
the Rappahannock.

Though the battle of Antietam can hardly be classed as a decisive
victory on the part of the Federal forces, in a strictly military point
of view, it was conclusive in its results; and General Lee retreated
into Virginia with a full conviction of his inability to cope
successfully on that ground with the army opposed to him, and thoroughly
dispossessed of the confident expectation he had entertained, that the
inhabitants would flock by thousands to his standard, when his forces
should appear in their midst. Restricted as he had ever been in his
commissariat, he had discovered that no dependence could be placed on
obtaining supplies in a hostile territory, surrounded by a numerous and
vigilant foe, whose well-disciplined and eager cavalry would surely cut
off any supplies from the Shenandoah Valley, long before they reached
the banks of the Potomac. With a loss of thirty thousand men, in killed,
wounded and prisoners, he was compelled therefore to retrace his steps,
which he was allowed to do, deliberately and securely.




                    M’CLELLAN’S ARMY ON THE POTOMAC.
                          OCTOBER 1–26, 1862.


At this juncture in military affairs, the cautious policy of General
McClellan once more came into conflict with that of the United States
Government, at Washington. It was McClellan’s desire to reorganize the
army, which had suffered much under the command of General Pope, and
which had just passed through two severe battles. Maryland Heights and
Harper’s Ferry had been occupied and fortified, and, as the Potomac was
low, and easily fordable by rebel raiders, McClellan designed to stretch
his forces along that river, from near Washington, to Cumberland, a
distance of about one hundred and fifty miles, to prevent further
incursions, and to make occasional sallies for reconnaissance or
offensive operations, while the work of reorganization should be in
progress. General Halleck, on the other hand, representing the President
and the War Department, denied the necessity for any delay and urged an
immediate onset.

No onward movement was made until the 26th of October. In the meanwhile,
President Lincoln, visiting the Army of McClellan on the first of the
month, had discussed the whole campaign with that officer, and had
personally inspected the battle-field of Antietam; then, returning to
Washington, he had, through General Halleck, issued an order to General
McClellan, directing him to cross the Potomac and attack General Lee. It
was in pursuance of this order that the advance was commenced on the
26th—the intermediate days having been spent in the work of
reorganization. But this work had not been accomplished without
difficulty. On the 10th of October, the rebel General Stuart crossed the
Potomac, at McCoy’s Ferry, leading a force of two thousand cavalry and a
battery of horse artillery, and made a raid into Maryland and
Pennsylvania. Means were immediately taken to cut off and capture those
forces. All the fords of the river were ordered to be guarded, and
Generals Pleasanton and Stoneman started in pursuit. General Stuart, by
his raid of the 13th of June, into the rear of the Union armies between
the Pamunkey and the Chickahominy, had acquired great credit for
boldness and celerity of movement. Hence the desire to capture him was
all the more eager, on the part of the National troops. But the failure
of a subordinate officer of General Stoneman’s to seasonably occupy
White’s Ford, a point about three miles below the mouth of the Monocacy,
unfortunately left open a chance of retreat, through which, on the 12th
of October Stuart succeeded in making his escape, after a conflict with
the Union forces, which lasted upwards of four hours. The fight took
place near the mouth of the river Monocacy, and, on the Union side, was
conducted by General Pleasanton. The losses were slight, upon both
sides.

The plan of General McClellan’s new campaign, commencing on the 26th of
October, may best be stated in his own language:

“The plan of campaign I adopted during this advantage was to move the
army, well in hand, parallel to the Blue Ridge, taking Warrenton as the
point of direction for the main army; seizing each pass on the Blue
Ridge by detachments, as we approached it, and guarding them after we
had passed as long as they would enable the enemy to trouble our
communications with the Potomac. It was expected that we would unite
with the Eleventh corps and Sickles’s division near Thoroughfare Gap. We
depended upon Harper’s Ferry and Berlin for supplies until the Manassas
Gap Railway was reached; when that occurred, the passes in the rear were
to be abandoned, and the army massed ready for action or movement in any
direction.

“It was my intention if upon reaching Ashby’s or any other pass, I found
that the enemy were in force between it and the Potomac in the valley of
the Shenandoah, to move into the valley and endeavor to gain their rear.

“I hardly hoped to accomplish this, but did expect that by striking in
between Culpeper Court-House and Little Washington I could either
separate their army and beat them in detail, or else force them to
concentrate as far back as Gordonsville, and thus place the army of the
Potomac in position either to adopt the Fredericksburgh line of advance
upon Richmond, or to be removed to the Peninsula, if, as I apprehended,
it were found impossible to supply it by the Orange and Alexandria
Railroad beyond Culpeper.”

On the night of November 7th, General McClellan received an order from
Washington, relieving him from the command of the Army of the Potomac,
and appointing General Burnside to be his successor. This change was
immediately consummated. The army, at this time, was in fine condition
and spirits, and was strongly posted near Warrenton, its right wing
being across the Rappahannock, and its left resting on Manassas
Junction, the front extending along the line of the Orange and
Alexandria Railroad. The rebels, under Longstreet, were massed near
Culpeper, and it was apparent that a great battle could not long be
deferred. Such was the posture of affairs, when General Burnside assumed
command of the Army of the Potomac.

The impressive and affecting words of General McClellan, in reference to
this passage in our national history, ought here to find a place. They
render a merited tribute to the noble army of patriots, which he had led
through so many perils.

“I am devoutly grateful to God that my last campaign with this brave
army was crowned with a victory which saved the nation from the greatest
peril it had then undergone. I have not accomplished my purpose if, by
this report, the army of the Potomac is not placed high on the roll of
the historic armies of the world. Its deeds ennoble the nation to which
it belongs. Always ready for battle, always firm, steadfast and
trustworthy, I never called on it in vain; nor will the nation ever have
cause to attribute its want of success, under myself, or under other
commanders, to any failure of patriotism or bravery in that noble body
of American soldiers.

“No man can justly charge upon any portion of that army, from the
Commanding General to the private, any lack of devotion to the service
of the United States’ Government, and to the cause of the Constitution
and the Union. They have proved their fealty in much sorrow, suffering,
danger, and through the very shadow of death. Their comrades dead on all
the fields where we fought, have scarcely more claim to the honor of a
nation’s reverence than their survivors to the justice of a nation’s
gratitude.”

The situation of the respective forces was then as follows: The Federal
army, reinforced by the divisions of Generals Sigel and Sickles, who had
advanced from Washington, occupied all the region east of the Blue
Ridge, with the right resting on Harper’s Ferry, and the left extending
nearly to Paris, on the road from Aldie to Winchester. The centre was at
Snickersville; with Snicker’s Gap in its possession. The Confederate
line was on the south side of the Blue Ridge, with the Shenandoah river
immediately in its front, extending from Front Royal down to
Charlestown, with the great body of their troops massed between
Berryville and Winchester. On November 4th Ashby’s Gap was occupied
without opposition by the Federal troops. The cavalry corps, under
Colonel Pleasanton, pushed on from Piedmont, and occupied Marguette,
holding the approaches to Manassas and Chester Gap, on the left side of
the Blue Ridge. The condition and spirit of the army at this time were
unequalled by that of any force before organized. On the 6th General
McClellan’s headquarters were at Rectortown near Front Royal. The army
was steadily advancing and the Confederate force falling back, with some
skirmishing. Warrenton was occupied by the Federal troops on the same
day. On the 7th a severe snow storm commenced, and continued throughout
the day. On the 8th the bridge at Rappahannock Station was taken and
held by General Bayard.

The next day was devoted by General McClellan to the transfer of his
command to General Burnside. The most cordial feelings existed between
the two officers, the latter of whom accepted a promotion which he had
before twice declined, only upon the peremptory order of the War
Department. On Sunday evening his officers assembled at his tent, for a
final parting of commander and officers. It was such a scene of deep
feeling as could occur only where officers reposed the highest
confidence in their commander, who had led them successfully through
some of the most fearful battles of modern wars. Monday was occupied in
passing among the various camps, reviewing the troops, and taking a
final leave of both officers and men. A spectator of these scenes has
summed them up in these words:

“As General McClellan, mounted upon a fine horse, attended by a retinue
of fine-looking military men, riding rapidly through the ranks,
gracefully recognized and bid a farewell to the army, the cries and
demonstrations of the men were beyond bounds—wild, impassioned, and
unrestrained. Disregarding all military forms they rushed from their
ranks and thronged around him with the bitterest complaints against
those who had removed from command their beloved leader.”

On the next day, the 10th, he withdrew, taking the railroad cars at
Warrenton. On reaching Warrenton Junction a salute was fired. The
troops, which had been drawn up in line, afterward broke ranks, when the
soldiers crowded around him and many eagerly called for a few parting
words. He said in response, while on the platform of the railroad depot,
“I wish you to stand by General Burnside as you have stood by me, and
all will be well. Good-bye.” To this there was a spontaneous and
enthusiastic response.

The troops were also drawn up in line at Bristow’s Station and Manassas
Junction, where salutes were fired and he was complimented with
enthusiastic cheers. On reaching Washington he proceeded immediately to
the depot, and passed on to Philadelphia and Trenton, where he arrived
early on the 12th.

What was now the military aspect? The movement of General McClellan’s
army, after crossing the Potomac, was towards Gordonsville. This made a
movement on the part of the Confederate general Lee necessary in order
to prevent the Federal army from getting between him and Richmond. For
this purpose he attempted to move from Winchester through the gaps of
the Blue Ridge to Culpeper. The larger part of his force had passed
through, when the gaps were taken and held by General McClellan. At the
same time General Sigel had advanced from Washington, and lay near the
Blue Ridge, covering at once Washington, observing the gaps to the
Rappahannock, and protecting the railroad communication to that river.
The bridge at Rappahannock Station had already been seized by the
cavalry, under General Bayard. The available force of General McClellan
was about one hundred and twenty thousand men; that of General Lee
consisted of about sixty thousand able men at Culpepper and
Gordonsville, and thirty thousand in the Shenandoah Valley, near
Strasburg. The distance from Warrenton to Gordonsville is about fifty
miles, and from Warrenton to the Rapidan, thirty-five miles; from
Strasburg to Gordonsville, by Staunton and Charlottesville, one hundred
and thirty-five miles; and by the only other practicable route, one
northwest of Gordonsville, and perpendicular to General McClellan’s line
of advance, about one hundred miles. In his position it was necessary
for General Lee to defend the line of the Rapidan, or endeavor to effect
a junction with the force in the Shenandoah Valley, under General
Jackson, or fall back upon Richmond, in a country without a line of
defence, with General McClellan close upon him, leaving General Jackson
to shift for himself. The defence of the Rapidan was impracticable from
the course of the river from the Alexandria railroad to the Blue Ridge.
The efforts to join General Jackson would have uncovered Richmond, and
the attempt to fall back on Richmond would have at least hazarded the
demoralization of his army, and enabled General McClellan to turn the
defensible parts of the Rappahannock, and the line of the North Anna.
The appointment of General Burnside was followed by the organization of
a portion of the army into divisions, and a movement to concentrate it
at Fredericksburg.




                        OPERATIONS IN KENTUCKY.
                        JUNE TO SEPTEMBER, 1862.


Never in the history of the world has there been a war of such magnitude
as that waged by the loyal Unionists against the Southern insurgents in
the American Republic, and never have the divisions of military forces
stretched over so wide a field of operations. While the Army of the
Potomac was fighting in Virginia, the struggle of loyalty and treason
was going on in Kentucky. The masses of the people there were in favor
of the Union; but their feeling was so cold, and had been operated on so
strongly by Secession-sympathizing slaveholders, that as a body, they
desired to remain simply neutral. The Governor of Kentucky, Beriah
Magoffin, adopted a position of strict neutrality, and in accordance
with this unpatriotic spirit, the slaveholding Senate of the State
passed a decree that the State “will not sever her relations with the
National Government, nor take up arms for either belligerent party.” At
the same time, while refusing to lend the National cause any assistance,
the slaveholding aristocracy of Kentucky entreated the people of the
loyal North to yield to the rebels and win them back by amending the
Constitution, in such a way as to make it a bulwark of negro slavery.
But all this manœuvering was finally terminated, and the men of Kentucky
were driven either to the protection of the national flag, or to the
camps of the rebels. The battles before Richmond, Virginia, having paved
the way for a general rebel advance, the enemy resolved on an effort to
transfer the field of battle to northern soil; and it was in pursuance
of this plan that General Lee had invaded Pennsylvania; but having been
signally repulsed, he had, as we have seen, been obliged to abandon the
attempt.

Early in June guerrilla operations became troublesome in some of the
lower counties of Kentucky. At Madisonville, in Hopkins county, a
descent was made by a small body of them at night. The county clerk’s
office was broken open and the records of the court carried off or
destroyed. In other places horses and other property were taken. Their
own friends, equally with Union citizens, were robbed. In Jessamine,
Mercer, Boyle, and Garrard counties bridges over the streams were
burned. On the 5th of July Lebanon was taken. It is at the termination
of the Lebanon branch of the Louisville and Nashville road. About the
same time Murfreesboro’, in Tennessee, was captured by a strong
guerrilla force under Colonel Forrest. Vigorous opposition was, however,
made by the small body of Federal troops stationed there. The Ninth
Michigan regiment, however, was captured entirely by surprise, with
Brigadier-Generals Duffield and Crittenden, of Indiana.

At about this time the rebel Generals Bragg, Smith, Kirby and Van Dorn,
had combined to invade Kentucky, their object being to capture
Louisville, and then push forward and take possession of Cincinnati. It
was the prosecution of this movement that led to the battles of
Richmond, Tazewell, Mumfordsville, Perryville, Iuka, and Corinth. In
name, as we have seen, the State of Kentucky was still attached to the
Union. She had contributed her full quota to the national army, and her
whole territory was unoccupied by Confederate forces; but the State was
full of guerrilla bands, which, under cover of serving the rebels,
plundered in all directions, on their own account. The chief of these
guerrilla marauders, John Morgan, with his gang, took possession of the
town of Lebanon, on the 12th of July, 1862. His troops continually
increased till at last with a large force he advanced upon Cynthiana,
which he attacked on the 18th. There a home guard of three hundred and
forty men, entirely undisciplined, made a desperate resistance, and were
not overpowered till they had slaughtered many of the rebel invaders.
This little band of patriots was commanded by Colonel J. J. Landrum,
whose coolness and bravery deserves every commendation.

A series of guerrilla attacks now succeeded each other, giving
indications of hostile movements of a more serious character.

About the middle of August, it was reported that Frankfort, the State
capital, was in danger from the approach of Morgan, and that the rebel
General E. Kirby Smith was advancing with a well organized force, into
Kentucky, from Knoxville, Tennessee.

Morgan’s force was subsequently overtaken near Paris, by General Green
C. Smith, and defeated. About the same time Henderson was occupied by
citizens from Kentucky and other States, acting the part of guerrillas,
and the hospital and other stores carried off. Farther to the north,
Newburg, in Indiana, on the Ohio river, was occupied by a band from
Kentucky. They soon, however, left. The activity of the bands under
Colonel Morgan produced a great excitement in the interior of the State.
Many towns were visited and much plunder obtained. It had been his
conviction that large numbers of the citizens would flock to his
standard. In this he was greatly mistaken, and the indifference and
hostility of the people, together with the preparations to resist him,
checked his movements. Active operations continued in Tennessee, whither
Colonel Morgan retired. Clarksville was captured with large military
stores, and about the 22nd of August a considerable body of Confederate
cavalry attacked the Federal force at Gallatin, and after a severe
contest repulsed the latter.

At the same time, Governor James F. Robinson, who had succeeded
Magoffin, appealed to the people in a stirring proclamation, dated
August 31st, to rally in defence of the State, against the rebel
invaders. His language is that of a whole-souled patriot.

“I appeal to you as Kentuckians, as worthy sons of those who rescued the
dark and bloody ground from savage barbarity, by the memories of the
past of your history, and by the future of your fame, if you are but
true to yourselves, to rise in the majesty of your strength and drive
the insolent invaders of your soil from your midst. Now is the time for
Kentuckians to defend themselves. Each man must constitute himself a
soldier, arm himself as best he can, and meet the foe at every step of
his advance. The day and the hour, the safety of your homes and
firesides, patriotism and duty, alike demand that you rush to the
rescue. I call upon the people, then, to rise up as one man, and strike
a blow for the defence of their native land, their property, and their
homes. Rally to the standard, wherever it may be nearest, place
yourselves under the commanders, obey orders, trust to your own right
arm and the God of battle, and the foe will be driven back, discomfited
and annihilated. To arms! to arms!! and never lay them down till the
stars and stripes float in triumph throughout Kentucky. I but perform my
duty in thus summoning you to the defence of your State, and I am
assured that it will be promptly responded to. I promise that I will
share with you the glory of the triumph which surely awaits you.”

Cumberland Gap, Tenn., was at this time in possession of the national
troops, under command of General G. W. Morgan; and an attack of the
rebels was made to drive General Morgan from his position; but, being
fiercely repulsed by his advance at Tazewell, they turned toward the
west, and proceeded over a difficult mountain road to a point known as
Big Creek Gap. On the 9th of August, Governor Johnson, of Tennessee,
received intelligence of this rebel invasion. Preparations were at once
made, to withstand these combined armies. The United States government
had no troops to spare for the defence of Kentucky, save undisciplined
recruits, raised under the President’s call for three hundred thousand
men, made on the first of July. Pope’s campaign was at this moment in
progress. Altogether, the time was full of danger, and trouble, and
doubt. Happily Governor Tod of Ohio, and Morton, of Indiana, were loyal
and energetic men, and to their efforts at this juncture the State of
Kentucky was mainly indebted for protection against her foes and the
foes of the nation. Troops were immediately despatched into Kentucky
from those States. General Boyle was in command at Louisville. General
Wallace, volunteering to serve in the capacity of a Colonel, was put in
command at Lexington, which point was directly fortified. J. J.
Crittenden, Leslie Coombs, and Garrett Davis, assuming positions on
General Wallace’s staff, rendered valuable aid, through their large
popularity and influence, in bringing in recruits. General Wallace also
organized a regiment of negroes, and employed them on the
fortifications. All the while the rebels were steadily advancing. Before
the armies met, however, General Wallace had been relieved of his
command.

Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, and eastern Kentucky were
organized into a military district, entitled the Department of the Ohio,
General U. S. Wright being appointed to its chief command, and
Major-General Nelson transferred to the command of the Army of Kentucky.
The latter officer adopted tactics very different from those of his
predecessor, and, as events presently demonstrated, far less prudent.
Casting aside the spade, he at once advanced beyond his intrenchments,
to meet the enemy and give him battle. The result was a defeat at the




                        BATTLE OF RICHMOND, KY.
                            AUGUST 30, 1862.


Richmond, Kentucky, is a small village south of the Kentucky river,
southeast of Frankfort, and about twenty-five miles from Lexington.
Richmond is the capital of Madison county, situated about fifty miles
south-southeast of Frankfort, the capital of the State. The Federal
force there consisted of one Ohio regiment, five Indiana regiments and
part of a sixth, two Kentucky regiments, all raw troops, and a squadron
of Kentucky cavalry, under the command of Brigadier-Generals Mahlon D.
Manson and Crufts, with nine field-pieces, making in all six thousand
five hundred men. The number of the enemy’s forces, known to be in
front, could not be ascertained. Information was brought to General
Manson, Friday, August 29th, that the enemy were approaching in large
force. General Manson at once sent a dispatch to Colonel Munday,
commanding a small detachment of cavalry in the neighborhood of
Kingston, directing him to hold the enemy in check; and, if possible to
ascertain his strength and position. The first brigade was then ordered
to stand to arms, and hold themselves in readiness to act at a moment’s
notice.

Four additional companies were sent forward, to strengthen the pickets
at the fort of Big Hill, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Wolfe, of
the Sixteenth Indiana.

At two o’clock, General Manson received intelligence that the infantry
picket, the cavalry of Lieutenant-Colonel Munday, and a similar force
under command of Colonel Metcalf, were retreating with all speed toward
the camps, hard pressed by a rebel force numbering four or five thousand
men. Without loss of time, General Manson ordered out the First brigade,
consisting of the Fifteenth, Fifty-fifth, Sixty-ninth and Seventy-first
Indiana regiments; and the artillery under command of Lieutenant
Lamphere. After an advance of three-quarters of a mile, General Manson
descried a heavy column of rebel cavalry, hardly a mile east of the
road, and ordered a section of the artillery into position, to fire upon
the enemy. The firing was commenced with such excellent effect, as to
scatter the enemy in every direction. General Manson then continued his
advance, bivouacking for the night at Rogersville.

On the morning of the 30th he met the enemy. By this movement he had
placed a distance of four miles between himself and General Cruft’s
brigade. The din of battle at once began, Kirby Smith attacking the
National troops, with the whole rebel force. General Cruft, hearing the
cannonading, moved to General Manson’s support, without waiting for
orders; and found the battle already raging with fierceness and fury.
The new troops were hastily formed in line, under heavy fire, and they
fought bravely, against a foe of almost double their own numbers. But
the slight confusion of forming them into line had already been taken
advantage of by the enemy, who pressed forward in heavy force, and
outflanked the Union troops, by gaining the cover of a large corn-field
and the woods; and making a dash upon the left wing, it gave way, and
fell back in the utmost confusion. General Manson had maintained his
position for upward of three hours; and the artillery had kept up an
almost unceasing fire. The Sixteenth, Fifty-fifth, Sixty-ninth, and
Seventy-first Indiana regiments, under command of, respectively, Colonel
Lucas, Colonel Mahan, Lieutenant-Colonel Korff, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Topping, occupied prominent positions during the engagement, and were
constantly exposed to the enemy’s fire. As the rout of the Union forces
became general, three regiments of General Cruft’s brigade, with the
Eighteenth Kentucky, Colonel Warner, in advance, came up, and made a
determined and desperate effort to check the advancing enemy. For twenty
minutes they contended manfully with an overpowering rebel force, but
were at last obliged to fall back before overwhelming numbers. But the
Union forces were not yet defeated; they retreated about three-quarters
of a mile, and once more formed into line of battle. General Cruft’s
brigade was ordered to the right, to take position on an elevated part
of the ground; two regiments were placed on the extreme right, within
cover of a piece of wood; and two behind a fence, fronting a field of
corn. The First brigade was placed on the left of the road, and formed
in line behind fences. The rebels, secure in numbers, and triumphant
from recent victory, came dashing forward exultantly and with loud
cheers, and threw themselves upon the left flank of General Manson’s
little army. This movement occasioned an immediate change of front; in
the attempt to effect it the Union troops were again thrown into
confusion, and completely routed. General Manson and General Cruft rode
forward, and made a last effort to rally the scattered remnants of their
twice defeated troops; and General Nelson at this moment coming up, a
third time the line was formed, under the combined efforts of these
officers: but the day was against the Union soldiers. After a short,
sharp contest, lasting but a few minutes, the patriot line was repulsed,
defeated, and scattered in confusion. The archives of the State and
about one million of treasure from the banks of Richmond, Lexington, and
Frankfort were transferred during the night to Louisville.

The increase of guerrilla operations in Kentucky about the 1st of
September, with the manifestations of the existence of a Confederate
force, indicated some hostile movements. It was soon known that the
Confederate General E. Kirby Smith was approaching from Knoxville in
Tennessee. On the 22d of August he left Jacksborough with a train of one
hundred and fifty wagons, and passed through Big Creek Gap. So difficult
were some parts of the route in Tennessee that for two or three days the
rear of the trains was only able to reach at night the point from which
the advance started in the morning. Rations failed, and the men were
obliged for several days to subsist on green corn. Hungry, thirsty,
footsore, and choking with dust, his men marched steadily on to a land
of plenty. The ordnance stores were brought safely through without the
loss of a wagon.

There was now no obstacle in the way of the rebel advance. On the 2nd of
September, General Kirby Smith led his victorious followers into
Lexington, and on the 6th he took possession of Frankfort. His
successes, of course, occasioned great consternation, but they did not
paralyze the preparations of the Unionists, to resist his advance and
drive him back. General Nelson had withdrawn to Louisville. General
Wallace was once more called into active service and put in command at
Cincinnati. Both these points were liable to attack, and both
accordingly were as strongly fortified as time and circumstances would
permit. The prompt and effective action of General Wallace, at this
time, was mainly instrumental in stemming the tide of invasion. Troops
flocked to his standard, from all directions. Confidence was restored.
The rebels under Kirby Smith reconnoitred Cincinnati, but found it too
strong for attack, and after a brief time, slowly and sullenly withdrew.




             BRAGG’S INVASION—BATTLE OF MUNFORDSVILLE, KY.
                         SEPTEMBER 14–16, 1862.


The advance of the rebels under General Bragg, into the State of
Kentucky, commenced shortly after that of Kirby Smith. General Bragg had
been opposed by General Buell, in Tennessee. But, slipping away from the
Union commander—never a very active officer—General Bragg had, on the
23rd of July, surprised and captured Murfreesboro, and had then passed
around Nashville, and pushed on into Kentucky, intending to cooperate
with Kirby Smith. How the latter fared we have seen. Our attention is
now due the operations of the former. That he was immediately followed
by General Buell, may be premised.

On the 13th of September the rebel advance reached Munfordsville, where
it was met by Colonel J. T. Wilder. Again the Sabbath sun looked down on
one of the fearful contests of this dreadful war; and it may here be
mentioned, how frequent during the war for the Union, battles of great
moment to the country were fought upon the Sabbath day. With the first
light of Sunday morning, the advance of Bragg’s army, under General
Chalmers, made a fierce attack on Munfordsville. The rebels had
conceived an idea that the Federals had fled, and came rushing on to
what they anticipated as certain victory, when the patriots, making no
sign till the enemy was close upon them, opened a sudden and furious
fire from their well-aimed guns. Utterly confounded, the rebels reeled
back before the unlooked-for shower of death, and fled to the woods in
great confusion. A similarly fierce attack had been made on the right,
while the above was made on the left; and under the dreadful fire of the
rebels, the Union flag was pierced with one hundred and forty bullets.
The enemy was completely repulsed, and, at a little before ten, they
ceased firing. No more fighting ensued during that day. In the mean
time, a reinforcement of six companies had been sent to Colonel Wilder;
and dispatches for more had been sent to Louisville and Bowling Green.
But Louisville was in great trouble, and could spare no troops; and for
reasons utterly inexplicable, General Buell did not send any assistance,
though his entire army was stationed at Bowling Green. On Monday the
battle was renewed fiercely, and kept up during the day. Evening came,
and with it General Bragg and the bulk of his army.

On Wednesday morning, the place was surrendered by Colonel C. L. Dunham,
who had arrived with his regiment, and then had command. The troops
surrendered consisted of the Seventeenth, Sixtieth, Sixty-seventh,
Sixty-eighth, Sixty-ninth Indiana, a company of Louisville cavalry, a
part of the Fourth Ohio, and a section of the Thirteenth Indiana
battery; amounting in all to about four thousand five hundred men, and
ten guns. Both officers and men were at once paroled. General Bragg,
unmolested by General Buell, continued his march northward, and before
reaching Louisville, turned his troops toward the centre of Kentucky.
General Buell marched straight to Louisville, where, having encamped, he
left Bragg in the heart of the State, to despoil it, and pick up
everything in the way of supplies that could in the future be of value
to him.




                       BATTLE OF PERRYVILLE, KY.
                            OCTOBER 8, 1862.


After a long period of extraordinary inaction, and after General Bragg
had commenced his retreat from Kentucky, General Buell suddenly roused
to the necessity of doing something, and moved from Louisville. His army
was divided into three corps: the first, under command of Major-General
A. McDowell McCook; the second under Major-General Crittenden; the third
under Major-General Gilbert. Major-General Thomas being second in
command, moved with the second corps; and General Buell himself with the
third.

The army advanced in pursuit of the enemy, and it was thought that the
rebels would concentrate at Danville—but instead of doing so, finding
themselves hard pressed, they made a stand at Perryville; where on the
evening of the 7th they stubbornly resisted General Buell’s advance.
This point became the field of a bloody battle, which took its name from
the spot on which it was fought. General McCook did not receive orders
to march to Perryville, till three hours after midnight; and though his
troops began to advance before dawn they did not reach the battle-field
till ten o’clock on the 8th. General McCook formed a junction with
General Gilbert’s corps; and in person reported to General Buell for
orders. General Buell, appearing to anticipate no serious fighting, gave
no orders for immediate attack; and the rebels, taking instant advantage
of his indisposition for opening the engagement, resolved to take the
initiative before the remaining corps under General Crittenden could
arrive. General Bragg drew together his entire force and impetuously
hurled them on General McCook’s corps, who met the unexpected assault
with the greatest bravery, and stood like adamant before the furious
enemy. From two o’clock till nightfall the battle continued to rage with
unexampled violence; and both generals—Union and rebel—have recorded it
as one of the bloodiest of the war. At General Buell’s headquarters the
cannonading was distinctly heard; and he proved himself a most
inefficient officer, in not sending the other two divisions to the
immediate assistance of General McCook; whose solitary corps of fifteen
thousand men was withstanding a force of at least three times their own
number. There can be no doubt that the cooperation of the three corps
would have insured certain victory; instead of which the brave division,
fearfully cut up, after a superhuman contest of many hours was compelled
to retire before the superior numbers of the enemy. Having completely
overcome the troops under General McCook the rebels followed up their
advantage by falling with all their strength on the corps of General
Gilbert, which was still waiting orders from the commander-in-chief to
hasten to the assistance of General McCook. The battle was instantly
renewed with trebly increased fury; the large numbers of the enemy, like
a great ocean sweeping on to what they considered an easy victory. But
the flood was met and momentarily checked by a brigade under Colonel
Gooding; and the Union forces rallying, the rebels retreated across the
valley, never pausing till they had reached the protection of their
batteries. Then began the carnage to the patriot band, who charged
bravely upon the rebel batteries: but being unsupported, and flanked on
either side, they were obliged to fall back and take up a position near
the town—when night ended the conflict. On both sides the loss of
officers was heavy; the loss of men on the Union side far outnumbered
that of the rebels.

In the morning it was found that the rebel force, with their leader,
fearing a renewal of the battle, had taken flight during the night; and
pursuit was ordered; but was abandoned after a chase of about ten miles.
And thus the invasion of Kentucky by General Bragg was ended, with
results by no means wholly satisfactory to the rebels.

General Buell’s extraordinary tactics during the battles of
Munfordsville and Perryville had entirely lost him the confidence of his
army; and as the murmurs against his generalship grew louder, and
deeper, he was on the 30th October again relieved of command; and
Major-General V. S. Rosecrans was appointed to the position of
commander-in-chief of the Army of the Ohio, subsequently known as the
Army of the Cumberland.




                         BATTLE OF IUKA, MISS.
                          SEPTEMBER 19, 1862.


A brief backward glance is here necessary at the operations of the Army
of the Mississippi, immediately preceding the transfer of General
Rosecrans from that army to the command of the Army of the Ohio.
Corinth, as we have seen, had been captured by the national forces on
the 30th of May, 1862. Its importance as a military position, (early
recognized by the rebel General Beauregard) continually tempted the
rebels to undertake its recapture. Many endeavors to effect this had
been made, during the summer of 1862. One of these occasioned severe
engagements at Bolivar Station, on the 30th and 31st of August, and at
Britton’s Lane, on the 1st of September. The rebels lost heavily in
these fights.

The rebel strategy at this time contemplated severing the railroad
communication between Memphis and Corinth. To prevent that disaster, and
effectually to check the advance of the insurgents, General Rosecrans,
on the 19th of September, gave battle to the rebels under General Price,
attacking them near the village of Iuka. The battle commenced toward
evening, the attack being made by two brigades of Missouri cavalry,
commanded by General Stanley and General Hamilton, supported by the
Fifth Ohio, Colonel Matthias—an excellent officer and a brave man—and
the Eleventh Ohio battery. The latter, placed in position on the brow of
a hill, commanded the road in front, and did great service. The Fifth
Ohio and the Twenty-sixth Missouri occupied a position on the right
under cover of woods. On the left of the road and slightly in advance of
the battery, was stationed the Forty-eighth Indiana. The rebel forces,
comprising eighteen regiments, were commanded by General Price, in
person.

The rebels, largely outnumbering the Unionists, hurled themselves, at
the outset, in a dense mass upon the front of the National line, and
strove to break it. To bring up new troops to its support was
impossible. At first, it appeared that the Federals would give way;
great confusion prevailed; but just at the critical moment General
Stanley pushed to the front, to aid General Hamilton in reforming the
disordered troops. His presence had a magical effect; and when at length
the Eleventh Missouri, a part of his division, was pushed to the right,
where it united with the Twenty-sixth Missouri and the Fifth Iowa, a
gallant and successful stand was made against the enemy, who was finally
driven back with great loss. From this time, until darkness put an end
to the battle, the rebels, confident in their great numerical strength,
made repeated and desperate attacks upon the National forces—attacks
which, in every instance, were bravely met, and successfully repulsed.

[Illustration: JEFFERSON DAVIS.]

The brunt of the battle was borne by General Hamilton’s regiments, who
well deserve the honor due to dauntless bravery. General Stanley’s
division, being in the rear, was, with the exception of the Eleventh
Missouri, before named—which rendered signal service—prevented from
taking an active part in the conflict.

On the morning of the 20th, it was found that the rebels had fled—in a
southerly direction. General Hamilton and General Stanley immediately
started in pursuit with cavalry, following the foe for fifteen miles.
Then, worn out with labor and fighting, and famished for want of food,
they discontinued the pursuit and returned to camp.




                        BATTLE OF CORINTH, MISS.
                         OCTOBER 3 AND 4, 1862.


Immediately after the battle of Iuka, the rebel forces of Price and Van
Dorn formed a junction, for the purpose of making another attempt upon
Corinth. General Rosecrans, meanwhile, always watchful and energetic,
speedily divined their plans, and at once made the requisite
preparations to check their advance. Nor was the collision long
deferred. On the morning of the 3rd of October, the Union forces were
attacked by a body of insurgents, largely superior in numbers,
(officially stated at thirty-eight thousand,) and on that day and the
next was fought one of the bloodiest battles of the war, which is known
as the battle of Corinth. The rebel force was commanded by Generals
Price, Van Dorn, Lovell, Villipigue and Rusk.

The following was the disposition of the Union troops, on the 3rd of
October: General McKean with his division occupied Chewalla; General
Davis with his division, occupied the line between the Memphis and
Columbus road: General Hamilton, with his division, had taken position
between the rebel works, on the Purdy and Hamburgh roads; and General
Stanley held his division in reserve, near the old headquarters of
General Grant. This disposition of the troops placed General Hamilton on
the right, General McKean on the left, and General Davis in the centre.
McKean had an advance of three regiments of infantry, and a section of
artillery under Colonel Oliver, on the Chewalla road, beyond the enemy’s
breastworks.

On the morning of the 3rd, the advance under Colonel Oliver, took a
strong position on a hill, near an angle in these breastworks: and at
about nine o’clock they were strongly pressed by the enemy, who
manœuvred to outflank them. At ten o’clock General Rosecrans was
informed that Colonel Oliver was imperatively in need of reinforcements,
and must yield his position unless they were furnished. The hill would
be of great value to the enemy; and it was therefore necessary that the
Union forces should hold possession of it; and two regiments of Colonel
Davies’ brigade were sent to Colonel Oliver’s assistance. It was
presently demonstrated that Brigadier-General Arthur had taken up four
more regiments from McKean’s division; and Colonel Oliver’s position
upon the hill was being strongly contested. An advance, leaving an
interval between McArthur’s and Davies’ left, was now made upon the
enemy’s breastworks; but the rebels cleverly pushed on behind Davies’
left, and, after a fierce and determined resistance, forced the brigade
to a rapid retreat of nearly a thousand yards, in which movement it lost
two heavy guns. Of the fighting, in this engagement, on the 3rd of
October, General Rosecrans speaks thus:

“Our troops fought with the most determined courage, firing very low. At
one P. M. Davies having resumed the same position he had occupied in the
morning, and McArthur’s brigade having fought a heavy force, it became
evident that the enemy were in full strength, and meant mischief. McKean
with Crocker’s brigade had seen only skirmishers; there were no signs of
any movement on our left, and only a few cavalry skirmishers on our
right. It was pretty clear that we were to expect the weight of the
attack to fall on our centre, where hopes had been given of our falling
back.

“Orders were accordingly given to McKean to fall back to the next ridge
beyond our intrenchments, to touch his right on Davies’ left, for
Stanley to move northward and eastward, to stand in close echelon, but
nearer town. General Hamilton was ordered to face toward Chewalla and
move down until his left reached Davies’ right. Davies was informed of
these dispositions, told to hold his ground obstinately, and then, when
he had drawn them in strongly, Hamilton would swing in on their front
and rear and close the day. Hamilton was carefully instructed on this
point, and entered into the spirit of it.”

The result of this day’s battle was not favorable to the National
troops; the fighting of each and every division engaged was superb, but
the number of the enemy so far exceeded that of the Union army that when
the engagement for the day was closed by the approach of night, the
whole National force was driven back, and had lost a great many men.
General Oglesby was wounded, and General Hackleman was killed.

Very early on the following morning the opening of fire from the enemy’s
artillery gave indications of a very hard fight to come.

At seven o’clock the heads of the rebel column were seen, emerging from
the woods in front of the Union forces, and slowly bearing down upon
their centre—first on Davis, next on Stanley, and last on Hamilton. The
rebel force was so overpowering that the jaded and worn troops of the
Union fell back before it. A contemporary correspondent describing this
portion of the battle on the 4th, writes as follows: “It was perhaps
half-past nine o’clock when the bitter tragedy began to develop in
earnest. A prodigious mass, with gleaming bayonets, suddenly loomed out,
dark and threatening on the east of the railroad, moving sternly up the
Bolivar road in column by divisions. Directly it opened out in the shape
of a monstrous wedge, and drove forward impetuously toward the heart of
Corinth. It was a splendid target for our batteries, and it was soon
perforated. Hideous gaps were rent in it, but those massive lines were
closed almost as soon as they were torn open. At this period the skilful
management of General Rosecrans began to develop. It was discovered that
the enemy had been enticed to attack precisely at the point where the
artillery could sweep them with direct, cross and enfilading fire. He
had prepared for such an occasion. Our shell swept through the mass with
awful effect, but the brave rebels pressed onward inflexibly. Directly
the wedge opened and spread out magnificently, right and left, like
great wings, seeming to swoop over the whole field before them. But
there was a fearful march in front. A broad turfy glacis, sloping upward
at an angle of thirty degrees to a crest fringed with determined,
disciplined soldiers, and clad with terrible batteries, frowned upon
them. There were a few obstructions—fallen timber—which disordered their
lines a little. But every break was instantly welded. Our whole line
opened fire, but the enemy, seemingly insensible to fear, or infuriated
by passion, bent their necks downward and marched steadily to death,
_with their faces averted like men striving to protect themselves
against a driving storm of hail_. The Yates and Burgess sharpshooters,
lying snugly behind their rude breastworks, poured in a destructive
fire, but it seemed no more effectual than if they had been firing
potato-balls, excepting that somebody was killed. The enemy still
pressed onward undismayed. At last they reached the crest of the hill in
front and to the right of Fort Richardson, and General Davies’s division
gave way. It began to fall back in disorder. General Rosecrans, who had
been watching the conflict with eagle eye, and who is described as
having expressed his delight at the trap into which General Price was
blindly plunging, discovered the break and dashed to the front, inflamed
with indignation. He rallied the men by his splendid example in the
thickest of the fight. Before the line was demoralized he succeeded in
restoring it, and the men, brave when bravely led, fought again. But
they had yielded much space, and the loss of Fort Richardson was
certain. Price’s right moved swiftly to the headquarters of General
Rosecrans, took possession of it, and posted themselves under cover of
the portico of the house, and behind its corners, whence they opened
fire upon our troops on the opposite side of the public square. Seven
rebels were killed within the little inclosure in front of the General’s
cottage. The structure is a sort of sieve now—bullets have punctured it
so numerously. But the desperate men got no further into town.

“Battle was raging about Fort Richardson. Gallant Richardson, for whom
it was named, fought his battery well. Had his supports fought, as his
artillerymen did, the record would have been different. The rebels
gained the crest of the hill, swarmed around the little redoubt, and
were swept away from it as a breath will dissipate smoke. Again they
swarmed like infuriated tigers. At last a desperate dash with a yell.
Richardson goes down to rise no more. His supports are not at hand. The
foe shouts triumphantly and seizes the guns. The horses are fifty yards
down the hill toward Corinth. A score of rebels seize them. The
Fifty-sixth Illinois suddenly rises from cover in the ravine. One
terrible volley, and there are sixteen dead artillery horses, a dozen
dead rebels. Illinois shouts, and charges up the hill, across the
plateau into the battery. The rebels fly out through embrasures and
around the wings. The Fifty-sixth yells again and pursues.

“The rebels do not stop. Hamilton’s veterans, meantime, have been
working quietly—no lung-work, but gun-work enough. A steady stream of
fire tore the rebel ranks to pieces. When Davies broke it was necessary
for all to fall back. General Rosecrans thought it well enough to get
Price in deeply. A rebel soldier says Van Dorn sat on his horse grimly
and saw it all. ‘That’s Rosecrans’s trick,’ said he; ‘he’s got Price
where he must suffer.’ Maybe this is one of the apocrypha of battle. A
rebel soldier says it’s true. But Hamilton’s division receded under
orders—at backward step, slowly, grimly, face to the foe, and firing.
But when the Fifty-sixth Illinois charged, this was changed. Davies’
misfortune had been remedied. The whole line advanced. The rebel host
was broken. A destroying Nemesis pursued them. Arms were flung away
wildly. They ran to the woods. They fled into the forests. Oh! what a
shout of triumph and what a gleaming line of steel followed them. It is
strange, but true. Our men do not often shout before battle. Heavens!
what thunder there is in their throats after victory. ‘They’’ report
that such a shout was never before heard in Corinth. Price’s _once_
‘invincible’’ now invisible legions were broken, demoralized, fugitive,
and remorselessly pursued down the hill, into the swamps, through the
thickets, into the forests. Newly disturbed earth shows where they fell
and how very thickly.”

During this hot fighting on the right, General Van Dorn, with his corps
arranged in four dense columns, made an attack on the Union left,
advancing on Battery Robinette. As the rebels came on they were received
with a volley of grape and canister; and as they drew nearer, a
murderous fire of musketry, from the Ohio brigade, met them directly in
the front, and caused them to reel back in confusion to the woods in
their rear. But the enemy were not yet defeated; they reformed
immediately, and boldly advanced to the charge again, led on by Colonel
Rogers, of the Second Texas; but a second time the dread musketry of the
Ohio brigade broke over them in a perfect shower of death. The rebels
held their ground with a front of desperate bravery, but when the
Twenty-seventh Ohio and the Eleventh Missouri, at the order to charge,
rushed forward upon them, their thinned ranks broke into fragments, and
they fled wildly back to the shelter of the woods pursued by the Union
soldiers, and the battle of Corinth was over—an entire and triumphant
victory to the National arms.

The enemy’s loss in killed was one thousand four hundred and
twenty-three officers and men; their loss in wounded amounted to five
thousand six hundred and ninety-two. The Unionists took two thousand two
hundred and forty-eight prisoners, among whom were one hundred and
thirty-seven field-officers, captains, and subalterns, representing
fifty-three regiments of infantry, sixteen regiments of cavalry,
thirteen batteries of artillery, and seven battalions, making sixty-nine
regiments, six battalions, and thirteen batteries, beside separate
companies.

The National troops took also fourteen stands of colors, two pieces of
artillery, three thousand three hundred stand of arms, four thousand
five hundred rounds of ammunition, and a large lot of accoutrements. The
enemy blew up several wagons between Corinth and Chewalla, and beyond
Chewalla many ammunition wagons and carriages were destroyed, and the
ground was strewn with tents, officers’ mess-chests, and small arms.

When it was finally ascertained that the enemy, utterly routed, were in
full retreat, General Rosecrans ordered preparations for an immediate
pursuit. General Grant also sent a force under General Ord and General
Hurlbut to intercept and cut off the enemy’s retreat; and thus, when the
rebels reached Hatchie river, they found themselves completely hemmed
in—caught between two rivers—the Hatchie in front of them, the Tuscumbia
behind them. For a time the capture of the entire rebel army seemed
inevitable, pursued as they were by General Rosecrans, and assailed in
front by the reinforcements from General Grant. Unfortunately, the Union
army was too much exhausted by its recent severe efforts, to follow up
the advantage; and General Price, always accomplished in carrying out a
retreat, made a successful attempt to cross the Hatchie a few miles
above the point where his first effort had been disputed, and so escaped
with his imperilled army.




       GENERAL BURNSIDE TAKES COMMAND OF THE ARMY OF THE POTOMAC.
                           NOVEMBER 10, 1862.


On the 12th of November General Burnside issued the following address to
the army:


                      HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC, _Nov. 10, 1862_.

  In accordance with General Orders, No. 182, issued by the President of
  the United States, I hereby assume command of the Army of the Potomac.
  Patriotism, and the exercise of every energy in the direction of this
  army, aided by the full and hearty cooperation of its officers and
  men, will, I hope, under the blessing of God, insure its success.

  Having been a sharer of the privations, and a witness of the bravery
  of the old Army of the Potomac in the Maryland campaign, and fully
  identified with them in their feelings of respect and esteem for
  General McClellan, entertained through a long and most friendly
  association with him, I feel that it is not as a stranger I assume
  command.

  To the Ninth army corps, so long and intimately associated with me, I
  need say nothing. Our histories are identical. With diffidence for
  myself, but with a proud confidence in the unswerving loyalty and
  determination of the gallant army now intrusted to my care, I accept
  its control, with the steadfast assurance that the just cause must
  prevail.

                               [Signed]          A. E. BURNSIDE,
                                               Major-General Commanding.


This was a position that was by no means coveted by General Burnside. He
well knew the difficulties and responsibilities of the office, and
expressed his misgivings of his ability to perform its duties. But he
was a brave and gallant soldier, and had already won the confidence of
the Government, and the admiration of his companions in-arms. It was
only after mature deliberation, and the consultation and advice of the
principal corps commanders that he consented to take upon himself the
chief command. In this determination he recognized the soldier’s duty of
obedience as a paramount consideration.

On the 12th the general-in-chief, (Halleck) and General Meigs proceeded
from Washington to the headquarters to confer with General Burnside. On
the same day the advance of the army was across the Rappahannock and
fifteen miles south of Warrenton. On the 14th General Burnside issued
the following order reorganizing a portion of army:


                                 HEADQUARTERS, ARMY OF THE POTOMAC,    }
                                 WARRENTON, VA., _Nov. 14, 1862_.      }

  _General Order, No. 184._

  First. The organization of a part of this array in three grand
  divisions is hereby announced. These grand divisions will be formed
  and commanded as follows:

  The Second and Ninth Corps will form the right grand division, and
  will be commanded by Major-General E. V. Sumner.

  The First and Sixth Corps will form the left grand division, and will
  be commanded by Major-General W. B. Franklin.

  The Third and Fifth Corps will form the centre grand division, and
  will be commanded by Major-General Joseph Hooker.

  The Eleventh Corps, with such others as may hereby be assigned to it,
  will constitute a reserve force, under the command of Major-General F.
  Sigel.

  Assignments of cavalry and further details will be announced in future
  orders.

                               By command of Major-General BURNSIDE.
                                                   S. WILLIAMS, A. A.-G.


Meanwhile the mass of General Lee’s forces retired to Gordonsville. On
the 16th the forces of General Burnside began to move for
Fredericksburg, as had been previously determined in consultation on the
12th between Generals Halleck and Burnside. On the 15th the evacuation
of Warrenton and the adjacent places was commenced, and by the morning
of the 18th it was entirely completed. The advance was led by General
Sumner. At the same time supplies were sent to Acquia Creek, and the
repairs of the railroad track to Fredericksburg commenced, and the army
concentrated at Falmouth, opposite Fredericksburg.

The march to Richmond was to be made by the route from Fredericksburg.
This city is on the south bank of the Rappahannock, and sixty-five miles
distant from Richmond. It is connected with the latter place by a
railroad, of which there is a double line nearly to Hanover Junction,
twenty-three miles from Richmond. The railroad crosses the Matapony
river at Milford, thirty-seven miles from Fredericksburg, and the
Pamunkey, twenty-five miles from Richmond, besides a number of smaller
streams. Between Falmouth, where the Federal army concentrated, and
Richmond, there are two main and two minor lines of defence. The first
that of the Rappahannock river. Above Falmouth its abrupt banks, which
are lined with high hills, difficult of access, and its narrow fords and
rocky bottom render a rapid crossing for a large force almost
impossible. Below, the valley of the river expands, spreading often into
spacious plains, while the winding course of the stream forms numerous
necks of land, easily commanded from the north side, and giving secure
crossing places, and ample ground for the formation of troops. At
Fredericksburg the north commands the south bank, and much of the
distance, which is a mile and a half, to the frowning hills or table
land beyond. But these heights equally command this intermediate plain,
and are unassailable in front except by infantry. Next in the rear, and
twelve miles distant, is the line of the Po river and Stannard’s Marsh,
which is hardly available except to hold a pursuing foe in check. The
North Anna is about forty miles from the Rappahannock, and affords
another principal line of defence. It is a deep and rapid stream, with a
narrow valley. The table-land on its north bank is about one hundred
feet above the bed of the river, and about one hundred and fifty feet on
the south bank. The extension of its line after it turns to join the
South Anna, and becomes the Pamunkey, presents scarcely less obstacles
than the river itself, so well is the ground guarded by swamps and
flanked by streams. The last and a minor line of defence is the South
Anna river, with the southern commanded by the northern bank, and too
near the North Anna for a second formation by a force that has been
badly defeated. Numerous small streams parallel to the line of advance
present suitable points for resistance, and protect foes attacking the
line communication, while the bridges over them are weak points
necessary to be securely guarded.

By the 20th a considerable force had reached Falmouth. General Sumner on
the next day sent a summons to surrender, which elicited a
correspondence from Mayor Slaughter, showing that the town was at the
mercy of the combatants, and beyond the control of the city authorities.

As General Burnside’s army concentrated on the north bank, General Lee’s
forces concentrated on the heights in the rear of Fredericksburg. Had
the pontoon bridges been at hand when the advance reached Falmouth, the
line of the Rappahannock would have been taken without opposition. Then,
with proper supplies and bridges, thirty of the sixty miles to Richmond
would have been placed within the reach of General Burnside, and perhaps
a lodgment have been effected on the banks of the North Anna. Nearly
thirty days elapsed before the pontoons arrived and the bridges were
completed.

It was the design of General Burnside that the pontoons should leave
Alexandria on November 11, and arrive at Falmouth at the same time with
the advance of his army. The right grand division reached Falmouth on
November 17. The pontoons left Alexandria on November 19, and arrived at
Fredericksburgh after the movements of General Burnside had not only
become known, but after General Lee had advanced his forces from
Gordonsville to the heights in the rear of Fredericksburg, and had
fortified them. They were not used until the night of December 10, owing
to material changes in the plan of the commander-in-chief, necessitated
by new movements of the enemy.

During the night of the 10th of December, therefore, the pontoons were
conveyed to the river, and the artillery to the number of one hundred
and forty-three pieces was placed in position opposite the city. Between
four and five o’clock on the morning of the 11th, the work of building
four bridges was commenced. One was to be made at the point where the
railroad bridge formerly crossed, and two others opposite the city but
nearer Falmouth, and the fourth nearly two miles below for the crossing
of the left wing under General Franklin. A dull haze so obscured the
movement, that it was not discovered for some time by the Confederate
pickets. The bridges were thus partly constructed, when a brisk and
deadly fire of musketry from along the banks of the river and windows of
the houses was opened, which compelled the workmen to stop. They fled to
the cover of the surrounding hills where they formed again, and about
six o’clock the work was recommenced. The Confederates had now become
aroused to a sense of what was going forward, and with reinforcements of
sharpshooters swarmed the opposite bank and houses. The pontonniers,
nothing daunted by the hot fire poured upon them, went bravely to work.
A storm of bullets covered them. The planks and boats were riddled by
every volley. Once more they were compelled to withdraw, and again fell
back to the cover of the ridge of hills running parallel with the river.
Orders were now given to the artillery to open fire on the city. The
Federal batteries commenced an almost simultaneous bombardment,
directing their fire chiefly at the houses in which the sharpshooters
had concealed themselves. At the first fire they became untenable, and
the riflemen retreated to the rear of the town, and took shelter behind
the buildings unharmed. The fire of the artillery, which commenced at
seven o’clock, was continued incessantly until one o’clock. The fog
somewhat obscured its results, but bodies of the Confederates with great
stubbornness still kept within the city. The Confederate batteries on
the heights in the rear continued silent. Not a gun was fired. About ten
o’clock, the workmen were again formed for a third attempt to build the
bridges. Volunteers joined them from the Eighth Connecticut. Some planks
were seized and carried out to the end of a string of boats and placed
in position, when a galling fire from sharpshooters in rifle pits near
the edge of the water again interrupted them, and they were recalled.
Meantime the bombardment was continued, and several houses in the city
had taken fire. In the afternoon, several pontoon boats, loaded with
volunteers from the Seventh Michigan and Nineteenth Massachusetts, were
sent over. They chased the Confederate sharpshooters from their hiding
places, and the bridges were finished without further interruption. On
the other side a scene of destruction presented itself. The walls of
houses were breached, roofs had fallen in, and the interiors were
destroyed.

No sooner were the bridges completed than the troops began to cross, and
before dusk General Sumner’s grand division had gone over, and a section
of General Hooker’s. All had rations for three days, and blankets for a
bivouac. The grand division of General Franklin, consisting of the corps
of General Reynolds and Smith, crossed over at the lower bridge, which
was built earlier in the day, without interruption, as there was a plain
before it which the artillery could have easily swept. The troops
commenced crossing again early on the morning of the 12th without
molestation. Some sharp resistance had been made by the Confederate
soldiers to those who crossed on the previous day, but those were driven
out of the city, or killed. During the afternoon fire was opened upon
the city by the Confederate batteries on the nearest heights, which was
replied to by the Federal batteries, and soon ceased. The occupation of
Fredericksburg had now been successfully made. No greater opposition had
been presented by the forces of General Lee than was sufficient to tempt
the Federal troops to press forward with greater ardor.

The next movement was to drive the Confederate forces from their
positions on the heights. These positions consisted of two lines of
batteries, one a mile in rear of the other, and both overlooking the
city. They extended, in the form of a semicircle, from Port Royal to a
point about six miles above Fredericksburg. Their right wing, under
General Jackson, extended from Port Royal to Guinney’s Station on the
Richmond and Fredericksburg railroad; the centre, under General
Longstreet, extended to the telegraph road; the left, under General
Stuart, was west of Massaponax creek. A reserve corps was commanded by
General A. P. Hill. This was the force which had fought at Richmond and
in Maryland.

Friday night and Saturday morning, the 13th, were spent by General
Burnside in making a proper disposition of his forces. The left was
occupied by General Franklin with his grand division, the centre by
General Hooker, and the right by General Sumner.

The right of General Franklin rested on the outskirts of the city, his
centre was advanced about a mile from the river, and his left was on the
Rappahannock, about three miles below. The action commenced on the
extreme left by an annoying fire from a rebel battery, which the Ninth
New York was ordered to charge and capture. In this attempt they were
repulsed. A brigade was brought to their aid by General Tyler, and
another attempt made, but the fire was so deadly that it failed of
success. The battle now became more general, and another attempt was
made to capture the battery. No advantage was gained at this time, but a
severe loss was suffered. The conflict now extended along the whole line
of the left, and a desperate effort was made to drive the Confederates
across the Massaponax creek by turning their position. The ground was
contested most obstinately, but the Confederates gradually fell back,
occasionally making a most desperate stand, until night, when General
Franklin had succeeded in gaining nearly a mile, and his troops occupied
the field. The right of General Franklin’s division, under General
Reynolds, encountered the fire of the Confederate artillery on the
heights, and although the conflict was most deadly, no advantage was
gained.

On the right, under command of General Sumner, the action commenced
about ten o’clock and was furious during the rest of the day. The
Confederate forces occupied the woods and hills in the rear of the city,
from which it soon became evident they could not be driven except at the
point of the bayonet. The charge was ordered to be made by the division
of General French supported by that of General Howard. Steadily the
troops moved across the plain, until they were within a dozen yards of
the ridge, when they were suddenly met by a galling fire from the
Confederate infantry posted behind a stone wall. For a few minutes the
head of the column exhibited some confusion; but quickly forming into
line it retired back to a ravine within musket shot of the rebels. Here
they were reinforced by fresh troops who fearlessly advanced to their
aid under a most destructive fire of artillery. The line of assault was
now formed again, and with bayonets fixed and a double quick step, they
rushed forward to seize the Confederate artillery. From the first step
they encountered a terrific fire of infantry and artillery. No veterans
could face that shock. They were thrown into confusion and brought to a
sudden halt. At this juncture the centre quivered, faltered, and fled in
disorder, but was afterwards rallied and brought back. Three times was
the attack thus made to dislodge those batteries. But each time it was
in vain. The ranks of the storming party, shrunk to small limits,
retired. The entire force of his artillery was now brought by General
Sumner to bear upon the enemy, and thus the contest was kept up until
dark. At night the Confederate force occupied their original position,
and the wounded and the dead remained where they had fallen. Every
attempt to remove them by the Federal troops was defeated by the rebel
infantry.

In the centre under the command of General Hooker, skirmishing commenced
early in the morning; and during the forenoon, while the fog prevailed,
a terrific contest, chiefly with artillery, was kept up on both sides.
The Confederate position appeared to be invulnerable to artillery, and
about noon preparations were made for storming it. The troops marched
steadily up within musket shot of the batteries, and were there met by
such a destructive fire of artillery and rifles as drove them back with
a heavy loss. Reinforcements were obtained, and the attempt to take the
batteries was repeated in the afternoon, but without success. The
contest continued with great fierceness until night. About half past
five the firing of the musketry ceased, but that of the artillery
continued until long after dark.

On the next day, Sunday the 14th, both armies remained comparatively
quiet. Some skirmishing and artillery fire took place for a short time.

On Monday, both armies continued in the same position. The Confederates
had strengthened some of their works. During the ensuing night, the army
evacuated Fredericksburg and retired across the river to its former
position. The artillery crossed first, followed by the infantry, the
last of whom left about daylight. The pontoon bridges were then removed
and all communication cut off. The movement was not perceived by the
Confederates until it was too late to do any injury to the retreating
force. The following is the despatch of General Burnside announcing this
movement:


                              HEADQUARTERS ARMY POTOMAC,               }
                  SIX O’CLOCK, P. M., _December 16, 1862_. }

  Major-General HALLECK: The army was withdrawn to this side of the
  river because I felt the position in front could not be carried, and
  it was a military necessity either to attack or retire. A repulse
  would have been disastrous to us. The army was withdrawn at night,
  without the knowledge of the enemy, and without loss either of
  property or men.

                                                       A. E. BURNSIDE,
                                               Major-General Commanding.


The Federal loss was as follows: General Sumner’s division on the right,
killed, four hundred and seventy-three; wounded, four thousand and
ninety; missing, seven hundred and forty-eight. Total, five thousand
three hundred and eleven.

General Hooker’s division on the centre, killed, three hundred and
twenty-six; wounded, two thousand four hundred and sixty-eight; missing,
seven hundred and fifty-four. Total, three thousand five hundred and
forty-eight.

General Franklin’s division on the left, killed, three hundred and
thirty-nine; wounded, two thousand five hundred and forty-seven;
missing, five hundred and seventy-six. Total, three thousand four
hundred and sixty-two. Grand total, killed, one thousand one hundred and
thirty-eight; wounded, nine thousand one hundred and five; missing, two
thousand and seventy-eight. Total, twelve thousand three hundred and
twenty-one.

The Confederate loss was comparatively small, having been sheltered by
their works.

General Burnside in his report to the general-in-chief, thus explains
his defeat:

“How near we came to the accomplishment of our object future reports
will show. But for the fog, and the unexpected and unavoidable delay in
building the bridges, which gave the enemy twenty-four hours to
concentrate his forces in his strong position, we would almost certainly
have succeeded, in which case the battle would have been, in my opinion,
far more decisive than if we had crossed at the places first selected.
As it was, we came very near success. Failing in the accomplishment of
the main object, we remained in order of battle two days, long enough to
decide that the enemy would not come out of his strongholds to fight me
with his infantry, after which we recrossed to this side of the river
unmolested, without the loss of men or property.

“As the day broke our long lines of troops were seen marching to their
different positions as if going on parade—not the least demoralization
or disorganization existed.

“To the brave officers and soldiers who accomplished the feat of thus
recrossing in the face of the enemy, I owe everything. For the failure
in the attack, I am responsible, as the extreme gallantry, courage, and
endurance shown by them were never exceeded, and would have carried the
points had it been possible.

“To the families and friends of the dead I can only offer my heartfelt
sympathies, but for the wounded I can offer my earnest prayer for their
comfort and final recovery.

“The fact that I decided to move from Warrenton on this line rather
against the opinion of the President, Secretary of War, and yourself,
and that you have left the whole movement in my hands, without giving me
orders, makes me the more responsible.”

Thus closed the third campaign against Richmond. No further hostile
demonstrations were made by either army during the year.




           OPERATIONS IN TENNESSEE. BATTLE OF MURFREESBORO’.
                           DECEMBER 31, 1862.


On the 25th of October General Rosecrans was ordered to Cincinnati to
take command of the Army of the Ohio, which consisted of what remained
of the splendid army formerly commanded by General Buell. The Army of
the Ohio was at this time—October 30, 1862—concentrated at Bowling
Green, Kentucky; and there General Rosecrans took up his headquarters.
This General’s first step was to organize and discipline the army, which
had been, in a measure, demoralized by its reverses, under the command
of General Buell. This was a task of magnitude, requiring both time and
energy. It was accomplished, however, and on the 10th of November,
General Rosecrans transferred his headquarters from Bowling Green to
Nashville, Tennessee.

Six weeks of unavoidable delay occurred, during which time the Army of
the Ohio did nothing to retrieve its past disasters. General Rosecrans
was one hundred and eighty-three miles from Louisville, his base of
supplies; and the only communication between his present headquarters
and the capital of Kentucky was a single line of railroad, not yet
completed from Mitchellsville to Nashville, a distance of fifty miles.
The completion of this piece of railroad occupied three weeks; and after
it was in perfect running order, it required still another three weeks
to collect supplies, sufficient to make it safe for the army to attempt
any movement in advance. Much skirmishing between the patriot troops and
the rebels meanwhile occurred; in most of which the former were
victorious. The only disaster of any moment, that occurred to the Union
army, at this period, was the capture of Colonel Moore’s brigade, at
Hartsville, by the rebel guerrilla, General John A. Morgan, with a
cavalry force, and mounted infantry, numbering about five thousand men.

General Rosecrans proceeded with indefatigable energy in his
preparations to meet the enemy; but, with the utmost dispatch and
patience combined, it was almost the end of December before he was in
condition to offer battle to the rebel Bragg, who was stationed at
Murfreesboro’, having made his headquarters there, after his escape from
Kentucky. The army under General Rosecrans bore no comparison in numbers
with that of Bragg; but its organization was perfect. Being compelled to
leave a large force at Nashville, for the protection of that city,
General Rosecrans’ force, when he advanced, was less than forty-seven
thousand men; while that of General Bragg numbered sixty-five thousand.

General Rosecrans divided his army into three corps; one under command
of General McD. McCook; another under command of General George H.
Thomas; and a third under command of General Thomas L. Crittenden. The
corps of General McCook consisted of three divisions under Generals
Johnson, Davis and Sheridan; General Thomas’ corps consisted of two
divisions, under Generals Rousseau and Negley. The corps of General
Crittenden was composed of three divisions, under Generals Van Cleve,
Wood and Palmer. General D. S. Stanley was chief of cavalry.

The rebel forces under Bragg were also divided into three corps,
commanded respectively by Generals Hardee, Polk and E. Kirby Smith. In
addition General Bragg had two cavalry brigades, under command of
General Forrest and General Morgan; each of these brigades contained
five thousand men.

The moment for attack had come, in the judgment of General Rosecrans.
The rebel cavalry force had been sent north, on a raid, in consequence
of incorrect information received by Bragg, concerning the movements of
Rosecrans.

General McCook received orders to advance upon General Hardee, who
occupied a position on the Nolensville road. General Thomas was ordered
to the Franklin road, so as to threaten Hardee’s flank; and, by a
crossroad, to form a junction with McCook. And General Crittenden was
ordered to advance on the Murfreesboro’ road, as far as Lavergne. These
movements being carried out caused the retreat of Hardee toward
Murfreesboro’. Encountering considerable opposition from the rebels, and
being compelled to feel their way over a totally unknown and wooded
country, the National force had all crossed over to the Murfreesboro’
road.

On the night of Tuesday, the 30th of December, General Rosecrans had his
line formed. The relative positions of the armies were then as follows:

The rebels were intrenched in a thick wood about two miles in front of
Murfreesboro’; their lines extending along both sides of a stream, the
right under command of General Polk, the left commanded by General
Hardee, and the centre by General Smith.

The line of battle of the National troops was drawn up directly opposite
that of the rebels, with General Crittenden holding the left, which
rested on Stone River; General McCook the right, and General Thomas the
centre.

While General Rosecrans was deciding the method of attack, and
explaining it to his corps commanders, the rebel General had decided to
take the aggressive.

The rebel attack was cleverly managed. Without any demonstration, the
enemy suddenly emerged from the woods in which they had been concealed,
at about seven o’clock on the morning of the 31st of December, and
steadily and noiselessly advanced toward the National line. The troops
had fallen in line on the first news of the enemy’s approach, and
quietly awaited their coming; but notwithstanding this, however, the
unexpected nature of the attack threw the Union troops into confusion,
in a very short time the infantry breaking and retreating without a
single shot. There was much brave but fruitless fighting. The dense
masses of the enemy bore down upon the enfeebled National line, and were
bravely met; but continued resistance was impossible. A large part of
McCook’s ammunition and subsistence trains were captured by the enemy.
The day was plainly against the Federals; and, for the time, it might
have been said that General Rosecrans was defeated even before his
attack had begun. Unless the battle-field was at once given up to the
rebels, it became evident that a complete and immediate change of plan
was essential to the maintenance of even a show of resistance to the
enemy. General McCook’s army was almost broken up; and upon the centre
the firing only increased in fury.

General Rosecrans, with the energy, bravery, and promptness that ever
characterized him, saw the danger of defeat, and instantly determined on
a means of retrieving his fortunes. Having sent his staff along the
lines, he dashed right into the furious fire upon the centre, and sent
forward Beatty’s brigade. Immediately a scorching fire was opened from
six batteries at once; and as a loud, prolonged cheer burst from the
Union troops, it was plain that the rebels were falling back before
them. This so encouraged the patriots that every man bent with renewed
vigor and enthusiasm to the work before him. A large force of cavalry,
which had been sent down the Murfreesboro’ road, had arrested the flying
men of McCook’s division, and sent them back to their regiments. General
Rosecrans continued to urge his encouraged troops forward, and the
rebels fled before them for nearly a mile. The foe now prepared to fall
upon the left of the Union line; and although that portion of the army
had already received orders to charge upon the enemy, before the advance
could be made, the rebels had meanwhile again burst upon the centre,
which had begun to break. The breech was instantly filled by the gallant
General Rousseau, at the head of his division, and the enemy was beaten
back into the cedar thicket in their rear.

Once more the rebels fell upon the Union right, driving it back; and, as
the men, fled in disorder before the attack, the sight was very
discouraging: but happily no panic ensued. General Rosecrans now massed
his divisions against the rebel left, crossed the river, and gave them
desperate battle for the space of two hours, during which time the
rebels had all the advantage of position and attack till they were at
last checked by a terribly destructive fire of musketry and artillery.
“The scene at this point,” says a correspondent of the day, “was
magnificently terrible.” The whole battle was in full view, the enemy
deploying right and left, bringing up their batteries in fine style—our
own vomiting smoke and iron missiles upon them with awful fury, and our
gallant fellows moving to the front with unflinching courage, and lying
flat upon their faces to escape the rebel fire until the moment for
action. Shell and shot fell around like rain. General Rosecrans was
himself incessantly exposed. It is wonderful that he escaped. His
chief-of-staff, the noble Lieutenant-Colonel Garesché, had his head
taken off by a round shot, and the blood bespattered the General and
some of the staff. Lieutenant Lylam Kirk, just behind him, was thrown
out of his saddle by a bullet which shattered his left arm. The enemy at
about six o’clock took up a position not assailable except by artillery;
and being evidently exhausted by the repeated and rapid assaults, the
firing on both sides gradually slackened, and ceased entirely as the
darkness deepened,—the battle having continued almost without
intermission for eleven hours. The losses on both sides were heavy.
Major Rosengarten and Major Ward were both killed, during a cavalry
charge: General Rousseau at the head of his splendid division, was
wounded, after having made two bayonet charges, and fought during five
hours. General Stanley and General Palmer were also wounded.

At dawn of the following morning, General Rosecrans opened fire
furiously upon the enemy, with his left endeavoring to beat him back
from the right. The enemy met the attack bravely, holding their ground;
and the battle continued in that direction for several hours. Matters
did not look favorable for the National army; but at twelve o’clock new
supplies of ammunition were received, the batteries were replenished and
massed, and a murderous fire was opened upon the rebel line. It began to
give way: and, with General Thomas pressing on its centre, and General
Crittenden on its left, was handsomely repulsed.

For the remainder of the day, the battle changing from one point to
another, continued to rage with varied success—now the Unionists were
victors, and now the rebels; till night again closed the conflict, and
no decisive victory had been gained on either side.

The next day, Friday, began quiet along both lines: the dead lay
unburied on the field, already become objects of loathing and horror,
nor could their comrades of yesterday spare the time to lay them beneath
the moist, and blood-stained earth. The day wore slowly away, both
Unionists and Confederates making preparations for more fighting but up
to three o’clock in the afternoon there seemed no prospect of the battle
being resumed during that day. At half past three the rebels made a
furious and sudden attack upon the left wing of the National army,
Colonel Beatty’s division, (in command since General Van Clere had been
wounded) with the evident intention of cutting it off from the rest of
the line. But Beatty was not wholly unprepared, and met the overwhelming
force hurled against him, with skill and gallantry. The rebels were
three columns deep, and consisted of the divisions of Breckinridge,
Claiborne, and Anderson. Beatty’s three brigades defended themselves
with desperate bravery; and in return for the flood of shot, shell, and
Minnie sent into their ranks, they sent back a perfect storm of lead
that caused the first rebel column Breckinridge’s division, to fall back
instantly, mowed down by the fierce fire of the Union brigades. The
place of the retreating column was instantly filled by another formed of
Claiborne’s division; which met with better success than its
predecessor; as Beatty’s division, after the severe treatment it had
just received could not hope to stand before an entirely fresh column of
the enemy.

The Union brigades fell slowly back, and recrossed the river, pursued to
the very banks by the rebels, pouring in upon them a steady fire, and
then immediately forming their line in the deserted position. The rebel
artillery was moved, and from both sides of the stream a heavy fire was
poured into each force by its opponents.

There was still a Union reserve; for a wise purpose of his own, General
Rosecrans had not yet permitted Negley’s men to be sent forward; but by
the General’s order they were now ordered to come up, which they did,
closely followed by General J. C. Davis’s division. With shouts of
enthusiasm they pressed forward toward the aid of Beatty’s left; and
having reached the banks of Lytle’s creek, they opened a furious and
destructive fire upon the rebel force beyond. Two batteries were set to
work, and a severe volley of grape and shrapnel poured in on the enemy’s
line. The effect was perceived at once—they fell back slowly; and
Davis’s division was ordered to cross the stream in pursuit. The Seventy
eighth Pennsylvania sprang forward, plunged in, and were the first to
cross, led by the gallant Colonel Sirwell. Immediately the Nineteenth
Illinois and the rest of the two brigades followed, Davis also crossed,
speedily followed by Beatty; and one of the most brilliant and desperate
charges of the day was executed. Davis pressed through his ranks, and
taking off his hat placed it on his sword, and with a loud hearty shout
to his men to _Charge!_ led them himself to the top of the hill. The
rebel line broke before the gallant charge, and fled in the greatest
confusion. Negley perceiving the advantage gained by the troops across
the stream, followed it up without an instant’s loss of time, by
ordering his batteries to cross, which, together with a captured rebel
battery were put to work, pouring death into the enemy’s retreating
line. General Negley now sent word to General Rosecrans that he was
driving the rebels before him, and that they were almost compelled to a
complete and disgraceful rout. “Drive ’em!” was the enthusiastic
response of the Union General; and he immediately ordered the whole of
the National line to be advanced; and on the instant after one sheet of
flame burst from right to left along the entire front, and the shouts of
victory rose high above every other sound.

The rebel resistance was desperate, but useless; and Polk’s entire
division fled before Negley, who never slackened in pursuit till the
enemy was driven far beyond their outer works, when the coming on of
night saved them from utter destruction. General Negley now ordered a
halt, and sent a dispatch to General Rosecrans that darkness had
overtaken him within three-quarters of a mile of Murfreesboro’, but he
would advance no further till he had received orders from the General in
command.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF MURFREESBORO’, DEC. 31, 1862.]

[Illustration: REBEL BATTERY CARRIED BY ASSAULT BY GENERAL ROUSSEAU’S
COMMAND.]

The order for advance was not sent; and the tired soldiers bivouacked
within sight of Murfreesboro’. It was evident that the battle was over,
and the morning would prove the enemy completely defeated.

On Saturday it rained; and General Rosecrans determined to keep his
powder dry. Knowing that success was certain, he permitted nothing to be
done except shelling the enemy, and this was kept up during the day.
About two o’clock, at night, the rebel redoubt in front of Rousseau gave
considerable trouble by opening an artillery fire. General Rousseau sent
to General Rosecrans for permission to take the works, and having
received it, he detailed the Third Ohio and Eighty-eighth Indiana for
the duty. In the face of a heavy fire they advanced and took the works
at the point of the bayonet. They also captured fifty prisoners.

During the night came reports that the rebels were already evacuating
Murfreesboro’; and although the intelligence was scarcely credited at
first, morning proved its correctness, for the enemy was gone! It now,
only remained to take possession of Murfreesboro’, and at eleven o’clock
on Sunday morning, General Rosecrans entered the village, with the main
army.




                  NORTH CAROLINA AT THE CLOSE OF 1862.


Notwithstanding the brilliant victories by the army and navy of the
Union in the early part of this year over the Confederate forces in
North Carolina, but little, if any impression had been made on the stern
spirit of opposition and defiance which was here as everywhere else
manifested by the leaders of the rebellion.

The brave and indomitable army led by Burnside, and the no less valiant
and victorious naval forces under Commodore Goldsborough, had unitedly
subdued and captured all the defensible positions on the coast; and the
capture of Roanoke Island and the Confederate navy in those waters, had
opened the Albemarle sound and its tributaries to the unmolested passage
of the Federal fleet, and placed Newbern, Edenton, Winton, Beaufort,
Elizabeth city, and many other towns in possession of the Union forces.

The magnitude of the operations on the Peninsula of Virginia, at a later
period of the year, overshadowed these earlier movements, which were
only designed as supplementary by the Federal government. The military
operations for the remainder of the year were not therefore of a
character demanding an extended notice in this history.

Colonel Vance was elected Governor of the State in August by a large
majority; and in his message in November, urged a vigorous prosecution
of the war. In this he was seconded by the Legislature, who by
resolution declared the separation of the State from the Federal Union
as final, and pledged all the power and resources of the commonwealth to
maintain the Confederate government.

As an important part of the State had now come under Federal control by
conquest, the authorities at Washington determined to appoint a
Provisional or military Governor, as had previously been done in
Tennessee by the appointment of Andrew Johnson.

Edward Stanley, formerly a distinguished citizen of North Carolina, was
tendered that office by President Lincoln, and accepted the trust. He
arrived at Newbern on the 26th of May, and entered upon his duties. On
the 17th of June he made an address to the people of Washington, N. C.,
which citizens from all parts of the State were permitted to pass
through the Federal lines to attend. Men were present from seventeen
counties to hear him; but the result showed that so long as the
Confederate Government retained its organization and power, the citizens
were powerless, and dare not oppose it.

Governor Stanley endeavored by wise and conciliatory measures to win the
confidence of the people, and thus restore peace to the State. To that
end he proposed a conference with Governor Vance; but that functionary
refused to meet him, and referred Stanley to the Confederate Government
at Richmond.

Thousands of slaves flocked within the Federal lines, five thousand
having collected in Newbern alone within three months after its
occupation by the Union army.

Simultaneous with the campaign against Richmond undertaken by General
Burnside, efforts were made to cut the rebel lines of communication
between Richmond and the southwestern states. There are three lines of
railroad running south and southwest. One running southwest, passes
through southwestern Virginia, eastern Tennessee, northern Alabama, and
connects with roads to western Tennessee, and to New Orleans. A
southerly line connects Richmond with Wilmington, Charleston, Savannah,
and parts of Alabama; while another southerly line passes through North
and South Carolina. By cutting the former of these roads at Cumberland
Gap, reinforcements and supplies could not be brought from the southwest
for General Lee; neither could Lee aid General Bragg’s army at
Murfreesboro’. By cutting the second the most direct communication
between Richmond and the principal cities of the Confederate States was
destroyed.

When General Rosecrans was preparing to move from Nashville to attack
the Confederate army at Murfreesboro’, an expedition was sent into East
Tennessee to destroy the railroad, and so prevent reinforcements from
Richmond from reaching General Bragg. General Carter with a force of one
thousand cavalry left London in Kentucky, December 21st, and entering
Virginia between Cumberland Gap and Pound Gap, advanced within six miles
of Bristol, burned the bridges across the Halston and Wataugo rivers,
and took up portions of the track, destroying the rails for a distance
of one hundred miles, almost to Jonesboro’. They captured five hundred
prisoners, seven hundred stand of arms, and a large amount of stores.
They reached Manchester, Kentucky, on the 6th of January, having lost
only ten men in their hazardous but successful enterprise.

The expedition against the second line of railroads was undertaken in
North Carolina, and forms the only subsequent military movement of
importance in addition to those hitherto described in the department
during the year. It was a march against Goldsborough and the destruction
of the railroad at that place, which is the line connecting Charleston
and Savannah with Richmond.

General J. G. Foster, who commanded the department after the departure
of General Burnside, took charge of the expedition.

The force consisted of four brigades under Colonels Wessels, Amory,
Stevenson and Lee; the Third New York and First Rhode Island batteries;
also sections of the Twenty-third and Twenty-fourth New York Independent
batteries, and the Third New York cavalry. It left Newbern on the
morning of December 11, and moved on the Kingston road fourteen miles.
Some parts of the road were obstructed by felled trees. On the next
morning it advanced to the Vine Swamp road, having some sharp
skirmishing with a small Confederate force. At this point three
companies of cavalry were sent up the Kingston road as a demonstration,
and the main force took the Vine Swamp road, thereby avoiding the
obstructions and the Confederate forces. It was delayed to build the
bridge over Beaver creek, where the Fifty-first Massachusetts and a
section of artillery were left to hold it, and support the cavalry on
the main road, and halted at a distance of four miles.

The next morning the main column advanced, turning to the left, and
leaving the road it was upon to the right. At the intersection the
Forty-sixth Massachusetts and a section of a battery were left as a
feint and to hold the position.

On reaching Southwest creek a Confederate force was found posted on the
opposite bank, about four hundred strong, and with three pieces of
artillery. The creek was not fordable, and ran at the foot of a deep
ravine. Under the protection of a battery the Ninth New Jersey effected
a passage and formed on the opposite bank, where it was afterward
supported by the Eighty-fifth Pennsylvania. This caused the Confederate
force to retire with some skirmishing.

On the next day an advance upon Kinston was made, and the Confederate
force found posted in a strong position about one mile from the place.
An attack was at once made with the Ninth New Jersey in advance, and the
position taken. The Confederate force retired across the Neuse river,
with a loss of four hundred prisoners. On crossing, the bridge was set
on fire, but soon extinguished by the advance of General Foster. The
bridge was immediately repaired, and the column crossed, and occupied
the town of Kinston. With constant skirmishing, the force of General
Foster continued to advance until the 17th, when it reached
Goldsborough. Here it burned two trestle-work culverts, destroyed a
train of four railroad cars, water station, depot, etc., and some small
arms which it was unable to carry off. After destroying other bridges,
and capturing some small positions that had been occupied by a
Confederate force, the expedition successfully returned to Newbern.

These expeditions, although successful, secured no important advantages,
as the great movement on Richmond had, in the mean time, been suspended.
They were useful reconnoissances, and the former may have delayed the
arrival of reinforcements from General Lee to General Bragg before the
battle of Murfreesbero’.

On the 6th of September a body of Confederate troops surprised the
garrison at Washington in the department of North Carolina. A vigorous
resistance was made, and the attacking party was repulsed with a loss of
thirty-three killed, and nearly one hundred wounded. The Federal loss
was eight killed, and thirty-three wounded.




                   BATTLE OF POCOTALICO BRIDGE, S. C.
                           OCTOBER 23, 1862.


A severe engagement occurred on this day in the Department of the South,
where the military operations of the year, not previously detailed, had
been unimportant. General Mitchel, the renowned man of science and
brilliant commander, whose untimely death at a short subsequent period,
filled the whole country with sorrow, was at that time commander of the
department. An expedition was sent out from Port Royal to destroy the
trestle work bridges of the Charleston and Savannah railroad across the
Pocotalico, Tullifinny, and Coosawhatchie, tributaries of the Broad
river, and to make a reconnoissance of these streams. The expedition was
under the command of Generals Brannan and Terry. The main body of the
troops was landed at Mackey’s Point, about fifteen miles from the
railroad, and marched seven miles inland, where the Confederates were
met in force. After a sharp fight of an hour they retired to a point two
miles distant, and made a second stand. From this point they again fell
back to the village of Pocotalico, and having burned the long bridge
across the stream, they were inaccessible.

Meanwhile Colonel Barton, with three hundred and fifty men, penetrated
to the railroad at Coosawhatchie, and destroyed some of the rails, cut
the telegraph wires, and fired upon a train containing troops. The
engagement by the main force was severe, and the Federal loss was
thirty-two killed, and one hundred and eighty wounded. The Union force
retired on the next day, having failed in the object of the expedition,
except the reconnoissance.




                       BATTLE OF BATON ROUGE, LA.
                            AUGUST 5, 1862.


Another important engagement took place on the above date, which our
general plan will not permit us to engross in its historical connection.
On the 5th of August an attack was made on Baton Rouge, in the
Department of the Gulf, which was under the government of General
Butler. The Federal force at this city was under command of
Brigadier-General Williams. The Confederate army making the attack was
under the command of General John C. Breckinridge. The contest was sharp
and bloody, and the attack was successfully repulsed. The Federal loss
was ninety killed, and two hundred and fifty wounded. Among the killed
was General Williams. Three hundred of the Confederates were reported to
have been killed and buried by the force of General Williams. The city
was subsequently evacuated on August 16, by command of General Butler.

General Williams was a graduate of West Point, and an officer of great
merit and promise. He was a native of Connecticut, but received his
appointment in the army from Michigan.




                        OPERATIONS IN MISSOURI.


Early in April, 1862, General Halleck having departed for Corinth,
Miss., General Schofield was left in command of the largest portion of
the State of Missouri, General Price having been driven, after his
disastrous defeat at Pea Ridge, to a point south of the Boston
Mountains, where he remained, no longer pursued by the troops of General
Curtis, in the hope of obtaining reinforcements, and recovering from his
losses. On the 5th of April a rumor that General Price was moving upon
Springfield, Missouri, caused General Curtis to march in that direction.
During a march of two days his army accomplished thirty-eight miles, and
reached the junction of Flat Rock with the James River. The river could
not be crossed at that point; but a crossing was subsequently effected
at Galena. In another march of two days, after a heavy rain storm,
twenty-nine miles were accomplished; and the rebels, under General Price
were found to be encamped on the other side of the river about five
miles farther south.

No engagement took place between the two armies. All remained quiet in
Missouri for some weeks.

On June 3d the State Convention met: the financial condition of the
State was found to be in a very unsettled condition; and the civil
condition not much better. Although in many parts of the State courts of
justice were open and the laws properly administered, in many other
parts every species of disturbance and crime was perpetrated under the
name of guerrilla warfare.

From this time till the middle of the month the Convention was variously
occupied in receiving and passing bills, in repealing ordinances, &c. On
the 16th a Mass Convention of emancipationists assembled at Jefferson
City. Immediately after the dissolution of the two Conventions the State
was threatened by an unusually terrible guerrilla outbreak. The largest
part of the National forces being absent, the guerrillas, consisting in
most part of the returned troops of General Price, felt themselves safe
in repeating the raids of the previous year.

General Schofield on June 22d issued an order holding rebels and rebel
sympathizers responsible in their property, and, if need be, in their
persons, for damages thereafter committed by guerrillas or marauding
parties. This order produced no lasting effect. About the middle of July
the entire northern and western parts of Missouri were constantly
disturbed by intelligence of guerrilla raids and outrages. Colonel
Porter and Colonel Quantrell had already began to gather followers about
them; but the former had been defeated at Cherry Grove in Schuyler
County, and his band dispersed. The increasing rumors of raids, and a
general fear that the guerrilla uprising would be followed by another
invasion from the south made vigorous measures necessary for defence. On
the 22d July the Governor of the State, H. R. Gamble, issued an order
authorizing Brigadier-General Schofield “to organize the entire militia
of the State into companies, regiments, and brigades; and to order into
active service such portions of the force thus organized as he might
judge necessary for the purpose of putting down all marauders and
defending peaceable citizens of the State.” On the same day General
Schofield issued the necessary orders; and the militia was organized
rapidly and energetically; so that the State was soon prepared at all
points for a vigorous opposition to guerrilla attacks. Colonels Porter
and Cobb, rebel commanders, attempting a raid, were defeated, July 28th,
in Calloway County; but on the 31st Colonel Porter captured Newark in
Knox County, and took prisoners two companies of National troops. About
the same time, and during the first week in August a new guerrilla
leader, Colonel Poindexter, sprang into notice in the central Missouri
Counties, and, together with Quantrell in the West, caused the National
commanders to take additional precautions to repel the daring marauders.

On the 6th of August, Colonel Porter was defeated with great loss by
Colonel McNeill at Kinksville, in Adair county. The warfare was now
shifted to the central and western portions of Missouri; and Colonel
Coffee and Colonel McBride went to the assistance of Quantrell.

On the 13th, an attack was made by three guerrilla bands; in which the
National troops were severely defeated. On the 15th, eight hundred men
of the State militia were drawn into an ambush by Colonels Quantrell and
Coffee, but were rescued by reinforcements from Kansas, under General
Blunt.

No sooner was the southwest cleared of guerrillas, than their raids upon
the north were renewed with great activity. The town of Palmyra was
plundered by a gang of these marauders on the 12th of August, the Union
garrison there being overpowered. It was at this time that the rebels
seized the person of Andrew Allsman, a Unionist, and an old and much
respected resident of Palmyra. Subsequently, when the Unionists again
occupied Palmyra, General McNeill demanded the return of Allsman, within
ten days from the 8th of October, on peril of the lives of ten rebel
prisoners. The man was not returned, and, on the 18th of October, ten
rebel prisoners were publicly shot at Palmyra. Long before this the
State had been cleared of guerrillas. Quantrell made some trouble, in
the month of September, but he was speedily defeated and chased across
the border. An election took place in Missouri, in November, resulting
in victory to the emancipation wing of the Union party. The State was
thus pledged to the Government. The war-cloud drifted away from it, and
from that time to this it has been loyal and free.




                       NAVAL OPERATIONS IN 1862.


A general review of the naval operations to the close of the year 1862,
not heretofore described in the first volume of this work, will now be
given, which we will preface by a description, and the names of the
commanders of the several squadrons.

The North Atlantic squadron was under command of Rear-Admiral L. M.
Goldsborough until September 5th, at which time he was succeeded by
Acting Rear-Admiral S. P. Lee. The Virginia and North Carolina coasts
were assigned to this squadron. The South Atlantic squadron, blockading
the coasts of South Carolina, Georgia, and the northeast coast of
Florida, was commanded by Rear-Admiral S. F. Dupont. The Eastern Gulf
squadron was under Acting Rear-Admirals Lardner and Bailey, and the
Western Gulf squadron was commanded by Rear-Admiral Farragut. The
western flotilla on the Mississippi, was under command of Rear-Admiral
A. H. Foote from May 9th to October 15th, at which date Rear-Admiral D.
D. Porter succeeded him. The Potomac flotilla was commanded by Commodore
Harwood, and the James river flotilla was under Commodore Wilkes.




                        BATTLE OF DRURY’S BLUFF.
                             MAY 15, 1862.


The destruction of the rebel iron-clad Merrimac threw open the James
river to the gunboats of Commodore Goldsborough; and on the 15th of May,
the iron-clads Galena, Monitor and Naugatuck, ascended to Ward’s, on
Drury’s Bluff, about eight miles below Richmond, where they encountered
a heavy battery and two separate barriers formed of piles and sunken
vessels. The banks of the river were lined with sharpshooters, who
effectually prevented any attempt to remove the obstructions. The Galena
ran within about six hundred yards of the battery, and opened fire; the
Monitor attempted to pass ahead of her, but found her heavy guns
ineffective at close range, as they would not admit of sufficient
elevation to bear on the position of the enemy. The Aroostook and Port
Royal, wooden vessels, were attached to the flotilla, but, of course
were not adapted to an attack on fortifications of this nature, though
they bravely took part in the distance.

After an engagement of over three hours, the Federal vessels were
compelled to relinquish the attack, without having produced any apparent
effect upon the battery. The Naugatuck was disabled by the bursting of
her 100-pound Parrott gun, and the Monitor was struck several times but
received no injury. The Galena was not so fortunate. Thirteen shot
penetrated her iron sides, starting the knees, planks, and timbers, and
killing or wounding about twenty-five of her crew. Commodore Morris of
the Port Royal was wounded in the engagement.

The gunboat Ellis, Lieutenant W. P. Cushing, captured the town of
Onslow, on New River Inlet, N. C., on November 23rd, destroying the salt
works and securing three schooners and ten whale boats. The Ellis ran
aground and was blown up by her commander, who secured his prizes
without loss.




                  NAVAL OPERATIONS ON THE MISSISSIPPI.
                         MAY TO DECEMBER, 1862.


Commander Palmer of the Iroquois, took possession of Baton Rouge on May
7th, which place was subsequently occupied by the military forces under
General Williams.

After the brilliant operations of the United States naval forces under
Commodore Farragut which resulted in the capture of New Orleans,
immediate steps were taken by that commander to ascend the river, and
occupy such positions as would enable him to cooperate with important
army movements then in contemplation. Seven vessels were sent up the
Mississippi under Captain Craven, while the smaller steamers under
Captain Lee were ordered to ascend as high as Vicksburg.

Commander S. P. Lee, with the advance of the squadron, arrived near
Vicksburg, May 18, and in reply to his demand for surrender, received a
defiant refusal. Flag-Officer Farragut arrived a few days afterwards,
accompanied by a column of troops under General Williams. Additional
naval forces soon afterwards arrived, including Commodore Porter’s
mortar fleet, which had done much effective service in the reduction of
Forts Jackson and St. Philip, at the mouths of the river. Porter opened
the bombardment on the night of June 26–27, directing fire partly
against the town and partly against some formidable batteries on the
heights. On the morning of the 27th, the Owasco, Lieutenant Guest, ran
up abreast of the town and threw in some incendiary shells, which failed
to explode. At three o’clock on the morning of the 28th the squadron
made a move to pass the batteries, the mortar fleet supporting them as
at the battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip. The Hartford and several
other vessels succeeded in passing the range of batteries, which
extended full three miles, and did this too in the face of a strong
current, but as there was not a sufficient land force to cooperate in
the attack, no substantial benefit resulted from the movement. The enemy
were several times driven from their batteries, but returned to their
guns as soon as the ships had passed.

Forming a junction with the western gunboat flotilla of Flag-Officer C.
H. Davis, Farragut concerted with that officer and General Williams an
expedition up the Yazoo River, consisting of the gunboats Carondelet and
Tyler, and the ram Queen of the West, strengthened by sharpshooters from
the army. They started on the morning of July 15, and near the mouth of
the river encountered the Confederate ram Arkansas. A severe fight
ensued, in which both the Carondelet and the Tyler were partially
disabled, and the Arkansas then entered the Mississippi and passing
boldly through the surprised fleets of Farragut and Davis, took refuge
under the guns of Vicksburg.

Farragut now determined to repass the batteries for the double purpose
of supporting the rest of his squadron and destroying the Arkansas in
passing; to assist in which Flag-Officer Davis added to his force the
ram Sumter, Lieutenant Commanding Erben. Toward evening, Davis opened a
bombardment, for the purpose of covering the movement, and Captain
Farragut succeeded in getting below Vicksburg again with little loss of
life, but his designs against the Arkansas were defeated by the darkness
of the night.

On the 22d, Commander W. D. Porter, with the iron-clad gunboat Essex,
and Lieutenant-Colonel Ellet, with the ram Queen of the West, made
another attempt to destroy the Confederate vessel, but the attack though
executed with great gallantry under the fire of the batteries, did not
succeed. The Essex ran down to Farragut’s fleet, and Farragut having
been instructed by the navy department to drop down the river before the
water got too low, it was arranged that Commander W. D. Porter should
remain below Vicksburg with the Essex and Sumter.

On the 28th of July, Farragut arrived at New Orleans, leaving the
Katahdin and Kineo at Baton Rouge. On the 5th of August, the
Confederates made a vigorous land attack upon the latter place, which
was repulsed after a severe contest. The gunboats were not able to
assist until toward the close of the action, when they threw their
shells directly into the midst of the enemy with great effect. The
Arkansas had dropped down the river to take part in the attack, but was
not brought into action, one of her engines having broken down. The next
morning, Porter, who was then at Baton Rouge with the Essex, moved up to
attack her, but before the fight had fairly begun her other engine gave
way, and she was run ashore, abandoned, and set on fire by the crew.
About an hour afterward she blew up. On the 11th, Farragut sailed for
Ship Island and Pensacola, which latter place, having been evacuated by
the Confederates, was now made the depot of the Western Gulf Squadron.

Commander W. D. Porter remained at Baton Rouge until August 23, when,
the town having been evacuated by the Federal troops, he proceeded up
the river to reconnoitre batteries reported in progress at Port Hudson,
and thence ascended to Bayou Sara to obtain coal, where his boat’s crew
was fired upon by guerrillas. Some of the buildings were thereupon
burned, and a few days afterward, as the firing was repeated, the rest
of the place was destroyed. Afterwards a boat’s crew from the Essex,
sent ashore at Natchez to procure ice for the sick, was attacked, by
some two hundred armed citizens, one of the sailors being killed, and an
officer and five men wounded. Commander Porter immediately opened fire
on the town, set a number of houses in flames, and continued the
bombardment for an hour, after which the mayor surrendered. On her way
down to New Orleans, the Essex had a brisk engagement, on September 7th,
with the Port Hudson batteries.

In the mean time, several vessels of Captain Farragut’s squadron had
been employed on the coast of Texas, where acting volunteer Lieutenant
J. W. Kittredge, with the bark Arthur, the little steamer Sachem, and a
launch, captured Corpus Christi, after several spirited engagements with
the enemy’s batteries, but was unable to hold the town, and was himself
made prisoner, September 14, while on shore exploring.

On September 26, Acting Master Crocker, with the steamer Kensington and
schooner Rachel Seaman, and Acting Master Pennington, with the mortar
schooner Henry Janes, captured Sabine Pass, taking a battery of four
guns without loss.

On the 4th of October, Commander W. B. Renshaw, with the steamers
Westfield, Harriet Lane, Owasco, and Clifton, and the mortar schooner
Henry Janes, captured the defences of the harbor and city of Galveston
without the loss of a man. The resistance was feeble: the first shell
from the Owasco burst immediately over a heavy 10-inch Columbiad mounted
on Fort Point, causing a panic in the fort, and depriving the defenders
of their main reliance.

Toward the end of October, Lieutenant Commander T. McKean Buchanan, with
the steamers Calhoun, Estrella, Kinsman, and Diana, and the transport
St. Mary’s, having on board the Twenty-first Indiana regiment, was sent
to the Atchafalaya river, La., to cooperate with a land force under
General Weitzel. On Nov. 1, near Brashear City, he captured the
Confederate despatch boat A. B. Seger, and the next day had an
engagement with an iron-clad gunboat and some land batteries on the
Bayou Teche. The batteries were silenced, but the gunboat, being behind
a row of obstructions across the channel, escaped up the river.
Lieutenant Commander Buchanan then returned to Brashear City to repair
damages. On the 6th, the Kinsman discovered and burned two steamers in
one of the small bayous in the neighborhood.

Early in August, an expedition was concerted between Flag-Officer Davis
and General Curtis, which moved up the Yazoo, and captured a battery of
heavy guns, field pieces, munitions of war, &c., besides taking the
Confederate transport Fairplay, loaded with one thousand two hundred
Enfield rifles, four thousand new muskets, four field guns, mounted
howitzers, small arms, a quantity of fixed ammunition, &c.

On the 26th of September, the ram Queen of the West and two transports
having been fired into by the Confederates at Prentiss, Miss., the town
was shelled and burned.

On December 13th the gunboat Cairo, while ascending the Yazoo, was blown
up by a torpedo, and sank in fifteen minutes after the explosion. It is
remarkable that none of the crew were killed, or even seriously hurt.




                     HOOKER’S CAMPAIGN IN VIRGINIA.
                           JANUARY 26, 1863.


After the disastrous battle of Fredericksburg, General Burnside’s army
remained inactive at Falmouth for several weeks. The Army of the Potomac
was then as strong in numbers as it had ever been. An important movement
on the 26th of January was frustrated by a severe storm, and the army
after marching fifteen miles, was compelled to return to its original
position. General Burnside then tendered the resignation of his command
to the President, which was accepted.

On the 26th of January, 1863, the command of the Army of the Potomac was
transferred from General Burnside to General Hooker. On the same day,
Generals Sumner and Franklin were removed from the command of the right
and left divisions of the army.

At this period the extreme cold rendered it impossible for any movement
to be made either by the Army of the Potomac or by its opponent, at
Fredericksburg. Occasional rebel raids, and cavalry movements were the
only operations taking place on either side. The cavalry of the enemy
made a raid, marked with considerable success, as far inside the Union
lines as Fairfax Court-House, in Virginia. This occurred about March
12th, and the rebels carried off Brigadier-General Stoughton, whom they
surprised in bed, besides capturing a detachment from his brigade, with
horses and other property.

Five days later, a sharp fight took place between a body of cavalry,
under General Averill, and a force of the enemy’s cavalry, near Kelly’s
ford. Nothing more of special interest transpired until April 13th, when
an expedition of cavalry, artillery and infantry, from the Federal army
proceeded in detachments to Bealton, Warrenton, Rappahannock, and
Liberty, with Major-General Stoneman in command. Thence, General
Stoneman moved to the Rapidan fords, and took possession of them; these
operations being in advance of a grand movement to cross the
Rappahannock, and attack General Lee on the opposite side.




                    GENERAL STONEMAN’S CAVALRY RAID.
                              MAY 1, 1863.


The storms which ensued prevented active movements by General Stoneman
until the 29th of April. On that day he crossed at Kelly’s Ford. The
division of General Averill moved to the Orange and Alexandria railroad,
and encountered two regiments of the enemy, who retired towards
Gordonsville. Thence he proceeded to Culpeper, and dispersed a force of
the rebels there, capturing their rear guard, and seizing a large amount
of flour, salt, and bacon. The enemy were pursued by way of Cedar
Mountain toward the Rapidan. Here he received a dispatch from General
Stoneman, desiring him to push the enemy as vigorously as possible, and
keep him occupied. On the 1st, scouting parties were sent up and down on
both sides of the Rapidan. On the 2d, orders were received by him to
join General Hooker at United States Ford, at once.

General Stoneman, after crossing at Kelly’s Ford, moved the main body of
his command across Fleshman’s creek, and encamped for the night in an
open field. On the next day, the 3d, General Buford crossed the Rapidan,
two miles below Racoon Ford, and drove a body of infantry from the ford,
where General Gregg crossed later in the day. A lieutenant and thirteen
privates of an artillery company were captured here. At night, the whole
force bivouacked one mile from the river. On the next day the march was
commenced, and at Orange Spring, a force of the enemy, approaching by
railroad, barely escaped capture. That night, the command encamped at
Greenwood, one mile from Louisa Court House, through which the Virginia
Central railroad passes, connecting Gordonsville with Richmond. On the
next day, the 2d of May, a squadron of the Tenth New York, under Colonel
Irwin, was sent five miles above the town, and another of the same
regiment, under Major Avery, was sent the same distance below, to
destroy the track of the road, while Colonel Kilpatrick took possession
of the town. The track was torn up for some distance, the telegraph cut,
and some commissary stores seized. In the afternoon, the command moved
to Thompson’s Four Corners. From this place, as headquarters, several
expeditions were sent out. On the next morning, Colonel Wyndham
proceeded to Columbia, on the James river, where the Lynchburg and
Richmond Canal crosses the river. An unsuccessful attempt was made to
destroy the aqueduct. Five locks were injured, three canal boats, loaded
with commissary stores, and five bridges, were burned, and the canal
lock cut in several places. A large quantity of commissary stores and
medicines in the town were also destroyed. Another detachment, under
Captain Drummond, of the Fifth United States Cavalry, destroyed the
bridge over the James river, at Centreville. Other small parties were
sent out in different directions, and some skirmishing took place with
small parties of the enemy. At the same time, a force, consisting of the
Tenth New York and First Maine, with two pieces of artillery, was sent
out under General Gregg, to destroy the railroad bridge at Ashland,
while Colonel Kilpatrick, with the Harris Light, and Twelfth Illinois,
Lieutenant-Colonel Davis, were to go between Ashland and Richmond,
destroying the railroad, bridges, &c. General Gregg destroyed the
railroad bridge across the South Anna, on the road from Columbia to
Spottsylvania; thence he moved east, and destroyed the road to Beaver
Dam Station. He then turned north to the Richmond and Gordonsville
turnpike, sending out a detachment to burn the Ground Squirrel bridge.
That night he bivouacked eight miles from Ashland. A detachment sent out
to burn the bridge at Ashland found it too strongly defended. Some
portions of the railroad track, however, were destroyed. Leaving Colonel
Kilpatrick and Lieutenant-Colonel Davis, General Gregg returned on the
next day to General Stoneman. On the night of the 4th, General Gregg
moved near Yanceyville, and was followed the next day by General
Stoneman and General Buford’s command. On the 5th, the retrograde
movement commenced, and crossing Racoon Ford, on the Rapidan, the
command arrived at Kelley’s Ford on the North Fork. Meantime, the
advance of Colonel Kilpatrick was made, and thus subsequently reported
by him:

“By directions from Major-General Stoneman, I left Louisa Court House on
the morning of the 3d instant, with one regiment (the Harris Light
Cavalry) of my brigade; reached Hungary, on the Fredericksburg railroad,
at daylight on the 4th; destroyed the depot and telegraph wires and
railroad for several miles; passed over to Brook turnpike, drove in the
rebel pickets; down the pike, across the brook, charged a battery, and
forced it to retire within two miles of the city of Richmond; captured
Lieutenant Brown, aid-de-camp to General Winder, and eleven men within
the fortifications; passed down to the left of the Meadow bridge on the
Chickahominy, which I burned; ran a train of cars into the river;
retired to Hanovertown on the peninsula; crossed and destroyed the ferry
boat just in time to check the advance of a pursuing cavalry force;
burned a train of thirty wagons loaded with bacon; captured thirteen
prisoners, and encamped for the night five miles from the river.

“I resumed my march at 1 P. M. of the 5th; surprised a force of three
hundred cavalry at Aylett’s; captured two officers and thirty-three men;
burned fifty-six wagons, the depot, containing upwards of twenty
thousand bushels of corn and wheat, quantities of clothing and
commissary stores, and safely crossed the Mattapony, and destroyed the
ferry again just in time to escape the advance of the rebel cavalry
pursuit. Late in the evening I destroyed a third wagon train and depot a
few miles above and west of the Tappahannock on the Rappahannock, and
from that point made a forced march of twenty miles, being closely
pursued by a superior force of cavalry, supposed to be a portion of
Stuart’s, from the fact that we captured prisoners from the Eighth,
First, and Tenth Virginia cavalry. At sundown discovered a force of
cavalry drawn up in line of battle about King and Queen Court House.
Their strength was unknown, but I at once advanced to the attack, only
to discover, however, that they were friends—a portion of the Tenth
Illinois cavalry, who had become separated from the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Davis, of the same regiment.

“At ten A. M., on the 7th, I found safety and rest under our own brave
old flag within our lines at Gloucester Point. This raid and march
around the entire rebel army—a march of nearly two hundred miles—has
been made in less than five days, with a loss of one officer and
thirty-seven men, having captured and paroled upwards of three hundred
men.”

At the same time, Lieutenant-Colonel Davis, of the Twelfth Illinois, was
ordered to penetrate to the Fredericksburg railroad, and, if possible,
to the Virginia Central, and destroy communications. If he crossed the
Virginia Central he was to make for Williamsburg on the peninsula.
Leaving the main body on the South Anna, on Sunday, May 3d, he passed
down the bank of that river, burning a bridge, and, dispersing a mounted
party of the enemy, struck the railroad at Ashland. Here he cut the
telegraph, tore up some rails, and burned the trestle-work bridge south
of the town. At the same time a train of cars, filled with sick and
wounded, arrived, and was captured. The prisoners were paroled, and the
locomotives disabled. Twenty wagons, with horses, were destroyed, and
several horses taken. Leaving at 6 P. M., a train of eighteen wagons was
met and destroyed, and Hanover Station reached at 8 P. M. Here thirty
prisoners were captured, and the railroad line broken. The depot,
storehouses, and stables, filled with government property were
destroyed, also a culvert and trestle-work south of the station. Among
the property destroyed were more than one hundred wagons, a thousand
sacks of flour and corn, and a large quantity of clothing and horse
equipments. The command then moved down within seven miles of Richmond,
and thence marched to Williamsburg, and then proceeded to Gloucester
Point, having destroyed property of the enemy valued at a million
dollars. Colonel Davis’s loss was thirty-five men.




                           HOOKER’S ADVANCE.


The weather now became very inclement; and storms succeeded each other
for several days. It was not till the 27th that the movement to cross
the Rappahannock was finally effected.

General Hooker’s army numbered about one hundred and twenty thousand
men, who were divided into seven separate corps. The army of General Lee
numbered about seventy thousand men; it held a line running from
northwest to southeast, with its right wing extending to Port Hudson on
the Rappahannock, and its left resting above Fredericksburg.

General Hooker’s plan of attack was as follows: three corps were massed
below Fredericksburg, and, crossing the river at West Point, were to
make a feint attack upon the enemy; having done this, the two corps were
to return instantly, and join the remaining four corps, and with them
recross the river at ten or twenty miles above Fredericksburg, thus
moving down upon the left of the enemy; and, according to General
Hooker’s idea, forcing the rebels to a battle outside their
intrenchments, which would compel them to fall back on Richmond. The
following description will give a clear idea of the position, at that
time, of the Army of the Potomac: Falmouth, the position occupied by
General Hooker’s army, is nearly opposite Fredericksburg on the north
bank of the Rappahannock. About twelve miles above, the Rapidan, a small
river, unites with a stream hitherto called the North Fork, to form the
Rappahannock. Lately, however, the North Fork had been called the
Rappahannock, and the Rapidan had been spoken of as a tributary.

The United States Ford is about one mile below the mouth of the Rapidan.
Banks’s Ford is about midway between the United States Ford and
Falmouth. Kelly’s Ford, where the four corps crossed the North Fork, or
the Rapidan, as it was now called, is about twenty miles above Falmouth.
Germania Ford, where the same force crossed the Rapidan, is about twelve
miles south of Kelly’s Ford, at a place called Germania Mills.

On Monday morning, April 27th, three corps under Major-General Howard,
Major-General Slocum, and Major-General Meade, marched to Kelly’s Ford,
which was reached on the afternoon of the following day, by General
Howard, who was in advance. Portions of the Seventy-third Pennsylvania,
and One Hundred and Fifty-fourth New York, amounting to two hundred and
fifty men, crossed in boats, and took position on the opposite side of
the river. No enemy was to be found, except a few pickets, who retired
before the skirmishers sent out to reconnoitre. During the evening the
remainder of General Howard’s corps crossed the river; General Slocum’s
bivouacked on the shore, and General Meade’s crossed the river some
miles further down. On Wednesday morning General Slocum’s corps also
crossed over; and on Thursday the last day of April, the three corps
advanced to Chancellorsville, and were massed at night at the point
where the Culpeper road joins the Orange Court-House road. General
Hooker arrived there at nightfall, and made the place his headquarters.
On the 29th the second corps under command of General Couch, had taken
up a position five miles above Fredericksburg, at Banks’s Ford. General
Sherman’s cavalry was sent to cut off the railway communication between
General Lee’s army and Richmond. Meanwhile, the remaining three corps of
the army under Major-Generals Sickles, Sedgwick, and Reynolds, had left
camps on Monday night, and taken up a position two miles below
Fredericksburg. On Tuesday morning, one division of General Sedgwick’s
corps crossed the river at this point; and one division of General
Reynolds’ corps crossed about a mile further down. General Sickles’
corps was detached from the remaining two on Wednesday, and ordered to
join General Hooker at Chancellorsville.

This was the position of General Hooker’s army on Friday, May 1st.

With the exception of some slight skirmishing, which took place at the
seizure of the Fords, there was, up to this time, no fighting. It was
impossible to judge at what time, or from what direction, the enemy
would first advance; but every possible preparation was made to guard
against a surprise. At two o’clock in the afternoon, a large force of
the enemy was discovered approaching from an easterly direction, and
coming along what had been a turnpike road; and also along a planked
road. Both these roads entered Chancellorsville at right angles; and
joining, form one direct road from a building called Tabernacle Church.
General Hooker, who had himself headed a cavalry party for the purpose
of reconnoitring, immediately on learning of the enemy’s approach
returned to his headquarters at Chancellorsville, and made ready to meet
them. It being uncertain from which of two points, the south and east,
the enemy’s attack would be made, both points were intrenched against
them. General Meade’s corps was formed on the front, facing the east;
the division of regulars occupying a point north of the old turnpike
road, and the other two divisions placed to the left of this on the line
of Bank’s Ford road. A division of General Sickles’ corps, under General
Berry, supported the left wing of this line; and General Couch’s corps
supported the right wing. General Howard’s and General Slocum’s corps
were placed in front, at the side facing the south, General Slocum’s
corps being formed in double column, with its left resting on the plank
road; and General Howard formed in line on the right of it. As supports
for this line, the two remaining divisions of General Sickles’ corps
were ordered up, under General Whipple, and General Birney.




                    BATTLE OF CHANCELLORSVILLE, VA.
                             MAY 1–4, 1863.


The moment of attack had come. Soon the brisk cracking of rifles and
muskets announced the rebel proximity, and the Union skirmishers, in
compliance with orders, gradually fell back upon the main line of
battle. This manœuvre had the desired effect, and drew forth the enemy
in pursuit, yelling and shouting like fiends broken loose. Matters soon
began to look serious, for as rebel column followed column, and they
advanced directly upon General Meade’s second division, under General
Sykes, it seemed as if the small body of Union men would be instantly
overwhelmed by the large Confederate force. General Lee was always
distinguished for his skill in hurling a large force upon his opponents;
and the present manœuvre bade fair to be one of his many successes of
the kind.

The rebel force, as it charged out of the woods, was certainly three
times as large as that of General Sykes; yet the latter showed no
disposition to quail; but, after giving a moment’s glance to satisfy
their curiosity, every soldier brought his musket to his shoulder, and
five thousand bullets were sent into the rebel line. Such steadiness
appalled them. They were unprepared for it. Their front rank quailed
before it. The sudden thinning of their numbers amazed and frightened
them. They discharged their pieces recklessly and broke in confusion.
But there was no flight for them. The heavy bodies behind them, to whom
the front ranks had been a bulwark, protecting them from the murderous
volley of the Union regulars, were steady and determined. They, absorbed
the front rank in the second, and still moved forward—firm, unshaken,
confident. Meantime the Union men reloaded their pieces, and
simultaneously a volley was fired from both sides; and then, from the
brow above, the Union artillery opened with canister and grape, shooting
over the heads of the National troops and dealing destruction and
confusion to the enemy. And as the loud cannon continued its work with
fearful rapidity the order was given to “fire at will”—an order that was
copied by the enemy—and the continuous roar of musketry that followed
almost deadened the reports of the artillery. It was the first fight of
the great battle, and for nearly twenty minutes both parties stood firm,
as though nothing could lead them to give the prestige of a first
success to the other. But, although outnumbered, General Sykes’ division
had an advantage in the support of artillery, which, while his infantry
held the rebels in check, made huge gaps in their ranks. Still they
yelled and shouted defiance, and attempted charges and continued their
firing, rank after rank of them being broken and thrown back in
confusion, while their officers shouted, and ordered, and stormed, and
cursed, in the vain effort to rally them to a persistent, determined
charge. They fought well. They fought as none but Americans can fight.
But with musketry alone they could not contend against both artillery
and musketry. It was simply murder on the part of their officers to
attempt to hold them to it; and their officers began to appreciate the
fact when nearly half their column had been placed _hors de combat_; and
then the order was given to retire.

[Illustration: “STONEWALL” JACKSON.]

Shouts and cheers from the Union column proclaimed the enemy’s retreat;
and even the wounded staggered to their feet, leaning against their
comrades, and joined in the triumphant cry. But the triumph must be
followed up, and pursuit was ordered—an order that was quickly and
gladly obeyed. For upwards of a mile the victorious troops followed
closely on the heels of the vanquished rebels; till, coming upon a
second line of the enemy, in very strong force, General Sykes deemed it
imprudent to contend against new and fresh troops, and gave his men
orders to retire.

The rebels immediately prepared to give chase; but instead of flying
before the overwhelming numbers of the enemy, General Sykes’ men wheeled
and sent a heavy volley into their ranks, which determined them not to
follow up the chase; and the much shattered division was quietly
permitted to retire. Immediately upon the termination of the rebel
engagement with Sykes’ division, General Lee massed a large body of his
troops in the woods opposite Slocum’s division; and with great
suddenness came down like an avalanche upon it; but the troops met it
bravely, and with a half dozen volleys sent the rebels back. General
Howard’s corps was also engaged on the left with some light skirmishing
which did not amount to anything serious, although the rebels unmasked
one battery, and discharged a few shells upon the artillery men at work
some distance below it. The Union artillery opened in reply; and the
enemy immediately withdrew their pieces; and no further demonstrations
were made on either side during the remainder of the day.


               THE SECOND DAY’S FIGHT. SATURDAY, MAY 2ND.

Many changes were made in the position of the national forces during
Friday night. The Second corps was thrown down the Banks’s Ford road,
holding the extreme left of the line, and, with a portion of the Fifth,
completed the line on the east up to the plank road supported by the
Second division of the third corps (General Sickles) which was resting
on the direct road to the United States Ford. The Second division,
General Geary’s, of the Twelfth (General Slocum) held the left of the
Union centre, its left resting on the plank road in front of the general
headquarters, and extending along the entire front of the field. General
Williams’ division of the same corps was formed on the right of this
line, facing to the southwest, its extreme right resting in the edge of
the woods facing a little cleared field, situated about two miles
southwest from headquarters. The Eleventh corps (General Howard) was
originally directed to take position on the right of General Williams,
with its right extending as far down towards the Wilderness road as
consistent with a proper strengthening of the position. Birney’s
division of the third corps was ordered to take position on the plank
road as a reserve both to the Eleventh and Twelfth; but General Sickles,
discovering an advantageous opening in a cleared field about a quarter
of a mile south of the plank road, and a mile and a half west of general
headquarters, obtained permission to advance Birney to this place, which
brought him between the Eleventh and Twelfth corps. At this point he
deployed off to the right around the field, General Williams occupying
the other side in the opening. In the general disposition of the forces
for Saturday, both Berry’s and Whipple’s divisions of the Third corps
were held in reserve, though Bordan’s sharpshooters were detached from
the latter’s division, for special duty with Birney.

The First corps (General Sedgwick) had arrived from the left, and were
placed on the extreme right, bringing the national lines down in that
direction, almost to the Rappahannock river.

Nor had the enemy been idle during this time; about midnight it was
observed by the advanced pickets of the Third and Twelfth corps, that
large masses of the rebels were being moved in front of the Union line,
with a view to get a position on the right, and flank it.

At the earliest dawn of morning on Saturday, 2nd of May, the enemy
executed a manœuvre to lead the Union generals to the belief that they
were evacuating, and deceived some of the corps commanders; but General
Hooker, perceiving that the movement of their wagon trains was nothing
more than a blind, directed General Sickles to plant a battery at a
point commanding the moving train, and shell it. This being done, the
train was thrown into complete disorder, and obliged to move back. To
obtain the road over which the wagon trains had been moving, General
Sickles ordered General Birney to advance his troops and take possession
of a hill opposite the road. This was done after much difficulty.
Captain Seely’s battery, of the Fourth United States artillery was
charged up the hill in such haste as did not leave it even time to
procure a supply of ammunition. It, however, worked brilliantly, till
obliged to retire to replenish its caissons. A charge upon the rebel
rifle-pits was now ordered, which resulted in the stoppage of their
musketry firing, and gave about a hundred of their occupants into the
hands of General Birney. With much skirmishing, and now and then severe
shelling, the advance was continued till Birney’s division occupied the
extreme brow of the hill. The rebels had been driven back over a mile,
and the Federals held a most commanding position. After sending to
headquarters many times for reinforcements, General Sickles at last
obtained permission to advance General Whipple’s division to the aid of
General Birney.

Later, the Eleventh corps was directed to advance, and join its flank to
Birney’s right; the Twelfth was to the left; and a general advance was
ordered. The skirmishers of both armies immediately became engaged; the
rebels gradually falling back. The soldiers of the Union charged boldly
upon the rebels, and the engagement immediately became general.

The enemy held their ground obstinately, fighting with most determined
bravery; as usual, owing to the skillful generalship of the rebel
generals, the enemy were in greater force than the Unionists wherever
they met, although the number of Lee’s army was greatly inferior to that
of Hooker. Borne down with heat and fatigue, the national troops began
to show evidences of faltering. To carry the heights in their present
condition was impossible, and General Williams ordered the retreat of
his division. But the most painful part of the defeat was yet to come.

The Eleventh corps, which had been ordered to the right of Birney, had
moved forward to the position assigned them on his flank. One brigade
succeeded in getting up the hill, and reported by its commander to
Generals Sickles and Birney. The rest of the corps met the enemy under
command of General Stonewall Jackson, when about two-thirds of the
distance up. Here they had a short engagement, in which it does not
appear they had even so large a force to contend against as that which
Williams, with his single division, had fought so bravely. Headed by
their commander the gallant Howard, the German corps charged boldly up
to the rebel lines. Here they were met, as the rebels often met their
foe, with shouts of defiance and derision, a determined front, and a
heavy fire of musketry. The German regiments returned the fire for a
short time with spirit, manifesting a disposition to fight valiantly.
But at the time when all encouragement to the men was needed that could
be given, some officers of the division fell back to the rear, leaving
their men to fight alone. At the same time General Devens, commanding
the First division, was unhorsed and badly wounded in the foot by a
musket ball. Thus losing at a critical moment the inspiriting influence
of the immediate presence of their commanders, the men began to falter,
then to fall back, and finally broke in a complete route. General Howard
boldly threw himself into the breach and attempted to rally the
shattered columns; but his efforts were perfectly futile. The men were
panic-stricken, and no power on earth could rally them in the face of
the enemy.

Information of the catastrophe was promptly communicated to General
Sickles, who thus had a moment given him to prepare for the shock he
instantly apprehended his column would suffer. The high land of the
little farm that formed the base of his operations was parked full of
artillery and cavalry, nearly all the artillery of the Third corps,
together with Pleasanton’s cavalry, being crowded into that little
fifty-acre inclosure. But Sickles was not to be thrown off his guard by
a trifle, and anything short of a complete defeat seemed to be
considered by him in the light of a trifle. With the coolness and
skillfulness of a veteran of a hundred campaigns he set to work making
his dispositions. He had not a single regiment within his reach to
support his artillery; Whipple was falling back, and must meet the
approaching stampede with his own force in retreat; Birney was far out
in the advance, in imminent danger of being completely surrounded and
annihilated; the rebel forces were pressing hard upon the flying
Germans, who could only escape by rushing across his lines, with every
prospect of communicating the panic to them. It was a critical moment
indeed, and one that might well stagger even the bravest-hearted. But it
did not stagger the citizen soldier. Calling to the members of his
staff, he sent them all off, one after the other, lest any one should
fail of getting through, to warn Birney of his danger and order him to
fall back. Then, turning to General Pleasanton, he directed him to take
charge of the artillery, and train it upon all the woods encircling the
field, and support it with his cavalry, to hold the rebels in check
should they come on him, and himself dashed off to meet Whipple, then
just emerging from the woods in the bottom land. He had scarcely turned
his horse about when the men of Howard’s corps came flying over the
field in crowds, meeting the head of Whipple’s column, and stampeding
through its lines, running as only men do run when convinced that sure
destruction is awaiting them. At the same moment large masses of the
rebel infantry came dashing through the woods on the north and west
close up to the field, and opened a tremendous fire of musketry into the
confused mass of men and animals. To add to the confusion and terror of
the occasion, night was rapidly approaching, and darkness was already
beginning to obscure the scene.

That which followed cannot be justly portrayed by the poor aid of words.
On one hand was a solid column of infantry retreating at double quick
from the face of the enemy, who were already crowding their rear; on the
other was a dense mass of beings who had lost their reasoning faculties,
and were flying from a thousand fancied dangers as well as from the real
danger that crowded so close upon them, aggravating the fearfulness of
their situation by the very precipitancy with which they were seeking to
escape from it. On the hill were ten thousand of the enemy, pouring
their murderous volleys in upon the National troops, yelling and
hooting, to increase the alarm and confusion; hundreds of cavalry horses
left riderless at the first discharge from the rebels, were dashing
frantically about in all directions; a score of batteries of artillery
were thrown into disorder, some properly manned, seeking to gain
positions for effective duty, and others flying from the field; battery
wagons, ambulances, horses, men, cannon, caissons, all jumbled and
tumbled together in an apparently inextricable mass, and that murderous
fire still pouring in upon them. To add to the terror of the occasion
there was but one means of escape from the field, and that through a
little narrow neck or ravine washed out by Scott’s Creek. Toward this
the confused mass plunged headlong. For a moment it seemed as if no
power could avert the frightful calamity that threatened the entire
army. That neck passed, and this panic-stricken, disordered body of men
and animals permitted to pass down through the other corps of the army,
destruction was sure. But in the midst of that wildest alarm there was a
cool head. That calamity was averted by the determined self-possession
of Major-General Daniel E. Sickles.

The disastrous flight of the Eleventh corps may here be concluded. They
did not all fly across Sickles’s line. They dispersed and ran in all
directions, regardless of the order of their going. They seemed
possessed with an instinctive idea of the shortest and most direct line
from the point whence they started to the United States Ford, and the
majority of them did not stop until they had reached it.

General Birney first learned of the shameful stampede of the German
corps by the flight of their troops across his lines; and seeing that
retreat was inevitable he prepared for it, but found that the rebels had
gained possession of the road by which he had advanced. He was,
therefore, obliged to make a road out, which he did by moving quietly
down into the ravine. This movement was successfully accomplished with
no further trouble than a slight skirmish with the rebels in the ravine;
after which General Birney moved his column out in perfect order.
General Whipple, with much difficulty, saved his command, which was
attacked in rear by the rebels, and broken in upon on the flank by the
demoralized men of the Eleventh. He brought off his troops, however, in
comparatively good order, and bivouacked for the night with Birney and
Pleasanton on a little farm in the woods. Thus ended the battle of the
second day.


                 THE THIRD DAY’S BATTLE. SUNDAY, MAY 3.

Once more General Hooker formed a new line of battle, which placed
General Reynolds on the extreme right, with his right flank resting on
the Rappahannock. General Slocum’s corps held the centre, and that of
General Sickles the left, with its left resting on the stream called
Scott’s creek.

Couch and Meade were left to look after the front towards
Fredericksburg, while the remnant of the Eleventh was to be used, if it
could be reorganized, wherever it could be most effective. On the
previous night, during the confusion of the stampede, General Berry, of
Sickles’ corps, had moved up the plank road and taken a position just at
the edge of the woods, where he met the enemy as they were advancing to
complete the discomfiture of the right wing, and had hurled them back
most effectually. He was then ordered to retain the ground he had thus
defended, which he did most gallantly, and lost his life at the post of
duty.

Precisely at sunrise the rebels advanced with characteristic promptness
and courage, upon the two divisions commanded by General Sickles. At the
same moment, another body pushed down the road towards Berry’s division,
and fell upon it with great violence. Never, on any battle field, have
men of any nation fought with more determined bravery than did the rebel
force on this occasion. It was evident that this battle must decide the
contest of the campaign between the National and the rebel troops. The
opposing force of Union men was very small; but they fought with most
determined bravery. Although they were assailed by a force of twenty
thousand men, against whom they could oppose only the remains of two
brigades under Williams and Whipple, numbering not over five thousand in
all, there was no faltering.

On the occasion of this Sunday morning attack the colors of the corps
were still upon the field, as also the corps commander. Their brigade
colors were also there, and he is but a poor soldier who deserts his
flag when it is in danger, and there was danger now.

But it was impossible that they could hold their ground against the
overwhelming numbers of the enemy; and after hardly an hour’s gallant
fighting, they were forced to fall back to the shelter of a stone wall,
some distance in the rear. Here they made another bold stand, and soon
mowed down from the enemy’s ranks tenfold the number which they had lost
from their own.

Regiment after regiment were completely swept away by their musketry and
the grape and canister of their artillery, and yet fresh regiments were
as often pushed forward to take their places. At last, gaining
possession of the woods on the right of the stone wall, the foe got an
enfilading fire on the heroic patriots, who were compelled to abandon
their position. But if the enemy had driven them back, it had cost him
dearly. That little field was strewn all over with the mangled corpses
of the slain rebels, telling the silent story of the desperation of the
struggle.

For more than an hour these men had held the rebels in check; and had
thus given General Hooker an opportunity to perfect his main line of
battle.

The battle had by this time become general, and raged fiercely in all
directions.

In the mean time the Sixth corps, General Sedgwick, had crossed the
Rappahannock, and were moving upon Fredericksburg. They carried the
first line of the rebel intrenchments, and thus obtained a position
about six miles from General Hooker.

On the following morning, Monday the 4th, the rebels appeared in strong
force upon General Sedgwick’s front, and upon the hills to the left.
About four in the afternoon they moved up to attack; and although the
Union artillery opened upon them from every point, their slow and steady
advance could not be checked; and General Sedgwick, after a hot and
fierce engagement of five hours, was compelled to fall slowly back to
Banks’ Ford, and that same night he recrossed the Rappahannock.

Up to this time, from five o’clock in the morning, the deafening roar of
musketry, and the booming of a hundred cannon had known hardly any
cessation from any point of the bloody field.

And yet the brave patriots held their position. Could human endurance do
more? They too, were suffering; not slain so lavishly as the enemy,
because sheltered; but their ranks were sensibly thinning. Half past
nine o’clock—the column was growing weak; ten o’clock—the work of death
still went on. Ten thousand brave men had closed their eyes in death
within the past five hours.

Two thousand an hour slain! Ten thousand more had been mangled and
crippled for life. The ratio of deaths to the simply wounded, was never
equalled in war. One to one. The Unionists mowed the enemy down by
brigades; they wounded only by dozens and scores. Could the Union men
endure the exertion long enough? Even though the rebels did so greatly
outnumber them, they should finally be destroyed. But the Federal troops
were exhausted.

Half past ten o’clock. The ranks were broken. From sheer fatigue the men
had given way. One entrance into their rifle pits and the still dense
masses of the enemy made but short work of clearing them. But though
repulsed, the Union troops were not disordered. Like veterans, every
column fell back in order; and the line was re-established at the old
brick house, Chancellorsville, General Hooker’s headquarters.

While standing upon the porch of the house General Hooker narrowly
escaped death from a shell which struck a pillar of the house close
beside him, and threw him down, completely stunning him for the time. A
short time afterwards, another shell, striking against the house,
entered, and exploded. The building was almost instantly in flames; and
great numbers of the unfortunate wounded men within it perished in the
fire. That the rebels had won the day could no longer be denied; already
the necessity of a retreat began to be whispered about, and the position
of the National troops, as well as General Hooker’s condition of mind,
was far from enviable. The night was a dreary and melancholy one; and
the day that followed was anxious and busy. Many fierce skirmishes took
place; although no decisive battle was fought throughout the day. On
Tuesday the recrossing of the river was definitely fixed upon; and the
night proving dark and rainy, the humiliating retreat began, at ten
o’clock, in the midst of gloom and universal despondency. The river had
risen very much owing to the recent rains. The troops reached their old
camping ground on the left bank of the Rappahannock, without much
difficulty, and without being pursued by Lee.




                SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF STONEWALL JACKSON.
                BORN JANUARY 24, 1824—DIED MAY 10, 1863.


A noteworthy incident of the sanguinary battle of Chancellorsville was
the accidental shooting of the rebel General Stonewall Jackson, by his
own troops. This casualty occurred on the evening of May 2d, 1863. It
may be interesting—since Stonewall Jackson, if not the ablest, was the
most brilliant officer in the service of the rebellion—to preface the
narrative of his death with some account of his civil and military
career.

Thomas Jefferson Jackson—who, as we have seen, acquired the soubriquet
of “Stonewall,” was born at Clarksburg, Harrison Co., Va., January 21,
1824. The first years of his life were spent on his uncle’s farm. In
1842 he became a cadet at West Point, from which military school he
graduated in 1846, in the same class with McClellan and other students,
subsequently distinguished in the Civil War. As a boy and as a young
man, Jackson was noted for gravity of manners and reticence of nature;
quiet, studious, and thoughtful at all times, he was also deeply
religious in temperament and in faith. In the Mexican War, in 1848, he
served under General Taylor and under General Scott, and distinguished
himself at Contreras, Churubusco, and Chepultepec. In 1852, he resigned
his commission, being in ill health, and was afterwards appointed
Professor of Mathematics, in the Military Institute of Virginia. The
breaking out of the Rebellion found him there, and entering the rebel
service, he received a Lieutenant’s commission from Governor Letcher of
Virginia. His participation in the war was brief, but was marked by
daring exploits and many successes. He bore a conspicuous part in the
first battle of Bull Run, and as we have seen, made a dashing and
successful raid up the valley of the Shenandoah, pursuing Banks to the
Potomac, and getting away unscathed. He also took part in the battle of
Malvern, and he greatly harassed General Pope, during the campaign of
that officer. The capture of Harper’s Ferry was, in part, due to his
strategy; and he was engaged in the bloody battle of Antietam. He also
participated in the battle of Fredericksburg, and defeated Burnside’s
left wing, commanded by General Franklin. At the battle of
Chancellorsville his rank was that of Lieutenant-General, equivalent to
that of a corps commander, in the United States Army. His operations in
the latter fight have already been described. The manner of his death
was peculiar, and is worthy of minute description. Late in the afternoon
of the 2d of May, he had attacked and routed the Eleventh United States
Army Corps, under General Howard, forming part of the rear of the
Federal right wing. At about 8 o’clock in the evening, when returning
from this attack, attended by his staff, the cavalcade was mistaken, by
the rebels, for a body of Union cavalry, and was fired upon, in the
darkness. Jackson was struck by three balls. One passed through the left
arm, two inches below the shoulder joint, shattering the bone and
severing the chief artery; another ball passed through the same arm
between the elbow and wrist, making its exit through the palm of the
hand; a third ball entered the palm of the right hand about its middle,
passing through, and broke two bones. He was wounded on the plank road,
about fifty yards in advance of the enemy. He fell from his horse, and
was caught by Captain Wormley, to whom he remarked, “All my wounds are
by my own men.” He had given orders for his men to fire at any one
coming Up the road, before he left the lines. The Union skirmishers
appeared ahead of him, and he turned to ride back. Just then some one
cried out, “Cavalry charge!” and immediately the regiment fired. The
whole party then broke forward to ride through the rebel line to escape
the fire. Captain Boswell was killed, and carried through the line by
his horse, and fell among his own men. Colonel Couchfield,
Chief-of-Staff, was wounded by his side. Two couriers were killed. Major
Pendleton, Lieutenants Morrison and Smith, escaped uninjured. General
Jackson was immediately placed on a litter and started for the rear; but
the firing had attracted the attention of the Unionists, and it was
resumed by both lines. One litter-bearer was shot down, and Jackson fell
from the shoulders of the men, receiving a severe contusion, adding to
the injury of the arm, and severely injuring his side.

At this point the Unionists swept the field with artillery, and the
wounded man was left for five minutes, until the fire slackened, when he
was placed in an ambulance, and carried to the field hospital at
Wilderness Run. He lost a large amount of blood, and at one time told
Doctor M’Guire he thought he was dying, and would have bled to death,
but that a tourniquet was immediately applied. For two hours he was
almost pulseless. As he was being carried from the field, frequent
inquiries were made by the soldiers, “Who have you there?” He told the
doctor, “Do not tell the troops I am wounded.”

At the hospital his arm was amputated, while he was under the influence
of chloroform. He slept on Sunday morning, was cheerful, and was doing
well. On Monday he was carried to Chancellor’s house, near Guiney’s
depot.

During the ride to Guiney’s he complained greatly of heat, and begged
that a wet cloth be applied to his stomach, which was done, greatly to
his relief, as he expressed it. He slept well on Monday night, and ate
with relish the next morning. On Tuesday his wounds were doing very
well. He asked, “Can you tell me, from the appearance of my wounds, how
long I shall be kept from the field?” He was greatly satisfied when he
was told they were doing remarkably well. He did not complain of any
pain in the side, and wanted to see the members of his staff, but was
advised not to do so. On Wednesday night, while his surgeon, who had not
slept for three nights, was asleep, he complained of nausea, and ordered
his boy, Jim, to place a wet towel over his stomach. This was done.
About daylight the surgeon was awakened by the boy saying, “The General
is in great pain.” The pain was in his right side, and due to incipient
pneumonia and some nervousness, which he himself attributed to the fall
from the litter. On Thursday his wife arrived, greatly to his joy and
satisfaction, and she faithfully nursed him to the end.

On Sunday morning, when it was apparent that he was rapidly sinking,
Mrs. Jackson told him he was going to die. He said: “Very good: very
good. It is all right.” He had previously said: “I consider these wounds
a blessing. They were given me for some good and wise purpose. I would
not part with them if I could.” He expressed a wish to be buried in
Lexington, in the valley of Virginia. During delirium his mind reverted
to the battle-field, and he sent orders to General A. P. Hill to prepare
for action, and to Major Hawks, his Commissary, and to the surgeons. He
frequently expressed to his aids his wish that Major-General Ewell
should be ordered to command his corps. This wish was subsequently
fulfilled. He died on the afternoon of Sunday May 10th, and on the 12th,
was honored with a public funeral in Richmond. The press, at the North
as well as the South, rendered eulogiums upon his character and
achievements. Posterity will remember him as a kind of Cromwellian
soldier, an enthusiastic devotee of religion, and a man who fought
bravely in a bad cause.




                          THE REBEL INVASION.


The battle of Chancellorsville resulted, as we have seen, in a
substantial reverse to the Army of the Potomac. The Unionists did,
indeed, capture many rebel prisoners and standards, and munitions of
war, besides covering themselves with glory by their dauntless courage,
and their heroic achievements. But the generalship of Lee, and the
desperate fighting of the rebels, ultimately resulted in checking the
advance of the Union army. This advantage, however, as we shall
presently see, was soon lost to the Confederates at the great battle of
Gettysburg, fought in the early part of the following month of July.
General Lee, meantime, projected a descent upon the rich soil of
Pennsylvania, hoping to replenish his wasted stores, and to smite the
North with panic. His policy in this respect was very bold, and in some
sense it was successful. He commenced his movement on the 3rd of June,
advancing in the direction of Culpepper Court-House. The troops were led
by General Longstreet, General Hood, and General Ewell. General A. P.
Hill was left in command of the rebel forces confronting General Hooker
at Chancellorsville. By the 9th of June, the design of Lee became
apparent to General Hooker, who put his army in motion on the 14th, on
parallel lines with the rebel advance, and arrived by forced marches on
the banks of the Potomac. The intense heat of the weather, and the rapid
march of the army, was extremely exhausting. Hundreds of men fell daily
in the ranks, overcome by the severe task imposed upon them, and many
lives were thus lost.

At Culpepper the rebel advance formed a junction with General Stuart’s
cavalry; and thence the whole force advanced up the valley of the
Shenandoah, in the direction of Winchester. A reconnoissance made toward
Culpepper by the Union General Buford, on the 9th of June, resulted in
an engagement, in which the Federals lost upwards of three hundred and
fifty men, including Colonel B. F. Davis, who had led the cavalry force
from Harper’s Ferry, at the time of its surrender in 1862. The enemy’s
loss was somewhat larger. Other skirmishes marked the rebel advance.
Great excitement resulted from it in Pennsylvania, and generally
throughout the North, and measures to check the rebels and to drive them
back, were immediately taken by the Government and General Hooker. On
the evening of the 14th, and the morning of the 15th, a large body of
rebel troops crossed the Potomac in the vicinity of Nolan’s Ford, and
moved on Hagerstown, which was evacuated by our troops on the 15th. At
nine P. M. on that day, the rebel advance guard entered Chambersburg. On
the 16th the rebel advance, consisting mainly of cavalry, was at
Chambersburg and Scotland. The forces assembled for the protection of
the State were at Shippensburg, Pennsylvania.

Two new military departments were organized by the Secretary-of-War on
the 9th of June:—that of the Monongahela, and that of the Susquehanna.
The former comprised parts of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Ohio; the
latter comprised the whole eastern part of the State of Pennsylvania.
Major-General W. T. H. Brooks commanded the one; Major-General D. N.
Couch commanded the other. He established his headquarters at
Harrisburg, and there took command of the militia, which were called out
from the several States, by the President, on the 15th of June. From
this date until the battle of Gettysburg, July 3rd, the current of
events was marked by frequent alarms, by many disturbances, and
continual excitement. Mosby’s guerrillas at this time again appeared in
Loudon county, and committed many depredations. The town of
McConnelsburg, Pennsylvania, was overrun and pillaged by the rebels on
the 19th, and all the bridges on the Baltimore and Ohio railroad,
between Harper’s Ferry and Cumberland, which are a hundred miles apart,
were destroyed. Hagerstown and Frederick were pillaged, and the rebels
took possession of Winchester and Martinsburg. A large portion of the
beautiful town of Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, was laid in ashes by the
incendiary fires of a relentless foe, in retaliation for the devastation
wrought by General Hunter in the Valley of the Shenandoah. The alarm
occasioned by all these movements, caused the militia of several states
to be called out, and sent to the protection of Pennsylvania. Troops
were also raised in that State to the number of twenty-five thousand.
The cities of Harrisburg, Baltimore, Pittsburg, and Philadelphia, were
fortified. Many of the inhabitants of these cities and of other points
that were threatened by the rebels, becoming panic-stricken, fled
northward.

A contemporary account thus describes the state of feeling at Harrisburg
at this juncture:

“The morning broke upon a populace all astir, who had been called out of
bed by the ‘beat of the alarm drum,’ the blast of the bugle and the
clanging of bells. The streets were lively with men, who were either
returning from a night’s work on the fortifications, or going over to
relieve those who were toiling there. As the sun rose higher the
excitement gathered head. All along the streets were omnibuses, wagons,
and wheelbarrows, taking in trunks and valuables, and rushing them down
to the depot, to be shipped out of rebel range. The stores, the female
seminaries, and almost every private residence, were busy all the
forenoon in swelling the mountain of freight that lay at the depot.
Every horse was impressed into service, and every porter groaned beneath
the weight of his responsibilities.

“The scene at noon at the depots was indescribable, if not disgraceful.
A sweltering mass of humanity thronged the platform, all furious to
escape from the doomed city.

“At the bridge and across the river the scene was equally exciting. All
through the day, a steady stream of people on foot and in wagons, young
and old, black and white, was pouring across it from the Cumberland
valley, bearing with them their household goods, and all manner of goods
and stock. Endless trains, laden with flour, grain, and merchandise,
hourly emerged from the valley, and thundered across the bridge and
through the city. Miles of retreating baggage-wagons, filled with calves
and sheep tied together, and great old-fashioned furnace wagons, loaded
with tons of trunks and boxes, defiled in continuous procession down the
pike and across the river, raising a dust that marked the outline of the
road as far as the eye could see.”

Among the lesser engagements of this period a spirited cavalry
engagement near Aldie is worthy of note. At 3 o’clock on the 17th of
June, a division of the Union cavalry encountered a rebel force,
consisting of General Fitzhugh Lee’s cavalry brigade and a battery of
artillery, about one mile from Aldie, on the road to Unionstown. As soon
as General Lee was apprised of the approach of the National troops he
made preparations to oppose their advance, and to maintain his position.
The rebel Captains Boston and White, with a command of thirty men, were
sent forward as sharpshooters, but not receiving any support they were
compelled to fall back before the first charge of the advancing
Unionists. Close behind the rebel advance the Fifth and the Third
Virginia cavalry were stationed; and as the National troops charged upon
them a fierce hand-to-hand encounter took place, and in the course of
the fight many rebel prisoners were captured. After a brave resistance
the rebels were overcome, and the order was given to fall back.
Seventy-seven privates were taken prisoners, together with the following
officers:—Major Carrington of the Third Virginia regiment; Captain E. B.
Boston of the Fifth Virginia; Captain F. R. Winser and Captain Jones of
the Third Virginia; and Captain L. B. White; Lieutenant Boston;
Lieutenant Turnell; and Lieutenant Douglass of the Fifth Virginia. The
loss upon the Union side was very trifling; the men fought with the
greatest bravery. It was dark before the fight was finally at an end,
light artillery firing being kept up on both sides, without any material
injury to either; and when night fell it saw the Union troops entirely
victorious, and the rebels slowly retiring.




                         BATTLE OF WINCHESTER.
                             JUNE 14, 1863.


On Saturday, the 13th of June, an attack was made by the advance of the
enemy’s forces moving up the Shenandoah valley, upon Berryville, then
held by General McReynolds. The position was midway between Winchester
and Snicker’s gap; and, as an outpost of Winchester, it was valuable.
The force under General McReynolds, numbering about three thousand men,
made a gallant defence; but finding themselves overwhelmed by numbers
they retreated toward Winchester. In the mean time a portion of the
rebel advance, consisting of two divisions commanded by Generals Early
and Johnson, under General Ewell, had attacked Winchester, which was
held by Major-General Milroy. The firing was continuous during the day,
and the fighting was severe on both sides. During the whole of the
following day the fighting continued at short intervals. At about half
past four o’clock the skirmishers of the enemy charged up the Berryville
and Front Royal roads, but were received by a hot fire from the Union
troops, which dispersed them in confusion. General Milroy now ordered a
charge upon the enemy, which was gallantly made, but his men, finding
the rebels very strongly encamped in a wood behind them, were forced to
return as quickly as possible to the protection of the town. A road
running directly west from Winchester, called the Romney road, now
became the point from which the enemy attacked. About 5 o’clock the
rebels appeared in strong force in front of the main fort situated north
of this road, and a sharp engagement took place between them and the
National troops. The rebel general, Ewell, got his batteries into
position and opened a heavy fire upon the Union men; he then massed his
infantry and charged upon them in the face of their hottest firing.
Without an instant’s pause the rebels leaped over the breast works,
driving off the Ohio regiment at the point of the bayonet, and planted
their colors on the embankment.

Of the Ohio regiment a few escaped back to the main fort, but the
greater number were either killed or taken prisoners. The Union forces
were now completely hemmed in, but not defeated. Sharp and deadly firing
continued between the rebels and Unionists until dark. The First
brigade, under General Elliott, at this time occupied the main fort; the
Second, under Colonel Ely, occupied the town and the space to the main
fort on the northwest; and the Third, under General McReynolds, was
posted to the north of the main fort. The final charge of the day
occurred soon after dark; the rebels crossed a ravine between their main
position and the front, but were received by a hot and murderous fire
from the Union artillery, which hurled them back again, and the fighting
was over for the night. At midnight, after a council held by the brigade
commanders, General Milroy ordered a retreat to Harper’s Ferry. The
troops marched straight on the road to Martinsburg for about four miles,
when they were met by a large body of rebels. They attempted an advance,
but were violently repulsed; and two regiments, the Eighteenth
Connecticut, and Fifth Maryland, were captured entire. Of the whole
force, about four hundred reached Hancock and Cumberland; one thousand
six hundred reached Maryland Heights; and one thousand seven hundred
reached Bloody Run; while the remainder of the division of twelve
thousand men, with a large quantity of artillery and military stores,
were captured by the rebel forces.




                        CAPTURE OF MARTINSBURG.
                             JUNE 14, 1863.


While the fight just described was taking place at Winchester, the rebel
General Rhodes appeared in front of Martinsburg, a town some miles to
the north of Winchester, and demanded its surrender from General Tyler,
then in command. The surrender was proudly refused; and the rebels
immediately opened an attack, which was gallantly resisted until night
came on. Perceiving that he could not hold his position, General Tyler,
under cover of the darkness, prepared to evacuate the city. The movement
was discovered by the enemy, who at once renewed the attack, and a most
bloody contest began, which was kept up till the Union troops reached
the Potomac river. General Tyler, after a hard struggle, and the loss of
two hundred men, many pieces of artillery and a large quantity of
ammunition and grain, succeeded in crossing the river at Shepherdstown,
and moving on, to Harper’s Ferry. The rebels instantly took possession
of Martinsburg; their losses in the capture of it having been only one
killed and two wounded.

                  *       *       *       *       *

During this time it was impossible to determine correctly where General
Lee was moving with his main army; but on Monday, the 29th, it became
evident that he had selected Gettysburg for his field of operations and
on that night the flame of his army’s camp-fires shone luridly against
the sky—a warning of the bloody battle to come. During the entire period
of this bold invasion of the North the skirmishes, raids, and minor
battles consequent upon the continual meetings of the rebel and Union
forces were almost daily, but the great battle was that which will ever
be remembered at the sound of the word, Gettysburg, and must always
bring a glow of pride to the cheek of every loyal American who hears it
named.




                        ATTACK ON CARLISLE, PA.
                             JULY 1, 1863.


As we have seen, the advance of Lee’s army began on June 27th, a large
rebel force occupied the city of Carlisle; and on the 30th they removed
all their infantry and stores to Gettysburg. On the evening of July 1st,
a severe engagement took place between the rebels under General Fitzhugh
Lee (who had not been apprised of the withdrawal of the enemy, under
General Ewell, from Carlisle) and the Union forces under command of
General W. F. Smith, who were just entering the deserted town. Being
unable to comprehend the state of affairs before him General F. H. Lee
commenced skirmishing with the Union troops; but finding them much
stronger than was supposed, he sent in a flag of truce demanding the
surrender of the town. General Smith promptly refused to surrender, and
at once made preparations for sending away the women and children.

The work of shelling the town was at once commenced; and a perfect
shower of grape, canister and shell was poured in upon it for three
hours; at the end of that time the enemy’s fire slackened a little, and
once more, at midnight, General Lee sent in a flag of truce, with a
demand for surrender. General Smith indignantly refused; and the fire of
the enemy recommenced, and was carried on without intermission for three
hours. During this time severe skirmishing was kept up by the Union
infantry, though no heavy reply of artillery was made to the enemy’s
fire. Finally the rebels fired the cavalry barracks, and accidentally
set on fire several buildings with shells. The town was very much
injured and many people were killed, but the rebels were defeated in
their object, and obliged to fall back the next day.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the month of June drew towards its close all the movements that were
made by both armies tended directly towards a great battle. On the 27th
June, a skirmish took place at Skerrett’s Gap, in which the Union
pickets were driven in, many of them being captured. On the 25th the
town of McConnellsburg, a short time before pillaged by the enemy, and
occupied by a body of rebels five thousand strong, under command of
General Stuart, was attacked by a detachment of the First New York
Cavalry. The Unionists drove in the rebel pickets, causing much alarm.
The rebels made but very little resistance; and at nine o’clock of the
following morning they evacuated the place, retiring towards
Chambersburg, with the intention of reinforcing the rebel force which
threatened Harrisburg. During the same day a destructive raid was made
by a large body of Imboden’s men, through the lower part of
Pennsylvania, in which they carried away with them every available
article of every description of property.

They were not, however, at all points successful. A small body of
cavalry—numbering forty or fifty men—under Captain Jones, entered
McConnelsburg (which had been in possession of the National troops but a
day or two), on a reconnoissance. Captain Jones had but just dismounted
his horse, when one of his pickets hastened to him with the news that a
body of the enemy were advancing, and close upon the town. “How many are
there?” asked Captain Jones. “About a hundred,” was the reply. “Very
well. I will fight them!” returned the intrepid officer. “Men, take your
places!” The men mounted and leisurely rode down the street. The enemy,
supposing it to be a retreat, were getting ready for pursuit, when the
Unionists suddenly halted, turned, and faced them. The rebel leader sang
out to his men,—“Charge—charge the damned Yankees!” But the rebels never
moved. Captain Jones called out in a clear, firm voice, to his noble
little band, “Charge!” and the order required no repetition. With a
wild, triumphant cry, they sprang forward, sabre in hand, and drove the
enemy like chaff before them. The sharp ring of carbines, the clang of
sabres, and the ringing shouts of the triumphant pursuers, filled the
air with the enthusiasm of the scene. At the edge of the town, the Union
cavalry overtook the flying rebels, and dashing into their midst, a
hand-to-hand struggle took place, in which the rebels were compelled to
fight for their lives. The result was soon seen to be in favor of the
Unionists; and when they returned to the town, they drove before them
more prisoners than their own number. Two rebels were killed, one
dangerously wounded, and three escaped; the rest were taken prisoners.

By this time the Union army, in readiness for the great fight, was
impatient for it to begin. On the 28th sharp skirmishing took place at
Wrightsville between the rebels and a small force of Union troops under
Colonel Frick. The rebels attacked the Unionists in their rifle-pits,
and were fiercely repulsed, until, overpowered by numbers, the Federals
fled across the bridge over the Susquehanna river, near Columbia, which
they set on fire in order to prevent the rebels from crossing in pursuit
of them. On the same day the enemy took possession of the town of York,
Pa. From all the cities threatened by the rebels the citizens were
rapidly fleeing toward Philadelphia; although a very large number
rallied bravely to the defence of their homes. The publication of many
newspapers was suspended, the employees having all entered the ranks.
The excitement increased every hour.




                         BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG.
                            JULY 1–3, 1863.


General Meade, as soon as it was ascertained that the rebels were
encamped within full view of Gettysburg, set about making the required
changes in the positions of his own troops. On Tuesday, June 30th,
General Buford was sent, with a cavalry force numbering six thousand, to
make a reconnoissance on the Chambersburg road. They encamped there for
the night. Two corps were sent towards the southwest, to a point about
four miles from Gettysburg, where they also encamped for the night.
These corps were the First, numbering about eight thousand men, under
command of General Reynolds; and the Eleventh, numbering nearly fifteen
thousand, under command of General Howard. Two corps of the rebel
forces, under Generals Hill and Longstreet, and two divisions of Ewell’s
corps, were encamped quite near to the town of Gettysburg. The town of
Gettysburg, itself, lies at the head of a gently sloping valley, and
forms the centre for roads running north, south, east, and west.

The Catoctin and the South Mountain run on either sides of the valley;
and a short distance to the east of the town runs the stream of water
called Rock creek. Near the town are two hills, known respectively as
Round Top, and Little Round Top, and on the former General Meade posted
the extreme left of his line. To the northwest of this position, also on
a slight eminence, General Lee had posted his men, forming a circular
line of several miles in extent, and almost hemming in the patriot
troops. On the morning of the following day a body of cavalry, under
General Buford, was sent forward for reconnoitring purposes, and became
engaged with the rebel advance immediately. General Reynolds followed,
with his entire corps, and plunged into the thickest of the fight at the
first sound of battle; the odds, however, were fearful—eight thousand
against twenty thousand—and General Reynolds sent an urgent message to
General Howard, to send forward reinforcements. But not till one o’clock
did the Eleventh corps arrive to the assistance of the hard-pressed men,
who still stood their ground like a rock, and fiercely drove back the
advancing rebel hosts. General Reynolds riding up and down the line in
front of his men, urging them on with look and word, fell a victim to
his own dauntless bravery, being shot through the head by a rebel
sharpshooter.

At last came two divisions of the Eleventh corps, under Schurtz and
Barlow. Eager to retrieve their reputation, so tarnished at
Chancellorsville, they formed bravely on the right, and stayed the
faltering line, for the first time beginning to waver. The remaining
division of the Eleventh corps, under General Steinwehr, was sent to
occupy a point called Cemetery Hill, on the south side of the town.

[Illustration: ALEXANDER H. STEPHENS.]

For three hours longer the brave line continued to hold its ground
against the ever increasing numbers of the enemy; but human endurance
could bear no more, and at last the right wing slowly yielded, and then
the whole line fell gradually back, in good order, to the town of
Gettysburg. Here they fell a prey to the pursuing rebels, who overtook
them in the turnings and twistings of the streets, and in a few minutes
one thousand and twenty men became prisoners to the enemy. Now, indeed,
the day looked dark for the Union soldiers; but at the very moment that
all seemed lost, the artillery of the troops which had been sent to
Cemetery Hill blazed forth a most unexpected check to the triumphant
rebels. This saved the battle of Gettysburg from being lost to the
National arms; the effect of the sudden firing was magical, and night,
which now began to darken down around both friend and foe, put an end to
the day’s battle.

The night following this day was one of anxious thought to the generals
commanding the Union army; and in the Cemetery, among the monuments of
the dead, many a prayer for reinforcements passed the lips of those who
knew that certain destruction awaited them on the morrow, if more troops
did not in the mean time arrive to their assistance.

But midnight brought relief and joy to those anxious waiting hearts. At
about twelve o’clock the Twelfth corps, under General Slocum, and the
Third, under General Sickles, arrived, fresh and eager for the battle.
And soon after daylight came further reinforcements of the Second and
Fifth corps; and the sun of the next day shone down on an almost
entirely new army, which struck consternation to the hearts of the
astonished rebels, who had already made up their minds to an easy and
certain victory.

On this day the position of General Meade’s forces was as follows:
General Howard, with the Eleventh corps, held the centre; the remaining
portion of the First corps, and the Twelfth, under General Slocum,
formed the right wing, and were placed on the right of the Baltimore
road; the Second corps,—General Hancock,—and the Third,—General
Sickles,—formed the army’s left wing, between the Taneytown and
Emmetsburg roads.

On Thursday morning, the enemy, apparently surprised by the formidable
Union army which they found ready to oppose them, remained strangely
quiet during the most of the day; and it was four o’clock before they
attacked the waiting and immovable line of Federal troops. Then indeed
the crisis of the battle began. General Longstreet hurled his whole
division upon the left wing of General Meade’s army, and the storm of
artillery that plowed through the ranks, dealt swift and terrible
destruction. But the brave Third corps, not even wavering before the
dreadful fire, beat back the rebels again and again. On their left
flank, danger now menaced them. Already one of Longstreet’s divisions
was manœuvering to cut them off from Round Top Hill, on which were
placed but three or four batteries. The position would be of
incalculable value to the rebels, who, by placing their batteries on the
hill, could hurl shell upon the whole Union line. To save Round Top Hill
was of the greatest moment to the National forces, who put forth almost
superhuman efforts to beat back the approach of the enemy. Bravely, with
unflinching front, the rebels marched up to the very mouths of the guns,
to be blown into atoms, and hurled in horrible burnt, blackened,
bleeding fragments through the air, their places instantly filled up by
scores of others equally daring and reckless of life. Captain Bigelow,
commanding the battery at the extreme left, held the hill, after losing
many of his men, several artillerists, two sergeants, four of his guns,
and being himself severely wounded in the thigh, until McGilway’s two
batteries arrived to his assistance, and poured in an unflinching fire
upon the enemy’s lines.

Below, at the base of the hill, the battle raged with even greater
violence; but feeling that it would be lost if Round Top Hill were
yielded, the brave Union men determined to die in its defence, or hold
it to the end. On came the rebels with their dreadful battle yell, as
deafening as the roar of their artillery, and with fixed bayonets
charged forward, a sea of gleaming, death-dealing, blood-stained steel,
upon the noble, patriotic band, who met their attacks with unfaltering
courage, and hand to hand fought them to the death, while the artillery
rained a perfect torrent of shot and shell along the whole line. While
this noble division, composed of Maine, Michigan, New York, and
Pennsylvania regiments, all under command of General Barnes, were thus
heroically resisting the rebels, the First division stood in danger of
being completely swept away by the enemy’s advance. But now came General
Ayres’ division, steadily marching forward, and with that indomitable
bravery for which it was famed, and which had been displayed on previous
battle-fields, poured down in resistless force upon the rebels, and
saved the First division. Still harder pressed on the fight to obtain
the coveted position on Round Top Hill; but the rebels were destined to
defeat. General Meade sent orders to the Fourth and Fifth brigades of
the Pennsylvania reserves to clear the hill of the enemy, and the
movement began at once, superintended by General Crawford in person.
Hastily forming his line General Crawford ordered a dash to be made, and
the enemy was immediately driven back. One rebel brigade, under General
Anderson, made a stand in a gap of the woods, but was fallen upon by a
brigade under Colonel McCandless, and completely routed or taken
prisoners. The Union men pressed on after the retreating rebels, and
drove them back headlong and in wild confusion through the valley and
into the woods beyond. Returning then to the hill so bravely fought for,
and won with the blood of heroes, the Fourth and Fifth brigades took up
their position there and held it to the close of the fight.

Great credit is given to General Crawford for his management of this
affair. The honor of the army was saved by the brilliant action of the
reserves. The loss of so many arms was entirely regained by this dash,
and the ground upon which so many of the Union wounded lay without
assistance, rescued from the enemy. Not one of the wounded had received
the least assistance, and the groans of the suffering and dying men were
terrible. Ambulances were immediately sent for, under orders of General
Crawford, and the wounded were cared for.

In the mean time sharp and deadly fighting was going forward between the
Eleventh corps, situated northeast of Cemetery Hill, and General Early’s
division. As at Round Top on the day before, it was a hand-to-hand
fight; the guns were so hot from the continuous shower of destruction
that had thundered from their dreadful throats, that they could not be
worked; but the rebels advanced over the cemetery wall, and leaped to
the very mouths of the guns, but were beaten off with clubbed muskets.
Before this unexpected resistance, they were compelled to fall suddenly
back. The Twelfth corps was not so successful in beating off a similar
attack made upon them, and the rebels gained a slight foothold, which
would every hour become more valuable to them. But night had again
fallen upon the combatants, and nothing further could be done to beat
the enemy back. In the battle of Thursday, the losses on both sides were
heavy. Of general officers, Brigadier-General Paul, and
Brigadier-General Zook, were killed; and Generals Sickles, Barlow,
Graham, and Warren, were wounded.

At earliest dawn of the following day, the battle was opened by a
murderous fire from the National guns; and the fighting spread rapidly
along the line. On the right, the Twelfth corps was already preparing to
regain its losses of the previous evening; its rifle-pits bristled with
rebel muskets, which were presently pouring out a deadly fire in return
for the fierce attack of General Slocum’s men. But the brave Twelfth met
the fire courageously, and their renewed strength was too much for the
rebels, who, reluctantly began to fall back before them. The Union men
pushed forward their advance, pressed back the rebels from their
breastworks, and triumphantly taking up their lost position, the
National line was again perfectly unbroken from end to end.

From this time till about eleven o’clock, the battle continued to rage
with equal intensity and equal advantages or disadvantages to both
sides; and then for a time a short, general quiet prevailed. It had
already been proven by the battle of the previous day, that the final
issue of the contest turned upon the occupation of Cemetery Hill; and,
therefore, all General Lee’s ingenuity was exercised to obtain a clue to
its capture, as all General Meade’s military skill was put in force to
retain his valuable position. The rebel general had made preparations
early in the morning for an attack upon Meade’s entire line; and he had
also concentrated a large body of his troops against the Union centre,
with the design of taking the ground it occupied. In other respects, as
well, the rebel forces were skillfully and powerfully placed. The Union
artillery on Cemetery Hill was subjected to a half-circle of cross
fires, from the skillful arrangement of the enemy’s troops; General
Longstreet having massed fifty-five guns of long range upon the brow of
a slight eminence in front of General Hill’s extreme right, and General
Hill had massed sixty guns along the hill, in front of the heights held
by the National troops.

At one o’clock the signal gun was fired, and the cannonading commenced.
The fire of the enemy was thus concentrated on the position held by the
Eleventh and Second corps. It drew a most terrific response from the
Federal batteries. It is thus described by a spectator in the Union
army:

“The storm broke upon us so suddenly that soldiers and officers—who
leaped, as it began, from their tents, or from lazy siestas on the
grass—were stricken in their rising with mortal wounds, and died, some
with cigars between their teeth, some with pieces of food in their
fingers, and one at least—a pale young German, from Pennsylvania—with a
miniature of his sister in his hands. Horses fell, shrieking such awful
cries as Cooper told of, and writhing themselves about in hopeless
agony. The boards of fences, scattered by explosion, flew in splinters
through the air. The earth, torn up in clouds, blinded the eyes of
hurrying men; and through the branches of the trees and among the
gravestones of the cemetery a shower of destruction crashed ceaselessly.
As, with hundreds of others, I groped through this tempest of death for
the shelter of the bluff, an old man, a private in a company belonging
to the Twenty-fourth Michigan, was struck, scarcely ten feet away, by a
cannon ball, which tore through him, extorting such a low, intense cry
of mortal pain as I pray God I may never again hear. The hill, which
seemed alone devoted to this rain of death, was clear in nearly all its
unsheltered places within five minutes after the fire began.”

The same contest is thus described by an eye-witness in the Confederate
army:

“I have never yet heard such tremendous artillery firing. The enemy must
have had over one hundred guns, which, in addition to our one hundred
and fifteen, made the air hideous with most discordant noise. The very
earth shook beneath our feet, and the hills and rocks seemed to reel
like a drunken man. For one hour and a half this most terrific fire was
continued, during which time the shrieking of shell, the crash of fallen
timbers, the fragments of rocks flying through the air, shattered from
the cliffs by solid shot, the heavy mutterings from the valley between
the opposing armies, the splash of bursting shrapnell, and the fierce
neighing of wounded artillery horses, made a picture terribly grand and
sublime, but which my pen utterly fails to describe. After the firing
had continued for little more than an hour, the enemy’s guns began to
slacken, and finally all were silenced save some six or eight, which
were in a clump of woods a little to the left of the stone fence.”

For three hours the firing had continued steadily; suddenly the Union
fire was slackened for a moment to allow the guns to cool, when the
enemy, supposing they had been silenced, prepared to make a final and
irresistible attack. Their storming party was moved up. The division of
General Pickett, which had arrived since the previous day, led the
advance, supported on the right by General Wilcox’s brigade of General
Anderson’s division, and on the left by Heath’s division, commanded by
General Pettigrew. The troops of General Pickett’s division advanced in
splendid order. On his left, the command of General Pettigrew emerged
from the woods, and swept down the slope of the hill to the valley
beneath, and some two or three hundred yards in the rear of General
Pickett.

The Union line met the advance bravely. As they came under the fire of
the First and Second Corps, the enemy’s batteries became suddenly
silent. Their ammunition was exhausted. But still the rebel advance
pressed boldly forward, never wavering, even when a fire of grape and
shell was opened upon them. Steadily they crossed the Emmetsburg road,
and with undaunted front approached the Union infantry, who quietly
awaited their advance. General Gibbon, in command of the Second Corps,
walking composedly along the front of his line, encouraged his men with
his calm and steady voice:

“Hold your fire, boys—they are not near enough yet,” he called out
almost loud enough for the advancing rebels to hear, who, still coming
steadily onward, suddenly charged bayonets, and rushed forward on the
rifle pits. Then from the Union line flashed a blaze of fire before
which hundreds fell to the earth; but their comrades filled up the
vacant spaces, and charged over the pits. Now General Gibbon called to
his men to fall to the rear of the batteries, and without any sign of
confusion, the order was obeyed. But General Pettigrew’s brave division
no longer remained steady and unbroken; the artillery pouring in upon
them a blasting and destroying fire, had scattered their ranks in wild
confusion; and completely panic-stricken they fled over the plain, and
far to the rear. General Pickett was now left to bear the whole strength
of the Union forces alone, his officers wounded and falling around him
on every side. Further resistance was worse than useless, and the rebel
general gave the order to fall back. The Unionists pressed them
strongly, but their retreat was successfully effected under cover of a
brigade commanded by General Wright, and sent forward for that purpose
by General Lee.

While this fierce attack was being resisted, and utterly repulsed by
General Gibbon’s corps, the extreme right and left had been severely
tried by the rebels under Generals Ewell and Longstreet; but on every
side they were beaten back, and the night ended in the complete success
of the National arms, and the glorious victory of Gettysburg. During the
whole of the next day, both armies were engaged in the mournful duty of
burying their dead, and caring for their wounded. The losses upon both
sides during these three days were very heavy. That of the National army
in killed was two thousand eight hundred and thirty-four; in wounded,
thirteen thousand seven hundred and ninety; in missing, six thousand,
six hundred and forty-three. That of the rebels in killed, wounded, and
prisoners, was much greater. The Union soldiers buried four thousand
five hundred of the rebel dead. They estimated their entire killed at
about one thousand more; their wounded numbered twenty-one thousand; and
their loss in prisoners, stragglers, and deserters numbered thirteen
thousand.

During all day of the 4th of July, General Lee sent forward such of his
wounded as would bear removal, to Hagerstown; and when night fell the
entire remnant of his army was put in motion on the road to Fairfield.
On the 6th General Lee reached Hagerstown, and took up position there
with his army. On the following day General Meade’s advance in hot
pursuit of the rebel army, reached Funktown, a place six miles south of
Hagerstown. On the 8th a sharp conflict took place at Boonsboro’ between
the retreating rebels and the pursuing Federal troops. The opposing
forces were the Union cavalry under General Buford and General
Kilpatrick; and the divisions under Generals Stuart, Hampton, and Jones,
together with a division of infantry.

General Kilpatrick’s division was encamped in the immediate vicinity of
the town. General Buford, who was posted about two miles in advance, was
attacked by the enemy about eleven o’clock in the morning. General
Kilpatrick immediately moved out to the front, and, relieving the
brigades of Merritt and Devin, engaged the rebels.

The Union horse artillery was planted upon a very commanding position,
and was served with great effectiveness.

The enemy’s infantry pressed the National line so closely that it was
compelled to fall back, though the retrograde movement was made very
slowly, and the ground disputed inch by inch. The cavalry repeatedly
charged the enemy, breaking his line and routing his cavalry; but the
rebel infantry pressed so hard that it was at length determined to fall
back upon Boonsboro’.

About night the Third division of the Eleventh corps arrived, when the
Union cavalry dashed impetuously upon the enemy, and drove him three
miles.

Day after day, the rebels continued to retreat, and were closely pursued
by the Union soldiers; skirmishing, and occasionally sharp fighting,
marked the whole line of retreat; and there was every appearance of a
long, pitched battle, between the Union array and that of General Lee,
before the latter could succeed in escaping with his troops across the
Potomac, and back into Virginia.

At daybreak on the 10th, a fight was opened at Sharpsburg, between the
Union and rebel armies, which lasted till six o’clock in the evening,
and resulted in a victory to the Union arms. During the night, the town
was evacuated by the rebels; Generals Lee, Longstreet, and Ewell, being
the last of the rebels to leave the place. The enemy fell back toward
Williamsport, and were pursued for several miles by the Federal troops.

The Army of the Potomac marched steadily on, till it was in sight of
Lee’s entire army, which occupied a strong position on the heights, near
a marsh, in front of Williamsport. During this, and many previous and
subsequent days, there was continual skirmishing in all directions; and
the great battle that now seemed imminent was most anxiously waited for
by the Union forces, who were eager to be at work again.

On the morning of the 14th of July, to the unbounded astonishment of the
whole of Meade’s army, it was ascertained that the rebels under General
Lee had effected a most skillful retreat. Under cover of the darkness,
they had withdrawn from Williamsport, and the whole force, together with
all its trains, plunder, &c., had escaped across the Potomac. On the
same day the Union troops occupied Williamsport and Falling Waters;
capturing at the latter place, a brigade of infantry, fifteen hundred
strong, two guns, two caissons, two battle flags, and a large number of
small arms. A vigorous pursuit of the rebel army was immediately
ordered; and on the 15th, Meade’s army pursued, overtook, and engaged
the rear of the rebel army; but the enemy continued to make good his
retreat, while the Unionists continued to follow closely, till on the
24th, the Union army again overtook the fugitives; and a battle on the
north side of the Rappahannock appeared to be inevitable. But again the
wily rebel general disappointed the brave Unionists, so eagerly awaiting
an opportunity to engage and defeat his troops. During the night,
General Lee again effected his escape from his pursuers, and reached
Culpepper Court-House, before his movements were detected.

Active operations were now, for a time, at an end, with the Army of the
Potomac. It occupied the same line on the Rappahannock, which it had
held two months previous, and the wearied soldiers rested from the
labors of their long and tiresome march, still wearing upon their brows
the laurels they had won in General Meade’s successful if not brilliant
campaign.




                        THE VICKSBURG CAMPAIGN.


For more than a year the possession of Vicksburg had been the ultimate
object of the military and naval operations of the principal forces of
the United States in the west, before that object was attained. After
the unsuccessful naval and military operations in July, 1862, repeated
expeditions had been set on foot, at immense expense to the Government,
accompanied with great labor and privation on the part of the patriots
engaged in the enterprises, only to be met in turn with disaster and
reverse. These operations were under the direction of Major-General
Grant, commander-in-chief of the army of West Tennessee, and may take
their date about December 1, 1862, at which time the principal forces of
General Grant were at La Grange, three miles east of Grand Junction, on
the Cairo and New Orleans railroad. General Grant was placed in command
of the Department of Tennessee, embracing all the country west of the
Tennessee river, and on both shores of the Mississippi river, from
Corinth to Louisiana. He was in command of the Thirteenth Army Corps,
and his troops fought the famous battles of Iuka and Corinth, although
General Grant did not command in person, being at Jackson, Tennessee,
his headquarters. In December, 1862, he removed his headquarters to
Holly Springs; and on the 22d of that month, his forces having greatly
increased, he divided them into four corps, viz.: the Thirteenth,
Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Corps of the United States Army.

The first expedition, under General Grant, was started in December,
1862. The plan of General Grant was—that General Sherman should take
command of the forces in Memphis in Tennessee, and Helena in Arkansas,
and descend the river on transports with the gunboat fleet, and make an
attack on Vicksburg by the 29th of December; and that General McClernand
should take the forces at Cairo and move down to Vicksburg, thus
reinforcing General Sherman soon after his attack on the town.
Meanwhile, General Grant was to advance rapidly upon the Confederate
troops in Mississippi north and east of Vicksburg, which formed the main
body of their army, and keep them fully employed, and, if they retreated
to Vicksburg, arrive there with them, ready to cooperate with General
Sherman.

The Confederate force, now under the command of General Pemberton,
retired to the river, and finally fell back beyond Granada. Meanwhile
General Grant advanced to Oxford, and on the 20th of December an attack
was suddenly made in his rear, by a Confederate force under General Van
Dorn, on the garrison under Colonel Murphy at Holly Springs, which
surrendered. The prisoners were paroled and the supplies collected there
for General Grant’s army were destroyed; also a large quantity of cotton
which had been purchased of the people in the vicinity.

The surrender of Holly Springs was a severe blow to General Grant, and
the officers in command were severely censured by him. Colonel Murphy,
the commander, allowed himself to be taken by surprise, and surrendered
all of his command, and an immense quantity of supplies, which had been
gathered there for the use of the advancing army.

While General Grant was moving his columns toward the objective point,
the enemy were by no means idle. On the same day on which Colonel Murphy
surrendered Holly Springs, an attack was made on Davis’s Mills, a post a
little farther north, which was bravely repulsed. On the next day,
Humboldt was captured, and an attack made on Trenton, while several
important stations on the railroad were, in turn, visited by the
Confederate raiders, who demolished the equipments of the roads, cut the
telegraph lines, and inflicted serious injury, by destroying the
communications of General Grant’s army, which compelled him to make a
retrograde movement, or fall back on Holly Springs. This left General
Pemberton at liberty to concentrate his forces at Vicksburgh against
General Sherman, who was then advancing on that place in accordance with
General Grant’s plan, while the cooperating forces were removed so far
from the scene of action, that there was no hope of their being able to
afford any assistance, either by participation or by the diversion of
any portion of the enemy’s forces.

Meanwhile General W. T. Sherman, who had been stationed at Memphis,
embarked with one division on the 20th of December, and dropped down to
Friar’s Point, the place of rendezvous, where he was joined by Admiral
Porter with his flagship and two consorts.

The arrangements were completed by the military and naval commanders
during the next forenoon, the 22d, and the fleet got under way, and
moved down just below the mouth of White river, where it came to, at
sunset. On the next day it descended to Gaines’s Landing, and at two P.
M. came to anchor, to await the arrival of the transports in the rear,
and also a division of troops from Memphis. Half of the town of Gaines’s
Landing was destroyed by fire while the army was there. Similar
destruction had also been made at Friar’s Point. These acts led to
stringent measures on the part of General Sherman.

On the morning of the 25th, the fleet arrived at the mouth of the Yazoo
river. The fleet consisted of more than sixty transports, with a number
of iron-clad and other gunboats, and several mortar boats. The Yazoo is
a deep, narrow, and sluggish stream, formed by the Tallahatchie and
Yallobusha rivers, which unite in Carroll county, Mississippi. It runs
through an alluvial plain of extreme fertility, about two hundred and
ninety miles, and empties into the Mississippi river twelve miles above
Vicksburg.

On the 26th, the expedition, under convoy of the gunboats, moved up the
Yazoo, and the troops were landed at various points from the junction of
Old River with the Yazoo to Johnson’s Farm, a distance of about three
miles, without opposition. The distance from Vicksburg was about eight
miles. A strong position, known as Haines’s Bluff, some distance above
on the river, was held by the Confederate forces, and in the mean while
attacked by the gunboats De Kalb, Cincinnati, Louisville, Benton and
Lexington. It was the plan of General Sherman to attack Vicksburg in the
rear. For this purpose he was engaged, on the 28th, in getting his
forces in position.

Vicksburg is situated upon a high bluff, rising nearly a hundred feet
above the water. This bluff faces very nearly to the west. The
Mississippi in front of Vicksburg runs in a southwesterly course. These
bluffs are on its eastern bank, and run off from a point five miles
below the city directly inland from the head of the bend in the
Mississippi until they strike the Yazoo river, nine miles northeast of
Vicksburg in a straight line, and twenty-three miles from the
Mississippi by the course of the Yazoo river.

The face of this bluff, throughout its length precipitous and high,
furnishes a natural defence against any force attempting to get into the
rear of the city from the north. Where the bluffs approach the Yazoo
river the rebels had constructed formidable batteries, which prevented
the passage of all manner of craft. Just above these batteries, and
defended by them, they had placed a heavy raft of timber and iron in the
stream, making a most effectual blockade.

Thus it was impossible to flank this range of bluffs. They must be
attacked, if attacked at all, full in front. Against this the enemy had
guarded themselves by fortifying the entire range, from Vicksburg to
Milldale, its upper extremity. These fortifications consisted of abatis
in front of the bluffs to a width on the average of a mile. At the foot
of the bluff they had rifle pits the entire way. Above the rifle pits,
and in the face of the bluff, they had constructed batteries mounting
one gun each, at short intervals all the way along. On the summit of the
bluffs they had earthworks thrown up, ready to cover field artillery
whenever it should be desirable to bring it into action from any of
these points. Thus these entire ranges of hills were one complete,
bristling fortification, dangerous to approach and difficult to capture.

But, notwithstanding the dangers and difficulties in the way, our brave
Western soldiers were not afraid to grapple with them, nor doubtful of
their abilities to overcome them.

General Sherman’s army consisted of four divisions, the first of which
contained three brigades, under Brigadier-General Geo. W. Morgan; the
second, three brigades under Brigadier-General A. J. Smith, and the
fourth, four brigades, commanded by Brigadier-General Frederick Steele,
whose Brigade-Generals were Frank P. Blair, John M. Thayer, C. E. Hovey,
and Colonel Hassendurbel.

The division of General Steele was the largest one on the ground.
Blair’s brigade was detached, and after making a landing, pushed forward
inland under General Morgan L. Smith.

The rest of the division, under General C. E. Hovey, was sent three
miles further up the Yazoo River, to penetrate the rear and get at the
railroad near Vicksburg. He landed above Blake’s Bayou, and within two
miles, he encountered the heavy guns of the enemy on the high bluffs, in
front of a lagoon or bayou which it was impossible to cross without
boats or bridges, and he returned to Chickasaw Bayou, where General H.
H. Morgan had already landed.

In taking position General A. J. Smith took the right, General Morgan L.
Smith the right centre, General Steele the left centre, and General G.
W. Morgan the extreme left. The Federal line was formed in this order
parallel with the bluffs, and in the edge of the timber that skirted the
abatis, bringing it about a mile from the rebel lines. To reach this
position from the point of debarkation on the Yazoo River, the forces
had to cross a series of bayous, or deep ravines, which were then filled
and unfordable. These crossings had to be made by pontoon bridges, the
building of which was stoutly resisted by the rebels, occasioning a
continual skirmishing throughout the day, though with no very serious
results. In addition to this difficulty roads had to be cut in most
instances; the old roads—where any existed—having been destroyed by the
rebels or blockaded with fallen timber, while in most directions no
roads existed at all.

The Confederate batteries opened fire on General Morgan’s position at an
early hour on the 29th, which continued for about an hour, with but
slight effect.

On Monday morning the great effort was to be made to gain the heights,
and all the forces were ordered to move at daylight. The morning dawned
with a dense fog upon the face of the country, so thick as to utterly
prevent any movement. Lying in the middle of the little narrow Yazoo, it
was impossible to distinguish the timber on either shore. Any movement
made under such circumstances was, of course, attended with great
hazard; any firing was at a venture, and as likely to hit friend as foe.
It was eight o’clock before the fog lifted. The gunboats which were to
shell the rebel batteries and encampments on the left, at Milldale,
having obtained their ranges on the previous day, did not wait for the
fog to clear away, but were at work at the appointed time, drawing a
brisk response from the enemy.

At various points along the lines, too, field batteries engaged the
rebel batteries at a venture, and as the morning advanced this firing
increased, until from eight to ten o’clock there was nothing to be heard
but one continuous roar of artillery. Upwards of one hundred and fifty
pieces, embracing all calibers, from the ordinary 6-pounder field piece
to the heavy 10-inch Columbiad on the fortifications and the 11-inch
Dahlgrens on the gunboats, united to swell the din, making a roar such
as the Valley of the Mississippi never before heard.

This artillery duel lasted half the forenoon, resulting, as such duels
usually result, in no great loss of life. The batteries in the face of
the bluff became rather too warm for occupancy, and one after another of
them was abandoned, the gunners dragging their guns with them to the top
of the hill. This apparently left the coast for the advance of the
Federal infantry. As the lines began to emerge from the woods, the broad
plain extending from the timber to the base of the hills was found to be
cut up with gulleys as well as covered with abatis, and these gulleys
were filled with the sharpshooters of the enemy, whose skill was soon
found to be of no mean order.

Beyond these, at the foot of the bluffs, was the range of rifle-pits,
filled with rebel infantry. The right centre division, commanded by
General Morgan L. Smith, made an effort to cross the bayou in their
front. The Sixth regiment of Missouri Volunteers, under command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Blood, was detailed for the advance. The enemy’s
works were very strong, there being a steep bank of thirty feet high to
ascend, fortified with breastworks and rifle-pits, with a heavy force
drawn up in line of battle behind them. The only approach was by a road
across a sand-bar in the bayou, exposed to a double cross fire from the
enemy, and the only way of ascending the bank was by cutting a road. An
order was received for two companies to be sent over in advance for the
purpose of cutting the road—one with picks and shovels, and the other
with muskets to protect the workers from the enemy’s sharpshooters in
the rifle-pits over their heads. Company F, Captain Boutell, and Company
K, Captain Buck, were the first to volunteer, the peril being so great
that Colonel Blood was reluctant to order a detail. Their services were
accepted, and the two companies of heroes went across under a most
terrific fire, which left more than a tenth of their number stretched
upon the sand. On getting across they immediately commenced operations
on the bank, and very soon made a large excavation, almost sufficient
for the purpose, when the position of the enemy’s forces and batteries
were found to be such that the further prosecution of the attempt would
be certain destruction to all concerned in it, without accomplishing any
thing. In the mean time Lieutenant-Colonel Blood, with the balance of
the regiment, had crossed over to their support, but with still greater
loss, one-sixth of his force being killed or wounded.

The greater part of the division had now been brought under fire, and
after vainly struggling to advance amid a storm of destructive missiles
from an unseen enemy, the men hesitated, and were on the point of
retreating in confusion, when General Smith, seeing the emergency,
rushed to the head to lead the column across in person. Scarcely had he
taken his position, and called out a cheering word to the men, when a
ball struck him in the thigh, tearing the flesh badly, causing a profuse
hemorrhage. He soon became weak from the loss of blood, and was carried
from the field. His division being left without a commander fell back to
its old position, and under cover of the Federal guns, and favored by
approaching darkness and a heavy shower of rain, succeeded in returning
without further loss. Private McGee of the Sixth Missouri was shot four
times, and thirteen bullets penetrated his clothing. As he lay upon the
bar, unable to proceed, the enemy’s balls still came whistling around
him, and to protect himself he scooped a hole with his hands in the sand
and crawled into it.

General Steele’s division had no bayou to cross, but had in front of it
the same broad plain, covered with abatis and cut up with gulleys, in
which were concealed the sharpshooters of the enemy. Notwithstanding
these obstacles, the column was crowded forward close up to the bluff,
securing one of the enemy’s fortifications and a field battery of six
guns. But the ground was too hot for them; and they were compelled to
retire, but not without taking their trophies with them.

Once again this gallant division was brought up to the work and made a
noble charge across the plain, this time making a considerable further
advance than on the former occasion. They drove the enemy out of their
rifle-pits and pursued them half way up the hill, fighting heroically as
they went, receiving galling volleys of musketry at every step, with
showers of grape and canister from the field artillery above.

Some regiments of this division actually gained a foothold on the summit
of the hill in this charge, but, being unsupported, were compelled to
retire. The division labored right nobly to maintain their position, but
it could not be done, and again they retired across the plain to the
cover of the timber, their lines terribly thinned and shattered by the
effort, but carrying with them three more guns captured from the enemy.

On the extreme left General Morgan made a like effort to break the rebel
lines and get into the rear of the batteries at Haines’s Bluffs. But he
too, after reaching the foot of the hill, was compelled to abandon the
attempt.

On the right, General A. J. Smith had a bayou to cross in the midst of
the plain, to reach which he had to find his way through a field of
abatis, as well as to cross the abatis after reaching the opposite side
of the bayou. But these difficulties had but little weight with him. He
ordered the Fifty-fourth Ohio to charge across the bridge, which they
did most gallantly. They were met on the opposite side by a vastly
superior force of the enemy, but were not disposed to surrender or
retreat. Most bravely they stood their ground, fighting against vastly
superior numbers, until finally they were surrounded and forced to the
alternative of surrendering or being annihilated. In this emergency, one
of the Union batteries was brought to bear from our side of the bayou,
and poured a fire of shell into the contending forces, regardless alike
of enemy or friend.

The rebels quickly abandoned the field, leaving many of their number
upon the spot. The Ohioans then gathered up their killed and wounded and
retired across the field. The Federal shell had killed seven of their
number, and wounded twenty or thirty others. But it was not a dear price
to pay for the salvation of the regiment. They had made a noble stand,
and deserved to be rescued.

After the Fifty-fourth had retired, the gallant Eighth Missouri—the
heroes of a dozen battles, and a regiment that was never known to waver
or give way—and the Thirteenth Regulars, led the way. The crossing was
effected with safety, when the little column filed off to the right to
get possession of the road leading to Vicksburg. At this moment a
brigade of rebels came charging down the road at a double quick. The
little Union column soon wheeled into line and were ready to meet their
assailants. A brisk engagement ensued, lasting nearly half an hour, when
the rebels gave way in disorder and fled.

This affair terminated the fight for the day. In the edge of the evening
the regiments that had maintained themselves across the bayou were
recalled, and the entire force rested, after the day’s fight, where they
had on the previous night.

General Sherman’s repulse at Vicksburg was complete. The entire force,
under General McClernand, who at that time was the superior officer in
command of the army, though not present during the engagement,
reembarked on the third of January, on transports, closely followed by
the rebel advance, which coming in range of the gunboats was driven back
with severe loss. The Federal loss was six hundred killed, one thousand
five hundred wounded, and one thousand missing.

A council of war was held on the 4th on board the Tigress, which vessel
had been temporarily selected by General McClernand as his headquarters.
Admiral Porter, Major-Generals Sherman and McClernand, with the Generals
of the divisions of the army in Kentucky were present. It was determined
at this council that it would be folly to attempt any thing farther
against Vicksburg with the available force. The rebels had means of
communication by which they were rapidly and heavily reinforced, while
the Unionists had no such opportunity or prospect of receiving
reinforcements. It was, therefore, deemed expedient that the campaign
should be abandoned.

The rebel Generals Pemberton and Price were now in command at Vicksburg,
and their army was reinforced to the extent of fifty thousand men. They
had an artillery force of one hundred and sixty guns in battery, besides
a large number of field-pieces.




                   CAPTURE OF FORT HINDMAN, ARKANSAS.
                          JANUARY 10–11, 1863.


Shortly after the defeat of Sherman, the whole rebel force of Tennessee
was precipitated upon General Rosecrans. On the 31st of December, the
battle of Murfreesboro’ ensued, already fully described in this work,
and resulted in the defeat of the rebels at that point, thereby securing
the western part of Tennessee, and the region between Nashville and the
Mississippi river. A few roving bands still infested the region, but as
a whole, the specified space was cleared of the rebel forces. And thus
opened the year 1863 in the West.

General McClernand, wishing to secure his rear from attack, and knowing
that a rebel force existed at Fort Hindman, on the Arkansas river, in
conjunction with Rear-Admiral Porter, planned an expedition which
resulted in a brilliant success to the Federal arms, and destroyed the
hopes of the enemy and their confident anticipations of a victorious
campaign—compelling them to assume defensive, instead of offensive
operations.

A small settlement surrounds the Fort, which for nearly two hundred
years has been known as the “Post of Arkansas.” It is the oldest
settlement in the State. Nearly two centuries ago, there was a Spanish
town in the immediate vicinity, and also a small Spanish fort. Fort
Hindman is situated on the right bank of the Arkansas river, about fifty
miles from its mouth, and one hundred and seventeen miles from Little
Rock, the capital of the State. It was settled in 1685, by the Acadian
French, and was the trading-post for furs from the surrounding country,
during the winter and spring. It had now a few stores, and at intervals
for a dozen miles along the river bank, there was an occasional house.

The fort was a regular, square-bastioned work, one hundred yards
exterior side, with a deep ditch some fifteen feet wide, and a parapet
eighteen feet high.

On the 10th of January, the land forces, under command of General
McClernand, and the flotilla, under Admiral Porter, ascended the river,
and the former disembarked with a view of surrounding the work. During
the night, the gunboats fired a few shots at the work, and in the
morning, the troops being in position, the work commenced in earnest.
The _New York Herald_ correspondent thus describes the attack:


                            THE BOMBARDMENT.

It was five minutes past one when the gunboats Baron DeKalb, Cincinnati,
and Louisville, all iron-clads, steamed up to within about three hundred
yards of the fort, and opened fire upon it. As soon as the gunboats hove
in sight, and before they fired a shot, the fort opened on them. On a
sort of sandy beach, by the bend in the river, the rebels had erected
several targets, which were to assist them in aiming at the gunboats.
Barricades had also been placed in the river opposite the fort; but the
high water had washed part of them away and left the channel open. The
bombardment increased in rapidity as other vessels of the squadron came
into position. It took some time to get good range of the casemated guns
and the barbette gun on the fort. The Baron DeKalb had orders from the
Admiral to fire at the right hand casemate, the Louisville at the middle
one, and the Cincinnati at the great 9-inch Dahlgren gun _en barbette_.
In half an hour after the bombardment commenced the casemates were
struck by the shell from the gunboats. When the range was obtained, the
shells from the gunboats struck the guns in the fort almost every shot,
until every one was silenced and smashed. The Cincinnati fired shrapnell
at first, and cleared the crew away from the 9-inch Dahlgren gun on the
parapet, when the Baron De Kalb broke off the muzzle with a 10-inch
shot. The Lexington, light draught, Lieutenant-Commander James W. Shirk,
moved up at two o’clock, and with her rifled guns replied to the Parrott
rifled guns in the fort, while the Rattler, Lieutenant-Commander Walter
Smith, and the Gilde, Lieutenant-Commander Woodworth, threw in
shrapnell, and in company with the ram Monarch, Colonel Charles E.
Ellet, of the army, commanding, pushed up close to the fort. Each of the
gunboats silenced the gun it was instructed to fire at about the same
time. At twenty minutes past two all the heavy smooth bore and rifled
guns in the fort were most effectually silenced. The Black Hawk,
Lieutenant-Commander K. R. Breese, the Admiral’s flagship, steamed up
and took part in the fight. The Admiral himself, with his secretary,
Doctor Heap, was in the little tug which was all the time screaming and
dancing about among the gunboats, directing and superintending the
fight.


                            THE LAND ATTACK.

The first gun from the fleet was the signal for the soldiers to move,
and Morgan and Sherman immediately pushed forward their men, and were
met by a fierce fire from the rebel works.

The troops in front wore now sharply engaging the rebels in their works,
while our artillery, and their field-pieces, behind the breastworks near
the fort, were blazing away at each other with great rapidity. In one
instance, the rebels galloped the horses up to the parapet with a gun,
and when the horses wheeled with it, in order that it might be placed in
position, the infantry fire killed all the horses in the traces, and the
artillerists scampered off in an instant, and left their gun. At a shot
from one of our Parrott guns, which knocked one of the timbers from the
breastwork, at least a hundred rebels ran away from behind the
intrenchment into the bastioned fort. Our caissons were now coming from
the front for ammunition. At ten minutes past three, most of Morgan’s
men were in line, and the remainder were forming in the rear. In five
minutes more they were advancing with vigor. Sharp musketry and
artillery firing was kept up all the time. At twenty minutes past three
a heavy column of Morgan’s men was seen moving to the left, near the
river bank, advancing amid clouds of smoke. It was a body that was
moving quickly to the front, to extend the advancing line.

The time was now fifteen minutes past three. The fight was quite severe
on both sides. Although the heavy guns in the fort were silenced the
field-pieces and the infantry behind the parapet with great
determination continued to resist our vigorous advance. The Union line
extended from the river on the left, round in front of the fort, and to
the bayou on the right. The engagement was general along its whole
extent. Morgan sent word that his left was advancing steadily, and, as
the gunboats commanded the river, he had sent for Lindsay’s brigade to
return from the other side.

It was now nearly four o’clock. The Admiral’s flagship was coming close
to the bank, and, with the other gunboats, was pouring shot into the
fort; Lindsay’s brigade, across the river, was also firing into the
works, while Morgan’s and Sherman’s men were advancing fast in front.
The white flag was seen in several places on the parapet; enthusiastic
cheers arose from the troops in front; the firing ceased; the rebels
rose from behind the breastwork; and the Federal troops rushed wildly
forward with flags flying, into and over the intrenchments. The fort had
surrendered.

General McClernand and staff dashed off, and were soon in the enemy’s
intrenchments, surrounded by thousands of the men. When the flag was
shown on the river side, the jolly Jack Tars jumped ashore, and were
soon in the fort, followed by Admiral Porter and a number of his
officers. Colonel Dunnington, commander of the fort, surrendered his
sword to the Admiral in person. General Churchill, commander of the
forces, soon appeared with his staff, and surrendered himself and his
troops to General McClernand. General Churchill accused his subordinates
of treachery. It may be, that the soldiers, seeing that further
resistance was useless, concluded to abandon the defence. One thing is
certain, there was great unanimity among the rebels in the surrender.


                            ADMIRAL PORTER.

The following sketch of Admiral Porter, who commanded the gunboat
attack, will inform the reader of his previous history:

ACTING REAR-ADMIRAL DAVID D. PORTER, the commander of the Mississippi
Flotilla, is the son of the famous Commodore David Porter of the
_Essex_, and was born about the year 1814. In 1829 he entered the navy
as midshipman on board the _Constellation_, and served six years on that
ship and the _United States_. In 1835 he passed his examination, and
served six years as passed midshipman on the Coast Survey. In 1841 he
was commissioned a lieutenant, and served with that rank on board the
_Congress_ for four years. After a brief period of service at the
Observatory at Washington, he was placed on active duty under Commodore
Tattnall in the Gulf of Mexico, and took a leading part in the naval
operations of the Mexican war. In 1849 he took command of one of the
Pacific Mail Company’s steamers, and remained several years in the
service of that Company.

At the beginning of the year 1861 he was under orders to join the Coast
Survey on the Pacific, but, fortunately, had not left when the rebellion
broke out. His name at that time stood number six on the list of
lieutenants. The resignation of several Confederates left room for his
advancement, and the “Naval Register” for August 31, 1861, placed him
number seventy-seven on the list of commanders. He was placed in command
of the steam sloop-of-war _Powhatan_, a vessel of about twenty-five
hundred tons, and armed with eleven guns. After doing blockading duty
for some time, he left that ship to take special charge of the mortar
expedition. The active part he took in the reduction of the forts below
New Orleans will make his name ever memorable in connection with the
mortar fleet. After the capture of New Orleans he, with his fleet, went
up the Mississippi river, and was engaged in several affairs on that
river, including that of Vicksburg. From that place he was ordered to
the James river, and returned in the _Octorara_. When off Charleston, on
his way to Fortress Monroe, he fell in with and captured the Anglorebel
steamer _Tubal Cain_. He was then appointed to the supreme control of
all the naval forces on the Mississippi river, with the rank of Acting
Rear-Admiral. The force under his orders, in vessels, guns, and men, was
larger than had ever heretofore been under the command of any United
States naval officer. His squadron was distinct in every way from that
of Admiral Farragut, who commanded the Western Gulf Blockading Squadron.

[Illustration: HOUSE USED FOR CONFINEMENT OF REBEL SYMPATHIZERS, AT ST.
LOUIS, MO.]

The capture of the Post of Arkansas was the first exploit performed by
the Admiral in his new command.


                       MAJOR-GENERAL M’CLERNAND.

MAJOR-GENERAL JOHN A. MCCLERNAND was a lawyer by profession, and had
figured prominently as a leading Democratic politician from Illinois. He
was a leader of the Douglas Democrats, and did battle for them valiantly
at Charleston. At the outbreak of the war he took sides manfully for the
Union, and shortly afterward was nominated a Brigadier-General of
Volunteers. In the Belmont fight he gave evidence that he possessed good
military capacity, and during his administration of military affairs at
Cairo he secured the good will of the men under his command. In the
reconnoissance in the rear of Columbus, during the advance upon Fort
Henry, and at the grand battle before Fort Donelson, General McClernand
manifested superior military ability. For his gallantry on these
occasions he was, on the 21st of March, 1862, made by Congress a
Major-General of Volunteers, and accompanied the advance up the
Tennessee river toward Savannah. At the battle of Pittsburgh Landing he
was highly distinguished.

                  *       *       *       *       *

After spending two days devoted to the care of the wounded, and the
burial of the dead, the fort was blown up and completely destroyed, the
rifle pits levelled, and a hundred wagons which had been captured, were
burnt. On the 18th, General McClernand embarked with the main body of
his troops, and proceeded down the Arkansas river to Napoleon, where a
conference was held with General Grant and Admiral Porter, and future
operations were planned.

Meantime an expedition of light-draught steamers, under
Lieutenant-Commander J. G. Walker, and a body of troops led by General
Gorman, had proceeded up the White river, and captured the towns of Des
Arc and Duval’s Bluff.

General McArthur’s corps of General Grant’s army, left Memphis on the
20th of January on transports, and landed at Young’s Point, on the west
side of the river, about nine miles above Vicksburg. Here the greater
part of the fleet was concentrated; and on the 2d of February, General
Grant arrived, and assumed command of the army. At this point a canal
had been commenced by General Williams, previous to the unsuccessful
attack on Vicksburg the year before, for the purpose of effecting a
passage for vessels across the peninsula in front of Vicksburg out of
range of the enemy’s guns.

The attack on Vicksburg, from up the river, had demonstrated the
strength of its defensive works on the north, and convinced General
Grant that they were too strong to be carried without a very heavy loss.
The first step for him to accomplish, therefore, was the transportation
of his army below the city, in order to make an attack from the south.
The passage by the river was too hazardous to be attempted. The
formidable batteries on the river front at Vicksburg were capable of
destroying all the transports. Work was therefore recommenced on the
canal. While this work was in progress, the river continued to rise
rapidly, and great labor was required to keep the water out of the
canal, and also out of the camps of the laborers and soldiers. In
addition, the rain was incessant, and the magnitude of the work was,
from these causes, greatly increased. The earth taken out of the
excavation was placed on the west side, and thus formed an embankment or
levee, which it was supposed would prevent the water from flooding the
country.

While a portion of General Grant’s forces were employed in cutting the
canal at Young’s Point, their commander, firmly intent on accomplishing
the great enterprise before him, was industriously employed in the
prosecution of other plans, which might be consummated in the event of a
failure in the canal at the peninsula. A channel was cut from the
Mississippi into Lake Providence, on the west side of the Mississippi,
and another into the Cold Water river on the eastern bank, by way of the
Yazoo Pass.

While these operations were in progress, a daring enterprise was
undertaken by Colonel Charles E. Ellet, commander of the ram steamer
Queen of the West, by which he hoped to destroy a formidable rebel
steamer called the City of Vicksburg, then lying under the guns of the
fortifications at that place.

The Queen of the West had been previously provided with all the
arrangements deemed necessary to insure the complete success of the
dangerous undertaking. Three hundred bales of cotton had been procured
further up the river and placed on board, particularly about the
machinery, in order to save her from any serious injury by shot and
shell from the rebel batteries. Rear-Admiral Porter had given orders
that she should proceed down to Vicksburg, destroy the rebel steamboat
City of Vicksburg, lying opposite the city, and then run past the lower
rebel batteries. The Colonel was directed to keep close to the right
bank going down, to have all his lights on board extinguished—as it was
intended that she should run the gauntlet in the darkness—and having
safely passed the batteries, to anchor below the mouth of the canal and
there wait for further orders.

The Colonel started with the ram from above the bend at half past four
o’clock in the morning. It was about six o’clock, just as the sun was
rising, when the ram rounded the point of land lying opposite Vicksburg.
She had only men enough on board to work her, it having been arranged
that the remainder of the crew would cross the point of land and get on
board of her below after she had passed the batteries. When rounding the
point she was distinctly seen by the rebels. They immediately opened a
heavy fire from several of their batteries, which crowned the crests of
the bluffs about the city. The Queen slowly and steadily proceeded down
the river under a heavy fire from those batteries, until she reached a
point opposite the spot where the steamboat City of Vicksburg was lying.
Colonel Ellet saw that the steamboat was lying in almost the same
position as was the rebel ram Arkansas when he ran into her with the
Queen of the West. If the rebel steamboat should be struck as the ram
was running down the river, the prow, instead of penetrating her, would
be inclined to glance, and the full force of the blow would thus be
lost. Wishing to make the shock as effective as possible, when the ram
had reached the proper position the Colonel turned her partly around, so
as to face the city, and then made across the river straight for the
fated steamboat. The rebels, who had crowded on the banks, scampered off
in the most affrighted manner from the shore, and sought safety in the
city. The ram still went steadily on to the execution of her destructive
errand. She struck the rebel steamboat forward of the wheel-house; but
at the moment of collision the current caught the stern of the ram and
swung her round so rapidly that nearly all the momentum of the blow was
lost. To set the rebel steamboat on fire was part of the arrangement.
That portion of the programme was intrusted to Sergeant J. H. Campbell.
He was directed to fire the forward guns, loaded with combustible balls
saturated with turpentine. As the ram swung round he was ordered to fire
them. Just at that moment a 64-pound shot from one of the rebel
batteries came crashing into the barricade of cotton near him; but the
brave Sergeant did not hesitate a moment in the execution of the order.
The guns were fired, a tremendous blaze was vomited forth from them, and
the rebel steamboat was in flames.

About the same time the ram was found to be on fire. A shell from shore
had set her on fire near the starboard wheel, while the discharge of the
guns with the combustible balls had fired the cotton on her bow. Both
steamboats were thus ablaze at the same time. The flames spread rapidly
on both vessels. The smoke from the front of the ram rushed into her
engine-room and threatened to suffocate the engineers. Those on board
the rebel steamboat did all they could do to extinguish the flames on
their boat. This they soon accomplished. Colonel Ellet had intended to
strike the rebel steamboat in the stern, and thus finish the work of
demolition; but the spreading flames on the Queen of the West made it
necessary for him to attend to the safety of his own vessel. He
therefore ran down stream, and set all hands on board at work
extinguishing the flames. Though the cotton had been wet before
starting, the fire was extending rapidly, and several burning bales were
thrown overboard in order to save the ram. She then anchored below the
mouth of the canal, where she awaited further orders.

All this time, both when approaching the city and leaving it, the rebel
batteries were blazing away at the Queen of the West with light and
heavy guns. It was a very exciting scene. About one hundred and twenty
shots were fired from the batteries; but the ram was struck only twelve
times, and sustained no material injury.

The Queen of the West now proceeded down the Mississippi, and when below
Natchez, burned three small rebel steamers, the Moro, Berwick Bay, and
A. W. Baker, laden with stores for the army at Vicksburg. After cruising
for two weeks in the Atchafalaya, the Red river, and other tributaries
of the Mississippi, inflicting serious injury on the rebel commerce, and
capturing several vessels, she finally ventured up the Black river, and
captured the rebel steamer Era. She proceeded to Fort Taylor, some fifty
miles from the mouth of the river, where she grounded on a bar, exposed
to the fire of the guns of the fort, and her crew was compelled to
abandon the vessel, which fell into the hands of the enemy. Captain
Ellet and most of the men succeeded in reaching the Era, and effected
their escape.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the work on the canal through the peninsula had approached its
completion, and the huge iron scoop of the dredging machine had
commenced demolishing the barrier which intervened between the bed of
the canal and the “Father of Waters,” an unforeseen occurrence, which
could not be guarded against, crushed the enterprise.

Owing to heavy rains and the rapid rise of the Mississippi above and
opposite Vicksburg, the head of the canal gave way, and the water poured
in at a tremendous rate. The force of the current, however, did not
break the dam near the mouth of the canal, but caused a crevasse on the
western side, through which the water flowed in such profusion as to
inundate the lower part of the peninsula to the depth of four or five
feet. When the fracture occurred a number of soldiers were on the levee,
and were thrown into the torrent, but no lives were lost. All attempts
to repair the mischief proved ineffectual, and the troops were removed
to Milliken’s Bend, fifteen miles above.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 27th of February, Admiral Porter dispatched what was called a
dummy Monitor, to run the Vicksburg batteries, in order to ascertain
their exact location. This contrivance was an old flatboat, with
flour-barrels for smoke stacks, and a couple of large hogsheads to
represent Monitor turrets. It ran the fortifications in gallant style,
and drew the fire of the rebel guns, without creating a suspicion of the
true character of the vessel. The rebel authorities, fearful of the
capture of the Indianola, then in an exposed position undergoing
repairs, caused that vessel to be blown up to prevent her from falling
into the hands of the Federals, and thus uselessly sacrificed the finest
iron-clad they had on the western waters.

The prudent forethought of General Grant exhibited by his employing a
portion of his men in cutting channels from the Mississippi to
Providence lake on the west side, and to Moon lake on the east side, was
now made apparent, and those works were progressing rapidly.

Lake Providence is a few miles south of the boundary line between
Arkansas and Louisiana. It is situated in Carroll parish, Louisiana,
about one mile west of the Mississippi river, and about seventy-five
miles above Vicksburg. It is about six miles in length. Two streams flow
out of the lake to the south, Moon bayou and Tensas river. The former,
after running about a hundred miles, unites with the latter. The two
continue south, and unite with the Washita, and are called after the
junction, Black river. By cutting a channel from the Mississippi to Lake
Providence, General Grant thought a communication might be had through
that lake down the Tensas and Black into the Red river, and thence
through the Atchafalaya, with General Banks at New Orleans. This route
avoided the batteries of Vicksburg and Port Hudson. The canal to the
lake was finished so as to let in water on the 16th of March. The flood
was so great as to inundate a large district of country, some of which
was fine land for growing cotton. Some boats passed into Lake
Providence, but the uncertainty of the channel of the Tensas river, and
the interest which was now excited by the Yazoo Pass expedition,
together with the unimportant results to be anticipated by removing a
large force to the Red river or below, caused a diversion from this
route to others presenting more certain prospects of success against
Vicksburg.

Eight miles below Helena, in Arkansas, and on the opposite side of the
river, is a little lake, known as Moon lake. The passage from the
Mississippi across the lake to the mouth of the Yazoo Pass is about
eight miles; thence through the Pass proper to the Coldwater river,
twelve miles. The Coldwater, a narrow stream, runs south, empties into
the Tallahatchie, which continues to flow south, and unites with the
Yallobusha, forming the Yazoo river, which empties into the Mississippi
a few miles above Vicksburg.

Another important operation took place on the 14th of March, which had
much to do with the success of General Grant’s movements. Admiral
Farragut, with his fleet, attacked Port Hudson, and the flagship
succeeded in running past the batteries and arriving before Warrenton,
when he communicated with the fleet above. Shortly after this Admiral
Porter succeeded in running some of his fleet down to the assistance of
Farragut, and the united fleets began operating upon the river between
Vicksburg and Port Hudson, cutting off the communications of the rebels
with Louisiana, and making important military movements on the Louisiana
shore.

An attempt to pass the rebel batteries at Vicksburg, was made by the
Union rams Lancaster and Switzerland, on the 25th of March, without
success. As soon as they came within range, the rebels opened a
tremendous fire. The Lancaster was struck thirty times. Her entire bow
was shot away, causing her to sink immediately. All the crew except two
escaped. The Switzerland was disabled by a 64-pound ball penetrating the
steam-drum. She floated down, the batteries still firing, and striking
her repeatedly, until finally the Albatross ran alongside and towed her
to the lower mouth of the canal.

An expedition proceeded down the Coldwater, on the 2nd of April,
consisting of a portion of General Sherman’s and General McClernand’s
corps, under General L. F. Ross, with eighteen transports and five small
gunboats, and arrived at the mouth of the river without obstruction.
They proceeded down the Tallahatchie, to its junction with the
Yallobusha, which there forms the Yazoo, near which point is the village
of Greenwood. On a peninsula near by, the rebels had erected a
fortification. It consisted of a single line of breastworks facing
westerly, composed of cotton bales and earth, and flanked on the right
by a battery of three heavy guns fronting the river. Other field-pieces
were in position on the works. On the right flank of the line, a defence
or raft of logs had been constructed, to serve as a blockade of the
river. Directly in front of the breastworks was a deep slough, extending
across the peninsula, and admirably serving the purpose of a ditch. The
slough was close to the base of the works at the upper end, but
gradually receded from them at the lower, where it was several hundred
yards distant. Beyond the slough there was an almost impenetrable
canebrake, backed by an extensive forest.

The reduction of this fort was an inevitable necessity, before the
expedition could proceed further, and the gunboat Chillicothe,
Lieutenant Foster, was sent forward on the morning of the 11th of April
to reconnoitre. The vessel approached the fortification, and fired
several shots, but was soon struck four times by heavy rifle shots.

At the same time detachments from the Forty-sixth and Forty-seventh
Indiana regiments were sent out to feel the Confederate position on the
land side. A considerable body of the enemy’s skirmishers were
encountered, who were driven across the slough and into the works, when
the detachments were withdrawn. In the afternoon the Chillicothe was
ordered to engage the fortification. After she had fired seven rounds, a
64-pound shell from the enemy passed through a half-open port striking
upon the muzzle of a gun, in which a shell had been placed preparatory
to cutting the fuse. Both shells exploded at once, by which three men
were killed and eleven wounded. At this time orders were received to
withdraw from the engagement. During the ensuing night a force was sent
to throw up a battery facing the enemy’s works, west of the slough, and
in the edge of the timber. A single 30-pound Parrott gun was mounted,
and the work concealed by brush from the view of the enemy. Subsequently
another gun was mounted. No attack was made on the 12th, in consequence
of the absence of the mortar boats. After some delay, on the 13th, the
engagement was commenced about half past ten A. M. by the land
batteries. The gunboats Chillicothe and DeKalb soon after approached and
opened their fire. It now appeared that the fortification mounted a
rifled 64 Parrott, and three 24-Dahlgrens, and a small field battery.
These guns were protected by a parapet composed of seven tiers of cotton
bales, covered on the outside with eight feet of earth. The contest was
bravely maintained for some time, when the fire of the enemy was
suspended, but no disposition to surrender was shown. The gunboats and
battery kept up the fire, but without any success in reducing the works.
The Chillicothe was struck thirty-four times, but not severely injured.
The DeKalb suffered more, in consequence of some shot penetrating her
casemates, by which one man was killed and five wounded.

The impracticable nature of the land approaches rendered any attempt on
the part of the military futile, and the expedition was compelled to
retire.

An expedition under Admiral Porter, consisting of the heavier gunboats
of his flotilla was undertaken about this time accompanied by
transports, for the purpose of reaching the Yazoo river below Fort
Pemberton, and Greenwood, and above Haines’ Bluff. The route of this
expedition was up the Yazoo to Cypress bayou, thence into Steele’s
bayou, and through Cypress lake to Little Black Fork and Deer creek.
These waters were found to be impenetrable to the Federal vessels, and
that expedition also proved a failure.




                    PASSING THE VICKSBURG BATTERIES.
                           APRIL 16–22, 1863.


General Grant having now fully determined to transport his army below
Vicksburg, the cooperation of the naval commander was obtained: and on
the 16th of April, three transports, under cover of the gunboats, were
in readiness to descend the river. At half-past ten at night Admiral
Porter’s vessels started on their perilous expedition down the river.

The vessels comprising the expedition started in the following order,
fifty yards apart: Benton, Lieutenant-Commander Green; Lafayette,
Captain Walker, with the General Price lashed on the starboard side;
Louisville, Lieutenant-Commander Owen; Mound City, Lieutenant Wilson;
Pittsburg, Lieutenant Hall; Carondolet, Lieutenant Murphy, and
Tuscumbia, Lieutenant Commander Shirk, with the tug Day, which was
lashed to the Benton. The three army transports were in the rear of
these vessels, and the Tuscumbia was placed astern of all.

Two of the transports, when the firing became heavy, attempted to run up
stream; but Lieutenant Commander Shirk drove them back, and stayed
behind them until the Forest Queen was disabled. He then took her in
tow, and placed her out of reach of the enemy’s shot.

All the vessels except the Benton took coal barges in tow, and all
except the Lafayette brought them safely past the batteries. Having the
Price alongside the Lafayette did not manage very well, and the coal
barge got adrift, but was picked up at New Carthage. The Louisville,
Lieutenant Commander Owen, lost hers in the melee, but picked it up
again. The Benton fired over eighty shell, well directed, into the town
and batteries.

The Pittsburg, Mound City and Tuscumbia were more fortunate than the
others in not turning round as they came by, although no ill results
happened to those vessels which did turn. The pilots were deceived by a
large fire started on the side opposite to Vicksburg by the rebels, for
the purpose of showing the vessel more plainly. Fires being started on
both sides of the river at once, the vessels had some narrow escapes,
but were saved in most instances, by the precautions taken to protect
them. They were covered with heavy logs and bales of wet hay, which was
found to be an excellent defence.

No one on board of the transports was injured; and, encouraged by the
success of this enterprise, General Grant ordered six more to be
prepared in like manner for running the batteries. On the night of the
22d of April the Tigress, Anglo Saxon, Cheeseman, Empire City, Horizona
and Moderator, left Milliken’s Bend, and all passed in safety but the
Tigress, which received a shot in her hull below water-line, and sunk on
the Louisiana shore.




                      CAPTURE OF GRAND GULF, MISS.
                         APRIL 29-MAY 3, 1863.


On Wednesday, the 29th of April, a part of the gunboat fleet under
Admiral Porter, consisting of the Benton (flagship), Lafayette, Mound
City, Pittsburg, Carondolet, Tuscumbia and Louisville, left Hard Times,
and steaming down below Coffee Point, engaged the rebel batteries at
Grand Gulf, just at the confluence of the Big Black and the Mississippi.
The engagement commenced at eight o’clock and lasted until half-past
two.

The enemy had four batteries at Grand Gulf, one on the rock around which
the waters of the Big Black flow into the Mississippi, and three below,
about midway between the water and the summit of the bluffs. In the
former they had placed four heavy guns, and in the three latter two and
three each, with parapets, embrasures and rifle pits. The upper guns
were very large, throwing shot and shell weighing one hundred pounds.
The lower guns were mostly thirty-two-pounders.

The Benton opened the fight, followed by the other gunboats in rapid
succession. At first they stood off at long range, and fired at a
distance of a mile or more; but as the fire became warm they pressed
closely to the bluff, and passed and repassed the batteries, sending
broadsides upon the fort whenever they came in position. For six hours
where the gunboats firing and receiving fire, until the gradually
ceasing explosions of the enemy indicated their desire to terminate the
engagement.

The Benton suffered considerably in her upper works, not less than a
half dozen shots passing entirely through her. One shell exploded in her
porthole, killing five men. The Tuscumbia was disabled. Other gunboats
were more or less injured, but not seriously.

On the same day Admiral Porter sent the following report to the
Secretary of the Navy:


  HON. GIDEON WELLES, Secretary of the Navy:—

  I have the honor to inform you that, by an arrangement with General
  Grant, I attacked the batteries at Grand Gulf this morning, which were
  very formidable. After a fight of five hours and thirty minutes we
  silenced the lower batteries, but failed to silence the upper one,
  which was high, strongly built, and had guns of very heavy calibre.
  The vessels were unmanageable in the heavy current. It fired but
  feebly toward the last, and the vessels all laid by and enfiladed it,
  while I went up a short distance to communicate with General Grant,
  who concluded to land the troops and march over to a point two miles
  below Grand Gulf. I sent the Lafayette back to engage the upper
  batteries, which she did, and drove the soldiers out of it, as it did
  not respond after a few fires. At six p. m. we attacked the batteries
  again, and under cover of the fire all the transports passed by in
  good condition. The Benton, Tuscumbia, and Pittsburg were much cut up,
  having twenty-four killed and fifty-six wounded, but they are all
  ready for service.

  We land the army in the morning on the other side to march on
  Vicksburg.

                                   DAVID D. PORTER, Acting Rear Admiral.


On the 30th of April General Grant, with the three selected _corps de
armeé_, viz.:—the Thirteenth, General McClernand; the Fifteenth, General
Sherman, and the Seventeenth, General McPherson, crossed from the
Louisiana side of the Mississippi river and landed at Boulinsburg.

The total number of killed in the fleet was twenty-six, and the wounded
fifty-four.

The bombardment was terrific, the gunboat men exhibiting a coolness,
courage and determination which it seemed nothing could resist. The
rebels stood bravely to their guns, but the steady and heavy fire of the
iron-clads drove them again and again. All the boats were struck
repeatedly; but the Tuscumbia was the only one materially damaged. She
had her hogchains cut away, and was otherwise so badly damaged that it
was deemed advisable to remove her from the scene of action.

Finding it useless to protract the contest when the object to be
attained could be reached by another way, the gunboats moved out of
range and prepared to run the blockade at night. The usual precautions
were taken to prevent casualties, and each gunboat carried all the
troops it could conveniently accommodate. The transports were filled
with troops, and all the barges crowded—so eager were the soldiers to
take part in the exciting scene. The gunboats started first, and were
subjected to a severe fire, for it was almost as bright as midday; the
moon shining from a cloudless sky. When the transports appeared the
concentrated fire of the rebel batteries was directed to them; but none
of the vessels were disabled. The Cheeseman had six or seven horses
killed by the explosion of a shell; but no lives were lost, as far as
heard from.

General Grant was aboard a tug during the fight, and directed the
movement of troops, under cover of the gunboat fire. The forces landed
at Bayou Pierre.




                     BOMBARDMENT OF HAINES’ BLUFF.


Simultaneous with the land attack on Grand Gulf, General Sherman made a
demonstration on Haines’ Bluff on Wednesday morning, April 29. A
considerable force was embarked on the transports, and preceded by the
iron-clad Choctaw and all the wooden gunboats in the Yazoo, proceeded up
that stream. The bombardment at the Bluff was chiefly carried on by the
gunboats Choctaw, DeKalb, Black Hawk, Romeo, Linden and three mortar
boats. The former was struck fifty-two times, and had her upper works
pretty badly battered. Her pilot house was struck by an eight-inch solid
shot, which penetrated the extreme top, but fortunately injured none of
the occupants. Her turret was struck repeatedly, but the shot all
glanced off. She was also penetrated by three shots below the water
line, one shot entering three feet below the surface of the water.
Another shot penetrated her casemates and floundered on her deck. It was
supposed to be a shell, and all hands beat a hasty retreat, except Chief
Engineer Baldwin, who ran up, seized it and threw it overboard. General
Sherman landed his forces on the south bank of the Yazoo. The main
object of the expedition was to prevent the enemy from sending
reinforcements to Port Gibson. The rebels displayed a large force, and
anticipated a battle. The expedition returned on the 7th of May.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the third of May, Admiral Porter took possession of the forts at
Grand Gulf. The details of the occupation are narrated in his report to
Secretary Welles, of the same date:


                        FLAGSHIP BENTON, GRAND GULF, Miss., May 8, 1863.

  Hon. GIDEON WELLES, Secretary of the Navy:

  SIR—I have the honor to report that I got under way this morning with
  the Lafayette, Carondolet, Mound City and Pittsburg, and proceeded up
  to the forts at Grand Gulf, for the purpose of attacking them if they
  had not been abandoned. The enemy had left before we got up, blowing
  up their ammunition, spiking their large guns, and burying or taking
  away the lighter ones. The armament consisted of thirteen guns in all.
  The works are of the most extensive kind, and would seem to defy the
  efforts of a much heavier fleet than the one which silenced them. The
  forts were literally torn to pieces by the accuracy of our fire.
  Colonel Wade, the commandant of the batteries, was killed; also his
  chief of staff. Eleven men were killed that we know of, and our
  informant says that many were wounded, and that no one was permitted
  to go inside the forts after the action except those belonging there.

  We had a hard fight for these forts, and it is with great pleasure
  that I report that the navy holds the door of Vicksburg. Grand Gulf is
  the strongest place on the Mississippi. Had the enemy succeeded in
  finishing the fortifications no fleet could have taken them.

  I have been all over the works and found them as follows:—One fort on
  a point of rocks seventy-five feet high, calculated for six or seven
  guns, mounting two seven inch rifles, and one eight-inch and one
  Parrott gun on wheels, which was carried off. On the left of this work
  is a triangular work, calculated to mount one heavy gun. These works
  are connected with another fort by a covered way and double rifle pits
  extending one quarter of a mile, constructed with much labor, and
  showing great skill on the part of the constructor. The third fort
  commands the river in all directions. It mounted one splendid Blakely
  one hundred-pounder, one eight-inch and two thirty-pounders. The
  latter were lying bursted or broken on the ground.

  The gunboats had so covered up everything with earth that it was
  impossible to see at first what was there, with the exception of the
  guns that were dismounted or broken.

  Every gun that fell into our hands was in good condition, and we found
  a large quantity of ammunition.

  These are by far the most extensively built works, with the exception
  of those at Vicksburg, I have seen yet, and I am happy to say that we
  hold them.

  I am dismounting the guns, and getting on board the ammunition.

  Since making the above examination new forts have been passed nearly
  finished. They had no guns, but were complete as regards position, and
  had heavy field pieces in them.

                                DAVID D. PORTER, Acting Rear Admiral,
                                        Commanding Mississippi Squadron.




                     CAPTURE OF PORT GIBSON, MISS.
                              MAY 1, 1863.


Two days after the bombardment of Grand Gulf by Admiral Porter’s fleet,
General Grant’s forces made a successful attack on Port Gibson, a point
six miles in the rear of Grand Gulf, which compelled the rebels to
evacuate the latter place. General Grant sent the following dispatch to
General Halleck, dated May 3:


                                         GRAND GULF, Miss., May 3, 1863.

  Major-General HALLECK, General-in-Chief:

  We landed at Boulingsburg April 30, moved immediately on Port Gibson,
  met the enemy eleven thousand strong, four miles north of Port Gibson,
  at two o’clock A. M. on the 1st inst., and engaged him all day,
  entirely routing him, with the loss of many killed, and about five
  hundred prisoners, beside the wounded. Our loss is about one hundred
  killed, and five hundred wounded.

  The enemy retreated towards Vicksburg, destroying the bridges over the
  two forks of the Bayou Pierre. These were rebuilt, and the pursuit has
  continued until the present time.

  Besides the heavy artillery at this place, four field pieces were
  captured and some stores, and the enemy were driven to destroy many
  more.

  The country is the most broken and difficult to operate in I ever saw.

  Our victory has been most complete, and the enemy are thoroughly
  demoralized.

                       Very respectfully,            U. S. GRANT,
                                               Major-General Commanding.


Governor Yates, of Illinois, writing from Grand Gulf, on the following
day, gives a glowing account of the operations of the Federal army:


  “Our arms are gloriously triumphant. We have succeeded in winning a
  victory which, in its results, must be the most important of the war.
  The battle of May 1 lasted from eight o’clock in the morning until
  night, during all of which time the enemy were driven back on the
  right, left and centre. All day yesterday our army was in pursuit of
  the rebels, they giving us battle at almost every defensible point,
  and fighting with desperate valor. Last night a large force of the
  enemy was driven across Black river and General McClernand was driving
  another large force in the direction of Willow Springs. About two
  o’clock yesterday I left General Logan, with his division in pursuit
  of the enemy, to join General Grant at Grand Gulf, which the enemy had
  evacuated in the morning, first blowing up their magazines, spiking
  their cannon, destroying tents, etc. On my way to Grand Gulf I saw
  guns scattered all along the road, which the enemy had left in their
  retreat. The rebels were scattered through the woods in every
  direction. This army of the rebels was considered, as I now learn,
  invincible; but it quailed before the irresistible assaults of
  Northwestern valor.”




                            GRIERSON’S RAID.
                         APRIL 17–MAY 2, 1863.


For a long time Colonel Grierson’s ambition had been to lead the cavalry
force under his charge into the enemy’s country. At last he received an
intimation from General Grant’s headquarters that his desire would be
gratified. Colonel Grierson commanded the First brigade of cavalry under
General Grant. This force had been for some time occupying Lagrange,
Tenn., which is a small town on the Memphis and Charleston railroad,
about fifty miles east of the city of Memphis, and four miles west of
the junction of the Mississippi and Charleston railroads. When Colonel
Grierson first received permission to move with his force into
Mississippi, one of the chief objects of the expedition was to cut off
the means of communication between the rebel army of the West, and that
of General Bragg, then in Middle Tennessee; but when the expedition was
once begun, it branched off into many unthought-of directions, and ended
in being one of the most brilliant, as well as important feats of the
war.

On the morning of the 17th of April, Colonel Grierson received orders
from General Grant to move his force out on the Ripley road;
accordingly, his brigade, consisting of the Sixth Illinois cavalry,
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Loomis; the Seventh Illinois cavalry,
Colonel Edward Prince; and the Second Iowa cavalry, Colonel Edward
Hatch, obeying the directions they had received, bivouacked for the
night on a plantation a few miles northwest of the town of Ripley.
During the night five guerrillas were captured by the Union men. On the
morning of the next day the march began; the main body of Colonel
Grierson’s men proceeded in a southerly direction, while one regiment,
the Second Iowa, crossed the Tallahatchie, and went in a southeasterly
direction. On both sides of the river the enemy’s pickets were posted in
all directions, endeavoring to prevent the Union soldiers from crossing,
and there was constant skirmishing between them and the rebels. The
pickets were constantly driven in; and an attempt to fire the bridge at
New Albany was prevented by the rapid movements of Grierson’s men. At
the close of the day the Union troops had accomplished their
contemplated march, and were stationed as follows: the Sixth and Seventh
Illinois regiments were encamped on a plantation a few miles south of
New Albany, and the Second Iowa about four miles east of the same place.
The Second Iowa, during the night, repulsed a severe attack of the
enemy. On the morning of the 19th, Colonel Grierson dispersed his troops
in various directions, with a view to mislead the enemy, and cause him
to suppose that the main object of the expedition was to break up the
various military organizations in that part of the country. Accordingly,
one detachment marched to the eastward, another moved back toward New
Albany, and a third marched northwest towards King’s Bridge; and the
enemy was thus completely puzzled and in total ignorance of the real
destination of the Union forces.

Colonel Grierson himself, with the main body of his command, marched in
a southerly direction, and were subsequently joined by the remainder of
the force, when they took the road to Pontotoc. There they met a
detachment of the rebels, who fled before them, after the exchange of a
few shots, and were hotly pursued, and driven through the town. Their
entire camp equipage was captured, and a large store of salt, which was
destroyed. The march was then continued till about eight o’clock at
night, and the men encamped at a point on the road leading to Houston, a
few miles south of the Pontotoc. At an early hour on the following
morning the reveille was sounded. Major Lull of the Second Iowa, with
about one hundred and fifty picked men, and one piece of artillery, was
then sent back to Lagrange in charge of all the prisoners and captured
property which had been taken from the rebels, in order that the force
might be relieved of all incumbrance, and the enemy made to suppose that
Colonel Grierson was retracing his steps.

At five o’clock on the morning of the 21st, Colonel Hatch was ordered
with his command to proceed up the Columbus road, and destroy as much of
the Mobile and Ohio railroad as was possible; and to attack Columbus
These orders were successfully carried out; and Colonel Hatch, with the
troops under his command returned to Lagrange, and thus aided in still
further deceiving General Chalmers (who was in command of the rebels at
this point) in regard to the movements of Colonel Grierson.

In the mean time the remainder of the Union forces had continued their
march, and reached Starkville, where they captured and destroyed a rebel
mail which had arrived; and set fire to and utterly destroyed one of the
finest tanneries in the country, which they reached after continuing
their march for five miles in a southerly direction.

On the following day, the 22d, the march was not only disagreeable, as
the men were often compelled to swim their horses through streams and
lead them over blind marshes, but extremely perilous; for often horse
and rider would sink into the marsh together, and though the men escaped
with life, the hapless animals often disappeared and were lost. With
unparalleled fortitude the men pushed on; and at ten o’clock the next
morning they reached Philadelphia, Miss. At this place the mail was
taken from the post-office, and destroyed, but nothing else was injured
in any way.

On the following day the march was vigorously prosecuted. A battalion
was sent by the Southern railroad to Decatur and Newton, where they were
joined the same night by the main body, under Colonel Grierson. Two
trains of cars were captured at Newton, laden with every description of
commissary stores, and a large quantity of ammunition and loaded shell.
All were destroyed, and the locomotives rendered unfit for any further
service. The march was then resumed, and continued till the 25th, when a
halt was made at a plantation a few miles west of Montrose, the men
having fired every bridge which they passed on the way. From this place
the route was slightly changed, and the cavalry pressed on in a more
southerly direction.

At Raleigh they halted for the night, and a scout who had been sent out
to cut the telegraph wires on the Southern railroad between Lake Station
and Jackson, was met by the enemy, and questioned as to the whereabouts
of Grierson’s men. The rebels were then on the direct road to the camp,
and not more than fourteen miles distant; but the scout, with admirable
self-possession, parried their questions, and succeeded in misleading
them as to the position of the Union troops, and then escaped and
hastened back to camp in time to give information of the enemy’s
proximity. Colonel Grierson immediately moved his men across Leaf river,
and destroyed the bridge to prevent the rebels following and attacking
him in the rear. They then marched on to Westville, and swam their
horses across Reaul river, at a point ten miles from Westville. The
advance, under Colonel Prince, had by this time reached Hazlehurst
station, where they captured a train of forty cars,—four of which were
filled with shell and ammunition, and the remainder with commissary
stores. As the march continued, the cavalry came upon a team carrying a
32-pound Parrot gun, which was then on its way to Fort Gibson. The piece
was captured and spiked. Two detachments from the main body had been
doing serious damage to the rebels, burning cars, water tanks, and a
great deal of other property.

At early dawn on the 28th, the advance moved upon Brookhaven, and
entered the town so suddenly that two hundred rebels were taken
prisoners, before they had recovered from their surprise at finding
themselves confronted with Union soldiers. At Gallatin a camp of
instruction, said to have been one of the most beautiful and extensive
in the State, was utterly destroyed. After leaving Gallatin, the Union
cavalry encountered a rebel cavalry force under Colonel Garland, and a
skirmish occurred, in which the enemy suffered severely in killed,
wounded, and prisoners. Two clever feints, menacing Port Gibson and
Natchez, deceived the enemy again, and the main body marched straight
forward to Brookhaven, which was already occupied by Colonel Grierson’s
advance.

On the 30th, the whole force left Brookhaven, and proceeded to Bogue
Cluto Station, destroying every bridge on the way. At the station,
fifteen freight cars, which were standing on the track, partially
loaded, were fired, and utterly destroyed. From that point to Summit a
rapid march was performed, and there twenty-five freight cars were
reduced to ashes. Information was sent to Colonel Grierson that a
regiment of rebel cavalry was rapidly moving toward Wassitta, and they
were discovered at Wall’s bridge on the Tickfaw, by a detachment of
Union cavalry, who dashed in upon them, and killing and wounding a large
number, put the rest to flight. Colonel Grierson’s loss was one killed
and five wounded.

The march again continued, at first east of the Tickfaw, and then
changing again continued directly south, marching through woods, lanes
and by-roads, and struck a road which led directly from Clinton to
Osyka. There the cavalry came most unexpectedly upon the Ninth Tennessee
cavalry regiment, which was posted in a strong defile guarding the
bridges across the Tickfaw river. A sharp skirmish ensued, in which the
enemy’s pickets were captured, and the regiment driven back with great
loss. The cavalry then crossed the river at Edward’s bridge, where they
were met by Garland’s rebel cavalry, which they put to flight with a
single battalion of the Sixth Illinois, and two guns of the battery,
without even halting the column. It was clearly perceived now that the
rebels were sending out forces in all directions to intercept the march
of Colonel Grierson’s troops.

At midnight the Amite river was crossed, over which there was but one
bridge; and the National troops were just in time to escape a heavy
column of infantry and artillery which had been sent to intercept them.
They moved on to Sandy creek, where Hughes’ cavalry, under
Lieutenant-Colonel Wilburn, were encamped, and reached that point at
dawn of day. The rebel camp, completely surprised, was in no condition
to make a successful resistance, and a large number of the enemy were
taken prisoners; the camp, consisting of one hundred and fifty tents,
was destroyed, together with a great quantity of ammunition, guns,
public and private stores, books, papers, and public documents. A large
number of horses were captured also; and the cavalry then took the road
to Baton Rouge, and on the way surprised Stuart’s cavalry at Commite
river, and took prisoner forty men with their arms and horses.

On the morning of the 1st of May, the commander at Baton Rouge was
startled by the intelligence of the close proximity of Grierson’s
cavalry, and sent out two companies under Captain Godfrey, to meet and
welcome them. The troops entered the city at three o’clock in the
afternoon, amid cheers and shouts of welcome that rent the air, and
echoed along the hills toward Port Hudson. Thus in less than sixteen
days this heroic cavalry force had marched over six hundred miles, over
marshes and rivers, endangering their lives for whole days at every mile
they traversed. The last twenty-eight hours’ march was performed without
either rest or food to men or horses. The loss to Colonel Grierson’s
command during the whole journey was three killed, seven wounded, five
sick and left upon the route, and nine men missing. Of the enemy, over
one hundred were killed and wounded; five hundred taken prisoners (many
of them officers); from fifty to sixty miles of railroad and telegraph
wire destroyed, and three thousand stand of arms, together with army
stores and government property, captured and destroyed—making in all a
loss to the rebels of over three million dollars.




                        BATTLE OF RAYMOND, MISS.
                             MAY 12, 1863.


On Thursday, May 7th, General McPherson moved his corps to Rocky Spring,
and his camp was occupied next day by General Sherman. On Saturday
McPherson again moved to the eastward, to the village of Utica, crossing
the road occupied by McClernand, and leaving the latter on his left. On
Sunday morning McClernand marched to Five Mile creek, and encamped on
the south bank at noon, on account of broken bridges, which were
repaired the same day. Monday morning Sherman’s corps came up, passed
McClernand’s, and encamped that night at the village of Auburn, about
ten miles south of Edwards’ Station, on the railroad from Vicksburg to
Jackson. As soon as it passed, McClernand’s corps followed a few miles,
and then took a road going obliquely to the left, leading to Hall’s
Ferry, on the Big Black river. Thus, on Monday evening General
McClernand was at Hall’s Ferry; General Sherman was at Auburn, six or
eight miles to the northeast, and General McPherson was about eight
miles still further to the northeast, a few miles north of Utica. The
whole formed an immense line of battle, Sherman’s corps being in the
centre, with those of McPherson and McClernand forming the right and
left wings. From Grand Gulf the army marched westward, but, by these
last movements, swung on the left as a pivot, and fronted nearly
northward.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES MARCY. HARNEY. MITCHELL. MILROY. AUGUR.]

Up to this the enemy had not appeared on the line of march. On Tuesday
morning General McClernand’s advance drove in the enemy’s pickets near
Hall’s Ferry, and brisk skirmishing ensued for an hour or two, with
little loss to either side. By noon the rebels had disappeared from his
front, and seven wounded and none killed was the total Union loss.
General Sherman put Steele’s division in motion early in the morning,
and came upon the enemy at the crossing of Fourteen Mile creek four
miles from Auburn. The cavalry advance was fired into from the thick
woods that skirt the stream, but was unable, owing to the nature of the
ground, to make a charge or clear the rebels from their position.
Landgraber’s battery was thrown to the front, supported by the
Seventeenth Missouri and Thirty-first Iowa infantry regiments, and threw
a few shell into the bushy undergrowth skirting the stream which gave
them cover. Skirmishers were thrown out, and advanced to the creek,
driving the enemy slowly. A brigade was thrown to the right and left
flanks, when the rebel forces, mainly cavalry, withdrew toward Raymond.
The bridge was burned during the skirmish, but a crossing was
constructed in two hours, and trains were passing before noon.

But the principal opposition to the line of march was in the front of
General McPherson. General Logan’s division came upon a body of rebel
troops, estimated at about ten thousand, posted on Fondren’s creek, two
miles southwest of this, at ten o’clock on Tuesday morning. Brisk
skirmishing began at once, and a general engagement was soon brought on.
The enemy (as in front of General Sherman), was almost wholly concealed
at first by the woods bordering the stream, behind which their forces
were posted. Their artillery was on an eminence that commanded our
approach. The Federal troops had to cross an open field, exposed to a
terrible fire. The First and Second brigades, commanded by General J. E.
Smith, and General Fennis (both Illinois regiments), were in the
thickest of the fight, and suffered most. After three hours’ hard
fighting, the enemy withdrew sullenly in two columns, the principal one
taking the road to Jackson. The Federal loss, in killed, wounded, and
missing, was about three hundred. The rebel loss was much greater.




                       CAPTURE OF JACKSON, MISS.
                             MAY 14, 1863.


On the 13th, General McPherson moved to Clinton, and destroyed the
railroads and telegraph. General Sherman moved to a parallel position on
the Mississippi Springs and Jackson road, and General McClernand to a
point near Raymond.

On the 14th General McPherson and General Sherman each advanced from his
respective position toward Jackson. The rain had fallen in torrents
during the night before, and it continued to fall until about noon, thus
making the roads at first slippery and then miry. Nevertheless, the
troops marched in excellent order and spirits about fourteen miles, when
they came upon the enemy. The main body of their force in Jackson had
marched out on the Clinton road, and encountered General McPherson about
two and a half miles from the city. A small force of artillery and
infantry also took a strong position in front of General Sherman, about
the same distance out from Jackson.

On the march of General McPherson from Clinton toward Jackson, General
Crocker’s division held the advance. All was quiet until he reached a
hill overlooking a broad open field, through the centre of which and
over the crest of the hill beyond, the road to Jackson passed. On the
left of this latter hill the enemy had posted his artillery, and along
the crest his line of battle. As the Federal force came within range,
the artillery of the enemy opened fire. The battery of the First
Missouri was moved to the left of a cotton gin in the open field, and
returned the fire for nearly an hour, when the guns of the enemy were
withdrawn. Meantime, General Crocker had thrown out two brigades to the
right and left of his battery, supported by another brigade at a proper
distance, and had also pushed forward a strong line of skirmishers, and
posted them in a ravine in front, which protected them from the fire of
the enemy. After a little delay they were again advanced out of cover,
and a desultory fire ensued between the opposite line of skirmishers, in
which the enemy, owing to the nature of the ground, had the advantage.
At length General Crocker, seeing the necessity of driving the rebels
from the crest of the hill, ordered a charge along the line.

With colors flying, and with a step as measured and unbroken as if on
dress parade, the movement was executed. Slowly they advanced, crossed
the narrow ravine, and, with fixed bayonets, reached the crest of the
hill in easy range of the rebel line. Here they received a tremendous
volley, which caused painful gaps in their ranks. They held their fire
until they were within a distance of thirty paces, when they delivered
the returning volley with fearful effect, and, without waiting to reload
their muskets, with a terrific yell, they rushed upon the staggered foe.
Over the fences, through the brushwood into the enclosure, they worked
their way, slaughtering on the right and left without mercy. The enemy,
astonished at their impetuosity, wavered and fell back, rallied again,
and finally broke in wild confusion. They finally retreated north, but
without further damage.

When General Sherman encountered the enemy, he discovered their weakness
by sending a reconnoitering party to his right, which had the effect of
causing them to retreat from that part of their line. A few
artillerists, however, remained in their places, firing upon General
Sherman’s troops until the last moment.

At this time General McClernand occupied Clinton with one division,
Mississippi Springs with another, Raymond with a third, and his fourth
division and General Blair’s division of General Sherman’s corps were
with a wagon train, still in the rear, near Auburn. At the same time
General McArthur, with one brigade of his division of General
McPherson’s corps, was moving toward Raymond on the Utica road. It was
not the intention of General Grant to move these forces any nearer
Jackson, but to have them in a position where they could be in
supporting distance if the resistance at Jackson should prove more
obstinate than there seemed any reason to expect.

On the retreat of the enemy, General McPherson followed directly into
the city of Jackson. A fine battery of six pieces was found, and around
the Deaf and Dumb Institute, which was used as a hospital, tents enough
were seized to encamp an entire division. The commissary and
quartermaster’s stores were in flames. The Governor and State Treasurer
had withdrawn, taking the State funds and papers. All citizens
officially connected with the State or Confederate Governments had also
left. Many soldiers remained, besides a large number in the hospital.

Early on the morning of the day following the occupation of the city of
Jackson it was decided to evacuate the position. There were several
reasons which induced General Grant to arrive at this decision,
prominent among which was the difficulty of keeping intact his long line
of communication, and the fear that General Johnston—who was known to be
hovering in the region north of Jackson with a force estimated at twenty
thousand men—would attack his rear. The force which he encountered just
before reaching Jackson, under General Gregg, had divided, one portion
going to Canton from the north, and the other from the south. Johnston
and Gregg combined might prove altogether too formidable. It was
therefore decided to return to Clinton and move upon Vicksburg.

The main column of the enemy was at Edwards’ Station, proposing to give
battle there. Soon after daylight the column was in motion, General
McPherson in advance. They reached Clinton at noon, and after an hour’s
delay marched to their camping ground, a short distance from the village
of Bolton.

The programme of the advance was arranged by General Grant and General
McClernand as follows:—Extreme left, General Smith, supported by General
Blair; on the right of General Smith, General Osterhaus, supported by
General Carr; General Hovey in the centre, with McPherson on the extreme
right, and Crocker as reserve. In this order the advance was made;
General McClernand’s corps, with the exception of General Hovey’s
division, reaching the position by way of the several roads leading from
Raymond to Edward’s Station.

On the evening of the 15th, General McClernand heard that the enemy was
advancing from Edwards’ Station to Raymond, and quickly placed his
troops in order of battle to repel the anticipated attack. Extensive
reconnoissances revealed the fact, however, that he was merely feeling
his position and force, and that no attack need be expected that day.

At nine in the morning, General Osterhaus took possession of Bolton,
capturing a rebel mail and several prisoners. General McClernand placed
his army in camp early in the evening, and by daylight the following day
each division occupied the ground selected, and prepared to offer
battle.




            BATTLE OF BAKER’S CREEK, OF CHAMPION HILL, MISS.
                             MAY 16, 1863.


Early this morning General McClernand’s corps was put in motion. General
Hovey’s division was on the main road from Jackson to Vicksburg, but the
balance of the corps was a few miles to the south. General Ward was on a
parallel road, and General McPherson’s corps followed Hovey’s division
closely.

The enemy’s first demonstration was upon the Union extreme left, which
they attempted to turn. This attempt was most gallantly repulsed by
General Smith, commanding the left wing. At seven o’clock the
skirmishers were actively engaged; and as the enemy sought the cover of
the forest the Union artillery fire was opened, which continued without
intermission for two hours. At this time General Ransom’s brigade
marched on the field, and took up a position as reserve behind General
Carr.

At nine o’clock General Hovey discovered the enemy in front on Champion
Hill, to the left of the road, near Baker’s creek, apparently in force.
Skirmishers were thrown out, and the division advanced cautiously and
slowly to give General McPherson’s advance division under General Logan
time to come within supporting distance. General Hovey’s division
advanced across the other field at the foot of Champion Hill in line of
battle.

At eleven o’clock the battle commenced. The hill itself was covered with
timber, and is, in fact, but an abrupt terminus of a high ridge, running
north and south, flanked on both sides by deep ravines and gulleys, and
in many places covered with an impenetrable growth of scrubby white oak
brush. The rebels appeared deficient in artillery throughout the battle,
but opened with rather a heavy fire from a four-gun battery of rifled
six-pounders, planted about four hundred yards back from the brow of the
hill. The woods on both sides of the road leading up the face of the
hill, and winding back on the ridge a mile or more, were filled with
sharpshooters, supported by infantry. Here the battle began just as the
Federals entered the edge of the timber, and raged terribly from eleven
till between three and four o’clock.

The battle raged fearfully along the entire line, the evident intention
of the enemy being to mass his forces upon Hovey on the centre. There
the fight was most earnest; but General McPherson brought his forces
into the field, and after four hours’ hard fighting the tide of battle
was turned, and the enemy forced to retire.

Disappointed in his movements upon the Union right, he turned his
attention to the left of Hovey’s division, where Colonel Slack commanded
a brigade of Indianians. Massing his forces here he hurled them against
the opposing columns with irresistible impetuosity, and forced them to
fall back; not, however, until at least one quarter of the troops
comprising the brigade were either killed or wounded. Taking a new
position, and receiving fresh reinforcements, the Federals again
attempted to stem the tide, this time with eminent success. The enemy
were beaten back, and compelled to seek the cover of the forest in their
rear. Following up their advantage, without waiting to reform, the
soldiers of the Western army fixed their bayonets and charged into the
woods after them. The enemy were seized with an uncontrollable panic and
thought only of escape. In this terrible charge men were slaughtered
without mercy. The ground was literally covered with the dead and dying.
The enemy scattered in every direction, and fled through the fields to
reach the column now moving to the west along the Vicksburg road.

General Hovey’s division carried the heights in gallant style, and,
making a dash on the first battery, drove the gunners from their posts,
and captured the pieces. The rebels lay thick in the vicinity of the
guns. Their horses were more than half killed, their gun carriages and
caissons broken, and knapsacks, blankets, small arms and other debris,
attested the deadly struggle. The colors of the Thirty-first Alabama
regiment were captured there.

At this juncture Mitchell’s Ohio battery was opened at about eighty
yards from the brow of the hill. The rebels made a dash for it; but the
fleetness of the horses prevented its capture. At the same time the
rebels appeared with fresh troops on that wing, and redoubled their
efforts to hold their position and dislodge the Federals on the hill.
Hovey was slowly driven back to the brow; but a brigade from General
Quimby was ordered to his support, and the ground was speedily recovered
and the rebels finally repulsed.

At the commencement of the engagement General Logan’s division marched
past the brow of the hill, and, forming in line of battle on the right
of Hovey, advanced in grand style, sweeping everything before them. At
the edge of the wood in front of Logan the battle was most desperate.
Not a man flinched nor a line wavered in this division. All behaved like
veterans, and moved to new positions with a conscious tread of victory.
Two batteries were captured by this division, and enough hard fighting
done to establish its fame. They also captured a large portion of the
prisoners, small arms, &c.

Between three and four o’clock General Osterhaus and General McArthur’s
divisions came into action on the extreme left, and completed what had
been so auspiciously carried forward. They were both miles away when the
engagement began, but were brought forward with all dispatch possible.
The enemy were in full retreat.

The battle ended, the left was speedily advanced upon the Vicksburg
road, driving the enemy rapidly before them, and picking up as they
advanced large numbers of prisoners and guns.

On the left of the road were seen large squads of rebel soldiers, cut
off from the main column, who engaged at intervals with artillery. One
of these was under the command of Major-General Tilghman, who was struck
by a shell from a Federal battery and instantly killed while in the act
of sighting a gun. The Federal loss in this battle amounted to three
thousand in killed and wounded; while that of the rebels approximated
two thousand five hundred in killed and wounded and three thousand
prisoners.

Major-General Lloyd Tilghman, of the rebel army, was a native of
Maryland, and nearly fifty years of age. He was appointed to West Point
Military Academy as a cadet in 1831, and graduated on the 30th of June,
1836, standing last but three in a class of forty-nine members. On the
1st of July, 1836, he was breveted a second lieutenant of the First
dragoons, rather a high brevet for an officer occupying so low a grade
in the Academy; but when we consider who were the appointing officers at
that time, and the position the same men held in the war, our readers
need not wonder at the appointment. Three days after that date he
received his full commission and after being in the army for three
months he resigned, plainly showing that he merely wished to gain a
military education at the expense of the United States government, for
which he gave nothing in return but rebellion. During the remainder of
1836 and the subsequent year he was appointed to the lucrative position
of division engineer of the Baltimore and Susquehanna Railroad, followed
immediately by that of assistant engineer in the survey of the Norfolk
and Wilmington Canal of Virginia. He was next appointed (1838–9)
assistant engineer of the Eastern Shore Railroad of Maryland, and in
1839–40 of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. During 1840 he was also
engaged in the survey of the public improvements of Baltimore.

For the next few years he held no important public position; but the
Mexican war again brought him into notoriety. He first served as
volunteer aid to General Twiggs in the battles of Palo Alto and Resaca
de la Palma, Texas, May, 1846, and doubtless here learned some of his
early military lessons.

Orders were now sent back to General Sherman to turn his corps toward
Bridgeport, and General Blair was expected to join him at that place.
Bridgeport was on the Black river, and some miles north of the railroad.
By crossing the river at that point, General Sherman would be on the
flank of the enemy, if they made a stand at the railroad crossing of the
river.




                   BATTLE OF BIG BLACK BRIDGE, MISS.
                             MAY 17, 1863.


The battle of Big Black Bridge was fought on Sunday, the 17th, the day
after the battle of Champion’s Hill. In this spirited engagement only
the Thirteenth army corps was engaged. In the morning, after a bivouac
on the hill overlooking the village of Edwards’ Station, the column,
with McClernand at its head, moved towards Black river bridge.

The country between Edwards Station and the bridge loses that hilly and
broken character which distinguishes the region further east, and
spreads out into a broad and fertile plain. There are no commanding
hills, but there are numerous patches of forest, under the cover and
from the edge of which the enemy could easily enfilade the open fields
by the roadside. There was such a one a mile east of the rebel
intrenchments where the main picket guard was stationed. Here determined
resistance was first made.

General Carr’s division had the extreme advance of the column, and
opened and ended the engagement. Hastily deploying a heavy line of
skirmishers to the right of the road, backed up by the two brigades of
Carr’s division in line of battle behind it, with General Osterhaus’
division on the left of the road similarly disposed, General McClernand
gave the order to advance. Soon in the depths of the thick forest the
skirmishers of both armies were hotly engaged, while batteries of
artillery planted on the right and left of the road poured shot and
shell into the fort most furiously. The guns in the intrenchments
replied with vigor and spirit. Almost the first shot dropped in the
caisson belonging to Foster’s Wisconsin battery, and exploded its
contents, slightly wounding General Osterhaus and Captain Foster, of the
battery, and very seriously injuring two gunners. General Osterhaus
being thus disabled, the command of his division was temporarily given
to Brigadier-General A. L. Lee.

After skirmishing had continued for an hour, during which the enemy gave
way and sought the cover of his intrenchments, the order was given to
the several brigade commanders on the right to advance and charge the
enemy’s works. The order was received with cheers and shouts, and the
Twenty-first, Twenty-second, Twenty-third Iowa and Eleventh Wisconsin,
General Lawler’s brigade, were the first to announce themselves in
readiness. The order “forward” was given, and steadily and splendidly
the brave patriots moved up to the assault. The enemy crouched down
behind the breastworks. A portion of them, stationed in a curtain on the
right of the fort, whence they were able to get a cross-fire upon the
column, reserved their volley until the Federals were within easy range
of the intrenchments, when they swept the advancing line with their
terrible fire.

The brave soldiers lost in that fearful volley one hundred and fifty
men; yet they faltered not nor turned their steps backwards. They waded
the bayou, delivering their fire as they reached the other bank, and
rushed upon the enemy with fixed bayonets. So quickly was all this
accomplished, that the rebels had not time to reload their guns, and
were forced to surrender.

The battle was ended, and the fort, with three thousand prisoners,
eighteen pieces of artillery, several thousand stand of arms, and a
large supply of corn and commissary stores, fell into the hands of the
Federals.

The enemy had, earlier in the day, out of the hulls of three steamboats,
constructed a bridge, over which he had passed the main body of his
army. As the charge was made, and it became evident that the Unionists
would capture the position, the rebels burned this bridge, and also the
railroad bridge across the river just above.

In the afternoon several attempts were made to cross the river, but the
rebel sharpshooters lined the bluffs beyond, and entirely prevented it.
Later, the main body of sharpshooters were dispersed by the Federal
artillery. It was not, however, safe to stand upon the bank, or cross
the open field east of the bridge until after dark, when the enemy
withdrew altogether.

By this time, General Sherman had reached Bridgeport on the Black river,
just above. The only pontoon train was with him. By the morning of the
18th he had crossed the river and was ready to march on Vicksburg.
Generals McClernand and McPherson caused floating bridges to be
constructed during the night, and were ready to cross their troops by
eight o’clock on the next morning.

General Sherman commenced his march by the Bridgeport and Vicksburg road
on the 18th, and, when within three and a half miles of Vicksburg, he
turned to the right to get possession of Walnut Hills and the Yazoo
river. This was successfully accomplished before night. General
McPherson crossed the Black river above the road to Jackson, and came
into the same road with General Sherman, but in his rear. His advance
arrived after nightfall at the point where General Sherman turned to the
right. General McClernand moved by the Jackson and Vicksburg road to
Mount Albans, in the rear of Vicksburg, and there turned to the left to
get into the Baldwin’s Ferry road. By this disposition the three army
corps covered all the ground their strength would admit of, and by the
morning of the 19th the investment of Vicksburg was made as complete as
could be by the forces under the command of General Grant.

Communication was now opened with the fleet above Vicksburg, and General
Grant’s supplies were thenceforth received from the Yazoo, instead of
from Grand Gulf.




                       CAPTURE OF HAINES’S BLUFF.
                             MAY 18, 1863.


The operations of Rear-Admiral Porter, which had an important bearing on
the movements of General Grant’s army at that time, are thus detailed in
the reports of that officer, and of Lieutenant Walker.


                              FLAG SHIP BLACK HAWK,                    }
                      HAINES’S BLUFF, YAZOO RIVER, _May 20th_. }

  To Hon. GIDEON WELLES, Secretary of the Navy:

  On the morning of the 16th I came over to the Yazoo to be ready to
  cooperate with General Grant, leaving two of the iron-clads at Red
  river, one at Grand Gulf, one at Carthage, three at Warrenton, and two
  in the Yazoo, which left me a small force. Still I disposed of them to
  the best advantage. On the 18th, at meridian, firing was heard in the
  rear of Vicksburg, which assured me that General Grant was approaching
  the city. The cannonading was kept up furiously for some time, when,
  by the aid of glasses, I discovered a company of artillery advancing,
  taking position, and driving the rebels before them. I immediately saw
  that General Sherman’s division had come on to the left of Snyder’s
  Bluff, and that the rebels at that place had been cut off from joining
  the forces in the city.

  I dispatched the DeKalb, Lieutenant-Commander Walker, the Choctaw,
  Lieutenant-Commander Ramsay, the Borneo, and Forest Rose, all under
  command of Lieutenant-Commander Breese, up the Yazoo, to open
  communication in that way with Generals Grant and Sherman. This I
  succeeded in doing, and in three hours received letters from Generals
  Grant, Sherman, and Steele, informing me of this vast success, and
  asking me to send up provisions, which was at once done. In the mean
  time, Lieutenant-Commander Walker in the DeKalb pushed on to Haines’s
  Bluff, which the enemy had commenced evacuating the day before, and a
  party remained behind in the hopes of destroying or taking away a
  large amount of ammunition on hand. When they saw the gunboats they
  ran away and left everything in good order, guns, forts, tents, and
  equipage of all kinds, which fell into our hands.

  As soon as the capture of Haines’s Bluff and the fourteen forts was
  reported to me, I shoved up the gunboats from below to fire on the
  hill batteries, which fire was kept up for two or three hours. At
  midnight they moved up to the town and opened on it for about an hour,
  and continued at intervals during the night to annoy the garrison. On
  the 19th I placed six mortars in position, with orders to fire night
  and day as rapidly as they could.

  The works at Haines’s Bluff are very formidable. There are fourteen of
  the heaviest kind of mounted eight and ten inch and seven and a half
  inch rifle guns, with ammunition enough to last a long siege. As the
  gun carriages might again fall into the hands of the enemy, I had them
  burned, blew up the magazine, and destroyed the works generally. I
  also burned up the encampments, which were permanently and remarkably
  well constructed, looking as though the rebels intended to stay some
  time. Their works and encampments covered many acres of ground, and
  the fortifications and rifle pits proper of Haines’s Bluff extend
  about a mile and a quarter. Such a network of forts I never saw.

  As soon as I got through with the destruction of the magazines and
  other works, I started Lieutenant-Commander Walker up the Yazoo river
  with sufficient force to destroy all the enemy’s property in that
  direction, with orders to return with all dispatch, and only to
  proceed as far as Yazoo City, where the rebels have a navy yard and
  storehouses.

  In the mean time General Grant has closely invested Vicksburg, and has
  possession of the best commanding points. In a very short time a
  general assault will take place, when I hope to announce that
  Vicksburg has fallen, after a series of the most brilliant successes
  that ever attended an army.

  There never has been a case during the war where the rebels have been
  so successfully beaten at all points, and the patience and endurance
  shown by our army and navy for so many months is about being rewarded.
  It is a mere question of a few hours, and then, with the exception of
  Port Hudson, which will follow Vicksburg, the Mississippi will be open
  its entire length.

                                    [Signed]       D. D. PORTER,
                                        Commanding Mississippi Squadron.


                  *       *       *       *       *


                                   U. S. STEAMER BARON DEKALB,  }
                                           MOUTH YAZOO RIVER, May 23d. }

  SIR: I have the honor to report that in obedience to your order, I
  started from Snyder’s Bluff on the 20th, with the DeKalb, Choctaw,
  Forest Rose, Linden, and Petrel, on an expedition to Yazoo City.
  Arriving at Haines’s Bluff, I landed a force and spiked an 8-inch gun
  on the fort there, and burned the carriage. I also burned some forty
  tents left standing, and a steam sawmill.

  Arriving at Yazoo City at one P. M., 20th, I was met by a committee of
  citizens, who informed me that the place had been evacuated by the
  military authorities, and asking protection. The navy yard and vessels
  had been fired by the enemy. I sent a working party to insure the
  destruction of everything valuable to the rebels. The vessels burned
  were the Mobile, a screw vessel, ready for plating; the Republic,
  which was being fitted out for a ram; and a vessel on the stocks—a
  monster, three hundred and ten feet long, seventy-five feet beam. The
  navy yard contained five saw and planing mills, an extensive machine
  shop, carpenter and blacksmith shops, and all necessary fixtures for a
  large building and repairing yard, which, with a very large quantity
  of lumber, were burned. I also burned a large sawmill above the town.
  Most of the public stores had been removed; such as I found in town
  were taken on board the vessels or destroyed. Enclosed I send a list
  of articles removed or destroyed by Acting Volunteer Lieutenant Brown,
  the officer detailed for that purpose. In the hospital I found and
  paroled one thousand five hundred prisoners, a list of whom I enclose.

  Returning, I left Yazoo City this morning, arriving here at four P. M.
  At Liverpool Landing, in a sharp bend in the river, we were attacked
  by some field guns, and about two hundred riflemen concealed in the
  bushes, and for a few minutes the firing was very sharp. The enemy
  retreated as soon as the vessels got into position to use their guns
  with effect. The Petrel, Linden, and Choctaw were struck with shot,
  but received no particular injury. Sergeant Stockinger, of this
  vessel, was killed by a rifle shot. The Linden had five wounded, the
  Petrel two, and the Choctaw one. Most of the wounds are slight.




                 BOMBARDMENT AND ASSAULT OF VICKSBURG.
                            MAY 19–23, 1863.


After encompassing Vicksburg as closely as the nature of the locality
and the numerical force under his command would permit, General Grant
lost no time in preparing for a direct assault on the place, in
combination with a grand naval attack by the fleet. During the 19th,
there was a continued skirmishing, and General Grant was not without
hope of carrying the works.

After the storming of the rebel position on the Big Black river, and the
enemy had been driven within the fortifications of Vicksburg, their army
was reorganized, and placed as follows: General Smith’s division on the
extreme left, Major-General Forney in the centre, and Major-General
Stephenson on the right. Brigadier-General Bowen’s division or
Missourians held the reserve.

General Grant ordered an assault at an earlier day than was desirable,
as there was danger of General Pemberton being reinforced by an army
under General Johnson, which was then gathering strength, and advancing
in the rear. A general assault was made at two o’clock on the 19th. This
was made by the Fifteenth army corps, which arrived in time before the
works on the previous day to get a good position. The Thirteenth and
Seventeenth corps succeeded in gaining an advanced position covered from
the fire of the enemy. A Confederate report of the action is as follows:
“On Tuesday morning, before daylight, they opened fire from their
batteries, our guns responding immediately, and at ten o’clock, advanced
to the assault in a rather ridiculous manner. They advanced their flags
close to the works, their negro troops in front, and lay down. Bowen’s
gallant Missourians never fired a shot. The other regiments then marched
up, and the whole assaulting column, forlorn hope and all, marched
within easy musket range.

“At the word ‘forward—charge!’ they received our fire, shattering their
ranks frightfully. They rallied, closed up and stood to it for thirty
minutes, when they broke and fled. They were rallied to the charge four
successive times and met with the same storm of iron hail and leaden
rain. The whole field was literally covered for one mile with their dead
and wounded, where they were still lying on Thursday night, unburied and
without attention.” Another Confederate writes:

“The days intervening from the 19th to the 22d were spent in one
continued bombarding and sharpshooting during the day; in the night they
generally ceased firing. On the morning of the 22d, the enemy opened a
terrific fire with their Parrot guns, and continued it till about eleven
o’clock, when the bombardment ceased, and heavy columns of the enemy
could be seen forming in line of battle. Our forces were all ready for
them, and eager for their advance. At about a quarter to twelve, the
column of the Federal army advanced all along the lines in splendid
order, and with a loud cheer dashed up to the works. They were gallantly
responded to by our brave boys, and the first charge repulsed. On the
extreme right of our lines, the nature of the ground prevented the enemy
from making any heavy attack, but on the right of the centre, the
centre, and the left of the centre, the assault was desperately made and
gallantly met. But once did our lines break, and that was in Lee’s
brigade. The enemy gained a temporary footing on the rifle-pits, but Lee
quickly rallied his men, and, after a desperate hand-to-hand fight,
drove them out and reoccupied the lines. The engagement at this point,
and at the right of the line, held by Brigadier-General L. Herbert, was
of a terrible nature, the Federals having thrown their best troops on
these works. Five times did they charge, and each time were repulsed.
The last charge on the right of Brigadier-General Herbert’s lines was
made by an Irish regiment (the Seventeenth Wisconsin), carrying the
green flag of Erin. They came at a double-quick up the hill, each man in
the front ranks furnished with a ladder to reach the works. Three times
they essayed to plant their ladders, but were prevented by the obstinate
resistance offered by the consolidated Twenty-first and Twenty-third
Louisiana regiments. At the third charge they came within ten yards of
the line, but two volleys of buckshot from the shotguns of our forces
compelled them to make a precipitate retreat from the front of our
works. At about two o’clock they made their last charge, and were again
repulsed, when they retired, and did not attempt any further
demonstration that day. The loss of the enemy on that day is estimated
by competent parties at not less than from eight to ten thousand, while
our loss was between eight hundred and one thousand in killed and
wounded.”

The following dispatch of Rear-Admiral Porter to the Secretary of the
Navy, describes the part taken in this conflict by the naval force:


  MISSISSIPPI SQUADRON, FLAGSHIP BLACK HAWK, }
                                May 23, 1863. }

  SIR—On the morning of the 21st I received a communication from General
  Grant, informing me that he intended to attack the whole of the rebel
  works at ten A. M. the next day, and asking me to shell the batteries
  from half-past nine until half-past ten, and to annoy the garrison. I
  kept six mortars playing rapidly on the works and town all night, and
  sent the Benton, Mound City and Carondolet up to shell the water
  batteries and other places where troops might be resting during the
  night. At seven o’clock in the morning, the Mound City proceeded
  across the river, and made an attack on the hill batteries opposite
  the canal. At eight o’clock I found her in company with the Benton,
  Tuscumbia, and Carondolet. All these vessels opened on the hill
  batteries, and finally silenced them, though the main work on the
  battery containing the heavy rifled gun was done by the Mound City,
  Lieutenant Commanding Byron Wilson. I then pushed the Benton, Mound
  City and Carondolet up to the water batteries, leaving the Tuscumbia,
  which is still out of repair, to keep the hill batteries from firing
  on our vessels after they had passed by. The three gunboats passed up
  slowly, owing to the strong current, the Mound City leading, the
  Benton following, and the Carondolet astern. The water batteries
  opened furiously, supported by a hill battery on the starboard beam of
  the vessels. The vessels advanced to within four hundred and forty
  yards (by our marks) and returned the fire for two hours without
  cessation, the enemy’s fire being very accurate and incessant.

  Finding that the hill batteries behind us were silenced, I ordered up
  the Tuscumbia to within eight hundred yards of the batteries; but the
  turret was soon made untenable, not standing the enemy’s shot, and I
  made her drop down. I had been engaged with the forts an hour longer
  than General Grant asked. The vessels had all received severe shots
  under water which we could not stop while in motion, and not knowing
  what might have delayed the movement of the army, I ordered the
  vessels to drop out of fire, which they did in a cool, handsome
  manner.

  This was the hottest fire the gunboats had ever been under; but, owing
  to the water batteries being more on a level with them than usual, the
  gunboats threw in their shell so fast that the aim of the enemy was
  not very good. The enemy hit our vessels a number of times, but
  fighting bow on, they did but little damage.

  Not a man was killed, and only a few wounded. I had only enough
  ammunition for a few moments longer, and set all hands to work to fill
  up from our depot below.

  After dropping back I found that the enemy had taken possession again
  of one of the lower hill batteries and was endeavoring to mount his
  guns, and had mounted a 12-pounder field piece to fire at General
  McArthur’s troops, which had landed a short time before at Warrenton.
  I sent the Mound City and Carondolet to drive him off, which they did
  in a few moments.

  I beg leave to enclose a letter from General McArthur, explaining why
  he did not (to use his own expression), take advantage of the results
  gained by the gunboats. I have since learned through General Grant
  that the army did assault at the right time vigorously. In the noise
  and smoke we could not see or hear it. The gunboats were, therefore,
  still fighting when the assault had proved unsuccessful.

  The army have terrible work before them, and are fighting as well as
  soldiers ever fought before. But the works are stronger than any of us
  dreamed of. General Grant and his soldiers are confident that the
  brave and energetic generals in the army will soon overcome all
  obstacles and carry the works.

                             DAVID D. PORTER, Acting Rear-Admiral,
                                         Commanding Mississippi Squadron


Having been repulsed with severe loss in several attempts to storm the
rebel works, General Grant now determined to approach the fortifications
by regular siege lines. It had been demonstrated that it was impossible
to approach any point of attack, with a force equal in numbers to that
with which the enemy would be prepared to resist him.

General Pemberton deemed it prudent at that time, to forbid all
unnecessary waste of ammunition, and thus General Grant was able to
commence throwing up works and erecting forts within a short distance of
the opposing line of breastworks. The firing upon the town was made only
during the day, until the 26th of May, after which it was continued day
and night. The mortars on the peninsula opposite Vicksburg opened fire
on the 25th, and continued it until the surrender. It was estimated at
Vicksburg that as many as six thousand mortar shells were thrown into
the town every twenty-four hours, and on the line in the rear of the
city, as many as four thousand in the same time. During about five days
after the siege commenced, the troops in the city were allowed full
rations. At the expiration of that time, they were gradually reduced to
four ounces of flour, four ounces of bacon, one and a half ounces of
rice, two ounces of peas, not eatable, and three ounces of sugar. The
extent of the works, and the limited number of the Confederate troops,
required every man to defend the lines, and no time was allowed to rest.
Whole companies laid back of their breastworks for three weeks without
leaving the line for a moment.

Meantime every effort was made to strengthen the force under the command
of General Grant. He had already ordered a division under General
Lanman, and four regiments at Memphis to join him. He now brought
forward the divisions of Generals Smith and Kimball, of the Sixteenth
army corps, and placed them under the command of Major-General C. C.
Washburn. On the 11th of June, Major-General F. J. Herron’s division,
from the department of Missouri, arrived, and on the 14th, two divisions
of the Ninth army corps, Major-General J. G. Parke commanding, reached
Vicksburg. These two divisions were a part of the forces of General
Burnside, commanding in the Department of Ohio. This increase of the
forces of General Grant enabled him to make the investment of Vicksburg
more complete, and at the same time left him a large reserve with which
to watch the movements of General Johnston.

These reinforcements were arranged by placing General Herron’s division
on the extreme left, south of the city. General Lanman’s division was
placed between Generals Herron and McClernand. General Smith’s and
General Kimball’s divisions, and the force under General Parke, were
sent to Haines’s Bluff. This place was now fortified on the land side,
and every preparation made to resist a heavy force. About the 25th of
June, General Johnston crossed the Big Black river with a portion of his
force, and everything indicated that he would make an attack.

About this time Rear-Admiral Porter reported to Secretary Welles, under
date of May 27, the loss of one of the finest gunboats in his fleet, in
the following dispatch:


  SIR:—Amidst our successes I regret to report any losses; but we cannot
  expect to conquer a place like this without some loss.

  At the urgent request of Generals Grant and Sherman, I sent the
  Cincinnati to enfilade some rifle pits which barred the progress of
  the left wing of our army.

  General Sherman supposed that the enemy had removed his heavy guns to
  the rear of the city. On the contrary, he seemed to have placed more
  on the water side than usual.

  The Cincinnati was sunk in shoal water, with her flag flying. The
  enemy still continued to fire upon her, but the flag was not hauled
  down. Twenty-five were killed and wounded, and fifteen are missing.
  The latter are supposed to be drowned. The vessel can be raised. The
  pilot was killed early in the action.

                            DAVID D. PORTER, Acting Rear-Admiral,
                                        Commanding Mississippi Squadron.


A successful naval expedition to Yazoo city, is thus described in the
report of Rear Admiral Porter, under date of May 24:


  SIR—I have the honor to inform you that the expedition sent up the
  Yazoo river the day after I took possession of the forts on
  Snyder’s Bluff, has returned, having met with perfect success. As
  the steamers approached Yazoo city the rebel property was fired by
  Lieutenant Brown, of the ram Arkansas; and what he began our
  forces finished. Three powerful rams were burned, the Mobile, a
  screw vessel, ready for plating; the Republic, being fitted for a
  ram, with railroad iron plating, and a vessel on the stocks—a
  monster, three hundred and ten feet long and seventy-five feet
  beam. This vessel was to have been covered with four and a half
  inch iron plating, and was to have had six engines, four side
  wheels and propellers. She would have given us much trouble. The
  rebels had under construction a fine navy yard, containing fine
  sawing and planing machines, and an extensive machine shop,
  carpenter and blacksmiths’ shops, and all the necessary appliances
  for a large building and repairing yard. Lieutenant-Commander
  Walker burned all these, with a large quantity of valuable
  building timber. He also burned a large saw mill that had been
  used in constructing the monster ram. The material destroyed, at a
  moderate estimate, would cost more than two millions of dollars.
  We had one man killed and seven wounded by field pieces from the
  enemy’s batteries going up the river, but the wounded are doing
  well. I enclose Lieutenant-Commander Walker’s report in relation
  to this affair. He deserves much credit for the handsome manner in
  which he performed the duty assigned him. If he could have
  obtained pilots he would have succeeded in getting possession of
  all the rebel rams, instead of having them burned. I am, very
  respectfully, your obedient servant.

                                   DAVID D. PORTER,
                   Acting Rear-Admiral, Commanding Mississippi Squadron.

  HON. GIDEON WELLES, Secretary of the Navy.


From the 22d of May, until the 25th of June, no attempt was made to take
the city by direct assault. During all that time, however, the mining
operations had been carried on successfully, and on the latter day a
fort on the immediate right of the Jackson road was blown up. It was
occupied by the Third Louisiana regiment, but the troops had been
withdrawn, and only a few were wounded by the explosion. An advance by a
small portion of the Federal force, immediately after, was the occasion
of a bloody contest, in which the Unionists were defeated, and compelled
to retire.

Several portions of the enemy’s defences were destroyed by the mining
operations of the Federals at this time, but no decisive advantage had
thus far been obtained. The condition of affairs in the city is thus
described by a Confederate officer: “About the thirty-fifth day
provisions began to get very scarce, and the advent of General
Johnston’s relieving force was anxiously and momentarily looked for.
Mule meat was the common fare of all alike, and even dogs became in
request for the table. Bean meal was made into bread, and corn meal into
coffee, and in these straits the garrison patiently dragged on the weary
length of one day after another, under a scorching sun, the stench from
the unburied corpses all around alone causing the strongest minded,
firmest nerved to grow impatient for the day of deliverance. The enemy
pushed their works: they blew up several forts, and with them the
soldiers and attempted to charge; but the meagre and famished yet
steadfast garrison still defiantly held the key of the Mississippi. But
everything must have an end. General Pemberton learned from General
Johnston that he could not afford him relief, and as the garrison was
too famished and reduced to cut its way out, he determined to
capitulate.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

After resisting the Federal forces for fifteen months, and enduring a
direct siege and bombardment for forty-seven days, Vicksburg was finally
surrendered to General Grant, on the 4th of July.

The following correspondence between Generals Grant and Pemberton embody
the interesting details of that event:


                                  HEADQUARTERS, VICKSBURG, July 3, 1863.

  Major-General Grant, commanding United States forces:—

  GENERAL—I have the honor to propose to you an armistice for —— hours,
  with a view to arranging terms for the capitulation of Vicksburg. To
  this end, if agreeable to you, I will appoint three commissioners, to
  meet a like number to be named by yourself, at such place and hour
  to-day, as you may find convenient. I make this proposition to save
  the farther effusion of blood, which must otherwise be shed to a
  frightful extent, feeling myself fully able to maintain my position
  for a yet indefinite period. This communication will be handed you
  under a flag of truce, by Major-General James Bowen.

                            Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                                        J. C. PEMBERTON.


To this General Grant replied as follows:


                       HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF TENNESSEE,      }
                           IN THE FIELD, NEAR VICKSBURG, July 3, 1863. }

  Lieutenant-General J. C. Pemberton, commanding Confederate forces,
     &c.:—

  GENERAL—Your note of this date, just received, proposes an armistice
  of several hours, for the purpose of arranging terms of capitulation
  through commissioners to be appointed, &c. The effusion of blood you
  propose stopping by this course, can be ended at any time you may
  choose, by an unconditional surrender of the city and garrison. Men
  who have shown so much endurance and courage as those now in
  Vicksburg, will always challenge the respect of an adversary, and I
  can assure you will be treated with all the respect due them as
  prisoners of war. I do not favor the proposition of appointing
  commissioners to arrange terms of capitulation, because I have no
  other terms than those indicated above.

                I am, General, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                            U. S. GRANT, Major-General.


General Bowen, the bearer of General Pemberton’s letter, was received by
General A. J. Smith. He expressed a strong desire to converse with
General Grant, and accordingly, while declining this, General Grant
requested General Smith to say that if General Pemberton desired to see
him, an interview would be granted between the lines in McPherson’s
front, at any hour in the afternoon which General Pemberton might
appoint.

A message was soon sent back to General Smith, appointing three o’clock
as the hour. General Grant was there with his staff, and with Generals
Ord, McPherson, Logan, and A. J. Smith. General Pemberton came late,
attended by General Bowen, and Colonel Montgomery. He was much excited
and pert in his answers to General Grant. The conversation was held
apart between General Pemberton and his officers, and Generals Grant,
McPherson, and A. J. Smith. The rebels insisted on being paroled, and
allowed to march beyond our lines, officers and men, all with eight
days’ rations, drawn from their own stores, the officers to retain their
private property and body servants.

General Grant heard what they had to say, and left them at the end of an
hour and a half, saying that he would send in his ultimatum in writing,
to which General Pemberton promised to reply before night, hostilities
to cease in the mean time.

General Grant then conferred at his headquarters with his corps and
division commanders, and sent the following letter to General Pemberton,
by the hands of General Logan and Lieutenant-Colonel Wilson.


                GENERAL GRANT’S OFFER FOR THE SURRENDER.


                        HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF TENNESSEE, }
                                NEAR VICKSBURG, July 3, 1863.          }

  Lieutenant-General J. C. PEMBERTON, commanding Confederate forces,
     Vicksburg, Miss.:

  GENERAL—In conformity with the agreement of this afternoon, I will
  submit the following proposition for the surrender of the city of
  Vicksburg, public stores, &c. On your accepting the terms proposed, I
  will march in one division, as a guard, and take possession at eight
  o’clock to-morrow morning. As soon as paroles can be made out and
  signed by the officers and men, you will be allowed to march out of
  our lines, the officers taking with them their regimental clothing,
  and staff, field, and cavalry officers, one horse each. The rank and
  file will be allowed all their clothing, but no other property.

  If these conditions are accepted, any amount of rations you may deem
  necessary can be taken from the stores you now have, and also the
  necessary cooking utensils for preparing them; thirty wagons also,
  counting two two-horse or mule teams as one. You will be allowed to
  transport such articles as cannot be carried along. The same
  conditions will be allowed to all sick and wounded officers and
  privates, as fast as they become able to travel. The paroles for these
  latter must be signed, however, whilst officers are present authorized
  to sign the roll of prisoners.

         I am, General, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                             U. S. GRANT, Major-General.


The officer who received this letter, stated that it would be impossible
to answer it by night, and it was not till a little before peep of day,
that the proposed reply was furnished.

While these deliberations were pending, the men of both armies, who
simply knew that a surrender was in contemplation, under intense
excitement, were anxiously awaiting the result. Groups of soldiers, who
a few hours before were engaged in a deathly struggle, now freely
engaged in conversation from the edge of the opposing works.


 REPLY OF GENERAL PEMBERTON, ACCEPTING ALL THE TERMS OFFERED BY GENERAL
                                 GRANT.

                                  HEADQUARTERS, VICKSBURG, July 3, 1863.

  Major-General GRANT, commanding United States forces:—

GENERAL—I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
communication of this date, proposing terms for the surrender of this
garrison and post. In the main your terms are accepted; but in justice
both to the honor and spirit of my troops, manifested in the defence of
Vicksburg, I have the honor to submit the following amendments, which if
acceded to by you, will perfect the agreement between us:—At ten o’clock
to-morrow I propose to evacuate the works in and around Vicksburg, and
to surrender the city and garrison under my command, by marching out
with my colors and arms, and stacking them in front of my present
limits, after which you will take possession; officers to retain their
side arms and personal property, and the rights and property of citizens
to be respected.

                            I am, General, yours very respectfully,
                                    J. C. PEMBERTON, Lieutenant-General.

To this General Grant immediately replied as follows:—


 GENERAL GRANT DECLINES TO ACCEDE TO THE AMENDMENTS PROPOSED BY GENERAL
                               PEMBERTON.


                        HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF TENNESSEE, }
                                BEFORE VICKSBURG, July 4, 1863.        }

  Lieutenant-General PEMBERTON, commanding forces at Vicksburg:—

[Illustration: UNION HEROES STONE. SHIPLEY. ANDREWS. WHITE. MEIGS.]

  GENERAL—I have the honor to acknowledge your communication of the 3rd
  of July. The amendments proposed by you cannot be acceded to in full.
  It will be necessary to furnish every officer and man with a parole
  signed by himself, which, with the completion of the rolls of
  prisoners, will necessarily take some time. Again, I can make no
  stipulation with regard to the treatment of citizens and their private
  property. While I do not propose to cause any of them any undue
  annoyance or loss. I cannot consent to leave myself under restraint by
  stipulations. The property which officers can be allowed to take with
  them will be as stated in the proposition of last evening—that is,
  that officers will be allowed their private baggage and side arms, and
  mounted officers one horse each. If you mean by your proposition for
  each brigade to march to the front of the lines now occupied by it,
  and stack their arms at ten o’clock A. M., and then return to the
  inside and remain as prisoners until properly paroled, I will make no
  objection to it. Should no modification be made of your acceptance of
  my terms by nine o’clock, A. M., I shall regard them as having been
  rejected, and act accordingly. Should these terms be accepted, white
  flags will be displayed along your lines, to prevent such of my troops
  as may not have been notified, from firing on your men.

                I am, General, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                U. S. GRANT, Major-General, U. S. A.


To this the following was received:—


 UNCONDITIONAL ACCEPTANCE BY GENERAL PEMBERTON OF THE TERMS PROPOSED BY
                             GENERAL GRANT.


                                  HEADQUARTERS, VICKSBURG, July 4, 1863.

  Major-General U. S. GRANT, Commanding United States forces, &c.:—

  GENERAL—I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
  communication of this date, and, in reply, to say that the terms
  proposed by you are accepted.

                               Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                   J. C. PEMBERTON, Lieutenant-General.


Of the terms of the surrender, General Grant thus speaks in his report:
“These terms I regarded more favorable to the Government than an
unconditional surrender. It saved us the transportation of them north,
which, at that time, would have been very difficult, owing to the
limited amount of river transportation on hand, and the expense of
subsisting them. It left our army free to operate against Johnston, who
was threatening us from the direction of Jackson; and our river
transportation to be used for the movement of troops to any point the
exigency of the service might require.”

At ten o’clock on the 4th, the Confederate forces marched out and
stacked arms in front of their works, while General Pemberton appeared
for a moment with his staff upon the parapet of the central front. The
city was immediately after occupied by the divisions of Generals Logan,
J. E. Smith and Herron.

The result of his operations is thus summed up by General Grant: “The
result of this campaign has been the defeat of the enemy in five
different battles outside of Vicksburg; the occupation of Jackson, the
capital of the State of Mississippi, and the capture of Vicksburg and
its garrison and munitions of war; a loss to the enemy of thirty-seven
thousand prisoners, among whom were fifteen general officers; at least
ten thousand killed and wounded, and among the killed, Generals Tracy,
Tilghman, and Green; and hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of stragglers,
who can never be collected and reorganized. Arms and munitions of war
for an army of sixty thousand men have fallen into our hands, besides a
large amount of other public property, consisting of railroads,
locomotives, cars, steamboats, cotton, etc., and much was destroyed to
prevent our capturing it.

“Our loss in the series of battles may be summed up as follows:

         ╔═════════════════════════╤════════╤════════╤════════╗
         ║                         │ Killed.│Wounded.│Missing.║
         ╟─────────────────────────┼────────┼────────┼────────╢
         ║Port Gibson              │     130│     718│        ║
         ║Fourteen Mile Creek      │       4│      24│       5║
         ║Raymond                  │      69│     341│      32║
         ║Jackson                  │      40│     240│       6║
         ║Champion’s Hill          │     426│   1,842│     189║
         ║Big Black railroad bridge│      29│     242│       2║
         ║Vicksburg                │     545│   3,688│     303║
         ╚═════════════════════════╧════════╧════════╧════════╝

“Of the wounded, many were but slightly wounded, and continued on duty;
many more required but a few days or weeks for their recovery. Not more
than one-half of the wounded were permanently disabled.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

We will now turn our attention to a brilliant engagement which occurred
simultaneously with the fall of Vicksburg. The town of Helena, in
Arkansas, had been garrisoned by a small force under General Prentiss, a
gallant officer, who had been captured at Pittsburg Landing with a large
portion of his division, after bravely contending for more than half a
day with a foe quadruple his own force.




                    THE BATTLE AT HELENA, ARKANSAS.
                             JULY 4, 1863.


The town of Helena, in Arkansas, is situated upon the northern bank of
the Mississippi river, and lies upon flat ground. Not more than a
quarter of a mile from the river the city and its approaches are
commanded by high ridges, between which are ravines opening toward the
river. The city had been strongly fortified by batteries placed upon
these hills and connected in line by rifle-pits.

An attack upon Helena had been anticipated for some days, and at four
o’clock on the morning of the 4th of July, the attack was opened upon
General Prentiss by a rebel force numbering fifteen thousand, under
Generals Holmes and Price. The Union forces, who had been two nights
under arms and waiting the attack, were in readiness in a few minutes,
and infantry, cavalry, and artillery were immediately in the positions
assigned them. Between the ridges and the river the low, flat ground was
protected by cavalry and rifle-pits and flanking batteries of
ten-pounder Parrotts, and six and twelve-pounder brass pieces. Making
the city the base of operations, Battery A was placed upon the right,
and Batteries B, C, and D, upon the left. The enemy attacked upon the
left of the line, and were opposed by a strong force of cavalry, with a
brigade of infantry and four pieces of artillery. Presently it was
reported that a large force was assaulting Battery A; and close upon the
heels of this intelligence came the news that sharpshooters were
harassing batteries C and D; behind the sharpshooters came heavy columns
of the enemy who were rapidly moving artillery into position. In front
of Battery B could be seen a large force of cavalry, showing that the
enemy had been disposed by the planning of a master mind. The enemy
opened a spirited fire on both flanks of General Prentiss’ troops at
once, but without producing any effect; evidently no great result was
expected by the rebels in regard to this movement, and it was merely
intended as a diversion while they were throwing their whole strength
against the Union centre. This plan would, if successfully carried out,
have given them possession of Fort Curtis, a point which was centrally
located, and commanded all the ridges surrounding the city. But the
rebels were not aware of the presence at the city’s landing of the
gunboat Tyler, commanded by Lieutenant James M. Pritchett, and they were
equally astonished and disconcerted when, at a critical moment, the
Tyler made them aware of her presence. The enemy were unable to open
batteries upon the centre from being disappointed in finding ravines in
which to place them, and therefore relied upon their infantry for the
work. The attack upon Battery D was personally superintended by
Lieutenant General Holmes, and Major-General Price directed that made
upon Battery C. Half an hour after the battle first opened a regiment
moved out to attack Battery D; but as they advanced in line upon a
bridge within range of the guns of Battery C, the latter opened upon
them a furious fire of shell, which was imitated by the guns of Battery
D, with such effect as to create a perfect panic in their ranks which
rapidly increased to a rout, and the rebels retired in great disorder.
They were immediately reinforced, however, and their sharpshooters
pressed close upon the guns of Battery C, so that they were turned upon
them, vomiting forth canister, and so effectually checking their advance
that they retreated again, and took refuge under cover of the ravines
and fallen timber.

About this time operations on both sides ceased for a brief while owing
to a dense fog which had fallen, and continued to hang heavily in the
air for about three-quarters of an hour. When it was light again the
force in front of Battery D appeared to be much weakened, while a
brigade of three regiments was seen crossing the ridges between that
work and Battery C. Before any of the guns could be used against the
approaching force the first line of pits in front of the battery was
flanked, and the company forced back upon the battery, where they stood
bravely. The guns of Battery D opened furiously upon the rebels, but
notwithstanding the fierce fire they pressed forward upon the company of
Battery C, swarming like locusts, and causing a sudden panic to fall
upon the Union men. Two companies upon the left of the battery broke and
fled in the wildest confusion; but two more with the guns, and two in
the pits to the right of them held their ground bravely, pouring in a
heavy fire of canister and minnie balls into the ranks of the enemy. But
the guns could not be saved; seeing which the captain of the battery
spiked one just as the enemy reached the piece, while the gunners,
determined that the battery should be useless to its captors, secured
all the friction-primers. At the foot of the hill the retreating
Unionists made another stand, and being promptly supported by portions
of two regiments they proved to the rebels that they were not yet
beaten.

It was now that the services of the Tyler became of such value to the
National forces; and as the enemy, flushed with success, gathered
together his scattered companies and charged down the hill toward Fort
Curtis, a broadside from the gunboat poured death and destruction down
the slopes of the hillside and enfiladed the ravines, while the stern
guns silenced the rebel battery below, and the bow guns at the same
moment played upon the upper one. And yet the rebels bore the fire, nor
once turned to flee, although it seemed worse than madness to go on.

But in the language of a correspondent of the day, “With the howl of
demons, the last mad, defiant impotent howl of baffled but still
determined traitors, exposed to history, to nations, and to themselves,
whipped, naked, and hungry, on they came cursing, firing, riding like
the ‘Light Brigade’ ‘into the gates of death, into the mouth of hell.’
No hurrying, no excitement, and yet no hesitation in the fort and
batteries, but steadily the shell, case, grape, and canister flew, with
the swiftness of lightning and the precision of fate straight in the
faces of the infuriate mob. Heads, trunks, and limbs hurled asunder by
bursting iron, flew into the air, nauseating and sickening all who
witnessed the horrible sight. No body of men on earth could long endure
such a tornado of iron as was hurled on them, while their shots all fell
short or passed harmlessly over the gunners of the fort. Not a man was
even wounded. Slow to receive conviction, but at last satisfied of the
hopelessness of their assault, the mob turned about as if by common
consent and broke into squads of twenty, ten, two, and at last, every
man for himself.” The rebels, who fought like madmen, made still another
stand, and tried an approach through a ravine; but one particular point
which the line must pass was exposed to the fire of the Union troops;
and very soon the guns succeeded in getting such excellent range of this
point that not a man could pass it. One regiment which had passed into
the ravine could not return, nor could the brigade pass in to its
support. At the mouth of the ravine one of General Prentiss’ regiments
was so placed as to rake the entire length of the rebel line, while
another immediately took position on a ridge on the right flank of the
rebel brigade, and both regiments poured in their fire at once; and
cross fires from the Fort and batteries, aided by the gunboat,
completely scattered the regiments left upon the ridges. In haste and
confusion they abandoned the guns which they had captured, uninjured,
and left the brave regiment which had passed into the ravine, with all
their arms, officers, and colors, prisoners of war. About three hundred
of the rebel killed and wounded, besides four hundred prisoners, were
lost by the enemy in this charge.

A similar attack had been made on Battery D while this was going on
against Battery C, and with much the same result to the enemy, who was
driven back by a murderous fire from the battery’s guns and from the
sharpshooters. A few who succeeded in getting through the Union lines
took position in a ravine to the left of the battery, but they made only
a short fight, when they threw down their guns and formally surrendered.
The following anecdote is related of a Lieutenant-Colonel who commanded
the rebels. While they were still fighting he sprang upon a log and
waved his sword, lustily cheering on his men.

The captain of Battery D called out to him: “What in thunder do you keep
swinging that sword for? Why don’t you surrender?”

“By what authority do you demand my surrender?” returned the rebel
officer.

“By the authority of my 12-pound howitzer,” replied the captain.

The rebel looked sharply around, and seeing no chance of escape passed
his sabre-blade into his right hand and holding it out said, “Very well,
sir, I surrender.”

At Battery D the enemy lost almost as heavily as at Battery C. Nearly
two hundred and fifty men were killed and wounded; and between three and
four hundred were taken prisoners, with arms, officers, and colors. This
fight raged with almost unparalleled fury for six hours; but it was
still comparatively early in the day when it was at an end. At half past
ten A. M. the firing had quite ceased, and the enemy had completely
retired. The white flag was at the same moment hoisted at Vicksburg. The
total loss in killed, wounded, and missing to the National troops in
this engagement was two hundred and thirty, while that of the enemy was
not less than two thousand.




             MORGAN’S RAID IN INDIANA, KENTUCKY, AND OHIO.
                        JULY 3 TO JULY 26, 1863.


While the advance of Lee into Pennsylvania was agitating the whole
north, the rebels were making good use of their time elsewhere. A raid
by a guerrilla band under their chieftain, John Morgan, was made into
the three States of Indiana, Kentucky, and Ohio. He designed to sweep
everything before him, and by attracting public attention to himself,
give the rebel General Lee more opportunity to carry out his plans for
the invasion of the North. His first attempt was to break off the
railroad communications by which reinforcements could be sent to the
defence of Louisville; having done this, General Buckner, from
Tennessee, with the whole rebel force under his command, was to dash
into Kentucky, capture Louisville, and in cooperation with Morgan, make
an attack upon Cincinnati.

But General Buckner was prevented from participating in this movement.
General Rosecrans’s advance upon the army of General Bragg, which took
place about this time, made it necessary that the rebel Buckner should
remain where he was. At this time Morgan, with a force of four thousand
men, was in Tennessee; he had made a feint of attacking the town of
Tompkinsville, the capital of Monroe county, in the State of Kentucky.
Brigadier-General Hobson was ordered to Tompkinsville on the 20th of
June. General Morgan immediately crossed the Cumberland river, made a
rapid advance on Columbia, where a brilliant defence was made against
them by a small force under Captain Carter, consisting of only one
hundred and fifty men of Colonel Wolford’s regiment. They were, however,
forced to retire before the guerrilla general, having first lost their
brave commander. On July 4th, Morgan attacked Colonel Moore with two or
three hundred men, at Green river bridge. There a fierce resistance was
made to the rebel advance; but it was ineffectual, and Morgan marched
onward to Lebanon, which he reached the next day. His demand for the
surrender of the city was refused by the Union commander, Colonel
Hanson, and the attack which was immediately made upon it was gallantly
repelled for seven hours. At the end of that time Colonel Hanson, to
save his men from utter destruction, was compelled to surrender. Many of
the public buildings, and the whole northern part of the town was burnt
by the guerrillas; and the men who had surrendered were forced to march
with the rebels to Springfield, keeping pace with the cavalry, and in
such haste that the march was performed by the wearied Union men in one
hour and a half, the distance being ten miles. From Springfield, the
rebels marched to Shepherdsville, and then to Bardstown. On the 7th they
reached Brandenburg, on the Ohio river, where they seized a steamer
which had stopped to take in passengers; having appropriated everything
of value to them which the vessel contained, it was run out into the
river, and anchored. A short time after, another vessel was decoyed into
their possession by hoisting signals of distress on board the McCombs,
the vessel which had already been taken. The Alice Dean, the second
vessel, went alongside the McCombs, without any suspicion, and was
immediately boarded and seized. On the following day, Morgan’s entire
force, which consisted of more than four thousand, eleven regiments, and
ten pieces of artillery, including two howitzers, were taken across the
river. The rebels then gave up the steamer McCombs, but burned the Alice
Dean, and also the bridge at Brandenburg. By this time the pursuit of
the victorious guerrilla band had begun, but the march was very slow. On
the night of July 7th, the whole Union force in pursuit, which consisted
of troops under General Hobson, artillery and cavalry under
Brigadier-General Shackelford, Colonel Wolford and his brigade, all
under command of General Hobson (who had received orders to that effect
from General Burnside), had reached a point within nine miles of
Brandenburg; and on the next day they reached the river just as the last
boat had crossed with the enemy. The rebels, still marching onwards,
reached Corrydon in Indiana, on the 8th, where considerable resistance
was made to them by the inhabitants. From Corrydon Morgan marched his
men to Salem, where they took prisoners a force of three hundred and
fifty men who had fallen back before the rebels from Palmyra;
subsequently these prisoners were paroled. At Salem, the depot of the
Louisville and Chicago railroad was burned, and General Morgan had
issued orders to burn all the mills and factories in the town, but these
were spared from destruction on the payment of one thousand dollars for
each of them. Much other damage was done in breaking, destroying and
burning; and every good horse in the town was taken out, and
appropriated to the use of the guerrilla invaders.

From Salem they went to Canton, where they took over one hundred horses;
at this place General Morgan’s right column entered the town by way of
Harristown, and his whole force was joined together, and marched in the
direction of Vienna in Scott county, which they reached at two o’clock
on the morning of the next day. There much public property was burned;
but private property was respected. The force of the guerrilla General
was again divided into two columns, one of which was sent off in the
direction of Madison, while the other under General Morgan marched in a
northerly direction, and reached Old Vernon in Jennings county on the
11th of July. A surrender of the place was demanded by General Morgan;
and on the refusal of it, the town was threatened, and half an hour
allowed for the women and children to leave the place; but when, at the
end of that time, the Union forces went out to meet the rebels they
found that they were gone. The Unionists pursued, and many of Morgan’s
band were captured. The rebels moved southward, tearing up the tracks of
the Madison and Indianapolis railroads on their way, and cutting the
telegraph wires. Changing their course to the eastward, they reached
Versailles on the 12th; they then divided into several parties, and
advanced in various directions. On Sunday night a large body proceeded
to Harrison; another party of them reached Harrison on Monday. As they
proceeded, on all sides, they helped themselves to the best horses in
the towns they passed through, and leaving their own disabled animals
behind, continued on their way. On the morning of the 14th they reached
Miamiville, having passed through Glendale, Springdale, Camp Monroe,
Sharon, Reading, and Montgomery.

At Miamiville a body of guerrillas crossed the Little Miami railroad,
and at a point known as Dangerous Crossing they placed some ties and
rails across the track near a declivity, so that when the morning train
came by the locomotive was thrown from the track, causing the death of
the fireman, and seriously injuring the engineer. The rebels then rushed
out from the woods in which they had been concealed and took prisoners a
number of Union recruits, amounting to two hundred. The prisoners were
paroled. Arrangements being now made by the National troops to cut off
the progress of the rebels by means of gunboats, General Morgan hastened
his movements, until having passed through Williamsburg, Brown county,
Sardinia, and Piketown, he reached Jackson on the evening of Thursday,
the 16th, where he remained until joined by his whole force. From
Jackson he started for the Ohio river.

During all this time the Union forces were in hot pursuit of the rebels,
but owing to all the best horses having been seized by Morgan he had
necessarily the advantage of his pursuers. So soon as it became evident
that Morgan was endeavoring to reach Gallipolis or Pomeroy on the Ohio,
the inhabitants began felling trees across the roads, and throwing in
his way every obstacle they could to interrupt and delay his progress.
Morgan’s men were much harassed in this way, and as in the course of
their raid they had lost many of their numbers by exhaustion and by
captivity the original force was greatly diminished. On Sunday, the
19th, the main body of Morgan’s guerrillas reached Buffington island,
which lies in the Ohio river, close to the Ohio shore, about thirty-five
miles above Pomeroy, and was chosen by the rebels as a place of crossing
into Virginia on account of the shoals between it and Blannerhasset’s
Island, twenty miles above. They had doubtless been well advised of the
movements of the Union forces sent from all points, to either head them
off or to keep them confined to the only route eastward for them, until
they reached the mountainous region and the eastern frontier. The
National forces were fully prepared and, indeed, expected a fight with
the rebels at this point; and it very shortly became manifest that a
severe battle was pending. On the evening of the 16th, General Judah in
command of a large Union force, started from Portsmouth, and it was even
then expected that an engagement would take place; for trustworthy
information had been received at the headquarters of Colonel P. Kinny,
commander of the post, during the afternoon, that the rebels were at
Miamiville, about eleven miles out, and as it was not the design to
either court or bring on an engagement, it being well known that the
rebels were scattered over fifty or sixty miles of country, the
necessary concentration which they must make was rather humored than
otherwise, so that the result might culminate in the complete capture or
destruction of the entire force.

General Judah kept as close as possible to the rebels, but between them
and the river, when the doing so was practicable, until Morgan reached
Jackson. Judah then pushed for Centreville, thinking that the enemy
would take that route for the river; but he avoided it, and went through
Winchester and Vinton toward Pomeroy, and thence north of that to the
scene of action.

So soon as it had been definitely ascertained that Morgan was pushing
eastward, the Union gunboats, Moose, Reindeer, Springfield, Naumkeag and
Victory, under command of Lieutenant-Commander Le Roy Fitch, were
prepared to do service in the coming engagement. These boats had been
patroling the river from an accessible point below Ripsey to Portsmouth,
but as soon as they were required upon the scene of action the Moose,
towed by the Imperial, started up the stream, and was followed at
regular distances by the rest of the boats. The Moose made the foot of
Buffington Island on Saturday night, and remained until next morning,
without changing position, on account of a dense fog.

The rebel force upon the opposite side of the shore took position under
cover of artillery, in an extensive corn and wheat field, skirted by
hills and woods on its north and east sides.

The rebels had their artillery placed on the highest elevation on the
east and completely commanded the Pomeroy road, over which General
Judah’s force came filing along unaware of the close proximity of the
enemy. It should be noted here that the old stage road to Pomeroy, over
which Morgan came, and the lower road traveled by Judah meet in an acute
angle three-quarters of a mile from the battle-field. General Judah’s
column came along the lower road within range at six o’clock, after
marching all night, having started from Pomeroy, and not being as fresh,
by five or six hours’ rest, as the enemy.

The rebels met the National troops in solid column, and moved in
battalions, and at the first fire repulsed the advance, which was too
far ahead to be assisted by the Union artillery.

Although the rebels had here their best opportunity, they did not follow
it up; and the Union troops having fallen back to bring up their
artillery, the fighting continued in a desultory manner until General
Judah got his artillery into position and drew the lines of his army
completely around the enemy. His troops then made a furious onset upon
the rebels, and drove them back over the field to the shelter of the
woods beyond. By a fortunate circumstance Commodore Fitch learned the
exact position of the enemy, and was enabled so to direct his guns as to
shower shell into the midst of their ranks, and render very signal
service to the Union troops on the field.

Unfortunately the dense fog which prevailed, prevented Colonel Fitch
doing as great execution in the rebel works as he desired, but his shots
from the larboard and forward guns were effective, and a quick
scattering took place. The Moose opened at seven o’clock, and as the
rebels were driven she kept steadily moving up the stream, throwing
shell and shrapnel over the heads of the Union soldiers into the ranks
of the enemy.

It was soon plainly perceived that Morgan’s men were being pressed hard
in all directions, and were evidently in dread of total discomfiture. An
attempt to cross into Virginia was made by a simultaneous rush toward
the river, the rebels throwing away arms and even clothing in their fear
and consternation at finding themselves hemmed in by the Union forces.

The point chosen to effect the crossing was one mile and a half above
the head of Buffington Island, and the movement would undoubtedly have
been attended with considerable success, but for the presence and
performance of the gunboats. The crossing was covered by a 20-pounder
Parrott and a 12-pounder howitzer, dragged into position by the rebels
in their hasty retreat, but before the guns could be loaded and sighted,
the bow guns of the Moose opened on the rebel guns and drove the gunners
away, after which the pieces were captured. Some twenty or thirty men
only succeeded in crossing into Virginia at this point. Several were
killed in the water, and many returned to the shore.

While this was transpiring on the river, the roar of battle was still
raging on the shore and back in the country. Basil Duke, under whose
generalship the fight was conducted, was evidently getting the worst of
it, and his wearied band of horse-thieves, raiders, and nondescripts,
began to bethink them only of escape. Many threw down their arms, were
taken prisoners, and sent to the rear. Others sought the shelter of
trees, or ran wildly from one point to another, and thus exposed
themselves far more to the deadly chances of the field than if they had
displayed courage, and stood up to the fight.

A running fight next ensued, as the main force of the enemy retreated up
stream toward a point on the Ohio shore opposite Belleville, Va. The
retreat was made as rapidly as possible, but considerable confusion was
apparent. The gunboat kept almost ahead of the retreating column, and
when practicable, threw shell over the river bank toward it.

The rebels next attempted to cross at Belleville; but the Moose, which
had reached that point, fired upon the first party which tried to land.
They then pushed further along the shore, and made an effort to cross at
Hawkinsport, but were again foiled in their attempt by the gunboat.

While the Moose was winning her laurels, the other boats of the fleet
were not failing to enact their regularly assigned part of the
programme, which was to guard the fords below the island, and prevent
any roaming squads of the rebels crossing to the much-wished-for
Virginia shore.

It is said that some of Morgan’s men sang, “Oh! carry me back to Ole
Virginny,” with a pathos and sincerity of tone quite suggestive, not, to
say touching, and it certainly cannot be denied that Captain Fitch “went
for them” with a degree of alacrity which proved his entire willingness
to assist them as far as he could.

The engagement was kept up pretty briskly, and the rebels, as a body,
effectually prevented from crossing into Virginia; the entire force was
most gallantly fought, defeated, and utterly routed. A large number of
the rebels were captured, with all of their arms, guns, and
accoutrements; and a great many of their horses, and the plunder they
had carried away from the towns they passed through. Over one thousand
and seven hundred of the guerrilla band was computed to have fallen into
the hands of the Union soldiers; and they admitted a loss of two hundred
killed and wounded on the field. The Union loss was not more than one
fourth of that number. The chief source of regret to the National troops
was, of course, that the guerrilla general had effected his escape: but
they had one and all fully determined that he should not be allowed to
roam at large for any length of time, nor have any opportunity of
collecting together another band from the remnants of his scattered
army. Accordingly, the pursuit was kept up vigorously, until on the 26th
of July, the daring guerrilla leader was made prisoner near New Lisbon,
where, with a small remnant of his men, he had tried to cross the river.
The event was announced in the following way by General Shackelford, in
a dispatch sent to General Burnside:

“By the blessing of Almighty God, I have succeeded in capturing General
John H. Morgan, Colonel Clicke, and the remainder of the command,
amounting to about four hundred prisoners.”




                   THE DRAFT RIOTS IN NEW YORK CITY.
                           JULY 13–15, 1863.


Upon the 15th day of June, President Lincoln issued a proclamation
calling for a draft of three hundred thousand men to fill the ranks of
the Union army. The proclamation was received with murmurs of discontent
from large masses of the populace in every city of the North; and the
murmurs proved to be only the foreshadowings of very serious
disturbances in New York, Boston, Brooklyn, Philadelphia, Troy, Buffalo,
and in short, every city of importance. In New York, the draft commenced
on Saturday, July 11th. It had previously been announced through the
press, that on this day the ballots for one district would be publicly
counted at the corner of Forty-sixth street and Third avenue, and that
immediately afterward the wheel would be turned, and the draft begin.

Quite a large crowd was assembled at an early hour at the office of the
Provost-Marshal of the Ninth Congressional District; and at about nine
o’clock Assistant Provost-Marshal Charles E. Jenkins stepped upon the
table and read out his orders in relation to the draft, and the manner
in which it was to be conducted. Upon the table was a large wheel,
containing the ballots, on which were inscribed the names of all those
who had been enrolled; one of the enrolling clerks, having been
blindfolded, then proceeded to make the drawings of the names. The
business began and proceeded pleasantly, and with no demonstrations even
of ill-humor; and at the close of the day, there was no cause for
apprehending a disturbance growing out of the draft. But so severe were
the apprehensions of many of the working classes, lest they should be
forced from their homes, that secret associations had been formed to
resist the draft, even at the cost of bloodshed. The next day being
Sunday, these parties took occasion to meet, and to make resolutions to
resist upon Monday, to the utmost extremity. Accordingly, upon the
morning of the 13th, a very large crowd had gathered about the corner of
Forty-sixth street and Third avenue, and for a short time the business
of the day proceeded quietly, and without any sign of disturbance; from
seventy-five to one hundred names had been drawn from the wheel and
announced, when suddenly the report of a pistol was heard in the street.

This seemed to be the signal for an attack upon the office, for almost
upon the instant a perfect shower of brickbats, paving stones, and other
missiles, were hurled from the street into the building, a proceeding
which took everybody by surprise. Following the shower of stones came an
immense crowd, who poured into the office, carrying everything before
them. The wheel containing the remaining ballots of the Twenty-second
Ward was carried by two of the clerks to the top story of the house, and
placed in a room, the inmates of which refused to have it there, when it
was placed in the hall. The Provost-Marshal, Commissioner, Surgeon,
engrossing clerks, with the members of the press, effected their escape,
by a back door. Captain Jenkins clambering a fence, and secreting
himself in the next house until a favorable moment arrived, when he made
his way home.

One of the clerks who endeavored to save some of the papers, was seized
by the crowd, the papers taken from him by force, and torn in pieces.
The mob now had possession of the building. In a few moments afterward,
a man appeared with a can of turpentine, which he poured on the floor of
the office, and, setting fire to it, the room was soon in a blaze. All
this time the mob were breaking up the pavement and assaulting the
police and men attached to the office with stones.

The fire which had been kindled in the back office, spread rapidly to
the upper part of the house, the flames in a little time communicating
to the three houses on the north side, which were of equal size with the
one occupied by the Provost-Marshal.

Around the bell-tower in Fifty-first street, the mob had sent their
friends to stop the bell from ringing. When engine Number Thirty-three,
and Hose Fifty-three were coming down Third avenue, they were cheered by
the mob, but not allowed to work.

The corner building having been nearly destroyed, one of the engineers
now mounted the engine and appealed to the crowd for permission to throw
water upon the fire, telling them that they had accomplished their
purpose in burning the Marshal’s office.

About one o’clock Chief-Engineer Decker arrived at the scene of
conflagration, and seeing how matters stood, he ordered the firemen to
go to work and extinguish the flames, and thus prevented the
conflagration from extending to the neighboring buildings.

But a great deal of damage had already been done; and not less than six
families were turned houseless into the streets.

Shortly after eleven o’clock a detachment of the Provost Guard,
numbering fifteen and a half files, belonging to the Invalid Corps, left
the Park Barracks and reached the ground about noon. Upon reaching
Thirty-fourth street, the mob began to surround them, hooting, yelling,
and groaning. The guard formed in line between Forty-fourth and
Forty-fifth streets, but were so closely pressed upon all sides, that
they were unable to “order arms.” The mob now commenced pushing and
jolting the soldiers, and throwing stones at them, when Lieutenant Reed,
who was in command of the guard, ordered his men to load, and
immediately after gave the order to “fire.” The soldiers poured a blank
volley into the crowd, and no one was hurt. The crowd, who had retreated
a short distance when the firing occurred, quickly rallied, and closing
upon the guard, wrested arms from their hands, and discharged several of
the pieces which had been reloaded. The soldiers, thus attacked,
retreated quickly, but were pursued by the infuriated throng.

The pursuit was kept up as far as Twentieth street, when it was
abandoned, and a majority of the men escaped. One of the soldiers was
pursued up Forty-first street to First avenue, where a crowd of some
twenty men surrounded him, knocked him down, and beat him until he was
insensible. A number of women joined in, and one of them endeavored to
stab him with a bayonet, but another woman took the weapon out of her
hand, and carried it off. The soldier was left dead on the walk.

It was impossible to tell whence the first steps of this movement
proceeded; for in twenty or thirty different places men ceased labor as
if at some mysterious signal, and poured pell-mell into the streets to
join the rioters.

The streets from Forty-first to Sixty-third and the avenues were full of
knots and throngs of laboring men, some counseling violence at once,
others discussing their power to effect anything, many drowning bitter
judgment in frequent potations of ardent spirits.

The telegraph poles were cut down, and thrown across the track of the
street cars; which were not allowed to run on the Third and Fourth
avenue railroads.

The rioters were composed of the employees of the several railroad
companies; the employees of Brown’s iron factory, in Sixty-first street;
Taylor’s factory, in Forty-first street; Cummins’, street contractor,
and numerous manufactories in the upper part of the city. The crowd
marched through many of the streets in the upper part of the city,
compelling laborers in every quarter to knock off work and fall in. A
few demurred, but were brought into the ranks by furious threats. Thus
compelling all whom it met to swell its ranks the crowd soon reached
vast proportions, every moment increasing in boldness. Well dressed men
appeared to be specially obnoxious to it. The general cry was, “Down
with the rich men.” Three gentlemen talking together on Lexington avenue
were set upon and knocked down, narrowly escaping with their lives.

One of the Guard endeavored to make his escape by climbing the rocks
near Forty-second street. No sooner, however, was his intention
discovered, than another portion of the rioters seized him, and taking
him to the top of the rock stripped his uniform off him, and after
beating him almost to a jelly, threw him over a precipice some twenty
feet high on the hard rocks beneath. Not contented with this, stones and
dirt were thrown at him as he lay helpless until he was half buried.

[Illustration: DRAFT RIOTS AT NEW YORK CITY—ANDREWS LEADING THE
RIOTERS.]

Soon after the defeat of the soldiers a strong squad of police made
their appearance in line of battle. As soon as the mob caught sight of
them they fired a volley of stones, knocking down two of the officers.
The police drew their clubs and revolvers, but after a contest of a few
minutes they were also forced to retreat, which they did in good order
until near Fortieth street, when one of them discharged his revolver
four times into the midst of the throng, shooting a horse that was
attached to a wagon standing on the corner. A rush was made at once for
the officer, who immediately retreated into a store near by, the people
of which at once barred the door and endeavored to give him protection.
The crowd, however, went to the back of the house, tore down the fence,
and rushed into the building, seized the policeman, knocked him down,
and beat him in a fearful manner.

Police Superintendent Kennedy, through in citizen’s dress, was observed
by the mob, who made a rush at him and knocked him headlong into the
gutter, when several of the rioters kicked him and beat him dreadfully
about the head, face, and body. Some one of his friends who chanced to
be near by, recognizing Mr. Kennedy, went to his assistance and
succeeded in rescuing him. Mr. Kennedy was taken into a store and thence
removed to his residence in a carriage. His injuries, though severe, did
not prove fatal, as was at first feared by his friends.

Growing more violent every instant the mob continued to hoot and yell
through the streets; stopping before some of the handsomest dwellings
they passed, attacking them with violence, and breaking in the doors and
windows; then entering they pillaged and destroyed at will. Those who
were disposed to theft carried away every available article they could
lay hands upon, and threw into the streets everything they could not
conveniently carry with them—as handsome, marble-topped furniture,
sofas, arm-chairs, pier-glasses, pictures, &c. The chief objects of
their rage were the unfortunate negro population, and after them all who
sought in any way to protect them, or to quell the riot.

The crowd divided into gangs, with their leaders bearing pieces of board
for banners on which were written “Independent,” “No Draft,” &c., and it
was unsafe to express a single word in dissent from the proceeding.
Hundreds of mere boys, from fifteen to eighteen years of age, were armed
with clubs, or pickets, and marching in the ranks.

The mob now began firing all the buildings they had sacked; and in a
dozen streets at once the incendiary flames shot up, and seemed to
threaten a general conflagration. The fire engines were brought out: but
they were set upon by the frantic, yelling mob, which was rapidly
swelling to dangerous proportions, and prevented from being set to work.

About 2 o’clock P. M. a gentleman connected with the Press, while
standing on the corner of Forty-sixth street and Third avenue, was
attacked by the crowd, crying out, “here’s a d—d Abolitionist; let’s
hang him.” He was seized by the hair and dragged toward an awning post,
but fortunately something else diverting the attention of the crowd, he
escaped up Third avenue—but only for a short time, for a blow with a
paving stone on the back of the head and another one in the face,
stunned him so that he lost all consciousness, and while in this state,
he was robbed of his gold watch and chain, diamond breast-pin and
thirty-three dollars in money.

At three o’clock a procession of about five thousand, people marched up
First avenue, all armed with bars, pistols, &c., threatening vengeance
on all persons connected with the draft. They halted in front of the
Eighteenth ward Station-House in Twenty-second street, yelling in a
demoniacal manner.

About four o’clock P. M. the rioters, perfectly frenzied with liquor,
roamed about in every direction attacking people miscellaneously, and
burning every building in which they saw a policeman take refuge.

The police suffered severely in these attacks of the first day,
seventeen of them having been badly wounded; many of them so much
injured that they were carried to hospitals.

The city was particularly unsuited to resist a riot at the time when the
ringleaders of this one chose to begin it, as nearly every regiment in
New York had been sent to the defence of Pennsylvania. The militia,
however, were called out, by order of General Wool.

The First and Third cavalry, which had been ordered to parade at the
funeral of Colonel Zook, were sent forthwith to the Seventh avenue
arsenal.

Lieutenant-Colonel Missing, with a portion of his force, was ordered to
the upper arsenal.

One hundred citizens of the Sixth ward reported themselves in readiness
to General Sandford, for such duty as he might assign them to, and were
sent by him to the arsenal in White street.

The authorities at the Brooklyn Navy Yard were notified of the
disturbances, and a large force of United States Marines, besides a
considerable number of soldiers of the regular army, were ordered into
instant service.

General Sandford issued the following order, calling a meeting at the
Seventh regiment armory, at eight o’clock in the evening of the 13th, to
concert measures for the protection of the city:


                 HEADQUARTERS, FIRST DIVISION N. Y. S. M., }
                             NEW YORK, July 13, 1863.                  }

  The ex-officers of this division, and of the United States Volunteers
  now in this city, who are disposed to assist in preserving the peace
  of the city, are requested to meet at the Seventh regiment
  drill-rooms, over Tompkins Market, this evening at eight o’clock.

                                              CHARLES W. SANDFORD,
                                                          Major-General.


In answer to the call of General Sandford, the ex-officers then in the
city met at the Seventh regiment armory on the same evening, and took
steps toward the formation of one or more regiments to assist in
protecting New York.

One of the greatest outrages perpetrated during the four days’ riot, was
the burning of


                       THE COLORED ORPHAN ASYLUM.

This building was fired about five o’clock in the afternoon. The
infuriated mob, eager for any violence, were turned that way by the
simple suggestion that it was full of colored children. They clamored
around the house like demons, filling the air with yells. A few
policemen, who attempted to make a stand, were instantly
overpowered—several being severely or fatally injured. While this was
going on, a few of the less evil disposed gave notice to the inmates to
quit the building.

The sight of the helpless creatures stayed for a moment, even the
insensate mob; but the orphans were no sooner out, than the work of
demolition commenced. First the main building was gutted, and then set
on fire. While it was burning, the large wing adjoining—used as a
dormitory—was stripped, inside and out. Several hundred iron bedsteads
were carried off—such an exodus of this article was probably never
witnessed before. They radiated in every direction for half a mile.

Carpets were dragged away at length; desks, stools, chairs, tables,
books of all kinds—everything moveable—was carried off. Even the caps
and bonnets of the poor children were stolen. While the rioters stripped
the building of its furniture, their wives and children, and hundreds
who were too cowardly to assist the work of demolition, carried it off.
The wing, while burning, swarmed with rioters, who seemed endowed with a
demoniacal energy to rend in pieces, rob and destroy.

Shutters and doors were torn off and tumbled into the streets. These
were seized and torn to pieces almost before they touched the ground,
and, with everything else, carried off with surprising celerity. Several
persons were injured, and one killed, by the falling of shutters and
furniture from the windows. What was very marked as the destruction
proceeded, was the absence of excitement. Things were done as coolly by
the rioters, as if they were saving instead of destroying property.

In the early part of the day the building occupied by the
Provost-Marshal, corner of Twenty-eighth street and Broadway, was
attacked by a mob, fired, and together with the adjoining buildings,
laid in ashes.

Mr. John Decker, Chief-engineer of the Fire Department, now made an
effort to stay the devouring flames, by addressing himself to the insane
mob, and counselling them, as a matter of common sense, to allow the
engines to work, and so save the property of those who were entirely
innocent of bringing on the draft. At first there seemed a disposition
to listen to him, and the engines were got ready, but before they could
be set to work, the largest portion of the mob, which had gone tearing
down Broadway, learning the firemen’s intentions, came rushing
back—howling, cursing, swearing, and vowing vengeance.

In less than a minute they cleared the streets, drove the firemen from
their engines, stoned the police from the sidewalks, and again took
possession of the engines, hose-carriages, etc., which, however, they
did not damage.

Half an hour later, Chief Decker got his engines at work, and succeeded
in eventually saving a part of the building on the corner of
Forty-seventh street, the whole of the rest of the block having been
destroyed.

About eight o’clock in the evening, the frenzied rioters having reached
Printing House Square, commenced an attack on the Tribune office,
hurling bricks and stones into its windows, and utterly destroying them.
An entrance to the counting-room was next effected, and an attempt made
to set the building on fire. At this instant a strong police force came
upon the full run across the Park, scattering the rioters. A heavy rain
soon set in, and the mob dispersed in every direction; though a great
deal of petty mischief continued to be done during the night by those
who did not seek their homes, or had none to seek. Whole blocks of
buildings were burned during this one day’s riot; and the damage to
government property alone was estimated at two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars.


                            THE SECOND DAY.

At an early hour on Tuesday morning, after a night of sleepless anxiety
to the inhabitants of the city, demonstrations of violence began, and
the outrages of the previous day were renewed. At about half-past eight
o’clock, it was reported at the Police Headquarters that a large body of
rioters were gathering along the Second avenue, threatening every house
along the thoroughfare. A police force of three hundred men was
immediately detailed under Inspector Carpenter, for the purpose of
breaking up the crowd; finding the railroad track obstructed, they left
the street cars, and marched in solid column toward Second avenue, where
the mob received them with ominous silence.

When the whole force had reached the block between Thirty-fourth and
Thirty fifth streets, they were closed in upon by the mob, and assailed
by a thick shower of bricks and stones, which rained from the houses and
windows in the neighborhood. For some moments the men wavered, and the
peril was imminent, when the reassuring voices of the officers in
command recalled them, and they returned the shower of stones with a
volley of bullets from their revolvers. The order was then given to
charge, and a most furious onset was made upon the rioters—the police
driving them into the houses, chasing them all over the buildings and
again into the street, where they were scattered by a most vigorous
application of clubs. All the side streets were then cleared, and the
police marched over the battle-ground victorious. The men behaved
bravely, hunting every rioter, and clubbing him if he made any
resistance.

The police then marched through the Avenue, and were met by a detachment
of the Eleventh regiment of the N. Y. S. V., headed by Colonel O’Brien
and a couple of field-pieces, under command of Lieutenant Eagleson. The
forces united, and countermarched down the avenue. The mob had in the
mean time rallied, when the military formed a line of battle, and fired
upon the crowd. Bullets whistled through the air in every direction,
shattering shutters and doors.

Many of the rioters fell, and some were killed; two children were killed
also, and a woman wounded. At this point no further hostile
demonstrations occurred on the part of the mob; and the police and
military force marched to the Central office. About noon, however, the
riot was resumed on Second avenue. About five hundred of the mob entered
the Union Steam works at the corner of Twenty-second street and Second
avenue, and commenced carrying away the muskets which had been deposited
there the day previous, the arms having been taken from Mr. Opdyke’s
armory in Second avenue before the building was fired by the mob.

During the morning all the factories and shops in the neighborhood were
visited, and threats made to burn each establishment to the ground
unless it was closed. As a consequence, every factory for a mile around
the Union Steam Works was shut up, and the streets swarmed with
infuriated men.

The mob had taken possession of the latter building for the purpose of
using it as a fortification from which to resist the police.

About two o’clock, a force of two hundred police, under command of
Inspector Dilks, arrived on the ground. Some of the rioters, becoming
alarmed at being thus caged, endeavored to escape, but were too late,
for upon the moment Inspector Dilks gave the order to charge. In an
instant four of the rioters were stretched upon the pavement. The men,
with all the pluck of veterans, rushed into the building upon the mob,
and after a desperate fight of a few moments, during which some of the
policemen as well as the rioters, were injured, succeeded in conquering
the crowd, causing them to leap from the windows, and rush to every
other avenue of escape.

A large number of women at this moment attacked the police, cursing them
in a fearful manner, and in some instances stoning them.

Having cleared the building of the rioters, the police came into the
street again, each man holding a musket, and charged upon the mob, which
scattered in every direction.

At this same place the mob subsequently augmented so greatly that they
stormed the place and notwithstanding the resistance of the small force
of police left for protection, took possession of it. Reinforcements
speedily arrived, and again the building was emptied of the mob; the
police then marched through the district, the military bringing up in
the rear; and again the crowd rallied, following them, and sent into
their ranks a shower of every sort of missile they could lay hands upon.
Quick as thought Captain Franklin gave the order “’bout face,” which
brought the soldiers face to face with the crowd. In an instant
thereafter the order to “fire” was given, and a volley was poured into
the mob. Fifteen were reported killed and wounded. A charge was made
with fixed bayonets, when the mob broke and scattered like sheep. The
force then returned to their rendezvous with about two hundred carbines
which they had captured.

The crowd was being constantly reinforced as the day wore on. A number
of gentlemen attacked one gang of the ruffians, and succeeded in
capturing two of them. About five o’clock a large squad of rioters
attacked a building on Twenty-ninth street, because it was alleged that
“Horace Greeley lived there.” While engaged in the destruction of the
house and its contents a detail of about fifty soldiers and thirty
policemen appeared on the ground and marched through the street clearing
it of all obstructions.

A short time afterwards, in another portion of the street a gang of
rioters raised a cry against a gentleman passing by “that he was a
Tribune reporter,” and instantly he was set upon by the infuriated mob,
who pursued, knocked him down, and beat and kicked him about the body,
face and head in such a way as to leave him nearly dead. A gentleman
present interfered and succeeded in saving the young man’s life. He was
taken to his residence near, and it was found on examination that he had
received no mortal wound.

This same mob while in the vicinity set upon a man against whom they had
conceived some fancied antipathy, and beat him to death.

The riot was now increasing in all parts of the city notwithstanding the
vigorous measures adopted for quelling it. An attack was made upon the
residence of Mayor Opdyke by a comparatively small body of men and a
party of boys, who threw stones and brickbats at the windows. Not more
than half of the rioters, however, entered the building, their object
evidently being plunder. About twenty gentlemen living in the
neighborhood, having anticipated the attack, assembled at a given place,
and, with such weapons as were at hand, rushed upon the crowd and drove
them from the door. They then entered the Mayor’s house and speedily
expelled the rioters. Meantime the mob was increasing and the cry was
“Burn the building!” The front steps were then occupied by the small
party of gentlemen whose determined looks the crowd did not seem to
relish.

Happily, a body of police appeared, and charging upon the rioters put
them to flight. The policemen were relieved by a detachment of two
hundred soldiers.

One of the most atrocious and bloodthirsty acts of the second day’s riot
was the murder of Colonel O’Brien, who had command of a portion of the
military troops. The mob having been in great measure dispersed, a
temporary quiet ensued toward evening, and Colonel O’Brien took
advantage of this circumstance to return to his residence, and remove
his family to a place of safety, fearing the violence of the rioters
against them, for he had heard many threats to that effect. He alighted
from his carriage in Thirty-fifth street, and had just entered his house
when a part of the mob, who had apparently been watching for him, made
their appearance, and pouncing upon him dragged him into the yard, where
they beat and kicked him in the most brutal manner.

Several women who were among the crowd also kicked the unfortunate man.
Yelling like so many devils, three or four men seized the Colonel by his
hair, and dragged him into the street, where they again kicked and beat
him.

A man keeping a drug store on the corner, carried out a glass of water
to give the Colonel, whereupon the mob turned about and completely
gutted his store.

After beating Colonel O’Brien until he was insensible, they again
dragged him into the yard and threw him into a corner, where every now
and then they visited him and renewed their attack upon him.

Several persons witnessed this outrage from their near windows, and
protested against it, when the mob cried out “kill them too, don’t let’s
have any witnesses.” The ringleaders notified the neighbors that they
intended burning the block at night, and were going to burn the body of
the Colonel.

The brutal murderers watched over his body until life was extinct,
refusing to allow any one to approach to give him the slightest
assistance. Two Roman Catholic priests finally came up and conveyed his
body in a hand-cart to the Bellevue Hospital Dead-House. He was terribly
mangled, and his body was almost naked and covered with gore.

Among the acts of the rioters during Tuesday, were the following: The
main track of the Hudson River railroad from Fifty-ninth to Fifty-third
streets was torn up by the insurgents about ten o’clock in the morning,
the Albany express train which left at that hour being compelled to back
out of town on one of the turn outs. The crowd was armed with
cart-rungs, small clubs, and other weapons. After damaging the railroad
they proceeded down the avenue, amusing themselves by applying the torch
to the house of any person whom they considered opposed to them.

The Western Hotel, the Western Drove-Yards, and other buildings, were in
this manner destroyed.

At the corner of Twenty-sixth street and Eleventh avenue, the Hudson
River cars were stopped and threatened with destruction, but were
eventually allowed to proceed on their way.

The residence of Colonel Nugent, Eighty-sixth street, was utterly
destroyed; and an adjoining building was burned to the ground. A large
factory in Harlem was fired, and completely consumed. Post-Master
Wakeman’s residence in Yorkville was pillaged of everything it
contained, and then reduced to ashes; an attack was made on the clothing
store of Mr. Brooks, Catherine street, the rioters carrying away
articles of clothing of great value. The robbery was interrupted, and
the probable subsequent destruction of the building prevented, by the
arrival of a police force, who fell upon the mob with great fierceness,
capturing many, and scattering the remainder in confusion. Thieves,
garroters, rowdies and ruffians of all descriptions took this
opportunity of joining the mob and robbing and plundering at their
pleasure. Many of the rioters arrested by the police were recognized as
old offenders.

Another assault upon the Tribune Office was attempted, but did not
amount to anything. A large crowd was collected in the Park, and around
the City Hall. Governor Seymour made his appearance upon the front steps
of the building, and addressed the crowd in the following manner:

“MY FRIENDS: I have come down here from the quiet of the country to see
what was the difficulty, to learn what all this trouble was concerning
the Draft. Let me assure you that I am your friend. [Uproarious
cheering] You have been my friends—[cries of “Yes,” “Yes,” “That’s
so”—“We are and will be again”]—and now I assure you, my
fellow-citizens, that, I am here to show you a test of my friendship.
[Cheers.] I wish to inform you that I have sent my Adjutant-General to
Washington to confer with the authorities there, and to have this Draft
suspended and stopped. [Vociferous cheers.] I now ask you as good
citizens to wait for his return, and I assure you that I will do all
that I can to see that there is no inequality, and no wrong done to any
one. I wish you to take good care of all property as good citizens, and
see that every person is safe. The safe keeping of property and persons
rests with you, and I charge you to disturb neither. It is your duty to
maintain the good order of the city, and I know you will do it. I wish
you now to separate as good citizens, and you can assemble again
whenever you wish to do so. I ask you to leave all to me now, and I will
see to your rights. Wait until my adjutant returns from Washington, and
you shall be satisfied. Listen to me, and see that no harm is done to
either persons or property, but retire peaceably.” [Cheers.] Some of the
crowd here shouted, “Send away those bayonets,” referring to a company
of soldiers who were drawn up in front of the City Hall, but the
Governor declined to interfere with the military, and bowing to the
crowd, retired.

A person named Andrews, formerly of Virginia, then introduced himself
and asked the crowd to disperse, and await the reply from Washington,
which he was certain would come by telegraph this afternoon, and which
he knew would be, that no draft would take place. [Cries of “Send these
soldiers away, then we’ll go.”] Upon the suggestion of some person, Mr.
Perrin told the crowd that the soldiers present were subject to the
command of Governor Seymour, and could not go unless he ordered them
away. The speaker then retired, as did also the crowd, after many
mutterings against the troops.

Those of the mob who had gathered solely with a view to oppose the
draft, gradually dispersed; but the crowd had attracted to itself too
many who were only anxious to pillage and destroy, to be so readily
broken up; and the rioters only left the City Hall to assemble
elsewhere. Again night, but not quiet, descended upon the scene. From
end to end of the city the feeling of anxious fear was increased rather
than diminished. Violence, theft and bloodshed reigned in all
directions, and the sky was lurid with the lights of the still burning
buildings.


                             THE THIRD DAY.

The Seventh regiment had been sent for, and were hourly expected on this
day, the 15th; but the expected arrival of a body of military fresh from
the seat of war did not, apparently, in the least intimidate the
rioters, who went about threatening the houses, property, and lives of
all who came under their displeasure, and boasting that they were so
well organized as to fear nothing. One of the first acts of the rioters
upon this day was a cowardly and brutal outrage upon an unfortunate
negro, whom it was alleged had shot one of their number in self-defence.
Immediately a crowd of two or three hundred rioters surrounded the
unfortunate wretch, and seized him as he was endeavoring to enter his
house. Dragging him into the middle of the street, they jumped upon him
and pounded him with their fists and with stones, until life was
extinct. “Hang him”—“hang him,” was the cry, and procuring a piece of
clothes line, the crowd suspended the lifeless body from the limb of a
tree, where he remained hanging several hours. This fiendish act
accomplished, the insurgents cried, “burn his house,” when a rush was
made upon the building, and the door burst open. After emptying it they
set fire to and destroyed it. The firemen arriving upon the ground in
response to the alarm, saved the adjoining property from injury.

Meantime a woman told the mob that a row of tenement houses in the rear
were occupied by colored people, when the ringleader, armed with a
cudgel, led to the place in search of the inmates, but they had effected
their escape, having been apprised of their danger by some friendly
neighbors at the commencement of the outbreak. Incensed at the escape of
their prey, the mob burned the buildings, and fled on the arrival of the
police. The body of the unfortunate negro was cut down, and removed to
the dead-house.

At a later hour, the mob, strongly reinforced, again appeared in the
neighborhood, when they were fired upon by a company of military who had
been ordered to the spot. Several of the rioters were killed, but their
names were never ascertained.

About half past two o’clock a large force of the mob stopped at a
lumber-yard on Fourteenth street, fired it, and burnt it to the ground,
causing the luckless owner a loss of ten thousand dollars. The rage of
the bloodthirsty rioters continued to expend itself upon the colored
population, and upon all who had the reputation of being abolitionists.
Many beautiful buildings were laid in ashes, for no other reason than
because some maliciously disposed person volunteered the information
that “an abolitionist lived in the pile somewhere.”

It was certain death not only to any negro to be seen upon the streets
but to any white person who expressed pity for the bad treatment to
which the poor wretches were subjected. The telegraph wires were cut in
many directions; and much inconvenience as well as a great deal of
damage caused thereby. All the principal hotels in the city were
organized for defence, and the male boarders armed themselves in case of
attack; while in private families there was an almost universal
compulsory fast, both because the markets were closed up, and because it
was dangerous to go into the streets even for the purpose of purchasing
the necessaries of life.

Nearly all day there were demonstrations by the rioters in Seventh
avenue, in the vicinity of the arsenal. Cannon had been placed so as to
command all the approaches to the arsenal, and a strong force of cavalry
was on the ground. These preparations had the effect of keeping the mob
at a respectful distance, but the spirit of turbulence manifested itself
occasionally, and was often met by a terrible retribution from the
military. Cannon were held in readiness, and the conflicts during the
day, resulted in the killing and wounding of between forty and fifty
men, women, and children. Toward night the mob found a negro man, and,
having expended their rage by nearly killing him, they then hung him to
a lamp post at the corner of Twenty-eighth street and Seventh avenue.

An attack upon the gas-house was made, but before it resulted in
anything disastrous, a detachment of infantry came up, and immediately
put the rioters to flight. To protect the works from any further damage
the military kept guard upon them all night.

Late in the afternoon a consultation was held by Governor Seymour,
General Sandford, General Wool and General Brown on the propriety of
proclaiming martial law; but Governor Seymour was averse to such an
extreme measure, depending upon the military forces then in the city and
those expected to arrive to quell the disturbances.

In the course of the day the mob increased to the number of eight
hundred persons. A large body of them attacked a shoe store on Grand
street, and having appropriated every article of property it contained
they set the building on fire, and reduced it to ashes. The citizens of
the Tenth, Eleventh, Fifteenth, Seventeenth, and Nineteenth Wards having
organized themselves into Committees of Safety, patrolled the streets
carrying arms. Toward evening the Tenth, and Sixty-fifth regiments
returned to the city, and were loudly cheered as they walked up
Broadway. This somewhat sobered the rioters, but robbery and pillaging
continued during the succeeding night, although both the military and
police were on the alert. On this day the excitement had spread on the
one side of the city to Brooklyn; and on the other to Hoboken; fires
occurring in both cities ignited by the incendiaries, who profited by
their wicked acts. Boston, Troy, Buffalo, and very many other cities of
the North suffered by the riot during the fifteenth, and for several
days succeeding.


                            THE FOURTH DAY.

The morning of the fourth day of the riot opened under auspicious
circumstances. People awoke to find the cars and omnibuses running, and
they never were so glad to see them before. The railroads and stage
lines were assured ample protection by an order of Governor Seymour
requiring General Sandford to furnish the Police Commissioners such
force as they might require to protect their depots and stables.

The public confidence was still further increased by the arrival of the
Seventh, and Seventy-fourth Regiments, and the battery of the Eighth.

The Sixty-fifth, Colonel Burns, of Buffalo, was placed by Governor
Seymour under the orders of General Wool, and at an early hour three
companies of it were assigned to the sub-treasury building. The other
four companies were retained for street service at General Brown’s
headquarters.

The battery of the Eighth regiment, Captain Brown, which arrived with
the Sixty-fifth, was threatened by a mob at the Battery, but the two
negro servants accompanying it were firmly protected.

The expectation of the other regiments, five of New York and five of
Brooklyn, whose return Governor Seymour had requested, tended to
increase the feeling of safety which was growing with the citizens. A
Michigan regiment, whose term of service had nearly expired, was also
expected to return home by way of the metropolis.

The appropriation, moreover, of two million five hundred thousand
dollars by the Common Council to satisfy the three hundred dollar
exemption clause, withdrew most of those who feared the draft from the
mob; and few but the thieves were left.

About noon a large gang of rioters fired upon a company of soldiers from
a house on the Seventh avenue. The soldiers returned the fire, and
immediately ten or a dozen desperate fellows, armed with clubs and guns,
rushed out of the house, and pursued the soldiers, who wheeled about and
poured the contents of their muskets into them. In an incredibly short
space of time, the streets became thronged with rioters, who made the
most violent demonstrations against the soldiers, but were soon driven
from the vicinity. When the military were out of sight, the mob finished
sacking some houses they had broken into, and threatened to use the
torch forthwith for the balance of the block.

Very fortunately the mob was foiled in all its efforts to obtain
possession of the Arsenal, the lower floor of which was filled with
artillery and equipments, and the second floor with muskets, swords,
sabres, pistols, and all kinds of infantry and cavalry equipments. Had
the rioters gained possession of the building, there would have been no
lack of arms for any number they could have mustered. The third floor,
of the size of the entire building, is the drill-room, now used for
barracks and guard-house. In the centre and around the sides muskets
were stacked, and soldiers lying, with knapsacks under their heads,
asleep. It looked almost like a battle-field; coats, equipments, arms,
soldiers lying indiscriminately together. “Here,” said Major Kiernan, of
the Sixth Missouri, to a gentleman present, “you have a glimpse of war
as it is.”

The military being present in large force, the rioters became hourly
less demonstrative. Notwithstanding this, however, a great deal of
damage was done in various parts of the city. The most violent
demonstrations of the rioters were now subdued; and on the following day
business was resumed throughout the city, and all the stores which had
been obliged to be closed, were again opened. As the disturbance in New
York city subsided, the rioting in adjacent towns, and all other places
affected by it, gradually decreased; and quiet again succeeded the
short, but bloody “reign of terror.”




                   OPERATIONS IN TENNESSEE, IN 1863.


The headquarters of the Army of the Cumberland was established at
Murfreesboro’ on the fifth of January, 1863, the army itself occupying a
position in front of the town which was completely encircled by
extensive earthworks, constructed with the view of rendering it a depot
of supplies and the base of prospective operations. The rainy season set
in and a suspension of activity on the part of the Federals ensued, but
the cavalry of the enemy was as lively and ubiquitous as ever, and not
only often succeeded in capturing many men and wagons, but also in
burning a number of steamers on the Cumberland, with the view of cutting
off the communications of the Union army, and of stopping its supplies.

On the 31st, Brigadier-General Jefferson C. Davis with three brigades,
made a bold dash in the direction of Rover and Franklin. During an
absence of thirteen days the two brigades of cavalry he had with him
visited eight towns and secured one hundred and forty-one prisoners,
including two colonels and several other officers, without the loss of a
man.




                     BATTLE OF FORT DONELSON, TENN.


On the 3rd of February, 1863, Major-General Wheeler, Brigadier-General
Wharton and Colonel Forrest, with five thousand Confederates and twelve
cannon, marched on Fort Donelson. They were met half a mile from the
fort by a skirmishing party, under Captain McClanahan, sent out by
Colonel A. C. Harding, commanding the garrison, which consisted of nine
companies of the Eighty-third Illinois, one company of the Fifth Iowa
cavalry, and two sections of Flood’s battery, in all about six hundred
effective men. The battery consisted of four rifled brass pieces, in
addition to which there was one siege gun, a rifled thirty-two pounder,
in position. The skirmishers fell inward slowly, firing upon the enemy
as they retired, until they were called in. The Confederates now
displayed a white flag and demanded the surrender of the fort and
garrison. Colonel Harding replied that he “would fight while he had a
man left.” He had formed his line of battle, (in the shape of a
crescent,) one flank on the river and the other extending to a brick
building near the intrenchments; he had sent for gunboats, and was
content to abide the issue. The enemy completely encompassed the town;
and the fire of artillery opened on both sides. His men were all
mounted; and made charge after charge upon the gallant defenders, whose
Springfield rifles emptied scores of saddles at each assault. The rebel
General Wharton dismounted his men, gained the rear of the town, and
they then forced their way into it. Colonel Forrest, who had fired his
troops with daring emulation, led his brigade, in line more than a mile
long, to the attack. It was met by a perfect storm of lead. The troops
pressed on through the fatal hail, driving the Federals from their
rifle-pits and chasing them into the town, but here the pursuers were
greeted with a deadly shower that threatened them with annihilation, and
they wavered, turned and fled. But they were soon rallied, reformed, and
again urged into the mouth of destruction; and, in this spirit, was the
contest kept up from noon till half past seven o’clock, when another
flag of truce was sent in with a second demand for an unconditional
surrender.

Flood’s battery had lost forty-eight out of sixty-four horses; one
piece, had every gun dismounted, and had fired its last cartridge. The
rebels assured Colonel Harding that he had done all that could be
expected of a brave man, and that further resistance on his part would
only lead to a useless effusion of blood. The hero replied, “I have no
orders to surrender, I cannot think of such a thing—I’ll take the
consequences.”

The struggle was renewed. It appeared a hopeless one for the Unionists,
till a cheering sight appeared on the river. It was the sable Lexington,
followed by her consorts moving majestically into the rear of the
position. The gunboat, always the rebels’ terror, began to speak in her
tones of thunder.

The enemy had posted his main body in line of battle in the graveyard at
the westerly extremity of the town, with his left wing exposed to a
raking fire in a ravine which led down to the river; and the fire of the
gunboats Lexington, Fairplay, Brilliant, St. Clair, Robb and Silver
Lake, which fairly rocked the Post with the force of the concussion, did
frightful execution among the terror-stricken and fleeing masses of
rebels that filled the surrounding valleys and ravines.

In this gallant defence, the Federal loss was sixteen killed and sixty
wounded. The cavalry, which had been sent to reconnoitre four hours
before the commencement of the engagement, were all captured except
four, making the loss in prisoners about fifty. The rebels had fully one
hundred and fifty killed, four hundred wounded, and left one hundred and
fifty prisoners with the Unionists.




                      BATTLE NEAR FRANKLIN, TENN.
                             MARCH 5, 1863.


On the fourth of March, an expedition composed of the Thirty-third
Indiana, Twenty-second Wisconsin, Nineteenth Michigan, Eighty-fifth
Indiana, One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Ohio infantry, with detachments
of the Second Michigan, Ninth Pennsylvania, and Fourth Kentucky cavalry,
left Franklin, Tenn., under the command of Colonel John Coburn, to meet
a force which General Rosecrans was to send from Murfreesboro’ at a
point some twelve miles from Franklin. The column had proceeded about
three miles when it encountered the enemy, and a slight artillery
engagement ensued, in which he was defeated with the loss of ten killed,
left on the field. Here the train, which consisted of about one hundred
wagons, proving too cumbersome, was, with the exception of the
baggage-wagons, sent back, and the army went into camp. The next morning
information was brought by two negroes that the enemy under Colonel
Forrest was reinforced by Major-General Van Dorn, and now numbered ten
thousand men. The negroes were dispatched, under guard, to General
Gilbert to whom Colonel Colburn had already sent a letter informing him
of the probable number of the enemy and asking for reinforcements. “The
Colonel must be scared,” observed the General, as he wrote this laconic
order: “your force is sufficient, move forward.”

At eight o’clock A. M. the column resumed its march, throwing out
skirmishers; and when it had advanced about four miles, fire was opened
from a battery immediately in front. Colonel Colburn drew up his command
in line of battle, placed three pieces on its right and two on the left,
so that the battery might bear simultaneously on two points. Another of
the enemy’s batteries immediately revealed itself on the right, but no
force was visible. The Eighty-fifth and Thirty-third Indiana were
ordered to take it. They started down the hill, and were received with a
murderous volley from infantry behind a stone wall and around the depot,
where they disclosed overwhelming numbers. At the same moment another
rebel battery opened on the left. The two regiments were ordered to
retire. The Eighteenth Ohio battery on the left failed to stand the
scathing fire of the enemy’s guns, and being out of ammunition, had also
without orders moved down to the pike. The enemy now advanced on the
left in line of battle, and Colonel Colburn was leading the Thirty-third
and the Eighty-fifth Indiana into the fiery snare laid for them. The
Twenty-second Wisconsin and Nineteenth Michigan, on the summit of a
hill, held their positions against overwhelming odds. The section of the
battery on its right had also kept up a constant fire, but that on the
pike was retreating in double quick time, and was only too soon followed
by the other section, which had hitherto behaved so well.
Lieutenant-Colonel Bloodgood of the Twenty-second Wisconsin, seeing the
enemy closing round the hill to cut him off, gave the order to move the
regiment in that direction by the flank: one hundred and fifty obeyed
the command, and, with that number, he escaped. The cavalry had already
retired half a mile from the scene of action. The Union brigade was now
driven into a hollow, the enemy closing in upon it on every side, shell
and round shot pouring upon it, thick and fast, and bullets raining so
rapidly, that further resistance appeared like a useless immolation of
hundreds of lives. Colonel Colburn therefore surrendered.

The Union loss in this disastrous engagement was one hundred killed,
three hundred wounded, besides many prisoners, and a valuable train. The
rebel loss in killed and wounded was much less than that sustained by
the Federal forces.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the tenth of March a detachment of Federal troops, comprising the
Sixth and Seventh Illinois cavalry, commanded by Colonel Grierson,
surprised Colonel Richardson’s guerrilla band, four hundred strong, near
Covington, Tenn, killed twenty-five, captured a number of them, and
dispersed the rest.

On the twelfth Major-General Gordon Granger with his division, supported
by Colonel Minty, returned to Franklin from an expedition which had been
attended with a success so brilliant as to efface in great measure the
disgrace of the failure of Colonel Colburn’s expedition. General Van
Dorn and his command, flushed with their recent victory over Colonel
Colburn, were met by this expeditionary force, and “sent flying” over
the Duck river.

On the eighteenth, fourteen hundred men, consisting of the One hundred
and fifth Ohio, the Eightieth, and One Hundred and Twenty-third
Illinois, an Indiana battery, and one company of Tennessee cavalry,
under the command of Colonel A. S. Hall, left Murfreesboro’ and started
in the direction of Liberty. On the next morning the enemy was
encountered, but in numbers so overwhelming that Colonel Hall was
compelled to return. He was attacked the next day at Milton by the rebel
forces under General John Morgan. A fierce fight, lasting three hours
and a half, ensued, but the enemy were finally repulsed with the loss of
four captains and sixty men left on the field, dead or mortally wounded,
besides nearly three hundred placed _hors du combat_. Colonel Hall had
six killed, forty wounded, and seven missing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From this time, a great many expeditions of the above description were
sent out from time to time with more or less success. A force of rebels,
under Major-General Van Dorn, on the 10th of April, attacked the
National force under Major-General G. Granger, at Franklin. The rebel
force was estimated at nine thousand cavalry, besides two regiments of
infantry, and was greatly superior to the Union force, which consisted
of only two regiments, under Generals Baird and Gilbert, numbering about
sixteen hundred men, and sixteen guns; and two cavalry brigades under
General Smith and Colonel Stanley, numbering about twenty-seven hundred
men, and two guns. The only natural defence of the place was a fort, not
yet completed, and which mounted two siege, and two three-inch rifled
guns. This fort was elevated some forty feet above the surrounding
country, and commanded most of the approaches to the town. General
Granger’s camp was situated on the north side of the river, and about
two-thirds of a mile from Franklin. General Baird received orders to
check any force of the enemy attempting to cross the fords below, and
General Gilbert was so placed as to meet any attack made upon the front,
with orders to reinforce either flank if required. About four miles on
the road to Murfreesboro’, Colonel Stanley was stationed, and General
Smith’s cavalry was held in reserve to reinforce Colonel Stanley. The
attack was opened by General Van Dorn on General Granger’s front, which
was instantly repulsed. The attack was then renewed on Colonel Stanley,
who was driven back before reinforcements could reach him. The enemy
pressed close upon them; when they had advanced into an open field, they
halted, and the Unionists suddenly faced about, and delivered such a hot
fire into their ranks that they fell back in confusion. Speedily
recovering, however, the enemy charged again, and were again repulsed
with loss. They fell back again; and the Unionists not wishing to follow
up the advantage they had gained, continued to retreat till they had
neared the town, and there they were charged upon by the whole force of
the enemy’s cavalry. The Unionists kept up a continuous firing upon the
advancing rebels, but the enemy’s column came steadily onward. The
National troops now executed a brilliant, and very skillful
movement—each front company delivered its fire, and then retreated to
the rear, leaving the next one behind in front, and so succeeding until
the one in rear was again in front. In this way the retreating
Unionists, still under a hot fire from the rebels, held them in check
till the town was gained in safety. Once there, the National troops
concealed themselves within the shelter of the houses, yard-fences,
hedges, &c., and from this cover they poured into the enemy’s ranks a
constant and murderous fire. The siege guns and batteries now opened
upon them, also, and succeeded in driving them discomfited from the
field. In this engagement, the National loss was very much less than
that of the rebels, notwithstanding the latter had so far outnumbered
the former.

On the 20th, a skirmish occurred between a Union force, part of
Major-General Reynolds’s division, Colonel Wilder’s mounted brigade, and
a cavalry force under Colonel Minty, and the enemy, who were stationed
at a place called McMinnsville. The rebels formed a line, and charged
upon the Unionists as the latter approached the city, where they had
been sent from Murfreesboro’, to scatter any Confederate force which
might be found at McMinnsville. The National troops encountered the
rebel line, breaking through it at once, and drove the whole force,
consisting of seven hundred men, from the town. Many men were taken
prisoners by this Union force, and much destruction of rebel property
accomplished. On the 29th, a small body of Union men, under Colonel
Watkins, captured one of the enemy’s camps, taking prisoners one hundred
and thirty-eight men.




              COLONEL STREIGHT’S EXPEDITION INTO GEORGIA.
                              MAY 3, 1863.


About the 20th of April, an expedition was fitted out to proceed into
Northern Georgia, in charge of Colonel A. D. Streight, under whose
command was placed the Fifty-first Indiana and Eightieth Illinois,
together with portions of two Ohio regiments.

Colonel Streight was officially notified that the chief object of his
expedition was to push into Western Georgia, and cut the railroads which
supplied the rebel army, by way of Chattanooga; and that in pursuance of
this plan, he was not to allow incidental schemes, however promising as
to results, to involve him in such delays, as would endanger his safe
return. In order in deceive the enemy, he was to march long enough in
company with the army of General Dodge, to give rise to the belief that
he was a part of the expedition of the latter. He was further commanded
to refrain from pillage and marauding, but to destroy all depots of
supplies for the rebel army, all manufactories of guns, ammunition,
equipment, and clothing for their use, which could be done without
endangering their return.

In obedience to these instructions, Colonel Streight embarked his
soldiers from Nashville, and landed near Fort Donelson. From there he
crossed the country to the Tennessee river, thence proceeded to
Eastport, and conjointly with the forces of General Dodge, at the time
marching upon Tuscumbia, gave battle to the Confederate troops, and
defeated them with considerable loss.

At this point, Colonel Streight parted company with General Dodge, and
pursued his course toward Rome and Atlanta. General Forrest and Colonel
Rody, with a Confederate force, happening to be in the neighborhood of
Colonel Streight’s proposed route, were at once apprised of his
movements, and falling upon his rear, engaged in a running fight, which
lasted full four days, and comprised several sharp skirmishes, and two
battles. The Federal troops, however, managed to advance over a hundred
miles into the interior of the State, destroying on their way some
bridges, a large quantity of meal, and a foundry for the manufacture of
shot and cannon. But as the Confederate forces continually increased,
and both the ammunition and the men of Colonel Streight finally became
exhausted, he was obliged at a point some fifteen miles from Rome, (Ga.)
to make a complete surrender. His men, to the number of thirteen
hundred, were, according to custom, at once paroled, but his officers
were held and imprisoned, on the charge of having incurred the penalty
fixed by a statute of the State of Georgia, for inciting slaves to
rebellion. In substantiation of this claim, it was stated that black
men, uniformed, and bearing arms, were found in the command of Colonel
Streight. On the other hand, it was declared that these negroes had
marched from Nashville with the raiders.

In consequence of this refusal to parole Colonel Streight, the
Government suspended the exchange of Confederate officers, and General
Morgan and his officers were thrown into the penitentiary of Ohio.

Colonel Streight was subsequently released from imprisonment.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was toward the end of June that General Rosecrans commenced a series
of movements, which were designed to bring on a conflict between the
forces under his command, and the rebels under General Bragg. His
purpose was to march small portions of his army on Shelbyville, and by
feints give an idea that a serious movement was intended in that
direction; while his really decisive blow was aimed at Tullahoma.
Accordingly the Twentieth corps, under General McCook, was selected to
make the advance on the right; and about seven o’clock General
Sheridan’s division, preceded by five companies of mounted infantry,
under Lieutenant-Colonel Jones, proceeded on the way to Shelbyville.
During the night, this division bivouacked on each side of the wood, and
the divisions of General Johnson and Davis advanced six miles on the
road, and on the left turned to Liberty Gap. The following day was very
stormy—notwithstanding which the mounted infantry under Colonel Wilder,
marched along the road leading to Manchester, and were closely followed
by General Reynolds, with the remainder of his division.

At about nine o’clock in the morning, Colonel Wilder met the enemy’s
pickets eight miles from Murfreesboro’, and drove them, together with
all their reserves, on a quick run before him, to beyond Hoover’s Gap,
which is a long winding hollow through a chain of hills which divide the
Stone and Duck rivers. For about two-thirds the distance through the
gaps the rebels had fortified a strong position, but were driven so
closely by the men under Colonel Wilder, that before they had time to
deploy into their works, the Union soldiers were inside also. The rebels
fled instantly, leaving behind the battle-flag of the First Kentucky
cavalry regiment, and also forty-two prisoners. For full four miles
beyond Hoover’s Gap, Colonel Wilder’s men drove them on a sharp run;
when he heard the long-roll sounded in the enemy’s infantry camp two
miles beyond the Garrison Fork, down Duck river toward the right.
Immediately the proper dispositions were made for an expected fight, for
Colonel Wilder determined to hold the gap until General Reynolds with
his force should come up to his assistance. Almost on the instant, two
brigades of rebel infantry came up on the double-quick, and formed in
line of battle; the Unionists poured a volley into their ranks, which
caused them to hastily turn about and beat a retreat; upon the right of
Colonel Wilder’s column five regiments of rebels had charged, and
outflanked the Seventeenth. The Ninety-eighth Illinois, Colonel
Fernhouser, hastened to their relief, before whom the rebels did not
stand more than five minutes. Wheeling about, the enemy, despite the
cries and entreaties of their officers, beat a hasty retreat, and with
great noise and clatter carried their batteries away with them, and
posted them behind some hills in their rear. General Reynolds’ division
held possession of the gap.

During these and subsequent preliminary movements, the rebel position
was as follows: Bragg’s main army occupied a strong position north of
Duck river, with their cavalry on the right toward McMinnville, and
their infantry extending from Shelbyville to Wantrace; on the left,
toward Columbia and Spring Hill, Forrest was concentrating and
threatening Franklin. Their main base of supplies was, of course, at
Chattanooga; but their superior and efficient cavalry force had enabled
them to command all the resources of Duck river valley, and the country
toward the south. Tullahoma, the large intrenched camp of the rebels,
was situated on the “barrens” at the intersection of the Nashville and
Chattanooga railroad with the McMinnville branch, and was their main
depot. The rebel infantry was well protected by a high range of rough
and rocky hills; the principal routes passed southward from
Murfreesboro’ toward Tullahoma, and the enemy’s line of communications.
By the way of McMinnville, Tullahoma is distant seventy-five miles from
Chattanooga; the Manchester pike passes the hills above referred to,
goes through Hoover’s Gap, and ascends to the “barrens,” through a long
and difficult cañon called Matt’s Hollow. The Wantrace road passes
through Liberty Gap, and into a road which runs parallel with the
railroad at Bellbuckle Gap. The Shelbyville road runs through a defile
called Guy’s Gap. A road called the Middleton dirt road, is also
situated near here; and the road along Versailles runs into the
Shelbyville and Triune roads, neither of which have any passes, and but
few defiles.

The enemy held all these passes, his main position being in front of
Shelbyville, and strengthened by a redan line which extended from Horse
Mountain on the east, to Duck river on the west, and was covered by a
line of abattis.

It being still uncertain whether the enemy would advance to test the
strength of the whole Union force, the following disposition of the
latter was made for the 25th: Major-General Crittenden was ordered to
advance on Lannon’s Stand, and from thence open communication with
General Thomas, who was then to drive the rebels toward Fairfield, where
the Fourteenth corps was stationed to receive them; and General McCook,
with that portion of his corps under his own immediate command was to
make a feint along the Wantrace road by the way of Liberty Gap. General
Stanley, with the cavalry under his command, was to occupy the attention
of the rebels at Fosterville; while General Granger with the infantry,
was to support Stanley at Christiana. If General Thomas succeeded in his
manœuvre, and found the rebels retreating towards Wartrace, he was to
cover that road with a division, and thus move on to Manchester with the
remainder of his command, while General McCook, moving in on Beech
Grove, was to hold Liberty Gap with one division, and after a time to
withdraw quietly, leaving a force sufficient to protect it, and move on
to Manchester.

During this day it rained heavily and continuously; and General Brannan
was, in consequence, prevented from joining the Fourteenth corps as soon
as was necessary. Finally everything was in position; General Reynolds’
division advanced upon the heights toward Fairfield, but made no
demonstration against the enemy. At Liberty Gap the enemy endeavored to
regain possession, but were utterly routed, and compelled to leave it in
possession of the Unionists.

The greater part of the movements ordered on the 25th were completed on
the 26th, notwithstanding the drenching rain which had continued day and
night. The divisions of Generals Reynolds, Rousseau and Brannan, made a
combined advance upon the enemy, and forced him to retreat toward
Fairfield; Wilder’s cavalry seized Matt’s Hollow, and held it, thus
securing the passage toward Manchester for Reynolds to move forward with
his division, which the gallant General did during the same night.
Headquarters were established in Manchester during the 27th; and in the
course of the night all the remaining portion of General Thomas’ corps
came in from the different directions in which they had been posted. All
was now in readiness to prepare for the coming contest; rations were
distributed to the troops, and the column was closed up around
Manchester.

While these preparations were going forward, General Rosecrans saw an
opportunity for cutting off the railroad in the rebel rear, and thus
accomplishing one of his main objects. He therefore sent forward
Wilder’s brigade to burn the bridges across Elk river, and to destroy
the railroad between Deckhard and Cowan. Brigadier-General John Beatty
was sent to Hillsboro’ with a brigade of infantry, to cover, and if
necessary, support the movements of Colonel Wilder. Upon reaching Elk
river it was found to be so swollen, in consequence of the recent rains,
that it was impossible to ford it. Nothing daunted, the brave Colonel
proceeded upstream along the banks, till he came to a place where there
seemed a possibility of swimming his horse across. A raft was hastily
constructed from the ruins of an old sawmill, and he thus floated his
mountain howitzer over, by towing it with ropes. The One hundred and
twenty-third Illinois, Colonel Monroe, had been sent on to destroy the
bridge, but on arriving there found that he was late by about ten
minutes, as three regiments of the rebel Withers’ division of infantry
had arrived there and were protecting the bridge. Colonel Monroe,
therefore, returned from his fruitless errand; and with the rest of
Wilder’s command, moved on to Deckhard during the same night. There they
had a sharp skirmish with about eighty men of the garrison, but finally
drove them out, and in the darkness the rebels effected their escape.
Colonel Wilder then destroyed the telegraph wires, captured the
instruments, set fire to the depot, and tore up about three hundred
yards of the Chattanooga railroad track. From there Colonel Wilder took
the road across the mountains to Chattanooga intending to strike the
bridges at Cow’s creek, near Stevenson, but was prevented on finding
three trains loaded with rebel infantry awaiting him, while the enemy’s
cavalry was in hot pursuit of him. Unwilling to give up his object, he
next attempted to attack Anderson, ten miles further on, and destroy all
the bridges in that direction, but there, also, he found a rebel brigade
awaiting him. Being thus threatened on every hand, he was obliged to
make his escape in order to save his troops from capture; and, with
Buckner’s brigade close upon his heels, made all possible speed to
return to Manchester. His men were utterly exhausted; they were out of
rations, and the horses, which had scarcely been unsaddled for seven
days, were nearly starved. But men and animals exhibited alike great
powers of endurance; and by his admirable management, Colonel Wilder got
his troops back to Manchester in safety, and without the loss of a
single man, at about one o’clock on the afternoon of the 30th, having
marched one hundred and twenty-six miles, swam four streams, and tore up
three railroad tracks.

In the mean time a force of the enemy’s artillery and cavalry at Guy’s
Gap had been attacked by General Stanley’s cavalry, and the infantry
under General Granger. The enemy was completely routed, driven from
stand to stand, till they reached their intrenchments, where the
Unionists made an impetuous charge upon them, and drove them out,
capturing three pieces of artillery. From the intrenchments, the rebels
fled back to Shelbyville, and gathering together all their remaining
force, made another stand, and for a time withstood the National forces
with the courage of desperation. It was in vain. The Union cavalry swept
down upon them with resistless strength and fire, and drove them back in
dire confusion into the river. Large numbers fell on the field, many
were drowned, and a large force were taken prisoners, together with much
commissary stores, and a quantity of arms. The Union troops then took
possession of Shelbyville, amid the waving of flags, and the cheers of
welcome from the inhabitants.

Upon the 30th, the whole Union force, in mass, was prepared to move upon
Tullahoma; but on the next day a dispatch was received by General
Rosecrans from General Thomas, announcing to him that the enemy had
evacuated Tullahoma during the night. Pursuit was ordered instantly. The
divisions of Brannan, Negley, and Sheridan entered Tullahoma, and took
possession. The infantry arrived about noon; and the divisions of Negley
and Rousseau pushed on after the retreating rebels, and overtook their
rear-guard at Bethpage Bridge, two miles above the railroad crossing.
The rebels, in strong force, occupied the heights at this place; and the
Unionists engaged in a brisk skirmish with them, in which the National
forces entirely routed the rebels. General McCook, in command of two
divisions, pursued the enemy, on the next day, along the road which lay
west of the railroad. The Elk river was found to be almost unfordable by
the cavalry; while the rebel cavalry on the opposite side did everything
in their power to resist the attempted crossing by the Union forces. But
the rebels were speedily driven away, and the National troops took
possession of the ford. General Thomas, with similar difficulty,
effected a crossing, the enemy having during the night burned the bridge
by which he had expected to cross. The small cavalry force under General
Turchin pushed forward to Hillsboro,’ on the Deckhard road; and finding
the enemy’s cavalry at Elk Ford, near Morris Ferry, engaged them, and
being very soon reinforced by General Mitchell’s troops they forced a
passage across the river, after a sharp conflict. Night then closed the
pursuit. Upon the 3d July, General Sheridan succeeded in crossing Elk
river, and, supported by General J. C. Davis’s division, pushed the
enemy to Cowan, where he learned that the rebels, with their artillery
and infantry, had crossed the mountains by University and Sweden’s Cove,
and that the cavalry alone would be found covering their rear. On the
same day General Thomas got his troops across, also; portions of the
cavalry from Sheridan’s division, and also from the main column were
sent forward, but they only learned that the enemy was gone. The roads
were found to be almost impassable from the heavy rains, and the troops
being well-nigh out of provisions a halt was ordered until supplies
could be forwarded from Murfreesboro’.

Thus ended a campaign of nine days’ duration, in which the enemy had
been driven from two strongly fortified positions, and which had
resulted in giving the Union forces possession of the whole of Middle
Tennessee, and preserving Kentucky from the danger of a second invasion.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next advance of General Rosecrans was against Chattanooga. General
Bragg retreating on the south side of the Tennessee had reached this
place, and had there thrown up defensive fortifications. General
Rosecrans commenced his movement on the 16th of August; having spent the
time from July 3d to the middle of August in making the necessary
preparations. The advance was made, of course, across the mountains, its
front extending from the head of Sequatchie Valley in East Tennessee to
Athens in Alabama, a distance of about one hundred and fifty miles. The
army advanced in divisions, availing itself of various gaps in the
mountains, and crossing the Tennessee at various points. In the early
days of September the army of the Cumberland was threatening the rebels
under Bragg, all along that river from Whitesburg to Blythe’s Ferry.

General Rosecrans, having become convinced, from evidence gathered from
various sources, that General Bragg had commenced on the 6th of
September, to move on Rome, directed General Crittenden to hold
Chattanooga with one brigade and to pursue the enemy vigorously with the
remaining force at his disposal. General Crittenden occupied Ringgold on
the 11th, but Wilder’s mounted infantry pushed forward, skirmishing
sharply with the enemy as far as Tunnel Hill. Logan having joined
Crittenden, the whole corps advanced rapidly, on the twelfth, to
Gordon’s Mill. Wilder, while engaged in covering this movement, had a
desperate struggle with the enemy at Letts’ Tanyard. Negley, who had, in
the mean time, been reconnoitering in the vicinity of Dug Gap, where he
found the enemy in heavy force, was joined on the 11th by Baird’s
division, and, after a severe skirmish with the rebels, secured a strong
position in front of Stevens’ Gap. On the twelfth Reynolds and Brennan
closed up to sustain these two advanced positions.

General Rosecrans, having now ascertained that Bragg was not retreating
on Rome, but concentrating all his forces near La Fayette, behind Pigeon
Mountain, where he was receiving reinforcements from Johnston and from
Virginia, proceeded at once to concentrate his army. General McCook was
ordered to hold Dougherty’s Gap, with two brigades, and to join General
Thomas with the remainder of his command, with whom however, he did not
close up till the 17th. On the arrival of General McCook’s corps,
General Thomas moved down the Chickamauga, toward Gordon’s Mill. A
manœuvre was now made to cover the La Fayette road to Chickamauga, but
it was retarded by the narrowness of the roads and the disposition of
the troops, and, during its progress, Colonel Minty became engaged with
the enemy near Reed’s Bridge, and Wilder’s “Lightning Brigade” dashed
into a superior force, from which they escaped by the La Fayette road.
On the 11th, Minty’s cavalry and Wilder’s mounted brigade, were, after
an obstinate struggle, driven by the enemy from Reed’s and Alexander’s
bridges, to the Rossville road. General Thomas advanced during the night
to Kelly’s House on the La Fayette road, where Baird’s division was
posted. Here it was reported to him that a rebel brigade, isolated by
the burning of Reed’s bridge, was on his side of the Chickamauga.
Brennan, with two brigades, was sent out to capture it, and encountered
a strong column of the enemy, bent on turning the left of the Union
army, and on getting possession of the road between it and Chattanooga.
This movement opened the combat, and on the 19th of September, 1863, was
commenced.




                       THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA.


The enemy combined in heavy masses on the extreme left, and Croxton’s
brigade of Brennan’s division became engaged with the rebel General
Forrest’s cavalry, about ten A. M. General McCook, who had closed up to
Crawfish Springs as soon as Thomas’s column was out of his way, now sent
Johnson’s division to Thomas’s assistance. General Crittenden had
dispatched Palmer’s for the same purpose. The support was afforded most
opportunely. Croxton’s brigade, which had driven the cavalry under
Forest near half a mile, met at last Ector’s and Wilson’s brigades,
which made a resistance so obstinate, that Baird’s whole division was
advanced to Croxton’s support. The foe was again pushed back and many
prisoners captured. After an hour’s hard fighting against overwhelming
numbers, the ammunition of Croxton’s brigade was exhausted, and the men
were moved to the rear to enable them to fill their boxes. The united
forces of Baird and Brennan had driven the enemy from their immediate
front, and Baird was disposing his lines to receive an attack he had
reason to apprehend on his right, when Walthall’s and Govan’s rebel
brigades, under Liddell, impetuously assaulted Scribner’s and King’s,
and put them to flight, making several hundred prisoners, and capturing
Loomis’s and other batteries.

The regulars, outflanked after the withdrawal of Brannan’s men, fought
like tigers, but were rolled back and over Scribner’s brigade—the right
of which being too far advanced, was crumpled up and literally
surrounded. At this conjuncture, Johnson’s division of McCook’s corps,
and Reynolds’ division of Thomas’s arrived, and were placed in position,
connecting with the brigades already engaged.

The storm rolled upon them, and, as the most desperate valor was
displayed by both rebels and Unionists, the fortune of the fight
wavered, first on one side and then on the other. A tremendous onslaught
of the enemy broke Palmer’s lines, and scattered several of his
regiments in wild dismay. General Reynolds threw himself among the brave
but broken ranks, shouting, “Boys! are you the soldiers of the Sixth
Ohio, who fought so gallantly with me at Cheat Mountain in Virginia? You
never turned your backs upon traitors—will you do it now?”

“No! no!” they screamed, with frantic enthusiasm. “Lead us back. We will
fight it out! Lead us back!”

Back came the scattered fragments of regiments; with magic swiftness
ranks were formed, and the order was issued for the entire line to
advance—and never was a finer charge made than that which followed. But
they were Longstreet’s men who opposed, and they rallied and rallied
again, maintaining their reputation desperately; but Thomas, Reynolds,
and other heroic leaders inspirited their men with their own ardor; the
foe was still driven and Longstreet threatened with annihilation.
Attacked both in front and in the flank, the enemy was slaughtered
mercilessly; the artillery he had captured was, with the exception of
three pieces, recovered; and he was finally compelled to fall back, in
confusion, on his reserves, posted in a strong position on the west side
of Chickamauga creek.

While the contest was progressing so gloriously on the left, Polk and
Cheatham, with a powerful force, fell upon Palmer and Van Cleve, and
upon Reynolds’ right. The assault was made with such suddenness and
effect that Palmer’s division was staggered, and Van Cleve’s completely
shattered. Prisoners and artillery fell into the hands of the exultant
foe, and he was driving everything before him, when General Davis’
division came upon him and restored the fortunes of the day. But the
chosen legions of the enemy, and all his available forces, were massed
in this quarter, and the unparalleled obstinacy of Davis’s men would
have proved unequal to the occasion, had not Brannan’s division arrived
on the scene just in time to defeat Cheatham’s efforts to turn Reynolds’
right and rear. General Negley had been ordered to afford succor, and
responded readily to the summons. The gallant Wilder was however the
first to scatter the enemy in terror before him, but they rallied, and
forced him slowly back. General Sheridan now joined in the wavering
struggle and led Colonel Bradley’s noble brigade into the midst of it.
The rebels opened, from some timber near his flank, an enfilading fire,
which rained death into his ranks and compelled him to give way. But
Wood and Negley, who had been busied hitherto, repelling feigned
attacks, came at last to the rescue, and the tide was stayed. The
scattered troops reorganized, and lately broken brigades resumed their
places. A weltering fire now blazed along the whole Union front, with
such terrible effect that the rebels shrank from it. The Union centre
was restored to its integrity, and victory, was snatched from the grasp
of the foe.


                          SECOND DAY’S BATTLE.

Sunday, the twentieth of September, proved an eventful day to the Army
of the Cumberland. The sun rose bright and clear, but an impenetrable
mist hung over the field between the two hostile armies. General
Rosecrans was anxious and alarmed, from the fact that, at the close of
the preceding day, there were only two of his brigades which had not
been brought opportunely and squarely into the action. This convinced
him that he was greatly outnumbered, and he must now fight, not only for
the position of Chattanooga, but for the very existence of his army. The
corps commanders met at headquarters, at Widow Glen’s house, and, after
participating in long and grave consultation, received orders for the
disposition of the troops for the following day. General Thomas, with
his reinforcements, was to maintain the line he had assumed, with
Brennan in reserve; General McCook, when his pickets were driven in, was
to close on Thomas, and enclose the position at Widow Glen’s house.
Crittenden with two divisions in reserve, near the junction of Thomas’s
and McCook’s lines, was to place himself in position to succor either.
But McCook stationed his troops too far on the crest, and the reserve
under General Davis was removed to a wooded hill side, west of the Dry
Valley road, instead of being placed in close column in a sheltered
position more to the left. General Crittenden was in the valley close
by, too far to the right, and the indispensable necessity of keeping
near to the left where the enemy’s first assault might be expected, was
not sufficiently regarded. General Negley withdrew his reserve brigade
from the line and joined General Thomas, but General Crittenden failed
to relieve him. Wood’s troops were, however, finally moved into the
position vacated by Negley’s reserves; but the delay proved of serious
consequence, for the battle had already begun, at half past eight A. M.,
on the extreme left, as was expected. General Thomas sent for Negley’s
remaining brigades, and as he continued to be hard pressed. Van Cleve
was sent to his assistance. General Reynolds’s right was now found to be
exposed, by an opening in the line, to the enemy. General Wood was
ordered to close up on Reynolds, and General Davis on General Wood, and
General McCook to concentrate his whole command to the left. General
Wood, however, withdrew from the line and passed to the west of General
Brannan, who was in echelon, thus opening in the line of battle

                 “A gap for ruin’s wasteful entrance,”

into which the enemy poured like an avalanche. The keen eyes of the
rebel Generals Longstreet and Buckner had seen it. They opened on Wood,
Davis, and Brannan with a terrific fire of grape, canister and shrapnel,
shivering the woods behind which the timid attempted to take shelter;
and Stewart’s division fell furiously upon the left flank of Davis, and
sent it to the right in utter disorder. The first rebel torrent, on the
other side, struck Van Cleve, and what remained of Palmer’s command, and
shivered them as if by a thunderbolt. Rosecrans, sword in hand,
expostulating, shouting, and exposing himself and staff to the pelting
storm of the missiles of death, strove in vain to check the rout. After
this fatal break the line of battle was not again reformed that day. The
army was cut in two. Rosecrans attempted to rejoin Thomas, by passing to
the rear of the broken portion of his line, but could not make his way
through the broken throngs pressing to the left; and the enemy
advancing, compelled him to retire to Chattanooga. Davis’s two brigades,
one of Van Cleve’s, and Sheridan’s entire division were driven from the
field, and the remainder, consisting of the divisions of Baird, Johnson,
Reynolds, Palmer, Brannan and Wood, two of Negley’s and one of Van
Cleve’s, were left to sustain the conflict against the whole power of
the rebel army. Davis’s and Sheridan’s divisions were forced off toward
the right, in their retreat, and were fearfully cut up. Men, animals,
and vehicles became a mass of struggling, cursing, shouting, frightened
life. Everything and everybody appeared to dash headlong through the
narrow gaps, and men, horses, mules, ambulances, luggage wagons,
ammunition wagons, artillery carriages, and caissons were rolled and
tumbled together in a confused, inextricable, and finally motionless
mass, completely blocking up the mouth of the gaps. Nearly all this
booty subsequently fell into the hands of the enemy. The exultant rebels
boasted of the capture of forty-nine pieces of cannon, prisoners
amounting to over eight thousand, thirty thousand stand of arms, and
forty stands of regimental colors. The boast was an exaggeration, but no
doubt General Bragg and his army were elated beyond measure, and their
delight and exultation would doubtless have been justified by the event,
had not their victorious army encountered a lion, or rather a rock of
adamant, in the corps of the invincible General Thomas.

During the night, General Thomas’s troops had thrown up temporary
breastworks of logs; and he had with the prescience which distinguishes
genius in whatever art or science it engages, made every disposition for
the impending struggle. General Negley, sent for and promised, did not
come in time, for the enemy held him in check; but General Beatty’s
brigade arrived and assisted in stemming the furious assault which the
enemy were making on Baird’s left. But Beatty was not strong enough for
the work, and was obliged to recede before an overwhelming force.
Johnson’s reserve was sent to strengthen him, and with a helping hand
from Vandeveer’s brigade of Brannan’s division, a portion of Stanley’s
and Wood’s forces, drove the foe from Baird’s rear, where he had thrust
himself, entirely away from his left. Thomas now directed the massing of
artillery on Missionary Ridge, so as to sweep the ground to the left and
rear of Baird’s position. Similar assaults to that above described were
simultaneously made upon Johnson, Palmer and Reynolds, and renewed again
and again with fresh troops, but were met with Roman coolness and
deliberation.

The rude breastworks of logs and rails, constructed the night before,
saved the lives of thousands of Thomas’s troops. The men placed
themselves behind these, their artillery in the rear firing over their
heads. Their long line of defences appeared like an immense pyrotechnic
serpent, instinct with hideous and withering life, which it belched
continually, in volumes of smoke and flame, from its ghastly length.
Again and again the rebel lines emerged from the cover of the woods,
into the open corn-fields, charged with impetuous fury and terrific
yells toward this formidable obstacle, but each of the fiery blasts from
the Union batteries and battalions met them, and their ranks were swept
away as if washed by a rushing flood. But as fast as the line fell off,
another appeared, rushing sternly on over the dead and bleeding bodies
of their fallen comrades.

Thomas fought with his forces of Saturday, weakened by Saturday’s heavy
losses. It was an unequal contest. He now learned that the Union right
had been turned, and thus the enemy was in his rear, in force. He
notified General Reynolds of the fact. General Wood had barely time to
dispose his troops, on the left of Brennan, before they were both
exposed to a succession of such assaults as are above described. General
Gordon Granger, at the head of Steedman’s division of his corps,
appeared now on Thomas’s right, and was ordered to push forward and take
position on Brennan’s right. Steedman moved his troops into position
with almost as much precision as if on drill, and, fighting his way to
the crest of the hill on Brennan’s right, moved forward his artillery,
driving the enemy down the southern slope, and inflicting on him a most
terrible loss in killed and wounded. The opportune arrival of fresh
troops revived the flagging spirits of the Federals, and every assault
from that time till nightfall was repulsed in the most gallant style by
the whole line. Their ammunition, however, ran very low, for the
ammunition trains had been by some mistake removed to the rear; and, had
it not been for the small supply furnished by General Steedman’s
command, Thomas’s men would have had no resource but the bayonet.

General Thomas now received General Rosecrans’ despatch from
Chattanooga, directing him to take command of all the forces, and assume
a threatening attitude at Rossville. Accordingly, at half past five P.
M. the retirement of the Union troops commenced, under the direction of
General Thomas. Turchin, of General Reynolds’ division, executed a
manœuvre, with the view of covering the retreat, by which two hundred
prisoners were captured. A brigade commanded by Colonel Robinson of
Reynolds’ division, assisted by Turchin and General Willich, were posted
on the road leading through the ridge, to hold the ground while the
troops passed by to Rossville. The rebel leaders Stoull, Gibson, Helm,
Wood, and Polk had all day been hurling their commands against General
Thomas’s lines, and now prepared to make a final effort. The signal was
given and forward they pressed, with their wonted wild yell. Johnson’s
and Baird’s division, which were preparing to retire, saluted them with
several volleys as they advanced, but nothing could stay the tide and
the exhausted veterans began to waver in the face of the charging,
shouting, thundering host which confronted them; the next moment, wave
after wave of the rebel sea came surging upon the breastworks, dashing
madly against and over the barrier, and greedily swallowing up many of
its defenders, with their ammunition and material. Never was resistance
more stubborn and determined, and never was attack prosecuted with more
devilish pertinacity.

                  “But all too late the advantage came
                  To turn the odds of deadly game;”

for night had come on; the enemy’s forces were moving undisturbed toward
Rossville; and the Army of the Cumberland, after having had the
narrowest possible escape from annihilation, was saved by the masterly
generalship and intrepidity of General Thomas.

Major-General George H. Thomas was born in Virginia, July 31, 1816. He
graduated at West Point in 1840, and served with distinction in the war
with Mexico. He was subsequently stationed in Texas and in the Indian
territories. When the rebellion broke out, he was a Major in the regular
cavalry. A sincere patriot, he remained true to the flag which he had so
long and so honorably served, and he soon rose to the rank of Colonel.
In August, 1861, he was made Brigadier-General of Volunteers in the
Department of the Cumberland. After much active service, and after
thoroughly beating the rebels at Mill Spring, he, with his division,
joined General Buell, at Nashville. In April, 1862, he was constituted
Major-General of Volunteers. When General Rosecrans assumed command of
the Army of the Cumberland, he was assigned to the command of the
centre.

[Illustration: MAJOR-GENERAL GEORGE H. THOMAS.]

In personal appearance General Thomas is dignified and manly; in habit
temperate, and distinguished alike for wisdom in council and courage in
battle, “George H. Thomas,” said General Rosecrans, “is a man of
extraordinary character. Years ago, at the Military Academy, I conceived
that there were points of strong resemblance between his character and
that of Washington; and I was in the habit of calling him General
Washington.” General Thomas is singularly modest and unobtrusive in his
demeanor. He was a brigadier-general for some months before he put on
the uniform of that office. He did not assume the double star till after
the battle of Stone river, though made a major-general more than six
months before.




                 OPERATIONS IN NORTH CAROLINA IN 1863.


The National force in North Carolina was comparatively small during the
year 1863, as it was the purpose of the Government only to occupy the
important posts already gained there, and act merely on the defensive.

On Saturday, the 14th of March, a demonstration was made against Newbern
by the rebel forces under General Pettigru. At about daybreak sixteen
guns were placed in position near a small fort just opposite the town on
the north, and across the river Neuse. The enemy’s artillery was
supported by about three hundred infantry. Even while placing the guns
in position they commenced a fire of shell and canister against the
fort; but after firing a few rounds they sent in a flag of truce,
demanding a surrender, with information that further resistance was
useless, and they threatened a combined attack by the whole command
under General Longstreet. Colonel Anderson, in command of the Union
forces, with a view of gaining time for the National gunboats to get
into position, asked for a half hour’s time for consideration and
opportunity to consult with General Foster. The half hour was granted,
and at the end of that time Colonel Anderson’s answer was ready—“My
orders are to hold this place, and I shall never surrender it.” The
rebels in the mean time having got everything in readiness in the event
of such a reply, immediately opened a rapid and furious fire. Inside the
fort the Unionists, desiring to conceal their real strength until a
charge should be made, lay close back against the sand wall, and got
themselves in readiness by biting off cartridges, and putting them up
before them on the logs, that they might be able to open a quick fire
upon the enemy when they advanced to the assault. Soon one of the
gunboats was in position; and a schooner with one gun, and manned by
negroes, was the first to enter the contest. The firing raged
incessantly for upwards of four hours, though very ineffective, and the
rebels were apparently gaining ground, when there came a favorable
change to the Federals in the tide of battle. The gunboats came round
from the Trent river, with strains of music floating on the air, and the
batteries and gunboats poured forth a storm of shells, weighing from six
to one hundred pounds; the rebels were compelled to retreat toward the
bushes in great disorder. About fifteen was the enemy’s loss in killed,
and thirty wounded. The Union loss was two killed and four wounded.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PROVOST GUARD ATTACKING THE RIOTERS.—SEE PAGE 235.]

In April the town of Washington, on the Tar river, was laid siege to by
General Hill. The town had but a very small garrison, and was but
slightly fortified; but General Foster caused the works to be
strengthened so that the Union force was enabled to hold the city till
reinforcements arrived from Newbern, and the siege was raised.

                  *       *       *       *       *

ATTACK ON GUM SWAMP.—The next movement was made on the 22nd of May.
General Foster sent Colonel Lee’s brigade, consisting of the Fifth,
Twenty-fifth, and Forty-sixth Massachusetts regiments, a battalion of
cavalry, and three pieces of Bogg’s battery, to report to Colonel Jones,
who had declared his belief that the enemy’s outpost regiments at Gum
Swamp could be captured. Colonel Jones ordered a portion of the brigade
to attack the enemy in front, while the rest should close up on his
rear.

At daylight of the 22nd, the main body of Colonel Lee’s command drove in
the enemy’s pickets, and commenced an attack upon their front. Upon the
rear, some of the Union batteries had been deployed, and immediately
opened fire. The enemy made but faint resistance, and then scattered in
confusion in every direction. One hundred and sixty-five prisoners were
captured by the Unionists, and the rebel works were completely
demolished. Colonel Jones then made a demonstration towards Kinston, a
few miles distant; but the same evening his pickets were driven in, and
he was attacked by the enemy in such strong force, that he was obliged
to beat a hasty retreat, pursued by the rebels to the very edge of the
Union outpost line. On the afternoon of the following day, the enemy
again attacked the Unionists, but were severely repulsed at every point.
In this second attack of the enemy, Colonel Jones was shot through the
heart; and the army lost in him a gallant leader and efficient officer.




               THE EXPEDITION AGAINST ROCKY MOUNT, N. C.
                             JULY 24, 1863.


The last, and indeed the most important movement of the year in North
Carolina, was made on the above date. General Foster sent a force
consisting of the Third New York cavalry, and a squadron of the Twelfth,
and one company of a North Carolina regiment, under command of
Brigadier-General Edward E. Potter, to destroy the railroad bridge at
Rocky Mount. This bridge, which was three hundred and fifty feet in
length, was completely demolished. Besides this valuable bridge, a
cotton mill filled with cotton; a flour mill, containing one thousand
barrels of flour, and large quantities of hard bread; a machine shop,
filled with shells, gunpowder, and munitions of war; a large depot, with
all its offices and outbuildings; an engine and a train of cars; a wagon
train of twenty-five wagons, filled with stores and munitions; an armory
and machine shop, with all the machinery and materials, and eight
hundred bales of cotton, were destroyed in the same expedition. Further
on, at Tarboro’, on Tar river, two steamboats, and a large iron-clad, in
process of construction, were destroyed; and a saw mill, a train of
cars, one hundred bales of cotton, and a very large quantity of
subsistence and ordinary stores were destroyed, and about one hundred
prisoners, and three hundred head of horses and mules, captured. The
expedition was followed on its return to Newbern by about three hundred
negroes. During the entire time from its leaving Newbern till its
return, the force was engaged in constant skirmishing with the enemy,
particularly on the return, the rebels making every effort to impede
their way, but being in every instance compelled to retire, frequently
with loss. The Union loss in killed, wounded and missing, did not exceed
twenty-five men. For the next few months the Department of North
Carolina was transferred from General Foster, and united with that of
Virginia, under General Dix, who was subsequently transferred to the
Department of the East, when General Foster was reinstated in his former
position. Later in the year General Foster was transferred to the
command of the Department of the Ohio, and General B. F. Butler was
placed in the vacant position, as commander of the combined armies of
the Departments of Southern Virginia and North Carolina.




                 OPERATIONS IN SOUTH CAROLINA IN 1863.


Active operations in South Carolina were until the month of March as
dull as in North Carolina, and for the same reason. Up to this time the
only events that broke the strict monotony of inactivity were the
occasional running of the blockade by English and by rebel vessels; and
rare skirmishing with the enemy. But heavy work was soon to come. An
attack upon Fort Sumter and Charleston had long been contemplated by the
Navy Department, and success was regarded as certain, as it had been
arranged that the operations of the iron-clads were to be assisted by a
large land force prepared to join in the attack. The rebels were not
unaware of the measures that were in contemplation against one of their
strongest positions, and were busily preparing to resist them. General
Beauregard issued a proclamation in Charleston in March, in which he
declared it to be his duty to inform the “citizens of Charleston and
Savannah, that a land and naval attack on one or both cities, might be
expected at a very early date.” He conjured the citizens of Charleston
to arm themselves, adding, “Be not too exacting in the choice of
weapons. Picks and scythes will do for exterminating your enemies,
spades and shovels for protecting your firesides.” The citizens of
Charleston and Savannah reported promptly, and the preparations for the
attack, and for resisting the attack went on simultaneously.




                       THE ATTACK ON FORT SUMTER.
                             APRIL 7, 1863.


The defences of Charleston harbor were now somewhat changed in their
character, since the memorable attack on Fort Sumter, in 1861, and
require a new description from that furnished in the first volume of
this work. The chief works of the enemy for the defence of Charleston at
this time may be thus briefly described: On the upper or north end of
Sullivan’s Island a powerful sand battery guarding Maffit’s Channel;
another large sand battery, called Fort Beauregard, between this and the
Moultrie House; Fort Moultrie, which had been greatly strengthened since
the commencement of the war; Fort Sumter, built upon an artificial
island in the middle to the channel, near the entrance of the inner
harbor, and about one and a half miles west of Fort Moultrie; Battery B,
adjoining Fort Moultrie, on the western extremity of Sullivan’s Island;
the Mount Pleasant battery on the mainland between Sullivan’s Island and
Cooper river; Castle Pinckney, built on an island about a mile distant
from Charleston; all, with the exception of Sumter, being on the right
or northerly side of the harbor. On the other side of the harbor, in the
immediate vicinity of the city, was the Wappoo battery on James island,
commanding the embouchure of Ashley river; next to which was Fort
Johnson, and between it and Castle Pinckney, Fort Ripley, a work erected
on an artificial island in what was known as the “Middle Ground.” On
Cummings’ Point, Morris Island, opposite Fort Moultrie, was Battery
Gregg, and a mile south of this Fort Wagner, an extensive sand battery
of the most powerful construction. Finally, at Light-house Inlet, which
divides Morris Island from Folly Island, was another fortification
covering the landing at that place. Within a few days of the attack the
enemy also erected a new sand work between the two last mentioned. The
number of guns mounted on these works was estimated at several hundred,
comprising the heaviest smooth bore ordnance, and many rifled pieces of
English manufacture; and as an additional means of protection, the
channel between Fort Sumter and Sullivan’s Island was obstructed by rows
of floating casks supporting torpedoes and other submarine obstacles,
and in that between Sumter and Cummings’ Point were no less than four
rows of piles extending nearly up to Charleston.

Upon the 6th of April the whole National fleet crossed the Charleston
Harbor bar, intending to reduce Fort Sumter at once, and proceed thence
direct to the city; but the day turned out to be particularly foggy, and
the attack was necessarily deferred until the following day. About noon,
upon the 7th, the signal was given by Admiral Dupont from his flagship
for the vessels to weigh anchor. According to the plan of attack the
vessels were to form in the following order ahead, at intervals of one
cable’s length: 1. Weehawken, Captain John Rogers; 2. Passaic, Captain
Percival Drayton; 3. Montauk, Commander John L. Worden; 4. Patapsco,
Commander Daniel Ammen; 5. New Ironsides, Commodore Thomas Turner; 6.
Catskill, Commander George W. Rodgers; 7. Nantucket, Commander Donald
McN. Fairfax; 8. Nahant, Commander John Downes; 9. Keokuk,
Lieutenant-Commander Alexander C. Rhind. The squadron was then to pass
up the main ship channel without returning the fire of the batteries on
Morris Island, unless signalized to do so, and was to take up a position
to the northward and westward of Fort Sumter, and engage its northwest
face at a distance of from one thousand to eight hundred yards. A
squadron of reserve, consisting of the Canandaigua, Unadilla,
Housatonic, Wissahickon, and Huron, under the command of Captain Joseph
H. Green, of the Canandaigua, was ordered to remain outside the bar, and
be in readiness to support the iron-clads, when they should attack the
batteries on Morris Island, which would be subsequent to the reduction
of Fort Sumter.

At half past twelve the whole fleet was in motion; but almost
immediately a raft attached to the Weehawken became disarranged, and
nearly an hour was consumed in putting it to rights. The fleet then
moved forward again, and passed the works on Morris Island which
remained perfectly silent. In stately majesty the fleet moved on, till
within range of the fire of Fort Sumter and the batteries upon
Sullivan’s Island, but still the same ominous silence continued; not a
sound broke the stillness of the listening air, and the unbroken quiet
was growing into suspense that was painful. But scarcely had that
feeling of suspense time to manifest itself, when all around was clamor,
and a noise that equalled the loudest thunder, burst with a deafening
uproar on the ear. At precisely four minutes past three o’clock, a
terrific fire burst from Fort Sumter upon the Union fleet. The
Weehawken, being the leading vessel, was of course the first to receive
the enemy’s fire, but instead of moving forward as the rest of the fleet
moved up toward her, she was seen to come to a dead halt, just between
Sumter and Moultrie! It was impossible to those who were eagerly,
anxiously looking on, to assign any reason for such a halt. But very
soon the cause became startlingly apparent. The enemy had thrown a
strong hawser, floating on beer casks, across the river; upon this
hawser, nets, lines, and catlets, strung with torpedoes, were hung, and
should the vessel run into it, she would immediately become entangled,
be deprived of her motive power, and so be left at the mercy of the
current, to drift straight into the hands of the rebels. To attempt this
danger was not to be thought of, and all attention was turned toward the
left hand channel, to see what could be done between Sumter and
Cummings’ Point. But this was found to be still more impassable. A row
of piles, rising ten feet above the water, and extending the whole
distance across the channel, blockaded the passage; and on further
observation, it was discovered that another row of piles stretched
across the middle ground between Forts Ripley and Johnson. This did not
compass the whole passage, but left an opening for the fleet, which was
the most dangerous of all the entanglements for its destruction. Beneath
the water in that passage was a torpedo of enormous size, containing
five thousand pounds of gunpowder. Beyond this the three rebel
iron-clads were drawn up in line of battle. Thus again did the enemy
display his wonderful tact and ability in protecting the northwest face
of Sumter, which they well knew to be its weakest point. It was
impossible to carry out the first intentions with regard to the action
of the National fleet; and it only remained to put the vessels in the
most advantageous positions which circumstances would admit. To add to
all the other embarrassments attending the movements of the Union
iron-clads, the flagship caught in the tideway, and became, for the
moment, unmanageable; while the steamers Catskill and Nantucket, who
kept in the Ironsides’ wake, fell a-foul of her. Accordingly, Admiral
Dupont was obliged to signal to the rest of the fleet to disregard the
movements of the flagship; and shortly before four o’clock the remaining
eight vessels were ranged opposite the northeast front of Sumter, at
distances varying from five hundred and fifty to eight hundred yards.
The enemy during this time had not been idle, and from Forts Beauregard,
Moultrie and Sumter, Battery Bee and Fort Wagner, the concentrated fire
of three hundred guns was poured upon the devoted fleet, exceeding
probably in rapidity and power any cannonade previously known in
warfare. To this the eight iron-clads could oppose but sixteen guns.
During the climax of the fire one hundred and sixty shots were counted
in a single minute; and projectiles struck the vessels at every moment.
It has been estimated that during that brief engagement the enemy fired
three thousand five hundred round of ammunition.

The whole fury of the fight was comprised within the space of thirty
minutes, during which time it is impossible by the use of words to give
even a faint idea of the perpetual roar of the guns, and the unceasing
glare and flash of the fire. During this terrible fight it is not to be
supposed that the Union vessels were merely receiving the enemy’s fire.
At the order to disregard the movements of the Ironsides, Captain Rhind
ran the Keokuk up through the others, and laid it, apparently, under the
very walls of Fort Sumter, and scarcely more than five hundred yards
distant from it. Close behind the Keokuk came the Catskill, and close
upon this vessel the Montauk, the Passaic, the Patapsco, the Nahant, the
Nantucket, the Weehawken, and the Ironsides. The last named vessel
poured forth its whole strength upon Fort Moultrie, while the remainder
of the fleet directed all its fire against Fort Sumter. The face of
Sumter soon began to show the marks of the severe treatment it was
receiving from the heavy projectiles; and the brave men on board the
Union iron-clads were eagerly and hopefully looking forward to the
breach they expected to make, if their vessels could but remain under
the storm of rebel fire long enough to effect it. But on this occasion
the National cause was doomed to disappointment, and the bombardment of
Fort Sumter was a crushing failure. Already the Keokuk was utterly
disabled, and twelve of her men wounded; among whom was her gallant
commander, Captain Rhind. The Nahant received thirty gaping wounds; six
of her men were wounded, and the Quartermaster, Edward Cobb of
Massachusetts, received his death blow. The Passaic was struck in
twenty-five places: the Nantucket was badly injured; and the Catskill
and Ironsides slightly damaged. The remainder of the vessels, though
often struck, received no serious injury; but in the opinion of Admiral
Dupont another half hour would have placed them, also, _hors du combat_,
and accordingly, at five o’clock the signal was given to retire.

During the night following this disastrous fight it was confidently
expected that the attack would be renewed in the morning; but when the
morrow came Admiral Dupont had decided that, for the time, the
bombardment of Fort Sumter was at an end.

On the 12th of April, then, the whole fleet—with the exception of the
Keokuk, which had sunk, and the Ironsides, which was left outside of
Charleston Harbor Bay—returned to Port Royal.




                 CAPTURE OF THE REBEL IRONCLAD ATLANTA.
                                JUNE 17.


About the middle of June, Admiral Dupont, learning that the Atlanta and
other rebel vessels at Savannah, meditated an attack upon the blockading
vessels in Warsaw Sound, despatched the Weehawken (Capt. Rogers) and the
Nahant (Commander J. Downes), to prevent any disaster to the fleet. The
Atlanta, originally a swift and powerful British steamer called the
Fingal, had early in the war run the blockade of Savannah, and been
converted by the enemy into an iron-clad at a great expense. She was one
hundred and ninety-one feet in length, and forty feet beam, somewhat
over one thousand tons in measurement, and had a low deck with a
casement or covered iron-plated house in the centre, with sloping sides
and ends, in which was her battery, consisting of two six-inch and two
eight-inch rifled guns. Of these the former were broadside guns, and the
latter worked on a pivot, either as broadside or bow or stern guns. She
was further armed with a powerful ram, and had attached to her bow a
submarine torpedo, charged with about fifty pounds of powder. No efforts
had been spared to render her formidable, and it was believed by the
enemy that her speed, her heavy armament, and her ram, would render her
more than a match for any two vessels of the monitor type. Accordingly
at dawn of June 17th, she steamed down the sound; followed by several
small steamers containing pleasure parties who were to be the witnesses
of the confidently expected triumph of the rebel vessel.

At 4 A. M. she was perceived by the Union iron-clads,—lying at anchor
near the north of the Wilmington river—and they at once prepared for
action. The Weehawken was nearest to the enemy, and getting under way
stood up the sound, the Nahant following in her wake. The Atlanta lay
across the channel and quietly awaited the attack from the National
vessels; but at five o’clock she took the initiative and fired a single
shot at the Nahant, which, however, failed to have any effect. The
Weehawken steamed toward the Atlanta; and when within three hundred
yards opened upon her with a fifteen-inch gun. She then approached still
nearer, and when within two hundred yards she suddenly poured in upon
the rebel vessel the full contents of her two guns. The effect was
disastrous to the Atlanta, who immediately hauled down her colors, and
ran up the white flag in token of surrender. Another discharge from the
Union iron-clad was poured in upon her before the signal was understood,
after which all firing ceased, and the Weehawken, having done all the
fighting, took possession of her prize after a contest that lasted
barely fifteen minutes. In this engagement one hundred and forty-five
prisoners were captured.




                          SIEGE OF CHARLESTON.
                        COMMENCED JULY 3, 1863.


It was felt by the U. S. Government that the attack on Fort Sumter, of
April 7th, was a somewhat humiliating failure; but, notwithstanding
this, the original intention of redeeming Charleston was not abandoned.
It was understood, from the tone of Admiral Porter’s letters, that he
was opposed to a renewal of the attack on Charleston; and he was,
accordingly, relieved of command, and Rear-Admiral Foote was appointed
in his place. Before the period fixed for taking command of his squadron
had expired, Admiral Foote died in New York, and a second appointment
was made in the person of Admiral Dahlgreen, who entered upon his duties
on July 6th. About this time General Gilmore was constituted
commander-in-chief of the military department of the south, and
arrangements were entered into for combined operations by land and sea.




                      THE ATTACK ON MORRIS ISLAND.


On July 10th, an attack was made upon Morris island by the land forces
under General Gilmore, and the iron-clads Catskill, Montauk, Nahant, and
Weehawken, under command of Admiral Dahlgren. On Morris island, on the
opposite side of Light-house Inlet, the rebels had erected, after the
naval attack upon Fort Sumter, several batteries, in all mounting nine
heavy columbiads, and three 10-inch mortars, all bearing upon Folly
island, and the mouth of Light-house inlet, and the approach to the
island by way of Folly river.

At five A. M. the Union fire opened upon the batteries on Morris Island,
being directed from the entire line of works recently erected on Folly
Island. The rebels were taken by surprise, and as the fire from the
Union ranks poured in upon them, they sprang to the tops of the
sand-hills, eagerly looking whence it came, but speedily dropped back
again, and remained concealed till they were taken prisoners by the
Union troops. The fleet, with Admiral Dahlgren on board the Catskill,
had, at an early hour in the morning, crossed the southern channel, and
had drawn up in line of battle along the southern end of Morris island,
in order to deliver an enfilading fire and harass the enemy on his left
and rear.

A vigorous fire was also kept up, during the greater part of the day,
upon Fort Wagner. For three hours the cannonading continued against the
Morris island works, and when at length it began to slacken, General
Gilmore signalled to General Strong, who with his little boat fleet lay
concealed in Folly river, to land his forces, and assault and carry the
batteries at the point of the bayonet. The order was no sooner given
than executed. With shouts and cheers the troops sprang ashore, formed
in line of battle, with the Sixth and Seventh Connecticut on the right,
the Ninth Maine and Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania in the centre, and the
Third New Hampshire and the Forty-eighth New York on the left. In less
than ten minutes the right and centre had carried all the batteries, and
left all the rifle-pits—capturing ten Columbiads, two 10-inch mortars,
one Whitworth gun, together with nearly the entire garrison, consisting
of the First South Carolina Artillery, and ten companies of the
Twenty-first South Carolina Volunteers, in all numbering one hundred and
eighty-five men.

This unexpectedly quick and brilliant success in capturing these strong
works, and obtaining so important a footing upon the island, filled the
troops with the greatest enthusiasm. Cheer after cheer rent the air.

In a few moments General Gillmore and staff crossed to the island, and,
under a burning sun, examined the works, and ascertained the extent of
the victory. The batteries had been in command of Captain Mitchell, son
of the Irish orator, John Mitchell.

With the exception of Fort Wagner and Cummings’ point, all the works on
Morris island had been taken by this time; and during the whole
afternoon the monitors continued to throw shell into the fort. It was
determined that at daylight on the following morning, an attempt should
be made to carry Fort Wagner at the point of the bayonet.




                      THE ASSAULT ON FORT WAGNER.
                             JULY 11, 1863.


At three o’clock, A. M. the attack was made. General Strong led the
Seventh Connecticut, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Rodman; the
Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania, Major Henks, and the Ninth Maine, Colonel
Eng, boldly to the attack, drove in the first line of the enemy’s
pickets, thrown out about half a mile from the fort, received a vigorous
fire from three platoons of infantry in rifle-pits, advanced upon and
drove all not brought down by the Union rifles up to and through the
gates of the fort, while the Seventh Connecticut pushed aside the
abattis, waded through the ditch, took the southeast bastion, bayoneted
all who offered any resistance, and ran their first line all along the
parapet facing the sea, and in five minutes more would have had
possession of the whole fort if the Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania and the
Ninth Maine had supported them as gallantly as the Seventh Connecticut
led.

The garrison of the fort, which was about seven hundred strong, now
belched forth from their howitzers both grape and canister, against an
advancing force of only one hundred and eighty men; for the
Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania and Ninth Maine regiments were so completely
demoralized by the heavy fire of the enemy, that they instantly fell on
their faces, and rose only to retire beyond range.

Slowly the gallant little detachment from the Seventh Connecticut were
compelled to fall back, but not until they had left two-thirds of their
number in the ditches, on the parapet, and within the walls of the fort.
Lieutenant-Colonel Rodman and nearly all his captains were wounded.
Colonel Rodman behaved with the greatest gallantry, and received two
severe wounds.

During the rest of the day, nothing more was done by the land force; but
the monitors kept up a constant fire against Fort Wagner and Cummings’
point. The enemy made strong efforts to reinforce the garrison at Fort
Wagner, but without success.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From this time nothing of importance transpired as regarded the taking
of Charleston, for upwards of a month. General Gillmore was engaged in
pushing his intrenchments toward Fort Wagner, and the navy was
comparatively inactive until such time as the land forces would be ready
to cooperate. Almost every day two or three of the iron-clads bombarded
Fort Wagner and Battery Gregg on Cummings’ point, without receiving any
injury in return, while at the same time the firing served to divert the
enemy’s attention from the siege works in progress.




                      BOMBARDMENT OF FORT SUMTER.
                          AUGUST 17–23, 1863.


At early morning on the 17th August, General Gillmore opened all his
batteries on Fort Sumter, firing directly over Fort Wagner. Admiral
Dahlgren, during the same time, was making good use of the five
iron-clads, Ironsides, Weehawken, Nahant, Montauk and Catskill; he
brought these vessels abreast of Fort Wagner, and effectually silenced
that troublesome work for the remainder of the day. About two thousand
yards from Fort Sumter, the Passaic and Patapsco had taken up position,
and cooperated with the batteries on shore in the attack upon it. No
material injury was done to any of the vessels, but the service lost a
valuable officer in the person of General Dahlgren’s chief-of-staff,
Captain George W. Rodgers. Captain Rodgers was in the pilot house when
he met his death by a flying piece of fractured plating, which killed
him instantly. Paymaster Woodbury was also killed at the same time.

Within the city of Charleston, during this long siege, much fear and
dread troubled the hearts of the inhabitants. The future loomed up dark
and terrible before their affrighted minds, although the chroniclers of
the time declared that there was no panic, nor any prospect of one.
Business of all kinds was, however, almost entirely suspended; and the
cannonading without Fort Sumter, the storm of shot and shell continually
hurled against its walls, brought anxiety to every mind, and a deathlike
pallor to very many cheeks.

At about 2 o’clock in the afternoon all the fleet had retired, with the
exception of the Weehawken and the Nahant, which remained to keep Fort
Wagner silent, and to prevent the remounting of her guns. During the
whole afternoon and night the shore batteries continued firing upon Fort
Sumter with such effect that the shore damage done to it was visible to
the Union men without the aid of a glass. The enemy had erected a false
wall outside of Sumter, which was completely battered and crushed to
pieces; the inner wall was perforated in many places; and the northwest
corner hacked and cracked down almost to the edge of the water. Upon the
next morning the batteries were all briskly at work at an early hour,
the siege guns hurling shell at Sumter at the rate of five shells to the
minute. The masonry of the fort was gradually but surely crumbling to
pieces; but still the rebel flag floated above it, although it had been
twice shot away. Often as it was riddled and torn, a fresh one was run
up, while the determined band within seemed little inclined to
surrender. Since the previous day a severe storm was raging with a high
wind, which prevented the monitors from being of any marked assistance;
but during its utmost violence the land batteries continued to pour in a
deliberate and destructive fire, doing great damage to the gorge wall,
which had been strengthened in every possible way. Before the close of
the day the parapet was utterly demolished, and great breaches were to
be seen in the main wall, through which the projectiles hurled against
it entered, and struck the wall upon the other side, killing any that
came within their deadly path.

During the day a new flagship, the Philadelphia, arrived from Hampton
Roads, having been refitted for the use of Admiral Dahlgren, who
transferred his flag to her, as she was a much more roomy vessel than
the one he had been occupying.

During the long day’s engagement, the cannonading from the National guns
was terrific; and the shriek and scream of shells made the very air
alive with turmoil, while the enemy’s fire was very feeble; Wagner,
owing to the close watch kept upon her, being unable to get even an
occasional shot at the Unionists, and Sumter being too thoroughly
disarmed to attempt a full-voiced return to the countless thundering
defiances sent to her. By way of proving that life was not entirely
extinct within her, she did, however, at long intervals, hurl forth an
occasional shell.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE “SWAMP ANGEL.”—On the evening of the 18th, the enemy discovered that
a battery was being constructed on the Union left, in a marsh which lay
in that direction, and they immediately, from their guns on James
Island, began firing upon the men who were at work there. The erection
of that battery was of considerable importance, for it was nearer to
Charleston than any of the others. The men stood boldly against the
enemy’s fire, and bravely continued their work. One man was killed, and
two wounded. From the time that the enemy first discovered this battery
until the evening of the 20th, they devoted most particular attention to
the work, and within that time one hundred and sixteen shells were
hurled at it from the James Island batteries. Only one struck it, and
there were no farther casualties than those named above. The men
christened the battery in the marsh “The Swamp Angel,” from the great
service it did in concentrating the enemy’s attention upon itself.

                  *       *       *       *       *

CONTINUATION OF THE BOMBARDMENT.—Upon the morning of the 20th, Fort
Sumter still stood, notwithstanding its fall had been confidently and
speedily anticipated on the night of the 18th; but it was an obstinate
and very strong work, and from every flagstaff visible upon it, the
blood-red battle-flag of the “Confederate States Army” still floated
proudly and defiantly on the breeze. The gorge wall still stood
obstinately upright, notwithstanding the fearful fire directed against
it from end to end of the Union lines; although the effect of the
projectiles was plainly visible. Fort Wagner, too, in defiance of the
severe treatment it had received, remained as strong as ever, although
its walls showed the bruises of the many and formidable blows which had
been levelled against it; and it had now the farther advantage of having
been strongly reinforced. Before Sumter could be occupied by the Union
troops, it was absolutely necessary to reduce Forts Gregg and Wagner;
and active operations to this end were constantly going forward.

The storm, which still continued, and at times raged with great
violence, rendered it impossible for the monitors to be of any immediate
service, although the whole fleet moved up abreast of Fort Sumter on the
evening of the 19th, but were obliged to retire without firing a single
shot. When the port-holes were opened the heavy ocean swell washed in,
and effectually prevented the accurate elevation of the guns.

The troops still continued in excellent spirits; though from their
confidence of ultimate success, and the monotony of the long continued
bombardment, some of them showed a slight disposition to carelessness.
But this was speedily put an end to, and the hottest fighting since the
opening of the bombardment, began in terrible earnest. The firing
increased so rapidly that the loud and continuous roar was absolutely
deafening; every battery was at work. At six o’clock in the evening, the
entire top of the fort was completely gone, and every parapet gun was
dismounted, most of them having fallen into the sea. The flags were of
course shot away; the garrison no longer making any effort to return the
Union fire, which hardly ceased during the whole day. The southwest side
presented a mere mass of ruins, when at length the guns were silenced
for the night; and on the next day, nine enormous breaches were visible
in the strongest portion of the fort. The firing was again resumed; and,
upon rebel authority, “kept up heavier than ever during the 21st.” From
five o’clock in the morning, till seven in the evening, nine hundred and
twenty-three shots were fired, of which no less than seven hundred and
four struck the fort. The Ironsides, on this morning, also opened fire,
and Sumter occasionally replied. Fort Wagner fired briskly on the Union
advanced works, too, but without doing much damage. The National fire
upon Wagner was, however, very destructive, and with every hour
continued to grow more so. At eleven P. M., a demand for the surrender
of Fort Sumter was sent to General Beauregard, with a threat that, if
the demand was not complied with, the city of Charleston should be
shelled within four hours. The demand was refused, although the fort was
a ruin; and the paper containing the demand was returned at seven
o’clock on the morning of the 22d to General Gilmore. The flag of truce
which had been hoisted during the sending of and return of the demand,
was now lowered, and the firing recommenced in all its fury, passing
from end to end of the Union line, and continuing with unabated
fierceness for the remainder of the day. General Gilmore, (after
allowing time for the removal of the women and children,) gave orders to
Lieutenant Sellmer, commanding the “Swamp Angel,” to open with his heavy
rifled gun upon the city of Charleston; and accordingly, fifteen shells
(of Birney’s invention), were thrown across the James Island batteries
into the town. The arrival of these projectiles caused the utmost terror
and dismay to the inhabitants, who rushed blindly to and fro in
indescribable confusion, while the light of burning buildings and the
ringing of alarm bells, gave proof to the Unionists of the consternation
caused by the unexpected arrival of the messengers from the “Swamp
Angel.”

Fort Wagner now gathered up her whole strength to throw against the
Union forces, and her firing, directed exclusively against the right,
became really terrific. The Ironsides and two other monitors came up,
and for four hours poured a torrent of shells into the Confederate fort,
which finally silenced her.

Another flag of truce was hoisted during the day to receive a message
from General Beauregard, which turned out to be an indignant protest
against what he was pleased to call General Gilmore’s “unchristian and
uncivilized mode of warfare” in shelling the city of Charleston. The
dispatches were instantly replied to, and in a manner not calculated to
quiet Beauregard’s indignation. Again there was a suspension of
hostilities while the message was being carried, but the firing
recommenced as soon as the dispatch had been delivered.

During the night only a few shots were exchanged by the combatants; and
on the next morning such a dense fog hung over the bay that operations
were temporarily suspended. The “Swamp Angel” was again trained on
Charleston; and the shelling of the city continued with great violence
for a good part of the night, while the rebel batteries on James island
continued playing away on the “Swamp Angel,” but without doing it any
great damage.

Fort Sumter itself was by this time so utterly ruined that no further
damage could be done to it by continued firing, in rendering it useless
as a defence to Charleston; and as it was not deemed necessary to
absolutely level it with the earth, firing upon it was discontinued
after the 23d August. Fort Wagner was found to be very difficult to
overcome. Day after day the bombardment had been continued against the
place, which was evidently one of the strongest of the enemy’s forts. It
was commanded by Colonel Keith, of South Carolina, and garrisoned by
fourteen hundred effective men; but notwithstanding its brave defence
and its strength, it could not much longer hold out against the Union
forces. On the 26th General Gilmore succeeded in running a parallel very
close to Wagner. A ridge of sand which interposed, could, he perceived,
be made useful, as it was constantly occupied by a body of the enemy’s
pickets, and at night by a large force protected by rifle-pits. To push
the rebels from this sand ridge and take possession of it himself was
the intention of General Gilmore; and just before dark the position was
assaulted, and carried by the Twenty-fourth Massachusetts regiment. The
bombardment of the fort itself then continued more actively than ever,
while from Fort Johnson and all the other works on James island, the
booming of cannon continued to make itself heard loud and furious.

On the 30th of August the bombardment of Fort Sumter was resumed. For
seven days the firing had ceased against it, but as that was quite long
enough for the enemy to make necessary repairs, and in some degree fit
it up again, firing was recommenced in order to prevent the rebels from
making any important advance in their work of reconstruction, supposing
them to have begun it. No reply came from the fort in answer to the
firing directed against it, which only increased its battered and
helpless appearance.

On September 1st a general engagement took place between Forts Wagner,
Moultrie, and Sumter, and the Union iron-clads, in which two of the
forts suffered severely, but the apparently invincible Wagner was but
slightly injured. To mine the work was impossible, because of its low
position. The men who attempted to lay a train, discovered water at the
depth of only two feet. But the sappers succeeded, on the night of the
6th September, in mining the outerscrap, after long and tedious work;
and in this way all its guns were unmasked, and an order was issued to
carry the place by assault at nine o’clock on the following morning,
that being the hour of low tide. It was then discovered that the enemy
had commenced evacuating the fort late on the previous night, and with
the exception of seventy-five men, had escaped. The National troops
invested the fort, and took possession of Cummings’ point. A large
supply of excellent ammunition was captured, and nineteen pieces of
artillery; and thus the city and harbor of Charleston were completely
covered by the Union guns.

An assault upon Fort Sumter was made during the same night, by a
flotilla of twenty-five boats, manned by one hundred sailors, under
Lieutenant-Commander Williams, and about one hundred marines under
Captain McCauley. The entire force was under the command of Commander
Stephens, of the Patapsco.

The boats landed, and the men attempted to run up the parapet, but were
repulsed. At a signal from Fort Sumter, all the batteries bearing on it
opened at once on the boats, and a rebel ram coming up engaged them at
close quarter. Three boats were completely demolished and forty or fifty
sailors and marines were killed and wounded. Lieutenant Bayard was
mortally wounded and captured. The other officers captured were
Commander Williams, Lieutenant Renny, Lieutenant Hueston, Lieutenant
Rowell, Lieutenant Bunce, Doctor Wheeler, and Ensign Porter. The entire
list of casualties numbered about eighty; and the remainder of the
command retired in safety.

After this ineffectual attempt to take possession of Fort Sumter by the
navy, little progress in the siege of Charleston was made during the
remainder of the year. All the captured forts on Morris island were
enlarged and strengthened; and new batteries, which effectually
commanded Fort Sumter, were erected by order of General Gilmore, which
could also be made most valuable in aiding any further naval attack
against Charleston.

The next event of marked importance was an attempt on the part of the
enemy to blow up the frigate Ironsides, on the 5th October. The shelling
of the city was continued at intervals; and occasionally the forts were
severely bombarded. The portion of Charleston which was within reach of
the shells, was greatly injured, and had been quite abandoned by its
inhabitants at an early stage of the proceedings against the city. Fort
Sumter was furiously bombarded late in October, with severe damage to
the sea wall, but its devoted garrison still clung to it, and the return
fire was, at times, very severe. The year drew to its close, and the
rebels had lost their strongest forts—the National troops occupied
Wagner; Sumter was a ruin; and the city of Charleston, already severely
shelled, lay under the guns of the Union.




             OPERATIONS IN ARKANSAS—CAPTURE OF LITTLE ROCK.


On the 1st of July 1863, General Steele arrived at Helena, and reported
to General Hurlbut, the commander of the Sixteenth Army corps, in order
to receive instructions as to an expedition planned by General Grant,
against Little Rock, in that State. All of the troops then in Helena,
together with a cavalry division, operating in various parts of the
State at that time, and led by Brigadier-General Davidson, were
immediately placed under General Steele’s command. But the climate of
Helena, which was unfavorable to the troops, had weakened a large number
who were either sick or convalescent from sickness. The number mustered
at this point for the expedition, was about six thousand. The artillery
consisted of three six-gun batteries, one four-gun battery, and six
ten-pound Parrot guns. The cavalry numbered less than five hundred men
fit for duty, and consisted of the First Indiana and the Fifth Kansas
regiments. General Davidson’s cavalry division consisted of six thousand
men. On taking command at Helena, General Steele proceeded to organize
his forces, and to establish camps for the sick. This done, he commenced
an advance movement. General Davidson pushed on to Clarendon, a point on
White river, where corduroying two miles of bottom, he threw a bridge
over Rock Roe Bayou. Another division advanced toward the same point,
under command of General Rice, and still another under command of
Colonel W. E. McClean. The entire force was congregated, on the 17th of
August, at Clarendon. Beyond the river lay the enemy. General Steele’s
design, now, was to establish an Hospital at Duvall’s Bluff, a healthy
point on the river, and thence to advance against Little Rock, the
capital of the State, and the headquarters of the rebels, situated on
the west bank of the Arkansas river. This plan was pursued with equal
energy and success. As early as the 23rd July, the Hospital was
established; and, on the 25th, General Davidson, still advancing,
skirmished with the rebel General Marmaduke’s cavalry, which he finally
drove into their intrenchments at Bayou Meton. On the 27th he again
attacked the enemy, and drove them from their intrenchments; but the
rebels burned their bridges in returning, and thus, for a time,
succeeded in checking the Union advance. General Davidson then
concentrated his forces at Brownsville, where he remained until the end
of the month. On the 30th of August General Steele was reinforced, by
True’s brigade, from Memphis, and on the 14th of September he commenced
a general advance against the rebels beyond Bayou Meton. At first he
resolved to endeavor to turn the left flank of the rebel forces, and for
this purpose he sent out General Davidson to reconnoitre. This
reconnoissance, made by way of Austin, lasted two days. At the end of
that time, however, General Steele was in possession of such information
concerning the roads and the disposition of the foe, as determined him
to advance on the right. On the 6th of September, therefore, the general
advance was resumed, True’s brigade, and Ritter’s cavalry being left to
guard the sick at Brownsville. On the 7th the advance reached the
Arkansas river, at or near Ashley’s Mills, a point above Little Rock.
General Steele’s plans were now laid with equal boldness and skill.
General Davidson was directed to cross the Arkansas with a considerable
force, and to move down the south bank of the river directly against the
capital. General Steele meantime marched down the south bank, and
threatened the city in front. The passage of the river was effected by
means of a pontoon bridge, on the 10th, and General Davidson advanced to
Bayou Fourche before encountering any opposition. At this place,
however, he was met by a Confederate force, in regular line of battle,
consisting of Fagan’s and Tappan’s brigades and Marmaduke’s cavalry. A
brisk engagement ensued, but the rebels, galled by artillery fire from
the other side of the river, and steadily pushed by the gallant troops
of Davidson, were speedily compelled to retreat. The Union advance
meanwhile was continued—simultaneously upon both sides of the stream. In
a short time, volumes of smoke and clouds of dust, in the direction of
Little Rock, made it evident that the rebels were retreating from the
city, burning the bridges as they passed over. Marmaduke’s cavalry was
thus found to be the only obstacle to the Union occupation of the
capital. A bold push soon swept that foe away, and on the night of
September 10th, Little Rock was formally surrendered. The forces,
however, were too weary to continue the pursuit, until the next day,
when Merrill’s and Clayton’s cavalry followed the flying foe for twenty
miles, taking a number of prisoners and causing the destruction of a
part of the rebel baggage train. The Union loss in this battle did not
exceed one hundred; the rebel loss was at least five times as great,
including prisoners. So ended a campaign of forty-five days, which
resulted in substantially freeing the State of Arkansas from the
clutches of rebellion.

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE GENERALS. EWELL. JOSEPH E. JOHNSTON.
LONGSTREET. GARNETT. FITZHUGH LEE. A. P. HILL. MAGRUDER. BRAGG.]

The capture of Little Rock, however, was succeeded by a variety of
incidents, which deserve to be summed up in a brief statement, as
marking the close of the war in Arkansas.

On the 28th of October a portion of the retreating troops of the
discomfited rebel General Price, having eluded pursuit, attacked Pine
Bluff, hoping, if successful, to recapture Little Rock, and enfeeble the
Union troops by cutting off their line of communication with the
Mississippi. But the Unionists repulsed this attack, and on the same day
captured Arkadelphia, forcing the Confederates to retreat towards the
Red river.

Thus, at the close of the year 1863, the entire State of Arkansas,
excepting a small part in the Southwest, and another small part in the
Northwest, infested by guerrillas, was restored to the authority of the
United States Government.




             OPERATIONS IN SOUTHERN VIRGINIA, DURING 1863.


In the early part of 1863, there were no important military events
transpiring in Southern Virginia. There were three important positions
which the rebels were desirous of obtaining, and these were Suffolk,
Norfolk, and Portsmouth. The Union troops in that Department were, at
the time, under the immediate command of General Dix. The garrison
occupying Suffolk numbered thirteen thousand men, and was commanded by
General Peck, who, as events proved, was eminently capable of
maintaining the position he held. The intention of the enemy appeared to
be to reduce Suffolk, and then to march directly into Norfolk and
Portsmouth, which places were both weakly garrisoned by small and raw
regiments. General Longstreet was in command of the rebel force which
had for its object the capture of Suffolk; and the intention of that
able commander was either to descend suddenly upon the city and
overpower its garrison by superior numbers; or to cut off all the roads
by which it received supplies, and thus be enabled to carry it after a
short fight.

The town of Suffolk is situated at the head of Nansemond Creek, about
twelve miles from its confluence with the James river. In the town, two
railroads unite, by which General Peck received all his supplies. These
roads, passing through Suffolk, proceeded the one from Norfolk to
Petersburgh, and the other from Portsmouth to Weldon.




                         THE SIEGE OF SUFFOLK.
                         APRIL 11-MAY 3, 1863.


General Longstreet was well aware that Suffolk was strongly garrisoned,
and he did not open the attack upon it rashly. In order to make his
undertaking thoroughly successful, he perceived that several preliminary
movements were necessary, and he set about carefully executing them. The
first of these was a manœuvre by which the Suffolk garrison might be
materially weakened. Accordingly, General Hill was sent to attack Little
Washington, North Carolina; a subject which has been elsewhere treated;
and, as anticipated by the skillful rebel General, this movement against
Little Washington made it necessary for General Peck to send a
reinforcement to the assistance of the imperilled Union position. Three
thousand men were ordered forward to aid General Foster in his defence
of Little Washington.

General Longstreet had already collected several pontoon and siege
trains at various convenient points, which were held in readiness for an
immediate move as soon as it should be deemed necessary. Having been
informed by his spies of the removal of three thousand of General Peck’s
men, the rebel General instantly put his army in motion, and crossed the
Blackwater on several bridges, with the divisions of Hood, French,
Pickett, and Henderson, numbering in all thirty thousand men. This
comparatively large army, moving forward in three distinct columns, was,
by means of a forced march, placed in front of the Union camps in a few
hours. The cavalry pickets, utterly surprised, were quietly captured by
the rebels as they advanced. But here terminated the easy success which
the rebel General had anticipated. General Peck had not been idle while
Longstreet was making his preparations and watching for a good
opportunity to advance. The Union General was aware of the movements of
the rebel, and had fathomed his designs sufficiently well to be prepared
for him. Besides which General Longstreet had frustrated one of his best
laid plans; for at the moment that his troops captured the Union
pickets, the trains containing the reinforcements for General Foster
were about to be set in motion. The trains were delayed of course; and
the three thousand men were retained to aid in the defence of Suffolk.

The enemy, making the best of their mistake, advanced boldly on the
works, but found them strongly garrisoned and bristling with steel. It
required but a few moments to convince them that their surprise was an
utter failure; and that nothing remained for them but to fall back on
their superior numbers, and capture the town, if at all, by hard
fighting. The rebel General then directed his attention toward the
Nansemond—in which were stationed several army gunboats, sent there by
Admiral Lee—having first left a large force in front of the main
defences of the town, to engage the Union troops and divert attention
from the real rebel designs.

Again General Longstreet was disappointed in what he had regarded as a
sure and easy success. The gunboats did not apparently, to him, present
a formidable resistance; nor yet the two army gunboats, Smith Briggs,
and West End, which were commanded by two youthful officers—Captain
Rowe, and Captain Lee—whose skill and bravery put them on a level with
veterans in the service. Strong batteries of the enemy engaged the
gunboats at early dawn of the 12th of April, after having spent the
entire night in constructing battery after battery; and although the
frail boats were completely riddled, and their men were shot down so
fast that the decks were strewn with the killed and wounded, the staunch
little vessels, with their brave crews, obstinately refused to leave the
river. The Nansemond, which was so small a stream that a moderately
sized steamer could not turn round in it, was defended by this small
flotilla against a force thirty thousand strong, eager and determined to
cross, and having opposed to them six navy gunboats, two army gunboats,
a force, in all numbering but five thousand men, to hold a line eight
miles in length. Brigadier-General Getty, who had been entrusted with
the arduous task of defending the Nansemond river, was eminently suited
to defend it successfully. The Nansemond had the further disadvantage of
being surrounded with various swamps and creeks, so that it was
absolutely impossible for troops to pass, as reinforcements, from one
point to another, without great loss of time. To remedy this
inconvenience, General Getty had undertaken the construction of a
military road several miles in length, which should include many bridges
and long spaces of corduroy; and by extraordinary exertions the troops
had completed this road in the space of three days.

While the enemy’s batteries were brought into play upon the gunboats,
General Getty was putting into service all his skill as an artillerist.
Aided by Colonel Dutton, who commanded the Third brigade, he at once
began selecting positions for rifle-pits and batteries, which, on the
next morning, were in working order, and thundered forth a storm of
shell upon the astonished enemy. For several days this warfare
continued, the rebels persistently endeavoring to gain a foothold on the
shore, and being as persistently driven back by the Union fire from
batteries, rifle-pits and gunboats. Not until the 18th day of the month
did the rebels at all advance in their efforts: but on that day they
succeeded in establishing on Hill’s Point, six miles from Suffolk, an
earthwork which mounted five heavy rifled guns. Against this formidable
work the Union fire was powerless; the missiles for the most part
harmlessly burying themselves in its parapet, while from this strong
position the enemy maintained a constant and destructive fire upon the
National gunboats. Beneath this severe fire the Mount Washington
grounded directly under the rebel guns, and her brave companions refused
to leave her in such a strait. The Commodore Barney received fifty-eight
holes in her hull and machinery; and while the gallant captain of the
Mount Washington stood over the guns of his shattered vessel, still
hoping to save her, a severe contest raged for six long hours. At last
came the rising tide, and floated off the boats in safety.

Admiral Lee now ordered the gunboats out of the Upper Nansemond; and
affairs began to wear a discouraging aspect. But already the dawn that
succeeds the darkest hour was slowly breaking through its blackness,
soon to shine forth in the noontide glory of success. It was proposed by
Lieutenant Lansom to capture the Hill’s Point battery, and the proposal
was received with favor by General Peck.

The following, which is an extract from a description by an eye-witness
does not over-color this brilliant feat:


  “Shortly before sunset the gunboats on the river, and the four rifled
  guns at and near battery Stevens, opened a terrific fire upon the
  rebel battery. Meantime, detachments from the Eighty-ninth New York
  Volunteers, Lieutenant-Colonel England, and the Eighth Connecticut,
  Colonel Ward, in all two hundred and eighty men, embarked on board the
  gunboat Stepping Stones, Lieutenant Lansom, at a point about a mile
  above the battery. Protected by the artillery fire, the gunboat boldly
  steamed down the river about two hundred yards above the rebel works,
  the shore at that point being an abrupt bluff. Immediately the troops
  disembarked, wading to their waists in water, ascended the bluff, and
  with loud cheers charged on the rear of the fort. Meantime, the
  gunboat’s crew had landed four boat howitzers, placed them in
  position, and opened on the fort. The enemy, taken completely by
  surprise, were only able to deliver two or three volleys of musketry,
  and fire one gun, when our troops entered the work, and captured the
  entire party of seven officers and one hundred and thirty men, with
  five brass guns, and a large supply of ammunition.”


The capture of this battery so alarmed the rebels that they at once
turned all their attention to their own position, and the most earnest
preparations were made in all haste to resist the terrible artillery
fire of the Union batteries, which was now turned with all their
strength against their front.

Perpetually on the look-out for any change in the plans or position of
the enemy, General Peck was constantly sending out reconnoitering
parties, who, getting into skirmishes with the enemy’s outposts, would
drive them back to the rebel main line, and were then in turn forced
back themselves by formidable numbers. The work of fortifying continued
to go on during the whole three weeks of the siege; the labor of
erecting batteries, building roads and bridges, and cutting timber, went
briskly forward during the night, after days of severe fighting. Nothing
could exceed, nor no praise do justice to the constant patience,
courage, and devotion to duty manifested by the brave troops who
defended Suffolk.

Rebel reinforcements began to arrive about the 20th of April, returning
from their unsuccessful attack on Fort Washington. Day by day the enemy
grew stronger. But no fear of defeat troubled the brave Unionists, nor
did the thought of surrender occur to them.

By the 30th of April a rebel reinforcement, consisting of General D. H.
Hill’s troops, and numbering ten thousand, arrived and joined the
already strong army of General Longstreet; and such was Longstreet’s
opinion of the town’s fortifications and inner strength, that
notwithstanding his own very superior numbers, he began to feel that
after all he would be compelled to forego his plan of capturing Suffolk.
He would not retire, however, without a final effort; and new batteries
were constantly constructed, but no sooner unmasked, than they were
silenced by the deadly fire of the gunboats, and Parrotts from the Union
works. Victory had spread her wings above the Union forces, and was
waiting to fold them and settle down upon the National banner. General
Longstreet was soon compelled to acknowledge his attack a failure; and
the approaching conflict between the armies of Hooker and Lee (elsewhere
described), gave him a good excuse for raising the siege of Suffolk.

On the 3rd of May General Longstreet drew off his men, and commenced his
retreat. They were pursued by a strong Union force under General Getty
and General Harland; the enemy was overtaken, and some sharp skirmishing
took place between him and his pursuers, which was at length ended by
darkness. Under cover of the night the rebels retreated.

The next day a rebel cavalry force, numbering four hundred, was
encountered at Chuckatuck by small Union force, who routed them with
musketry and artillery. A short distance from Hill’s Point, the rebels
were encountered by another Union force under Colonel Dutton, and caused
them considerable annoyance for the remainder of the day. At midnight on
the 3rd of May, the Union troops under Corcoran, Dodge and Foster,
started in pursuit of the flying rebels; but without any result except
the capture of a few hundred stragglers. This ended the siege of
Suffolk; during which the National loss was forty-four killed, two
hundred and one wounded and fourteen missing. Four hundred rebel
prisoners were captured in all; and the enemy had gained absolutely
nothing, with a loss of one thousand five hundred men in killed wounded
and prisoners; five guns, and a very large quantity of stores and small
arms.




                     SIEGE OF KNOXVILLE, TENNESSEE.
                     NOVEMBER 17-DECEMBER 6, 1863.


From the commencement of hostilities until the fall of 1863, no
successful measures had been adopted to relieve the inhabitants of East
Tennessee from the iron rule of rebellion. More than three-fourths of
the population were unconditionally loyal, and her brave soldiers fought
side by side with the men of the North and West in defence of the
Government, while their homes were being desolated by a stern and
vindictive foe. Hundreds of her citizens had suffered death from
imprisonment and privations, while thousands were unwillingly
conscripted in the rebel armies.

Much had been hoped for, when General Buell led a gallant army through
Kentucky, almost to her border, but the day of her emancipation had not
yet arrived.

In the fall of 1863, a determined effort was made by the Government to
occupy East Tennessee. General Burnside had been called to the command
of the Department of the Ohio, in the month of March, but the exigencies
of the Vicksburg campaign had deprived him of his troops, and he had
subsequently remained inactive. The surrender of that stronghold had
placed an army again at his disposal, and by the latter part of August
he was in condition to attempt the occupation of East Tennessee, and
thus cooperate with General Rosecrans, who was then in the midst of his
heavy campaign bearing on Chattanooga. It was feared that reinforcements
would reach Bragg at Chattanooga, through East Tennessee from Virginia,
and to General Burnside was assigned the duty of destroying the
communications between these points. He entered the State late in
August, about midway between the eastern and western boundaries, and
immediately occupied Knoxville, which was evacuated by the rebel General
Buckner, without a struggle. His retreat was so precipitate, and his
surprise so great, that he had no opportunity to notify the garrison at
Cumberland Gap of their danger, consequently the rebel forces at that
point, numbering some two thousand men, were environed by the Union
army, and compelled to surrender.

Knoxville was now delivered from the rebel rule; and the inhabitants
hailed the presence of their deliverers with the warmest tokens of joy.
Recruits flocked to the Union army by hundreds, from all the surrounding
country, much faster than they could be either armed or clad.

Though the capture of Knoxville was an easy enterprise on the part of
General Burnside, its retention promised to be a work of great
difficulty. He was two hundred and fifty miles from the base of his
supplies in Kentucky, and on either side of him were the two great
armies of the rebellion—Lee on the east, and Bragg on the south. The
country in the neighborhood swarmed with guerrillas, and important posts
in the vicinity were liable to, and subjected to frequented attacks from
the Confederate forces, yet too feeble to attack the main Union army.
Clothes and shoes began to fail, and economy became necessary in all
means of subsistence. The disastrous battle of Chickamauga, which
imperilled the existence of General Rosecrans’ army, tended to increase
the difficulties of General Burnside.

During the month of November it became certain that General Longstreet
had been detached from the army of General Bragg, with the design of
attacking General Burnside, at Knoxville. After fortifying the city in
such manner as to insure confidence in his ability to maintain it,
General Burnside advanced to meet his antagonist, cautiously luring him
on, to invite his withdrawal from the support of Bragg, and finally
falling back within the defences of Knoxville, on the 17th of November,
with the rebel army pressing close upon his rear. The Union army was
informed that there was now to be no more retreating. The old defences
were strengthened and new ones erected, rifle-pits dug, and trees felled
to resist the approach of the besiegers.

The city lies on the north bank of the Holston river, and a range of
hills protects it on the west. The rebels, therefore, prepared to attack
the defences from the north and east. Their line extended in a circular
form, with their right touching the river, thus cutting off all water
communication, and the supplies of the army were thenceforward to be
obtained by forage trains alone. A long siege was not feared by General
Burnside, as he had the promise of assistance from General Grant, who
had just been called to the command of the army confronting Bragg. The
brilliant victories of Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge now enabled
General Grant to hasten forward the expected succor. Of this fact
Longstreet soon became informed, but as he had confidently anticipated
the capture of the city and its defenders, he was loth to leave his
anticipated prey without a desperate and hasty effort for its seizure.
He would try to carry Knoxville by storm.

One of the principal defences of the place was called Fort Sanders, in
honor of a brave general who had fallen in the early part of the siege.
It was situated on a high hill on the northeast corner of the town, and
was composed of well-planned earthworks. This fort commanded the
approaches to the city both from the north and east, and its capture was
a necessity before the assailants could enter Knoxville. The sides of
the hill had been covered with a dense forest of pine, which had been
felled, and now presented an abattis or network of brush or timber,
almost impassable, to within two or three hundred yards of the fort,
where a cleared space intervened, affording free range for grape or
canister. The works consisted of a ditch and parapet.

Three picked regiments were assigned the duty of storming this fort by
General Longstreet. On the night of the twenty-eighth of November these
regiments succeeded in pushing their way through the pine abattis,
reaching the edge of the clearing, after a short interval of skirmishing
with the defenders, and lay on their arms at the edge of the abattis
until daybreak on the morning of the twenty-ninth, when a charge was
ordered. A scene of carnage and desperate valor now ensued, which had
many parallels during this fratricidal war. As the rebels advanced
across the open space, a furious storm of grape and canister met them,
and decimated their ranks. A network of unseen wires, which had been
interlaced across the approach, now entangled their ranks, and threw
many of the men to the ground, who were trampled under feet by their
comrades. The air was filled with the whiz of minie balls. Yet still the
intrepid assailants rushed on, over the bodies of their dead and wounded
comrades, until they reached the ditch, where they encountered a
continuous storm of hand-grenades thrown into the midst of the
struggling mass, and exploding with horrible effect. One of the
assailants reached the parapet, and waved a Confederate flag, only to be
hurled into the ditch the next instant, a mangled corpse. None of the
rebels entered the fort, while scores lay dead before it. The whole
force of the garrison was but three hundred—far less than the dead and
dying who strewed the ground around it. The Federal loss was four killed
and eleven wounded.

General Longstreet, now despairing of success, abandoned the siege, and
retreated southward. On the sixth of December General Sherman entered
the city with reinforcements, and railroad communication with
Chattanooga was opened.




                        OPERATIONS IN TENNESSEE.
                    SEPTEMBER 20-DECEMBER 31, 1863.


The great battle of Chickamauga, ending on the 20th of September, 1863,
resulted, as we have seen, in no material advantage to the rebels and in
no additional success to the arms of the Union. It was substantially an
equal and a fruitless contest—“a drawn battle.” Upon both sides the
losses were very heavy. General Rosecrans lost sixteen thousand eight
hundred and fifty-one men, all told, and a large quantity of material of
war. General Bragg, on the other hand, lost eighteen thousand. Upward of
two thousand rebels were captured by the National troops.

On the 2d of October, General Rosecrans issued the following order,
dated at the Headquarters of the Department of the Cumberland, at
Chattanooga.


  “_Army of the Cumberland_: You have made a grand and successful
  campaign; you have driven the rebels from Middle Tennessee. You
  crossed a great mountain range, placed yourselves on the banks of a
  broad river, crossed it in the face of a powerful opposing army, and
  crossed two other great mountain ranges at the only practicable
  passes, some forty miles between extremes. You concentrated in the
  face of superior numbers; fought the combined armies of Bragg, which
  you drove from Shelbyville to Tullahoma, of Johnston’s army from
  Mississippi, and the tried veterans of Longstreet’s corps, and for two
  days held them at bay, giving them blow for blow, with heavy interest.
  When the day closed, you held the field, from which you withdrew, in
  the face of overpowering numbers, to occupy the point for which you
  set out—Chattanooga.

  “You have accomplished the great work of the campaign; you hold the
  key of East Tennessee, of Northern Georgia, and of the enemy’s mines
  of coal and nitre. Let these achievements console you for the regret
  you experience that arrivals of fresh hostile troops forbade your
  remaining on the field to renew the battle; for the right of burying
  your gallant dead, and caring for your brave companions who lay
  wounded on the field. The losses you have sustained, though heavy, are
  slight, considering the odds against you, and the stake you have won.

  “You hold in your hands the substantial fruits of a victory, and
  deserve and will receive the honors and plaudits of a grateful nation,
  which asks nothing of even those who have been fighting us, but
  obedience to the Constitution and laws established for our own common
  benefit.

  “The General commanding earnestly begs every officer and soldier of
  this army to unite with him in thanking Almighty God for His favors to
  us. He presents his hearty thanks and congratulations to all the
  officers and soldiers of this command, for their energy, patience, and
  perseverance, and the undaunted courage displayed by those who fought
  with such unflinching resolution.

  “Neither the history of this war, nor probably the annals of any
  battle, furnish a loftier example of obstinate bravery and enduring
  resistance to superior numbers—when troops, having exhausted their
  ammunition, resorted to the bayonet, many times, to hold their
  positions, against such odds—as did our left and centre, comprising
  troops from all the corps, on the afternoon of the 20th of September,
  at the battle of Chickamauga.

                              (Signed)            W. S. ROSECRANS,
                                              Major-General Commanding.”


After the battle of Chickamauga, the Union army fell back to
Chattanooga, and assumed a strong position in front of that place,
abandoning, however, the passes of Lookout Mountain, which were
immediately occupied by the rebels. The Army of the Cumberland at this
time received its supplies, by way of Stevenson, and Bridgeport, from
depots at Louisville and Nashville. To cut railroad communication with
those points, and thus to paralyze the Union forces, was now the aim of
the Confederate commander; and to this labor he addressed his efforts,
with promptitude and with courage. But the line of railroad was well
defended. On the 23d of September, General Hooker was sent to Tennessee,
in command of the Eleventh and Twelfth corps of the Army of the Potomac,
and was assigned to the protection of the line of communication between
Bridgeport and Nashville. The rebels, in their vain endeavors to
intercept the Union communications, brought about several small
engagements, in which the Unionists were invariably victorious. Thus, on
the 2d of October a rebel force, four thousand strong, under Wheeler,
was defeated, at Anderson’s Cross Roads, by the First Missouri and
Second Indiana cavalry, under Colonel Edward McCook. The enemy lost one
hundred and twenty men, killed and wounded, eighty-seven prisoners, and
upwards of eight hundred mules; and was completely routed, and driven
back for miles. Thus, also, on the 6th of October, General Mitchell
attacked the enemy, in strong force, at Shelbyville, and put them to
flight, with heavy loss. They were, likewise, defeated at Farrington, on
the 8th of October, by the National troops under General Crook, who
captured on this occasion two hundred and forty prisoners, four pieces
of artillery, and one hundred stand of arms.

But other and more important movements were in contemplation at this
time. The Government at Washington, hearing that Bragg was to receive
reinforcements, and feeling that the crisis demanded an infallible
commander, determined to relieve General Rosecrans, and entirely to
reorganize the conduct of the war in the west. With this view General
Grant was directed to advance with his forces from Vicksburg, and to
assume command of the Departments of Tennessee, Cumberland, and Ohio. On
the 18th of October, General Grant arrived at Louisville, and entered
upon his new duties. The immediate direction of affairs in the
Department of the Cumberland was committed to Major-General G. H.
Thomas. The Department of Tennessee was assigned to Major-General W. T.
Sherman. The corps of Generals McCook and Crittenden were consolidated,
and stationed at Cincinnati. General Burnside, commanding the Department
of Ohio, was, at this time, with a considerable Union force, in the
vicinity of Knoxville, in the eastern part of the State.

Such was the position of affairs, when General Grant took command of
these important operations. His first movement was to open a shorter
land communication between the Army of the Cumberland and its base of
supplies. This was necessary, because the rebels were, substantially,
investing Chattanooga; and to lose communication with its base of
supplies, would be to lose the army there intrenched. The movement was
effected in a very skillful manner, and at considerable peril, by
throwing a pontoon bridge across the river Tennessee, at a place called
Brown’s Ferry, about one mile and a half by land, and eight miles by
water, below the bridge at Chattanooga. The boats for this bridge were
floated down from Chattanooga, under cover of the night, and filled with
soldiers. More soldiers were then brought across the river at Brown’s
Ferry, the enemy was driven back on the hills on the shore, and the
bridge was constructed. It was nine hundred feet long, and the work of
building it occupied five hours. As soon as this step had been
successfully taken, General Hooker moved over from Bridgeport, crossed
the river at Brown’s Ferry, and so effected a junction with the forces
at Chattanooga. This opened the direct road to Kelly’s Ferry and so to
Bridgeport, and effectually baffled the enemy’s hopes of cutting off the
Union line of communication. General Grant now pursued, with comparative
freedom his campaign for clearing East Tennessee of the armed forces of
the Rebellion.

The rebel line at this time extended from Lookout Mountain, on the left,
to Fort Buckner, the extreme point of Missionary Ridge, on the right.
The position was, of course, on the south side of the Tennessee river.
The base of supplies was Atlanta. As soon as General Sherman arrived,
with his command, from Memphis, General Grant proceeded to carry out his
plan of the campaign. The rebel General Longstreet, with a considerable
force was now absent from Bragg’s army, having been detached to proceed
against the Union troops under General Burnside, at Knoxville. Bragg’s
army was, therefore, materially weakened. General Grant was not slow to
avail himself of this advantage. The plan upon which he proceeded
involved the following detail. A division of General Sherman’s troops
was to be sent to Trenton, threatening the enemy’s left flank. Under
cover of this movement, General Sherman’s main body was to cross the
Brown’s Ferry bridge at night and pass thence into a concealed camp of
the north side of the river, opposite South Chickamauga creek. One
division was to encamp on the North Chickamauga; about one hundred and
twenty pontoons were to be taken under cover of hills and woods, and
launched into the North Chickamauga; these were to be filled with men,
to be floated out into the Tennessee and down it, until opposite the
South Chickamauga (about three miles below), to effect a landing on the
bank, and throw up works; the remainder of the command was to be taken
across in the same boats, or a portion of them; the Tennessee and South
Chickamauga were to be bridged, and then the artillery crossed and moved
at once to seize a foothold on the bridge, taking up a line facing the
enemy’s right flank, near the tunnel. General Howard’s corps of General
Hooker’s command was to cross into the town by the two bridges, and fill
the gap between General Sherman’s proposed position and the main body of
General Thomas’s army. General Hooker, with the remainder of his force
and a division sent to Trenton, which should return, were to carry the
point of Lookout, and then threaten the enemy’s left, which would thus
be thrown back, being forced to evacuate the mountain and take position
on the ridge; and then the Federal troops, being on both flanks, and
upon one flank threatening the enemy’s communications, were to advance
the whole line or turn the other flank, as the chances might dictate.
Then a part of the force was to follow as far as possible, while General
Sherman destroyed the railroad from Cleveland to Dalton, and then pushed
on to relieve Knoxville, and capture, disperse, or drive off General
Longstreet from before it.




                      BATTLE OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN.
                           NOVEMBER 24, 1863.


General Grant’s forward movement against the rebel position on Lookout
Mountain commenced on the 24th. The preliminary movements had been
successfully carried out, the Tennessee having been bridged on the 23d,
and General Sherman’s troops pushed across the river. The ascent to
Lookout Mountain is very difficult, and was, of course, rendered all the
more arduous and perilous, by the enemy’s fortifications. But difficulty
was no bar, either to the gallant Army of the Cumberland or to its brave
leaders. Early on the morning of the 24th, General Hooker’s forces
commenced to move along the valley, greatly to the astonishment of the
rebels, who were watching the movement, from their vantage ground upon
the mountain, and who made no immediate opposition to the attempted
ascent of Lookout.

About twenty-five feet from the summit of the mountain is a line of
perpendicular rocks, known as “Palisades.” General Hooker’s division,
having reached these palisades, formed into line of battle, so as to
face the north, the right wing resting against the palisades and
stretching down the slope of the mountain. General Hooker’s army
advanced in three distinct lines. The front consisted of General Geary’s
division, with a brigade of New York troops, under Colonel Ireland, on
the right: the Sixtieth New York held the extreme right of the line,
while the extreme left and front were held by the One hundred and
second, the One hundred and thirty-seventh, and the One hundred and
forty-ninth New York. The second line was formed of the two brigades of
Grove and Whittaker. The third was formed by General Osterhaus’
division, which held itself in readiness to aid either of the other
lines. These dispositions having been made, the entire corps, with a
strong line of skirmishers thrown out, was ordered forward. After a
short march they came upon a detachment of the enemy, which totally
unsuspicious of the movements of the Union forces, was taken by
surprise. The enemy, outnumbered and outmanœvred, attempted to escape by
running up the hill; but they were instantly assaulted by the Union
soldiers from above, and finding themselves thus between two fires, were
compelled to make a stand and to fight. The rebel batteries on Lookout
Mountain, and the Union batteries on Mocassin Point, now opened a heavy
fire upon each other. The rebels, attacked on both rear and flank, were
not capable of making a steady resistance, although their skirmishers,
sheltering themselves behind trees and rocks, poured in a heavy fire
upon the Union line, but were at length driven back by General Geary’s
skirmishers. The enemy on the point of the mountain being severely
pressed, gradually gave way, and fell back, in disorder, till they
reached the line of breastworks on the eastern slope of the mountain.
General Geary here drew his line parallel with that of the enemy, and
boldly advanced; but finding himself met by strongly organized troops,
he was obliged, for the time, to retire. In the mean while very large
numbers of the enemy had been captured—for, whenever the Union troops
succeeded in bringing in the rebels, they secured them by hundreds; and
in this manner, over a thousand prisoners were taken, in a short space
of time.

A pause in the battle occurred after the repulse of Geary’s second
attack on the rebel line; and, as the enemy was found to be in a very
strong position behind his breastworks, General Hooker—after a careful
reconnoissance, in which he incurred great personal danger—decided on a
change in the disposition of his forces, for an attack on the enemy’s
works. The rebels had every natural advantage on their side, and were
also expecting reinforcements; but the latter failed to arrive, and
Hooker’s next attack caused the enemy to contract his line, and expose
his left flank. This attack began at two o’clock in the afternoon and
resulted in the severest fighting of the day, which lasted, in
undiminished fury, for the next two hours. Hooker’s dispositions were
made as follows. The Eighty-fourth Illinois, Colonel Waters, and the
Seventy-fifth Illinois, Colonel Burnett, were sent to hold the road
which crosses the mountain on the east. The line of battle, moving
against the rebel works in part, consisted of the command of Geary on
the right, that of Osterhaus on the left, and that of Whittaker and
Grove in the centre. Colonel Ireland’s force clung close to the
palisades. From all quarters, a destructive fire was poured in upon the
enemy. Those who, from Chattanooga and Orchard Knob—the latter point,
captured on the 23d, was still held by the troops of the gallant General
Wood—watched the battle, saw only clouds of smoke mingling with the mist
that enveloped the mountain. But the troops engaged could see each
other, and beneath the pall of mist they fought, on both sides, with
desperate valor. At four o’clock, General Hooker ordered a general
charge of his whole line. It was made, with the utmost gallantry—the
Union forces dashing onward, through a terribly heavy and continuous
fire—and carrying all before them. In five minutes the left flank of the
rebels had been turned, and, falling back upon the Summerton road, they
abandoned their position, artillery, works, and all, which were
immediately seized by the victorious troops of Hooker.

But, though flanked and driven back the rebels manifested no disposition
to yield their redoubts without a final struggle. Rapidly reforming,
they soon advanced to the assault of Geary, in their own former
position. The fight that ensued was bitter and furious. The Union
soldiers were nearly out of ammunition, and were already, for this
reason, evincing a disposition to straggle out of line. The enemy
perceived their advantage and tried to make use of it. General Hooker
had twice sent to Chattanooga for ammunition. The moment was exceedingly
critical. But, at the very moment when further delay must have proved
fatal to the success of the Union arms, the ammunition train of General
Thomas’s soldiers deployed across Chattanooga creek, and marched up the
hill, bringing an ample supply to their comrades in the fight. These men
consisted of General Carlin’s brigade of Johnston’s division, Fourteenth
corps, and upon them devolved the work of concluding the battle. Night
was now coming on, yet the outline of the contending masses could be
seen from Chattanooga, while the flashes of musketry were distinctly
visible in the gathering darkness. The pageant, as witnessed from the
town, was exceedingly gorgeous. The mountain was all ablaze with
intermittent fire, and all vocal with strange, unearthly sounds, as of a
giant groaning in pain. The great guns on its summit answered the lesser
ones on Moccasin point, and all was commotion, and bloody strife, and
ghastly pageantry of terror.

The result of this final charge was the complete defeat of the rebels.
They fell back along the Summerton road, guarding a convenient point to
check pursuit, and employed the long hours of the night in evacuating
the mountain. There was some skirmishing during the night, but with no
important results. General Hooker had gained a splendid victory.




                SHERMAN’S ADVANCE AGAINST MISSION RIDGE.
                           NOVEMBER 24, 1863.


While the Union forces under Hooker were thus advancing against the
enemy’s left, General Sherman’s command, which had crossed the Tennessee
at Brown’s Ferry, and advanced along the north bank of the river, to a
point opposite Chickamauga creek, was threatening the enemy’s right. The
crossing, commenced at early morning, was not completed till noon, at
which time also a junction was effected, at Chickamauga creek, between
General Sherman’s command, and reinforcements under General Howard, sent
forward from Chattanooga. At about one o’clock, and just as General
Sherman gave orders for an advance against Missionary Ridge, a drizzly
rain began to fall, which soon hid from view the object of assault.
There are several small hills clustered at the end of Missionary Ridge,
being separated from it by a valley, through which runs the Chattanooga
and Cleveland railroad. To take these hills was Sherman’s first design.
His line of battle was formed thus: General Ewing’s division occupied
the right, General J. E. Smith’s division the centre, and General Morgan
L. Smith’s division the left. General Jeff. C. Davis’s division of the
Fourteenth corps, artillery, had crossed the river and taken up position
in the works. The order for the advance was given by General Sherman, as
follows: “I see Davis is up. I guess you may as well go in, and take the
hill.”

The advance was made in perfect silence. The men looked very serious;
and, if they spoke to each other, spoke in undertones. The prospect
before them was a very serious one, and it was evident that they
realized it to the fullest extent. But, as the sequel made manifest, the
enemy did not propose to contest these hills, and, steadily continuing
his advance, General Sherman was in possession of them as early as four
o’clock in the afternoon. A few shells, thrown by the rebels from Tunnel
Hill, had passed over his forces, carrying consternation to the camp
followers in the rear; but there had been no serious fighting. On
inspecting the ground thus captured, General Sherman determined to
occupy the semi-circular ridge of the hills with his right and centre,
and deploy his left toward Meyers’s mill, on Chickamauga creek. General
M. L. Smith, commanding the left, executed the latter movement,
capturing about a hundred rebels, who were building rafts on the creek,
with which to destroy General Sherman’s pontoon bridges. At night on the
24th, therefore, General Sherman was strongly posted, and prepared for a
grand assault of the enemy’s works, on the following day.

Several new dispositions had been made along the Union centre, on the
24th, in anticipation of a great battle on the following day. Wood’s
forces, strengthened by those of General Baird, had been appointed to
storm the rebel heights at Blackford, which is a gap in the centre of
Missionary Ridge. Sheridan’s command, strengthened by General King’s
brigade—of regulars and volunteers—had been deputed to assault at
Thurman’s House, a point further toward the enemy’s left. General Gordon
Granger assumed command of the divisions of Wood and Baird, and General
Palmer took command of those of Sheridan and King. The object of these
movements was to cut the rebel army in two, in the centre, while Hooker
on its left, and Sherman on its right, should flank it, and cut it to
pieces.




                      BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE.
                           NOVEMBER 25, 1863.


Such was the position of affairs on the morning of the 25th of November.
At ten o’clock General Sherman commenced the battle of Missionary Ridge,
by pushing forward Colonel Loomis’s brigade of Ewing’s division, on the
right, against the enemy posted at Glass Station, back of the railroad.
This attack was promptly repulsed. General Corse then made a direct
assault upon Tunnel Hill, mounting the hill without difficulty, and in
gallant style. But it was only on reaching the crest of this eminence,
and coming upon the plateau, that the Union troops came under fire of
the guns of Fort Buckner, the strongest rebel fortification at this
point. They gained the plateau at precisely eleven o’clock, and, at
once, were greeted with a tremendous fire from the guns of the fort,
under which they retreated to the crest of the hill, leaving their dead
and wounded in the enemy’s rifle-pits. At this juncture, Colonel
Loomis’s brigade made a second charge from the right, driving the rebels
from their fortifications along the railroad track, and forcing them up
the hill to the right of Fort Buckner. General Corse was reinforced,
while his movement was going on, and, with fresh troops, he now
proceeded to make a second charge against the fort. A bloody conflict
ensued. The Union soldiers, swept by a continuous and merciless fire,
advanced to within twelve yards of the rebel works—then wavered, then
again fell back to their original position, once more leaving their dead
and wounded in possession of the enemy. This repulse took place at a
quarter past twelve, and from that time until half past one, no further
movement was made in Sherman’s front. At this hour, however, a third
assault of the hill was made by the combined force of Colonel Loomis and
Mathias, supported by two regiments of Colonel Raum’s brigade, the
Eightieth Ohio, and the Seventeenth Iowa. The charge of the Union forces
on this occasion has been described by an eye-witness as the most
magnificent act of gallantry that it is possible to imagine. It was made
in the face of a destructive fire, from six pieces of artillery, and a
long line of musketry, and—a somewhat navel expedient in modern
warfare—a fire of rocks and stones, which the rebels hurled down from
their fastness, in great abundance. Meanwhile, the hill flashed and
flared with flame, and echoed with the terrible roar of artillery. For
half an hour the strife continued. Then the column of Mathias broke and
fled—but only to the line of Raum’s reserves, where it was rallied as if
by magic. At precisely a quarter past two o’clock, a last grand charge
was made, all along the line. Fifty yards in front lay the rebel works.
The rebel cannon, double-shotted with canister, belched out death upon
the advancing patriots. The men drew their blue cloth caps over their
eyes, and pressed stubbornly onward. It was a very critical moment for
the rebels—and they knew it, for their commander suddenly called up
reserves from his centre, and so, under the combined sweep of a front,
flank, and cross fire, the gallant troops of Sherman were finally
obliged to fall back from Tunnel Hill. Such advantages as he had gained,
however, General Sherman held,—ordering his line into position, and
intrenching himself to secure the ground for new operations.

But that is not always failure which seems so at the moment. The
disaster to Sherman proved, in fact, the main-spring of victory to
General Grant. That commander, posted at Orchard Knob, and narrowly
watching the contest on his left, was not slow to observe that General
Bragg had been obliged to weaken the rebel centre in order to save
Tunnel Hill; and, with General Grant, to see an advantage was to improve
it. The moment Bragg’s reserves had been drawn away, General Grant
ordered a charge upon the rebel centre. At the same moment an artillery
fire was opened on the enemy from Orchard Knob and Fort Wood. The men
went forward in fine style, charging at the point of the bayonet, across
Citico Creek and up the hillside. For a little while, as it toiled
upward, the line looked broken and ragged; but the moment it reached the
crest of Missionary Ridge, it formed in perfect order, and rushed on
like the wind. Astonished and dismayed, the rebels fled before the
determined valor of the patriots. Through Fort Hindman danced the rebel
flag, borne along by the frightened hordes of Confederates, and after
it, streaming grandly in the stormy air, floated onward the flag of the
Union. At four o’ clock the ridge was won. General Grant himself,
following in the wake of the advancing columns, appeared among his
troops, and, by his presence, inspired them with new courage and
intrepid resolution.

In the mean while General Hooker, following up his victory of the 24th,
had completely possessed himself of Lookout Mountain, had descended into
the valley, crossed the Chattanooga creek, passed through Rossville, and
advanced northward along Missionary Ridge, to cooperate with General
Grant. His advance drove the rebels out of Fort Breckinridge, and
captured many prisoners. He came up late in the afternoon of the 25th. A
final effort, made by Bragg, to retake Fort Hindman, was successfully
repulsed, and then the rout of the Confederates was complete. They fled
in great disorder towards Ringgold, leaving hundreds of killed and
wounded in their track. A few vollies of grape and canister converted
their retreat into a wild rout.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE.]

[Illustration: PURSUIT TOWARDS RINGGOLD, GA.]

Though utterly defeated and disorganized, the rebel army was still
powerful in numbers and material, and the Federal commander, fully
sensible of the importance of following up his advantage, ordered a
vigorous pursuit. By daylight the next morning the Union forces were
pressing close upon the dispirited and fleeing enemy. So disheartened
were the rebels that hundreds threw away their arms and surrendered,
soon as the victorious Union columns came within range. All day the
pursuit continued, and, when night came on, the country for miles around
was lighted with huge fires, where the rebels were compelled to destroy
their stores, to prevent them from falling into patriot hands. The road
was strewed with commissary stores, and broken-down caissons and wagons.
The line of retreat was mostly along the railroad by the valley of
Ringgold.

The entire Federal loss in these combined battles did not exceed four
thousand in killed and wounded; while that of the enemy, in killed,
wounded, prisoners, and deserters, has been estimated at fifteen
thousand. Between sixty and seventy cannon, and seven thousand stand of
small arms were among the trophies of the victors.

By this brilliant success, the Federal power was firmly established in
East Tennessee, and no serious attempts were afterwards made by the
rebels to invade that portion of the State.




                        BATTLE OF RINGGOLD, GA.
                           NOVEMBER 28, 1863.


The dingy little town of Ringgold—the county town of Catoosa County,
Georgia—is situated at the base of the White Oak mountain range, only
a few miles from the State line between Georgia and Tennessee. It was
here that the routed forces of General Bragg first made a stand, after
the battle of Missionary Ridge, to oppose the pursuit of the
victorious soldiers of Hooker. A brief, but desperate and bloody
battle, ensued, on the 28th of November. Generals Osterhaus and Geary
led the Unionists, while the opposing rebels were Hardee’s command.
The fight lasted about five hours, and was attended with heavy loss
upon both sides. Three hundred rebel prisoners were captured, and the
enemy was driven back, beyond the town, to Tunnel Hill. Colonel
Creighton and Lieutenant-Colonel Crane were killed in this engagement,
and the Seventh Ohio regiment lost all of its officers excepting
one—Captain Creighton. This regiment was treacherously led into an
ambuscade by a portion of Hardee’s corps, who displayed Federal flags.
The Union soldiers behaved with the utmost gallantry. From Ringgold
the rebels fell back upon Dalton.




                    DEPARTMENT OF THE GULF IN 1863.


General N. P. Banks arrived in New Orleans on December 14, 1862, having
been appointed to supersede General Butler in command of the Department
of the Gulf. The news of this change created much surprise among all
classes of citizens; and not a few of those who were opposed to the
restoration of the national supremacy were sorry to part with an officer
who, though obnoxious for his zeal in the discharge of his duties, had
succeeded in establishing unexampled order and security in the city.
General Butler tendered a cordial welcome to his successor, assuring him
that the army would render a cheerful obedience to his orders. On the
15th General Butler took leave of the troops under his command, and paid
a well-merited tribute to their patriotism, valor, and soldierly
bearing; and on the following day he issued a lengthy address to the
citizens, in which he recapitulated the leading measures of his
administration, demonstrated the many great advantages which had
resulted from the reestablishment of the Federal authority, and exhorted
them all to return fully to their allegiance as the only means of
obtaining peace and lasting prosperity to their city.

On the same day a proclamation was issued by General Banks of a
patriotic and conciliatory tone. The commencement of General Banks’s
administration was marked by a leniency which seemed to indicate that
the severity which General Butler had thought it necessary to exercise
was either distasteful to the new commander, or contrary to the policy
of the Government. Many political prisoners were released, and other
lenient measures adopted towards obstinate rebels, which only resulted
in the abuse of his clemency, and the manifestation of a turbulent
spirit and disloyal conduct on the part of rebellious citizens. It soon
became evident that General Banks did not possess the ability to govern
a conquered city with that ease and tact which had been evinced by his
predecessor; and during his whole administration he was subjected to
opposition and constant annoyance from a class of civilians upon whom
the more bold and energetic measures of his predecessor had always been
sufficiently potent to restrain them from direct conflict with him.

Previous to the arrival of General Banks at New Orleans, he had been for
two months engaged in organizing a military and naval force to accompany
him, which was designed, in the first place, to cooperate with the
forces of General Grant and Admiral Porter in the reduction of Port
Hudson and Vicksburg, in order to open the Mississippi river to the free
passage of the Federal gunboats. This accomplished, a movement on Texas
was contemplated, which State was now contributing largely by her trade
on the Mexican border, and her contributions of army subsistence, to
sustain the rebellion.

No military events of importance occurred in Louisiana until the middle
of March, 1863, excepting a small expedition up the Teche river by the
gunboats, in which Commander Buchanan of the Calhoun was killed.

During the first weeks in March General Banks had concentrated his army
at Baton Rouge, amounting to nearly twenty-five thousand men. The naval
forces on the lower Mississippi were under the command of Admiral
Farragut.

Port Hudson, or Hickey’s Landing, as it was called some years ago, is
situated on a bend in the Mississippi river, about twenty-two miles
above Baton Rouge, and one hundred and forty-seven above New Orleans.
Approaching Port Hudson by water from below, the first batteries were
situated on a bluff about forty feet above high water mark.

On the night of 14–15th March, Admiral Farragut passed the rebel
batteries at Port Hudson with his flagship, the Hartford, and the
Albatross. He attacked the forts with his entire fleet, but all but the
two vessels above named were repulsed, and the Mississippi, having
grounded, was set on fire and abandoned. A graphic description of this
event is given by a correspondent of the New York Herald, on board the
Richmond, from which we subjoin the following condensed account, written
at the time:

“The rebel batteries extend about four miles in length, with a gap here
and there between. Below, just before the high bluff begins, a very
large number of field batteries were placed in position. These batteries
are by no means to be despised; for in such a narrow part of the river
they are just as effective as siege guns, especially as they can be
handled with far greater facility than ordnance of larger size.
Proceeding upward, the regular fortifications commence. They seem to
consist of three distinct ranges of batteries, numbering several in each
range. It does not seem, however, that either of them mounts guns of
very large calibre. The river now begins to trend to the west, forming a
faint representation of a horseshoe, in the hollow of which the town of
Port Hudson is situated. It is right in that hollow, and just below the
town, that the most formidable battery—the central one—is situated, on
the highest bluff. Four heavy guns appear to be mounted there in
casemates. I say appear, because the flashes from these guns revealed
nothing; but the flame from the muzzles showed that all beyond was in
obscurity—precisely as would be the case with guns in casemate. The
other guns, _en barbette_, or peering through open embrasures, revealed,
when fired, something of the lay of the land behind and around, though
but for a moment. Above the town are other batteries, only less
formidable than those just below. Beyond these the high bluffs gradually
subside into the general level of the surrounding country. Right
opposite the principal batteries, on the right bank of the river, is the
point of land on which the Mississippi grounded, in consequence of which
she had to be set on fire and destroyed.”

After describing the first shots from the Hartford, which were promptly
returned by the rebel batteries, the correspondent thus describes the
mortars opening fire:

“And now was heard a thundering roar, equal in volume to a whole park of
artillery. This was followed by a rushing sound, accompanied by a
howling noise that beggars description. Again and again was the sound
repeated, till the vast expanse of heaven rang with the awful
minstrelsy. It was apparent that the mortar-boats had opened fire. Of
this I was soon convinced on casting my eyes aloft. Never shall I forget
the sight that then met my astonished vision. Shooting upward at an
angle of forty-five degrees, with the rapidity of lightning, small
globes of golden flame were seen sailing through the pure ether—not a
steady, unfading flame, but corruscating, like the fitful gleam of a
fire-fly, now visible, and anon invisible. Like a flying star of the
sixth magnitude, the terrible missile—a 13-inch shell—nears its zenith,
up and still up—higher and still higher. Its flight now becomes much
slower, till, on reaching its utmost altitude, its centrifugal force
becomes counteracted by the earth’s attraction; it describes a parabolic
curve, and down, down it comes, bursting, it may be, ere it reaches
_terra firma_, but probably alighting in the rebel works ere it
explodes, where it scatters death and destruction around.

“The Richmond had by this time got within range of the rebel field
batteries, which opened fire on her. I had all along thought that we
would open fire from our bow guns, on the topgallant forecastle, and
that, after discharging a few broadsides from the starboard side, the
action would be wound up by a parting compliment from our stern chasers.
To my surprise, however, we opened at once from our broadside guns. The
effect was startling, as the sound was unexpected; but beyond this I
really experienced no inconvenience from the concussion. There was
nothing unpleasant to the ear, and the jar to the ship was really quite
unappreciable. It may interest the uninitiated to be informed how a
broadside is fired from a vessel-of-war. I was told on board the
Richmond that all the guns were sometimes fired off simultaneously,
though it is not a very usual course, as it strains the ship. Last night
the broadsides were fired by commencing at the forward gun, and firing
all the rest off in rapid succession, as fast almost as the ticking of a
watch. The effect was grand and terrific; and, if the guns were rightly
pointed—a difficult thing in the dark, by the way—they could not fail in
carrying death and destruction among the enemy.

“Of course we did not have everything our own way; for the enemy poured
in his shot and shell as thick as hail. Over, ahead, astern, all around
us, flew the death-dealing missiles, the hissing, screaming, whistling,
shrieking, and howling of which rivaled Pandemonium. It must not be
supposed, however, that because our broadside guns were the tools we
principally worked with, our bow and stern chasers were idle. We soon
opened with our bow eighty-pounder Dahlgren, which was followed up not
long after by the guns astern, giving evidence to the fact that we had
passed some of the batteries.

“Soon after firing was heard astern of us, and it was soon ascertained
that the Monongahela, with her consort, the Kineo, and the Mississippi
were in action. The Monongahela carries a couple of two-hundred-pounder
rifled Parrot guns. The roar of cannon was incessant, and the flashes
from the guns, together with the flight of the shells from the mortar
boats, made up a combination of sound and sight impossible to describe.
To add to the horrors of the night, while it contributed toward the
enhancement of a certain terrible beauty, dense clouds of smoke began to
envelop the river, shutting out from view the several vessels and
confounding them with the batteries. It was very difficult to know how
to steer to prevent running ashore, perhaps right under a rebel battery
or into a consort. Upward and upward rolled the smoke, shutting out of
view the beautiful stars and obscuring the vision on every side. Then it
was that the order was passed, ‘Boys, don’t fire till you see the flash
from the enemy’s guns.’ That was our only guide through the ‘palpable
obscurity.’ Intermingled with the boom of the cannonade arose the cries
of the wounded and the shouts of their friends, suggesting that they
should be taken below for treatment. So thick was the smoke that we had
to cease firing several times, and to add to the horrors of the night,
it was next to impossible to tell whether we were running into the
Hartford or going ashore, and, if the latter, on which bank, or whether
some of the other vessels were about to run into us or into each other.
All this time the fire was kept up on both sides incessantly.

“‘Muzzle to muzzle.’ This phrase is familiar to most persons who have
read accounts of sea-fights that took place about fifty years ago; but
it is difficult for the uninitiated to realize all the horrors conveyed
in these three words. For the first time I had, last night, an
opportunity of knowing what the phrase really meant. The central battery
is situated about the middle of the segment of a circle I have already
compared to a horseshoe in shape, though it may be better understood by
the term ‘crescent.’ This battery stands on a bluff so high that a
vessel in passing immediately underneath cannot elevate her guns
sufficiently to reach those on the battery; neither can the guns on the
battery be sufficiently depressed to bear on the passing ship. In this
position the rebel batteries on the two horns of the crescent can
enfilade the passing vessel, pouring in a terrible cross-fire, which the
vessel can return, though at a great disadvantage, from her bow and
stern chasers. We fully realized this last night; for, as we got within
short range, the enemy poured into us a terrible fire of grape and
canister, which we were not slow to return—our guns being
double-shotted, each with a stand of both grape and canister. Every
vessel in its turn was exposed to the same fiery ordeal on nearing the
centre battery, and right promptly did their gallant tars return the
compliment. This was the hottest part of the engagement. We were
literally muzzle to muzzle, the distance between us and the enemy’s guns
being not more than twenty yards, though to me it seemed to be only as
many feet.

“Matters had gone on in this way for nearly an hour and a half—the first
gun having been fired at about half past eleven o’clock—when, to my
astonishment, I heard some shells whistling over our port side. Did the
rebels have batteries on the right bank of the river? was the query that
naturally suggested itself to me. To this the response was given that we
had turned back. I soon discovered that it was too true. Our return was,
of course, more rapid than our passage up. The rebels did not molest us
much, and I do not believe one of their shots took effect while we were
running down rapidly with the current. It was a melancholy affair, for
we did not know but what the whole expedition was a failure; neither
could we tell whether any of our vessels had been destroyed, nor how
many. We had the satisfaction of learning soon afterward, however, that
the Hartford and Albatross had succeeded in rounding the point above the
batteries. All the rest were compelled to return. As I passed the
machinery of the vessel, on my way forward, I was shown a large hole
that had been made by an eighty-pounder solid conical shell, which had
passed through the hull of the ship, damaging the machinery so as to
compel us to return.”

During the naval combat, General Banks marched three divisions of his
army from Baton Rouge, to a point within seven miles of Port Hudson,
where after engaging in a skirmish with the enemy, with trifling loss,
they returned to their starting point. Being unprepared as yet to
undertake the capture of Port Hudson, General Banks now turned his
attention to that portion of the State west of New Orleans, and
bordering on the Teche river. This diversion, it was afterward
discovered, would have been made unnecessary, had General Banks
possessed the means of learning the exact force of the rebels at Port
Hudson, which was by no means so formidable as he had reason for
believing.

The Teche river is a tortuous stream rising in St. Landry parish, and
flowing southwardly. On its bank are the towns of Franklin,
Martinsville, and Opelousas. General Weitzel had previously made an
unsuccessful expedition up that river, and to guard against further
invasion a considerable rebel force was now posted in that region, and
heavy earthworks were thrown up in the vicinity of Patersonville. The
district of country bordering on the Teche, comprised the parishes of
Terrebonne, Lafourche, Assumption, St. Mary, and St. Martin, rich in
agricultural wealth, and having a large slave population. This district
had furnished valuable supplies to the rebel army.




          OPERATIONS ON THE TECHE AND ATCHAFALAYA RIVERS, LA.
                           APRIL 13–20, 1863.


General Banks having concentrated his forces at Brashear, General
Weitzel’s brigade was crossed over to Berwick on the 10th of April,
without opposition, followed on the succeeding day by General Emory’s
division, and both commands advanced upon the fortified position a few
miles above Pattersonville. On the 13th, there was considerable
artillery firing, in which the gunboat Diana, a late Federal capture,
took active part. On the 12th, the division of General Grover left
Brashear on the gunboats Clifton, Estrella, Arizona, and Calhoun, and
transports, and proceeded up the Atchafalaya river, which joins the
Teche at Berwick City, into Lake Chetimacha. The object was to get into
the rear of the enemy, and if possible cut off his retreat if he
evacuated his position, or to assail him in rear at the time of the
attack in front. The expedition effected a landing early the next
morning, about three miles west of Franklin, near a spot called Irish
Bend. At this time, the gunboat Queen of the West, which had been
captured previously by the enemy, was blown up and destroyed on the
lake. Skirmishing immediately ensued with a small force of the enemy,
that fell back as General Grover advanced. His position was about eleven
miles distant from General Banks.




                       BATTLE OF IRISH BEND, LA.
                            APRIL 13, 1863.


A correspondent in the army thus describes this battle:

“About seven o’clock A. M., the advance reached the edge of a dense line
of woods near what is known as Irish Bend (a sharp bend of the Teche),
about eleven miles distant from the rebel earthworks, where General
Banks was engaging the enemy. Here our force was met by a strong one of
the rebels, in position, from the banks of the Teche, across the front
and right flank of General Grover’s division. The enemy was strongly
posted at this point, their right flank supported by artillery, and
their left extending round into another wood, in such a manner as to
completely encircle any force which should simply attack their position
in the wood first spoken of.

“Colonel Birge, of the Third Brigade, of General Grover’s division, at
this time in command of the advance, and supported by two sections of
Rogers’s battery, now skirmished with the rebels in front for about an
hour, our skirmishers and their supports engaging the infantry and
dismounted cavalry of the enemy. Colonel Birge then ordered the
Twenty-fifth Connecticut and One Hundred and Fifty-ninth New York in
front of the first skirt of woods. He had no sooner done this than the
enemy commenced a flank attack, endeavoring to take the section of
Rogers’s battery which was on the right. These two regiments, assailed
by a fire on their front and right from an enemy very perfectly
concealed, replied ineffectually to the fire, became shaken, and finally
commenced to fall back, when General Grover rode up to the front and
rallied them, at the same time ordering General Dwight to hasten up with
his brigade. The section of Rogers’s battery was compelled to limber up
and go to the rear, the fire of the enemy being so lively as to pick off
nine cannoneers at their guns.

“At this time General Dwight moved on the field with his brigade, and
placed the Sixth New York on his right, in such a manner as to outflank
the enemy’s left, in a similar way that the enemy had outflanked our
right. The Ninety-first New York was ordered in front to advance against
the woods, with the First Louisiana supporting the Sixth New York, and
the Twenty-second Maine and One Hundred and Thirty-first New York in
support of the Ninety-first New York.

“The order to advance was given, and like veterans they moved forward
across the field, through the woods, and over another field, the enemy
slowly but surely falling back before them; sweeping on, taking from him
all his positions, and finally compelling him to so hasty a retreat that
he left over one hundred prisoners in our hands. Then the position which
Colonel Birge’s brigade failed to take, with a loss of something over
three hundred men, was taken by General Dwight, with a loss of only
seven killed and twenty-one wounded.

“General Dwight was now ordered to halt, take a favorable position, and
hold it. This was done, the enemy continuing to manœuvre in front of
General Dwight’s and Colonel Birge’s commands, for two or three hours.

“Our troops in the mean time, had been ordered by General Grover to rest
in their places until further orders, which they did until about three
P. M., when an order was given to feel the enemy on the front and flank,
with a view to our attacking their position in force.

“Before any considerable advance further was made the enemy evacuated,
retreating to the woods and canes, having previously set fire to the
gunboat Diana, and transports Gossamer, Newsboy, and Era No. 2. They
were signally repulsed, with a loss of from three to four hundred. On
the field of battle, one hundred and fifty prisoners were taken, and
thirty wounded.

“Among the killed is General Riley, and among the wounded, Colonel
Gray.”

This success of General Grover was followed by the evacuation of the
works before General Banks. Early on Tuesday, the 15th, the cavalry and
artillery, followed by General Weitzel’s brigade, with Colonel Ingram’s
force of General Emory’s division, as a support, followed the enemy. So
rapid was the pursuit that the enemy was unable to remove their
transports at New Iberia, and five, with all the commissary stores and
ammunition with which they were loaded, were destroyed at that place,
together with an incomplete iron-clad gunboat. On Thursday the army
reached New Iberia. A foundry for the manufacture of cannon and other
munitions of war was immediately taken possession of, and a similar one
had been seized two days before at Franklin. Two regiments were also
sent to destroy the tools and machinery at the celebrated salt mine of
the town. Thus far about fifteen hundred prisoners had been captured,
and more than five hundred horses, mules, and beef cattle taken from the
plantations. The Federal loss was small. The entire force of the enemy
was about ten thousand men.

On the next day, the 17th, the army moved forward, but General Grover,
who had marched from New Iberia by a shorter road, and thus gained the
advance, met the enemy at Bayou Vermilion. Their force consisted of a
considerable number of cavalry, one thousand infantry and six pieces of
artillery, massed in a strong position on the opposite bank. They were
immediately attacked and driven from their position but not until they
had succeeded in destroying by fire the bridge across the river. The
night of the 17th and the next day was passed in rebuilding the bridge.
On the 19th, the march was resumed, and continued to the vicinity of
Grand Coteau; and on the next day the main force of General Banks
occupied Opelousas. At the same time, the cavalry, supported by a
regiment of infantry and a section of artillery, were thrown forward six
miles to Washington, on the Courtableau. On the 21st, no movement was
made, but on the next day, Brigadier-General Dwight, of General Grover’s
division, with detachments of artillery and cavalry, was pushed forward
through Washington toward Alexandria. He found the bridges over the
Cocodrie and Bœuf destroyed, and during the evening and night replaced
them by a single bridge at the junction of the bayous. Orders were also
found there from General Moore to General Taylor, in command of the
Confederate force, directing him to retreat slowly to Alexandria, and,
if pressed, to retire to Texas.

Bute a la Rose, with its garrison of sixty men, two heavy guns, and a
large quantity of ammunition, was captured by General Banks. The result
of the expedition thus far is thus stated by General Banks: “We have
destroyed the enemy’s army and navy, and made their reorganization
impossible by destroying or removing the material. We hold the key of
the position. Among the evidences of our victory are two thousand
prisoners, two transports, and twenty guns taken, and three gunboats and
eight transports destroyed.” The Federal loss in the land battle was six
or seven hundred.

Admiral Porter took possession of Alexandria on the 6th of May, without
opposition, and General Banks established his headquarters at that place
on the day following. This town is situated on the Red river, one
hundred and fifty miles from its mouth. Admiral Porter thus describes
his operations at this time in a dispatch to Secretary Welles, dated May
13:


  “SIR: I had the honor to inform you from Alexandria of the capture of
  that place, and the forts defending the approaches to the city, by the
  naval forces under my command. Twenty-four hours after we arrived the
  advance guard of United States troops came into the city. General
  Banks arriving soon after, I turned the place over to his keeping. The
  water beginning to fall, I deemed it prudent to return with the
  largest vessels to the mouth of the Red river. I dropped down to Fort
  de Russe in the Benton, and undertook to destroy these works. I only
  succeeded however, in destroying the three heavy casemates commanding
  the channel and a small water battery for two guns. About six hundred
  yards below it I destroyed by bursting one heavy thirty-two pounder
  and some gun carriages left in their hurry by the enemy.

  “The main fort, on a hill some nine hundred yards from the water, I
  was unable to attend to. It is quite an extensive work, new and
  incomplete, but built with much labor and pains. It will take two or
  three vessels to pull it to pieces. I have not the powder to spare to
  blow it up. The vessels will be ordered to work on it occasionally,
  and it will be soon destroyed. In this last-mentioned fort was mounted
  the 11-inch gun, which I am led to believe lies in the middle of the
  river, near the fort, the rebels throwing it overboard in their panic
  at the approach of our gunboats. The raft which closed the entrance I
  have blown up, sawed in two, and presented to the poor of the
  neighborhood. I sent Commander Woodworth in the Price, with the
  Switzerland, Pittsburg, and Arizona, up Black river to make a
  reconnoissance, and he destroyed a large amount of stores, valued at
  three hundred thousand dollars, consisting of salt, sugar, rum,
  molasses, tobacco, and bacon.

               (Signed)                DAVID D. PORTER,
                   Acting Rear-Admiral, Commanding Mississippi Squadron.


General Banks now concentrated his troops at Simmesport, preparatory to
an advance on Port Hudson.

Minor expeditions were meanwhile taking place in other districts of the
department. A brigade under General Nickerson advanced to the
neighborhood of Lake Pontchartrain, destroying some valuable property,
and capturing a few prisoners. A portion of General Auger’s division
penetrated to a point on the railroad between Clinton and Port Hudson,
where they encountered and routed a Confederate force, killing five and
capturing twenty-five. Colonel Grierson was also successful in an
expedition near Port Hudson, capturing three hundred head of cattle.

Admiral Farragut now in command of the fleet, was preparing to assist in
the attack on Port Hudson. General Banks’s army advanced about the
middle of May from Baton Rouge to Port Hudson, portions of his army on
either bank of the Mississippi, and a part being forwarded on
transports.

On the 21st of May General Banks landed, and on the next day a junction
was effected with the advance of Major-General Augur and
Brigadier-General Sherman. His line occupied the Bayou Sara road. On
this road General Augur had an encounter with a force of the enemy,
which resulted in their repulse with heavy loss. On the 25th the enemy
was compelled to abandon his first line of works. On the next day
General Weitzel’s brigade, which had covered the rear in the march from
Alexandria, arrived, and on the morning of the 27th a general assault
was made on the fortifications.

Three series of batteries extended along the river above Port Hudson to
a point on Thompson’s creek, making a continuous line about three and a
half miles in extent. Above Thompson’s creek is an impassable marsh,
forming a natural defence. From the lower battery began a line of land
fortifications, of semi-circular form, about ten miles in extent, with
Thompson’s Creek for its natural terminus above.




                       ATTACK ON PORT HUDSON, LA.
                             MAY 27, 1863.


It having been understood that a grand and simultaneous attack from
every part of the lines encircling Port Hudson was to be made on
Wednesday, the 27th, General Augur, as early as 6 A. M. of that day,
commenced a heavy cannonade upon the works, which continued incessantly
until 2 o’clock, P. M.

At 10 o’clock, General Weitzel’s brigade, with the division of General
Grover—reduced to about two brigades—and the division of General Emory,
temporarily reduced by detachments to about a brigade, under command of
Colonel Paine, with two regiments of colored troops, made an assault
upon the right of the enemy’s works, crossing Sandy creek, and driving
them through the woods into their fortifications. The fight lasted on
this line until 4 o’clock, and was very severely contested.
Brigadier-General Sherman, who intended to commence his assault at the
same time on the left, had his troops in readiness.

General Augur’s assaulting forces consisted only of Colonel E. P.
Chapin’s brigade, viz., the Forty-eighth Massachusetts, led by
Lieutenant-colonel O’Brien; the Forty-ninth Massachusetts, by Colonel F.
W. Bartlett; the One Hundred and Sixteenth New York, led by Major Love;
and the Twenty-first Maine, by Colonel Johnson; also two regiments of
Colonel Dudley’s brigade, called up from the right, viz., the Second
Louisiana, under Colonel Paine; and parts of the Fiftieth Massachusetts,
under Colonel Messer.

Before commencing the assault Captain Holcomb’s Vermont battery played
upon the works to draw their fire, which he did very effectively; and
then the order for the assault was given. A number of brave fellows from
each regiment had volunteered to go in advance with the fascines, for
the purpose of making a roadway through the moat; these were immediately
followed by others who had volunteered to form the assaulting party; and
after them the various regiments with their colonels, all under the
immediate direction of Major-General Augur.

The scene that presented itself to the view as the devoted men emerged
from the wood was really appalling. Between them and the fortifications
to be assaulted lay an immense open space, at least a mile in length,
from right to left, and at least half a mile in depth from the edge of
the wood. This space was originally a dense forest, but the rebels had
ingeniously felled the trees, leaving the huge branches to interlace
each other, and forming, with the thick brushwood underneath, a barrier
all but impassable.

It was enough to daunt the stoutest hearts; but the order had been given
that Port Hudson must be taken that day, and the brave men advanced.

In so horrible a place, where men could scarcely keep their footing, and
were sinking at every step up to their arm-pits, and tumbling along as
best they could with their muskets and fascines through the impenetrable
rubbish—the enemy all the while blazing away at them with grape, shell,
and canister—the result may easily be imagined. It was wholesale
slaughter.

But it was cheering to see the heroism and endurance of the men. Onward
they went—the old flag streaming proudly above them (the fascine-bearers
falling in every direction)—until they actually, many of them, fought
their way through the half mile of tangled rubbish to the narrow open
space between it and the breastworks, where, as a matter of course, the
gallant fellows perished. The unequal contest lasted from 3 P. M. to 5
P. M., when General Augur, finding it utterly impossible to carry out
the instructions he had received, withdrew his men in perfect
order—returning shot for shot as they got back to the wood.

A vigorous bombardment of the position had been made by Admiral Farragut
for a week previous to this assault; and reconnoissances had discovered
pretty accurately the nature of these formidable defences.




                      ASSAULT ON PORT HUDSON, LA.
                             JUNE 14, 1863.


After a bombardment of several days, another assault on Port Hudson was
made on the above date. General Banks deemed it necessary on this
occasion to change the position of his troops, and they now formed a
right and left wing, without the customary centre, and were joined in
the form of a right angle. The division of General Grover, on the upper
side of Port Hudson, extended a distance of nearly four miles from the
river, toward the interior, within supporting distance of General
Augur’s division, which was on the west side of the fortifications, and
extended a distance of three miles to the river, within hailing distance
of the fleet. The defences of the enemy formed nearly a right angle,
both lines of which extended to the river, and enclosed a sharp bend.
The point of attack was the extreme northeastern angle of the enemy’s
position.

Several of their pieces had been dismounted at this point by the
incessant bombardment of the previous days, while the Federal
sharpshooters were able to render dangerous any attempt to work the
artillery in position. Two regiments of sharpshooters were detailed to
creep up to and lie on the exterior slope of the enemy’s breastworks,
while another regiment, each soldier having a hand-grenade besides his
musket, followed. Another regiment followed with bags filled with
cotton, which were to be used to fill up the ditch in front of the
breastworks. The remaining regiments of General Weitzel’s brigade
succeeded, supported by the brigades of Colonel Kimball and Colonel
Morgan. These forces, all under General Weitzel, constituted the right
of attack.

On the left General Paine’s division constituted a separate column. The
whole command was under General Grover, who planned the attack.

It was expected that General Weitzel’s command would make a lodgment
within the enemy’s works, and thus prepare the way for General Paine’s
division.

The advance was made about daylight, through a covered way, to within
three hundred yards of the enemy’s position; then their progress was
retarded by deep gulleys, covered with bush and creeping vines. Under an
incessant fire from the enemy, a part of the skirmishers reached the
ditch, where they were met with an enfilading fire, and hurled back,
while their hand-grenades were caught up by the enemy and thrown back
again into the Union ranks. The assaulting column moved on as rapidly as
possible, and made several gallant and desperate attempts on the enemy’s
works, but found them fully prepared at all points, and every part of
their fortifications lined with dense masses of infantry. At length the
assaulting columns were compelled to fall back under the deadly fire of
the enemy, and the fighting finally ceased at eleven o’clock in the
morning. General Banks’s loss was nearly seven hundred in killed and
wounded.

Meantime the first parallel encircling the outer line of the rebel
defences was pushed forward, and the skirmishers were posted in
rifle-pits so near that skirmishes were of constant occurrence at night.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The withdrawal of General Banks’s force from the west side of the
Mississippi was followed by great activity on the part of the enemy, for
the purpose of recovering the places held by small bodies of Federal
troops, and to cause a diversion from Port Hudson. Opelousas was
reoccupied by a considerable Confederate force; and the west bank of the
Mississippi was lined with squads of the rebels, who fired on every boat
which passed. On the 17th of June, an attack was made on the Federal
pickets at La Fourche, which was repulsed. On the 23d, Brashear City was
captured by a Confederate force under Generals Green and Morton. A camp
of contrabands was attacked by the enemy, and large numbers killed.
Immense quantities of ammunition, several pieces of artillery, three
hundred thousand dollars’ worth of sutler’s goods, sugar, flour, pork,
beef, and medical stores, of vast amount, were also captured. On the
28th, an attack was made on Donaldsonville, and the storming party
succeeded in getting into the fort. But the gunboats opened a flanking
fire above and below the fort, and drove back the supporting party, so
that the enemy broke and fled. Of those who had entered the fort, one
hundred and twenty were captured and nearly one hundred killed.

Other movements on the part of the enemy were made at this time, which
indicated great activity, and enabled them to destroy much Federal
property. No embarrassment however was caused to the position of General
Banks. The enemy, in short, recovered the La Fourche, Teche, Attakapas,
and Opelousas country, and captured Brashear, with fifteen hundred
prisoners, a large number of slaves, and nearly all the confiscated
cotton.

                  *       *       *       *       *

After the two attempts to reduce Port Hudson by a land assault, on the
27th of May and the 14th of June, the purpose to make another was given
up General Banks, until he had fully invested the place by a series of
irresistible approaches. He was thus engaged in pushing forward his
works when Vicksburg was surrendered. Information of this surrender was
sent to General Banks, and it was the occasion for firing salutes and a
general excitement in his camp, which attracted the attention of the
enemy, to whom the surrender was communicated. General Gardner, upon
receiving the information, sent by flag of truce, about midnight of the
7th, the following note to General Banks:


  “HEADQUARTERS, PORT HUDSON, LA., JULY 7th, 1863.
      “To Major-General BANKS, commanding United States forces near Port
         Hudson:

  “GENERAL: Having received information from your troops that Vicksburg
  has been surrendered, I make this communication to request you to give
  me the official assurance whether this is true or not, and if true, I
  ask for a cessation of hostilities, with a view to the consideration
  of terms for surrendering this position.

               “I am, General, very respectfully, Your obedient servant,
                                       FRANK GARDNER, Major-General.”


To which General Banks thus replied


                            “HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF THE GULF, }
                                BEFORE PORT HUDSON, JULY 8th, 1863.    }

  “To Major-General FRANK GARDNER, commanding C. S. forces, Port Hudson:

  “GENERAL: In reply to your communication, dated the 7th instant, by
  flag of truce, received a few moments since, I have the honor to
  inform you that I received, yesterday morning, July 7th, at 10.45, by
  the gunboat General Price, an official despatch from Major-General
  Ulysses S. Grant, United States Army, whereof the following is a true
  extract:

              “‘HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF THE TENNESSEE, }
                          NEAR VICKSBURG, JULY 4th, 1863.              }

  “‘Major-General N. P. BANKS, commanding Department of the Gulf:

  “‘GENERAL: The garrison of Vicksburg surrendered this morning. The
  number of prisoners, as given by the officer, is twenty-seven
  thousand, field artillery one hundred and twenty-eight pieces, and a
  large number of siege guns, probably not less than eighty.

                  “‘Your obedient servant, U. S. Grant, Major-General.’”

  “I regret to say, that under present circumstances, I cannot,
  consistently with my duty, consent to a cessation of hostilities for
  the purpose you indicate.

                           Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                                           N. P. BANKS.”


The following further correspondence then took place:


                                           “PORT HUDSON, JULY 8th, 1863.

  “GENERAL: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
  communication of this date, giving a copy of an official communication
  from Major-General U. S. Grant, United States Army, announcing the
  surrender of Vicksburg.

  “Having defended this position as long as I deem my duty requires, I
  am willing to surrender to you, and will appoint a commission of three
  officers to meet a similar commission appointed by yourself, at nine
  o’clock this morning, for the purpose of agreeing upon and drawing up
  the terms of the surrender, and for that purpose I ask for a cessation
  of hostilities.

  “Will you please to designate a point outside of my breastworks, where
  the meeting shall be held for this purpose?

                        “I am, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                FRANK GARDNER, Commanding C. S. Forces.”


                               “HEADQUARTERS, U. S. FORCES, BEFORE }
                                   PORT HUDSON, JULY 8th, 1863.        }

  “To Major-General FRANK GARDNER, commanding Confederate States forces,
  Port Hudson:

  “GENERAL: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
  communication of this date, stating that you are willing to surrender
  the garrison under your command to the forces under my command, and
  that you will appoint a commission of three officers to meet a similar
  commission appointed by me, at nine o’clock this morning, for the
  purpose of agreeing upon and drawing up the terms of the surrender.

  “In reply, I have the honor to state that I have designated
  Brigadier-General Charles P. Stone, Colonel Henry W. Birge, and
  Lieutenant-Colonel Richard B. Irwin, as the officers to meet the
  commission appointed by you.

  “They will meet your officers at the hour designated, at a point where
  the flag of truce was received this morning. I will direct that active
  hostilities shall entirely cease on my part until further notice, for
  the purpose stated.

            “Very respectfully, your most obedient servant,
                                “N. P. BANKS, Major-General Commanding.”


                              CAMP SCENES.

[Illustration: ASSORTING THE MAIL.]

[Illustration: THE NEWS DEPOT.]

The following are the articles of capitulation mutually agreed upon and
adopted:

ART. 1. Major-General Frank Gardner surrenders to the United States
forces under Major-General Banks, the place of Port Hudson and its
dependencies, with its garrison, armaments, munitions, public funds, and
materials of war, in the condition, as nearly as may be, in which they
were at the hour of cessation of hostilities, namely, 6 o’clock A. M.,
July 8, 1863.

ART. 2. The surrender stipulated in article one is qualified by no
condition, save that the officers and enlisted men comprising the
garrison shall receive the treatment due to prisoners of war, according
to the usages of civilized warfare.

ART. 3. All private property of officers and enlisted men shall be
respected, and left to their respective owners.

ART. 4. The position of Port Hudson shall be occupied to-morrow, at 7
o’clock A. M., by the forces of the United States, and its garrison
received as prisoners of war by such general officers of the United
States service as may be designated by Major-General Banks, with the
ordinary formalities of rendition. The Confederate troops will be drawn
up in line, officers in their positions, the right of the line resting
on the edge of the prairie south of the railroad depot; the left
extending in the direction of the village of Port Hudson. The arms and
colors will be piled conveniently, and will be received by the officers
of the United States.

ART. 5. The sick and wounded of the garrison will be cared for by the
authorities of the United States, assisted if desired by either party,
by the medical officers of the garrison.

The formal surrender was made on the 9th of July. General Andrews,
Chief-of-Staff of General Banks, with Colonel Birge leading his column,
followed by two picked regiments from each division, with Holcombe’s and
Rowle’s batteries of light artillery, and the gunners of the naval
battery, entered the fortifications. The enemy were drawn up in line,
with their officers in front of them, on one side of the road, with
their backs to the river. The Federal troops were drawn up in two lines
on the opposite side of the road, with their officers in front of them.
General Gardner then advanced, and offered to surrender his sword with
Port Hudson. In appreciation of his bravery, he was desired to retain
it. He then said: “General, I will now formally surrender my command to
you, and for that purpose will give the order to ground arms.” The order
was given, and the arms grounded. The surrender comprised, besides the
position, more than six thousand two hundred and thirty-three prisoners,
fifty-one pieces of artillery, two steamers, four thousand four hundred
pounds of canon powder, five thousand small arms, and one hundred and
fifty thousand rounds of ammunition. The loss of General Banks from the
twenty-third to the thirtieth of May was about one thousand. The village
of Port Hudson consisted of a few houses and a small church, which had
been nearly destroyed by the cannonade. The wounded and sick of the
garrison suffered most from want of medical stores. The provisions of
the garrison were nearly exhausted.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A short period of inactivity succeeded the heavy campaign of General
Banks’s army, which culminated in the capture of Port Hudson, on the 9th
of July, 1863. But the plans of the commanding officers were maturing
for new expeditions, in more remote regions, where the flag of rebellion
was still floating defiantly, and where the machinations of European
powers were striving covertly to give aid to the Confederate cause, and
to establish an unfriendly Government on the Federal confines, if not on
American soil.

Rear-Admiral David D. Porter arrived at New Orleans on the 1st of
August, 1863, and resumed command of the gunboats on the Mississippi.
About the same time Major-General Franklin, formerly a corps commander
in the Army of the Potomac, arrived at the same place, and reported for
duty.

A naval expedition to the mouth of the Sabine river, in Texas, was
undertaken by General Banks, who dispatched General Franklin with four
thousand men in four army transports, to capture the forts at Sabine
Pass, at the mouth of the river, which forms the boundary line between
Texas and Louisiana. The armed steamers employed were the Clifton,
Sachem, Arizona, and Granite City, and the naval forces were commanded
by Lieutenant Crocker.

Early on the morning of September 8th, the Clifton stood in the bay and
opened on the fort, to which no reply was made. At 9 A. M. the Sachem,
Arizona, and Granite City, followed by the transports, stood over the
bar, and, with much difficulty, owing to the low water, reached an
anchorage about two miles from the fort at 11 A. M. About the middle of
the afternoon the Sachem, followed by the Arizona, advanced up the
eastern channel to draw the fire of the forts, while the Clifton
advanced up the western channel. The Granite City remained to cover the
landing of a division of troops under General Weitzel. No reply was made
to the fire of the gunboats until they were abreast of the forts, when
eight guns opened fire upon them. Three of these were rifled. Almost at
the same moment the Clifton and Sachem were struck in their boilers and
both vessels enveloped in steam. The Arizona, not having room to pass
the Sachem, then backed down the channel until she grounded by the
stern, when the ebb-tide caught her bows and swung her across the
channel. White flags were raised on the Clifton and Sachem, and within
twenty minutes they were taken in tow by the enemy. The naval force of
the expedition being thus disabled, the transports moved out of the bay.
The Arizona was got afloat during the night, and followed. The
expedition then returned to Brashear City. The officers and crews of the
Clifton and Sachem, and about ninety sharpshooters who were on board
were captured, and the loss in killed and wounded was about thirty.
After remaining at Brashear City some time, the military force moved to
Franklin and Vermillionville.

On the 27th of October an expedition under General Banks put to sea from
New Orleans. It consisted of about twenty vessels, accompanied by the
gunboats Owasco, Virginia, and Monongahela, which sailed to the mouth of
the Rio Grande river, the boundary between Texas and Mexico. Brownsville
was occupied by Federal troops, which did much to check the designs of
the French Emperor. An American army was now placed on the frontier,
prepared to check any open demonstration of sympathy between the armies
of Davis and Napoleon.

Western Louisiana was again the scene of military operations in the
Teche district, where General Washburn’s command was attacked on the 5th
of November, and after a severe struggle, he succeeded in beating off
the enemy with a loss of one hundred killed and two hundred prisoners.
The Federal loss was forty killed.




                       NAVAL OPERATIONS IN 1863.


The most important operations of the navy during the year were those on
the Mississippi river, and before Charleston, which have been already
described in connection with army movements.

The work of building vessels for naval purposes was carried on
vigorously during the year, and, inclusive of vessels purchased, and
those captured from the enemy, fifty-eight vessels, mounting four
hundred and fifty-two guns, with a tonnage of fifty thousand tons, were
added; while the loss for the same period was thirty-four vessels of
about sixteen thousand tons, including the iron-clads Monitor and
Weehawken, which foundered in stormy weather. The number of seamen on
the register was about thirty-four thousand.

At daylight on January 29, an iron propeller named Princess Royal
attempted to enter Charleston harbor, but was captured by the gunboat
Unadilla. This was one of the most valuable prizes taken during the war.
The cargo would have been of great service to the enemy, who immediately
set on foot a daring scheme to recover her. Accordingly, before daylight
on the 31st, two rebel rams, the Palmetto State and the Chicora, under
Commodore Ingraham, came down the channel, and surprised the smaller
vessels of the blockading squadron, which lay close in shore. The
Mercedita was the first vessel attacked, which was rendered helpless by
the explosion of a 7-inch shell from the Palmetto State in her port
boiler, and surrendered. The Keystone State was then attacked by both
rams, and made a most gallant defence, but being disabled, she was
compelled to pull down her flag, but re-hoisted it when she found the
enemy did not discontinue his fire. Other vessels making their
appearance, the rams soon after discontinued the attack, and both the
disabled Federal vessels were taken in tow by their consorts.

It was claimed by General Beauregard and Flag-officer Ingraham that the
blockade had been raised in accordance with the laws of war, as there
were no Federal vessels in sight from Charleston at daylight on the 1st
of February; and the foreign consular agents in Charleston were induced
to indorse this claim, but the assumption remained unnoticed by foreign
governments.

On January 30, the Federal gunboat Isaac Smith, Lieutenant Conover, was
captured on Stono river, S. C., by masked shore batteries, after losing
twenty-four men in killed and wounded.

On the 27th of February, the Montauk monitor destroyed the rebel steamer
Nashville, under the guns of Fort McAllister.

On December 17th, the steamer Chesapeake, plying between New York and
Portland, was seized on her passage to the latter place, when about
twenty miles northeast of Cape Cod, by sixteen of her passengers, who
represented themselves as belonging to the Confederate States. The
captain was put in irons, one of the engineers killed and thrown
overboard, and the first mate wounded. The crew and passengers, with the
exception of the first engineer, retained to manage the steamer, were
subsequently put ashore in a boat, and the Chesapeake sailed to the
eastward. Upon the reception of the news in the United States, a fleet
of cruisers started in pursuit, and on the 17th the Chesapeake was
captured by the Ella and Anna, in Sambro harbor, Nova Scotia, and, with
a portion of her crew, was carried to Halifax and delivered to the
authorities. The prisoners were released by a mob, but the Chesapeake
was subsequently restored to her American owners by an order of the
chief colonial tribunal.

The number of vessels captured by the several squadrons, from the
commencement of the war to November 1, 1863, was one thousand and
forty-five, valued at thirteen millions of dollars. During the same
period the rebels had destroyed or captured one hundred and eighty-four
Federal vessels, valued at fifteen millions of dollars.




                    THE FIELD OF OPERATIONS IN 1864.


At the beginning of the year 1864, the authority of the United States
Government—established by the dauntless courage and determined valor of
the armies of the Union—extended over a very large portion of the
territory which had been controlled by the rebellion. The capture of
Vicksburg and Port Hudson had opened the navigation of the Mississippi
river. The State of Missouri had been redeemed, and the rebel power had
been broken in Arkansas. From Kentucky and Tennessee the rebel flag had
been driven out, by the victorious banner of the Republic. In Florida,
in the Carolinas, and in Southern Virginia, the arms of the Union had
effected a permanent lodgment. The mouth of the Rio Grande had been
closed, thus cutting off an important channel of rebel communication
with foreign markets, and with disloyal traders at the North. In
Louisiana the power of the Government was growing stronger, day by day.
Victory, moreover, had strengthened the hands and hearts of the patriots
at the North, soldiers as well as civilians. The army and the navy were
in excellent condition, and the War Department felt justified in making
a reduction of upwards of two millions of dollars, in its estimate of
military and naval expenditure for the next year. Thus, in every
particular, the condition of the country seemed much improved, while the
prospects for the future were full of comfort and promise. Important
work yet remained to be done: sacrifices were yet to be made. But the
work was enjoined by a sacred sense of duty, and the loyal people of the
United Slates were ready to make any and every sacrifice that might be
required for its suitable and thorough performance.

The positions of the various armies, at the beginning of 1864, should
here be noted. General Meade, commanding the Army of the Potomac, was
posted near Culpepper Court House, in Virginia, whither he had arrived,
after a variety of manœuvres, in the latter part of 1863. General Lee
confronted him with the finest army of the rebellion. The Union forces
occupied Winchester, Martinsburg, and Harper’s Ferry, and held the line
of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad, thus blocking all possible advance
of the rebels up the Shenandoah valley. A rebel force, however, was in
the valley, led on by General Jubal Early, whose headquarters were at
Staunton. General Bragg’s rebel forces were massed in the vicinity of
Dalton, Georgia, opposed by the Union armies under General Grant, in
front of Chattanooga, Tennessee. General Burnside—whose resignation had
not yet been given in—was at Knoxville, and not far to the eastward of
that point was General Longstreet’s division of the rebel army. General
Banks held command in New Orleans, and had detachments of troops in
Texas. General Rosecrans was at the head of a small force in Missouri.
General Steele commanded the Union troops at Little Rock, in Arkansas.
Military fortifications were established, all along the Mississippi
river. The United States had about six hundred thousand men in the
field: the Confederates about four hundred thousand. General Lee’s
forces, in Virginia and North Carolina, numbered at least one hundred
and ten thousand. The other great army of the Confederacy was commanded
by General J. C. Johnston, whose department included Georgia, Alabama,
and Mississippi. The rebel troops at Mobile were commanded by Generals
Maury and Clairborne.

The great operations of the year 1864 were, Sherman’s march from Atlanta
to Savannah—including, of course, the preliminary manœuvres and battles,
which prepared his way—and General Grant’s advance on Richmond, by way
of the Wilderness. Before describing these, however, a considerable
space must be devoted to miscellaneous operations in various parts of
the country.




              SHERMAN’S EXPEDITION AGAINST MERIDIAN, MISS.
                           FEBRUARY 3, 1864.


After participating in the battles around Chattanooga, and raising the
siege of Knoxville to relieve General Burnside, General Sherman withdrew
to Vicksburg, to take command of an expedition which left that city on
the 3rd of February, 1864, and proceeded in the direction of Meridian,
in Alabama. The force under General Sherman numbered about thirty
thousand men, and consisted of the two corps under General McPherson and
General Hurlbut, with sixty pieces of light artillery. After much
skirmishing by the way, in which the enemy was constantly overcome.
General Sherman reached Meridian on the 7th of February. The object of
this expedition was the destruction of several railroads which are
specified in the following order, issued after the Union force had been
one week in Meridian.


                    HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF THE TENNESSEE, }
                            MERIDIAN, Miss., February, 15, 1864.       }

  1. The destruction of the railroads intersecting at Meridian is of
  great importance, and should be done most effectually. Every tie and
  rail for many miles in each direction should be absolutely destroyed
  or injured, and every bridge and culvert should be completely
  destroyed. To insure this end, to General Hurlbut is entrusted the
  destruction east and north, and to General McPherson the roads west
  and south. The troops should be impressed with the importance of this
  work, and also that time is material, and therefore it should be begun
  at once, and prosecuted with all the energy possible. Working parties
  should be composed of about one-half the command, and they should move
  by regiments, provided with their arms and haversacks, ready to repel
  attacks of cavalry. The other half in reserve will be able to watch
  the enemy retreating eastward.

  2. Colonel E. F. Winslow, commanding cavalry, will keep his cavalry in
  advance of the party working eastward, and will act as though this
  army were slowly pursuing the enemy.

  3. Special instructions will be given as to the general supply train;
  and the troops now in Meridian will, under proper brigade parties,
  collect meal, meat and supplies. The destruction of buildings must be
  deferred till the last moment, when a special detail will be made for
  that purpose.

                               By order of        W. T. SHERMAN,
                                               Major-General commanding.


These directions being faithfully carried out, General Sherman with
justice declared that he had made the most complete destruction of
railroads ever beheld.

Supplies now beginning to fall short, the Union forces fell back toward
Vicksburg, returning by the way of Canton, and reached their original
position on the 26th of February.

In this expedition the National loss in killed and wounded amounted to
one hundred and seventy men.




             GENERAL SMITH’S EXPEDITION FROM MEMPHIS, TENN.
                           FEBRUARY 11, 1864.


General M. L. Smith, who had been ordered to report to General Sherman
at Meridian, had in the mean time, left Memphis on the 11th of February.
On the 13th the National forces reached the Tallahatchie, and on the
same day crossed the river at New Albany, without encountering any
opposition from the enemy. Pushing forward with all possible speed,
General Smith encountered the enemy, in force, near Houston. The
Unionists, not being strong enough to engage the rebels, then moved
eastward, and surprised and entered Okalona. Advancing along the
railroad, and tearing up the track as he went, General Smith next
reached West Point, having destroyed on the way two thousand bales of
cotton, and one million bushels of corn. Two miles north of West Point
Station, the enemy was encountered, and a short skirmish ensued, in
which the rebels were driven back. The enemy were next discovered to be
in strong force in front, holding all the crossings over a swamp to the
right of the town, and also on the line of the Octibbieha in front, and
that of the Tombigbee river on the left. An attack was necessary; and
General Smith, encumbered with pack trains and captured cattle,
determined to make his demonstration for battle in front, in order to
give his main body and trains an opportunity to fall back on Okalona.
This movement was successfully accomplished, notwithstanding that the
enemy, under the command of Generals Lee, Forrest and Chalmers, pressed
very hard upon the retreating Union line. Subsequently, on the 22nd,
General Smith was attacked at Okalona, and defeated with severe loss.
That night he retreated, with all possible secrecy and speed. A
correspondent thus describes his retreat:

“Picture to yourself, if you can, a living, moving mass of men, negroes,
mules, and horses, of four thousand or five thousand, all _en masse_,
literally jammed, huddled, and crowded into the smallest possible space;
night setting in; artillery and small arms booming behind us; cavalry
all around and ahead, moving on, on, on, over fences, through fields and
brush, over hills and across mud-holes, streams, and bridges, and still
on, on into the night, until the moon rises on the scene and shows us
some of the outlines of this living panorama. I forgot to say that in
this crowd were a lot of prisoners, too, once or twice attempting to
escape, followed by the swift report of the revolver, once with bitter
consequences to the escaping prisoners.”

On the night of the 23d General Smith succeeded in crossing the
Tallahatchie at New Albany, and on the 25th, at about noon, his forces
reached Memphis, with all their trains and spoils of war. The loss was
less than two hundred killed and captured. Thus it happened that the
expedition failed to make a junction with General Sherman, at Meridian.




                       THE RED RIVER EXPEDITION.
                         MARCH 10-MAY 16, 1864.


An extensive trade had been carried on for two years between the
Confederate States, and the Mexican border. The occupation of
Brownsville had checked in a measure this intercourse, and it was
determined by the Federal authorities to attempt the capture of
Shreveport, an important trading town in the extreme northwestern border
of Louisiana, near the boundaries of Arkansas and Texas. This place is
at the head of steamboat navigation on the Red river, in the midst of
the largest and richest cotton district in the trans-Mississippi
department. It was the rebel capital of Louisiana, the headquarters of
Gen. Kirby Smith, and the general depot for rebel supplies in that
section. The Government desired Shreveport, and the undisturbed
possession of the Mississippi, and General Banks was charged with the
duty of taking it. His army consisted of a part of the Nineteenth army
corps, which he formerly commanded in person; a portion of the
Thirteenth army corps, under General Ransom; and a portion of the
Sixteenth army corps, under the command of General Smith. A large naval
force under Admiral Porter, constituted an important part of the
expedition.

The Red river cannot be navigated with safety for any distance above
Alexandria by large vessels, except during the months of March and
April; and arrangements were accordingly made for the grand naval and
army expedition to start as early in the month of March as practicable.

On the second of the month, Admiral Porter concentrated his fleet off
the mouth of Red river, awaiting army movements, while some of his
gunboats were engaged in destroying bridges on the Atchafalaya and Black
rivers, and rebel property collected at Sicily Island. Admiral Porter’s
fleet comprised the following vessels:

The Essex, Commander Robert Townsend; Benton, Lieutenant-Commander James
A. Greer; La Fayette, Lieutenant-Commander J. P. Foster; Choctaw,
Lieutenant-Commander F. M. Ramsey; Chilicothe, Acting Volunteer
Lieutenant S. P. Couthouy; Ozark, Acting Volunteer Lieutenant George W.
Browne; Louisville, Lieutenant-Commander E. K. Owen; Carondolet,
Lieutenant-Commander J. G. Mitchell; Eastport, Lieutenant-Commander S.
L. Phelps; Pittsburgh, Acting Volunteer Lieutenant W. R. Hoel; Mound
City, Acting Volunteer Lieutenant A. R. Langthorne; Osage,
Lieutenant-Commander T. O. Selfridge; Neosho, Acting Volunteer
Lieutenant Samuel Howard; Ouachita, Lieutenant-Commander Byron Wilson;
Fort Hindman, Acting Volunteer Lieutenant John Pearce. And the lighter
boats: Lexington, Lieutenant George M. Bache; Cricket, Acting Master H.
H. Gorringe; Gazelle, Acting Master Charles Thatcher; Black Hawk,
Lieutenant-Commander K. R. Breese.

General A. J. Smith embarked from Vicksburg with his command, of about
ten thousand troops, on twenty transports, on the 10th of March. His
corps consisted of two divisions from the Sixteenth and two of the
Seventeenth army corps. He arrived at the mouth of the Red river on the
12th. On the same day the transports moved up to the Atchafalaya, and
the troops were landed at Semmesport, where they disembarked and marched
overland, a distance of thirty miles, to Fort De Russy, on the Red
river, skirmishing throughout the route with the enemy’s cavalry. On the
afternoon of the 14th they were in sight of the fort.

It consisted of two distinct and formidable earthworks, connected by a
covered way; the upper work, facing the road, mounted four guns, two
field and two siege; the lower work, commanding the river, was a
casemated battery of three guns. Only two guns were in position in it,
one an eleven-inch columbiad, and an eight-inch smooth bore. On each
side were batteries of two guns each, making in all eight siege and two
field-pieces. As the line moved up to the edge of the timber, the upper
work opened with shell and shrapnel, against which two batteries were
brought to bear. The cannonading continued for two hours. A charge was
then ordered, and as the men reached the ditch, the garrison
surrendered. The Federal loss was four killed and thirty wounded; that
of the enemy, five killed and four wounded. The prisoners taken were
twenty-four officers and two hundred men. Considerable ammunition and
stores were found, besides a thousand muskets.

The fleet met with many obstructions on its passage up the river, which
were removed without serious damage to the vessels; and after constant
skirmishing with the river batteries, arrived in front of the fort just
before the close of the action, and rendered effective service.

General Smith ordered the works to be destroyed. A portion of his troops
then embarked on the transports, and reached Alexandria, one hundred and
forty miles from the Mississippi river, on the evening of the 16th. They
were followed by the remainder of the forces and the fleet. The enemy
retired before the advance, destroying two steamboats and considerable
cotton. During the first week, the gunboats rescued upwards of four
thousand bales of cotton, and large quantities were brought in by the
negroes. The fleet was detained by the low water on the falls above
Alexandria, its depth being only six feet, whereas nine feet were
required to float the largest gunboats.

On the 20th, the cavalry force under General Lee, attached to the
command of General Banks, reached Alexandria, after marching from
Franklin across the Teche country. Meantime detachments from General
Smith’s command had been sent forward, and captured several small bodies
of the enemy.

On the 21st, Natchitoches was taken, with two hundred prisoners and four
pieces of artillery. It is about eighty miles from Alexandria.

About four miles from Natchitoches, is a small settlement of dingy
houses, called Grand Ecore. General Banks arrived at this place on the
4th of April, and it was then made the headquarters of both the army and
navy commanders, and the entire force of the expedition was located in
that vicinity.

The army numbered about twenty thousand men. The cavalry was under
General Lee, formerly of Grant’s army; the artillery was commanded by
Brigadier-General Richard Arnold. General Franklin was second in
command. He had one division of his corps with him, under General Emory.
That of General Green remained at Alexandria, to garrison the post.
General Ransom’s force consisted of two divisions. General Smith’s
command remained at Natchitoches. With the rest of the army General
Bank’s moved from Natchitoches for Shreveport on the 6th of April. The
country is a dense, interminable forest, with a few narrow roads, with
no signs of life or civilization, but a few log houses and half-cleared
plantations. Into this country General Banks was compelled to march. He
found, in the beginning, that two arms of his service would be almost
worthless. So long as he marched, his cavalry might picket the woods and
skirmish along the advance; but in action they would be as helpless as
so many wagon trains. His artillery would be of no use unless he could
manage to get the enemy into an open clearing. The region was little
more than a great masked battery. It was an unproductive, barren
country, and it became necessary for permanent military operations to
carry along everything that an army could use.

On the evening of the seventh, they reached Pleasant Hill, a small
village, thirty-five miles from Natchitoches, the cavalry advance
skirmishing nearly all the way through the woods. They had a severe
fight, on that morning, two miles beyond Pleasant Hill, in which the
Eighty-seventh Illinois (mounted infantry) lost quite heavily.

On the morning of the eighth they resumed their march. A severe skirmish
occurred at an old sawmill, ten miles beyond Pleasant Hill, in which
Lieutenant-Colonel Webb, of the Seventy-seventh Illinois, was killed;
but the enemy kept falling back, and were pursued by the cavalry and
infantry about eight miles further, to Sabine Cross-Roads, three miles
from Mansfield. Here the enemy was met in force, and a check made to
further progress.




                     BATTLE OF SABINE CROSS-ROADS.
                             APRIL 8, 1864.


The position of the Union army at 3 o’clock was as follows: In front,
and on the ground where a most terrible battle was soon to be fought,
was General Lee with Colonels Dudley and Lucas’s cavalry brigades with
Nim’s battery of six guns and one section (two guns) of Battery G, Fifth
United States regulars. United to this force there was now the Fourth
division, Thirteenth army corps, with the Chicago Mercantile battery,
(six guns.) Next, in the rear and completely blocking up the road, was
General Lee’s train of some two hundred and fifty wagons, to the
presence of which the subsequent disaster of the day is largely
attributable. Back of these was the Third division, Thirteenth army
corps, under General Cameron, moving up to the front as rapidly as
possible. Next to the Third division was General Emory with the First
division, Nineteenth army corps, seven miles from the extreme front,
while General Smith was back of Pleasant Hill, one day’s march in the
rear. The battle-ground was a large, open, irregular-shaped field,
through about one-half of which on the right of the road a narrow belt
of timber ran, encircling inward as it extended to the right until its
base rested around upon the woods in the rear. The road passed through
the centre of the field in a northwesterly direction toward Mansfield.

Meandering diagonally through the field and across the road was a small
creek or bayou, from the banks of which the ground rose gradually along
the line of the road, terminating in a considerable ridge on each side.
The ridge at the entrance to the field on the side of the advance was
close up to the woods, and commanded the whole battle-field, while the
ridge on the opposite side ran through the open field on the left to the
belt of timber dividing the field on the right, along which it sloped
gradually until it reached the level of the hollow on the bayou. The
outer line of the field beyond the belt of timber on the right was an
irregular semicircle, the extremities drawing inward, so as to
correspond somewhat to the outline of the dividing wood. The outer line
of the field on the left was very nearly at a right angle with the road.
The rebel forces, occupying a front of about one mile, were stationed
under cover of the woods along the further line of these fields. Their
front, therefore, extended from their right flank in a straight line to
the road, and then, following the shape of the field, circled inward
until their left flank reached a point that would be intersected by a
line drawn across the road at a right angle near the middle of the first
field on the right. The main body of the rebels was evidently on the
right of the roads. A battery was seen in position near the road, but it
was not brought into action.

On the right, and in the belt of timber which separated the first from
the second field, was Lucas’s cavalry brigade, mostly dismounted and
deployed as skirmishers, while beyond and supporting this brigade was
the Fourth division, Thirteenth army corps. About four o’clock, the
Fourth division was moved forward through the belt of timber, and took
position in line of battle behind the fence that inclosed the field
beyond.

At half-past four, General Ransom and staff passed on foot along the
outer infantry line, who were firing very briskly across the field into
the woods where the enemy was posted, but as the fire was of little
effect the general directed it to be withheld until the rebels came out
into the field. For half or three-quarters of an hour, everything
remained quiet along the lines, when all at once a heavy and continuous
discharge of musketry was heard on the right, from rebel forces marching
steadily in close ranks across the open field to the attack; while at
the same moment a heavy column was moving across the road upon the left,
where the cavalry brigade under Colonel Dudley was posted, aided by
Nim’s battery, the two howitzers, and one small regiment of infantry
(the Twenty-third Wisconsin.)

Every regiment now coolly but rapidly poured its destructive fire upon
the advancing foe, opening at every discharge great gaps in the rebel
ranks, and strewing the field with a continuous line of killed and
wounded. Under this terrific and well-directed fire, the rebel line was
checked, broken, and driven back, the only considerable body remaining
together being a mass of some three hundred or four hundred directly
opposite the Thirteenth Illinois, which was badly cut up, but held its
position without breaking.

Four guns of Nim’s battery were captured, not having horses to drag them
from the field.

This movement on the left, however, was simply a ruse on the part of the
enemy to induce General Banks to weaken his right wing, and it was
successful. At the commencement of the action General Franklin’s
divisions were in camp nine miles in the rear, but he hastened forward
in advance of his command, and, in conjunction with the
commander-in-chief, passed through the midst of the engagement,
encouraging by his presence, and leading on the men.

The right now became fiercely engaged, and the centre being pressed,
fell back, when the right also gave way. The loss of the Chicago battery
and the First Indiana soon followed. General Cameron then advanced to
the front with a brigade of Indiana troops of the Thirteenth corps, but
was unable to check the superior force of the enemy.

The line continued to fall back slowly until the baggage-trains blocked
up the roads in the rear so that the troops could not easily pass, when
a panic ensued. The enemy now pursued for three and a half miles, when
their advance was checked and driven back by General Emory’s division.
Here the conflict ended for the day. Six guns of the Chicago battery,
two of Battery G, four of the First Indiana, and six of Nim’s battery
were left on the field, with two howitzers of the Sixth Missouri. The
loss of General Banks was estimated at two thousand killed, wounded, and
missing. His force on the field was about eight thousand. The force of
the enemy was much larger. General Mouton was among the badly wounded of
the enemy.

As it was now known that General Smith with his force had marched to
Pleasant Hill and halted, General Banks determined to withdraw to that
place for the sake of concentrating his forces, and of the advantageous
position which he could there occupy. The movement commenced at ten
o’clock at night, and before daylight the rear of the army was well on
the road. The enemy during the night had pressed his pickets down on
General Banks’ front, but was not aware of the retreat of the troops
until the morning, when a pursuit commenced, the cavalry of the enemy in
advance, but General Emory had succeeded in bringing up the rear to
Pleasant Hill at seven o’clock on the morning of the 9th, where the new
line of battle was formed, the entire Federal force having reached that
place.




                      BATTLE OF PLEASANT HILL, LA.
                             APRIL 9, 1864.


The battle-ground was an open field on the outside of the town of
Pleasant Hill on the Shreveport road. It was open and rolling, and
ascended both from the side of the town and from the side on which the
enemy were approaching. A belt of timber extended almost entirely around
it. The division of General Emory was drawn up in line of battle on the
sloping side, with the right resting across the Shreveport road. General
McMillen’s brigade formed the extreme right of the line, with his right
resting near the woods, which extended along the whole base of the slope
and through which the enemy would advance. General Dwight’s brigade was
formed next, with his left resting on the road, Colonel Benedict’s
brigade formed next, with his right resting on the road and a little in
the rear of General Dwight’s left. Two pieces of Taylor’s battery were
placed in the rear of General Dwight’s left, on the road, and four
pieces were in position on an eminence on the left of the road and in
rear of Colonel Benedict. Hibbard’s Vermont battery was in the rear of
the division. General Smith’s division, under command of General Mower,
was massed in two lines of battle fifty yards apart with artillery in
rear of General Emory’s division. The right of the first line rested on
the road, and was composed of two brigades, the First brigade on the
right, commanded by Colonel Lynch, the Second brigade on the left,
commanded by Colonel Shaw. The Third Indiana battery (Crawford’s) was
posted in the first line of battle, on the right of the Eighty-ninth
Indiana. The Ninth Indiana battery (Brown’s) was in position on the
right of the First brigade. The Missouri battery occupied ground on the
right of the Eighty-ninth Indiana.

General Smith’s second line of battle was fifty yards in rear of the
first, and was composed of two brigades, one on the right of the line,
and that on the left commanded by Colonel Hill.

General Mower commanded the Second brigade, and was temporarily in
command of the whole force.

The skirmishing, which had continued all day, became lively towards its
close; and at ten minutes past five, General Emory sent word to General
Franklin that the skirmishers were driven in and the enemy marching down
upon him in three lines of battle.

At twenty minutes past five, the enemy appeared on the plain at the edge
of the woods, and the battle commenced, the Union batteries opening with
case shell as the rebels marched at a double-quick across the field to
the attack.

On the left, Colonel Benedict’s brigade came into action first, and soon
after the right and centre were engaged. The battle now raged fiercely,
the air was full of lead and iron, and the roar of artillery incessant.
The carnage on both sides was fearful, the men fighting almost hand to
hand, and with great desperation. Nothing could exceed the determined
bravery of the troops.

The contest now became fierce on both sides, when General Emory’s
division, pressed by overwhelming numbers, fell back up the hill to the
Sixteenth corps, which was just behind the crest. The enemy rushed
forward and were met by General Smith with a discharge from all his
guns, which was followed by an immediate charge of the infantry, by
which the enemy were driven rapidly back to the woods, where they broke
in confusion. Night put an end to the pursuit. The Taylor battery, lost
on the advance of the enemy, was recovered, and also two guns of Nim’s
battery. Five hundred prisoners were also taken. Early on the next
morning, leaving the dead unburied and the muskets thrown on the field,
the army commenced its march back to Grand Ecore, thirty-five miles from
Pleasant Hill, to obtain rest and rations.

The entire losses of the campaign thus far were stated to be twenty
pieces of artillery, three thousand men, one hundred and thirty wagons,
twelve hundred horses and mules, including many that died of disease.
The gains were the capture of Fort De Russy, Alexandria, Grand Ecore,
and Natchitoches, the opening of Red river, the capture of three
thousand bales of cotton, twenty-three hundred prisoners, twenty-five
pieces of artillery, chiefly captured by the fleet, and small arms and
considerable stores. A large number of citizens enlisted in the service
in Alexandria, and the material for two colored regiments was gathered;
and five thousand negroes, male and female, abandoned their homes and
followed the army.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Rear-Admiral Porter passed the falls with twelve gunboats and
thirty transports, and reached Grand Ecore when the army was at
Natchitoches preparing for an immediate march. As the river was rising
slowly the advance was continued with six smaller gunboats and twenty
transports, having army stores and a part of General Smith’s division on
board. Starting on the 7th of April, Springfield landing was reached on
the third day. Here a large steamer sunk in the river obstructed further
progress; and information was received that the army had met with a
reverse. Orders also came to General Smith’s troops to return to Grand
Ecore with the transports. The fleet, therefore, turned back, but was
constantly annoyed by the enemy on the bank of the river. Two of the
fleet at Grand Ecore were found above the bar, and not likely to get
away until there was a rise of water in the river.

The continued low water in the Red river, and the difficulty of keeping
up a line of supplies, caused the army to fall back to Alexandria. The
march commenced in the afternoon of April 21st, by starting the baggage
train with a suitable guard. At 2 o’clock the next morning the army
began silently to evacuate its position, General Smith’s force forming
the rear guard. Soon after daylight, the enemy observing the movement,
began his pursuit, but with so small a force that only slight
skirmishing took place. The army reached Alexandria without serious
fighting, on the 27th of April.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The difficulties and dangers which the naval commander was called upon
to meet and overcome are worthy of more than a passing notice. During
the return of the vessels through the narrow and snaggy river, they were
assailed continually by rebel batteries on the shore, and were followed
and attacked at all favorable points by thousands of infantry and horse
artillery.

On the 12th of April a severe engagement occurred, owing to an attempt,
by a rebel force of two thousand men, to capture the iron-clad Osage and
the transport Black Hawk, which had grounded. Flushed with their recent
victory over Banks’s army, the rebels displayed unwonted courage, and
soon drove all the men from the transport to the safe casemates of the
monitor; but a destructive cross-fire from the Osage and Lexington
quickly put them to flight with severe loss.

Every day difficulties of this character occurred, as the vessels were
constantly grounding, until they arrived at Grand Ecore, when greater
and more serious obstacles presented themselves, which threatened the
loss of the most valuable vessels of the fleet.

The rebels were industriously employed in cutting off the supply of
water from various channels up the river, in the hope of preventing the
passage of the vessels over the bar at Grand Ecore, and the result
appeared to promise success to their plans. The heavy vessels were
constantly grounding, and, on the 26th of April, the commander of the
Eastport, after laboring night and day for a week to carry his vessel
over the sand-bars and logs by which she was clogged, was compelled to
blow her up, after removing all her stores and available equipments.

On the 4th of May the steamers Covington, Warner, and Signal were
captured by about two thousand rebels, who attacked them from the banks
of the river, killing or capturing forty of their crew.

The crowning act of heroism and of engineering skill in this unfortunate
campaign, is described in the report of Admiral Porter, in detailing the
passage of the Falls of Alexandria by the fleet:


                       “MISSISSIPPI SQUADRON, FLAGSHIP BLACK HAWK, }
                           “MOUTH RED RIVER, May 16th, 1864.           }

  “SIR: I have the honor to inform you that the vessels lately caught by
  low water above the Falls of Alexandria, have been released from their
  unpleasant position. The water had fallen so low that I had no hope or
  expectation of getting the vessels out this season, and, as the army
  had made arrangements to evacuate the country, I saw nothing before me
  but the destruction of the best part of the Mississippi squadron.

  “There seems to have been an especial Providence in providing a man
  equal to the emergency. Lieutenant-Colonel Bailey, Acting Engineer of
  the Nineteenth army corps, proposed a plan of building a series of
  dams across the rocks at the falls, and raising the water high enough
  to let the vessels pass over. This proposition looked like madness,
  and the best engineers ridiculed it; but Colonel Bailey was so
  sanguine of success that I requested to have it done, and he entered
  heartily into the work. Provisions were short and forage was almost
  out, and the dam was promised to be finished in ten days or the army
  would have to leave us. I was doubtful about the time, but I had no
  doubt about the ultimate success, if time would only permit. General
  Banks placed at the disposal of Colonel Bailey all the forces he
  required, consisting of some three thousand men and two or three
  hundred wagons. All the neighboring steam-mills were torn down for
  material; two or three regiments of Maine men were set at work felling
  trees, and on the second day after my arrival in Alexandria, from
  Grand Ecore, the work had fairly begun.

  “Trees were falling with great rapidity; teams were moving in all
  directions, bringing in brick and stone; quarries were opened;
  flatboats were built to bring stone down from above, and every man
  seemed to be working with a vigor I have seldom seen equalled, while
  perhaps not one in fifty believed in the undertaking. These fails are
  about a mile in length, filled with rugged rocks, over which, at the
  present stage of water, it seemed to be impossible to make a channel.

  “The work was commenced by running out from the left bank of the river
  a tree dam, made of the bodies of very large trees, brush, brick, and
  stone, cross-tied with heavy timber, and strengthened in every way
  which ingenuity could devise. This was run out about three hundred
  feet into the river; four large coal barges were then filled with
  brick and sunk at the end of it. From the right bank of the river,
  cribs filled with stone were built out to meet the barges, all of
  which was successfully accomplished, notwithstanding there was a
  current running of nine miles an hour, which threatened to sweep every
  thing before it.


“It will take too much time to enter into the details of this truly
wonderful work; suffice it to say that the dam had nearly reached
completion in eight days’ working time, and the water had risen
sufficiently on the upper falls to allow the Fort Hindman, Osage, and
Neosho, to get down and be ready to pass the dam. In another day it
would have been high enough to enable all the other vessels to pass the
upper falls. Unfortunately, on the morning of the 9th instant, the
pressure of water became so great that it swept away two of the
stone-barges, which swung in below the dam on one side. Seeing this
unfortunate accident, I jumped on a horse and rode up to where the upper
vessels were anchored, and ordered the Lexington to pass the upper
falls, if possible, and immediately attempt to go through the dam. I
thought I might be able to save the four vessels below, not knowing
whether the persons employed on the work would ever have the heart to
renew the enterprise.

“The Lexington succeeded in getting over the upper falls just in time,
the water rapidly falling as she was passing over. She then steered
directly for the opening in the dam, through which the water was rushing
so furiously that it seemed as if nothing but destruction awaited her.
Thousands of beating hearts looked on, anxious for the result.

“The silence was so great as the Lexington approached the dam that a pin
might almost have been heard to fall. She entered the gap with a full
head of steam on, pitched down the roaring torrent, made two or three
spasmodic rolls, hung for a moment on the rocks below, was then swept
into deep water by the current, and rounded to safely into the bank.

“Thousands of voices rose in one deafening cheer, and universal joy
seemed to pervade the face of every man present. The Neosho followed
next—all her hatches battened down, and every precaution taken against
accident. She did not fare as well as the Lexington, her pilot having
become frightened as he approached the abyss, and stopped her engine
when I particularly ordered a full head of steam to be carried. The
result was that for a moment her hull disappeared from sight, under the
water. Every one thought she was lost. She rose, however, swept along
over the rocks with the current, and fortunately escaped with only one
hole in her bottom, which was stopped in the course of an hour. The
Hindman and Osage both came through beautifully without touching a
thing, and I thought if I was only fortunate enough to get my large
vessels as well over the falls, my fleet once more would do good service
on the Mississippi.

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE GENERALS. BEAUREGARD. E. KIRBY SMITH. BEN.
M’CULLOCH. LEONIDAS POLK. F. K. ZOLLICOFFER. J. E. B. STUART. STERLING
PRICE. JOHN H. MORGAN.]

“The accident to the dam, instead of disheartening Colonel Bailey, only
induced him to renew his exertions, after he had seen the success of
getting four vessels through. The noble-hearted soldiers, seeing their
labor of the last eight days swept away in a moment, cheerfully went to
work to repair damages, being confident now that all the gunboats would
be finally brought over. The men had been working for eight days and
nights, up to their necks in water, in the broiling sun, cutting trees
and wheeling bricks, and nothing but good humor prevailed among them. On
the whole, it was very fortunate the dam was carried away, as the two
barges that were swept away from the centre swung around against some
rocks on the left and made a fine cushion for the vessels, and prevented
them, as it afterward appeared, from running on certain destruction.

“The force of the water and the current being too great to construct a
continuous dam of six hundred feet across the river in so short a time,
Colonel Bailey determined to leave a gap of fifty-five feet in the dam,
and build a series of wing dams on the upper falls. This was
accomplished in three days’ time, and on the 11th instant the Mound
City, the Carondolet, and Pittsburgh came over the upper falls, a good
deal of labor having been expended in hauling them through, the channel
being very crooked, scarcely wide enough for them. Next day the Ozark,
Louisville, Chillicothe, and two tugs also succeeded in crossing the
upper falls.

“Immediately afterward, the Mound City, Carondolet, and Pittsburgh
started in succession to pass the dam, all their hatches battened down
and every precaution being taken to prevent accident.

“The passage of these vessels was a most beautiful sight, only to be
realized when seen. They passed over without an accident except the
unshipping of one or two rudders. This was witnessed by all the troops,
and the vessels were heartily cheered when they passed over. Next
morning at ten o’clock, the Louisville, Chillicothe, Ozark, and two tugs
passed over without an accident, except the loss of a man, who was swept
off the deck of one of the tugs. By three o’clock that afternoon, the
vessels were all coaled, ammunition replaced, and all steamed down the
river with the convoy of transports in company. A good deal of
difficulty was anticipated in getting over the bars in lower Red
river—the depth of water reported only five feet; gunboats were drawing
six. Providentially, we had a rise from the back-water of the
Mississippi—that river being very high at that time—the back-water
extending to Alexandria, one hundred and fifty miles distant, enabling
us to pass all the bars and obstructions with safety.

“Words are inadequate to express the admiration I feel for the abilities
of Lieutenant-Colonel Bailey. This is, without doubt, the best
engineering feat ever performed. Under the best circumstances, a private
company would not have completed this work under one year, and to an
ordinary mind the whole thing would have appeared an impossibility.
Leaving out his abilities as an engineer, and the credit he has
conferred upon the country, he has saved to the Union a valuable fleet,
worth nearly two million of dollars. More, he has deprived the enemy of
a triumph which would have emboldened them to carry on the war a year or
two longer; for the intended departure of the army was a fixed fact, and
there was nothing left for me to do, in case that event occurred, but to
destroy every part of the vessels, so that the rebels could make nothing
of them. The highest honors the Government can bestow on Colonel Bailey
can never repay him for the service he has rendered the country.

“To General Banks, personally, I am much indebted for the happy manner
in which he has forwarded this enterprise, giving it his whole
attention, night and day, scarcely sleeping while the work was going on;
tending personally to see that all the requirements of Colonel Bailey
were complied with on the instant.

“I do not believe there ever was a case where such difficulties were
overcome in such a short space of time, and without any preparation.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                         “DAVID D. PORTER, Rear-Admiral.

  “HON. GIDEON WELLES, Sec’y of the Navy, Washington, D. C.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The last of the gunboats passed the falls on the 12th of May, and on the
next day Alexandria was evacuated. The town was fired in several places
by some evil-disposed persons connected with the army, and most of the
inhabitants thus reduced to suffering and want.




              OPERATIONS IN GEORGIA—BATTLE OF TUNNEL HILL.
                           FEBRUARY 22, 1864.


While Sherman’s expedition was marching on Meridian, a force of rebels
detached from the army of Johnston—who had superseded Bragg—near Dalton,
was sent out to reinforce Polk, in Alabama. This caused General Grant to
direct a forward movement upon Dalton, which commenced February 22d, and
led to severe fighting. On the day specified, a strong column of
infantry, preceded by Colonel Harrison’s cavalry, set out from
Chattanooga on the road to Tunnel Hill and Dalton. The expedition was
under the direction of General Palmer, whose able coadjutors were
Generals Johnson, Davis, Baird and Carlin. No opposition was encountered
east of the Chickamauga. Colonel Harrison, however, caught sight of some
rebel cavalry and chased them through Ringgold’s Gap and Taylor’s Ridge.
The enemy’s mounted force, consisting of Tennessee cavalry, had at first
fled in confusion, but finally took heart and skirmished with
considerable spirit.

About four o’clock, P. M., the Union troops came in sight of Tunnel
Hill, and here the enemy made a determined stand. Colonel Harrison, who,
as was his wont, had kept close upon the heels of the foe, now found
himself confronted by vastly superior numbers; but no sooner did he
perceive the infantry advancing to his support, than he dashed at the
rebels and drove them in wild dismay out of the town of Tunnel Hill. The
rebel General Wheeler, with an entire brigade of cavalry and four pieces
of artillery, now checked the career of the daring patriot Colonel.
Their cannon opened furiously and effectively upon the assailants, to
which the Union artillery replied with resonant thunder, compelling
Colonel Brown’s rebel cavalry, who were assailing Colonel Harrison’s
right, to shrink from the contest. The fight continued, however, till
night descended upon the field of battle, and parted the combatants.

The Union forces, for the purpose of procuring supplies, had retired
about four miles in the direction of Dalton. General Stanley’s command,
with the Fourth Ohio cavalry under Colonel Long, had, in the mean time,
approached from the neighborhood of Cleveland; and, on the following
morning, the advance of the whole expedition was resumed at ten o’clock.
It arrived at half-past eleven in immediate proximity to the town of
Tunnel Hill. The skirmishing became very brisk, and the cavalry were
compelled to await the support of the infantry, which they no sooner
received than they advanced in column upon the enemy’s position. The
rebels, who had hitherto remained concealed, now disclosed a battery,
planted on a hill to the right of the tunnel, from which shell were
thrown with fatal accuracy into the midst of the Union ranks. This
occasioned a precipitate but orderly withdrawal. Captain Hotchkiss now
trained two ten-pound Parrotts of the Second Minnesota battery upon this
noisy rebel eyrie, but his shells failed to explode, and Captain Harris,
of the Nineteenth Indiana battery, was obliged to send his compliments
to the rebels from two pieces on the left of the road, before they would
vacate their commanding position.

General Morgan, with equal wisdom and daring, now marched his troops
along the crest of Tunnel Hill, caught the enemy on the right flank, and
turned his works without opposition. General Wainwright was, at the same
time, advancing with the view of performing the same feat on the enemy’s
left. The rebels fled without firing a gun, and Tunnel Hill was
captured.




           THE RECONNAISSANCE AND BATTLE AT ROCKY FACE RIDGE.
                           FEBRUARY 25, 1864.


The enemy was pursued along the road to Dalton to a gorge about three
miles from the town. The railroad runs through this gorge, formed in
Rocky Face Ridge or Buzzard’s Roost, and the position occupied here by
the rebels appeared to be almost impregnable. An advance on the 24th had
driven the enemy from all the ridge north of the creek, but on the
retirement of the Union troops at night, it was reoccupied by the
rebels, who, being now thoroughly aroused to their danger, recalled
Claiborne’s, Stevenson’s, and other divisions to aid in repelling their
assailants.

At about eleven o’clock, A. M., on the 25th, soon after all the forces
comprising the expedition had arrived, the Union troops, in long blue
lines, moved in splendid order upon the enemy’s works. The skirmishers
became at once closely engaged in the woodland. The advance was steady
and rapid, clearing the enemy from the ridge as it proceeded. The object
of the reconnoissance was accomplished; the enemy, in overwhelming
force, was found to be strongly posted in the gorge, and, accordingly
after much heavy skirmishing, the Union forces were ordered to retire.
Some rebel cavalry attempted to pursue them, but were soon driven out of
sight. The capture of Tunnel Hill, and the other important operations of
the expedition, had been accomplished with a loss of about seventy-five
killed and two hundred and fifty wounded. The rebels suffered much more
severely.




                    THE CAPTURE OF UNION CITY, TENN.
                            MARCH 25, 1864.


The Federal posts in West Tennessee and Kentucky, were, in consequence
of the withdrawal of the forces under Generals Sherman and A. J. Smith
from Vicksburg, left much exposed, and General Forrest did not hesitate
to avail himself of the opportunity thus presented of successfully
attacking them. He accordingly concentrated and reinforced his command,
and, on the 23d of March, started, with about five thousand men, from
Jackson, Tenn., and reached Union City on the twenty-fourth. Here he
found Colonel Hawkins with the Eleventh Tennessee Union cavalry,
consisting of about four hundred and fifty men. At first Colonel Hawkins
refused to surrender. His subordinate officers were confident of their
ability to hold out till succor arrived, which they believed would soon
reach them. Colonel Hawkins was, however, less sanguine, and finally
surrendered to the enemy after a slight assault, who captured beside the
garrison, two hundred horses and five hundred small arms. Hardly had the
place been surrendered, when General Brayman, from Cairo, advanced to
its relief. When within six miles from the post, he learned that its
surrender had just taken place, and marched back with the shameful
tidings to Cairo.




                       THE ATTACK OF PADUCAH, KY.
                            MARCH 26, 1864.


General Forrest, after taking possession of Hickman, moved north with
Buford’s division, marching direct from Jackson to Paducah, in fifty
hours. The veteran Colonel Hicks, who commanded at Paducah, was,
however, apprised of his approach in time to notify the inhabitants by
special order, and to provide for their safety by removing them to the
other side of the river. The pell-mell rush to the wharf of men, women,
and children, was, in itself, tumultuous, but fortunately means were at
hand to transfer them, so that few were remaining when the attack was
made on the city. Colonel Hicks, conscious of the great numerical
superiority of the enemy, estimated at from ten to fifteen thousand,
ordered his entire command into Fort Anderson, consisting of five
companies of the Sixteenth Kentucky, three companies of the One Hundred
and Forty-second Illinois, and a detachment of the First Kentucky
artillery, (colored) in all six hundred and eighty-five, exclusive of
the Union citizens of Paducah for whom arms could be found.

The fort mounted six guns, and contained ammunition and rations barely
sufficient for one day. It was a good earthwork defence, with a ditch
around it, standing about five hundred yards down the river from the
centre of the town. The enemy’s advance came in sight at one o’clock,
and shortly after the main body appeared, forming a line which was
little less than two miles long. Forrest pushed his line rapidly and
steadily forward. A detachment of several hundred rebels dashed into and
through the deserted city till they came within rifle-range of the fort,
where they took possession of the neighboring houses, from which they
could look into it and pick off the garrison. The rebel and Union
artillery had already exchanged shots, and the two gunboats in the
river, the Paw-Paw and the Piosta, began to play upon the rebel
sharpshooters ranging through the city. The enemy now prepared to make a
charge upon the fort. The assaulting force was greeted on its first
appearance with a heavy and well-directed fire, which caused a portion
of it to veer to the right and seek the cover of the uneven ground and
the suburban buildings, but still the advance was continued. When within
a good rifle-range, it was received with a fire that caused the men to
fall to the ground by scores. The gunboat Piosta at the same time poured
a steady stream of shells upon the attacking party. A number of them
gave way, and though some of them charged up to the ditch, disorder
prevailed, and presently the whole force broke and fled in confusion,
leaving two hundred killed and wounded upon the field.

The railroad depot, and the city, in several places, were on fire. The
fight, between the rebel sharpshooters and the gunboats was still
spiritedly sustained. So fatal was the Confederate fire, that the upper
guns of the boats could not be worked, and even those behind the
casemates were loaded in peril. The ill-starred city was exposed to
destruction from friend and foe. The rebels allowed the buildings they
occupied to begin to crumble and fall before they slackened their fire.

Forrest’s aid, under a flag of truce, now presented a note from the
rebel leader to Colonel Hicks, demanding the immediate and unconditional
surrender of the fort and garrison, and threatening, in case of refusal,
to take it by storm, and grant no quarter. The war-worn Colonel Hicks
promptly replied that he would not fail to do his duty in defending the
post to the last. This refusal to surrender was quickly followed by
another impetuous assault upon the fort. The daring Brigadier-General A.
P. Thompson, formerly a citizen of Paducah, led the Kentucky rebels
against the Union fort. A fire, more galling than ever, was opened by
the rebel sharpshooters upon the garrison as the main column rushed upon
the fort. Murderous discharges from the small arms and cannon of the
fort, and the raining shell of the gunboats, made fearful havoc in the
rebel ranks as they advanced. Still the rebel general persevered,
setting his men an example which would have insured the capture of the
position, had he not, when but forty feet from the fort, been instantly
killed by the explosion of a shell from the Piosta. His fall struck
dismay into the hearts of his followers, and they consequently suffered
a disastrous repulse.

A shout of victory now rose from the fort, which was echoed back from
the gunboats and the opposite shore. The city was thoroughly sacked by
the rebels, who carried away more than half a million dollars worth of
plunder. The gunboats and the fort continued to fire upon the town till
nearly every building in it was riddled by schrapnel and solid shot. All
the government buildings, the gas works, and the elegant residences
about the fort were destroyed, and the sun rose the next morning upon
the smouldering ruins of the once beautiful city of Paducah.

To the great relief of the garrison, who were out of ammunition, and who
had been told that they must now rely on their bayonets, the rebels left
the town about midnight, but hung about it for several days. The rebel
killed numbered three hundred, and his wounded at least a thousand. The
Unionists had fourteen killed and forty-four wounded.




                   THE CAPTURE OF FORT PILLOW, TENN.
                            APRIL 12, 1864.


Fort Pillow was an earthwork, crescent-shaped, eight feet in height,
surrounded by a ditch six feet deep and twelve feet in width. It was
situated on a high bluff which descended precipitately to the river’s
edge and on the other sides sloped to a deep ravine.

On the twelfth of April, just before sunrise, General Forrest’s command,
consisting of McCulloch’s brigade of Chalmers’ division and Bell’s
brigade of Buford’s division, under the command of Brigadier-General
Chalmers, appeared in the neighborhood of Fort Pillow. The garrison of
this fort comprised nineteen officers and five hundred and thirty-eight
enlisted men, of whom two hundred and sixty-two were colored troops,
including one battalion of the Sixth United States heavy artillery,
commanded by Major L. F. Booth, and one section of the Second United
States light artillery, together with one battalion of the Thirteenth
Tennessee cavalry (white), under the command of Major W. F. Bradford.
The pickets of the garrison were driven in and the fighting became
general, about nine o’clock, A. M. Major Bradford, who commanded,
withdrew all the forces, a portion of which had previously occupied
exterior entrenchments, within the fort, and, as both the black and the
white troops fought gallantly, he was sanguine of making a successful
defence.

General Forrest having assumed the command, he ordered General Chalmers
to advance his line so as to gain a position on the slope against which
the cannon in the fort could not be directed, and where the garrison
with small arms could not reach them without exposing themselves to the
sharpshooters, who, under cover of stumps and logs, forced them to keep
inside the works. This position, within one hundred yards of the fort,
was, after much hard fighting and a severe loss to the rebels, gained by
the assailants. The gunboat New Era shelled the latter continually but
with little effect, although constantly instructed by signals from the
fort of the whereabouts of the enemy. Her guns finally became
overheated, her ammunition almost exhausted, and she was compelled to
cease firing.

Forrest now demanded the unconditional surrender of the fort. Major
Bradford asked to be allowed an hour to consult with his officers and
those of the gunboat. Forrest, perceiving two Union gunboats
approaching, the foremost apparently crowded with troops, refused to
grant more than twenty minutes for the deliberation. There was some
equivocal parleying in the interim, and the rebels are accused of
unfairly gaining some approaches to the fort during the brief truce. The
twenty minutes expired, and it was understood that Major Bradford
refused to surrender.

Forrest, after exciting the rivalry and emulation of the rebel
Missourians, Mississippians and Tennesseeans who surrounded the fort,
ordered the bugle to sound the charge, which was made with a fierce
yell, and the works were carried without a halt in the Confederate line.
The rebels declare that the colored troops retreated toward the river,
with their arms in their hands, firing back, and their colors flying.
This assertion is stoutly denied by the few survivors of the massacre
which followed. The latter affirm that the Federal troops, black and
white, threw down their arms and sought to escape by running down the
steep bank to the river. Some hid themselves behind trees and bushes,
and others leaped into the river leaving only their heads above water,
and were fired upon and slain by the victors as soon as discovered.

The Committee of Congress who made this slaughter the subject of special
investigation, report many acts of barbarity on the part of the rebels,
including the shooting in cold blood of Major Bradford, of entire groups
and lines of prisoners, of the sick and wounded in the hospital, and
even of women and children; the burning of the sick and the wounded in
huts and tents from which escape had been rendered impossible—in a word,
that “no cruelty which the most fiendish malignity could devise was
omitted by them.” General Forrest himself, Lieutenant-General S. D. Lee,
and other rebel officers who were implicated, denied these horrible
charges.

General Forrest admits a loss in the engagement of twenty killed and
sixty wounded. He captured two ten-pound Parrott guns, two howitzers,
two brass cannon, three hundred and fifty stand of small arms, one
hundred and sixty white and seventy-three negro troops and forty negro
women and children. The rest of the garrison was slaughtered, and how
many refugee citizens and negroes besides will perhaps never be known.




                     OPERATIONS IN FLORIDA IN 1864.


On the fifth of February, in accordance with general instructions from
the War Department, and in pursuance of a plan previously submitted by
him, General Gilmore, commander of the Department of the South, set on
foot an expedition designed to penetrate to the interior of Florida, for
the purpose of procuring an outlet for large quantities of cotton,
lumber and timber, which were stored in that region, and to cut off one
of the most fertile sources of the enemy’s supplies. A further object
which the Federal commander had in view was to obtain recruits for his
colored regiments from the increased negro population then congregated
in that part of the State.

The Confederate force in the State of Florida at that time was much
larger in proportion to the population, than in other Southern States,
as in addition to eight or ten thousand regular troops, the Governor had
enrolled most of the arms-bearing population in a home organization for
self-defence, and thus evaded the sweeping conscription of the Davis
administration which had been so unsparing in other quarters.

On the eighth of February, Brigadier-General Truman Seymour, under
instructions of General Gilmore, landed at Jacksonville, and occupied
the town. His force consisted of seven thousand men, and was conveyed
from the Department headquarters in twenty steamers and eight schooners.

On the afternoon of the eighth he commenced his march for the interior
of the State, his army moving in three columns, which were commanded by
Colonels Barton, Hawley, and Henry. Colonel Barton moved on the main
road, while the commands of Colonels Hawley and Henry marched on
parallel roads to the right of Colonel Barton, which united, at a
distance of only three miles, where the infantry camps were spread for
the night; while a battalion of cavalry, Elder’s horse Battery B, First
artillery, and the Fourth Massachusetts infantry, under Colonel Guy V.
Henry, pushed forward on a reconnoissance toward Lake City, through a
dense pine forest, and over a low, marshy soil. After riding a distance
of eight miles, they surprised and captured an artillery camp of the
rebels, containing four guns, with the camp equipage and officers’
baggage. Only three prisoners were taken, the rest of the force
effecting their escape. The advance of the army reached Baldwin the next
morning, capturing some army stores, and Generals Gilmore and Seymour
arrived at that place in the evening.

Colonel Henry’s command still continued in advance, and on the tenth
captured one thousand barrels of turpentine and a quantity of bacon. A
reconnoitering party was then advanced to ascertain whether the enemy
purposed to defend the south fork of the St. Mary’s river, while the
main body followed with due caution. A skirmish ensued at the fork, in
which four of the Federals were killed and thirteen wounded, when the
enemy retired, losing five of their men. Colonel Henry reached
Sanderson, forty miles from Jacksonville, at six P. M. The place had
been abandoned by the enemy, and a large amount of stores committed to
the flames. On the eleventh the command encamped five miles from Lake
City, which was held by the enemy but evacuated during the night. This
was unknown to Colonel Henry, and, as he was without infantry, he
retraced his steps to Sanderson. The most important property captured
was as follows: Two twelve-pounder rifled guns, two six-pounder guns,
one three-inch gun, two other guns, five caissons, a large quantity of
ammunition, an immense supply of camp and garrison equipage, four
railroad cars, one hundred and thirteen bales of cotton, four army
wagons, one hundred and five horses and mules, a large stock of
saddlery, tanning machinery, three thousand and eighty-three barrels
turpentine, and six thousand bushels corn. Three large warehouses were
destroyed.

On the eleventh telegraphic communication was established between
Jacksonville and Baldwin, and on that day General Gilmore sent
instructions to General Seymour not to risk a repulse in advancing upon
Lake City, and also in case his advance met with serious opposition to
concentrate at Sanderson and the south fork of the St. Mary’s. On the
thirteenth General Seymour was further instructed to concentrate at
Baldwin without delay. This was done at once. Meantime, Colonel Henry
was sent toward the left to capture some railroad trains on the
Fernandina and Cedar Keys railroad, which resulted in a skirmish with a
battalion of cavalry from East Florida, who were repulsed. A
reconnoissance was made at that time by Colonel Scammon along the
Georgia State line, and several small works of the enemy were destroyed.

General Gilmore now departed for Hilton Head, after admonishing General
Seymour to avoid a general engagement with the enemy until he should
receive further instructions, and until the defences at Jacksonville,
Baldwin, and the south fork of the St. Mary’s should be further
advanced.

On the eighteenth of February, however, General Seymour again took the
field, and marched from Jacksonville with a force of five thousand men,
with ten days’ rations, and advanced sixteen miles on the line of the
railroad the first day. On the second day he moved seventeen miles, and
reached Barber’s Station, his men much exhausted by marching over bad
roads. The twentieth proved to be a beautiful day, and the army started
at an early hour, with the cavalry in advance. The line of march was now
across the south fork of the St. Mary’s and towards Sanderson, nine
miles distant, which place they reached without halting. The sky was
clear, and the savannahs, stretching on either side of the sandy road
winding through the pine woods were warm with the sunshine. The infantry
now made a short halt, but the cavalry kept its position about two miles
in advance. The march was resumed at midday toward Lake City. General
Seymour’s force moved in three columns, Colonel Hawley’s brigade on the
left, Colonel Barton’s in the centre, and Colonel Scammon’s regiment on
the extreme right. The cavalry in advance were led by Colonel Henry with
Elder’s battery. In the rear was the colored brigade led by Colonel
Montgomery.




                           BATTLE OF OLUSTEE.
                           FEBRUARY 20, 1864.


About six miles from Sanderson the enemy’s mounted pickets, thirty or
forty in number, were met and driven in after exchanging shots. The main
body hurried forward a distance of two miles, when three or four cannon
shot of the enemy fell among the head of the column. Skirmishing
commenced immediately. The artillery dashed into position on the gallop,
the infantry on the double-quick step, and in a brief period of time a
severe battle was progressing. Elder’s battery unlimbered at the head of
the road, Hamilton’s to the left, and Langdon’s on the extreme left,
opening at short range with canister shot. The artillery of the enemy
consisted of four or five guns, and was badly served at first, being
fired too high to do injury. General Seymour’s line of infantry was well
formed for the position. With the exception of a small field of a few
acres, it was in the woods, amid a heavy growth of pine timber, and with
swampy ground intervening between it and the enemy, of whose position
nothing was known. The battle lasted for three hours. Two of the Federal
batteries were disabled early in the action. The Seventh New Hampshire
broke, but was rallied again. The Eighth United States colored fought
well until the loss of their leader, when they fled. The contest closed
at dusk, when General Seymour, finding his force repulsed with some
loss, and the colored reserve unequal to the emergency, retired from the
field, leaving his dead and wounded. The retreat, for a short distance,
was conducted in successive lines of battle, but finding the enemy were
not disposed to follow, the line was changed, and the force retired in
column, Barton’s brigade bringing up the rear, covered by the cavalry
and Elder’s battery. A halt was made at Sanderson, where coffee was
cooked, and some attention given to the wounded. From Sanderson to
Barber’s Station, says a writer, “ten miles, we wended or crawled along,
the wounded filling the night air with lamentations, the crippled horses
neighing in pain, and a full moon kissing the cold, clammy lips of the
dying.” On the next morning the retreat was continued to Baldwin, where
the cavalry of the enemy made their appearance. Many of the wounded were
here sent on cars drawn by mules to Jacksonville, and General Seymour,
knowing that the enemy was following in force, ordered the commissary
stores, worth about sixty thousand dollars, to be destroyed, and resumed
his march to Jacksonville. His loss in killed, wounded, and missing, in
this disastrous and ill-advised expedition, was about twelve hundred.

The following dispatch from the Governor of Florida presents the enemy’s
account of the battle:


                                        “TALLAHASSEE, FLA., February 21.

  “TO PRESIDENT DAVIS: I have just received the following dispatch from
  General Finegan, dated yesterday:

  “‘I met the enemy in full force to-day, under General Seymour, and
  defeated him with great loss. I captured five pieces of artillery,
  hold possession of the battle-field, and the killed and wounded of the
  enemy. My cavalry are in pursuit. I don’t know precisely the number of
  prisoners, as they are being brought in constantly. My whole loss, I
  think, will not exceed two hundred and fifty killed and wounded. Among
  them I mourn the loss of many brave officers and men.’

  “I understand that General Finegan also captured many small arms.

                                   (Signed)      JOHN MILTON, Governor.”


General Seymour was allowed to occupy Jacksonville unmolested, and that
place remained in undisputed possession of the Federals for the
remainder of the year, while the rebel commander went into winter
quarters at Camp Finegan, eight miles distant towards Baldwin.

                  *       *       *       *       *

General Seymour was relieved from command of the Federal forces in the
State, and shortly after, Major-General Foster was assigned to command
the Department of the South, in place of General Gilmore, who was
appointed to the command of the Tenth army corps, in Virginia.

On the 20th of July General Birney was dispatched from Jacksonville with
a small force to the mouth of the Trent creek, where he destroyed two
bridges, and then advancing to Callohan station on the Fernandina
railroad, he destroyed a telegraph office, some cars, and other
property. Returning to Jacksonville, a few days thereafter, he embarked
on transports to Whitesville, on the north fork of the Black Creek,
where a slight skirmish ensued. Baldwin and Camp Milton were afterwards
occupied by Federal troops, but no military movements of importance
occurred in Florida during the remainder of the year.




                   BATTLE AT BACHELOR’S CREEK, N. C.
                           FEBRUARY 1, 1864.


Before daylight on the 1st of February, a Federal outpost at Bachelor’s
Creek, eight miles from Newbern, was attacked by a Confederate force
under General Picket, consisting of a portion of Hoke’s, Corse’s and
Clingman’s brigades. The Federal force was surprised by a superior
force, and after a gallant resistance were defeated, with a loss of
about one hundred in killed, wounded and missing, and three hundred
taken prisoners. The Confederate loss was about forty in killed and
wounded. While it was yet dark, the same force of rebels descended the
creek in barges, and captured and burned the United States gunboat
Underwriter, which was aground between Forts Anderson and Stephen,
within a mile and a half of Newbern.




                       CAPTURE OF PLYMOUTH, N. C.
                            APRIL 19, 1864.


A serious misfortune befell the Federal arms on the above date in the
capture of Plymouth, an important town on the Roanoke river, eight miles
from its mouth. This town had been in possession of the Union forces for
about two years, by whom it had been almost destroyed at the time of its
capture. It had since been strongly fortified, and placed in charge of a
brave and competent officer, who added new lustre to his well earned
reputation, by a skillful and soldierly defence. The town was on the
south bank of the river. A breastwork, with several strong forts along
its line, had been constructed, while about a mile up the river, another
defence, called Fort Gray, had been built, which was protected on the
water front by a triple row of piles, with a number of torpedoes
attached.

The rebels had constructed a powerful iron-clad ram, called the
Albemarle, in the river above, which had been equipped for some time,
and was now only waiting the cooperation of land forces to join in
assailing the Federal defences.

Two Union gunboats, the Southfield and Miami, were anchored in the river
opposite the town. General Wessels’ garrison consisted of two thousand
five hundred men, and was composed of the One Hundred and First, and the
One Hundred and Third Pennsylvania infantry, the Eighty-fifth New York,
the Sixteenth Connecticut, two companies of Massachusetts heavy
artillery, two companies of North Carolina volunteers, and the Twelfth
New York cavalry.

About three P. M. on the 17th, the enemy made known his presence by a
fierce artillery fire upon Fort Gray, which continued till midnight, and
was commenced with increased force at daylight the next morning. Before
noon two charges were made on the works, which were repulsed. The
gunboats took position on either side of the town, and did effective
service in driving back the enemy. But now a formidable opponent was
approaching to attack them on their own element. A picket boat stationed
up the river gave warning that the ram was coming down, and preparations
were made to meet the dreaded enemy. The two boats were lashed together,
and thus awaited the onset. When within one hundred yards the gunboats
opened fire, but made no impression on the iron-clad. The ram now bore
down on the Miami, upon whom she inflicted a slight blow, and gliding
off, struck the Southfield on her left side, crushing in her timbers for
a space of six or eight feet square. A shell thrown from the Miami now
struck the ram on her invulnerable sides, and rebounding to the deck of
the gunboat, killed her captain, Flusser, and wounded eight persons. The
boats were torn asunder by their concussion with the ram, and as the
Southfield was rapidly sinking, her crew escaped in the boats; while the
Miami, swinging round with the current, was glad to make her escape from
the unequal contest.

The Albemarle now came down to the mouth of the river, and in that
position held complete command of the town and its approaches, and
effectually shut off all hope of reinforcements or supplies to the
beleaguered garrison, who surrendered to Brigadier-General Hoke,
commander of the Confederate forces, on the ensuing day. General Peck,
the commander of the department, thus eloquently conveyed the
intelligence to his companions in-arms.


                   “HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY AND DISTRICT OF       }
                       NORTH CAROLINA, NEWBERN, N. C., APRIL 21, 1864. }

  “With feelings of the deepest sorrow the commanding general announces
  the fall of Plymouth, N. C., and the capture of its gallant commander,
  Brigadier-General H. W. Wessels, and his command. This result,
  however, did not obtain until after the most gallant and determined
  resistance had been made. Five times the enemy stormed the lines of
  the general, and as many times were they repulsed with great
  slaughter; and but for the powerful assistance of the rebel iron-clad
  ram, and the floating sharpshooter battery, the Cotton Plant, Plymouth
  would still have been in our hands. For their noble defence the
  gallant General Wessels and his brave band have, and deserve the
  warmest thanks of the whole country, while all will sympathize with
  them in their misfortune.

  “To the officers and men of the navy the commanding general tenders
  his thanks for their hearty cooperation with the army, and the
  bravery, determination, and courage that marked their part of the
  unequal contest. With sorrow he records the death of the noble sailor
  and gallant patriot, Lieutenant-Commander C. W. Flusser, U. S. Navy,
  who in the heat of battle fell dead on the deck of his ship, with the
  lanyard of his gun in his hand.

  “The commanding general believes that these misfortunes will tend, not
  to discourage, but to nerve the army of North Carolina to equal deeds
  of bravery and gallantry hereafter.”


Sixteen hundred men, and twenty-five pieces of artillery were captured.
The rebel loss in the attack nearly equalled the number of prisoners
taken.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The town of Washington, on the Tar river, was burned in the month of
April, at the time it was evacuated by the Federal forces, by unknown
persons. This act of vandalism, uncalled for and inhuman, was condemned
in unmeasured terms by General Palmer, the Federal commander. The
majority of the inhabitants were loyal in their sentiments, and many had
enlisted in the Federal army.

Captain Melancthon Smith, who was shortly afterwards appointed to
command the navy in the waters of the Sound, adopted vigorous measures
of preparation to meet and subdue the Albemarle, which for the space of
one month had held undisputed possession of the inner waters. On the 5th
of May, with the Sassacus, the Wyalusing, and four other vessels, he
appeared at the mouth of the Roanoke river, when the Albemarle, followed
by a small tender, named the Bombshell, came out to attack the Union
gunboats. It was the design of Captain Smith that the larger gunboats
should get alongside their antagonist, and fire upon her ports or roof,
which were her most vulnerable parts; but the eagerness of the smaller
vessels to engage rendered a near approach dangerous for some time,
despite the signals of the commander; and for half an hour the contest
was without result. The gunboats eluded the efforts of the Albemarle to
ram them, while their fire in turn was harmless to the enemy. But the
Sassacus, watching a favorable opportunity, struck the ram squarely
across her starboard beam, which caused her to careen until the water
washed over her deck and casemates, while from the close proximity of
the vessels, the crew of the Sassacus were enabled to throw
hand-grenades down the deck-hatch of the ram, while they also made
fruitless efforts to get powder into her smoke-stack. But the Albemarle
soon swung clear of her opponent, and in parting sent a hundred-pounder
rifle shot through her starboard boiler, enveloping the Federal vessel
in clouds of steam, and compelling her to withdraw from the contest. The
Bombshell was captured by the Federal vessels, and the engagement closed
without further result, and with no serious injury.




                     DESTRUCTION OF THE ALBEMARLE.


On the night of the 27th of October, Lieutenant W. B. Cushing, a young
naval officer who had already evinced great coolness and daring in
hazardous enterprises, was selected to take charge of a small launch to
which was attached a torpedo, and sent on the dangerous mission of
attempting the destruction of the Albemarle. Selecting a crew of
thirteen officers and men who volunteered for the service, he passed
several miles of the enemy’s pickets unobserved, and arrived within
twenty yards of the Albemarle before being hailed by her lookouts. The
torpedo boat was then steered under a full head of steam direct for the
ram, which lay at her wharf at Plymouth, protected by a raft of logs
extending outwards about thirty feet. Upon the alarm being given by the
lookouts, a confused fire of musketry was opened by the rebels, which
had little effect. “Passing her closely,” says Lieutenant Cushing, “we
made a complete circle, so as to strike her fairly, and went into her
bows on. By this time the enemy’s fire was very severe, but a dose of
canister at short range served to moderate their zeal, and disturb their
aim. In a moment we had struck the logs, just abreast of the
quarter-port, breasting them in some feet, and our bows resting on them.
The torpedo boom was then lowered, and by a vigorous pull I succeeded in
driving the torpedo under the overhang, and exploded it at the same time
the Albemarle’s gun was fired. A shot seemed to go crashing through my
boat, and a dense mass of water rushed in from the torpedo, filling the
launch, and completely disabling her. The enemy then continued to fire
at fifteen feet range and demanded our surrender, which I twice refused,
ordering the men to save themselves, and removing my own coat and shoes.
Springing into the river, I swam with others into the middle of the
stream, the rebels failing to hit us.” Lieutenant Cushing succeeded in
reaching the opposite shore, and during the next day made his way by
stealth through the surrounding swamps to a creek some distance below
Plymouth, where he found a skiff belonging to a rebel picket, in which
he effected his escape to the fleet. Only one other of his party
succeeded in escaping, the rest being either captured, killed, or
drowned. The Albemarle was completely submerged by the explosion of the
torpedo, and so remained long subsequent to the evacuation of Plymouth
by the rebels. This daring feat excited the admiration of the rebel no
less than of the Federal authorities, and obtained for Lieutenant
Cushing the thanks of Congress, and promotion to the next highest grade
in the service.

CAPTURE OF PLYMOUTH—The main rebel defence of Plymouth being thus
removed, Commander Macomb, the senior naval officer in the Sounds, with
the vessels under his command immediately pushed up the river to
Plymouth, drove the rebels from their rifle-pits and batteries, and on
October 31st retook the town, capturing a few prisoners, besides cannon,
small arms, and ammunition.




             CAPTURE OF FORT FISHER, AND WILMINGTON, N. C.
                  DECEMBER 24, 1864-JANUARY 22, 1865.


During the earlier years of the rebellion, an extensive trade was
carried on through the port of Wilmington, N. C., and her merchants were
growing rich through a traffic with foreign nations, which the most
vigilant efforts of the numerous vessels employed on the blockade were
insufficient to prevent. The many shoals and inlets which traversed and
intersected her coast, the foggy and dark nights, and the experienced
eyes of the native pilots, combined to enable the fleet steamers of
light draught, which were employed in the trade, to make many successful
voyages, with but little risk; while the State government was in receipt
of handsome revenues, her perquisites in a commerce of vast profit and
extent.

Wilmington was the most important sea-coast port left to the enemy, and
besides was a point of great strategic value for army movements, which
had been long coveted by the Federal Government. The navy had been
making strenuous exertions to seal the harbor of Wilmington, but with
only partial effect. The nature of the outlet of Cape Fear river was
such that it required watching for so great a distance, that, without
possession of the land north of New Inlet, or Fort Fisher, it was
impossible for the navy to entirely close the harbor against the
entrance of blockade-runners.

The Federal Government had long sought an opportunity to break up this
trade, but it was not until September, 1864, that the exigencies of the
war permitted the equipment of an expedition adapted to the capture and
occupation of Fort Fisher and Wilmington. A large fleet was collected in
Hampton Roads, in the earlier part of that month, under the command of
Admiral D. D. Porter, but it was late in December before all the vessels
and transports connected with the enterprise were prepared to sail for
their destination.

General Grant, in his report of this campaign, gives the following
details of the preliminary operation:


  “To secure the possession of these places required the cooperation of
  a land force, which I agreed to furnish. Immediately commenced the
  assemblage in Hampton Roads, under Admiral D. D. Porter, of the most
  formidable armada ever collected for concentration upon one given
  point. This necessarily attracted the attention of the enemy, as well
  as that of the loyal North; and through the imprudence of the public
  press, and very likely of officers of both branches of service, the
  exact object of the expedition became a common subject of discussion
  in the newspapers both north and south. The enemy, thus warned,
  prepared to meet it. This caused a postponement of the expedition
  until the latter part of November, when being again called upon by
  Honorable G. V. Fox, Assistant-Secretary of the Navy, I agreed to
  furnish the men required at once, and went myself, in company with
  Major-General Butler, to Hampton Roads, where we had a conference with
  Admiral Porter as to the force required and the time of starting. A
  force of six thousand five hundred men was regarded as sufficient. The
  time of starting was not definitely arranged, but it was thought all
  would be ready by the 6th December, if not before. Learning on the
  30th November that Bragg had gone to Georgia, taking with him most of
  the forces about Wilmington, I deemed it of the utmost importance that
  the expedition should reach its destination before the return of
  Bragg, and directed General Butler to make all arrangements for the
  departure of Major-General Weitzel, who had been designated to command
  the land forces, so that the navy might not be detained one moment.

  “On the 6th of December the following instructions were given:

                                    “‘CITY POINT, VA., December 6, 1864.

  “‘GENERAL: The first object of the expedition under General Weitzel is
  to close to the enemy the port of Wilmington. If successful in this,
  the second will be to capture Wilmington itself. There are reasonable
  grounds to hope for success, if advantage can be taken of the absence
  of the greater part of the enemy’s forces now looking after Sherman in
  Georgia. The directions you have given for the numbers and equipment
  of the expedition are all right, except in the unimportant matter of
  where they embark and the amount of intrenchment tools to be taken.
  The object of the expedition will be gained by effecting a landing on
  the main land between Cape Fear river and the Atlantic, north of the
  north entrance to the river. Should such landing be effected while the
  enemy still holds Fort Fisher, and the batteries guarding the entrance
  to the river, then the troops should entrench themselves, and, by
  cooperating with the navy, effect the reduction and capture of those
  places. These in our hands, the navy could enter the harbor, and the
  port of Wilmington would be scaled. Should Fort Fisher and the point
  of land on which it is built fall into the hands of our troops
  immediately on landing, then it will be worth the attempt to capture
  Wilmington by a forced march and surprise. If time is consumed in
  gaining the first object of the expedition, the second will become a
  matter of after consideration.

  “‘The details for execution are intrusted to you and the officer
  immediately in command of the troops.

  “‘Should the troops under General Weitzel fail to effect a landing at
  or near Fort Fisher, they will be returned to the armies operating
  against Richmond without delay.

                                      “‘U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.

  “‘Major-General B. F. BUTLER.’”


“General Butler commanding the army from which the troops were taken for
this enterprise, and the territory within which they were to operate,
military courtesy required that all orders and instructions should go
through him. They were so sent; but General Weitzel has since officially
informed me that he never received the foregoing instructions, nor was
he aware of their existence until he read General Butler’s published
official report of the Fort Fisher failure, with my endorsement and
papers accompanying it. I had no idea of General Butler’s accompanying
the expedition until the evening before it got off from Bermuda
Hundreds, and then did not dream but that General Weitzel had received
all the instructions, and would be in command. I rather formed the idea
that General Butler was actuated by a desire to witness the effect of
the explosion of the powder-boat. The expedition was detained several
days at Hampton Roads, awaiting the loading of the powder-boat.

“The importance of getting the Wilmington expedition off without any
delay, with or without the powder-boat, had been urged upon General
Butler, and he advised to so notify Admiral Porter.

“The expedition finally got off on the 13th of December, and arrived at
the place of rendezvous, off New Inlet, near Fort Fisher, on the evening
of the 15th. Admiral Porter arrived on the evening of the 18th, having
put in at Beaufort to get ammunition for the monitors. The sea becoming
rough, making it difficult to land troops, and the supply of water and
coal being about exhausted, the transport fleet put back to Beaufort to
replenish; this, with the state of the weather, delayed the return to
the place of rendezvous until the 24th.”

On the 25th a landing was effected without opposition, and a
reconnoissance, under Brevet Brigadier-General Curtis, pushed up toward
the fort.

The army consisted of General Ames’s division of the Twenty-fourth
corps, and of General Paine’s colored division of the Twenty-fifth
corps, numbering together six thousand five hundred effective men.

The attacking force of Admiral Porter consisted of thirty-seven vessels,
five of which were iron-clads, with a reserve of thirteen vessels, while
the transports and smaller vessels were seventy in number.

Colonel Comstock, chief military engineer of the expedition, thus
describes the defences of the inlet and Fort Fisher:

“The land front consists of a half bastion on the left or Cape Fear
river side, connected by a curtain with a bastion on the ocean side. The
parapet is twenty-five feet thick, averages twenty feet in height, with
traverses rising ten feet above it and running back on their tops, which
are from eight to twelve feet in thickness, to a distance of from thirty
to forty feet from the interior crest. The traverses on the left half
bastion are about twenty-five feet in length on top. The earth for this
heavy parapet and the enormous traverses at their inner ends, more than
thirty feet in height, was obtained partly from a shallow exterior
ditch, but mainly from the interior of the work. Between each pair of
traverses there was one or two guns. The traverses on the right of this
front were only partially completed. A palisade, which is loopholed and
has a banquette, runs in front of this face, at a distance of fifty feet
in front of the exterior slope, from the Cape Fear river to the ocean,
with a position for a gun between the left of the front and the river,
and another between the right of the front and the ocean. Through the
middle traverse on the curtain is a bomb-proof postern whose exterior
opening is covered by a small redan for two field-pieces, to give flank
fire along the curtain. The traverses are generally bomb-proofed for men
or magazines. The slopes of the work appear to have been revetted with
marsh sod or covered with grass, and have an inclination of forty-five
degrees or a little less. * * * There were originally on this front
twenty-one guns and three mortars. * * * The sea front consists of a
series of batteries, mounting in all twenty-four guns, the different
batteries being connected by a strong infantry parapet so as to form a
continuous line. The same system of heavy traverses for the protection
of the guns is used as on the land front, and these traverses are also
generally bomb-proofed.” There was also a rebel battery, commanding the
channel, on Zeeke’s island, two miles southeast of Fort Fisher, and
several miles north of the latter were the Flag Pond Hill and Half Moon
batteries, serving as outworks to it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The expedition was delayed two days waiting for the equipment of a
powder-boat, on which two hundred and fifteen tons of powder were
stored, with the hope of destroying the face of Fort Fisher, by its
explosion on the edge of the beach opposite the works. The gunboat
Louisiana was selected for the purpose, and disguised as a
blockade-runner, she approached the fort before daylight on the morning
of December 24th, was anchored four hundred yards from the works without
observation, and there exploded, producing no sensible effect on the
works. The rebels were not aware of the object of this expedition, until
informed through the northern papers.

[Illustration: VIEW OF A PARROTT GUN BURST ON BOARD THE SUSQUEHANNA AT
THE ATTACK ON FORT FISHER.]

At noon on the same day, the fleet got into position, and bombarded the
fort until dark. They renewed fire on the next morning, and continued it
without intermission all day. More than twenty thousand shots were
thrown from fifty vessels of war, while the rebel response numbered only
about twelve hundred shots. Under cover of this tremendous fire, a body
of troops was landed, on the afternoon of the 25th, with the intention
of storming the fort. The ground in front and rear of the fort was torn
up with shells, and some of the guns dismounted; but a careful
reconnoissance, under the eyes of General Weitzel, revealed the fact
that the fort was uninjured, and that an attempt to storm the place with
the force and material then at the disposal of the commander-in-chief,
could not be undertaken with any probability of success. This view was
sustained by other engineer officers attached to the expedition, and was
confirmed by the evidence of the rebel commander of the fort. The troops
were accordingly reembarked on the transports, and returned to their
former position in the army of the James. The Committee on the Conduct
of the War, after a rigid examination of General Butler’s conduct in
this affair, acquitted him of all blame in the matter.

Almost from the first inception of the enterprise, there was a want of
harmony between General Butler and Admiral Porter, which destroyed all
unity of action, and contributed in great measure, to the failure of the
expedition. General Butler also incurred the severe displeasure of
General Grant, first in accompanying the expedition as its commander,
and finally by his conduct in withdrawing the troops, which General
Grant regarded as a breach of orders, for which General Butler was
immediately relieved from command.

The embarkation was accomplished on the morning of the 27th. General
Grant thus details the preliminaries of a subsequent expedition in which
Major-General A. H. Terry was appointed to command the land forces:


  “Soon after the return of the expedition, I received a dispatch from
  the Secretary of the Navy, and a letter from Admiral Porter, informing
  me that the fleet was still off Fort Fisher, and expressing the
  conviction that, under a proper leader, the place could be taken. The
  natural supposition with me was that, when the troops abandoned the
  expedition, the navy would do so also. Finding it had not, however, I
  answered on the 30th of December, advising Admiral Porter to hold on,
  and that I would send a force, and make another attempt to take the
  place. This time I selected Brevet Major-General (now Major-General)
  A. H. Terry to command the expedition. The troops composing it
  consisted of the same that composed the former, with the addition of a
  small brigade, numbering about fifteen hundred, and a small siege
  train. The latter it was never found necessary to land. I communicated
  direct to the commander of the expedition, the following instructions:

                                      “CITY POINT, VA., January 3, 1865.

  “GENERAL: The expedition entrusted to your command has been fitted out
  to renew the attempt to capture Fort Fisher, N. C., and Wilmington
  ultimately, if the fort falls. You will, then, proceed with as little
  delay as possible to the naval fleet lying off Cape Fear river, and
  report the arrival of yourself and command to Admiral D. D. Porter,
  commanding North Atlantic blockading Squadron.

  “It is exceedingly desirable that the most complete understanding
  should exist between yourself and the naval commander. I suggest,
  therefore, that you consult with Admiral Porter freely and get from
  him the part to be performed by each branch of the public service, so
  that there may be unity of action. It would be well to have the whole
  programme laid down in writing. I have served with Admiral Porter, and
  know that you can rely on his judgment and his nerve to undertake what
  he proposes. I would, therefore, defer to him as much as is consistent
  with your own responsibilities. The first object to be attained is to
  get a firm position on the spit of land on which Fort Fisher is built,
  from which you can operate against that fort. You want to look to the
  practicability of receiving your supplies, and to defending yourself
  against superior forces sent against you by any of the avenues left
  open to the enemy. If such a position can be obtained, the siege of
  Fort Fisher will not be abandoned until its reduction is accomplished,
  or another plan of campaign is ordered from these headquarters.

  “My own views are that, if you effect a landing, the navy ought to run
  a portion of their fleet into Cape Fear river, while the balance of it
  operates on the outside. Land forces cannot invest Fort Fisher or cut
  it off from supplies or reinforcements, while the river is in
  possession of the enemy.

  “A siege train will be loaded on vessels and sent to Fort Monroe, in
  readiness to be sent to you if required. All other supplies can be
  drawn from Beaufort as you need them.

  “Keep the fleet of vessels with you until your position is assured.
  When you find they can be spared, order them back, or such of them as
  you can spare, to Fort Monroe, to report for orders.

  “In case of failure to effect a lauding, bring your command back to
  Beaufort, and report to these headquarters for further instructions.
  You will not debark at Beaufort until so directed.

  “General Sheridan has been ordered to send a division of troops to
  Baltimore, and place them on sea-going vessels. These troops will be
  brought to Fort Monroe and kept there on the vessels until you are
  heard from. Should you require them they will be sent to you.

                                       “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.

  “Brevet Major-General A. H. TERRY.”


“Lieutenant-Colonel C. B. Comstock, aide-de-camp (now brevet brigadier
general), who accompanied the former expedition, was assigned in orders
as chief engineer to this.

“It will be seen that these instructions did not differ materially from
those given for the first expedition; and that in neither instance was
there an order to assault Fort Fisher. This was a matter left entirely
to the discretion of the commanding officer.”

The expedition sailed from Fort Monroe on the morning of the 6th,
arriving on the rendezvous, off Beaufort, on the 8th, where, owing to
the difficulties of the weather, it lay until the morning of the 12th,
when it got under way and reached its destination that evening.

The severity of the storm had scattered the vessels of the fleet, as
well as the transports, but on the 12th, the combined force was slowly
wending its way up the widely-expanded mouth of Cape Fear river. Admiral
Porter, in his flagship, the Malvern, took his station at the head of
the gunboat fleet, while the flag of General Terry was waving from the
McClellan. The ships in the long line were lost to view beneath the roll
of the waves, while the whole surface of the water, far as the eye could
reach, was dotted at short intervals by the transports, in regular
order, preceded and flanked by the guardian gunboats.

Signal lights were rapidly interchanged between the squadron and the
blockade vessels near the shore, while an immense bonfire in the rear of
Fort Fisher, gave warning to the inhabitants of Wilmington of the
approach of the fleet.

On the morning of the 13th, the frigate Brooklyn, followed by other
vessels, skirted the shore, at the distance of a mile, throwing enormous
shells into the forest at intervals, and into every spot where it was
possible a rebel force or battery might be concealed. After this
effectual reconnoissance, preparations were made to land the troops, and
at three P. M. it was completed without loss. While this was in
progress, the New Ironsides, accompanied by the monitors, took position
within point-blank range of Fort Fisher, and opened a terrific fire. The
landing was effected upon a strip of hard beach about two hundred feet
in width, five miles above Fort Fisher.

Early in the afternoon the rebel fleet came down to Fort Fisher from
Wilmington, bringing reinforcements and supplies. At half past four
Admiral Porter signaled for the rest of the fleet to come forward and
take part in the bombardment. The fire of the ships was so incessant
that they soon became enveloped in their own smoke, and beneath the
power of the immense missiles hurled into the fort and against its
walls, the solid embankment began to crumble, and the garrison to
forsake their guns.

The troops had, meantime, slowly advanced towards the works, hoping that
a breach might soon be effected, sufficient to warrant an assault. All
night long a slow but constant fire was kept up by the monitors,
affording the garrison no opportunity of repose. At daylight it was
discovered that the flagstaff had been shot away, but at eight o’clock
it was replaced by another, showing the determination of the garrison
still to resist the tremendous force that was arrayed against them.

The troops had now thrown up two lines of breastworks across the
peninsula, extending from the ocean to Cape Fear river, and had advanced
their line to within a mile of the fort.

During the morning of Sunday, the 15th, the bombardment still continued,
eliciting but feeble and occasional response from the enemy, while the
immense shots from the fleet were striking the fort, for some time, at
the rate of three or four a minute. By noon the sea face of the fort was
so battered that it was thought a successful charge might be made. Under
cover of the fire of the fleet, one thousand six hundred sailors, armed
with cutlasses, revolvers, and carbines, and four hundred marines, the
whole commanded by Fleet Captain K. R. Breese, were landed on the beach,
and by digging rifle-pits worked their way up within two hundred yards
of the fort. The troops selected for the assault were Ames’s division,
comprising the brigades of Curtis, Pennypacker and Bell, while Paine’s
division of colored troops and Abbott’s brigade held the intrenchments
facing Wilmington, against which Hoke’s troops, estimated at five
thousand strong, had begun to demonstrate. At 3.30 P. M. signal was made
from the shore to the fleet to change the direction of the fire, in
order that the troops might assault; and soon afterwards the sailors
rushed with reckless energy toward the parapet of the fort, which at
once swarmed with rebel soldiers, who poured in upon them a murderous
fire of musketry. The marines, who were to have covered the assaulting
party, for some unexplained reason failed to fire upon the rebels on the
parapet, all of whom, in the opinion of Admiral Porter, might have been
killed. “I saw,” he said, “how recklessly the rebels exposed themselves,
and what an advantage they gave our sharpshooters, whose guns were
scarcely fired, or fired with no precision. Notwithstanding the hot
fire, officers and sailors in the lead rushed on, and some even reached
the parapet, a large number having entered the ditch. The advance was
swept from the parapet like chaff, and, notwithstanding all the efforts
made by the commanders of companies to stay them, the men in the rear,
seeing the slaughter in front, and that they were not covered by the
marines, commenced to retreat; and, as there is no stopping a sailor, if
he fails on such an occasion on the first rush, I saw the whole thing
had to be given up.” The attack on this part of the fort, though a
failure, diverted a part of the enemy’s attention, and rendered the work
laid out for the main storming column of troops much easier.

At the word of command, the division of General Ames, which had been
gradually drawn forward under the shelter of hastily formed breastworks,
rushed toward the fort, the brigade of Curtis taking the lead. The
palisades had been so much injured by the fire of the fleet that a few
vigorous strokes from the axemen sufficed to clear gaps for the passage
of the troops, and, in the face of a severe enfilading fire, a lodgment
was soon effected on the west end of the land front. Pennypacker’s and
Bell’s brigades followed in rapid succession, the latter moving between
the work and the river. “On this side,” says General Terry, “there was
no regular parapet, but there was an abundance of cover afforded to the
enemy by cavities, from which sand had been taken for the parapet, the
ruins of barracks and storehouses, the large magazine, and by traverses
behind which they stubbornly resisted our advance. Hand-to-hand fighting
of the most desperate character ensued. The first brigade dashed forward
with a run, and reaching the parapet near the western extremity of the
north face, gained a foothold within the enclosed space of the fort, by
entering within through the gaps of the palisades. They had now not only
to maintain the position they had obtained, but to advance, in the face
of a determined foe, to the succeeding traverses, over thirty feet in
height, and were compelled to capture nine or ten in succession before
the rebel forces yielded to the repeated assaults.

Each traverse was in reality an independent fort, enclosing within its
dense walls, a room entered by a passage so narrow that two men could
easily defend it against a large force. During the assault, General
Ames’ men were exposed to a galling fire of artillery and musketry,
while Fort Buchanan on the southwest also opened fire on the Federal
columns. Abbott’s brigade and a regiment of colored troops, dispatched
by General Terry, reinforced General Ames before dark, followed soon
after by the general-in-chief and his staff. Generals Curtis and
Pennybacker were badly wounded in the assault, and Colonel Bell received
mortal injuries.

It was not until after ten o’clock at night that all resistance ceased,
and the star-spangled banner floated out in the bright moonlight
unchallenged over the crumbled ramparts. When General Terry telegraphed
to Admiral Porter the final result, “we stopped fire,” says the Admiral,
“and gave them three of the heartiest cheers I ever heard. It was the
most terrific struggle I ever saw. The troops have covered themselves
with glory; and General Terry is my beau-ideal of a general.” The
garrison consisted of two thousand three hundred men, of whom one
thousand nine hundred and seventy-one, with one hundred and twelve
officers, were captured. The rest were killed and wounded. Their
commanders, General Whiting and Colonel Lamb, were both captured, badly
wounded.

The loss of the Federal army was one hundred and ten killed, and five
hundred and thirty-six wounded. That of the navy was between two and
three hundred in killed and wounded, principally in the assaulting,
column of sailors, and by the explosion of two fifteen-inch guns on
board the monitors. The ships sustained but trifling damage.

The greater part of the guns of the fort were dismounted, or otherwise
injured by the fire of the fleet, but the work itself received no damage
which was not susceptible of immediate repair, its strength being about
the same as before the bombardment. According to Admiral Porter, who had
visited the Malakoff during the siege of Sebastopol, Fort Fisher was a
much more formidable work than that celebrated stronghold. Its capture
caused an almost unprecedented rejoicing throughout the United States.
The capture of the fort sealed the fate of the rebel supremacy in Cape
Fear river.

On the 16th and 17th the enemy abandoned and blew up Fort Caswell and
the works on Smith’s island, which were immediately occupied by the
Federal forces.

The advance up the river was a continuous battle. On the night of the
21st, the rebels commenced destroying their materials and stores in
Wilmington. Fifteen thousand barrels of resin, and one thousand bales of
cotton were destroyed, and extensive cotton sheds, steam-mills and
turpentine works were consumed. At daylight on the morning of the 22d,
General Terry’s troops entered the city, and the reign of the rebellion
in that important city was at an end.




               KILPATRICK’S CAVALRY RAID TOWARD RICHMOND.
                       FEBRUARY 28-MARCH 5, 1864.


A very daring and successful expedition was undertaken by this intrepid
leader on the 28th of February, in which much damage was inflicted on
the two principal railroads on which General Lee received supplies for
his army, and a great deal of public property was destroyed. The command
left Stevensburgh, Virginia, on Sunday night, March 28, and crossing
Fly’s Ford, on the Rapidan, proceeded thence by rapid marches to
Spottsylvania, Beaver Dam Station, on the Virginia Central railroad, to
the fortifications of Richmond, crossing the Virginia Central railroad
and the Chickahominy river near the Meadows, and the White House
railroad, a little east of Tunstall’s Station, thence to New Kent
Court-House and Williamsburgh Court-House.

General Kilpatrick was not without hopes of entering Richmond by a
surprise movement, and also of liberating many Federal prisoners, who
were confined in that city and its environs.

In order to divert the attention of the rebel commanders from the
proposed raid, and also to attract the bulk of their cavalry in other
directions, fifteen hundred cavalry, led by General Custer, under cover
of an advance by the Sixth and Third corps to Madison Court-House, left
Culpepper Court-House simultaneously with the departure of Kilpatrick
from Stevensburgh. General Custer, after advancing to within a few miles
of Charlottesville, found the Confederates in very heavy force, and
hopeful of cutting off his command, which had now advanced twenty miles
beyond infantry support. In order to avoid the enemy, he led his men
through Luray Valley, by one of the gaps of the Blue Ridge, thus
avoiding a very formidable force that was waiting to intercept him at
the road by which he went out. Several small bodies of the enemy were
encountered, and sixty prisoners taken. Ten or twelve of the Federals
were wounded in these encounters, but no lives were lost, and General
Custer reached the infantry lines at Madison, in safety.

General Kilpatrick’s force consisted of his own division, a portion of
Merritt’s and Gregg’s divisions, and a light battery of six guns, in all
nearly eight thousand men. The troops reached Spottsylvania late at
night, and a detachment headed by Captain Estes, of Kilpatrick’s staff,
one of the bravest men in the army, moved rapidly forward to Beaver Dam
on the Virginia Central railroad, reaching that place at five p. m on
Monday, when the work of destruction commenced. Small parties were sent
up and down the railroad to tear up the track, burn the bridges, and
destroy the rails by heating and bending them; this was comparatively an
easy task, for there were thousands of cords of pine wood piled along
the track. A large new brick freight-house, the telegraph office,
passenger-depot, engine-house, water-tank, several cars, and a number of
outbuildings, were all set on fire. While engaged in this work, a train
loaded with troops appeared, and a portion of them disembarked. A charge
was made by the cavalry, in which thirty-two of the rebels were
captured.

At Frederickshall, a “court martial” was captured, consisting of a
colonel, five captains and two lieutenants.

Detachments were now sent out in various directions, in order to destroy
the railroad at other points, while the main body moved forward, and on
Monday night crossed the South Anna river. The detached parties
encountered small bodies of the enemy in all directions, and skirmished
with varied success.

Tuesday morning, at half-past ten, found the command passing the outer
earthworks on the Brook turnpike, within three and a half miles of
Richmond. Several citizen soldiers were here captured, and many of the
inhabitants encountered, who were unsuspicious of the character of the
Federal cavalry. When within the second line of defences, the
skirmishers encountered the first shots from Battery No. 9, near the
third line. Skirmishing was here kept up until between four and five
o’clock, General Kilpatrick anxiously awaiting some tidings from Colonel
Dahlgren’s command; when relinquishing hopes of the success of that
officer in his attempt to reach Richmond by way of the James river
canal, General Kilpatrick withdrew in the direction of Mechanicsville,
burning the trestle-work of the railroad across the Chickahominy on his
route.

Colonel Dahlgren, with five hundred men, was detached at Frederickshall,
with instructions to move to the right of Richmond, and destroy as much
of the James river canal as possible, and attempt the deliverance of the
prisoners at Belle Isle.

Colonel Dahlgren had taken a negro to pilot him to Richmond. His
detachment had rapidly moved across the country, destroying barns,
forage and everything which could possibly be of service to the enemy.
He soon discovered that his negro guide had betrayed him, and led him
toward Goochland instead of to Richmond, and on Tuesday night he found
himself miles in the opposite direction from that which he wished to
take. Exasperated by this treachery, the men burned the barns and
outbuildings of John A. Seddons, the rebel Secretary-of-War. Retracing
his steps, Colonel Dahlgren marched down the river road, destroying the
Dover flour mills, and several flouring establishments and saw mills.
His force also did considerable injury to the James river canal, burning
canal boats and seriously damaging one or two locks. They did not reach
the immediate vicinity of Richmond till afternoon, when everybody was on
the alert, Kilpatrick having already made his attack.

Colonel Dahlgren’s detachment was divided into several parties for the
accomplishment of different objects, keeping together, however. One
party attempted to cross the river, but were repulsed. A very sharp
fight ensued, and, finding the enemy in superior numbers and confronting
them on every road, the force was compelled to fall back.

In attempting to cut their way out, Colonel Dahlgren and Major Cook of
the Second New York, with about one hundred and fifty men were separated
from the rest, and Colonel Cook was taken prisoner. The other
detachments succeeded in rejoining General Kilpatrick.

A Confederate correspondent thus describes the tragic close of Colonel
Dahlgren’s expedition:

“Lieutenant Pollard had been watching the movements of the enemy all day
on Wednesday, in King William, and ascertained that night that Dahlgren,
with about two hundred of his followers, had crossed the Mattapony at
Aylett’s. With his own men he crossed over and followed the retreating
raiders. On reaching the forks of the road, a few miles above
Walkertown, Lieutenant Pollard learned that the enemy had taken the
river road, leading to that place. Leaving a few men to follow on after
them, he quitted the main road with the larger portion of the force at
his disposal, and by a circuitous route and forced march, he succeeded
in throwing himself in front of the enemy and awaited his approach. In
the mean time he had been joined by the home guards of King and Queen
County, and a few men of Robbins’s battalion. A little before eleven
o’clock at night the enemy approached on the road in which they were
posted. A fire was at once opened upon them; but their leader, Colonel
Dahlgren, relying, perhaps, upon their numbers, or stung by chagrin at
his failure to capture Richmond, determined to force his way through,
and at once forming his men, ordered a charge, which he led himself. It
proved, however, a fatal charge to him; for, in the onset, he was
pierced with a ball and fell dead. After his fall, the command could not
be rallied, but were soon thrown into confusion inextricable. Our boys,
noticing this, availed themselves of the opportunity it afforded, and
used it to the best advantage. Dashing in among the discomfited foe,
they succeeded in capturing ninety prisoners, thirty-five negroes, and
one hundred and fifty horses. The body of Dahlgren also fell into their
hands.”

A cavalry force from General Butler’s command had been sent out from
Williamsburg, to render assistance, if needed, to General Kilpatrick. A
junction was effected at Tunstall’s Station, and the whole body,
accompanied by the balance of Colonel Dahlgren’s cavalry, proceeded to
Williamsburg. The entire loss of the expedition was about one hundred
and fifty in killed and wounded, and one hundred and sixty in prisoners
and missing.




                    OPERATIONS IN ARKANSAS IN 1864.


In January, 1864, a Convention of Delegates, representing the people of
Arkansas, met at Little Rock, and remodelled the State Constitution, so
as forever to abolish slavery. The Convention also elected a Provisional
Government, under which efforts were made to restore quiet throughout
the State. But the Confederates were still powerful in Arkansas, and the
current of affairs was frequently vexed by rebel demonstrations,
throughout the year. Engagements between the Unionists and roving squads
of rebels were numerous, and sometimes disastrous. The organized forces
of the Confederacy, stationed at various points in the State, numbered
upwards of twenty-one thousand, and they were rarely idle.

Among the many minor battles which were fought at this time may be
mentioned that of Cotton Plant, which happened on the twenty-second of
April, and which may stand as a type of all the rest. It was incidental
to the progress of an expedition, which had been sent out from Little
Rock, to relieve the town of Batesville, on White river, from a
threatened attack by the rebels under General McRae. The National force
consisted of the Eighth Missouri cavalry, and was commanded by Colonel,
afterwards General Andrews. The battle lasted four hours, and was hotly
contested. The Unionists lost twenty-seven men, killed and wounded,
while the rebel loss was upwards of one hundred. Colonel Andrews’s horse
was shot beneath him. The expedition resulted successfully.

The most important military movement, however, which took place in
Arkansas, this year, was an expedition from Little Rock, that set forth
on the twenty-third of March, moving in a southwesterly direction, and
designed to cooperate with General Banks, in his advance on Shreveport,
Louisiana. The National force consisted of the Seventh Army Corps. The
expedition was not successful in its ultimate design, but it led to one
important battle, and it enabled the Unionists, in several encounters
with the enemy, to display great courage and endurance and to win
distinction. On the fifteenth of April, after frequent fights with
detachments of the rebels, under Marmaduke, Shelby, Cabell, and Dockery,
General Steele took possession of Camden, an important point on the
Washita river. Here he remained eleven days, when he received
intelligence of disaster to Banks, such as would preclude the proposed
attack on Shreveport, and learned, also, that Kirby Smith was advancing,
with eight thousand troops, to reinforce Price. Under those
circumstances General Steele resolved to abandon Camden and retire
towards Little Rock. This movement was begun on the night of April
twenty-eighth. On the thirtieth the enemy was encountered, near
Jenkins’s Ferry, on the river Sabine, where occurred the important fight
which we have mentioned above. The enemy’s force was found to be large,
and consisted of all his troops in southwestern Arkansas, and also some
from Louisiana, and was commanded by General Smith, General Price,
General Walker, and General Churchill. The forces under General Steele
consisted of the commands of Generals Salomon, Rice, Thayer, Ingleman,
and Colonel Benton. It was found impossible to cross the Sabine on the
night when the troops reached it, in consequence of a heavy rainstorm
and intense darkness, but the pontoon bridge was laid, and a small force
of the Unionists crossed over. On the morning of the battle the rain
poured in torrents, and in the midst of the storm the artillery trains
and men were obliged to cross the river. Skirmishing had commenced in
the rear with the first dawn of day, and a general and fierce engagement
speedily succeeded, which continued for seven hours. The enemy fought
with the wild desperation which characterized all their pitched battles,
but were finally repulsed with very heavy loss. General Steele lost
seven hundred men in killed and wounded, but secured a safe retreat to
Little Rock, which he reached on the second day of May; and also
redeemed, for the time, that portion of Arkansas and the State of
Missouri from the hands of the rebels. The conduct of the troops under
General Steele was of the most noble description throughout the whole
campaign, as will be seen by the following address to his men:


                  HEADQUARTERS DEPARTMENT OF ARKANSAS, }
                                  LITTLE ROCK, May 9.                  }

  “To you, troops of the Seventh Army Corps, who participated in the
  recent campaign designed to cooperate with General Banks’s movement
  against Shreveport, the Major-General commanding tenders his earnest
  and grateful thanks. Although you were compelled to fall back without
  seeing the main object of the expedition accomplished, you will have
  the satisfaction of knowing that you have beaten the enemy wherever he
  has met you in force, and extricated yourselves from the perilous
  position in which you were placed by the reverses of the cooperating
  column. This let loose upon you a superior force of the enemy, under
  one of their best generals, causing the loss of your trains and the
  total interruption of your communications, rendering it impossible for
  you to obtain supplies. You have fallen back over rivers and swamps,
  while pressed by a superior force of the enemy. This you have done
  successfully, punishing the enemy severely at the same time.

  “The patience with which you have endured hardships and privations,
  and your heroic conduct on the battle-field, have been brought to the
  notice of the Government, and will furnish a page in the history of
  this war of which you may well be proud.

                                  “F. STEELE, Major-General Commanding.”


The rebel force subsequently became still more formidable in the State
of Arkansas, owing to the failure of Banks’s Red river expedition. Large
forces of Confederates, relieved from the necessity of opposing Banks,
were enabled to concentrate in Arkansas, and keep General Steele at bay,
in Little Rock. So completely, indeed, did the rebels overrun the State,
that, by the close of the year 1864, Little Rock, Fort Smith, Pine
Bluff, Duval’s Bluff, and a few other points, were all that the National
arms preserved. The State was, likewise, furnished with a rebel State
government; and, altogether its affairs seemed anything but promising to
the hopes of the Unionists within its borders.

Having ample troops in Arkansas, and desiring to work as much mischief
as possible, the rebel General Price projected an




                         INVASION OF MISSOURI.
                            SEPTEMBER, 1864.


This movement, as may well be imagined, created no small excitement. It
led, moreover, to several lively encounters between the Unionists and
the Confederates, but it ended in utter discomfiture to the rebel arms.
General Price’s forces consisted of between fifteen and twenty thousand
men, while, at the time his invasion commenced—September 21st, 1864—the
Union troops in Missouri, commanded by General Rosecrans, numbered less
than seven thousand. At the first note of danger, however,
reinforcements were hurried forward to the aid of that gallant
commander. It appeared, at first, as if the rebels proposed moving on
Springfield; but, eventually, they turned in the direction of St. Louis.
They were first encountered at Pilot Knob, which was bravely and
successfully defended by the Union forces under General Ewing,
consisting of the Fourteenth Iowa and the Forty-seventh Missouri, with
detachments of the State militia. A severe fight took place at Pilot
Knob, on September 27th, in which the rebels were discomfited.
Meanwhile, St. Louis was rapidly put into condition to meet and repel
any possible rebel attack, and a large force of State troops, under
Generals Brown and Fisk, was concentrated at Jefferson City, the capital
of Missouri. Toward this point the rebel chieftain finally led his army.
His advance was successfully withstood, however, by the Union Generals,
who succeeded in saving the State capital, and destroying the hopes of
the rebels.

Upon the 8th of October, General Pleasanton assumed command at Jefferson
City, and his first step was to send General Sanborn, with a mounted
force of four thousand men in pursuit of the enemy, with the view of
harassing and hindering them, until the remaining Union cavalry and
infantry supports should arrive at the State capital. The enemy’s
rear-guard was by this movement forced back upon their main body at
Bruenville, and so kept between the Missouri river and the National
force, until the 19th of the month, when the Unionists were joined by
Wilson’s command, fifteen thousand strong, making the National force in
all forty-five thousand men, exclusive of escort-guards.

A small force attacked the rebels under General Fagan at Independence on
the 22d, and routed them with loss, capturing two valuable guns. A
contest with the enemy’s main force took place on the following day, in
which the rebels were driven beyond the Little Santa Fe; and, on the
24th, after marching sixty miles, the Unionists overtook a party of
rebels, about midnight, at a place called Marais des Cygnes. At four
o’clock on the ensuing morning, sharp skirmishing began, and the enemy
was driven from the field with a heavy loss of horses, mules,
ammunition, &c. Still fighting, they retreated to Little Osage Crossing,
where the pursuing Unionists, under Colonels Benteen and Phillips, made
a charge upon them, capturing eight pieces of artillery, and more than
one thousand prisoners, among whom were General Marmaduke and General
Cabell. The National troops, under General Sanborn, kept up the pursuit,
with many and always successful charges, until the enemy had been driven
to Marinton; where, under cover of the night, the rebels effected their
escape towards Arkansas. But they had not yet got rid of their pursuers.
A force of Kansas troops, and Colonel Benteen’s brigade, followed close
upon them, and on the 28th, they were overtaken at Newtonia, where they
made their last stand. Again they were routed, and the final blow was
struck at the unsuccessful invasion of the State. All General Price’s
schemes were signally defeated, and he inflicted no serious injury
except upon the narrow belt of country over which his army moved. His
loss was ten pieces of artillery; a very large quantity of small arms;
the greater number of his trains and plunder; one thousand nine hundred
and fifty-eight prisoners, and a long list of killed, wounded, and
deserters. The National loss amounted to three hundred and forty-six in
officers and men.




                         OPERATIONS IN GEORGIA.


GENERAL SHERMAN’S MARCH TO ATLANTA.

On the 14th of March, 1864, General Sherman, then at Memphis, Tenn., was
officially informed that he had been appointed to succeed General Grant,
as commander of the Department of the Mississippi. Upon the same day
General Sherman set out for Nashville, there to hold a conference with
General Grant. That conference took place on the 17th, and having
discussed at length the steps to be taken, and the policy for the
ensuing campaign, General Sherman accompanied General Grant as far
eastward as Cincinnati, where they parted. The former then returned to
Nashville, and undertook a tour of inspection, visiting, in Alabama, the
cities of Athens, Decatur, and Huntsville, and Larkin’s Ferry; and in
Tennessee, Chattanooga, Loudon, and Knoxville. General Sherman had
personal interviews with each of the following generals, in command in
that section of the country;—Major-General Thomas, commanding the Army
of the Cumberland, at Chattanooga; Major-General McPherson, commanding
the Army of the Tennessee, at Huntsville; and Major-General Schofield,
commanding the Army of the Ohio, at Knoxville. In these several
interviews, the 1st of May was agreed upon as the time for a general
movement.

General Sherman next turned his attention to the question of supplies
for the army, which at first necessitated a temporary stoppage of
provisions for many of the people in Tennessee, who had been receiving
their food from the supplies intended for the army. Fortunately no
positive suffering resulted from this step, which General Sherman was
compelled to take in duty to the soldiers under his command; and in a
short time all hardships were done away with, as the rich soil sent
forth an early vegetation, and meat and grain were brought from Kentucky
in large quantities by the ox-wagons constantly plying to and fro
between that State and Chattanooga.

On the 27th of April, General Sherman put all the troops under his
command in motion for Chattanooga; and on the next day he followed them
there in person. It was his aim to make the Army of the Cumberland
number fifty thousand men; that of the Tennessee, thirty-five thousand;
and that of the Ohio, fifteen thousand; but this he never was enabled to
do, as the Army of the Tennessee failed to receive General A. J. Smith’s
divisions from the Mississippi, which were unable to join the other
forces at the time designated, in consequence of the failure of the Red
river expedition. The effective strength of the several armies was, on
the 21st of May, as follows: Army of the Cumberland, sixty thousand
seven hundred and seventy-three men, and one hundred and thirty guns;
Army of the Tennessee, twenty-four thousand four hundred and sixty-five
men, and ninety-six guns; and the Army of the Ohio, thirteen thousand
five hundred and fifty nine men, and twenty-eight guns. On the morning
of May 6th, these armies were grouped thus:—The Cumberland, at and about
Ringgold; the Tennessee, at Gordon’s Mills, on the Chickamauga; and
Ohio, close by Red Clay, on the Georgia line, north of Dalton.

The enemy, under the rebel general, Joseph Johnston, was in and around
Dalton; the force numbering in all about sixty thousand men—the cavalry
numbering ten thousand under General Wheeler; and the infantry and
artillery—three corps—numbering fifty thousand, under command of
Generals Hardee, Hood, and Polk.

The city of Dalton was covered in front with an inaccessible ridge,
known as the Rocky Face, which rendered it impracticable to strike at it
from that direction; and on the north front the enemy was further
protected by a strong line of works along Mill Creek. General Sherman
finding these two points guarded, next turned his attention to the
south, and found, through Snake Creek Gap, a good way to reach Resaca,
an important point on the rebel line of communication, about eighteen
miles below Dalton. General McPherson was ordered to move directly on
Resaca, through Snake Gap, while, to occupy the enemy’s attention,
General Thomas was ordered to make a strong feint in front, and General
Schofield on the north of the city. These movements were successfully
carried out; General McPherson reached the gap on the 8th, and took by
surprise a whole cavalry brigade, while General Thomas pushed his
demonstration against Buzzard’s Roost and Rocky Face ridge till it
almost amounted to a battle; and General Schofield pressed down close
upon Dalton.

General McPherson advanced within a mile of Resaca, without meeting
opposition, but on nearing the place he perceived that it was too
strongly held by the rebels for him to carry it by assault, whereupon he
was obliged to fall back, and take position at the west end of Snake
Creek Gap.

On the next day two corps from General Thomas’s army were sent forward
to the support of General McPherson, leaving the Fourth corps, under
General Howard, to continue to threaten Dalton on the front. General
Schofield was also ordered forward to Snake Creek Gap, and on the 11th
of May, the entire army, with the exception of General Howard’s corps,
and a small force of cavalry left to watch Dalton, was in motion for
Resaca, and, on the next day moved against it in full force. Two miles
from Resaca the enemy’s cavalry was driven by Kilpatrick’s cavalry from
a cross road which they occupied, and in the engagement that brave
officer was so severely wounded that he was compelled to give up his
command for the time to Colonel Murray, who wheeled out of the road, and
allowed General McPherson to pass. The enemy’s infantry pickets were
driven in and General McPherson took possession of a ridge of hills
which placed the right of his army on the Oostanaula,—two miles below
the railroad bridge—and his left directly west of the town. General
Thomas came up on his left, and General Schofield followed on the left
of Thomas. It was now ascertained that the rebel General Johnston had
left Dalton; and General Howard entered the town and pressed close upon
the enemy’s rear, but owing to the rugged and hilly nature of the
country, the rebel general succeeded in reaching Resaca in safety; and
on the 14th of May the Unionists found the rebel army occupying a strong
position behind Camp Creek, and in possession of several forts at
Resaca, with its right on a ridge of high chestnut hills to the north of
the town.

General Sherman immediately made demonstrations against the enemy. A
pontoon bridge was placed across the Oostanaula, and a division of the
Sixteenth corps, commanded by General Sweeney, crossed and threatened
Calhoun. The cavalry division of General Gerrard was sent to break the
railroad below Calhoun and above Kingston, while General Sherman pressed
the main body of the army against Resaca, at all points.

General McPherson succeeded in making a lodgment close upon the rebel
works, while General Thomas pushed along Camp Creek Valley, and threw
General Hooker’s corps across the head of the creek to the main Dalton
road, close on Resaca; and General Schofield came up on his left. A
severe battle commenced about noon of the 15th, which continued during
the whole afternoon and evening.

The fighting on both sides was very severe: and when night put an end to
the conflict, the rebels took advantage of the darkness to make their
escape; and in the morning the town was entered and taken possession of
by the National troops.

The whole Union army then started in pursuit of the retreating rebels,
but found no token of their whereabouts until, the evening of the 17th,
near a place called Adairsville, a brigade of the enemy was overtaken.
The advance, consisting of General Newton’s division, engaged the rebel
rear-guard, and a sharp encounter ensued. Night again put a stop to the
conflict; and upon the following morning the enemy was gone, and was not
afterwards overtaken till the National army had advanced four miles
below Kingston, where he was again discovered on open ground, well
adapted for a heavy battle. The proper dispositions for a fight were
promptly made; but as the Union troops were getting in readiness, and
preparing to hem in the rebels, they once more took advantage of the
mantle of darkness, and escaped in the night-time across the Etowah
river, burning the road and bridges which they passed over, but leaving
the National troops in undisputed possession of the whole valuable
country about the Etowah river. General Sherman now gave his army a
brief rest of a few days, as well for the purpose of recruiting their
strength as to allow time for bringing forward supplies for the next
stage of the campaign.




                          CAPTURE OF ROME, GA.
                             MAY 19, 1864.


In the mean time a detachment of the Fourteenth corps (General Palmer)
under command of General Jeff. C. Davis had been ordered on the 17th of
May, along the west bank of the Oostanaula, toward Rome, a place fifteen
miles west of Kingston. General Davis reached Rome upon the following
day, and met with a determined resistance from the enemy. A sharp fight
ensued, which resulted in the rebels being completely routed; General
Davis took several forts, eight or ten guns of heavy calibre, a great
many valuable mills and foundries then doing duty in the service of the
Confederate government; and large quantities of stores. On the 19th,
General Davis with his troops took possession of the city of Rome.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 23d of May, the march was resumed. Feeling assured that the enemy
had the power, and would therefore use it, to hold the Union army in
check at a place called the Allatoona Pass, General Sherman determined
to turn it by a circuit to the right, instead of attempting it in front,
and on that day ordered the whole army, with the exception of the
garrisons at Rome and Kingston, forward upon Dallas.

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE GENERALS. COLQUET. RHETT. LOVELL. B. S.
JOHNSON. RAINS. FLOYD. CRITTENDEN. BRANCH.]

Upon the march a letter from the rebel General Johnston was captured,
showing that he had discovered General Sherman’s movement, and was
concentrating at Dallas to meet him.

General Geary’s division, of Hooker’s corps, encountered the enemy’s
line of battle, after crossing Pumpkin Vine creek, and advancing about
three miles along the Dallas road; the result was a severe fight of
several hours. The remaining troops of General Hooker’s corps were
advancing along different roads, but they were quickly brought in to the
assistance of Geary, and by order of General Sherman the entire corps
made a bold push to obtain a point called New Hope Church, which lay at
the intersection of three roads leading from Ackworth, Marietta, and
Dallas. A very heavy battle was fought at this point, which resulted in
defeat to the rebels, who were beaten back, but saved themselves from
being driven from the road by throwing up hastily constructed
fortifications. A severe storm, which set in about the close of the day,
also proved of great assistance to them, inasmuch as it prevented
General Hooker from making any further demonstration against them. In
the morning the enemy was discovered strongly intrenched in front of the
road which led from Dallas to Marietta. Consequently, preparations
against them were made in large force. General McPherson was stationed
at Dallas; General Thomas was deployed against New Hope Church; and
General Schofield was directed to hold the left. The cavalry under
General Garrard operated with McPherson, that under General Stoneman
with Schofield, and General McCook’s division brought up the rear.

During all these movements, constant skirmishing occurred between the
opposing armies. The heaviest attack took place on the 28th, and was
made by a strong rebel force upon General McPherson’s troops, when they
were in the act of closing up to General Thomas in front of New Hope
Church. The Federal troops being strongly protected by breastworks,
repulsed the enemy bravely, and succeeded in driving him back with heavy
loss. A brief pause succeeded this demonstration, which was at times
broken by a renewal of skirmishing; after which the movements against
the enemy were continued, and on the 1st of June General McPherson moved
to the left, and occupied the position of General Thomas in front of New
Hope Church, while that general and Schofield were ordered to move five
miles farther to the left, thus giving the Union troops the occupation
of the roads leading to Allatoona and Ackworth. General Stoneman’s
cavalry was next pushed into Allatoona, at the east end, and General
Garrard’s at the west end, of the Pass, thus accomplishing the real
intention to turn Allatoona.

The bridge across the Etowah which had been destroyed by the rebels was
immediately rebuilt; and General Sherman moved his army upon Ackworth on
the 4th, thus compelling Johnston to leave his intrenchments at New Hope
Church, and to move westward to cover Marietta. The National troops
reached Ackworth on the 6th, and rested there for a few days.

Allatoona Pass, being considered by General Sherman as specially suited
to the purpose, was chosen by him as a secondary base of operations, and
was, according to his orders, made suitable for defence.

On the 9th of June, the army moved forward to Big Shanty, having been on
the previous day strengthened by two divisions of the Seventeenth corps,
and one brigade of cavalry, which had been absent on furlough. Between
Big Shanty and Marietta a mountainous district intervenes, which has
three separate and well-defined summits, the most easterly of which is
called the Kenesaw Mountain, and lies directly north and northwest of
Marietta, and west of the railroad; it has a spur, called the Little
Kenesaw, which juts out for a considerable distance in a northeasterly
direction. The second of the highest summits, known as Lost Mountain,
lies directly west of Marietta, and midway between these two lies Pine
Mountain. These three mountains are connected by ranges of smaller
eminences, upon all of which the rebels had erected signal stations,
from which they could observe all the operations of the National troops.

A great battle was impending; and the rebels, swarming about the summits
of the hills, “thick as leaves in Vallambrosa,” made the place alive
with moving figures, and the air vocal with the hum of voices, the noise
of felling timber, and the many hundred sounds of hurried preparations
for the coming struggle.

General Sherman describes the scene as “enchanting—too beautiful to be
disturbed by the harsh clamors of war;” but beyond him lay the
Chattahoochie, which must be reached; and no way to reach it lay before
him except to cut his way through the rebel army, that stood between him
and the goal to which all his motions then tended. The moment for attack
approached. General McPherson was ordered toward Marietta; General
Thomas to Kenesaw and Pine Mountain; and General Schofield toward Lost
Mountain. The rebel front extended westward, and was upwards of two
miles in length; and was so drawn that Kenesaw Mountain, the controlling
point of the whole region, formed a sort of citadel for the enemy.

General Johnston’s force was estimated at sixty-three thousand, besides
a force numbering fifteen thousand of Georgia militia, which was placed
at his service. The preparations for attack had been going on for five
days, and on the 14th, the battle for the possession of the mountains
began.




                    THE BATTLES OF KENESAW MOUNTAIN.
                             JUNE 14, 1864.


Heavy skirmishing had continued from the opening of this battle till the
day on which the great fight occurred which ended in giving the
Unionists possession of the enemy’s position on Kenesaw Mountain. Upon
the 14th, the rebel general, Bishop Leonidas Polk was killed, while
commanding on Pine Mountain, during a heavy cannonading by the Fourth
corps. During the same night the enemy, having discovered that General
Hooker was moving to cut off their retreat, abandoned their works, which
were quickly occupied by Stanley’s division of the Fourth corps. A paper
was found affixed to a stake near the rebel works on Pine Mountain, on
which was written, “Here General Polk was killed by a Yankee shell.” It
was subsequently ascertained that the rebel generals Johnston and
Hardee, who were standing near Polk, narrowly escaped being killed at
the same time.

General Johnston now drew back his centre to the chain of hills which
connected Kenesaw and Lost Mountain, still keeping his right and left
flank respectively on these mountains. During the 15th, 16th, and 17th,
heavy skirmishing continued from morning till night; which told upon the
endurance of the troops almost as much as a pitched battle would have
done. Late in the evening of the 17th, severe skirmishing opened in
front of Stanley’s division. At the same time the enemy engaged Harkens’
brigade, of Newton’s division, and a regiment—the Ninety-third Ohio—of
Hazen’s brigade; and toward nightfall a heavy fire was opened all along
the front of General Howard’s line. The batteries of Bridge and Bradery
were speedily brought to bear upon the rebels, and with telling effect;
while upon the left the batteries of Logan and Blair were making
themselves heard in most formidable manner. Night drew on, and a brief
silence ensued, but the rebels had not yet abandoned the attack. A
correspondent of the day thus describes the renewal of the battle: “It
was a beautiful night. The soft moonlight beaming from the clear
southern sky, floated through the forest trees, lighting them with a
bewitching kind of beauty. The air was calm and balmy, the sky without a
cloud. Fireflies, sparkling like diamonds, were flitting around. The cry
of the whip-poor-will resounded through the forest, and the plaint cry
of the croaking frogs rose from the marshes like the tinkling of
sleigh-bells. Smoke and flames shot up from buildings that had been
fired by shells. Soon a dropping shot along the line, followed by rapid
musketry firing, roused us from our solemn kind of torpor. The rebels
had opened on our skirmish line, and a brisk fight ensued. Our batteries
soon opened, hurling shell and canister into their ranks. The attack
also extended to our left, where they vainly strove to regain their lost
position, but were again repulsed by Logan’s command. The rebels were
foiled in their attack at all points, and the horrid din of battle soon
gave way to the placid stillness of night.”

A sudden rain storm came on in a perfect deluge, during the night, and
the enemy abandoned his front line of works. Early in the morning
General Howard ordered his whole line to push forward sharply. General
Harkens’ brigade led the advance, and, having come up with the enemy,
and being reinforced with Wagner’s brigade, charged forward, driving
them from their first line of works. On this day the possession of the
Dallas and Marietta roads was secured; and the Unionists continued to
press the enemy so close and hard that at dusk the Twentieth corps was
in a line perpendicular with the rebel line.

During the operations of the 18th, the loss to the National troops was
very heavy; the rebel loss in killed and wounded was also severe,
besides which the Unionists took prisoner several hundred of the enemy.

General Johnston took advantage of the night, and a heavy rain storm, to
withdraw his left flank from its position on Lost Mountain, which he saw
could not be maintained, making his strong point of resistance on
Kenesaw Mountain. The National forces immediately took possession of the
abandoned works on Lost Mountain.

On the next morning, Stanley’s division followed up the enemy to their
new position, and threw out two brigades as skirmishers. Newton’s
division formed on Stanley’s left, and sent out the Thirty-sixth and
Eighty-eighth Illinois as skirmishers. Wood’s division then formed on
the right, and fierce skirmishing began all along the line. General
Harkens’ brigade signally distinguished itself in this encounter, and
aided by Kimball’s brigade developed the enemy’s lines and works.

Generals Sherman, Thomas, Howard, and other officers, were now occupying
the house of a Mr. Wallace, on the Marietta road, eagerly watching the
effect of the Union batteries upon the rebel works. Together with the
batteries named above, those of Goodspeed and Spencer were now got into
position, and all opened at once on the rebels, who promptly replied
with a couple of batteries from the slope of the hill, and a section of
heavy guns from the crest. A regular duel now opened between the
opposing artillery, and all along the intervening valley the clouds of
dense smoke hung midway in the air.

The whole line was soon engaged, and from early morning till late night
the crash and flash, the roar and scream of battle never ceased; and
when at length the night interrupted the fierce fight, it but served to
recruit the strength with which both sides renewed it in the morning. A
slight, forked ridge which jutted out in front of General Wood’s
division was selected, and at once made use of, as a position for a
battery; and two heavy guns were dragged forward, and placed so as to
bear heavily upon the rebel line, and set to work immediately. Shortly
after this it was ascertained from rebel prisoners that a portion of
Hood’s and Hardee’s corps were massing against Sherman’s centre; the
attack was made, and gallantly repulsed, the rebels being driven back
with loss. They next assailed Kirby’s division, but met with similar
misfortune, being fiercely repulsed, but not beaten. They again
attacked, and were stubbornly resisted for one hour; at the end of that
time they gained a slight temporary advantage, taking possession of a
prominent knoll in Kirby’s front, which they continued to occupy,
although severely attacked by the brigades of Gross and Whittaker. Again
night temporarily put a stop to the battle. The divisions of Newton and
Wood had perceptibly advanced—that of Stanley, having been most severely
pressed, had succeeded in keeping its ground, with the exception of the
knoll lost to the enemy. Just as night fell intense anxiety was felt by
all, for the rebels were seen pressing heavily upon Stanley’s front; but
after a few minutes’ suspense a loud ringing cheer from the brave
Unionists proclaimed the rebel repulse, and indicated that nothing had
been gained by them.

Early on the 21st, the fight opened with heavy skirmishing in all
directions, which continued during the whole day.

On the 22d, the enemy made a sudden attack upon portions of Generals
Hooker’s and Schofield’s troops on the Federal right, near what is known
as the “Kulp House,” and was handsomely repulsed, leaving his dead,
wounded, and many prisoners behind him. The Federal centre was now
established squarely in front of Kenesaw, but it required so many men to
hold the railroad and the line running along the base of the mountain,
that but a small force was left with which to attempt a flank movement
to the right. So small was it that General Sherman hesitated to push it
vigorously toward the railroad, in the rear of Marietta, for fear that
it might be altogether detached from the army, and exposed to disaster.
He therefore contented himself with extending his right along the
enemy’s flank, hoping that General Johnston would thereby be induced to
weaken his centre sufficiently to render an assault in that direction
practicable. “Although inviting the enemy at all times,” says General
Sherman in his official report, “to make such mistakes, I could not hope
for him to repeat them after the examples of Dallas and the ‘Kulp
House;’ and upon studying the ground, I had no alternative but to assail
his lines or turn his position. Either course had its difficulties and
dangers. And I perceived that the enemy and our own officers had settled
down into a conviction that I would not assault fortified lines. All
looked to me to ‘outflank.’ An army to be efficient must not settle down
to one single mode of offence, but must be prepared to execute any plan
which promises success. I waited, therefore, for the moral effect, to
make a successful assault against the enemy behind his breastworks, and
resolved to attempt it at that point where success would give the
largest fruits of victory.”




                       BATTLE OF LITTLE KENESAW.
                             JUNE 24, 1864.


On the twenty-fourth of June General Sherman ordered an attack to be
made at two points south of Kenesaw—the one to be made upon Little
Kenesaw, by General McPherson, and the other, about a mile south of that
point, by General Thomas. At six A. M. of the twenty-seventh—the
appointed day—the Seventeenth corps, commanded by General Blair, moved
upon the eastern point of the mountain, threatening the enemy’s right;
while the Fifteenth (General Logan), and the Sixteenth (General Dodge),
attacked the northern slope. The three brigades forming the Fifteenth
corps scattered the enemy’s skirmishers, and pushing up the slope with
daring impetuosity, carried a large part of the rebel rifle-pits.
Rushing forward, the troops found themselves at the foot of a
precipitous cliff not less than thirty feet high, which they attempted
to scale, but from which they were beaten back by the fire of the enemy
formed in line of battle at its summit, and by a shower of heavy stones,
which were hurled down upon them. A second attack was ordered, and, for
the purpose, a portion of General Newton’s division of the Fourth corps,
and General Davis’s, of the Fourteenth, were selected. Buoyant with
courage, the troops rushed forward, charged up the mountain in the midst
of a murderous fire, and gallantly carrying the line of rifle-pits,
reached the works beyond. Many of them scaled the ramparts, but the fire
of musketry and artillery was so overpowering that the men were hastily
recalled. General Newton’s troops returned to their original line, but
the Second brigade of General Davis threw up works between those they
had carried, and the enemy’s main line, and there they held their
position. Brief as this fight was, it cost General Sherman a loss of
three thousand men in killed and wounded, while that of the rebels,
intrenched behind strong works, was comparatively trifling.

Referring to this defeat General Sherman says, “Failure as it was, and
for which I assume the entire responsibility, I yet claim it produced
good fruits, as it demonstrated to General Johnston that I would
assault, and that boldly, and we also gained and held ground so close to
the enemy’s parapets that he could not show a head above them.”

It would have been wholly out of character in General Sherman to have
rested under the imputation of defeat; and, accordingly, immediate
preparations were made to turn the rebel left. On July 1st, General
McPherson was relieved by Garrard’s cavalry in front of Kenesaw, and was
in that way enabled to threaten Nickajack creek and Turner’s Ferry
across the Chattahoochie, Stoneman’s cavalry being pushed down below the
ferry. The effect of this movement was instantaneous, and on the morning
of the 3d, Kenesaw was utterly abandoned by the rebels, and its summit
covered by Union soldiers before the sun had risen. General Thomas’s
line was then moved toward the Chattahoochie, in pursuit of the rebels,
and at half past eight o’clock General Sherman entered Marietta, and
took possession of the city. During the rebel retreat upwards of two
thousand prisoners were captured by the Union soldiers.

General Thomas overtook the enemy at the Smyrna camp-meeting ground,
about five miles from Marietta, protected in front with a strong
parapet; and in rear by the Nickajack and Rottenwood creeks. General
Sherman assigned a garrison for Marietta, and joined General Thomas at
Smyrna. On the 4th, the whole line of rebel pits was captured, and on
the next morning the enemy was gone. The army of General Sherman then
moved directly on the Chattahoochie, beyond which the enemy was found
behind a very strong line. Heavy skirmishing opened at once, which
served to show the strength of the rebels, and to prove to General
Sherman that the line could be turned only in one way—namely, by
crossing the main river. On the 7th, General Schofield having been
ordered to cross the Chattahoochie, did so with success, surprised the
enemy, and effected a lodgment on high ground, from which the rebels
fled to the eastward. General Garrard next secured the fort at Rosswell,
which he was ordered to hold till relieved by infantry; which was done,
while General Schofield crossed the river two miles below Powens’ Ferry,
and took a strong position on the right. Thus three safe points of
passage across the river were secured. Each position obtained had good
roads leading direct to Atlanta, and at daylight on the tenth of July,
the enemy had fled, leaving the Unionists in full possession of all they
had won.

One of the most important objects of the campaign was now accomplished;
and beyond—only eight miles distant—lay the city of Atlanta, to obtain
possession of which was the next object of General Sherman’s march.
Without an hour’s delay the first step was taken.

An expedition, commanded by General Rousseau, in command of the district
of Tennessee, was sent out at that time to break the railroad between
Montgomery and Opelika, by which Johnston received his supplies.

General Rousseau, as his commanding general states, “fulfilled his
orders and instructions to the very letter;” and on his route
encountered and defeated the rebel General Canton, returning safely to
Marietta on the twenty-second; having sustained a loss of not more than
thirty men.

During this period the main army had spent some days in rest and
collecting supplies, and had advanced on the seventeenth along the road
called the Old Peachtree.

All the armies had closed in and were converging towards Atlanta on the
twentieth. In the afternoon the enemy emerged from his works along the
road and attacked the Union right centre, composed of General Newton’s
division of General Hooker’s corps, and of General Johnson’s division.
This attack, though entirely unexpected, was handsomely repulsed by all
three generals against whom it was aimed, with a loss to the enemy of
five hundred killed, one thousand wounded, many stand of colors, and
over three thousand prisoners. The National loss did not exceed fifteen
hundred in all, killed, wounded and missing.

During the 21st the enemy’s position was examined and found to be
strong—his right resting below the Augusta road to the east, and his
left on the Chattahoochie, about four miles from Atlanta. On the 22d
this whole line was found to have been abandoned during the night, which
singular movement was subsequently explained to the astonished Unionists
by learning that General Johnston had been superseded in command by
General Hood, and an entirely new line of policy determined on by the
rebels.




                       BATTLE BEFORE ATLANTA, GA.
                             JULY 22, 1864.


By a show of retreating to the city, the rebel general hoped to draw
General Sherman on, and, while he was in motion, to strike at the Union
army on all available points. This decoy was not wholly without effect,
for General Sherman pushed on beyond the abandoned rebel works, and
found the enemy, in strong force, occupying a line of redoubts which
entirely covered the approach to Atlanta. This showed an evident
intention to fight, on the part of General Hood; and General Sherman at
once sent orders to all points of the centre and right of his army to
press forward and engage the enemy, while General Schofield held as
large a force as possible in reserve.

General McPherson engaged the enemy at about noon, on the left, where
they were making a cavalry demonstration. The fighting had now become
very severe; the loud crash of musketry was followed in quick succession
by the rapid firing of artillery, and while a roar as of continuous
thunder pealed all along the line, the flash of fire streamed out in
vivid sheets of flame upon the noonday air. Just as General McPherson
reached the left, the enemy advanced upon the Sixteenth corps, but were
three times determinedly and desperately repulsed by General Dodge.

Perceiving that the attempt to break the line of the Sixteenth had
failed, General McPherson took advantage of a momentary lull to ride up
to the Seventeenth corps, which was reported severely threatened by the
enemy. Every member of his staff, except one, had been sent on various
errands; and he now directed that one to obtain a brigade from General
Logan to throw across the gap between the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
corps; and then, with a single orderly, struck into the road that led
direct to General Smith’s position. Almost immediately he found himself
hemmed within the enemy’s skirmish line; the rebel officer commanding
called out to him to surrender, which order he replied to by dashing his
horse to the front of the road, but before he could effect his escape a
volley fired by the skirmishers unhorsed him, mortally wounded. For a
time his body remained within the enemy’s line, but was subsequently
recovered and brought within the line of the Union army. His death was a
severe loss, and he was deeply regretted, both as an officer and as a
man. General Sherman in chronicling this event says of General
McPherson:

“He was a noble youth, of striking personal appearance, of the highest
professional capacity, and with a heart abounding in kindness, that drew
to him the affections of all men.”

By his death the command of the Army of the Tennessee devolved
temporarily upon the brave and gallant General John A. Logan, who
sustained his already brilliant reputation, and that of the veteran army
placed under his command.

The battle continued to rage with still increasing fury. The brigade
that had been ordered from Logan’s corps arrived just in time to check
the farther progress of the enemy in that direction, but was not able to
keep a portion of the rebel force from getting in the rear of the
Seventeenth corps; while a strong detachment pushed up against the Union
position on the hill beyond, determined to obtain possession of it. But
the brave troops held firmly to their post, and presented so determined
a resistance, that the rebels recoiled before them, leaving the ground
strewn with the dead and dying that fell from their ranks. A portion of
the enemy, which had pushed for the gaps between the Sixteenth and
Seventeenth corps—now bridged over with Wangelin’s brigade—made another
attack on the right flank of the Sixteenth, and captured a six-gun
battery, surprising the Unionists, but were promptly driven back in
confusion, and with heavy loss.

The enemy’s attack upon the Union left flank was quite abandoned by
three o’clock, the rebels having gained absolutely nothing except the
capture of a few guns, while they had suffered enormous losses in every
way.

At about four o’clock in the afternoon, General Hood massed a large
force of troops for the purpose of assaulting the Fifteenth corps—lately
commanded by General Logan, and then temporarily under General Morgan L.
Smith. The corps was stationed behind substantial breastworks, and held
the right of the Army of the Tennessee. The first rebel column marched
against the Union line, and were handsomely repulsed and kept at bay for
more than half an hour; when a second column approached steadily, and
without flinching, beneath the furious Union fire. Close behind them
came a third column, before which the Unionists were compelled to give
way, losing their position, and two important batteries. This gain to
the rebels was such a serious loss to General Sherman, that General
Logan was ordered to regain the lost position at any cost. Several
batteries from General Schofield were so placed that the enemy’s works
could be shelled, and reinforcements for him rendered impossible; and
just as the rebels were making ready to turn the captured battery upon
the National line, the Fifteenth corps, reinforced by General Schofield,
pressed forward, and after a desperate struggle, in which the combatants
fought hand-to-hand, the Unionists regained their lost position, and
retook their guns. The rebels retreated before them in the wildest
confusion, and the battle terminated with this defeat of the enemy’s
last effort.

In this battle the total loss to the Union army was estimated at three
thousand seven hundred and twenty-two men, of whom the larger portion
were killed and wounded.

In front of the National line the enemy’s dead was counted at two
thousand and two hundred, of whom eight hundred were delivered under
flag of truce; their total loss in killed amounted to three thousand two
hundred and forty. Upwards of three thousand prisoners were taken by the
Unionists, including one thousand wounded, among whom were many officers
of high rank. Besides these severe losses in men, eighteen stands of
colors, and five thousand small arms were taken from the rebels.




                        THE CAVALRY EXPEDITIONS.


The next important movement was fixed for the 28th of July, the
preparations for which were as follows: General Rousseau’s troops,
fatigued with their long march, were not expected to do active service
immediately: and were, therefore, ordered to relieve General Stoneman,
who was sent to the left flank, there to remain in readiness to strike
at the Macon road, at the same time that the Army of the Tennessee,
which had been shifted below Proctor’s Creek, was to move toward East
Point. In order to make General Stoneman’s movement sure of success, an
effective cavalry force of five thousand men was placed under his
command. This force, and that of General McCook, numbering four
thousand, were ordered to move at the same time, the latter, by the
right, on Fayetteville, and the former, by the left, skirting Atlanta,
round to McDonough. In the evening of the day appointed, these two
strong bodies of Union cavalry were to meet on the Macon road, at a
point known as Lovejoy’s, with orders to utterly destroy the railroad.
These orders were not carried out.

The two expeditions set forth; General Stoneman taking the direction to
McDonough, after sending General Garrard to Flat Rock to cover his
movement. General McCook took his way along the right bank of the
Chattahoochie. General Stoneman, after proceeding a very short distance
on the road he had taken, turned to the Georgia railroad, along which he
advanced to Covington. There he altered his course again, going due
south for Macon, the neighborhood of which he reached on the 30th. A
detachment which he sent east to Loudon, destroyed eleven locomotives
and several trains loaded with stores, and a great many bridges between
that place and Macon. It had been the intention of General Stoneman, as
a part of the expedition—having received the necessary permission from
his general commanding—to proceed to Macon and Andersonville, and
release the Union prisoners confined at those two places; but having
received information at Gordon that the prisoners at Macon had been sent
forward to Charleston, the movements upon Macon and Andersonville were
both abandoned. On the evening of the 30th General Stoneman turned
northward (having so far accomplished nothing of especial value),
skirmishing with the enemy as often as he was encountered on the way
till on the morning of the 31st he was met by a strong rebel force.

The country at this point was particularly unsuited for cavalry
movements; accordingly, General Stoneman determined to escape without
fighting, if possible. He sent a portion of his command forward as
skirmishers, but quickly discovered that he was surrounded. Everything
that ready wit and ingenuity could suggest was done with the hope of
outwitting the enemy; but escape was impossible. As a last resource,
General Stoneman ordered the larger portion of his command to break
through the opposing lines, and effect their escape in the readiest
manner possible, while he, himself, with a few hundred men and a section
of artillery, drew off the enemy’s attention from the movement of the
other troops. He was speedily overpowered, and obliged to surrender; and
together with all those who were with him, became prisoners to the
enemy.

Of the remainder of his command, one brigade returned in safety to the
main army, and another was attacked and considerably broken up on its
way back.

General Garrard, in the mean time, after remaining at Flat Rock two
days, awaiting further orders, moved toward Covington on the 29th, where
he learned that General Stoneman had gone south; and having no further
orders to obey, he returned to his position on the left flank of the
army.

General McCook was more fortunate in his expedition than his brother
officer. Having reached a place called Rivertown, on the Chattahoochie,
he crossed the river, and directed his way toward Palmetto Station; at
this place he destroyed a portion of the Atlanta and West Point
railroad. From there he proceeded to Fayetteville, dealing destruction
by burning public and private property along the whole line of his
journey. He destroyed an important part of the Macon and Western
railroad. There he was disappointed by not meeting General Stoneman; and
being constantly met by large and ever increasing numbers of the enemy,
he turned to the southwest, and proceeded in that direction. At a place
called Newman, on the Atlanta and West Point railroad, he encountered a
strong rebel force, through which he cut his way with hard fighting, and
considerable loss. After losing all his prisoners, he reached the
Chattahoochie, and from thence arrived in safety within the Union lines.




                         THE SIEGE OF ATLANTA.


General Howard, who, upon the 27th of July, according to the President’s
appointment, assumed command of the Army of the Tennessee, vacant by
General McPherson’s death, had put his army in motion while the events
above detailed were taking place. The Army of the Tennessee was placed
on the extreme right of General Sherman’s army, its right flank being
held by General Logan. By this movement the whole lino was drawn out
directly south, with its face to the eastward, and gradually winding
around to the Macon road. The enemy perceiving this, massed his troops
in the same direction. On the 28th, General Stewart’s corps advanced
from Atlanta upon the Union right flank, and for several hours kept up a
succession of fierce assaults upon General Logan’s troops. The assaults
were as fiercely repelled, causing the rebels to retire again and again,
with constantly lessening ranks, till compelled to retire entirely at
four P. M., leaving their dead and wounded on the ground, after
sustaining a loss of five thousand men. In this conflict the Union loss
did not exceed six hundred.

About this time General Hooker resigned command of his corps, and was
succeeded by General Slocum—whose place in turn, was temporarily filled
by General H. S. Williams—General Slocum being absent in Vicksburg
General Palmer also resigned command of his corps, and was succeeded by
General Jeff. C. Davis; and General D. S. Stanley was placed in command
of the Fourth corps, left vacant by the promotion of General Howard.

With his customary promptitude, General Sherman soon perceived that his
last movement would not effect the dislodgment of Hood from Atlanta, and
he accordingly changed his tactics. He still further extended the right
wing of his army, with the view of outflanking Hood in that manner. The
Twenty-third and Fourteenth were, therefore, during the 5th and 6th of
August, transferred from their position on the left to the extreme
right, where they joined the Fifteenth corps, and formed the army’s
right flank.

While this movement was in progress, occasional demonstrations were made
against the enemy, which only served to show that he was protected by
defences of the strongest description, and was in a condition to
maintain his position for a long period, unless dislodged by some
master-piece of generalship on the part of the Union commander.

The Union army was now very much changed from its first position for the
siege of Atlanta. Instead of threatening the city north and east,
General Sherman’s left now covered the northern approaches to it, while
his extreme right lay southwest and ran parallel to the railroad. The
lines of his army were drawn about two and a half miles from the city,
and between them and the enemy’s works lay a narrow strip of wooded
country, which had been the scene of almost perpetual skirmishing
between the opposing forces.

A movement against the enemy had now become of the first importance, as
nothing could be gained to the National troops by delay, while Hood was
every day strengthening the city’s defences, and adding to his army by
organizing all the laborers, teamsters, and quartermasters’ men within
Atlanta, and filling their places by negroes. Without haste, and after
mature consideration as to the safest course to pursue, General Sherman,
having satisfied himself that the rebel lines could not be taken except
by a fearful sacrifice of life, determined upon the capture of Atlanta
by a bold strategic movement. A new movement by the right flank was
ordered, which would require the participation of nearly the whole army.
One corps was withdrawn and sent to the intrenched position across the
Chattahoochie, in order to preserve, in any event, communication with
the base. The whole of the remaining army was ordered to move upon the
south and southwest sides of the city, destroy the railroad
communications, and thus place Atlanta beyond the possibility of
obtaining supplies. Preparations for these operations were entered upon
at once, and by the 16th General Sherman’s plans were virtually
completed. On the 18th, General Kilpatrick, with five thousand men, made
a raid, and struck the Macon railroad at Jonesboro’ and Lovejoy’s, and
the Atlanta and West Point road at Fairburn. But the enemy resisted him
at all points and he failed to inflict permanent injury upon the roads.
Retreating, therefore, on the 22d instant, by way of Decatur, he brought
in one hundred prisoners, and a piece of artillery. General Sherman now
made no further delay in executing his plan to force Hood to abandon
Atlanta. That plan, as already noted, consisted in changing the position
of his lines, getting in between Atlanta and Macon, and thus cutting off
Hood’s supplies. The scheme was brilliant, and was cleverly executed. A
brisk engagement took place near Jonesboro’, on the 31st of August, in
which the rebels under Hardee were severely defeated, which was
accomplished with little loss to the Union arms. Finding himself thus
dangerously situated, General Hood, on the 1st of September, ordered the
evacuation of Atlanta—first taking care to burn the railroad rolling
stock and all other material that would have been useful to the National
army. On leaving the city he retreated to McDonough, whence, moving
westward, he was able to join his forces to those of Hardee and S. D.
Lee. Meanwhile, at daybreak on the 2d of September, the Union troops
marched into Atlanta. “We have,” says General Sherman, announcing the
capture of the city, “as the result of this quick, and, as I think,
well-executed movement, twenty-seven guns, over three thousand
prisoners, and have buried over four hundred rebel dead, and left as
many wounded that could not be removed. The rebels have lost, besides
the important city of Atlanta and their stores, about five hundred
killed, twenty-five hundred wounded, and three thousand prisoners;
whereas our aggregate loss will not foot up fifteen hundred. If that is
not success I don’t know what is.”

To lose no time in the improvement of his victory, General Sherman, on
the 4th of September, issued an order to the effect that the city of
Atlanta being exclusively required for warlike purposes, all citizens
must remove from it; and to expedite such removal, he entered into a
truce with General Hood, and made arrangements with him for forwarding
the citizens and their effects beyond the Federal lines. In connection
with this event the following correspondence took place between the
authorities of Atlanta and General Sherman.


                                          “ATLANTA, GA., Sept. 11, 1864.

  “Major-General WILLIAM T. SHERMAN:

  “SIR: The undersigned, Mayor and two members of Council for the city
  of Atlanta, for the time being the only legal organ of the people of
  the said city to express their wants and wishes, ask leave most
  earnestly but respectfully to petition you to reconsider the order
  requiring them to leave Atlanta. At first view it struck us that the
  measure would involve extraordinary hardship and loss, but since we
  have seen the practical execution of it, so far as it has progressed,
  and the individual condition of many of the people, and heard the
  statements as to the inconvenience, loss and suffering attending it,
  we are satisfied that the amount of it will involve in the aggregate
  consequences appalling and heart-rending.

  “Many poor women are in an advanced state of pregnancy; others have
  young children, whose husbands, for the greater part, are either in
  the army, prisoners, or dead. Some say: ‘I have such a one sick at my
  house; who will wait on them when I am gone?’ Others say: ‘What are we
  to do? we have no houses to go to, and no means to buy, build, or rent
  any; no parents, relatives, or friends to go to.’ Another says: ‘I
  will try and take this or that article of property; but such and such
  things I must leave behind, though I need them much.’ We reply to
  them: ‘General Sherman will carry your property to Rough and Ready,
  and then General Hood will take it thence on:’ and they will reply to
  that: ‘But I want to leave the railroad at such a place, and cannot
  get conveyance from thence on.’

  “We only refer to a few facts to illustrate, in part, how this measure
  will operate in practice. As you advanced, the people north of us fell
  back, and before your arrival here a large portion of the people here
  had retired south; so that the country south of this is already
  crowded, and without sufficient houses to accommodate the people, and
  we are informed that many are now staying in churches and other
  outbuildings. This being so, how is it possible for the people still
  here (mostly women and children) to find shelter, and how can they
  live through the winter in the woods? no shelter or subsistence; in
  the midst of strangers who know them not, and without the power to
  assist them much if they were willing to do so.

  “This is but a feeble picture of the consequences of this measure. You
  know the woe, the horror, and the suffering cannot be described by
  words. Imagination can only conceive of it, and we ask you to take
  these things into consideration. We know your mind and time are
  continually occupied with the duties of your command, which almost
  deters us from asking your attention to the matter, but we thought it
  might be that you had not considered the subject in all of its awful
  consequences, and that, on reflection, you, we hope, would not make
  this people an exception to mankind, for we know of no such instance
  ever having occurred—surely not in the United States. And what has
  this helpless people done, that they should be driven from their
  homes, to wander as strangers, outcasts, and exiles, and to subsist on
  charity?

  “We do not know as yet the number of people still here. Of those who
  are here, a respectable number, if allowed to remain at home, could
  subsist for several months without assistance; and a respectable
  number for a much longer time, and who might not need assistance at
  any time.

  “In conclusion, we most earnestly and solemnly petition you to
  reconsider this order, or modify it, and suffer this unfortunate
  people to remain at home and enjoy what little means they have.

              “Respectfully submitted,          JAMES M. CALHOUN, Mayor.

  “E. E. RAWSON, }
  S. C. WELLS,   } Councilmen.”


                        GENERAL SHERMAN’S REPLY.


  “HEADQUARTERS MILITARY DIVISION OF THE MISSISSIPPI, IN THE FIELD, }
                          ATLANTA, GA., September 12, 1864. }

  “JAMES M. CALHOUN, Mayor, E. E. RAWSON, and S. C. WELLS, representing
     City Council of Atlanta:

  “GENTLEMEN: I have your letter of the 11th, in the nature of a
  petition, to revoke my orders removing all the inhabitants from
  Atlanta. I have read it carefully, and give full credit to your
  statements of the distress that will be occasioned by it, and yet
  shall not revoke my order, simply because my orders are not designed
  to meet the humanities of the case, but to prepare for the future
  struggles in which millions, yea, hundreds of millions of good people
  outside of Atlanta have a deep interest. We must have Peace, not only
  at Atlanta, but in all America. To secure this we must stop the war
  that now desolates our once happy and favored country. To stop war we
  must defeat the rebel armies that are arrayed against the laws and
  Constitution, which all must respect and obey. To defeat these armies
  we must prepare the way to reach them in their recesses provided with
  the arms and instruments which enable us to accomplish our purpose.

  “Now, I know the vindictive nature of our enemy, and that we may have
  many years of military operations from this quarter, and therefore
  deem it wise and prudent to prepare in time. The use of Atlanta for
  warlike purposes is inconsistent with its character as a home for
  families. There will be no manufactures, commerce, or agriculture here
  for the maintenance of families, and sooner or later want will compel
  the inhabitants to go. Why not go now, when all the arrangements are
  completed for the transfer, instead of waiting till the plunging shot
  of contending armies will renew the scene of the past month? Of
  course, I do not apprehend any such thing at this moment, but you do
  not suppose that this army will be here till the war is over. I cannot
  discuss this subject with you fairly, because I cannot impart to you
  what I propose to do, but I assert that my military plans make it
  necessary for the inhabitants to go away, and I can only renew my
  offer of services to make their exodus in any direction as easy and
  comfortable as possible. You cannot qualify war in harsher terms than
  I will.

  “War is cruelty, and you cannot refine it; and those who brought war
  on our country deserve all the curses and maledictions a people can
  pour out. I know I had no hand in making this war, and I know I will
  make more sacrifices to-day than any of you to secure peace. But you
  cannot have peace and a division of our country. If the United States
  submits to a division now, it will not stop, but go on till we reap
  the fate of Mexico, which is eternal war. The United States does and
  must assert its authority wherever it has the power; if it relaxes one
  bit to pressure it is gone, and I know that such is not the national
  feeling. This feeling assumes various shapes, but always comes back to
  that of Union. Once admit the Union, once more acknowledge the
  authority of the National Government, and instead of devoting your
  houses, and streets, and roads, to the dread uses of war, I, and this
  army become at once your protectors and supporters, shielding you from
  danger, let it come from what quarter it may. I know that a few
  individuals cannot resist a torrent of error and passion such as has
  swept the South into rebellion; but you can point out, so that we may
  know those who desire a Government and those who insist on war and its
  desolation.

  “You might as well appeal against the thunderstorm as against these
  terrible hardships of war. They are inevitable, and the only way the
  people of Atlanta can hope once more to live in peace and quiet at
  home is to stop this war, which can alone be done by admitting that it
  began in error, and is perpetuated in pride. We don’t want your
  negroes, or your horses, or your land, or anything you have, but we do
  want and will have a just obedience to the laws of the United States.
  That we will have, and if it involves the destruction of your
  improvements, we cannot help it. You have heretofore read public
  sentiment in your newspapers, that live by falsehood and excitement,
  and the quicker you seek for truth in other quarters, the better for
  you.

  “I repeat, then, that, by the original compact of government, the
  United States had certain rights in Georgia which have never been
  relinquished and never will be; that the South began war by seizing
  forts, arsenals, mints, custom-houses, &c., &c., long before Mr.
  Lincoln was installed, and before the South had one jot or tittle of
  provocation. I myself have seen in Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, and
  Mississippi hundreds and thousands of women and children fleeing from
  your armies and desperadoes, hungry and with bleeding feet. In
  Memphis, Vicksburg, and Mississippi, we fed thousands upon thousands
  of the families of rebel soldiers left on our hands, and whom we could
  not see starve. Now that war comes home to you, you feel very
  different; you deprecate its horrors, but did not feel them when you
  sent car-loads of soldiers and ammunition, and molded shell and shot,
  to carry war into Kentucky and Tennessee, and desolate the homes of
  hundreds and thousands of good people, who only asked to live in peace
  at their old homes, and under the Government of their inheritance.

  “But these comparisons are idle. I want peace, and believe it can only
  be reached through Union and war; and I will ever conduct war purely
  with a view to perfect and early success.

  “But, my dear sirs, when that peace does come, you may call on me for
  anything. Then I will share with you the last cracker, and watch with
  you to shield your homes and families against danger from every
  quarter. Now you must go, and take with you the old and feeble, feed
  and nurse them, and build for them in more quiet places proper
  habitations to shield them against the weather until the mad passions
  of men cool down, and allow the Union and peace once more to settle on
  your old homes at Atlanta.

                                     Yours in haste,
                                         “W. T. SHERMAN, Major-General.”




               HOOD’S CAMPAIGN IN ALABAMA AND TENNESSEE.


The capture of Atlanta occasioned, as well it might, a panic among the
rebel chieftains at Richmond. They saw, and saw clearly, that unless
Sherman could be defeated, their confederacy would be shorn of half its
territory and more than half its strength. In this emergency, Mr.
Jefferson Davis left the rebel capital, on a tour of inspection in
Georgia. In the course of this tour Mr. Davis exerted his well-known
talents as an orator, to fire once more the Southern heart and to
strengthen the Southern cause. His most important speech was delivered
at Macon, on the twenty-third of September. But the only effect of his
eloquence was to disclose the increasing weakness of the Confederacy.
Yet it must be admitted that the expedient, undoubtedly suggested by Mr.
Davis’s military experience and ability, which the rebels now adopted to
recover their lost ground, was extremely ingenious. They determined that
Hood’s army should move rapidly to the rear of Atlanta, cut off all
communications between that city and Chattanooga, subsequently isolate
the latter city from Nashville, and thus leave Sherman’s army, destitute
of supplies, in an enemy’s country, from which it would, necessarily, be
compelled to retire with all expedient haste.

The prosecution of this scheme was not long delayed. On the second of
October General Hood was across the Chattahoochee, leading his forces
toward Dallas. This was to be the point of rebel concentration. On the
fourth the rebels captured Ackworth and Big Shanty, and destroyed the
railroad between the two places. Then they advanced on Allatoona Pass,
which is five miles north of Big Shanty, and about thirty miles from
Atlanta. That position was one of great strength, and its possession was
most important to Sherman. Moreover, it was a storehouse of Federal
supplies. The rebels were aware of its value, and confident of its
capture. But in this instance they were not dealing with a blind foe.
General Sherman had already divined the entire plan of the rebel
campaign, and had taken measures, not only to frustrate the designs of
the foe, but to turn their temerity to his own advantage. The work of
interrupting National communication between Chattanooga and Nashville
had been committed to the rebel General Forrest. It was arranged that
General Thomas, operating before Nashville, should oppose this movement.
General Corse, who was at Rome, was directed to reinforce the garrison
of Allatoona Pass, and to hold it until the arrival of the main body of
the Union army. In obedience to this command General Corse immediately
threw in a force of nine hundred men, increasing the garrison to
seventeen hundred.

[Illustration: GENERAL HOSPITAL AT SAVANNAH, GA.]




                        BATTLE OF ALLATOONA, GA.


On the morning of October 5th, the rebels, seven thousand strong, and
led by General French, attacked Allatoona. A stubborn fight ensued,
lasting about six hours. General Sherman, pushing on from Atlanta,
reached Kenesaw Mountain while the battle was in progress. The National
troops holding Allatoona, though largely outnumbered, fought with the
greatest desperation, and successfully maintained their position, until,
on the approach of reinforcements, the rebels fell back, entirely
discomfited. Their loss in this spirited engagement was upwards of one
thousand men, killed, wounded and prisoners. The Union loss was about
five hundred.


                        THE GREAT REBEL BLUNDER.

General Sherman occupied the Pass, after the battle, and from that point
kept watch upon Hood, secretly hoping—while pretending anxious
pursuit—that the rebel general would be lured away into Northern Alabama
and Tennessee. The sequel satisfied the hopes of the Union commander.
Passing by Rome and Kingston, the rebels moved north, and next
threatened Resaca, which was held by Colonel Weaver, with a garrison of
six hundred men. Colonel Weaver’s reply, on being summoned to surrender,
is memorable: “In my opinion,” he said, “I can hold the fort. If you
want it, come and take it.” But Hood was burning with bolder designs,
and the determined little garrison of Resaca was passed by unmolested.

On the fourteenth of October, General Sherman’s forces arrived there,
slowly pursuing Hood. On the same day Hood captured Dalton, continuing
there the work of destruction which had marked his entire advance.
Thence, closely pushed by Sherman, he passed, by way of Lafayette, into
Alabama, halting at last at Gadsdens, on the Coosa river, seventy-five
miles from the latter city. But the halt lasted only for a few days.

Early in November, having received reinforcements from Beauregard—then
at Charleston—Hood resumed his march, and entered Tennessee. The
pursuing army of Sherman was now at Gaylesville; and here the pursuit
ceased. The enemy had fallen into the snare, and it only now remained
for the invincible General Thomas to deal him his deathblow. That blow
was struck, within a very brief period of time, at Nashville. It will be
proper, however, before describing those memorable battles, to recount
the more immediate movements of General Sherman, and the destruction of
Atlanta.


                PREPARATIONS FOR SHERMAN’S GRAND MARCH.

General Thomas, at the head of a considerable body of Union troops, was
at this time in readiness to confront the advancing rebels south of
Nashville. On hearing that Hood had started to invade Tennessee, General
Sherman immediately withdrew his army to Rome, and sent forward two
corps, the Fourth and the Twenty-third, one commanded by General
Stanley, the other by General Schofield, to reinforce Thomas. These
troops went by way of Chattanooga, and safely reached their destination.
General Sherman’s remaining force consisted of five corps—the
Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth, Seventeenth and Twentieth—the latter
constituting the garrison of Atlanta. With this force, subsequently
condensed into four corps, and amply sufficient for the purpose, he was
prepared for his great march across the rebel territory, from Atlanta to
the sea. Full details of the plan had been given to General Thomas, who,
on his part, felt confident of being able to dispose of Hood.

To cut off all communication between Atlanta and Chattanooga, to destroy
every possible facility of transportation in that vicinity, which an
enemy might chance to find serviceable, and lastly, to render Atlanta
itself entirely useless, were now imperative incidents of Sherman’s
campaign. This work was accomplished within the first twelve days of the
month of November. In the course of that time, all the wounded and the
sick, together with all prisoners, stores and machinery, and surplus
artillery that had accumulated at Rome, Atlanta, and other neighboring
places were conveyed by railroad to Chattanooga. The road was then
destroyed. The hand of destruction was also laid, though lightly, upon
Rome, everything being demolished in that city which might chance to
become useful to the rebels in future. A contemporary correspondent
gives the following account of




                        THE BURNING OF ROME, GA.
                           NOVEMBER 11, 1864.


“Rome was evacuated at ten o’clock this forenoon by our (U. S.) forces;
but not until the Etowah House, a respectable three-story brick hotel
was consumed by fire. Stragglers managed to ignite a lot of straw in the
building, and, there being no engines in the town, it was impossible to
subdue the flames. A block of fine brick stores was also wantonly
destroyed by skulking stragglers. All the barracks were laid in ashes,
and a black veil of dark smoke hung over the war-desolated city all day,
arising from the smouldering ruins. Owing to the great lack of railroad
transportation, General Corse was obliged to destroy nearly a million of
dollars’ worth of property, among which was a few thousand dollars’
worth of condemned and unserviceable government stores. Nine rebel guns,
captured at Rome by our troops, were burst, it being deemed unsafe to
use them. One thousand bales of fine cotton, two flour mills, two
rolling mills, two tanneries, one salt mill, an extensive foundry,
several machine shops, together with the railroad depots and
storehouses, four pontoon bridges, built by General Corse’s pioneer
corps, for use on the Coosa and Etowah rivers, and a substantial trestle
bridge nearly completed for use, were completely destroyed. This
trestle, constructed by the engineer corps, I am told, would have cost
fifty thousand dollars north. Recollecting the outrages perpetrated upon
Colonel Streight by the ‘Romans,’ our troops, as soon as they learned
that the town was to be abandoned, and a portion of it burned, resolved
to lay Rome in ashes in revenge. The roaring of the flames, as they
leaped from window to window, their savage tongues of fire darting high
up into the heavens, and then licking the sides of the buildings,
presented an awful but grand spectacle, while then mounted patrol and
the infantry men glided along through the brilliant light, like the
ghostly spectres of horrid war.”




                      THE DESTRUCTION OF ATLANTA.
                            NOVEMBER, 1864.


Atlanta, popularly called the Gate City, is situated seven miles
southeast of the Chattahoochie river, and on the line of railroads
leading from Savannah to Chattanooga and Nashville, and to Macon,
Augusta, Milledgeville, Savannah, and Charleston, in the southeast
direction. It is one hundred and one miles from Macon, one hundred and
seventy-one miles from Augusta, three hundred and seven miles from
Charleston, and two hundred and ninety-two miles from Savannah. Four of
the principal railroads of the State terminate at this point. The
Georgia railroad extends from Atlanta to Augusta; the Western railroad
to Macon; the Atlantic and Western railroad to Chattanooga; and the
Lagrange railroad to West Point, seventy-two miles distant. Atlanta was
laid out in 1845, and has grown with great rapidity, its population
being, in 1850, two thousand five hundred and seventy; in 1853, four
thousand two hundred and eighty; and in 1860, nine thousand eight
hundred and seventy.

Its destruction by General Sherman has sometimes been condemned as an
act of vandalism, whereas it was—as subsequent events sufficiently
demonstrated—a timely and unavoidable military act, dictated by the most
imperative prudential reasons.

The following narrative of the burning of Atlanta is furnished by an
eye-witness:

“Atlanta was of strategic value only so long as it remained a great
railroad centre; it had now no longer any value to our troops, as every
railroad leading to it was destroyed—the railways gutted, torn up, and
the very iron of which they were composed, put beyond use. For miles the
country round about it had been made a complete waste, so that there was
no possibility of the rebels again occupying it. But had we remained
there all winter, Hood and the rebel cavalry would also have remained
hanging about the place, and whenever opportunity offered, harassing our
men, though they would have, at any time, fled before our army. The
ever-active mind of General Sherman scorned such petty warfare; he
therefore determined to render the city itself as unfit for rebel
habitation as he had already rendered the country around it unfit for
the movements of an army.

“In the month of November, the once proud Atlanta—the beautiful Gate
City, was laid in ashes. A harrowing scene of confusion and fright was
presented when the city was first set in flames. Those of the citizens
who had not left with the first exodus, were now afraid of being
abandoned to the tender mercy of the rebels. The depot presented a scene
of confusion and suffering impossible to describe. Women and children
were huddled together, with the sole remaining wealth they possessed in
the world clutched closely to their bosoms. The cry of young infants
rose upon the air, and mingled dismally with the roar and crackle of the
flames not a hundred yards distant—flames which licked up it their
devouring fury the last remaining property of hundreds, and gave in
return only a thick, but sickening smoke, and a blood-red glare
streaming up against the clear sky. From house to house the destroying
element sped, thrusting out forked tongues of fire in a thousand
different directions—from street to street the dread demon of flame
trailed his hideous and scorching length along, leaving in his wake
desolate, grimy, smoking ruin. Men who were millionaires but a few
months before, fled from their homes and the scene of their wealth,
roofless in the wide world, and without a dollar in their pockets. On,
on, on, always onward, till nothing more remained, spread the
fire-fiend, with still increasing appetite for plunder, till every
factory, railroad depot, hotel, mill, government buildings of all
descriptions—everything, in short, save a few churches and some private
dwellings, were reduced to blackened, ghastly, horrible ruin.

“The Tyre of southern trade was laid level with the dust; her grace,
splendor, wealth and beauty, were things of the past, and the mere
charred skeleton of Atlanta alone remained, to prove that ever she had
been—to prove, also, one more dreadful monument of the waste and
desolation that must ever follow in the footsteps of rebellion.”




                     THE BATTLE OF FRANKLIN, TENN.
                           NOVEMBER 30, 1864.


Our narrative left the rebel army under General Hood—whose movements
were now superintended by the redoubtable Beauregard—advancing into the
State of Tennessee, in the early part of the month of November. His
design was to defeat the Union forces under General Thomas, and capture
the city of Nashville. On the twenty-third of November his army took
Pulaski, and on the twentieth, after a little skirmishing, entered
Columbia. All this while, as the rebels advanced, the National troops
retired; but, on the thirtieth, when the forces of Hood appeared before
the town of Franklin, where the Federal troops were fortified, General
Schofield felt it to be necessary to make a stand. The original plan had
been, to lure the rebels nearer to Nashville, and fight the final battle
there, with the aid of heavy reinforcements that were expected to arrive
at that point. But the foe pressed on somewhat too precipitately, and it
became necessary to check his advance. The National force here, under
General Schofield’s command, numbered fifteen thousand men. The right
wing was commanded by General Stanley, the left by General Cox.

At about half-past three, in the afternoon of the twentieth, the assault
was commenced by the rebels. Cheatham’s corps was on the right,
Stewart’s on the left, and S. D. Lee’s in reserve, on the centre.

Cheatham threw his whole corps on Wagner’s division with great
impetuosity, and after an hour’s desperate fighting pushed Wagner back
on the second Union line, where Wagner’s men became mingled with those
of Cox and Huger, on the left and centre.

The rebels, encouraged by their success in driving back Wagner, with
loud cheers advanced on the second line. Their order of advance was very
peculiar—a semicircle of two regiments deep, extending all around the
lines, and behind each alternate regiment was placed four others, so
that the assaulting columns were six regiments deep.

General Hood appeared about four o’clock P. M. at the head of his
command, and, pointing towards the Federal lines, said:—“Break those
lines, boys, and you have finished the war in Tennessee. Break them, and
there is nothing to oppose your march from Nashville to the Ohio river.”

Loud and ringing cheers answered the words of the rebel leader, and the
whole space in front of the National troops was crowded with the
advancing enemy.

Captain Lyman, commanding an artillery brigade in the Fourth corps, had
placed his batteries in most favorable positions, and from these storms
of shot and shell were hurled into the charging rebel ranks.

With the most reckless bravery the rebels rushed on. When within a few
hundred yards of the National works, the Unionists opened upon them a
terrible fire of musketry. It seemed impossible for anything to live
before it. But no wavering was perceived in the advancing rebel lines.
On they came, to the very parapets of the Unionists’ works, and stuck
their bayonets under the logs on the opposing battlements.

On the Columbus pike the pressure was so great that some of Cox’s and
Wagner’s men temporarily gave way.

Up to this time the brigade commanded by Colonel Opdyke, of the One
Hundred and Twenty-fifth Ohio, had been held in reserve; and now Colonel
Opdyke, by orders of General Stanley, came forward, with his brigade, to
restore the broken line.

The rebels, who had crawled over the works, had not time to retire, and
Cox’s and Wagner’s men, who had broken away but a moment before, rallied
and attacked the enemy on the flank, while Opdyke charged on the front.
A desperate hand to hand fight ensued with bayonets and the butt ends of
muskets. A hundred rebels were captured here, and the line was restored.
For two hours and a half the battle now raged all along the lines. The
men of the Fourth and Twenty-third corps vied with each other in
bravery. Riley’s brigade, of the Twenty-third corps, fairly covered the
ground in front of it with rebel dead. The rebel General Adams was
killed. He and his horse fell into the ditch in front of the One Hundred
and Fourth Ohio. Seventeen distinct attacks of the enemy were repelled.

At dusk the rebels were repulsed at all points, but the firing did not
cease until nine o’clock at night.

At least five thousand rebels were killed, wounded and captured. The
National loss was about fifteen hundred.

General Schofield directed the battle from the fort on the north bank of
the stream, where some heavy guns and the batteries of the Twenty-third
corps were placed, which did great service in damaging the enemy’s right
wing.

The following dispatch from General Schofield apprised General Thomas of
the leading facts of this battle:


                                        “FRANKLIN, TENN., NOV. 30, 1864.

  “Major-General THOMAS:—

  “The enemy made a heavy and persistent attack with two corps,
  commencing at four P. M. and lasting till after dark. He was
  repulsed at all points with heavy loss—probably five or six thousand
  men. Our loss is probably not more than one-fourth of that number.
  We have captured about one thousand prisoners, including one
  brigadier-general.

                                     “JOHN M. SCHOFIELD, Major-General.”


General Stanley greatly distinguished himself by his personal
intrepidity in this battle. When a part of his command had retired
before the charge of the rebels, he rushed to the front, had a horse
shot under him, and was himself wounded; yet he led on the charge,
waving his hat in the air and calling on his men to follow. By this
means he succeeded in rallying his faltering troops, and repelling seven
successive charges made by the rebels. Colonel Schofield, a brother of
General Schofield, and his chief of artillery, won great credit for his
admirable management of the guns.

The result of the battle of Franklin was to stay the advance of Hood,
and enable General Thomas to complete his preparations for the last and
decisive struggle. During the night of the thirtieth, General
Schofield’s forces fell back on Nashville. The rebels followed, next
day, and cautiously reconnoitered the Union lines; but, deeming it
unsafe to assault, they determined to beleaguer the city. Thus began the
siege of Nashville. It lasted two weeks. At the end of that time General
Thomas, having received his reinforcements and completed his
preparations, sallied out and fought the decisive battle of Nashville.




                     THE BATTLE OF NASHVILLE, TENN.
                         DECEMBER 15–17, 1864.


On the evening of the 14th of December, a council of war was held at the
St. Cloud Hotel, in Nashville, at which the plan of the battle was thus
arranged:

The artillery from the forts and advanced batteries to open all along
the line. Major-General Steadman, who commanded on the extreme left, was
to make a heavy demonstration, so as to attract the enemy’s attention to
that point. Schofield, who connected with Steadman’s right, was to hold
himself in readiness to move if necessary. Wood’s corps, the Fourth, was
to move on the Hillsboro’ pike, keeping up a connection with A. J.
Smith’s, and pierce the centre, while A. J. Smith was to attack the
extreme left. Hatch’s division of cavalry connected with Smith’s right.
Some of Major-General Wilson’s cavalry had wheeled on the enemy’s rear,
towards Brentwood, so as to cut off the rebel retreat.


                          FIRST DAY’S BATTLE.

The booming of guns from Forts Negley and Cassino and several batteries
awakened the inhabitants of Nashville, on the morning of November 15th,
to the terrible reality that a battle was raging outside their city.
There was great anxiety and hurrying to and fro, for the fate of
thousands hung upon the issue. Defeat would be ruin, for it meant the
fall of Nashville. Thomas knew this, and therefore decided on attacking
Hood before he had time to fortify his new position. At early dawn
Steadman’s troops were in motion. The First and Second brigades—colored
troops, commanded by Colonels Thompson and Morgan—took up position to
the right and left of the Chattanooga line. These were supported by an
Indiana battery. Colonel Grosvenor, commanding a brigade formed of
detachments of the Fourteenth corps, took up a position on their left.
The colored troops drove back the enemy’s skirmishers to their main
lines, but wavered under the assault. Grosvenor’s brigade charged,
taking the advance line of works; but, as it was not Thomas’s intention
to bring on a general engagement at this point, General Steadman ordered
them to fall back to their original position, still keeping up a brisk
skirmish fire.

About six o’clock in the morning the Fourth corps broke camp, moving on
the Hillsboro’ pike in the following order, _en echelon_ on the left;
the Second division in front, the First division next, and the Third
division in the rear. The corps moved forward, regulating its movements
by those of General Smith, who was to attack the rebel left flank, it
being intended to make the main assault on this part of the rebel line.
The Fourth corps took up the following position. General Samuel Beatty,
commanding the Third division, on the left, held the front line, the
division of General Nathan Kimball in the centre, came second, and the
division of General Elliot, in the rear, connecting with Garrard’s
division, of Smith’s corps; then came McArthur’s division.

There was heavy cannonading all the morning. About noon Smith’s and
Wood’s skirmishers became engaged. General Wood ordered General Beatty
to charge a hill in his front, held by a strong force of the enemy,
heavily intrenched. The Second brigade of Beatty’s division, commanded
by Colonel Post, was ordered to make the charge. The First brigade,
Colonel Straight, moved _en echelon_ on the left, and in support, while
the Third brigade of Colonel Kneppler (Seventy-ninth Ohio) was held in
reserve. The order was no sooner given for the charge than the Second
brigade rushed forward with a yell. The First brigade supported it by a
spirited fire, and on the order to charge being given, sprang forward in
a spirit of emulation. The rebels occupied a strong position around
Montgomery’s house, near the Granny White pike, which now became the
central point of the battle. The defence of the rebels at this point was
of the most stubborn character. The Unionists fired volley upon volley,
charged them repeatedly, and at last drove them in great confusion
through the grounds of the mansion. Though ordered to halt on dislodging
the rebels from this position, the National troops charged on them as
they fled, capturing over two hundred, and securing their entire line of
works in front of Wood. In the mean time the First and Second divisions
were sharply engaged, pressing back the rebels, and advancing slowly.
The batteries were moved forward to the hills abandoned by the rebels,
and the fight was carried on heavily all the while by Smith’s corps.
About two o’clock General Schofield, who had been in the rear of the
Fourth corps, took up a position on the right of Smith, thus extending
the Union line without weakening it, and soon became engaged. The roar
of artillery and musketry continued fierce along the whole line.

About three o’clock Post’s and Straight’s brigades, abandoning their
_echelon_ formation, formed in line with the First brigade of Beatty’s
division and the Second division of Wood’s corps, and the whole line
again advanced, protected by a fierce artillery fire from Battery H,
Fifth regular, the Second Pennsylvania, the First Illinois, the Fourth
regular, First and Sixth Ohio batteries. The advance of this line was
magnificent, the columns extending in one long line of battle, marching
steadily and strongly forward over a clear plateau and driving the enemy
before it, Post and Straight moving in simple line of battle, with
Kimball’s and Ellicott’s divisions, in column of brigade front. Smith
and Schofield continued to press back the rebel left flank to the hills
in rear of their first position. Garrard’s and McArthur’s divisions
captured the rebel works, and succeeded in turning their left flank and
driving them from hill to hill. The line of the Fourth corps for a
moment halted and laid down to allow batteries to rake the rebel line.
The fire grew nearer and nearer on the right. Soon the rebel lines and
columns were seen to be breaking up in mad panic and confusion. A wild
cheer ran along the lines. The Fourth corps rose and again advanced at a
double quick. The batteries poured shot and shell on the panic-stricken
fugitives. So wild was the enthusiasm that civilians rushed to the
batteries to help the gunners. Union columns now appeared on the right
and connected with the centre, thus forming a V out of their lines.

A deafening cheer went up when Smith’s and Schofield’s columns emerged
with flaunting flags, the rebels flying in confusion before them. A
gallant charge followed the wild cheering, and accompanied by the roar
of artillery, the enemy was pressed back on the centre in confusion, and
only night ended the pursuit.


                          SECOND DAY’S BATTLE.

During the night of the 15th, Hood withdrew both his wings from the
river, contracted his lines everywhere, and, on the morning of the 16th,
was holding a strong position along Granny White Hills, with his centre
protected by two lines of intrenchments.

The Union troops were disposed in the following order:—Wilson’s cavalry
was on the extreme right. Schofield’s Twenty-third corps, consisting of
Couch’s and Cox’s divisions, was at first held in reserve, but before
the main battle opened it had to take a position on the left of the
cavalry, thus forming the right of the infantry line. A. J. Smith’s
Sixteenth corps, consisting of the divisions of McArthur, Garrard and
Moore, came next on the left of Schofield. On the left of Smith, the
magnificent Fourth corps, General T. J. Wood commanding, comprising the
divisions of Kimball, Elliott, and Beatty, was formed in close order of
battle; and, partially massed, Steadman, with Croft’s division and two
brigades of colored troops, held the left. The Union plan of battle was
to press the advantage gained on the enemy’s left. At about half-past
eight o’clock a hundred pieces opened fire simultaneously along the
Union line. The rebel artillery replied feebly. Schofield, marching down
Granny White pike, carefully concealing his strength, placed his corps
directly upon the enemy’s left flank. Steadman at the same time worked
his force forward. The enemy in the mean time strengthened his advance
line. It was determined to carry this line without delay. Kimball’s
First division moved forward to the charge, firing volley after volley,
but still steadily pressing on until within half a pistol shot, when the
enemy’s fire became so deadly that the patriots, in order to return it
more effectually, came to the “halt.” They remained here, perhaps,
longer than any troops ever remained in such a position. They stood and
fired fast and furious at the enemy, but they could not remain and live.
A few gave way and fled in disorder, and the whole line staggered. Had
the rebels done nothing more than keep up their deadly fire, the
Federals would have been driven back; but the enemy shifted their
artillery, which was received as an indication that they were about to
abandon their lines and retire. Raising a loud shout, the division, with
fixed bayonets, rushed impetuously forward, and swarming over the works
captured such rebels as had not fled, and all the guns except two.

As soon as this preliminary success was achieved, General Thomas, who
was seen during the day in the very front of the line of battle, ordered
a charge along the entire line.

Schofield moved upon the left flank of the enemy, and before his
veterans the rebel lines gave way like frostwork.

The assailed flank crumbled to pieces as Schofield advanced, and rolled
back upon that portion of the line which was just then attacked by A. J.
Smith’s troops with a weight and energy nothing could withstand.
McMillan’s brigade, foremost in the battle, as on the previous day,
rushed right up in the face of three powerful rebel batteries, and
carried at the point of the bayonet the salient point of the enemy’s
works. In a few moments their works were everywhere overwhelmed, their
forces utterly routed, their soldiers captured by thousands, and every
piece of their artillery taken.

Such as escaped death or capture fled towards Franklin pike, to a refuge
behind A. D. Lee’s corps, which held the gap in the hills.

Wood and Steadman had now united on the left, and prepared to assault
the rebel right, which was still unbroken. Under cover of a tremendous
fire from the national guns, Colonel Post’s brigade moved forward.
Straight’s brigade, of Beatty’s division, formed on his right. In
support, immediately on Post’s left, Thomas’ colored brigade was drawn
up, and Morgan’s colored brigade was next on the left.

The enemy reserved his fire until Post’s brigade commenced climbing the
hill, when a perfect hurricane of shot, shell and canister tore through
his ranks. In the face of this fire the men steadily advanced.

Thompson’s men, in endeavoring to pass around to the left, met a
terrible flank fire, which confused their ranks. The troops on the
right, torn in pieces by the fire, paused an instant, and at this
juncture the brave Colonel Post was mortally wounded. In a moment all
order was lost, and the men, whose conduct had ennobled them, rushed
back, confused and scattering, to the line from which they started. Wood
soon reformed his broken battalions and issued orders for the renewal of
the assault, while Post’s veterans again assailed the hill directly, and
Thompson’s Africans moved on the rebel right. Elliott’s and Kimball’s
divisions were hurled like a thunderbolt against the rebel left. Wood
himself, accompanied by all his staff, followed and directed the charge.
The rebel force blazed forth anew, and the patriots, without hesitation
or panic, carried the entire works with all their guns, and drove the
rebels in dismay from the hill. This was the last stand that the rebels
made, and their whole army was now fleeing in rout and panic. The
results of the battle were five thousand prisoners, thirty guns, and
seven thousand small arms.


                          THIRD DAY.—PURSUIT.

During the night of the 16th, Hood’s army duly improved the opportunity
of retreat, falling back in the direction whence they had advanced. At
eight o’clock, on the morning of the 17th, the pursuit was commenced,
the fighting, of course, being chiefly done by the cavalry, and was
continued beyond Franklin. Many prisoners were captured. The pursuit
thus commenced went on from day to day, till before the close of the
year, the rebels had been fairly chased out of Tennessee. The loss of
the enemy, in prisoners, at the battle of Nashville, was thirteen
thousand one hundred and eighty-nine, including numerous officers of
various grades, and seventy-two pieces of artillery. The National loss
was about ten thousand. Hood retreated into Alabama.




            CONTINUATION OF THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON IN 1864.


The siege of Charleston was prosecuted with intermittent activity,
during many months of this year. On the third of January, the besiegers
threw a large number of shells into the city, loaded with Greek fire.
This is one of the most dangerous and deadly agencies of war, and its
use, on this occasion, has been condemned, as barbarous. But, as said by
General Sherman, “war is cruelty, and you cannot refine it.” A
conflagration of considerable violence and extent, was the result of
this bombardment. Its scene was the southern part of the city. The
shelling was continued at intervals, for several weeks. On the sixteenth
of January the Union headquarters were removed from Folly Island to
Hilton Head, General A. H. Terry being left in command at the former
place. Port Royal was all along held as the basis of military operations
on the coast of the State. From this time forward no event of magnitude
occurred in the vicinity of Charleston. The guns and mortars of the
Union rained on it, now and then, from Morris Island, and from the
blockading gunboats, and the rebels responded with occasional shells.
The harbor had been filled with insurmountable obstacles, and the city
was well fortified and bravely defended. Looked at in the light of
succeeding events, it would almost seem as if the capture of Charleston,
at this time, were not especially desired by the United States
Government. But, however that might have been, the city held out against
such assaults as were made, and was only abandoned at last, on the
approach of General Sherman from Savannah, after his great march from
Atlanta, which will be presently described. The Secession State
Government of South Carolina held control of the greater part of the
State throughout the year.




           OPERATIONS IN MIDDLE AND WESTERN VIRGINIA IN 1864.


At the opening of the campaign for this year, a force of thirty-one
thousand men, under command of Major-General Sigel, was held for the
protection of West Virginia, and the frontiers of Maryland and
Pennsylvania. While these troops could not be withdrawn to distant
fields without exposing the North to invasion by comparatively small
bodies of the enemy, they could act directly to their front and thus
give better protection than if lying idle in garrison. By such movements
they could compel the enemy to detach largely for the protection of his
supplies and lines of communication.

General Sigel was directed by General Grant to organize all his
available force into two expeditions, to move from Beverly and
Charleston, under command of Generals Ord and Crook, against the East
Tennessee and Virginia railroad. Subsequently, General Ord having been
relieved at his own request, General Sigel was instructed to give up the
expedition by Beverly and to form two columns, one under General Crook,
on the Kanawha, numbering about ten thousand men, and one on the
Shenandoah, numbering about seven thousand men. The one on the
Shenandoah to assemble between Cumberland and the Shenandoah, and the
infantry and artillery to advance to Cedar creek with such cavalry as
could be made available at that moment, to threaten the enemy in the
Shenandoah valley, and advance as far as possible; while General Crook
would take possession of Lewisburg with part of his force and move down
the Tennessee railroad, doing as much damage as he could, destroying the
New river bridge and the salt-works at Saltville, Va.

These movements of the Kanawha and Shenandoah valleys, under General
Sigel, commenced on the 1st of May. General Crook, who had the immediate
command of the Kanawha expedition, divided his forces into two columns,
giving one, composed of cavalry, to General Averill. They crossed the
mountains by separate routes. General Averill’s force comprised two
thousand cavalry. He started on the 1st of May, with three days’ rations
and two days’ forage, and moved day and night over mountain paths until
the evening of the 8th, when a cavalry force of the enemy was
encountered near Jeffersonville, Va. After a slight engagement with the
enemy, General Averill made a detour by way of Princeton. On the 9th he
left Tazewell Court House for Wytheville, in order to cut the railroad
thirty miles lower down than the point where General Crook’s command was
to strike. Averill reached Cove Mountain Gap, near Wytheville, on the
10th, where he learned that the enemy were then in possession of the
latter place. A conflict ensued, in which General Averill sustained a
heavy loss and was prevented from forming a junction with General Crook
at Dublin Station, as first proposed. He however accomplished the main
object of his expedition, and proceeding to New river and
Christiansburg, he destroyed the railroad, several important bridges and
depots, including New river bridge, and formed a junction with Crook at
Union on the 15th.

The rebel General Morgan commanded the troops encountered by General
Averill. General Morgan had made a forced march from Saltville, on
learning of Averill’s expedition, and arrived at Wytheville in advance
of the latter commander, and thus saved that town and its valuable lead
mines from destruction.

The division under General Crook, which started from Charleston
simultaneously with General Averill’s command, consisted of the
Twenty-third, Thirty-fourth, and Thirty-sixth Ohio, forming the first
brigade; the Twelfth and Ninety-first Ohio, Ninth and Fourteenth
Virginia, forming the second brigade; the third and Fourth Pennsylvania
Reserves, Eleventh and Fifteenth Virginia, forming the third brigade.

General Crook’s first object was to strike the Virginia and Tennessee
railroad at Dublin Station, where, forming a junction with Averill, he
hoped to be able to march to Lynchburg, and capture that important town,
the possession of which was vital to the sustenance of Lee’s army. He
proceeded without opposition nearly to Princeton, where two companies of
the enemy, one of cavalry and one of infantry, were encountered and
driven off. Near the southwestern base of Lloyd’s Mountain, about four
miles from Dublin depot, a more considerable force of the enemy was
found. These were under the command of General Jenkins. In the
engagement which ensued, that officer was killed, and the command of the
rebel forces was then assumed by General McCausland. After some
skirmishing, the enemy were attacked in front and flank and driven
through Dublin to New river bridge. The Federal loss was one hundred and
twenty-six killed, and five hundred and eighty-five wounded; and that of
the enemy was severe, but unknown. On the next day an attack was made on
the enemy’s position near the bridge, which was destroyed. The
expedition proceeded as far as Newberne, on the Virginia and Tennessee
railroad, ninety-nine miles from Bristol, destroying the railroad for
some distance. The resistance of the enemy, with the approach of a
strong force under General Morgan, caused General Crook to withdraw to
Meadow Bluff, in Greenbrier county.

General Sigel, with fifteen thousand men, moved up the Shenandoah valley
to New Market, about fifty miles from Winchester. This movement, like
that of the Kanawha valley, was designed to occupy Gordonsville and
Lynchburg, thus destroying the western communication of Lee’s army.

The Confederate authorities were early apprised of General Sigel’s
movements, and General Breckinridge was dispatched in great haste with
all the troops he could muster, to meet Sigel’s army.

The advance forces of the two armies encountered each other on the 13th
of May, and skirmishing ensued, which continued throughout the following
day, Saturday, and also on Sunday. General Sigel had not yet been able
to bring up all his force, but took position at three P. M., on the
15th, when the enemy immediately moved to the attack. A severe
engagement now ensued, which resulted in the defeat and discomfiture of
Sigel’s army, who fell back in great disorder, abandoning his hospitals
and destroying a portion of his train, and retreated to Cedar Creek,
near Strasburg. The Federals lost seven hundred men, one thousand stand
of arms, and six pieces of artillery.

By the result of this movement the Union commander incurred the
displeasure of General Grant, who asked the removal of General Sigel
from command, which was done, and Major-General Hunter was appointed to
supersede him.

General Hunter’s instructions were embraced in the following dispatches
to Major-General H. W. Halleck, Chief of staff of the army:


                     “NEAR SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE, VA., May 20, 1864.

  “The enemy are evidently relying for supplies greatly on such as are
  brought over the branch road running through Staunton. On the whole,
  therefore, I think it would be better for General Hunter to move in
  that direction, and reach Staunton and Gordonsville or
  Charlottesville, if he does not meet too much opposition. If he can
  hold at bay a force equal to his own, he will be doing good service.

  “If Hunter can possibly get to Charlottesville and Lynchburg, he
  should do so, living on the country. The railroads and canal should be
  destroyed beyond possibility of repairs for weeks. Completing this, he
  could find his way back to his original base, or from about
  Gordonsville join this army.

                                       “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.

  “Major-General H. W. HALLECK.”




                        BATTLE OF PIEDMONT, VA.
                             JUNE 5, 1864.


General Hunter immediately took up the offensive, and moving up the
Shenandoah valley, met the enemy on the 5th of June at Piedmont, and
after a well-contested battle of ten hours, routed and defeated him,
capturing on the field of battle one thousand five hundred men, three
pieces of artillery, and three hundred stand of small arms.

On the 8th of the same month Hunter formed a junction with Crook and
Averill at Staunton, from which place he moved direct on Lynchburg, via
Lexington, which place he reached and invested on the 16th day of June.
Up to this time he was very successful, and but for the difficulty of
taking with him sufficient ordnance stores over so long a march, through
a hostile country, he would no doubt have captured that, to the enemy,
important point. The destruction of the enemy’s supplies and
manufactories was very great. To meet this movement under General
Hunter, General Lee sent a force, perhaps equal to a corps, a part of
which reached Lynchburg a short time before Hunter. After some
skirmishing on the 17th and 18th, General Hunter, owing to a want of
ammunition to give battle, retired from before the place. Unfortunately,
this want of ammunition left him no choice of route for his return but
by way of Kanawha. This lost to the country the use of his troops for
several weeks from the defence of the north; at a period, too, when they
were urgently needed.

Had General Hunter moved by way of Charlottesville, instead of
Lexington, as his instructions contemplated, he would have been in a
position to have covered the Shenandoah valley against the enemy, should
the force he met have seemed to endanger it. If it did not, he would
have been within easy distance of the James river canal, on the main
line of communication between Lynchburg and the force sent for its
defence. General Grant says: “I have never taken exception to the
operations of General Hunter and I am not now disposed to find fault
with him, for I have no doubt he acted within what he conceived to be
the spirit of his instructions and the interest of the service. The
promptitude of his movements and his gallantry should entitle him to the
commendation of his country.”

As soon as it was ascertained by the enemy that General Hunter was
retreating from Lynchburg by way of the Kanawha river, thus laying the
Shenandoah valley open for raids into Maryland and Pennsylvania, he
returned northward, and moved down that valley. When this movement of
the rebels was ascertained, General Hunter, who had reached the Kanawha
river, was directed to move his troops without delay, by river and
railroad, to Harper’s Ferry; but owing to the difficulty of navigation
by reason of low water and breaks in the railroad, great delay was
experienced in getting there. It became necessary, therefore, to find
other troops to check this movement of the enemy. For this purpose
General Grant detailed the Sixth corps, taken from the armies operating
against Richmond, to which was added the Nineteenth corps, then
fortunately beginning to arrive in Hampton Roads from the Gulf
department, under orders issued immediately after the result of the Red
river expedition had become known. The garrisons of Baltimore and
Washington were at this time made up of heavy artillery regiments,
hundred-days’ men, and detachments from the invalid corps. One division
under command of General Ricketts, of the Sixth corps, was sent to
Baltimore, and the remaining two divisions of the Sixth corps, under
General Wright, were subsequently sent to Washington.

On the 3d of July the enemy approached Martinsburg. General Sigel, who
was in command of the Federal forces there, retreated across the Potomac
at Shepardstown; and General Weber, commanding at Harper’s Ferry,
crossed the river and occupied Maryland heights. On the sixth, the enemy
occupied Hagerstown, moving a strong column towards Frederick city.
General Wallace, with Rickett’s division and his own command, the latter
mostly new and undisciplined troops, pushed out from Baltimore with
great promptness, and met the enemy in force on the Monocacy, near the
crossing of the railroad bridge. A spirited engagement took place, but
owing to the inferiority of General Wallace’s command in numbers and
discipline, he was unable to withstand the rebel army, and the Federal
arms suffered defeat. An important result was gained, however, for the
rebel army was checked in its onward march, and sufficient time gained
to enable General Wright, with two divisions of the Sixth corps, and the
advance of the Nineteenth corps to reach Washington, and guard the
national capital from the peril which was threatening it. General
Wallace was warmly commended by the commander-in-chief, for his courage
and promptness in meeting the enemy at that important crisis.

Great alarm was now manifested in Baltimore and Washington, which was
heightened by the daring and success of numerous raiding parties from
Early’s command, who spread themselves in all directions, carrying off
horses and cattle, and levying contributions from the inhabitants.
Darnestown, in Maryland, was visited by one party, and Brestown, sixteen
miles from Baltimore, by another. A third party swept round Baltimore,
inflicting damage on the Northern Central railroad, while a fourth
reached the Baltimore and Philadelphia railroad, stopped the train, and
robbed the passengers, capturing Major-General Franklin, who was a
traveller in citizen’s dress. The house of Governor Bradford, of
Maryland, within five miles of Washington, was burned by Early’s
soldiers.

From Monocacy, General Early, the Confederate chief, marched direct for
Washington, his cavalry advance reaching Rockville on the evening of the
10th. General Wright, who had now reached the outer defences of
Washington, was placed in command of all the forces that could be made
available to operate against the enemy in the field, and made
preparations to advance and meet Early, with the design of forcing him
to battle, or of pursuing him as far as prudence would warrant.

A reconnoissance was thrown out from Fort Stevens on the 12th of July,
and the enemy was soon discovered in force. A short but severe
engagement ensued in which only a small portion of the Union forces were
engaged; but the enemy were soon put to flight, and Early commenced a
retreat, vigorously pursued by the Federal troops. The Union loss in
this engagement was about two hundred and eighty in killed and wounded;
while the rebel loss was probably somewhat greater. On the 13th a
portion of Early’s forces were overtaken at Snicker’s Gap, where a sharp
skirmish occurred. On the 20th, another portion of the rebel army was
confronted at Winchester, by General Averill’s command, in which the
enemy was engaged and defeated, with the loss of several hundred
prisoners and four pieces of artillery.

The protracted absence of General Hunter’s corps on his unsuccessful
expedition to Lynchburg, encouraged the rebel forces in the valley to
attempt another raid into Maryland and Pennsylvania. The enemy moved
down the valley, and on the 30th of July, a raiding party burned
Chambersburg in Pennsylvania, and then retreated towards Cumberland,
pursued by the Federal cavalry. Near that point they were met and
defeated by General Kelly, and then, with diminished numbers, they made
their escape into the mountains of Western Virginia.

During the whole of these movements in the months of June and July, in
the department of Western Virginia, Washington, Susquehannah, and the
Middle Department, much confusion arose from the rebel forces invading
so many points where they were brought in conflict alternately with
different, and independent Federal commanders, who all received their
instructions and reported to the General-in-chief, or through General
Halleck at Washington. From the time of the first raid the telegraph
wires were frequently down between Washington and City Point, making it
necessary to transmit messages a part of the way by boat. It took from
twenty-four to thirty-six hours to get dispatches through and return
answers back; so that often orders would be given, and then information
would be received showing a different state of facts from those on which
they were based, causing a confusion and apparent contradiction of
orders that must have considerably embarrassed those who had to execute
them, and rendered operations against the enemy less effective than they
otherwise would have been. To remedy this evil, it was recommended by
General Grant that one general should be appointed to have supreme
command of all the forces actively engaged in the field in those
departments. On the 2d of August, General Grant ordered General Sheridan
to report in person to Major-General Halleck, chief-of-staff, at
Washington, with a view to his assignment to the command of all the
forces against Early.

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE GENERALS. GUST. W. SMITH. PILLOW. BOWEN.
MARSHALL. HAMPTON. EARL VAN DORN. STEWART. HANSON.]

At this time the enemy was concentrated in the neighborhood of
Winchester. General Hunter’s forces at that time were posted on the
Monocacy, at the crossing of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad. Before any
definite orders were given in relation to army movements, General Grant
paid a visit to General Hunter at his headquarters, and gave definite
written instructions for the coming campaign. General Hunter having
expressed a willingness to be relieved of command, General Sheridan was
telegraphed to join General Grant at Monocacy.

On the 7th of August the middle department and the departments of West
Virginia, Washington, and Susquehanna were constituted into the “Middle
military division,” and Major-General Sheridan was assigned to command
of the same.

Two divisions of cavalry, commanded by Generals Torbert and Wilson, were
sent to Sheridan from the Army of the Potomac. The first reached him at
Harper’s Ferry about the 11th of August.

General Sheridan was confronted by a rebel force of about twenty
thousand men. Although a much larger force than this was at his
disposal, yet the numerous points that lay exposed to the incursions of
the enemy prevented the Federal commander from concentrating his army
for offensive operations, and the movements of the campaign for the
first month were of a desultory character.

On the 11th of August a detachment of Federal cavalry encountered the
enemy a few miles beyond Winchester, and engaged him for two hours, with
a loss to the Unionists of thirty men. Some infantry supports coming up,
the contest was continued from eleven o’clock till two, when the rebels
were driven from their position, but not until they had inflicted severe
loss on the Federals. The enemy were followed the next day to Cedar
creek, a few miles from Strasburg, where, from a strong position, they
resisted the Union advance throughout the day, but retreated at
nightfall, when the Federals pursued, and entered Strasburg.

On the 15th, Colonel Mosby, the noted rebel guerrilla, made a foray
through Snicker’s Gap, and succeeded in capturing a Federal supply
train, which he carried off in safety, securing seventy-five wagons, two
hundred prisoners, six hundred horses, and two hundred beeves.

Not knowing the extent or character of the rebel forces in their rear,
the Federals became alarmed, and beat a hasty retreat to Winchester,
destroying many of their stores, which they were unable to remove in
their flight. Being closely followed by the rebels, the Unionists
continued their retreat to Harper’s Ferry, fearful that Longstreet’s
army had reinforced Early.

On the 21st of August, General Sheridan had posted his army on an
important eminence called Summit Point, two miles out from Charlestown,
where he was attacked by General Early on that day, the fight lasting
from ten o’clock till dark, when the Federals were defeated, losing
three hundred men. They were compelled to retreat to Bolivar Heights.

During all this time, General Sheridan was restrained from inaugurating
any decisive movement against the enemy, owing to the important points
which it was necessary for him to cover, and which would be jeopardized,
should any serious misfortune befall his army. At a conference held on
the 15th of September, at Charleston, between Generals Grant and
Sheridan, it was determined that an immediate advance should be made on
the enemy. General Sheridan, always noted for the celerity of his
movements, took the field in less time than General Grant thought it
possible for him to be in readiness, and at 3 o’clock on Monday, the
18th, the troops marched to meet the foe.




                      BATTLE OF OPEQUAN CREEK, VA.
                          SEPTEMBER 19, 1864.


The rebel army was intrenched from the Opequan Creek to Winchester, in
the vicinity of Bunker Hill. The Federal troops advanced rapidly up the
valley through a narrow defile, designing to deploy beyond the gorge
before attacking the rebels, who were stationed in force in a ravine
whose sides were thickly wooded and steep, and bordered on the south by
a ridge of high hills. Early’s plan was to allow a portion of the
Unionists to pass along the ravine, and then attack before the remainder
could march through the narrow defile and take part in the conflict.

At ten o’clock in the morning, the Sixth corps emerged through the
ravine, and filing to the left in two columns, occupied some rifle-pits
and a wood on the enemy’s right, without opposition. A portion of the
Nineteenth corps and Rickett’s division now advanced and occupied the
centre, where they met a most determined resistance from the enemy, but
maintained their position against several furious charges of the rebels,
in which severe loss was suffered on both sides. Grover’s division
passed through the defile at eleven o’clock, and pressing immediately
into action, afforded welcome assistance to their exhausted
comrades-in-arms. An immense body of the rebels, hitherto lying
concealed, now advanced with loud shouts against the Union columns, and
for a time there was great danger that Sheridan would suffer defeat
before he could bring the whole of his force into action. The rebel
columns bore down on Grover and Ricketts, and poured volley after volley
into their unflinching ranks, until finally Rickett’s division wavered,
and was driven back along the Berryville and Winchester road towards the
mouth of the gorge. Many regiments for the time lost their organization,
and Early’s stern veterans pursued vigorously their advantage, already
confident of the overthrow of the Federal forces. The patriot commanders
exerted themselves to the utmost to stay the retreat of the
panic-stricken troops. A section of the First Maine battery availed
itself of a favorable position, and finally General Grover, assisted by
his officers and others of Emery’s command succeeded in opposing an
unbroken front to the advancing Confederates, and very soon the First
division of the Nineteenth corps, emerged from the defile, and again the
entire army was rallied and valorously contesting the field with their
opponents.

The undulating nature of the ground, and the dense woods which
obstructed the view on all sides, shut out the scene of conflict from
all the participants, who could only take cognizance of what was
transpiring in their immediate vicinity, and remained in ignorance of
the destiny of the battle in other portions of the field. It was a wild,
chaotic scene. The battle was now raging with the greatest fury, and was
urged with great desperation by both parties.

One regiment, the One Hundred and Fourteenth New York, suffered a loss
of one hundred and eighty-eight men in killed and wounded, more than
half their effective force brought into the field. The battle raged over
many miles of rugged country—of steep hills and stony ravines, dense
groves and tall grass.

Crook’s division executed a brilliant flank movement about three o’clock
in the afternoon, from the extreme right of the Federal lines, for which
the enemy seemed to be fully prepared. The battle at that point was for
a time of the most desperate character; and the prolonged and heavy
firing from that quarter, which appeared to deaden the noise from the
many lesser points of attack and defence, excited much anxiety in the
minds of all for the issue. But the gallant charge of Crook’s troops
upon the very stronghold of the enemy, became the signal for the advance
of the whole Federal line; and an impetuous charge now took place, which
the rebels found it impossible to resist, and they were soon routed with
great slaughter, and driven back into the woods.

The Federal cavalry now came forward, and dashing upon Early’s
disordered regiments, scattered them wildly in all directions, and drove
in their prisoners in large numbers. The Federals captured five thousand
prisoners, five cannon, and six thousand small arms. The entire rebel
loss must have exceeded seven thousand men.




                      BATTLE OF FISHER’S HILL, VA.
                          SEPTEMBER 21, 1864.


Though badly defeated, the strength of General Early’s army was not
broken. He retreated up the valley beyond Strasburg, and on the
succeeding day, the Federal advance found the rebels confronting them on
a strong position known as Fisher’s Hill. After a thorough
reconnoissance General Sheridan at once determined to attack the enemy
in his intrenchments.

Early’s forces lay on the north fork of the Shenandoah river, with his
left on North Mountain, his line extending across the Strasburg Valley.

The attack was made by Sheridan on the 21st of September, and the combat
lasted with varying success until evening, when the Confederates were
driven from their intrenchments in great confusion, leaving the line of
their retreat strewed with the debris of a routed army.

Eleven hundred prisoners and sixteen cannon were the fruits of this
victory, besides an immense quantity of wagons, caissons, horses and
camp stores. Sheridan pursued him with great energy through
Harrisonburg, Staunton, and the gaps of the Blue Ridge. After stripping
the upper valley of most of the supplies and provisions for the rebel
army, he returned to Strasburg, and took position on the north side of
Cedar Creek.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Having received considerable reinforcements, General Early again
returned to the valley, and on the 9th of October his cavalry
encountered General Sheridan’s near Strasburg, where the rebels were
defeated with the loss of eleven pieces of artillery, and three hundred
and fifty prisoners.

During the interim of the defeat of the rebels and the return of Early,
with reinforcements, General Sheridan, not anticipating important
movements, had gone to Washington, and was on his return to the army at
the time of Early’s advance. The Union army was posted on Cedar Creek,
behind breastworks, in a line of four or five miles in extent, while the
rebel camp was about four miles distant. Custer’s cavalry on the right,
was assailed on the 16th, but after a severe skirmish the enemy were
driven back.




                       BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK, VA.
                           OCTOBER 19, 1864.


On the night of the eighteenth, General Kershaw, of the rebel army,
crossed the mountains which separated the branches of the Shenandoah,
forded the north fork, and early on the morning of the nineteenth, under
cover of the darkness and the fog, surprised and turned the left flank
of General Sheridan’s army, and captured the batteries which enfiladed
the whole line. At the same time the rest of Early’s forces marched down
the turnpike from Strasburg to Cedar Creek, and before the Union army
was fairly awake, the rebels had penetrated within the intrenchments of
the Eighth corps, and the left division of Crook was thoroughly broken
up. The Federals were driven in confusion and many taken prisoners. The
Nineteenth corps now gave way and the entire left and centre were
routed, while the artillery and musketry of the rebels, playing upon the
disordered ranks of the Federals, increased momentarily the terror and
confusion. The full light of day exposed the extent of the disaster, and
showed the greater part of the army in a state of confusion. The rebels
had already captured eighteen cannon, which were turned upon the Federal
troops. The Sixth corps, under General Getty, by a gallant and rapid
movement, succeeded in turning the flank of Emory’s army, and attacking
him boldly, soon checked the onward movement of the enemy, for a time,
and enabled the Federal army to retreat in some degree of order to
Middletown, a village about five miles from Strasburg. They were closely
followed by the enemy, however, when the Federals continued their
retreat towards Newtown, a village five miles further in the rear. The
troops fell back with heavy loss and in much confusion, but were finally
rallied between Middletown and Newtown. At this juncture General
Sheridan, who was at Winchester when the battle commenced, arrived on
the field, arranged his lines just in time to repulse a heavy attack of
the enemy, and immediately assuming the offensive, attacked in turn with
great vigor. His arrival inspired the soldiers with new courage and
energy, and entirely changed the fortunes of the day. The enemy was
defeated with great slaughter and the loss of most of his artillery and
trains, and the trophies he had captured in the morning.

The Federal loss, in this battle, was between five and six thousand men,
which was much greater than that of the enemy. Three thousand rebels
were captured.

The wreck of Early’s army escaped during the night, and fled in the
direction of Staunton and Lynchburg. Pursuit was made to Mount Jackson.
Thus ended this, the enemy’s last attempt to invade the North, via the
Shenandoah valley.

General Sheridan’s army now retired to Winchester, in order to be near
their supplies; while the Shenandoah valley was laid waste for miles in
order that no subsistence might be obtained by the enemy, who had, from
the first of the war, made that section a base of supplies, from which
numerous bands of guerrillas were provided, and who were thus enabled to
make frequent damaging raids on the Federal borders. Merritt’s cavalry
crossed the Blue Ridge in December and carried desolation through Loudon
and Fauquier counties, destroying property valued at two and a half
millions of dollars.

Neither commander seemed desirous of carrying on hostilities longer in
that devastated district, and a large portion of either army was
detached early in the winter, to take part in the grand contest then
centering around Richmond.

On the twenty-seventh of February, 1865, General Sheridan left
Winchester with a large cavalry force, in three days marching eighty
miles. He drove Early from Stanton and pursued him to Waynesboro, where
thirteen hundred rebels and eleven guns were captured. Charlottesville
was next entered by Sheridan’s victorious troops, where three more guns
were taken from the enemy. The line of the James river canal was now
followed by the cavalry, and much damage done on the route. From the
north side of the James river, Sheridan struck across the country to the
Virginia Central railroad, carrying the desolation of war in his path.
On the tenth of March the north bank of the Pamunkey was reached, from
whence he crossed to the White House, where his troops were incorporated
into the army of General Grant.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Major-General Phillip Henry Sheridan was born in Perry County, Ohio, in
the year 1831, and was appointed a cadet at West Point in 1848. He
graduated on the thirtieth of June, 1853, and entered the United States
Regular Army on July 1st, as a brevet second lieutenant of Infantry. He
was attached to the First regiment, and joined his company at Fort
Duncan, Texas, during the autumn of that year. He fought against the
Indians of this region until the Spring of 1855, when he was transferred
to the Fourth regiment of United States Infantry, with the full rank of
Second Lieutenant, dated from November 22d, 1854.

During the months of May and June, 1855, Lieutenant Sheridan held
command of Fort Wood, New York Harbor, and in July, 1855, embarked for
California with a large body of recruits. He was next engaged in the
survey for the Pacific railroad from San Francisco, California, to
Columbia river, Oregon.

During September, 1855, he was detached from the survey at Vancouver,
Washington Territory, and ordered to join Major Raines’ expedition
against the Indians. He was specially mentioned for distinguished
conduct in an engagement with the Indians at the Cascades of the
Columbia, April 28th, 1856. He occupied posts in this region and was
complimented by General Scott during 1857, for meritorious conduct in
the settlement of the Indian difficulty.

[Illustration: MAJOR-GENERAL PHILIP H. SHERIDAN.]

During the early part of 1861 Lieutenant Sheridan was promoted one
grade, and on the 14th of May, 1861, became captain of one of the
companies of the Thirteenth regiment of United States Infantry. He
joined his regiment at St. Louis, Mo., during the following September,
and was made President of the Military Commission for the settlement of
claims against the Government of that State.

On December 24th, 1861, he was appointed Chief Quartermaster and
Commissary of “the Army of the Southwest,” remaining with it until after
the battle of Pea Ridge. He was afterwards appointed Chief Quartermaster
on the staff of General Halleck before Corinth.

Captain Sheridan was appointed Colonel of the Second Michigan cavalry on
May 27th, 1862, and participated in the movement under Colonel Elliott
to cut the railroad at Booneville, below Corinth. On May 30th he
repulsed and defeated McMaury’s rebel cavalry near that place.

Colonel Sheridan assumed command of a cavalry brigade on June 11th,
1862, and on July 1st, defeated a cavalry force of nine regiments under
General Chalmers by a brilliant _coup de main_. For this dashing
operation he was promoted to a brigadier-general of volunteers, dating
July 1, 1862.

General Sheridan assumed command of the Third division of the army of
the Ohio on September 20th, 1862, and fought at the battles of
Perryville, October 8th, and Murfreesboro’, December 31st, 1862. For his
gallant services in the battle of Stone river, he rose to the rank of
Major-General; and his brilliant subsequent career on the Peninsula, in
Western Virginia, and the final struggle with Lee’s army, was the
occasion of his appointment as Major-General in the United States army.




                    BATTLE OF MORRISTOWN, TENNESSEE.
                           NOVEMBER 13, 1864.


While the armies of Generals Thomas and Hood were engaged in their
campaign before Nashville, a large force of rebels under General
Breckinridge, entered East Tennessee. On the 12th of November he
attacked General Gillem’s command, which was entrenched near Morristown,
and drove them from their defences. General Gillem retreated with his
forces toward Morristown, where he was overtaken the next day by
Breckinridge, and again defeated with the loss of his artillery and
several hundred prisoners. He also suffered severely in killed and
wounded. General Gillem gradually fell back with the balance of his
command towards Knoxville, and was pursued by his inexorable opponent as
far as Strawberry Plains; here, anticipating trouble from the proximity
of heavy Union forces, General Breckinridge deemed it prudent to
withdraw.

Foreseeing Hood’s intention of surging round before Knoxville, and of
rebuilding the Virginia railroad from Greenville to Strawberry Plains,
under the directions of General Thomas, General Stoneman concentrated
the commands of Generals Burbridge and Gillem near Beans’ Station, to
operate against Breckinridge, and destroy or drive him into
Virginia—destroy the salt-works at Saltville, and the railroad in
Virginia as far as he could go without endangering his command.




                 STONEMAN’S RAID INTO WESTERN VIRGINIA.
                         DECEMBER 12–20, 1864.


General Gillem remounted his command, and General Burbridge gathered his
cavalry, scattered over Kentucky, and in less than five days mounted and
equipped four thousand men. The forces rendezvoused at Bean Station,
General Burbridge arriving at that place on Friday, December 2, having
made forced marches from Lexington.

The expedition was detained at Bean Station, in organizing the forces,
obtaining supplies, munitions, &c., until December 12, during which time
General Burbridge manœuvred so as to effectually deceive Vaughn, who was
laying at Greenville, with sixteen hundred men. On the night of December
3, Burbridge advanced rapidly in the direction of Rogersville, as far as
Mooresburg, and then fell back to Bean Station, leaving the enemy to
suppose that he was about to return to Kentucky with the stock he had
gathered. On the 11th General Stoneman, with General Gillem and his
brigade, sixteen hundred strong, arrived at Bean Station, and early on
the morning of the 12th the troops broke camp and the march began,
General Gillem leading the advance and General Burbridge following with
three brigades, commanded respectively by Colonels Brown, Buckley and
Wade, the whole force amounting to fifty-five hundred men.

THE FIGHT AT KINGSTON.—Marching all night, Stoneman came upon Duke’s
brigade, under Colonel Morgan, at Kingsport, about daylight on Friday,
December 13, where it was drawn up to oppose the crossing of the north
branch of the Holston river. Skirmishing at once began, General Gillem,
with the Eighth Tennessee, engaging the enemy’s attention in front while
General Stoneman sent two regiments—the Thirtieth Kentucky mounted
infantry and Thirteenth Tennessee—two miles up the river to cross at
Opossum ford and flank the enemy, which was successfully done. Morgan
was completely surprised, not being aware of the approach of the Union
forces on his flank until they charged him with a shout, routing his men
in confusion, killing and wounding fifteen, and capturing eighty-five
prisoners, among whom was Morgan himself. The rebels retreated in the
direction of Bristol, closely pursued by General Burbridge, who marched
until nightfall, when he halted, and built large fires, as if he meant
to encamp for the night; but, suddenly breaking camp, he moved rapidly
on Bristol, and at three o’clock in the morning the Eleventh Kentucky
cavalry charged into the place with drawn sabres, surprising the
garrison, and captured three hundred prisoners and a train of cars that
was just starting to Richmond with the mails. The remnant of Duke’s
brigade, which was encamped just out of the town, got together and
joined the home guards, who were put under arms; but before either party
could form the troopers were among them with their sabres, and, after
some small show of resistance and a few straggling shots, Duke’s men
broke, and the home guards threw down their arms and fled into the
houses. The telegraph was found all right, and communication open with
Richmond, Jonesboro’ and intermediate points. It was ascertained that
Vaughn had not learned of the movements of the Federals until they
reached Rogersville, when he had put off with his forces for Bristol,
and was then at Zollicoffer, twelve miles from Bristol. General
Burbridge marched immediately for Zollicoffer. When day broke Vaughn was
amazed to find himself cut off and confronted by a force larger than his
own. A dense fog prevented General Burbridge from attacking Vaughn, who
crossed the river and pushed rapidly for Abingdon, hoping to reach that
place before Burbridge, and get between him and the salt works. The
latter marched on a parallel road, and reached the crossroads two miles
from Abingdon at ten o’clock at night, two hours before Vaughn, who,
finding himself headed again, turned off on the North Carolina road and
struck out for Wytheville. General Stoneman came up at daylight the next
morning with General Gillem, and sent him, with his brigade, to pursue
Vaughn, and if possible cut him off from Wytheville.

THE ATTACK ON GLADE SPRINGS.—At the same time General Burbridge was
ordered to send three hundred light cavalry, with picked horses, to cut
the Virginia railroad at Glade Springs, nine miles from Saltville, and
thus prevent any reinforcements from being sent to that place from
above. Major Harrison, Twelfth Kentucky cavalry, was assigned to the
execution of the order, and successfully accomplished his task, cutting
the road only some twenty minutes after Breckinridge had passed up to
Saltville from Wytheville with a train of cars and some two hundred
militia from Lynchburg. Harrison then waited for the down train, which
was due, and captured and burned it, and also another train just behind
it, after which he dashed up the road towards Wytheville, burning all
the large bridges and depots along the way. At Seven Mile ford Vaughn
struck Harrison’s trail and followed him as fast as his jaded stock
could travel; but Harrison, being by far the best mounted, easily kept
out of his way. Vaughn passed the ford, following Harrison, at five
o’clock on the morning of December 16; and at six o’clock General Gillem
passed the same place in pursuit of Vaughn. The race now became
intensely exciting, Harrison trying to keep out of Vaughn’s way, but
burning right and left as he went, and Gillem straining every nerve to
come up with and keep him from overwhelming Harrison. About noon Gillem
came upon Vaughn’s rear guard near Marion, captured most of it and soon
after found part of Vaughn’s forces, under Colonel Gillespie, drawn up
in line of battle just beyond the town, Vaughn having continued the
chase of Harrison with a small body.

Gillem immediately commenced a spirited fight, charges being made on
both sides. In the mean time General Burbridge and his command were
rapidly closing up on Gillem, and, hearing the fighting, General
Stoneman sent Burbridge’s First brigade forward to support Gillem; but
before it reached him that general had driven the enemy from the field,
killing and wounding fifteen, and capturing seventy-five of the enemy.

Gillespie retreated in the direction of Wytheville, hotly pursued by
Gillem, who harassed his rear so severely that the former found it
necessary to make another stand near Mount Airy, when Gillem fell upon
him with fury, being now supported by Colonel Brown, who had come up
with him. The rebels were soon forced from the field in confusion
leaving a number of prisoners and seven pieces of artillery, among which
were two of the guns captured from General Gillem by Vaughn a short time
before at Morristown.

The joy of the General and his men at the recapture of their favorite
pieces was inexpressible. Gillespie continued to push towards
Wytheville; but his retreat soon degenerated into a rout, Gillem
following him hotly with his own and Brown’s brigade.

At Wytheville the home guard was got out, with four pieces of artillery,
and Gillespie rallied his men and made a desperate stand; but Gillem
charged with his whole command, capturing the home guard, with their
battery and all of Vaughn’s wagon train, which had just come in by
another road. Gillespie fell back into the town, where he was
immediately surrounded, Vaughn being reported to be in the place. Gillem
charged through the town; but Gillespie made his escape with about one
hundred men, which was all he had left of his sixteen hundred, the rest
having straggled, been killed, wounded, captured or deserted and gone to
their homes in Tennessee. In the mean time Major Harrison had swung
around Wytheville and rode down Rye valley for Bean Station. Generals
Stoneman and Burbridge, having reached Marion with the balance of the
command, Colonel H. M. Buckley was dispatched with the Second brigade to
destroy the lead mines. General Stoneman ordered Gillem to destroy the
railroad for ten miles above Wytheville and then return; which
destruction was accomplished most completely by Colonel Brown’s brigade,
who also burned the immense bridge four miles from Wytheville. After
burning three large rebel storehouses filled with supplies of all kinds,
and two arsenals, General Gillem returned and joined Generals Stoneman
and Burbridge twelve miles from Marion.

PURSUIT OF COLONEL WITCHER.—Soon after the junction of the two forces
General Stoneman found a force of rebels, counting three hundred strong,
under Witcher, in his front, and the General at once halted the head of
his column, endeavoring to hold Witcher in view, while General Gillem,
with his brigade, would go round him and get in his rear. But Witcher
made off, when Burbridge, with Brown’s brigade, pursued him for seven
miles, to Staley’s creek, where it was ascertained that Breckinridge was
close behind Witcher with a considerable force of mounted infantry. Just
as Burbridge was closing up on him with his sabres, Witcher ran
violently into the head of Breckinridge’s column, almost stampeding it,
and mixing for a time blue jackets and gray together.

FIGHT AT STALEY’S CREEK.—The rebels were confused, and a rout seemed
imminent; but Breckinridge and Echols restored order, drove back the
Federals beyond the mouth of the bridge over Staley’s creek, and held it
until their men could be formed. Burbridge at once commenced the
engagement with the Eleventh Michigan and Twelfth Ohio cavalry,
endeavoring to get possession of the bridge, but in vain, the rebels
holding it firmly. The whole of Burbridge’s command soon became engaged,
the Thirty-ninth Kentucky mounted infantry (Wade’s brigade) fording the
stream above and going into action on the right of the bridge, and the
Fifty-third Kentucky, and Forty-fifth Kentucky regiments mounted
infantry, with the Fifth and Sixth regiments United States colored
cavalry, fighting on the left. The Eleventh Kentucky, Eleventh Michigan
and Twelfth Ohio regiments cavalry (Brown’s brigade) held the centre;
opposite the bridge, the Fifth Kentucky battery, Lieutenant Judd
commanding, being posted in their rear. The rebels held their position
until night, when darkness put an end to the fight. Soon after dark
General Stoneman with General Gillem and his command came up, and
Stoneman directed that the centre should be forced. The Fifty-third
Kentucky infantry, Eleventh Kentucky cavalry and part of the Eleventh
Michigan cavalry were accordingly formed on the pike, near the bridge,
and Major Keogh, of General Stoneman’s staff, and Colonel Brisbin, of
General Burbridge’s staff, sent with them to drive the rebels from the
pike. The command advanced up the road about fifty yards, when the
rebels opened a severe fire and compelled them to fall back to the
bridge. This closed the fighting for the night. Early in the morning
General Stoneman sent General Gillem to the right, with orders to go
round Breckinridge, and if the fight was severe to attack him in the
rear; but, if not, to go into Saltville and attack that place before
Breckinridge could fall back to the works.

General Burbridge, as soon as it was light, recommenced the fight, and
soon after General Gillem had marched, it was ascertained that
Breckinridge had a much larger force than was supposed. General Gillem
was sent for and he joined Burbridge a little before dark, but too late
to take part in the operations of the day. In the mean time Generals
Stoneman and Burbridge had continued to engage the enemy from early
dawn, and the battle had now lasted nearly thirty-six hours, the fight
being particularly severe on the left and centre. The colored troops
made a magnificent charge in the afternoon, driving back in confusion
Duke’s rebel brigade from a hill near the bridge. On this hill Colonel
Boyle lost his life, while gallantly leading his regiment against the
enemy. Early in the morning it was determined to renew the battle, but
when day broke it was discovered that Breckinridge had retreated in the
direction of Saltville.

THE PURSUIT TO SALTVILLE.—Stoneman, with the whole command, started in
pursuit. Breckinridge had started in the direction of Saltville, but his
column had come back in great confusion, and took the North Carolina
road. The cause of this was soon apparent. Colonel Buckley, with his
brigade had been sent to destroy the lead mines. He completed the work,
and hearing the firing, had come down to the Seven Mile ford, in rear of
Breckinridge, charged his pickets, stampeding them and capturing his
advance guard. Breckinridge, finding a force in his rear, became
alarmed, and put back in haste to Marion, where he took the road to
North Carolina. Lieutenant-Colonel Bentley, with the Twelfth Ohio
cavalry, was sent in pursuit of him, and about six miles from Marion
came upon his rear guard, drawn up in line of battle, which Bentley
charged with the sabre, when it broke and fled, leaving in the hands of
the gallant Twelfth two wagons and an artillery caisson. Colonel Bentley
continued the pursuit until night, when, finding that Breckinridge had
blockaded the road in his rear by felling timber, he returned and joined
his command at midnight, near the Seven Mile ford.

THE CAPTURE OF SALTVILLE.—At three o’clock in the morning the whole
force moved towards the salt works, twelve miles distant, and at
daylight began driving in the rebel pickets. General Burbridge moved to
the right and attacked the works, while General Gillem closed in upon
those on the left. The garrison was found to consist of eight hundred
reserves, under Colonel Preston, and were posted in three forts. General
Gillem attacked the fort on the left with his whole force, under charge
of Colonel Stacey; while General Burbridge divided his troops, sending
detachments of Brown’s and Wade’s brigades, the Eleventh Michigan
cavalry, Fifth and Sixth United States colored cavalry, under charge of
Colonel Brisbin, to attack the main fort, immediately in front of and
commanding the road. Colonel Coates, with detachments of the
Thirty-ninth, Thirty-seventh and Forty-fifth Kentucky infantry, of
Wade’s brigade, and the Thirtieth, of Buckley’s brigade, was sent to
attack a fort on the right, while Buckley, with the balance of his
brigade, the Fifty-third and Fifty-fourth Kentucky, was dispatched to
hold the gaps and guard the rear. The rebels opened with shell, grape
and canister, but were soon forced into their works, and by night the
skirmishers had advanced so close to the works that the rebel gunners
could with difficulty work their guns. The Federal skirmishers crept up
close to the rebels, and then commenced noiselessly to drag the cannon
on hills overlooking the works, while an assaulting column was formed,
and all made in readiness to charge the forts as soon as it was light.

General Gillem ordered the assault on the left, and the Eighth Tennessee
cavalry, with loud cheers, charged into the fort, taking it without much
resistance and capturing one commissioned officer and a number of
prisoners. Soon after the forts on the centre and right were occupied by
the Eleventh Michigan cavalry and the Thirty-ninth Kentucky mounted
infantry, having been evacuated by the enemy, the guns being left
standing, unspiked. Colonel Stacey, with the Thirteenth Tennessee, of
General Gillem’s command, and Colonel Coates, with the Eleventh Kentucky
cavalry, of General Burbridge’s command, charged into the town, the one
on the right and the other on the left, and occupied the place. The salt
works were at last in the hands of the Union troops, and joy filled
every breast.

DESTRUCTION OF THE SALT WORKS.—Soon the ringing of the heavy sledge
hammers which for days had been carried patiently by the troops were
heard in every direction, breaking the metal kettles to pieces. The
South Carolina block was first demolished, Virginia next, then Georgia,
and so on until all the property of States represented were destroyed.
When the thousands of kettles were thoroughly broken the torch was
applied, and soon the great pile was a mass of smouldering ruins, so
that, by night, scarcely a vestige of what were the great salt works
remained to mark where they once stood. The wells were all destroyed by
dropping shot and shell into them, and the engines and pipes torn to
pieces.

The raid being now ended, Generals Burbridge and Gillem parted, General
Stoneman accompanying Gillem’s command to East Tennessee, while
Burbridge marched for Kentucky.

THE IRON WORKS DESTROYED—were, perhaps, the largest works of the kind in
Virginia, and had been worked by the rebel government ever since the war
began with success. Among other valuable machinery destroyed in them was
a percussion cap manufactory, one of the most difficult articles to get
in the Southern confederacy. The cap manufactory and works were laid in
ruins.

THE LEAD MINES—in Wythe county, Virginia, seventeen miles from
Wytheville, were considered invaluable to the rebel confederacy, as from
these mines General Lee obtained nearly all the lead used by his army.
The engines, smelting furnaces and entire works were destroyed. Colonel
Buckley captured at the mines one hundred prisoners.

Over fifty bridges were burned on the railroad between Richmond and
Saltville.

At Kingsport Gillem captured Duke’s train, and at Bristol Burbridge
captured another large train, loaded with supplies. In the fight on the
16th, Gillem captured all of Vaughn’s train, about seventy-five wagons;
and on the 20th Colonel Wade captured, near Saltville, a supply train of
fifteen wagons, with ninety mules and seventy-five negroes.




                   EXPEDITIONS AT THE CLOSE OF 1864.


Several expeditions of importance were undertaken at this period, which
had important bearings on the movements of the grand armies, but our
limits will not permit extended details.

DESTRUCTION OF FEDERAL DEPOT AT JOHNSONVILLE, TENN.—On the 28th of
October, General Forrest reached the Tennessee at Fort Hieman, and
captured a gunboat and three transports. On the 2d of November, he
planted batteries above and below Johnsonville, on the opposite side of
the river, isolating three gunboats and eight transports. On the 4th he
opened his batteries on the place, and was replied to from the gunboats
and the garrison. The gunboats became disabled, and were set on fire, as
also were the transports, to prevent them from falling into the hands of
the enemy. The fire extended to the levee and the storehouses, and
property to the value of one and a half million dollars was consumed.
The place was not occupied by the enemy, who withdrew on the following
day, crossing to the north side of the Tennessee river, above
Johnsonville, moving towards Clifton, and subsequently joined Hood’s
army, near Franklin.

DESTRUCTION ON THE MISSISSIPPI CENTRAL RAILROAD.—Soon after General
Sherman commenced his march from Atlanta, two expeditions, one from
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and one from Vicksburg, Mississippi, were
started by General Canby to cut the enemy’s line of communication with
Mobile and retain troops in that field. The expedition from Vicksburg
was under the command of Brevet Brigadier-General E. D. Osband (Colonel
Third United States colored cavalry). He reached the Mississippi Central
railroad on the 27th of November, and, after an obstinate engagement,
destroyed the bridge and trestle work over Big Black river, near Canton,
thirty miles of the road, and two locomotives, two thousand six hundred
bales of cotton and one hundred and sixty thousand dollars worth of
stores at Vaughan station. About the same time an expedition organized
under the direction of General Canby, consisting of a cavalry force
under General Davidson, left Baton Rouge. Thence it marched to
Tanghipiho and destroyed the railroad to Jackson, burning bridges and
railroad buildings. Thence it moved to Franklinville, capturing a mail
and prisoners. Thence it moved to West Pascagoula. These movements
caused a great panic in Mississippi, and created alarm for the safety of
Mobile, thus effectively cooperating with General Sherman.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A cavalry expedition, under Brevet Major-General Grierson, started from
Memphis on the 21st of December. On the 25th he surprised and captured
Forrest’s dismounted camp at Verona, Mississippi, on the Mobile and Ohio
railroad, destroyed the railroad, sixteen cars loaded with wagons and
pontoons for Hood’s army, four thousand new English carbines, and a
large amount of public stores. On the morning of the 28th he attacked
and captured a force of the army at Egypt, and destroyed a train of
fourteen cars; thence turning to the southwest he struck the Mississippi
Central railroad at Winona, destroyed the factories and large amounts of
stores at Bankston, and the machine shops and public property at
Grenada, arriving at Vicksburg January 5.

                  *       *       *       *       *

FOSTER’S EXPEDITION UP BROAD RIVER, S. C.—On the 29th of November, 1864,
General Foster, commanding Department of the South, also sent an
expedition, _via_ Broad river, to destroy the railroad between
Charleston and Savannah. The troops were commanded by Brigadier-General
J. P. Hatch, and a naval force under Commander G. H. Preble formed a
part of the expedition.

The transports arrived at Boyd’s Point a little after daylight on
Tuesday morning, the 29th, and in a short time men, horses, artillery
and supplies were on shore. On the next day the enemy were encountered
in force on the Grahamsville road, at a place called Honey Hill. The
batteries of the rebels were intrenched in the woods, and great bravery
was evinced by the naval brigade and by colored troops in several
charges which were made, in which they suffered severe loss. The
musketry fire was terrific. For seven hours the din was kept up, almost
drowning the artillery discharges. The position of the rebels at Honey
Hill proved too strong to be carried by General Foster’s command, and
the Federals were compelled to retire. The total casualties of the Union
force numbered eight hundred and ten.




     REBEL PRIVATEERS—THE ALABAMA, THE FLORIDA, AND THE SHENANDOAH.


On the 19th of June, 1864, the steamship Alabama, a rebel privateer,
built, equipped, and manned in Great Britain, but commanded by a
Confederate officer, was brought to bay in the harbor of Cherbourg,
France, by the United States sloop-of-war Kearsarge, Captain Winslow.
For nearly two years the Alabama had been roaming the seas unmolested,
avoiding a conflict with United States vessels of war on numerous
occasions where opportunities were offered to meet an antagonist on
equal terms, but committing serious depredations among merchant vessels,
destroying property of the value of nearly ten millions of dollars. For
these acts her commander, Captain Semmes, was feted and lauded by
leading English journals and merchants as a hero. The Alabama was
launched, armed and delivered to her Confederate commander in British
waters, with the full knowledge of the government authorities, and in
face of the protest of Mr. Adams, the American Minister at the Court of
St. James. Her crew were nearly to a man British subjects, recruited in
British ports, and her gunners were trained in Her Majesty’s
practice-ship Excellent. Her battery consisted of eight guns—one
one-hundred-pounder rifle, one sixty-eight-pounder rifle, and six
thirty-two-pounders. She was rated as a third-class sloop-of-war, and
was considered a model of beauty and speed. Her commander and crew were
received with warm welcome and flattering honors at numerous British and
French ports, and every facility afforded the vessel for supplies and
repairs. Great anxiety was felt and expressed among naval officers of
England and France, that Captain Semmes should avail himself of one of
the many opportunities afforded of meeting a Federal cruiser of equal
power in fair and honorable combat. This test of skill and courage was
carefully avoided by the Confederate commander, till on the date above
named, after submitting to a blockade of five days in the harbor of
Cherbourg by the United States sloop-of-war Kearsage, a vessel of equal
armament and tonnage, Captain Semmes, seeing there was no escape,
reluctantly assented to the combat.

The battery of the Kearsarge consisted of seven guns—two eleven-inch
Dahlgrens, throwing shell or shot of one hundred and thirty-eight
pounds, four thirty-two-pounders, and one twenty-eight-pounder rifle.

The conflict took place within sight of the harbor of Cherbourg, and was
witnessed by thousands of the inhabitants. At twenty minutes past ten A.
M., Sunday, June 19, the Alabama was discovered standing out,
accompanied by a French iron-clad steamer. When the Alabama was descried
the Kearsarge was about three miles from the entrance of the harbor, and
to avoid any question as to the line of jurisdiction, as well as to draw
the Alabama off shore, so that if disabled she could not flee in for
protection, the Kearsarge stood to seaward until she had attained the
distance of about seven miles from the shore. At fifty minutes past ten
she came quick about and approached the Alabama, and at fifty-seven
minutes past ten the Alabama commenced the action with her starboard
broadside at one thousand yards’ range. At eleven the fire was returned
by the Kearsarge, and the vessels came fairly into action at about nine
hundred yards’ distance.

Captain Winslow says it was soon apparent that Semmes did not seek close
action, and fears were entertained that after some fighting he would
make for the shore. To defeat this Captain Winslow determined to keep
full steam on, run under the stern of the Alabama, and rake; but the
Alabama, by sheering and keeping her broadside to the Kearsarge, was
forced with a full head of steam into a circular track.

On the seventh rotation the Alabama headed for the shore, disabled and
at the mercy of the Kearsarge. A few well directed shots brought down
her flag, a white one was displayed, and the fire of the Kearsarge was
reserved. In about two minutes the Alabama again opened fire. The
Kearsarge replied, steamed ahead and laid across the bows of the Alabama
for raking. The fire of the Kearsarge being again reserved, boats were
lowered and an officer in one of them came alongside at ten minutes past
twelve o’clock and surrendered the Alabama. Six officers and sixty-four
men were brought on board the Kearsarge. At ten minutes past three
o’clock the Kearsarge let go her anchor in seven fathoms water.

In an engagement of one hour and ten minutes, the great superiority of
the American vessel and gunnery was evinced, and the British corsair
struck her colors while in a sinking condition, and went down in the
waves of the British channel. The crew of the Alabama had suffered
serious loss in the combat, and the wounded were engulfed with the
vessel, while some eighty or ninety of the survivors, among whom was
Captain Semmes, were left struggling in the waves.

The Alabama was accompanied from Cherbourg by an English private yacht,
the Deerhound, owned and sailed by Mr. John Lancaster, a warm friend and
sympathizer with Semmes. When the Alabama lowered her flag the boats of
the Kearsarge were immediately put out to save the survivors, and
Captain Winslow signalled to the yacht and two French pilot boats to
assist in this work of humanity. Lancaster picked up Semmes and several
others of the officers and crew, and, regardless of the neutrality of
his country, steamed off to Cowes, and set them at liberty. One hundred
and fifteen of the crew reached the shores of England and France.

The Alabama is reported to have discharged three hundred and seventy or
more shot and shell in this engagement, but inflicted no serious damage
on the Kearsarge. Thirteen or fourteen took effect in and about the
hull, and sixteen or seventeen about the masts and rigging.

The Kearsarge fired one hundred and seventy-three projectiles, of which
one alone killed and wounded eighteen of the crew of the Alabama, and
disabled one of her guns.

Three persons were wounded on the Kearsarge.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The rebel privateer Florida was captured in the port of Bahia, Brazil,
on the 7th of October, 1864, by the United States war-steamer Wachusett,
Captain N. Collins. The particulars of that capture may be briefly
detailed.

The Florida arrived at Bahia on the night of the 6th of October. Bahia
is in the bay of San Salvador, on the Atlantic coast of Brazil, eight
hundred miles northeast from Rio Janeiro. The Florida came there to get
coal and provisions, and to repair her engine. Mr. Wilson, U. S. Consul
at Bahia, protested to the Brazilian Government against the Florida’s
admission to the port, and asked that a penalty should be exacted from
her for burning a United States vessel within Brazilian waters, near the
Island of Fernando de Norenha. The Government answered the protest
respectfully, but decreed that the Florida was rightfully in a neutral
port. The Wachusett was also in port at that time. Captain Collins
challenged the Florida to go out and fight, but the challenge was
declined. Thereupon he determined to capture the rebel steamer and carry
her away. This design was put into execution on the night of October
7th, at which time Captain Morris, of the Florida, and many of the crew
were on shore. The Wachusett ran into the Florida, striking her on the
quarter, and at the same time carrying away her mizen-mast and mainyard.
Little or no resistance was offered to the capture. A hawser from the
Wachusett was made fast to the Florida, and so the latter was towed to
sea. Twelve officers and fifty-eight seamen were captured with her.

From Bahia she was taken to St. Thomas, where several of the prisoners
were transferred to the U. S. sloop-of-war Kearsarge, Captain Winslow,
for transportation to Boston. The Florida, meanwhile, furnished with a
crew of loyal Americans, sailed from St. Thomas to Fortress Monroe,
where, on the 28th of the same month, she was accidentally run into by
an army transport, and sunk in nine fathoms of water.

The Florida was built in England for the Italian Government—it was
said—but was purchased by rebel agents in Liverpool, and surreptitiously
sent to sea in the rebel service in March, 1862. She was about seven
hundred and fifty tons burthen, carrying three masts and two smoke
stacks.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The most formidable, and also the most destructive of all the rebel
privateers during the rebellion, was an iron-clad steamer of great
speed, known as the Shenandoah, built and fitted out for the rebels in a
British port. She was more than a match for the majority of American
war-vessels, and roamed the ocean undisputed, at one time destroying the
whaling and fishing vessels by scores in the North Atlantic, and again
intercepting the richly laden China and India merchant vessels, carrying
on her devastation for months after the surrender of the rebel armies,
and the destruction of all semblance of a Confederate government. She
was finally surrendered by her commander to the British authorities and
delivered to the United States Consul at Liverpool in November, 1865.




                          THE ST. ALBANS RAID.
                           OCTOBER 19, 1864.


During the whole course of the rebellion Canada was a place of refuge
for numerous rebels of all grades, from the special minister and envoy
to foreign powers, or the quasi general, to the lowest incendiary, who
by a certain party were all well treated, and allowed social privileges.
Many plots were there formed, for the purpose of inflicting injury on
the American cause, all of which found warm sympathizers and abettors
among the anti Federal Canadians.

Early in October a party of Confederates was organized by Bennet H.
Young, an officer holding a commission from Jefferson Davis, who
appointed a rendezvous on the Canada line, for the purpose of crossing
to Vermont and robbing the banks at St. Albans.

St. Albans is a flourishing town, situated three miles east of Lake
Champlain, twenty-three miles from Rouse’s point—where the railroads
converge, going north—and sixteen miles from the Canada line. The raid
was made upon it on the afternoon of Wednesday, the 19th October.
Business hours had not passed and the banks were still open. The
attacking party numbered twenty-five or thirty persons. These men had
come over from Canada and quietly congregated at the various hotels in
St. Albans, holding no noticeable communication and awakening no
suspicion. Their plan was a bold one, and was successfully executed. On
the day mentioned, at about three o’clock in the afternoon, they
suddenly congregated, in squads, and made a simultaneous attack on the
St. Albans, the Franklin county, and the First National Banks. At each
bank they drew their revolvers, threatening instant death to all the
officers present if any resistance was made. They then robbed the
drawers and vaults of all specie, bills, and other valuable articles
that they could lay their hands upon.

At the St. Albans bank these ruffians compelled the tellers to take the
oath of allegiance to the Confederate Government. At the Franklin bank
they thrust the cashier, Mr. Beardsley, together with a Mr. Clark, into
the safe, and left them, where they must infallibly have suffocated, but
for the timely arrival of assistance, after the robbers had decamped.

At the First National bank some resistance was made to them, by Mr.
Blaisdell, one of the bank officers. But, in general, they met with no
opposition. The attack was so sudden and unexpected that at first the
citizens were panic-stricken, and the utmost confusion prevailed in the
town.

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE GENERALS. HOOD. HARDEE. TOOMBS. TWIGGS.
SIMMONS. CHEATHAM. BUCKNER. A. S. JOHNSTON.]

Parties of the raiders rushed about, from place to place, discharging
their pistols in every direction. Their weapons were seven-shooters, and
each man carried several of them. A number of citizens were killed—the
first victim being Mr. E. J. Morrison, who was shot down at the door of
Mrs. Beattie’s millinery store. Among the killed were a woman and a
little girl.

Having completely pillaged the banks, and murdered a number of the
citizens of St. Albans, they closed their foul work by seizing horses
from the farmers’ wagons and from livery stables, and so made good their
escape. Within half an hour from the beginning of the raid they galloped
away from the town.

The raiders were promptly pursued by a party of armed citizens of St.
Albans, under Captain Conger. The pursuit lay in the direction of
Sheldon Creek, at which point the flying robbers set fire to the bridge,
in order to protect their retreat. They were, however, followed into
Canada, where fourteen of them were captured by the pursuing party, and
surrendered to the Canadian authorities. These men were claimed by the
United States, under the extradition treaty, as burglars and robbers.
Their examination was commenced at St. Johns, before an ordinary
magistrate, who set them at liberty, and restored to the robbers the
plunder which had been taken from them. This unwarrantable decision was
overruled by higher colonial authorities, and some of the raiders were
again arrested and a new trial instituted. The men were released,
however, and the only concession made was the surrender of that portion
of the money which had been obtained from the robbers, and lodged in the
Canada banks.




                  ADVANCE OF THE ARMY OF THE POTOMAC.
                              MAY 3, 1864.


General Grant was called to the command of all the armies of the United
States on the 13th of March, 1864, at which time the Army of the
Potomac, numbering over one hundred thousand men, was encamped on the
north side of the Rapidan. General Lee, with an opposing Confederate
army of nearly equal force, was posted in a series of earthworks on the
southern bank of the upper Rapidan. His position was a very strong one,
and the construction of his defences had called forth the skill of an
able body of engineers, and was the product of several months’ labor.

During the months of March and April General Grant visited the several
commanders in person of the various departments contiguous to
Washington, and imparted to them his general plan of the campaign,
giving each department commander written instructions to guide him in
the part assigned to him in the eventful movements which were soon to
take place. He also communicated by letter to the heads of each
department throughout the country, giving such definite information and
instructions to all, as their peculiar position and circumstances called
for. His headquarters he declared to be with the Army of the Potomac in
the field. General Meade was retained as commander of that army, and
through him General Grant gave orders for its evolutions—General Meade
exercising all the responsibilities which were common to chief
commanders in the field.

General Butler, with about thirty thousand troops, was then in the
vicinity of Fortress Monroe, preparing to ascend the James, and
cooperate with the Army of the Potomac, by a demonstration towards
Richmond.

Major-General Meade was instructed that Lee’s army would be his
objective point; that wherever Lee went he would go also. For his
movement two plans presented themselves: One to cross the Rapidan below
Lee, moving by his right flank; the other above, moving by his left.
Each presented advantages over the other, with corresponding objections.
By crossing above, Lee would be cut off from all chance of ignoring
Richmond or going North on a raid. But if Meade took this route all he
did would have to be done while the rations he started with held out;
besides, it separated him from Butler, so that he could not be directed
how to cooperate. If he took the other route, Brandy Station could be
used as a base of supplies until another was secured on the York or
James river. Of these, however, it was decided to take the lower route.

It was designed that all the armies throughout the country which were
placed in antagonism with opposing rebel forces, should assume the
offensive about the 1st of May.

The movement of the army of the Potomac commenced early on the morning
of the 4th of May, under the immediate direction and orders of
Major-General Meade. Before night the whole army was across the Rapidan,
(the Fifth and Sixth corps crossing at Germania Ford, and the Second in
advance,) with the greater part of its trains, numbering about four
thousand wagons, meeting with but slight opposition. The average
distance travelled by the troops that day was about twelve miles.
General Grant had anticipated a bold opposition from the rebels while
crossing the river, and was much relieved when that result was obtained
without opposition. Toward night there was severe skirmishing along the
line and some loss was suffered on both sides. That night the army
encamped along a line some seven or eight miles in extent. The Second
corps occupied the old battle-ground at Chancellorsville. The Fifth,
under General G. K. Warren, was at the Wilderness Tavern, and the Sixth,
under General Sedgwick, at Germania Ford, where Generals Grant and Meade
established their headquarters.

On Thursday morning, before the dawn of day, the Federal troops prepared
to resume their march. They advanced in three columns, by roads leading
to the south. General Warren was on the right, General Hancock occupied
the centre, and General Sheridan with his cavalry covered the extreme
left. The troops had not proceeded far before there were indications of
the approach of the enemy from the west, advancing in great force,
bearing on the centre of the Federal lines. The rattling and irregular
fire of the skirmish line gave premonition of the approaching contest,
which became serious at noon.




                     THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS.
                             MAY 5–7, 1864.


When the battle began the rebels were disposed in the following manner:
General Longstreet’s corps was opposed to General Hancock’s; General A.
P. Hill’s to Warren’s; and Ewell’s to Sedgwick’s. General Griffin’s
division was the first to engage the enemy. His troops advanced about a
mile across the turnpike, and encountered the rebels under General
Ewell, and for the space of one hour the fighting continued with great
spirit, and severe loss. General Griffin’s division was at length driven
back; but the Fourth and Second divisions, under Generals Wadsworth and
Robinson, advancing to his aid, held the enemy in check and drove him
back. In this brief engagement the Federal loss was one thousand men.
The enemy’s next movement was to endeavor to gain a position between the
corps of Generals Warren and Hancock on the left centre. The fighting at
this point began about three o’clock. The carnage here was indescribably
frightful; the battle raged with terrible fury; and the well-tried and
brave soldiers on the extreme left—Hancock’s corps—were probably never
so hard pressed. A correspondent thus describes the battle at this
point: “Getty’s division, Sixth corps, was at the right of the Orange
Plank-road, fronting toward Mine Run, where Carr’s division, Second
corps, joined him on his left. The other divisions of Hancock’s corps
were pushing up; in the twinkling of an eye the rebels were upon him in
great force, with the evident purpose of turning our left. The ground
was closely overgrown with shrub trees, thick as sprouting shoots from
the same root. In a few minutes urgent requests came back for
reinforcements. The enemy was repeating his tactics of Chancellorsville
by falling with tremendous force and impetuosity upon one wing. This
time he was not repulsed, but foiled. The battle raged for three hours
precisely where it began, along a line of not more than half a mile.
Fast as our men came up they were sent in—still no ground gained, none
lost. It was all musketry, roll surging upon roll—not the least
cessation. We were fighting twenty thousand men, and such was the nature
of the country that but two guns could be planted bearing upon the
enemy. Hayes’s brigade of Birney’s division became warmly engaged soon
after the battle commenced. A little while and he asked for
reinforcements. Hancock sent back word: ‘I will send a brigade within
twenty minutes. Tell General Alex. Hayes to hold his ground. He can do
it. I know him to be a powerful man.’ Within that time General Hayes was
killed, and his body brought to the rear. The work was at close range.
No room in that jungle for manœuvering; no possibility of a bayonet
charge; no help from artillery; no help from cavalry; nothing but close,
square, severe, face-to-face volleys of fatal musketry. The wounded
stagger out, and fresh troops pour in. Stretchers pass out with ghastly
burdens, and go back reeking with blood for more. Word is brought that
the ammunition is failing. Sixty rounds fired in one steady stand-up
fight, and that fight not fought out. Boxes of cartridges are placed on
the returning stretchers, and the struggle shall not cease for want of
ball and powder. Do the volleys grow nearer, or do one’s fears make them
seem so? It must be so, for a second line is rapidly formed just where
we stand, and the bullets slip singing by as they have not done before,
while now and then a limb drops from the tree-tops. The bullets are
flying high. General Hancock rides along the new line, is recognized by
the men, and cheered with a will and a tiger. But we stay them. The
Second corps is all up, and it must be that troops will come up from
Warren or Sedgwick, or else they will divert the enemy’s attention by an
attack upon another quarter. Yes, we hold them, and the fresh men going
in will drive them. I ride back to general headquarters, and learn that
an advance has been ordered an hour ago along the whole line. General
Meade is in front with Warren, and Grant is even now listening for
Wadsworth’s division of Warren’s corps to open on Hill’s flank, for it
is Hill’s corps that is battling with Hancock. The latter reports that
he shall be able to maintain his ground. The severe fighting for the day
is over, and it is sunset.”

During this time the right had also been hotly engaged. The fighting
began with an attack by General Sedgwick upon the line opposing him; and
the result was a furious battle. Two divisions, only, of Sedgwick’s
corps were engaged—the third had not taken position. A desperate effort
was made by the enemy to turn Sedgwick’s right, and the enemy bore so
hard upon him that he was obliged to send to General Burnside, whose
corps from Fredericksburg had now joined the army, for assistance. A
brief lull occurred at this moment, just long enough to give an
opportunity for the reinforcements to come up. Rickett’s division came
into line and supported Sedgwick’s now almost exhausted troops. Again
the enemy advanced, and the fight recommenced with increased fury;
volley after volley succeeded each other in regular succession and with
deafening roar. At this time, and throughout the whole battle of the
Wilderness, the musketry firing far exceeded that of any other battle
during the war. Hour succeeded hour, and the heat of the conflict never
seemed to abate, but ever and anon to rage more furiously than before;
till at length, two hours after it had become so dark that the
combatants could no longer distinguish each other, the battle terminated
for the night. The enemy was driven back with very heavy loss, nor was
that of the Federals much less severe. Many gallant officers fell upon
the ground they fought for. Though the battle resulted in heavy loss of
men, it was a great gain, and terminated in a decided victory to the
Union troops, the enemy having been completely repulsed at every point
which he had attempted throughout the day.


                 SECOND DAY’S FIGHT OF THE WILDERNESS.

At five o’clock upon the following morning, while the sun was slowly
breaking though the light mist that hung above the earth, the battle was
resumed. At first slow and far between, the shots rapidly increased,
until at six o’clock the fight had become furious all along the line,
and so continued during the entire day. Both armies were intrenched
behind their hastily formed works—those of the rebels being much the
stronger; and in the space between, the battle was contested with all
the desperation of men putting forth their whole strength in a last
effort—with all the determined valor of soldiers who fought upon the
side of right, and already felt themselves the victors. In some places
the ground was fought over and over again, four, five, even six times
during the day.

General Hancock’s position was furiously assailed by an overwhelming
force of the enemy, who, after overcoming a gallant and desperate
resistance, drove back his troops, and repossessed the ground which the
Unionists had gained upon the previous day. General Seymour’s division
was thrown into dire confusion by an attack from General Longstreet’s
troops, and driven back for some distance. General Warren was furiously
pressed along his whole line, but his brave men resisted every attack
with incomparable gallantry, and held their position without losing
ground an inch, until darkness put an end to the battle.

Toward evening General Hancock attacked the rebels in the position they
had won from him, and fought them with such unconquerable bravery and
determination, that he succeeded in driving them from their ground, and
pursued them for nearly a mile. When night had come, General Hancock
again occupied his breastworks, to the admiration of all who had beheld
his brave conduct during the heat and fury of the battle. The ground
between the two armies was covered with the dying and the dead. The
rebel loss, especially, was appalling, but they had also gained
something; for in the confusion that followed the retreat of the
division holding the extreme right, the enemy had succeeded in
effectually turning the Union right flank.

The Union loss during the two days’ fighting was estimated at fifteen
thousand men. On both sides there was a serious loss of brave general
officers. Of General Grant’s army, General Hayes and General Wadsworth
were killed. Of Lee’s army, Generals Jones, Jenkins, and Pickett were
killed; and Generals Pegram, Hunter, and Longstreet severely wounded.
The latter was struck in the throat, and, at the time, was believed
mortally injured. He was unable to take the field for many months.

The death of General Wadsworth was to the Union cause an almost
irreparable loss. No man made greater sacrifices for his country; and
none will be held in more honorable recollection.

                  *       *       *       *       *

General Wadsworth was born at Geneseo, in the State of New York, on the
30th day of October, 1807; and was, at the time of his death, in the
fifty-seventh year of his age. He was educated at Harvard and at Yale
colleges, from both of which institutions he graduated with honors. He
entered the office of a lawyer in Albany, began the study of the legal
profession, and completed his legal studies under the tuition of Daniel
Webster; and was, at the age of twenty-six, admitted to the bar. A few
years later, Wadsworth began to devote himself to local politics, and
was known as a free-soil democrat; but in 1856 he took strong sides with
the republican party in the State of New York. During 1859–60 he was
named as republican nominee for Governor of the State, but was on that
occasion unsuccessful. In the early part of the war Wadsworth offered
his services to the government, and in 1861 was appointed by Governor
Morgan as one of the major-generals of the State troops in the field.
This appointment was, however, revoked, as the appointment of generals
in the field was vested solely in the United States Government. At the
period of Wadsworth’s recall the communications with Washington were
broken by destruction of the railroad bridges in Maryland. In this
emergency Mr. Wadsworth chartered a vessel, furnished it with supplies,
and set sail for Annapolis. Mr. Wadsworth was appointed a volunteer aid
with the rank of major on the staff of General McDowell when that
officer’s army took the field preparatory to the battle of Bull Run, and
thus participated in that campaign. Major Wadsworth was next appointed
brigadier-general of volunteers, the rank dating from August 9, 1861,
and he was afterward placed in command of a brigade of the Army of the
Potomac, then being organized in Virginia, in front of Washington. In
March, 1862, when the army advanced upon Manassas Gap, Wadsworth was
placed in command of the District of Columbia, including the National
capital, as military governor. On the removal of the main army to the
peninsula he was appointed commander of the military district in
Washington, which included the District of Columbia, the City of
Alexandria, the defensive works south of the Potomac from the Occoquan
to Difficult creek, and the forts at Washington. General Wadsworth held
this command till near the end of the year. In September he was
nominated as candidate against Horatio Seymour, as governor of the State
of New York, but was defeated at the election. From this time General
Wadsworth devoted himself exclusively to the military service. He took
the field and was engaged in the battle of Fredericksburg, December 13,
1862. He was then placed in command of the first division of General
King’s army corps. He was engaged in the battle of Chancellorsville in
May, 1863, and commanded the extreme left division; he conducted the
expedition which crossed the Rappahannock four miles below
Fredericksburg. When the Army of the Potomac was reorganized for its
grand campaign under Grant, General Wadsworth was assigned to the
command of the fourth division of the Fifth corps, under General Warren,
at the head of which, he bravely met his death.


                        THE THIRD DAY’S BATTLE.

On Saturday brisk skirmishing between the two armies was kept up all
along the line for the greater part of the day. A brigade of the enemy,
commanded by General Gordon, cut off communication between General
Sedgwick and Germania Ford, and obliged Sedgwick to withdraw toward
Wilderness Tavern. In the course of the afternoon, it became evident
that General Lee was withdrawing his main force toward Spottsylvania
Court House, and General Burnside moved his corps out on the road
leading to the same point. In the course of the night orders were issued
to the surgeons in charge of the hospitals to remove their sick and
wounded to Ely’s Ford, and the supply trains were ordered to move in the
direction of Todd’s tavern. Subsequent to these changes, Fredericksburg
became a depot for the sick and wounded, and was also made a basis for
supplies.

In the course of the afternoon of Saturday, a sharp engagement took
place between the Union and rebel cavalry—the loss on both sides being
about equal, and not exceeding two hundred and fifty on either side. In
the shadow of the darkness, Generals Burnside and Sedgwick moved along
the old Chancellorsville road, and arrived at a field near Spottsylvania
about noon of the following day. In the mean time General Warren, having
marched the whole of Saturday night, also reached a place within three
miles of Spottsylvania Court House, at an early hour in the morning.
Here he encountered the troops of General Ewell, together with a portion
of Longstreet’s command, who had also reached the same place, about the
same time. In fact, the two armies had raced from the Wilderness
battle-ground, in order to gain the choice of position at Spottsylvania;
but the rebels had arrived first, and had thus gained the advantage. On
Sunday morning the National troops were formed in line of battle two and
a half miles north of Spottsylvania Court House. The rebels opposed
them, defiant and formidable. Then began the terrible




                        BATTLE OF SPOTTSYLVANIA.
                            MAY 8–12, 1864.


While the advance troops of Warren’s corps pressed down the road, shells
were thrown into their ranks with great rapidity, but the enemy fell
back before them, making but feeble resistance. A short distance further
on—at a place called Alsop’s farm—the artillery of the enemy was found
to be stationed. The Union batteries were speedily placed in position to
command those of the enemy. The Union battle line was hastily formed,
and comprised General Griffin’s division on the right, and General
Robinson’s on the left.

Firing began immediately on both sides. The Unionists advanced in a
strong line upon the enemy, driving him back into a clearing in the
woods at his rear, and then began the serious work of the day. The
National troops rushed forward upon the enemy with all the impetuosity
of dauntless bravery, and the fight became general in all directions.
The remaining two divisions of Warren’s corps, commanded by Generals
Crawford and Cutter—the latter in command of the lamented General
Wadsworth’s troops—were hurried forward with all possible haste. The
slaughter was horrible—men fell not by twos, or threes, or dozens, but
by scores and hundreds, till the very earth seemed to sicken with the
deluge of blood poured out upon its bosom. For four hours a battle
raged, which, for the bravery displayed by the participants, the fury
with which it was carried on, and the carnage it created, was not
exceeded by any fight during the war. It will be understood, of course,
that all this fighting took place before the arrival of the remaining
corps of the army. The troops of General Warren, opposed as they were to
three times their own number, felt how much depended on their holding
their ground, and they fought with almost unexampled desperation. At the
close of four hours one brigade of the Sixth corps came to the
assistance of General Warren’s troops, which thus reinforced, not only
held the enemy at bay, but drove him back. This closing struggle lasted
for a considerable time, and was by far the fiercest of the day. The
enemy threw his entire strength upon the Union line, but was nobly
repulsed at every point, and compelled to fall back. With the exception
of the single brigade alluded to above, the Fifth corps did the whole of
the fighting of this hard-fought, well-won, and bravely contested day’s
battle.

Many officers were wounded, among whom were General Robinson, Colonel
Dennison, and Captain Martin. Major Stark and Colonel Ryan were killed.
The regiments suffered terribly, especially the First Michigan, which
went into the fight two hundred strong, and came out with a remnant of
twenty-three. The Union loss in killed, wounded, and missing was
estimated at thirteen hundred.

No great battle took place on Monday, the 8th. The time was occupied for
the most part in skirmishing, followed at intervals by heavy
cannonading. Toward evening General Grant ordered an advance on the
enemy, which was made by the divisions of Generals Birney and Gibbon,
followed by General Carroll’s brigade. This force crossed over to the
south bank of a branch of the Po river, where a severe battle with
infantry and artillery took place, both sides charging alternately. The
Unionists were finally obliged to retire, and the enemy held
Spottsylvania Court House.

Upon this day the National cause suffered one of its greatest losses in
the death of an officer whose place could not easily be filled. One of
the most gloomy and saddening calamities of the disastrous battles of
Spottsylvania Court House, was the death of General John Sedgwick,
commanding the sixth corps. General Sedgwick was an almost recklessly
brave man, and constantly exposed to the enemy’s bullets a life too
precious to have been held lightly. He was killed on Monday morning, by
a sharpshooter, while superintending the placing of a section of
artillery. The ball entered his head one inch below the left eye, and
passed out at the back of the right ear, causing instant death. No
general of the United States service was more highly respected or more
sincerely beloved.

General Sedgwick was a native of Cornwall, Litchfield County,
Connecticut, to which place his ancestors removed from West Hartford one
hundred and twenty years ago, and he resided on the old homestead, which
has been in possession of the family during all these years. His
grandfather, General John Sedgwick, was an officer in the Revolutionary
War, and transmitted an honored name to the distinguished Sedgwick
families of Connecticut, Massachusetts and New York. General Sedgwick
was born in 1811, and graduated at West Point in 1837.

He was always warmly attached to the Litchfield home, and in all his
active military life looked forward to the time he might retire to it in
his declining years. Just before the rebellion broke out he had
seriously contemplated such retirement, and on the first demonstration
of treason he told a relative that his hope had been to leave public
life, but added that it could not be now, for his country needed his
services. In private life General Sedgwick was an unassuming, retiring
man, possessing strong feelings and attachments. He was never married,
but kept up his ancestral estate under the care of an unmarried sister,
who was devotedly attached to him.

The remains of General Sedgwick were brought to New York city, where
they lay in state at the City Hall, and were subsequently taken to his
native home, where he was buried with military honors.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Terrible as had been the fighting of the previous days, it did but serve
as a prelude to that of Tuesday, the 10th. The belligerents still
occupied substantially the same positions which they had held upon the
previous day. The Union army faced the rebels in a crescent-shaped line,
extending, from end to end, about six miles. The enemy was protected by
a line of forest and underbrush along his whole centre; and at other
points by strong breastworks. At an early hour preparations were made
for the grand assault, but the attack did not take place until a late
hour in the afternoon. From time to time severe skirmishing occurred
between the combatants, becoming with every hour more severe, till at
last it merged into a general and most desperate engagement. General
Grant had given orders for the decisive attack upon the enemy to be made
precisely at five o’clock. As the hour drew near the anxiety and
excitement became intense. At that time the enemy were discovered in
force upon the right flank, and immediate preparations to meet this
onslaught became necessary, which delayed the preconcerted attack.
General Grant, however, was equal to that emergency, and the enemy was
met and held in check. The assault upon the rebel lines was then fixed
for half past six o’clock; and the enormous columns of the whole army
rapidly gathered together for the coming struggle. At the precise time a
discharge burst at the same instant from the mouths of twelve signal
guns, and put the whole mass of men in motion. Cheer after cheer burst
from the patriot ranks as they swept resistlessly onward, which was
answered back by savage yells from the defiant foe.

The enemy were driven into their intrenchments in gallant style, and
Upton’s brigade of Wright’s division, Sixth corps, got into the rebel
rifle-pits, capturing twelve guns and about one thousand prisoners.

Not being supported by other portions of the line, who were unable to
gain the tier of works in their front, this brigade was forced to
evacuate its advanced position, leaving the captured guns after spiking
them, but bringing off all the prisoners.

The enemy suffered heavy losses during the fight, from shells falling
into their works, and the destructive infantry fire, which was delivered
with remarkable precision.

In writing of this battle a correspondent of the daily press speaks in
the following language:

“The woods between the contending armies were all on fire from shells,
and the wind blowing strong to the northward, gave the enemy a decided
advantage over our troops, who were stifled and blinded by the heat and
smoke. Numbers of the wounded of both sides must have been burned to
death by the devouring element.

“At dusk the scene was one of awful sublimity. A battery of
thirty-two-pounders posted on the right of the Spottsylvania road, kept
up an incessant fire until half-past eight, when quiet was restored.”

The National loss in this most terrible battle was estimated at ten
thousand men; the rebel loss was not less severe. The loss in Federal
officers was very heavy. Among the killed were Brigadier-Generals
Stevenson and Rice.

The enemy’s position was, unquestionably, very strong; but the favorable
results of the fighting were all on the Union side. It was at this time
that General Grant sent to Major-General Dix his celebrated dispatch,
couched in the following words:

“We have now ended the sixth day of very heavy fighting. The result to
this time is much in our favor. Our losses have been heavy, as well as
those of the enemy. I think the loss of the enemy must be greater. We
have taken over five thousand prisoners in battle, while he has taken
from us but few except stragglers. _I propose to fight it out on this
line if it takes all summer._”

On Wednesday, the 11th, the fighting of the day consisted of sharp
skirmishing, which at no time emerged into a battle. During the
afternoon a refreshing rainstorm visited the thirsty earth—the first
rain which had fallen during the campaign. It was indeed welcome,
cooling the atmosphere and laying the dust which had, together with the
excessive heat, almost stifled the soldiers.

Upon the following day, the 12th, the battle was again resumed with
great violence. A dense fog succeeded the rain of the previous day,
veiling the earth in mist, through which the armies could with
difficulty distinguish each other. The first movement was made by the
Second corps, which moved up to the enemy’s lines at the dawn of day.
The first line was formed by the divisions of General Birney and General
Barlow; and the second line by the divisions of Generals Gibbon and
Mott. General Barlow’s division, moving in battalions, advanced boldly
across the rugged and woody space separating the two armies; and soon
with a loud cheer rushed forward upon the enemy’s intrenchments. With
louder and more exultant cries the brave fellows leaped over the
intrenchments, and dashed upon the astonished enemy, compelling their
surrender in a body. An entire division of the rebels was completely
surrounded, and officers and men obliged to surrender. Three thousand
prisoners—including two general officers—General Edward Johnson, and J.
H. Stewart—were captured. Immediately after this very brilliant feat
General Hancock dispatched the following report: “I have captured from
thirty to forty guns. I have finished up Johnson, and am now going into
Early.”

The next assault was made upon the second line of rebel rifle-pits,
which were taken possession of after a long and desperate resistance.
Immediately following this the whole line became engaged. Like all great
battles, the scene was one of appalling grandeur. Hour after hour passes
by, but no one takes any note of time—the roar of battle—with all the
varied cries, shrill and hoarse, shrieks and groans—is all that is
heard; and the clouds of smoke, the flash of fire, and the reeling and
falling of the dead and wounded is all that is seen. At times, while the
shrill and appalling battle cry which leads on each assault of the
columns is silent, the stifled groans of the wounded are heard, and
trains of litter bearers and ambulances follow each other, bearing away
the wounded.

The entire line had moved up to assist the brave Second corps (General
Hancock), which, up to this time, had borne the whole brunt of the
fighting. The Ninth corps, now rushing into the extreme left, joined its
weight to that point. The Sixth corps had advanced against Ewell’s
troops, and General Warren’s corps had moved up on the extreme right.
All were now hotly engaged, and pressed the enemy severely. The rebels
soon made a desperate effort to regain the lost works, but the charge
was nobly met by the Second and Ninth corps, and, after a furious and
bloody battle of three hours, the enemy was forced to fall back.

During this time the Union right and centre had charged the enemy’s
position with all the gallantry inseparable from such thoroughly brave
men, but without success; the rebels were found to be, for the time at
least, impregnable behind their powerful works, in force strong enough
to hold their ground against twice the number of the Unionists; besides
which every avenue of approach was guarded by most formidable artillery.

After a temporary lull in the fight, about midday, General Meade made an
effort to turn the enemy’s right; and crowded his troops down toward his
own left, still keeping up a severe artillery and infantry fire. At this
time the rain again began to fall, and continued to become heavier
during the whole afternoon, till night. But the battle, instead of
slackening, became, if possible, still more terrible. The enemy rapidly
concentrated on the right, charged the Unionists, and again the ground
was fought over with desperation. Night at length closed one of the most
dreadful contests on record, after a duration of fourteen hours, and
darkness settled down upon the wet, gloomy, blood-stained battle-field.

The first decided and important success of this series of movements was
that of General Hancock, on the morning of the 12th, which secured an
advance of a mile to the line at that point.

The courage, skill, and determined bravery exhibited upon the part of
all the troops engaged is deserving of the very highest commendation;
and so admirably did every division, brigade, and regiment behave, that
it is not possible to name any in particular as more highly deserving of
praise than the rest. The loss in killed and wounded numbered ten
thousand men; that of the enemy was estimated as being equally severe.
About three thousand prisoners were captured.

Upon the next day—Friday the 13th—it was discovered that the enemy had
fallen into a new position of defence, and had withdrawn his main force
on the left. The rain still fell heavily, so that the roads were
rendered very difficult. Artillery firing, and occasionally brisk
skirmishing, were kept up from time to time throughout the day, between
small bodies of the troops.

It was at noon this day that General Meade issued the following address
to his army:

“SOLDIERS! The moment has arrived when your commanding officer feels
authorized to address you in terms of congratulation.

“For eight days and nights, without almost any intermission, through
rain and sunshine, you have been fighting a desperate foe in positions
naturally strong, and rendered doubly so by intrenchments. You have
compelled him to abandon his fortifications on the Rapidan, to retire
and to attempt to stop your progress, and now he has abandoned the last
intrenched position, so tenaciously held, suffering in all a loss of
eighteen guns, twenty-two colors, eight thousand prisoners, including
two general officers.

“Your heroic deeds, noble endurance of fatigue and privation, will ever
be memorable. Let us return thanks to God for the mercy thus shown us,
and ask earnestly for its continuance.

“Soldiers! Your work is not over. The enemy must be pursued, and, if
possible, overcome. The courage and fortitude you have displayed renders
your commanding general confident that your future efforts will result
in success. * * *

“We shall soon receive reenforcements, which he cannot expect. Let us
determine, then, to continue vigorously the work so well begun, and,
under God’s blessing, in a short time the object of our labors will be
accomplished.”

Upon the next day—the 14th—the enemy, although he had fallen back, still
held tenaciously to the Court House. By this time General Meade’s line
stretched at right angles across the Fredericksburg and Spottsylvania
roads, leaving on its right the corps of General Hancock, and on the
right centre the Ninth corps of General Burnside. General Warren held
the left, and General Wright the left centre. The position of the enemy
was now that of a semi-circular line of earthworks, with rifle-pits here
and there. These works were well established, on commanding heights, the
entire position being flanked on right and left by dense woods. The
enemy was still busily engaged in strengthening his breastworks; and
General Grant’s troops were speedily armed with spades, so that on both
sides the work of intrenching went forward diligently.

During this time much severe fighting was done on the extreme left.

The next day was the Sabbath—the 15th of May—and one of the few Sabbaths
which passed without a battle when the opposing armies confronted each
other. Reconnoissances were made by both Unionists and rebels, and
positions in every direction were still further strengthened, for all
felt that a momentous movement was close at hand. The pickets exchanged
occasional shots, and the dense woods flanking the enemy’s strong
defences were shelled severely, for the purpose of driving out any
lurking foes who might be concealed there. Late in the afternoon a brief
but sharp engagement took place between a force of the enemy and
Birney’s division, in which the rebels were defeated and suffered
considerable loss.

On the 16th the roads were found to be in such a condition from the
recent rains that any movement against the enemy was impracticable.
During the afternoon a fresh breeze sprang up, and the sun shone down
with almost tropical intensity. The roads dried up rapidly, and on the
17th they were found to be in good condition. The sun still shining
brightly, continued to dry them up so well that a movement was decided
on for Wednesday. These days of rest had greatly refreshed the army; the
troops were in fine health and spirits, and eager for work.

It had all along been General Grant’s desire to outflank the enemy, and
force him to abandon his strong works, rather than to compel his retreat
by falling upon him, and, in order to do this, all his movements had
been made against the enemy’s right. He now determined to change his
mode of operations, and to make a bold assault upon the enemy’s left.
With this view, preparations were made on Tuesday night, under cover of
the darkness, and batteries and troops were moved up for the assault.
The new Union line was formed before morning, and ran direct from right
to left. This line was composed of four divisions, commanded
respectively by Hancock, Burnside, Warren, and Wright.

With the first dawn of day, on the morning of the 18th, the assault was
made. The enemy’s skirmishers were driven back at the first onset, and
again the loud, reverberating roar of cannon echoed back from the
surrounding hills. The air was filled with splinters of shell and
whistling shot, flying along on the wings of destruction. The rebel left
was found to be much strengthened to meet the attack against it, for
General Lee, suspecting Grant’s movement, had made preparations to
receive him. Charge upon charge was made upon the rebels, and first one
and then another of their lines of rifle-pits were captured, together
with many prisoners. With cheer upon cheer, the Union troops pressed on,
until suddenly they came upon a dense, impregnable abattis, behind which
lay concealed a long line of riflemen; while behind these again were
stationed a heavy, frowning array of batteries. To advance was to bring
certain, inevitable death upon a countless number of the brave
Unionists, while, at the same time, the prospect of success in the
charge was very dim. The troops were therefore ordered to retreat, and
fell back in good order, under a destructive fire opened on them by the
enemy. Brigadier-General Barlow, commanding the First division of the
Second corps, is entitled to honor as a brave man and a thoroughly
competent officer, for the admirable behavior of his troops under severe
fire.

It was now clear that the enemy’s position at this point could not be
carried except by an incalculable loss of life, and the attempt was,
therefore, for the time abandoned. The Union loss during this short but
sanguinary conflict numbered twelve hundred.

Both armies remained quiet for the remainder of the day, but kept a
constant watch upon each other’s movements.

During the night, General Grant, having ascertained the enemy’s strength
and precise position, sent off a detachment of troops, in command of
General Torbert, to a point on the Richmond and Fredericksburg road,
called Guinea’s Station, situated about ten miles southeast of
Spottsylvania. By this movement the Unionists gained a position in the
enemy’s rear, and destroyed much valuable rebel property along the
railroad. During the next day reinforcements for Grant’s army arrived
from Belle Plains, and a considerable portion of the day was occupied in
receiving and arranging the newly arrived troops. A portion of the
National troops moved toward Guinea Station, but no fighting took place
between the hostile armies, who were at that time within artillery range
of each other, but remained so quiet that not even a gun was fired.

Between four and five in the afternoon, however, firing was heard upon
the Fredericksburg road, which turned out to be from a strong division
of the rebel General Ewell’s corps. The enemy had fallen upon the Union
baggage train as it filed along in rear of the right flank, but were
gallantly met and repulsed by General Tyler’s division of heavy
artillery, armed as infantry. These troops were mostly new recruits,
and, though thus unexpectedly called into action by this sudden
irruption of the rebel raiders, they acquitted themselves with great
credit, and succeeded in checking the enemy’s advance. They were warmly
commended by General Meade. Before the rebels could make a second
charge, or follow up any advantage they might have gained by dint of
superior numbers, Colonel Tannatt’s brigade came to the assistance of
Tyler, and Ewell’s men were effectually brought to a halt. Another
brigade came forward at this point, and the enemy was driven in great
confusion back into the forest.

Again, at five o’clock, the rebels, with the desperation of starving
men, made a second attack on the baggage-trains, but were speedily
driven back.

During these brisk, but deadly conflicts, the Unionists lost upwards of
six hundred men; the rebel loss was not so heavy. For the remainder of
the day, and during the night, the baggage-trains were closely watched,
but no further attempts were made upon them.

From the 20th of May onward, the movements of General Grant contemplated
forcing General Lee to abandon his position at Spottsylvania, and fall
back towards Richmond. Continued efforts were, therefore, made to flank
the rebel army. Nor were these efforts unsuccessful. On May 23, General
Grant’s army was in a position facing westward, extending from Guinea
Station to Milford, while the enemy had fallen back beyond the North
Anna river.

A fight took place at Taylor’s Bridge Ford, on the 23d, in which General
Birney’s division behaved with great gallantry. The bridge, of course,
was the point at issue, and both parties contested the prize with
desperate valor—the rebels striving to hold, and the Unionists to take
it. About five hundred men were killed on each side. The National troops
succeeded in obtaining possession of the bridge, but it was repossessed
by the rebels during the night, and again taken by the Unionists in the
morning.

On the 24th, the whole army crossed the North Anna; and on the 29th it
had crossed the Pamunkey, its base being White House. The rebels
continued to fall back. There was some fighting on the 30th and the 31st
of May, but no serious engagement until the




                         BATTLE OF COAL HARBOR.
                            JUNE 1–3, 1864.


At the time this battle was fought, the Eighteenth Army Corps (General
Smith) which was detached from the Army of the James, had reinforced the
army of General Meade. The first charge was made by this corps, which
took and held the first line of the enemy’s rifle-pits, capturing six
hundred prisoners. Finding himself thus attacked on his right wing, the
enemy retaliated by a severe assault upon the National right, thinking
it had been weakened to sustain the charge by the left. Longstreet’s
corps, on the rebel side, did most of the fighting. Warren’s and
Hancock’s divisions were, on the Union side, especially assailed. The
enemy made repeated charges, which were as repeatedly repulsed.
Artillery was freely employed in this fight, and the losses on both
sides were very heavy. The rebels being intrenched, their loss was not
so severe as otherwise it would have been. The Union loss was about two
thousand.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF COAL HARBOR, VA., JUNE 3, 1864.]

Thursday, the 2d of May, proved rainy, and General Grant, for this
reason, delayed a further attack of the enemy, although he permitted one
or two charges, which resulted in no positive success. Skirmishing, of
course, was frequent, owing to the close contiguity of the lines of
battle. The first day’s operations had put the Union army in possession
of Coal Harbor, and General Grant’s design now was to push the rebels
across the Chickahominy river—his ultimate object being to hem in the
army of Lee within the cities of Petersburg and Richmond, isolate those
places on all sides, and then compel the surrender of the rebels, either
through starvation or in one general and desperate battle. The rebel
commander penetrated this design, and, naturally, opposed it at every
point; and so skillful and successful was his resistance, that—as will
presently be seen—he was enabled to prolong this contest through a
period of ten months, holding Petersburg and Richmond all the while, and
keeping open his communications with the south and southwest, by way of
Weldon and of Lynchburg. His defenses, it is true, were of the most
formidable character, and so extensive, that it was impossible for
General Grant to concentrate sufficient force for successful assault, at
any one point, without weakening his own lines, which were far more
extended than the rebel defenses, and thus expose himself to an attack
from General Lee.

The battle of the second day at Coal Harbor—being the 3d of June—was
desperate and bloody. The assault was commenced by the National forces
at half-past four o’clock in the morning. The brigades of Generals
Gibbons and Barlow, of General Hancock’s division, made the first attack
on the rebel lines. It was a dark and cloudy morning, and, at intervals,
rain poured down upon the battle-field. Barlow’s and Gibbons’ brigades
took a portion of the rebel works, but were not able to hold their
prize. They captured many prisoners, however, and then, falling back,
took up an advanced position and intrenched themselves. The Eighteenth
and Sixth corps met with about the same success, capturing works which
they were subsequently obliged to resign, and finally intrenching
themselves in a new position close to the enemy’s line. On the Union
right the battle was less severe than upon the left. Far to the left
General Wilson’s cavalry fought that of Wade Hampton. All day long the
battle raged furiously, and even encroached upon the night—a fierce
assault being made by the rebels at nine o’clock in the evening, which
was repulsed by the soldiers of Hancock, Smith, and Wright. But the
results were scarcely commensurate with the sacrifices made for their
attainment.

On the morning of the 5th, the National troops held their advanced
position, and it was found that the enemy’s left wing, in front of the
forces of General Burnside, had been drawn in during the night. The
Union losses, during the three days operations around Coal Harbor, are
set down at not less than seven thousand five hundred.

For several days succeeding this battle, both armies occupied themselves
in strengthening their respective lines of battle. A truce of two hours,
declared on the 6th, enabled the belligerents to bury their dead and
relieve their wounded.




                    GENERAL GRANT’S CHANGE OF BASE.


From the 5th till the 14th of June, General Grant occupied himself in
building defensive works, receiving and placing reinforcements,
distributing supplies, and preparing for a movement across the
Chickahominy and the James rivers, in pursuance of his design of
extending his lines of circumvallation around Petersburg, and of pushing
Lee nearer and nearer to the interior rebel works.

On the 12th of June the enemy’s line extended from Bottom’s Bridge along
the Chickahominy, confronting that of Grant at every point. That night
the National forces began to move, crossing the Chickahominy at Long’s
Bridge and at Jones’s Bridge, and marching for Wilcox’s wharf on the
James river. A portion of the troops went by transports from White House
to Bermuda Hundred, General Butler’s headquarters. On Wednesday, the
15th, the entire army was on the south side of the James river, having
lost, in the skirmishing incident to this important movement, only about
four hundred men. White House had been abandoned as a base, the railroad
leading thither being taken up and all the supplies there accumulated
brought safely away. The distance traversed was fifty-five miles.

By this change of base General Grant’s army was augmented by a junction
with General Butler’s, and by alliance with the United States naval
forces on the James river. He had possessed himself, moreover, with a
healthier tract of country in which to operate, and he had narrowed the
scene of his operations. His dispositions for other and cooperative
campaigns had been wisely made—as shown in other chapters of this
narrative—so that he had now nothing to fear from rebel invasion of the
North. Lee’s attention would now be concentrated on Petersburg and
Richmond, and it was evident that the close of the struggle could not
long be deferred.




                     OPERATIONS ON JAMES RIVER, VA.
                            MAY 4–10, 1864.


When General Grant assumed command of the armies of the United States,
the headquarters of General Butler was at Fortress Monroe, from whence
he exercised jurisdiction over the Department of Southern Virginia and
North Carolina. The part assigned him in the coming campaign was an
important one, and is thus fully described in the report of the
Lieutenant-General:

“My first object being to break the military power of the rebellion and
capture the enemy’s important strongholds, made me desirous that General
Butler should succeed in his movement against Richmond, as that would
tend more than anything else, unless it were the capture of Lee’s army,
to accomplish this desired result in the east. If he failed, it was my
determination, by hard fighting, either to compel Lee to retreat, or so
to cripple him that he could not detach a large force to go north and
still retain enough for the defence of Richmond. It was well understood,
by both Generals Butler and Meade, before starting on the campaign, that
it was my intention to put both their armies south of the James river,
in case of failure to destroy Lee without it.

“Before giving General Butler his instructions, I visited him at Fort
Monroe, and in conversation pointed out the apparent importance of
getting possession of Petersburg and destroying railroad communications
as far south as possible. Believing, however, in the practicability of
capturing Richmond unless it was reinforced, I made that the objective
point of his operations. As the army of the Potomac was to move
simultaneously with him, Lee could not detach from his army with safety,
and the enemy did not have troops elsewhere to bring to the defence of
the city in time to meet a rapid movement from the north of James
river.”

Under date of April 2d, General Grant gave written instructions to
General Butler, in which were more specially detailed his plans for the
opening of the campaign:

“GENERAL: In the spring campaign, which it is desirable shall commence
at as early a day as practicable, it is proposed to have cooperative
action of all the armies in the field, as far as this object can be
accomplished.

“It will not be possible to unite our armies into two or three large
ones to act as so many units, owing to the absolute necessity of holding
on to the territory already taken from the enemy. But, generally
speaking, concentration can be practically effected by armies moving to
the interior of the enemy’s country from the territory they have to
guard. By such movements they interpose themselves between the enemy and
the country to be guarded, thereby reducing the number necessary to
guard important points, or at least occupy the attention of a part of
the enemy’s force, if no greater object is gained. Lee’s army and
Richmond being the greater objects towards which our attention must be
directed in the next campaign, it is desirable to unite all the force we
can against them. The necessity of covering Washington with the army of
the Potomac, and of covering your department with your army, makes it
impossible to unite these forces at the beginning of a movement. I
propose, therefore, what comes nearest this of anything that seems
practicable. The army of the Potomac will act from its present base,
Lee’s army being the objective point. You will collect all the forces
from your command that can be spared from garrison duty, I should say
not less than twenty thousand effective men to operate on the south side
of James river, Richmond being your objective point. To the force you
already have will be added about ten thousand men from South Carolina,
under Major-General Gillmore, who will command them in person.
Major-General W. F. Smith is ordered to report to you, to command the
troops sent into the field from your own department.

“General Gillmore will be ordered to report to you at Fortress Monroe,
with all the troops on transports, by the 18th instant, or as soon
thereafter as practicable. Should you not receive notice by that time to
move, you will make such disposition of them and your other forces as
you may deem best calculated to deceive the enemy as to the real move to
be made.

“When you are notified to move, take City Point with as much force as
possible. Fortify, or rather entrench, at once, and concentrate all your
troops for the field there as rapidly as you can. From City Point
directions cannot be given at this time for your further movements.

“The fact that has already been stated—that is, that Richmond is to be
your objective point, and that there is to be cooperation between your
forces and the army of the Potomac—must be your guide. This indicates
the necessity of your holding close to the south bank of the James river
as you advance. Then, should the enemy be forced into his intrenchments
in Richmond, the army of the Potomac would follow, and by means of
transports the two armies would become a unit.

“All the minor details of your advance are left entirely at your
discretion. If, however, you think it practicable to use your cavalry
south of you so as to cut the railroad about Hicks’ Ford about the time
of the general advance, it would be of immense advantage.

“You will please forward for my information at the earliest practicable
day, all orders, details, and instructions you may give for the
execution of this order.

                                       “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.

“Major-General B. F. BUTLER.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 19th of the same month General Butler was informed that he was
expected to move from Fort Monroe on the same day that General Meade
moved from Culpepper. The exact time of course could not at that time be
designated; but, says General Grant: “It was my intention to fight Lee
between Culpepper and Richmond if he would stand. Should he, however,
fall back into Richmond, I would follow up and make a junction with his
(General Butler’s) army on the James river; that, could I be certain he
would be able to invest Richmond on the south side so as to have his
left resting on the James, above the city, I would form the junction
there; that circumstances might make this course advisable any how; that
he should use every exertion to secure a footing as far up the south
side of the river as he could, and as soon as possible after the receipt
of orders to move; that if he could not carry the city, he should at
least detain as large a force as possible.”

The military force under General Butler comprised the Eighteenth corps
under General W. F. Smith, and the Tenth corps, under General Q. A.
Gillmore. In order to mislead the enemy, these forces, on the 2d of May,
were massed at Yorktown and Gloucester as if designed for a movement up
the York river. At the same time a brigade under Colonel S. F. Alford,
Third New York, landed at West Point, up the York river, and commenced
building the wharves, &c. On the 4th of May orders to move were issued,
and the troops embarked on board the transports. After dark on the 4th
the vessels began to move down the York river, and up the James river,
preceded by three army gunboats under command of Brigadier-General
Graham; by the double-enders Eutaw, Mackinaw, and Osceola; four
monitors, the Tecumseh, Canonicus, Saugus, Onondaga, and the iron-clad
Atlanta, and by the smaller gunboats, Commodore Morris, Hunchback,
Commodore Jones, Dawn, Delaware, Putnam, and Sheshonee.

General Butler thus describes the result of his first movement, in a
dispatch to General Grant, from City Point:

“We have seized Wilson’s Wharf Landing. A brigade of Wild’s colored
troops are there. At Fort Powhatan Landing two regiments of the same
brigade have landed. At City Point, Hink’s division, with the remaining
troops and battery, have landed. The remainder of both the Eighteenth
and Tenth Army Corps are being landed at Bermuda Hundred, above the
Appomattox.

“No opposition experienced thus far. The movement was apparently a
complete surprise. Both army corps left Yorktown during last night. The
monitors are all over the bar at Harrison’s Landing and above City
Point. The operations of the fleet have been conducted to-day with
energy and success. Generals Smith and Gillmore are pushing the landing
of the men. General Graham with the army gunboats, led the advance
during the night, capturing the signal stations of the rebels.”

Simultaneous with the departure of the transports, in order to embarrass
the enemy, a party of nineteen hundred cavalry, led by Colonel West,
started from Williamsburgh, to proceed up the Peninsula by
land—supported by infantry—who drove the rebels before them, whenever
encountered. At the same time, also, another expedition, consisting of
the Eleventh Pennsylvania cavalry, Third New York cavalry, and First
Delaware cavalry, and led by General Kautz, started up the James river.
The design of this three-fold movement was to cut railroad
communications between Richmond and Petersburg, and between Petersburg
and Weldon, and thus to prevent reinforcements and supplies from coming
to Lee’s army. In this they were partially successful. Within twenty
hours after the transports sailed, the National forces were at City
Point, with not a rebel behind them. Colonel West was completely
successful in his Peninsula advance. On the 5th he dashed across the
Chickahominy, and attacked the camp of the Fourth Virginia cavalry, in
which thirty of the enemy were killed and wounded and thirty-five horses
captured.

General Kautz’s party, proceeding up the south bank of the James, as if
to cover the movement of the transports, wheeled off at Surrey
Court-House, on the road for Sussex Court-House. Thence they proceeded
to Hicksford, forty-five miles below Petersburg, where they cut the
Petersburg road by destroying the bridge over the Meherrin river.

Colonel Spear, with a detachment of Kautz’s cavalry, pushed on to
Jarrett’s Station, by the county road, where he destroyed the depot and
a quantity of grain and supplies, after having put to flight a body of
the enemy who opposed him.

Meantime General Kautz proceeded to Nottaway river, with the main body
of his command, where he encountered fifteen hundred of the enemy
entrenched in a square redoubt. After a spirited contest the rebels were
hemmed up in the fort by a portion of the Federal force, while the
remainder proceeded to destroy the public stores and burn the bridge.
After advancing to Sussex Court House, they encamped until Monday
following, the 8th, when they went on to Littleton, and taking the
Petersburg plank-road, they marched within seven miles of that place.
Reaching the Norfolk and Petersburg railroad, they burnt several bridges
and destroyed the telegraph and railroad, advancing thirteen miles on
that road. The next morning they returned to City Point. About three
hundred prisoners were captured on this expedition.

On the 7th of May five brigades, under General Brooks, advanced toward
the Petersburg and Richmond railroad, where they encountered a large
force of the enemy, and engaged them at intervals for six hours. The
railroad bridge across one of the tributaries of the Appomattox, seven
miles from Petersburg, was destroyed, when the troops were withdrawn to
their former position.

On the 9th there was a general advance of General Butler’s troops in the
same direction. The enemy were discovered near Bakeman’s Creek, where
severe skirmishing ensued, the brunt of which was borne by General
Heckman’s brigade. A furious charge of the rebels was met and bravely
repelled by the 27th Massachusetts. The rebel rifle-pits were finally
carried by a simultaneous charge of the brigade; but the Federal[ were
checked by a strong earthwork near Swift creek, that commanded the forks
of the road. General Terry with the right of the Union forces, destroyed
the railroad track about Chester Court House Junction, when the troops
were withdrawn. The Federal loss was about four hundred and fifty in
killed and wounded, principally in Heckman’s brigade. Many rebel
prisoners were taken, chiefly from South Carolina regiments. They were a
portion of Beauregard’s troops, who had just arrived in Virginia.




                      BATTLE AT FORT DARLING, VA.
                            MAY 12–16, 1864.


On the 12th of May, a heavy force under General Gilmore advanced up the
railroad toward Chester and Richmond, while a corresponding force, under
General Smith, proceeded up the Petersburg and Richmond road between
James river and the railroad. The object of this combined expedition was
to cover the movements of General Kautz’s cavalry, then operating on the
Nottaway river.

After a series of skirmishes throughout the day, General Smith’s troops
reached Proctor’s Run towards night, within three miles of Fort Darling.

Meantime General Gilmore’s troops on the left, had approached the
neighborhood of Half-way House, unopposed by the enemy, at which place
he baited his command for the night.

On the following morning the rebels were found to have withdrawn
themselves within an extensive range of earthworks, which constituted
the outer line of defences of Fort Darling. After consultation, General
Butler determined to dislodge them from their position by turning their
works on the left. While heavy skirmishing along the whole line was in
progress, the Union left was ordered to swing around upon the centre and
right, while a large body of troops advanced to turn the right flank of
the rebel works. The flanking column moved round stealthily through the
woods, slightly to the left, till they reached the outer edge of the
fortifications. Here, under cover, they charged up a steep hill, and
then across an open space, only twenty or thirty rods in width, in the
face of a destructive fire of musketry. Before the rebels could reload
the Federals troops had carried the position, capturing thirty of the
enemy. Their own loss was about one hundred and thirty.

The enemy abandoned the whole of the outer line on the next morning, and
withdrew to their second tier of works. The parapet of these outer
defences was in some places ten feet thick, having many embrasures for
artillery.

The Federal artillery was now brought to bear on the rebels in their new
position, and aided by the sharpshooters, the enemy’s batteries were
soon silenced, and the combat for the remainder of the day was confined
to the sharpshooters.

One of the magazines of Fort Darling exploded during the afternoon,
which was the occasion of much cheering in the Union lines. A night
attack was made on the Federals near the Petersburg turnpike, but being
on the alert, the enemy was repulsed without much difficulty.

At noon on the 15th, the rebels came out of their intrenchments in great
force, and attacked Heckman’s brigade. The combat was with musketry
alone, and lasted until four o’clock, when the enemy were discomfited,
and retired within their works.

At daylight on the 16th the rebels again hurled a strong force on the
weakest point of the Federal lines, upon Heckman’s brigade on the right
wing, the same troops who had suffered so heavily in previous contests.
Under cover of a dense fog the rebels bore down in overwhelming numbers,
and Heckman’s brave troops were compelled to yield their position.
Colonel Drake’s brigade was fortunately thrown forward at this juncture,
and for a time stayed the advancing enemy. Two brigades of Weitzel’s
division were also attacked at the same time, but repulsed the enemy
with great slaughter. Meantime, with courageous pertinacity, the rebels
attacked Terry’s division on the Union left, and two of the Union
brigades of that commander suffered heavy loss. General Gilmore was soon
compelled to yield his favorable position on the left, and the whole
Federal force was then withdrawn, without confusion or serious loss in
retreating.

An attempt of the enemy to get in the rear of the Union forces was
repulsed; but General Butler was compelled to cut new roads for the
retreat of his army, as the rebels held control, of both the roads by
which the Federals had advanced. General Butler was then compelled to
retire within his intrenchments between the forks of the James and
Appomattox rivers, at Bermuda Hundred, a strong position, in which he
was perfectly secure against the whole rebel army.

The total loss of the Federals in this battle was five thousand men,
mostly in prisoners.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 19th of May the rebels, under Beauregard, encouraged by their
successful resistance of Butler’s troops, resolved to attack that
officer in his intrenchments at Bermuda Hundred. After two assaults, in
which they met with only temporary success, the rebels retired with
severe loss. The loss of the Unionists was about three hundred.

The result of the line of strategy thus far adopted by General Butler in
this campaign did not meet with the approbation of General Grant, who
considered that a good opportunity to capture Petersburg, if not
Richmond, had been allowed to pass by, between the 6th and 13th of May,
before Beauregard could collect his dispersed forces in North and South
Carolina, and concentrate them in front of Butler’s forces, for the
defence of Petersburg.

That General was now in a position of great security, but completely
shut off from further operations against Richmond; and it required but a
comparatively small force of the enemy to hold him there, while a large
portion of the troops opposed to him were sent out to assist in opposing
the advance of General Grant’s army north of Richmond. To compensate for
this strengthening of Lee’s army, General Grant directed that General W.
F. Smith’s corps should join the Army of the Potomac.




                      ASSAULTS OF PETERSBURG, VA.
                            JUNE 8–18, 1864.


On the first occasion the city of Petersburg was actually in possession
of the Federal forces, but the failure of a prominent commander to
perceive and take advantage of the opportunity, was the cause of heavy
losses to the Federal army in after battles for the same object.

On the night of June 8, an expedition under General Gilmore was sent out
from Bermuda Hundred for the capture of Petersburg.

The cavalry force was under General Kautz, who carried the works on the
south side of the town, with but slight resistance, and penetrated to
the suburbs of the city, where they remained for some time, awaiting the
advance of the infantry from the north. General Gilmore, finding the
works which he approached very strong, and deeming an assault
impracticable, returned to Bermuda Hundred without attempting one. The
cavalry being unsupported, were obliged to yield the advantage gained,
and retire.

It was well known by General Grant that the enemy held but a small
garrison at that time in Petersburg. Attaching great importance to the
possession of that place before the return of the troops that had been
sent from there to reinforce Lee, he immediately detached General
Smith’s command by water, via the White House, to reach Bermuda Hundred
in advance of the Army of the Potomac. The design of this was to secure
Petersburg before the enemy, becoming aware of the intention of the
Federal chief, could reinforce the place. The importance attached by
General Grant to this movement, induced him to seek a personal interview
with General Butler, at that time, which is thus alluded to in the
report of the Lieutenant-General.

“The instructions to General Butler were verbal, and were for him to
send General Smith immediately, that night, with all the troops he could
give him without sacrificing the position he then held. I told him that
I would return to the Army of the Potomac, hasten its crossing, and
throw it forward to Petersburg by divisions as rapidly as it could be
done; that we could reinforce our armies more rapidly there than the
enemy could bring troops against us. General Smith got off as directed,
and confronted the enemy’s pickets near Petersburg before daylight next
morning, but for some reason, that I have never been able to
satisfactory understand, did not get ready to assault his main lines
until near sundown. Then, with a part of his command only, he made the
assault, and carried the lines northeast of Petersburg from the
Appomattox river, for a distance of over two [and a half miles,
capturing fifteen pieces of artillery and three hundred prisoners. This
was about seven P. M. Between the line thus captured and Petersburg
there were no other works, and there was no evidence that the enemy had
reinforced Petersburg with a single brigade from any source. The night
was clear—the moon shining brightly—and favorable to further operations.
General Hancock, with two divisions of the Second corps, reached General
Smith, just after dark, and offered the services of these troops as he
(Smith) might wish, waiving rank to the named commander, who he
naturally supposed knew best the position of affairs, and what to do
with the troops. But instead of taking these troops, and pushing at once
into Petersburg, he requested General Hancock to relieve a part of his
line in the captured works, which was done before midnight.

“By the time I arrived the next morning, the enemy was in force. An
attack was ordered to be made at six o’clock that evening by the troops
under Smith and the Second and Ninth corps. It required until that time
for the Ninth corps to get up and into position. The attack was made as
ordered, and the fighting continued with but little intermission until
six o’clock the next morning, and resulted in our carrying the advance
and some of the main works of the enemy to the right (our left) of those
previously captured by General Smith, several pieces of artillery, and
over four hundred prisoners.

“The Fifth corps having got up, the attacks were renewed and persisted
in with great vigor on the 17th and 18th, but only resulted in forcing
the enemy to an interior line from which he could not be dislodged. The
advantages in position gained by us were very great. The army then
proceeded to envelop Petersburg toward the Southside railroad, as far as
possible, without attacking fortifications.”

The severe and continued fighting of the four days resulted in a loss to
the Federal army of about ten thousand men; the casualties of the Second
corps alone were estimated at fifteen hundred men.

                  *       *       *       *       *

General Grant thus alludes to the operations near Bermuda Hundred,
General Butler’s headquarters, which transpired simultaneously with the
transactions thus described:

“On the 6th, the enemy, to reinforce Petersburg, withdrew from a part of
his intrenchment in front of Bermuda Hundred, expecting no doubt to get
troops from north of the James to take the place of those withdrawn
before we could discover it. General Butler, taking advantage of this,
at once moved a force on the railroad between Petersburg and Richmond.
As soon as I was apprised of the advantage thus gained, to retain it I
ordered two divisions of the Sixth corps, General Wright commanding,
that were embarking at Wilcox landing, under orders for City Point, to
report to General Butler, at Bermuda Hundred, of which General Butler
was notified, and the importance of holding a position in advance of his
present line urged upon him.

“About two o’clock in the afternoon General Butler was forced back to
the line the enemy had withdrawn from in the morning. General Wright,
with his two divisions, joined General Butler on the afternoon of the
17th, the latter still holding with a strong picket line the enemy’s
works. But instead of putting these divisions into the enemy’s works to
hold them, he permitted them to halt and rest some distance in the rear
of his own line. Between four and five o’clock in the forenoon the enemy
attacked and drove in his pickets, and reoccupied his old line.

“On the night of the 20th, and morning of the 21st, a lodgment was
effected by General Butler, with one brigade of infantry, on the north
bank of the James, at Deep Bottom, and connected the pontoon bridge with
Bermuda Hundred.”




                  WELDON RAILROAD, NEAR PETERSBURG VA.
                           JUNE 22–23, 1864.


An attempt was made on the 22d of June, to cut the Weldon railroad below
Petersburg, in order to cut off the rebel supplies through that
important line of communication. The expedition was simultaneous in
departure with a cavalry force under General Wilson, whose design was to
also cut the railroad at a point several miles below.

The Sixth corps, in conjunction with the Second, were dispatched early
in the morning, but had not advanced far before they were discovered by
the rebels, who boldly came out to meet them, in order to check the
movement on the railroad. Great advantage occurred to the rebel forces
from a more accurate knowledge of the topography of the country. Hill’s
rebel corps first made their appearance on the flank of Barlow’s
division, gradually worked round towards his rear, and he eventually
succeeded in throwing a division of his troops between the Second and
Sixth corps, thus creating confusion in the Union ranks. A desultory
combat ensued for a short time, in which the Federals were driven some
distance, and several hundred of Barlow’s men were captured. The left
flank of Mott’s division now became involved in a similar misfortune,
when he too was compelled to retire with the loss of three or four
hundred prisoners. The rebel troops following up their advantage, soon
became strongly reinforced, and assailed Gibbon’s division in front and
rear. His brigades on the right boldly withstood the enemy; while those
on the left, though slightly entrenched, were obliged to yield ground
under pressure of the immense force which was brought against them. A
four-gun battery now opened on the enemy, but being without infantry
supports, it was soon captured, and the rebel troops pressed forward in
dense masses, throwing the Federal lines into inextricable confusion.
Several regiments were captured at this time, which had become so
disorganized as to be able to oppose little if any resistance. At this
point a change of front was effected by a small force, the centre of
which was the Twentieth Massachusetts, and the enemy were soon checked
by a determined resistance. A want of good discipline and generalship,
exposed the Federals to a heavy loss and severe defeat on this occasion
by an inferior force of the enemy. The ground was partly recovered on
the succeeding day by an advance of the Sixth and Second corps; but it
soon became apparent that the main object of the expedition was
unattainable, as the enemy were strongly intrenched on the northern side
of the Weldon railroad and an assault was not deemed advisable. The
Union loss was five hundred in killed and wounded, and two thousand
prisoners.




           ENGAGEMENTS AT REAMS’S STATION, STONY CREEK, ETC.
                           JUNE 22–29, 1864.


The cavalry expedition which left the Federal camps at the same time
with the infantry force described in the previous section, was
successful in its results. It was composed of General Wilson’s division
of the Army of the Potomac, and General Kautz’s division of the Army of
the James, both under the command of the former officer. The entire
force comprised about seven thousand men, and was accompanied by three
batteries of four guns each. This force was also designed to operate on
the railroads south of Petersburg, and the results of their raid were
such as to deprive the rebels of their accustomed supplies for several
weeks by the ordinary roads, which occasioned them great inconvenience
and actual want. They first struck the Weldon railroad at Reams’s
Station, where they destroyed all the public buildings, and several
miles of the road. They then struck boldly across the country by way of
Dinwiddie Court House to Sutherland’s Station, destroying several miles
of the Sutherland railroad, fifteen miles from Petersburg; also at
Ford’s Station on the Lynchburg railroad, twenty-two miles from
Petersburg, Kautz’s troops being in advance, where sixteen cars, two
locomotives, and the depot were destroyed, and several miles of the
track rendered useless.

On the morning of the 23rd, Kautz’s troops again pursued their march,
and on reaching Nottoway Station a rebel force of two brigades made
their appearance, and an engagement ensued, in which the enemy were
defeated. General Kautz’s troops moved on to Burkesville in the
afternoon, where the work of destruction was continued. General Wilson’s
command proceeded from Nottoway Court House to Medler’s Station, and
destroyed the Danville railroad to Roanoke bridge, a distance of
twenty-five miles, where he found the enemy in force, and in a position
from which he could not dislodge him. The entire force then moved in a
southeasterly direction toward Williamsburg, which they reached on the
morning of the 26th. General Wilson then commenced his return march, and
on the 28th he met the enemy’s cavalry in force at the Weldon railroad
crossing of Stony creek. The rebels made some show of resistance while
the Federals were crossing the bridge, but were speedily driven back,
and the crossing effected. The enemy were soon encountered in force and
a fierce contest ensued. Under a severe fire a portion of the Federal
cavalry dismounted and formed a slight breastwork, where they resisted
several charges of the rebels. After five hours’ fighting, General
Wilson relinquished the design of forcing a passage at that point, and
sent General Kautz’s force up a left-hand road to Reams’s Station,
supposing that place to be in the possession of Federal troops. General
Kautz there encountered a body of Confederate cavalry, supported by
infantry, and after a short engagement was compelled to retire, with the
loss of his artillery and trains. In this encounter General Kautz and a
part of his force became separated from the body of the Federal cavalry,
but succeeded in making his way into the Union lines. General Wilson,
with the remainder of the force, succeeding in crossing the Nottoway
river, and coming in safely on the left and rear.




                SHERMAN’S MARCH FROM ATLANTA TO SAVANNAH
                   NOVEMBER 16 TO DECEMBER 22, 1804.


“On the 12th of November,” says General Sherman’s report, “my army stood
detached and cut off from all communication with the rear.” On the 16th,
General Sherman himself left Atlanta, and the march may be said to have
fairly commenced. It covered a period of five weeks, and terminated in
the capture of Savannah. In many respects this was the most brilliant
operation of the entire war. The sensation which the great march
occasioned throughout the North and in Europe, is almost unexampled in
history. One effective element was its mystery. In leaving Atlanta,
Sherman cut himself off from all communication with the North, and
utterly disappeared—no one knew whither, except such as enjoyed the
confidence of the government. The rebel authorities and press were
uncommonly reticent of all information of his movements. Rumors were
hunted up from day to day, but it was not until the army emerged upon
the Atlantic coast, that its history became known, and the importance
and the brilliancy of Sherman’s campaign was adequately realized. The
story of the great march has been many times told—very curtly and
concisely by General Sherman himself, in his report; very profusely by
war-correspondents who accompanied the army, and have since put forth
their narratives of its adventures. It was not attended by any important
battles, but was, of course, marked by a great variety of lively and
picturesque incidents.

The army, consisting of sixty thousand infantry and five thousand five
hundred cavalry, with one cannon to each thousand men, was divided into
two wings, the right being entrusted to Major-General O. O. Howard,
commanding the Fifteenth and Seventeenth corps, and the left to
Major-General H. W. Slocum, commanding the Fourteenth and Twentieth
corps. The right wing, under General Howard, preceded by
Brigadier-General J. Kilpatrick’s cavalry division, was put in motion in
the direction of Jonesboro’ and McDonough, with orders to make an
imposing feint on Macon, “to cross the Ocmulgee about Planter’s Mills,
and rendezvous in the neighborhood of Gordon in seven days, exclusive of
the day of march.” The cavalry moved out in columns of fours, filing
past the right wing, their splendid appearance eliciting shouts of
applause from the infantry. The latter suspected rightly that to
Kilpatrick was assigned the glorious task of releasing the Union
prisoners confined at Millen, and they consequently wished him God-speed
with all their hearts.

On the same day, General Slocum moved by Decatur and Stone Mountain. The
progress of the corps was at first slow, but the spirits of the men were
buoyant. They had been told all it was necessary for them to know, that
the base was to be changed, that a long and difficult march was before
them, and that a fatal blow was, by such means, to be dealt the rebel
Confederacy. The ensuing night proved pleasant; the road was broad and
good, and brilliantly illuminated by the conflagration of Atlanta.

The army was to move in four columns. The two constituting the left
wing, under General Slocum, were to take the more northerly route, and
the two forming the right, under Howard, were to pursue the more
southerly one, but all were to keep within supporting distance of each
other, with the cavalry operating on the flanks. The troops were
provided with good wagon trains, loaded with ammunition and forty days’
edible supplies, and were instructed to maintain this order of things as
long as possible by foraging liberally, and “living chiefly, if not
solely, upon the country.” Orders were issued to prevent the infliction
of any unnecessary loss and suffering upon the inhabitants, and “to
leave each family a reasonable portion for its maintenance but of course
such instructions were often disregarded and too frequently converted
into a license for indiscriminate plunder, so that the Georgians were at
last compelled to endure the full penalty of the fratricidal war they
had assisted in provoking.

As the left wing, under General Slocum, moved forward, the railroad from
Social Circle to Madison was torn up. On reaching Rutledge, the railroad
depot, engine-house, &c., were destroyed, and large quantities of cotton
were burned, three hundred bales being often destroyed by one corps in a
day’s march. Foraging, too, began to be richly recompensed. Madison, one
of the loveliest villages in Georgia, was next partially shorn of its
beauty. Its stores were sacked and its slave calaboose burned to the
ground. On Sunday the troops arrived at Eatonville, a terminus of the
branch railroad from Milledgeville, where they suffered much from cold
rains and the worst and most slippery roads they had yet traversed.
General Geary had, in the mean time, made a detour, for the purpose of
destroying the Oconee railroad bridge, a splendid structure, twelve
hundred feet in length. Several wagon bridges, tanneries,
shoe-factories, and four hundred bales of cotton in the neighborhood
shared its fate before he joined the main column. Supplies were now
found on every hand in abundance, including stacks of corn fodder,
numerous ground beds, containing about one hundred bushels of sweet
potatoes in each; also, cattle, sheep, hogs, and poultry. Fine horses
and sleek mules were hidden in thickets, but they were almost invariably
discovered by the men and appropriated to government use. Negroes
willingly assisted the soldiers in their search for hidden treasures,
and left their homes at a moment’s preparation to go they knew not
whither, in search of freedom, which they too often imagined to be “an
eternal Christmas—a life-long holiday.” Old and young, strong and weak,
men, women, and children, of all shades, some dressed in their master’s
or mistress’ best, and others almost naked, joined Sherman’s march, some
of them declaring that “Mars’r Sherman was a great man, but dis am de
work ob de Lord.”

On the twenty-second of November, Captain Duncan, with ten scouts,
dashed into Milledgeville, the capital of the State, and captured it.
The mayor came forth, and made a formal surrender of the town to General
Slocum, deprecating the destruction of private property. Governor Brown,
after vainly endeavoring to infuse into the hearts of the legislators
the courage which he himself could not muster, had fled precipitately,
as they had done, leaving the capital without defenders. Two thousand
stand of arms, a ton and a half of powder, and much other valuable
public property, was here captured. The penitentiary was burned by some
disorderly soldiers, after the convicts had been released. Millions of
Georgia paper money was found in the Treasurer’s office. Private
property was here protected, and only that belonging to the rebel
government, including two thousand bales of cotton, arsenals, machinery,
depots, &c., was burned.

General Kilpatrick’s cavalry had been—as, indeed, they were during the
whole march—busy covering the movements of the infantry columns,
protecting flanks, lighting up the country with burning cotton, guarding
against rebel dashes in the rear, and fighting splendidly in front.
After crossing Mud Creek, near Jonesboro’, the advance encountered the
enemy in force, provided with artillery. The rebel cannon opened
fiercely, but the enemy no sooner witnessed the imposing display of
cavalry which confronted them, than they lost heart, and retreated to
Lovejoy’s Station, where Wheeler had taken refuge behind a line of
earthworks, with artillery in position, and a large force of militia and
one brigade of his old command, under Iverson, numbering in all perhaps
four thousand men.

Colonel Murray’s gallant brigade, consisting of four regiments, was
formed for the assault, while the artillery on both sides thundered
heavily. The open country was favorable for a charge, which was quickly
sounded, and a brilliant dash upon the rebel works was made, which
resulted in the recapture of two of Rodman’s guns, which were lost by
Stoneman in his unfortunate raid, and the complete rout of the enemy,
with the loss on his part of ten killed and forty taken prisoners.

General Howard was now approaching Planter’s Mills with the view of
laying his pontoons and crossing the Ocmulgee, which purpose he
accomplished undisturbed. Kilpatrick was at the same time menacing Macon
from the west side of the stream. His cavalry passed Clinton on the 20th
and advanced upon Macon in three columns, the brigade under Colonel
Atkins taking the right, that under Colonel Murray the left, while the
Third Kentucky held the central road. Colonel Murray went dashing for
miles over a succession of barricades with little loss till he came
within reach of the guns of the enemy’s works, which opened a furious
discharge upon him. Without flinching, the Tenth Ohio advanced in the
face of this fire up the hill, and when the signal charge was given,
rushed forward with irresistible impetuosity. The works were surmounted,
artillerymen and infantry supports scattered, and the fort captured with
a celerity that surprised the victors themselves. But while busying
themselves with the eight siege guns they had taken but could neither
spike nor remove, the enemy rallied, other guns were turned upon the
Federals, and they were compelled to retire.

The cavalry now destroyed the Central railroad as far as Griswoldsville,
where Walcott’s brigade of infantry joined them in order to cover that
flank, while Howard’s trains were closing up and his men scattered and
engaged in the destruction of the railroad toward Gordon. The enemy had
made a reconnoissance in force and captured an entire picket post. He
was approaching in considerable strength, and scarcely had the Union
cavalry thrown up some hasty works, before they were assaulted by the
rebels, who advanced with a deafening yell. Walcott’s infantry,
regarding the Confederate militia with supreme contempt, swept down upon
them; but they did not prove such contemptible foes after all, and were
content with nothing short of a thorough defeat. They were commanded by
General Phillips, who displayed much gallantry in rallying them when
they shrank under a heavy fire of musketry and artillery; but his
efforts were finally unavailing, and his men fled panic-stricken,
leaving their brave commander and several hundred men prisoners in the
hands of the Union troops.

Kilpatrick crossed the Oconee river and joined Sherman at Milledgeville.

Slocum’s column left the capital on the 24th, crossed the Oconee, and
plunged into an extensive pine forest. The Oconee bridge was burned on
the following morning. The road traversed a wide swamp formed by a
winding creek, over which nine bridges had been built. The enemy had
destroyed these, and pontoons and corduroy had to supply their place.
Skirmishing with the enemy now grew lively. A dash of Colonel Hughes
into Sandersville nearly proved fatal to him, and the infantry of the
second column advanced to undisturbed possession of the town. Louisville
was reached on the 30th, and on the 2d and 3d of December, both men and
mules suffered much from the heat. On the march, the plantation of a
violent secessionist, Dr. W. Jones, was completely devastated, and that
of widow Jones, who had shown sympathy to Union captives, was spared for
the sake of her charitable deeds. The Milieu stockade, which had been
the prison of many thousand Union captives, was passed, but the
prisoners had been removed before even the swift and dashing Kilpatrick
could reach it. It consisted of a high log fence, enclosing fifteen
acres, in a thick pine forest, and was a melancholy and dreary
spectacle.

The right wing, under General Howard, had encountered little opposition,
except at Oconee Bridge, where Major Hartridge, of Wheeler’s cavalry,
made a stout but unavailing resistance. The Fourteenth and Twentieth
corps arrived at Millen with punctuality, which tended to ensure the
accomplishment of Sherman’s masterly plans.

Kilpatrick had, in the mean time, been raiding in advance. Two hundred
of his men under Captain Hayes, had struck out sixty miles from the main
command. They ventured within eight miles of Augusta, destroying a train
of cars, the bridge over Brier creek on the Augusta Branch railroad, and
committed other devastations calculated to weaken and confound the
enemy. Kilpatrick took special pains while Hayes was thus engaged, to
keep Wheeler’s attention fixed upon him, in the vicinity of Louisville.
Colonel Murray’s detachment was thrice vigorously assailed by the rebel
cavalry, and though driven off at last by the aid of artillery.
Kilpatrick’s command continued to be harassed with sharp skirmishing,
which culminated in a hard fight, at Turkey creek, where the narrow and
difficult passage over the bridge afforded the enemy an opportunity to
check his progress.

[Illustration: HOOD’S HEADQUARTERS AT ATLANTA.]

[Illustration: SHERMAN’S HEADQUARTERS AT ATLANTA.]

On the 28th of November, a foggy morning, Wheeler’s cavalry suddenly
assaulted Kilpatrick’s rear, drove him behind his second barricade, and
followed up the advantage with so much vigor, that nothing but hard
fighting and swift running saved that commander from capture. At Buck
Head creek the cavalry had another sharp conflict. The enemy charged
Kilpatrick on the flank, but his men were advantageously posted behind
timber, and the rebels exposed in an open field to a fire which drove
them back with the loss of two hundred left dead and wounded upon the
field. On the first of December Kilpatrick had the good fortune to
strike Wheeler’s cavalry in turn on the flank, and an encounter ensued
in which the rebels were defeated. On the 4th, Kilpatrick was again in
search of the enemy, and found him eight miles from Waynesboro’, where
he was ensconced behind rail barricades. These defences were found
obstinate, but Kilpatrick led his men in person, when the three lines
were successfully carried in a hand-to-hand fight, and Wheeler was
chased through Waynesboro’. The cavalry now moved toward Savannah,
exchanging a few shots with the rebel infantry at Sister’s ferry, when,
passing to the right wing again, they moved through Cypress Swamps; and,
on December 10th, they were shelled by the rebel batteries at Savannah,
in plain view, while picking their way through the rice fields which the
rebels had flooded to prevent their approach to the city.

As all the columns had reached their rendezvous about Millen in time,
they were ordered to continue their march on Savannah by several roads,
according to their position in line; General Davis following the
Savannah railroad, General Slocum the middle road, by the way of
Springfield, General Blair the railroad, and General Howard continuing
still south and west of the Ogeechee, with instructions to cross to the
east bank opposite Eden Station.

On approaching Savannah, the country became more marshy and difficult,
and the pioneer companies were constantly employed removing felled trees
and other obstructions, so placed as to impede the advance of the army.
When the heads of the columns were within fifteen miles of Savannah, all
the avenues to the city were found to be thus obstructed, with the
addition of extended earthworks and artillery. “But these,” says General
Sherman, “were easily turned, and the enemy driven away, so that by the
10th of December the rebels were driven within their lines at Savannah,
which followed two swampy streams, bordered by flooded ricefields.” The
only approaches to the city were by two railroads and three dirt-roads,
all of which were commanded by heavy ordnance, too strong for an attack
by the artillery which Sherman’s army had brought with it.

General Slocum had struck the Charleston railroad near the bridge, and
thus severed the connection between Charleston and Savannah. He invested
the latter city on the right and front, the left of the Twentieth corps
extending to the river. Here some of the foragers discovered the steamer
Water Witch, captured from the Union fleet, moving up, which was soon
recaptured and burned.

Howard now swung into line, bringing the Seventeenth corps on the right
centre, and placing the Fifteenth in reserve, to open communication with
the Union fleet, which purpose was effected by Captain Duncan, chief of
Howard’s scouts.

Major-General Kilpatrick had reconnoitred Fort McAllister, and, by a
rapid movement to Kilkenny Bluff, also succeeded in communicating with
the fleet. He solicited permission to attack the fort, which was very
prudently refused.




                  THE CAPTURE OF FORT MC ALLISTER, GA.
                           DECEMBER 13, 1864.


The railroad bridge called King’s Bridge, across the Ogeechee, leading
to the fort, had been burned by the rebels, and was now reconstructed in
an incredibly short time. On the 13th of December the Second division of
the Fifteenth corps, under the command of Brigadier-General Hazen,
crossed the bridge to the west bank, with orders to carry Fort
McAllister by assault. This work was a strong enclosed redoubt, manned
by two companies of artillery and three of infantry, in all about two
hundred men, and mounting twenty-three guns, _en barbette_, and one
mortar. General Hazen deployed his division about the fort, with both
flanks resting upon the river, posted his skirmishers behind the trunks
of trees whose branches had been used for abattis, and, about five P.
M., assaulted the place with nine regiments at three points.

General Sherman witnessed the assault from a rice-mill on the opposite
side of the river, and had the satisfaction of perceiving, at the same
moment, a United States gunboat in the distance, which, shortly
afterward, responded to his signal from the mill. Hazen had brought no
artillery, for the ground was too swampy to sustain it, and he placed
his reliance on the dash and bayonets of his men. All the guns of the
fort opened upon his single line as it advanced. At the same time, the
torpedoes, which had been buried plentifully in all the approaches to
the position, began to explode, killing and Wounding more than the guns.
The assailants had first to surmount the thick abattis, which they had
no sooner done than they poured into the fort a fire so deadly as to
silence its guns. A ditch, bristling with spikes, was the next fearful
obstacle to overcome. The Union soldiers scrambled out of this, and
clambered into the fort in swarms. A terrible, close, crowded conflict
now ensued. The garrison fought desperately; many of the men were
bayoneted at their guns, and the officers for a time refused to
surrender. But the Union troops continued to pour in on all sides, and
the fort was soon after surrendered to the victors.

On the following day the rebel prisoners were compelled to remove all
the torpedoes about the fort. The Union loss in this gallant affair was
twenty-three killed and eighty-two wounded; that of the enemy fourteen
killed, twenty-one wounded, and one hundred and ninety-eight soldiers
and thirteen officers made prisoners.

An important advantage gained by the capture of Fort McAllister was the
opening of communication with the supply ships which the government had
prudently held in readiness for the wants of Sherman’s army.




                        THE CAPTURE OF SAVANNAH.
                           DECEMBER 21, 1864.


The Union lines now closely encircled Savannah. Its supplies were cut
off, and the Federals were night and day working themselves closer to
the city. Some thirty-pound Parrott guns were landed from the fleet, and
placed in position, and preparations were made for assaulting the
enemy’s works on all sides. On the 17th of December General Sherman
demanded of Lieutenant-General W. J. Hardee the surrender of Savannah,
and, on the following day, an answer was returned by Hardee refusing
this demand, coupled with an assertion of his ability to hold his
position for an indefinite time. He sustained this boast by opening a
wasteful and furious bombardment, with shot and shell, on the Union
lines.

The next night, the 20th of December, Hardee evacuated Savannah. He
ferried his men quietly across the river, and escaped by the Union
causeway, carrying with him all the able-bodied negroes, under guard,
into South Carolina.

General Geary was the first to discover the movement, and to enter the
deserted works. Mayor Arnold rode out and surrendered the city to him.
General Geary was afterward entrusted with the command of Savannah, and
afforded general satisfaction to its citizens, who were well pleased
with the moderation and equity of his administration.

General Hardee had burned the shipyard and a rebel ram there which was
nearly completed. The iron-clad floating battery, Georgia, was sunk by
her commander, and the iron-clad Savannah, after indulging in some
wanton firing upon the captured city, was blown up, the explosion
visiting the city like an earthquake.

The Union loss during the siege of Savannah did not exceed six hundred.
One hundred and forty-five cannon, one thousand prisoners, thirty
thousand bales of cotton, and immense quantities of ammunition and
supplies, and much valuable property were captured, which, as the city
was virtually taken before it was surrendered, were regarded by General
Sherman as the undoubted prizes of the government for which he and his
army had toiled and fought so long.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Sherman’s grand march to the sea was accomplished. Its mysterious
strategy and alarming boldness were now elucidated and justified by the
event. The rebels had been perplexed and distracted by the movement. The
feint on Macon first misled the enemy, and, afterward, Sherman’s
constant menace against Augusta divided the forces which might have been
united against him, and kept the Georgians in the most demoralizing
suspense and terror, which allowed the Union army to sever and burn at
its leisure the enemy’s only remaining railroad communications eastward
and westward, for hundreds of miles—namely, the Georgia State railroad
and the Central railroad from Gordon to Savannah, with numerous other
portions of it. The army passed over forty-two of the finest
grain-growing counties of the State, consuming their corn and fodder,
sweet potatoes, cattle, sheep, hogs, and poultry, appropriating ten
thousand or more horses and mules, burning all their bridges, cotton
gins, all public buildings of service to the enemy, and bringing away a
countless number of slaves. “I estimate,” says General Sherman, “the
damage done to the State of Georgia and its military resources at one
hundred million dollars, at least twenty million dollars of which has
inured to our advantage, and the remainder is simple waste and
destruction. This may seem a hard species of warfare, but it brings the
sad realities of war home to those who have been directly or indirectly
instrumental in involving us in its calamities.”




                   GRAND NAVAL COMBAT IN MOBILE BAY.


              CAPTURE OF FORTS MORGAN, POWELL, AND GAINES.
                           AUGUST 5–23, 1864.

Admiral Farragut, who had anchored off Mobile Bay for more than a month,
awaiting reinforcements and military cooperation, at length saw the day
approach on which he was prepared to undertake the most dangerous if not
formidable naval combat that history has ever recorded.

At the head of Mobile Bay, nearly thirty miles from the Gulf of Mexico,
lies the city of Mobile. Dauphin’s Island lies at the mouth of the bay,
and almost closes the entrance, having a narrow strait on either side.
The western channel affords but five feet of water, and is therefore not
navigable for heavy vessels. The eastern strait channel has a depth of
twenty feet. The entrance to the bay is guarded by two strong forts. The
principal defence is Fort Morgan, which is built on a low, sandy point
opposite Dauphin’s Island, and four miles from it. The rebels had
blockaded the whole passage between Fort Morgan and Dauphin Island with
tiers of piles, chains, and torpedoes, leaving a channel of fifteen
hundred yards in width for the blockade-runners, which flowed directly
under the guns of the fort.

Opposite Fort Morgan, on Dauphin Island, is Fort Gaines; and about a
mile distant from the latter structure was Fort Powell.

Early in August, Admiral Farragut’s fleet was reinforced by two
iron-clads from James river, and two from the Mississippi.

Soon after sunrise on the morning of the 5th of August, signals were
given to all the fleet, and at twenty minutes to six the gunboats and
monitors were underweigh, moving up the bay.

The vessels were lashed side by side in couples, for better protection,
and in order to assist each other when any became disabled. Chains and
sand bags were laid on the decks over the machinery, to resist a
plunging fire; while sheet chains and other protective material were
hung on the sides of the vessels. The first object of the Admiral was to
pass the forts, inflicting as much damage to them as possible in the
transit, and then to engage and overcome the rebel gunboats, and the
formidable ram which lay in the inner waters. The attacking fleet
comprised fourteen wooden vessels, and four iron-clad monitors.

About seven o’clock the leading vessels came under fire from Fort
Morgan, and the rebel gunboats anchored under the guns of the fort;
while the Federal vessels, advancing in as close order as safety
permitted, replied with their rifled bow guns, and as soon as the range
permitted, with their formidable broadsides, driving the rebels from
their guns, and breaching the walls of their defences. The Admiral was
lashed in the main-top of his flagship, the Hartford, from which exposed
situation he had a good view of the battle, and communicated his orders
through speaking tubes.

At half-past seven the leading Monitor, the Tecumseh, struck a torpedo,
which exploded with terrific and fatal force, and the staunch vessel,
overcome by the terrible concussion, sank in the vortex, engulfing her
brave commander, Captain T. A. M. Craven, and all but ten of her crew.
This remnant was picked up while struggling in the water by a boat from
the Metacomet, under a storm of shot and shell. The fate of the Tecumseh
did not check the advance of the fleet, for all the brave sailors in the
squadron well knew that they were exposed to the same frightful fate,
and had entered the combat prepared to encounter the danger. The
flagship Hartford, with the Metacomet lashed to her port side, now took
the lead, and, boldly followed by the remainder of the squadron, passed
the forts without serious damage, and were out of range in an hour’s
time.

The Hartford was now assailed by the rebel ram Tennessee; a most
formidable vessel upon which the rebels confidently relied for the
destruction of the whole Federal fleet, should they succeed in passing
the forts, and avoiding the dangerous obstructions. The Confederate
gunboats Morgan, Gaines, and Selma, also courageously took part in the
combat, but were soon disposed of by the Union vessels as they came up.
In half an hour the Selma was a prize to the Metacomet, and the Gaines
had ran ashore under the guns of Fort Morgan, while the Morgan had
escaped to the city docks.

The iron-clad Tennessee, bearing the flag of Admiral Buchanan,
maintained a fierce and sanguinary combat with the heavier Union vessels
for nearly two hours. This vessel was one hundred and eighty feet in
length, sheathed with iron plates, five inches in thickness, of narrow
plates, strongly bolted, and backed by two feet of solid oak. She was
armed with a powerful ram, and had two ports on either side, closed by
iron shutters turning upon a pivot. The wooden ships defiantly
encountered the Tennessee, although her armor was impervious to their
guns, while the iron-clads grappled fiercely with their formidable
antagonist. The Manhattan, with one of her fifteen-inch shot, broke
through the armor of the Tennessee, and a monitor shot disabled the
steering gear, and thus rendered her helpless. At ten o’clock she
surrendered. Twenty officers and about one hundred and seventy men were
captured in this vessel, and ninety officers and men in the Selma. The
capture of these two vessels terminated the glorious battle of the 5th
of August. On the following day one of the iron-clads shelled Fort
Gaines with such effect that Colonel Anderson the commander sent a
communication to Admiral Farragut offering to surrender. General
Granger, commanding the United States military forces then investing
Mobile, was sent for, and the terms of capitulation were signed by the
respective parties on board the Hartford.

On the night of the 5th of August, Fort Powell was attacked, and blown
up, the guns falling into the hands of the naval commander. From this
time onward movements were in preparation for attacking Fort Morgan, and
on the 22nd of August, with day-dawn, a bombardment was opened from the
shore batteries, the Monitors and ships inside, and the vessels outside
the bar. At six A. M. on the 23d, a white flag was displayed by the
rebels, and at two o’clock the fort was unconditionally surrendered to
the navy and army of the United States by General Page, the commander.

The capture of Forts Powell, Gaines and Morgan, and the destruction of
the rebel fleet, gave the navy possession of the bay, and closed the
port to all ingress or egress of blockade runners. This was all that was
contemplated. Possession of the city of Mobile could not make the
blockade more effectual, and without a sufficient cooperating land
force, which could not then be spared to take and hold the place,
further demonstration was not advisable.

To obstruct naval operations, the bay had been strewn with torpedoes,
and as late as the 13th of September, Rear Admiral Farragut wrote the
department that he was still engaged in removing them. One hundred, it
was reported, had been placed in the bay by the rebels.




           SHERMAN’S MARCH FROM SAVANNAH TO GOLDSBORO’, N. C.
                        JANUARY TO MARCH, 1865.


The city of Savannah, and the forts around it, were, on the 18th of
January, 1865, transferred to General Foster, who commanded the
Department of the South, and General Sherman once more pushed
forward—this time to reach Goldsboro’, in North Carolina, and open
communication with cooperating forces from that point. The capture of
Charleston was incidental to this campaign; but was left to General
Foster’s command. The order to march was given on the 19th of January.
Savannah was garrisoned by a division of the 19th Army corps, under
General Grover, while General Schofield’s corps, the Twenty-third, was
sent to reinforce Generals Terry and Palmer, who were operating on the
coast of North Carolina.

Sherman’s march lasted about two months, and was attended by skirmishes
and small battles, but was never checked; and, in the end, was
thoroughly successful in accomplishing its intended purpose. The
condition of the rivers, swollen by thaws and rains, at first caused the
army some trouble. But all obstacles were speedily overcome.

An engagement at Rivers’ Bridge, on the 3d of February, was the earliest
fighting of moment. The point was carried with the loss of one officer
and seventeen men. The troops engaged were a division of the Seventeenth
corps, under Generals Thomas and Smith. Heavy skirmishing took place, at
Blackville, Williston and Aiken, between General Kilpatrick’s cavalry,
and the rebel cavalry of Wheeler.

On the 12th of February, General Sherman was at Orangeburg, where there
was some fighting. By this time he had isolated Branchville and
Charleston, so that the rebels would probably be obliged to evacuate
those places. His next blow was aimed at Columbia. This beautiful city
is one hundred and twenty-eight miles from Charleston. The rebels, under
Hampton, abandoned it on the 16th, having first fired a large quantity
of cotton which was there accumulated. On the 17th it was surrendered to
General Sherman, who, in anticipation of the occupation of the city, had
issued to General Howard orders concerning the conduct of the troops.
These were to destroy absolutely all arsenals and public property not
needed for his own use, as well as all railroads, depots, and machinery
useful in war to an enemy, but to spare all dwellings, colleges,
schools, asylums, and harmless private property. But, as it turned out,
before one single public building had been fired by order, the
smoldering fires, set by Hampton’s orders, were kindled by the wind, and
communicated to the buildings around. About dark they began to spread,
and got beyond the control of the troops, and raged until about four A.
M., when the wind subsiding, the flames wore subdued. “I was up nearly
all night,” says General Sherman, “and saw Generals Howard, Logan,
Woods, and others, laboring to save houses and protect families thus
suddenly deprived of shelter, and of bedding and wearing apparel. I
disclaim on the part of my army any agency in this fire, but on the
contrary claim that we saved what of Columbia remains unconsumed. And
without hesitation I charge General Wade Hampton with having burned his
own city of Columbia, not with a malicious intent, but from folly and
want of sense in filling it with lint, cotton, and tinder.” During the
18th and 19th, the arsenal, railroad depots, machine shops, foundries,
and other buildings were destroyed by detailed working parties, and the
railroad track torn up down to Kingsville and the Wateree bridge, and up
in the direction of Winnsboro’.

The next principal point was Cheraw, which was entered, after a toilsome
march, on the 3d of March. Charleston had, meanwhile, been evacuated by
General Hardee, on the 18th of February, and many guns and much
ammunition had been conveyed thence to Cheraw. These were now captured
by General Sherman, who also broke up the railroad as far as Darlington,
and the branch road from Florence to Cheraw. He then pushed on to
Fayetteville, which he occupied on the 11th of March. The enemy, broken
into small detachments, were all the while retiring before Sherman’s
advance, but at the same time were harassing him by occasional dashes.
One of these, made by Hampton, on the 9th, led to a brisk engagement
between his forces and Kilpatrick’s cavalry, in which the latter were
victorious. But the rebels, fearing for Raleigh, now endeavored to
concentrate in Sherman’s front. Beauregard’s troops, from Columbia,
Cheatham’s from the West, the garrison of Augusta, and Hardee’s from
Charleston, were to be speedily massed together, under the command of
General J. E. Johnston. General Sherman’s plan was to feign an attack on
Raleigh, but really to push on to Goldsboro’. One obstacle in his path
was Hardee, who, with twenty thousand men, had made a stand between Cape
Fear river and South river. General Williams, with the Twentieth corps,
was thereupon ordered to dislodge Hardee and capture the position. The
result was the




                         BATTLE OF AVERASBORO’.
                           MARCH 15–16, 1865.


This fight commenced about noon, and lasted till night. Skirmishing
continued all night, and on the morning of the 16th, the battle was
renewed, with great fury. Severe fighting took place during the day,
without satisfactory results. The enemy held his position, although
suffering heavy loss. Everything indicated the presence of Hardee’s
whole army corps. He evacuated the line, during the night of the 16th,
however, and fell back to Averasboro’, pursued by Ward’s division of the
Twentieth corps. His dead and wounded were left on the field, and
abandoned along the road to Averasboro’. General Ward pressed up to
Averasboro’, holding the plank road in front, while the balance of the
command moved off to the right, across Black river, on the Goldsboro’
road, now uncovered. The National loss in this fight was four hundred
and forty-six in the Twentieth corps, one hundred and eight in the
Fourteenth, and one hundred and seventy-one in Kilpatrick’s
command—total, seven hundred and thirty-seven. The number of rebels,
buried on the field, and paroled wounded, was three hundred and
twenty-seven—exclusive of those they carried off, and the unhurt
prisoners captured by the Unionists.

The advance of General Sherman was immediately continued, in an easterly
direction from Averasboro’, along the Goldsboro’ road. General Johnston
had suddenly moved from Raleigh, and concentrated his entire force at a
village called Bentonsville, on this road, eighteen miles from
Averasboro’, intending to fall on Sherman’s left flank and overwhelm it,
before the arrival of its cooperating column. But the Union commander,
anticipating such a movement, was wholly prepared for it.

A battle ensued at Bentonsville, the Union line being complete and
strong, and the rebels on the defensive, in intrenchments.




                        BATTLE OF BENTONSVILLE.
                            MARCH 20, 1864.


At noon the enemy left his works and advanced on Jeff. C. Davis’ two
divisions. Buell and Hobart were overwhelmed, and pressed back through
the woods more than a mile and a half. Vandeveer’s, Mitchell’s, Fering’s
and Cogswell’s brigades, on the right, fought stubbornly and
desperately, and lost but little ground. There was temporary confusion,
and a rout was imminent. Five batteries of artillery were massed at a
point where a hospital had been established in the morning, the balance
of Jackson’s division, Twentieth corps, were placed on the left, and a
new line formed. During the day five grand charges were made by the
enemy, massed, but each was repulsed. They succeeded in capturing three
guns of the Nineteenth Indiana battery, but only two were taken off.
There was desperate fighting all day, the musketry firing being very
heavy. Although they gained considerable ground on the left during the
day, the rebels retired to their main line, when night fell, leaving the
greater part of their dead and wounded on the field.

The rebel loss was twenty-five hundred in killed and wounded. Seven
hundred were captured. The Twenty-sixth Tennessee regiment was captured
entire, colors and all, with a large part of the Twelfth Louisiana.

The National loss was quite severe, being estimated at sixteen hundred
and forty-three. During the temporary confusion caused by the furious
charge on Carlin’s division, the Unionists lost about two hundred and
fifty prisoners.

This was the last important battle in which General Sherman was engaged.
General Schofield had entered Goldsboro’ on the 21st, and General
Sherman’s forces, immediately after the fight at Bentonsville, advanced
to that place.

On the 25th the Newbern railroad was completed, and the army was
receiving its supplies from that base. Between the 27th and 30th General
Sherman had visited City Point, and conversed with the President and
General Grant, for the arrangement of the final campaign of the war, and
had returned to Goldsboro’.




                  THE OCCUPATION OF CHARLESTON, S. C.
                           FEBRUARY 18, 1865.


General Sherman’s advance, as has already been noted, isolated
Charleston, and caused its evacuation by General Hardee. The rebels
abandoned the city on the night of the 17th of February, and the
National forces occupied it next day. General Foster, suffering from
wounds and ill health, had, meantime, been relieved by General Gilmore,
and it was by the forces of this officer and of Admiral Dahlgren, that
the far-famed cradle of the rebellion was finally occupied.

The following was General Gilmore’s dispatch, announcing the capture of
the city:


                                  “CHARLESTON, S. C., February 18, 1865.

  “Major-General HALLECK, Chief of Staff:—

  “GENERAL—The city of Charleston and all its defences came into our
  possession this morning, with about two hundred pieces of good
  artillery and a supply of fine ammunition.

  “The enemy commenced evacuating all the works last night, and Mayor
  Macbeth surrendered the city to General Schemmelfinnig at nine o’clock
  this morning, at which time it was occupied by our forces.

  “The cotton warehouses, arsenals, quartermaster’s stores, railroad
  bridges and two iron clads were burned by the enemy. Some vessels in
  the ship yard were also burned.

  “Nearly all the inhabitants remaining behind belong to the poorer
  class.

                                “Very respectfully,
                                    “Q. A. GILMORE, General Commanding.”


                  *       *       *       *       *

The rebel movement of evacuation commenced on the night of Friday, the
17th, the garrison of Sullivan’s Island and Point Pleasant quietly
withdrawing and retreating over the road by Christ’s Church, just in
time to escape Potter’s advance cutting them off. The troops in the city
moved out on the northeastern railroad, as did the garrison on James
Island, which was finally evacuated on Saturday morning.

Shortly after daylight on Saturday, it was discovered that there were no
troops in and about Sumter, or Moultrie, or in the works on James
Island. Lieutenant-Colonel Bennett, of the Twenty-first United States
colored troops, commanding Morris Island, immediately dispatched Major
Hennessy, of the Fifty-second Pennsylvania volunteers, to Fort Sumter,
in a small boat, to ascertain whether the fort was evacuated. Major
Hennessy proceeded to Sumter, and soon waved the Stars and Stripes over
the battered battlements of the work, from which they had been torn down
in April, 1861. The sight of the old flag on Sumter was an assurance
that the enemy had evacuated all their works, and it was hailed by every
demonstration of joy on ship and shore. Another boat, in charge of
Lieutenant Hackett, of the Third Rhode Island artillery, was immediately
sent to Fort Moultrie to take possession of that work, and raise again
the National colors upon its parapet. The navy, anxious to share in the
honors of the day, also launched a boat, and strove to gain the beach of
Sullivan’s Island before the army, and an exciting race ensued between
the boats of the different branches of the service.

The army boat, under Lieutenant Hackett, reached the shore in advance.
As she touched, the officer and crew sprang off on the beach, through
the surf, and rushed for the goal. The parapet was soon gained, and the
flag given to the breeze, amid the cheers of the soldiers and sailors,
who had come up a moment or two behind him. The guns were all spiked,
and the carriages somewhat damaged. A large quantity of munitions was
found in the magazines, which the enemy had not time to destroy.

When the flag floated over Moultrie, Lieutenant-Colonel Bennett, Major
Hennessy, and Lieutenant Burr, of the Fifty-second Pennsylvania, started
for the city, giving orders to have troops follow. They pulled up the
bay, while the rebel iron-clads and vessels were in flames and the city
itself was burning at various points. Reaching Fort Ripley, or what is
known as the Middle Ground battery, the Federal flag was displayed over
the work. The party then pushed on to Castle Pinckney, when the same
ceremony of taking possession was observed, and then the boat was pulled
cautiously, but directly, toward the city. No hostile force was seen,
although a large number of negroes and some whites were congregated on
the docks, watching the approach of the “Yankee boat.” Colonel Bennett
immediately landed, and the United States flag was displayed again in
the city of Charleston, amid the cheers and cries of joy of the crowd
assembled about it. It was a perfect storm of applause and outbursts of
unfeigned joy and satisfaction.

Colonel Bennett, on landing, immediately demanded the surrender of the
city, which was formally yielded by the mayor, Charles Macbeth, who
asked protection for the firemen, who were being impressed by the
retreating rebels, who had fired the city in several places. Colonel
Bennett promptly promised the assistance of his troops, to save the city
from conflagration. His first step was to rescue the arsenal, which the
rebels had prepared for blowing up.

The firemen got out their apparatus, and devoted themselves to the
extinguishment of the fires now raging with violence at various points
in the city. They were aided by the Union troops, who now began to
arrive in numbers, and, after a long struggle, the flames were checked,
but not until many buildings had been destroyed. A large quantity of
cotton, probably two thousand bales, was destroyed, together with a
considerable amount of supplies.

The worst feature of the conflagration had, however, occurred in the
morning—being the blowing up of the Northeastern railroad depot. In this
building a quantity of cartridges and kegs of powder had been stored by
the rebels, and, as they had not time to remove it, they left it
unprotected. A number of men, women, and children had collected to watch
the burning of a quantity of cotton in the railroad yard, which the
rebels had fired, and, during the conflagration, a number of boys, while
running about the depot, had discovered the powder. Without realizing
the danger they incurred, they began to take up handfuls of loose powder
and cartridges, and bear them from the depot to the mass of burning
cotton, on which they flung them, enjoying the dangerous amusement of
watching the flashes of the powder and the strange effects on the
cotton, as it was blown hither and thither. A spark ignited the powder
in the train, there was a leaping, running line of fire along the
ground, and then an explosion that shook the city to its very
foundations. The building was, in a second, a whirling mass of ruins, in
a tremendous volume of flame and smoke. The cause of the terrific
explosion soon became known, and a rush was made for the scene of the
catastrophe. Such a sight is rarely witnessed. The building was in
ruins, and from the burning mass arose the agonizing cries of the
wounded, to whom little or no assistance could be rendered by the
paralyzed spectators. Over one hundred and fifty are said to have been
charred in that fiery furnace, and a hundred men were wounded more or
less by the explosion or were burned by the fire.

From the depot the fire spread rapidly, and, communicating with the
adjoining buildings, threatened destruction to that part of the town.
Four squares, embraced in the area bounded by Chapel, Alexander,
Charlotte, and Washington streets, were consumed before the
conflagration was subdued. Everything in the houses was destroyed with
them. Another fire on Meeting street, near the Court House, destroyed
five buildings. This was set on fire by the rebels, with a view of
burning Hibernian Hall and the Mills House. It did not succeed, although
it destroyed the five buildings alluded to. One or two other fires also
occurred, destroying several buildings each. A large number of smaller
conflagrations occurred, burning government storehouses, &c.

A large quantity of rebel property and material of war was captured at
Charleston. The city was immediately put under martial law, and, in a
very short time, under the energetic administration of General Gilmore,
was restored to order, and, to some extent, favored with the blessings
of peace. The poor people here were found to be in a very destitute and
mournful condition; but they were speedily relieved by the United States
authorities.




                GENERAL SCHOFIELD’S MARCH TO GOLDSBORO’.


                       BATTLES OF KINSTON, N. C.
                           MARCH 7–10, 1865.

While General Sherman was marching from Fayetteville toward Goldsboro’,
General Schofield was approaching the same point, from the direction of
Newbern and Wilmington. The rebels, under Hoke, attempted to dispute his
passage, however, and made a stand near Kinston. Skirmishing began
between the armies on the 7th of March, which resulted in the rebels
being driven, by Colonel Classen’s command, to their intrenchments at
Jackson’s Mills, four miles east of Kinston. General Cox was in command
of the National forces, under supervision of General Schofield, whose
headquarters were at Newbern; but General Schofield was in the field in
person, during most of the time of these Kinston battles.

On the morning of the 8th, the enemy made a sudden charge upon the left
wing of the Union line, and captured the Fifteenth Connecticut and the
Twenty-seventh Massachusetts. The men, however, fought with great
bravery, and only yielded to overpowering numbers, when their ammunition
was exhausted. Lieutenant-Colonel Bartholomew and Major Osborne,
commanding the regiments above mentioned, were captured by the rebels.

To partially compensate for these losses, Colonel Savage, of the Twelfth
New York cavalry, afterwards made a detour toward the rear of the enemy
with a portion of his command, capturing between fifty and one hundred
rebels. The same afternoon, also, an attack was made upon the Union
right, occupied by the First division, commanded by General Innes N.
Palmer; but it was repulsed without difficulty and without serious loss
of life.

The National line on the 8th was in front of Jackson’s creek, at one
point on which (Jackson’s Mills,) the rebels had their strongest
position. Colonel Malloy with the First brigade, Second division,
successfully opposed the enemy in the afternoon. No communication
existed at this time between the First and Second divisions.

Between three and four o’clock, General Ruger came up and filled the
interstice between the First and Second divisions. This gave a new life
to the entire line, and Colonel Malloy made a charge upon the rebel
rifle pits, partially regaining the ground he had formerly occupied. At
this, night came on and the action ceased.

Thursday morning, the 9th, Malloy fully regained his original position
and continued to hold it. The enemy charged upon him three times in the
forenoon, and were each time easily repulsed, with some loss of life and
a small loss of prisoners to them. The afternoon was mostly occupied
with light skirmishing along the whole line. About two hundred rebel
prisoners were taken during the day.

All through the evening of the 9th, and the night and morning of the 9th
and 10th, the enemy were persistent in their attacks. They had evidently
learned that Couch was coming up overland to join Cox. This, of course,
necessitated a furious and speedy onset upon Cox, in order to annihilate
him before Couch should arrive. But the wave was sent bounding back,
time after time, and finally, on the morning of the 10th, as they
attempted another flank movement, the Unionists took a large number of
prisoners, which discouraged the enemy from further assaults.

On the morning of the 11th, General Couch’s troops came up and formed a
junction with those of General Cox. The rebel troops then retired across
the Neuse river.

On the 15th the Mayor of Kinston, with a delegation, came out and
formally surrendered the city. The National troops immediately took
possession of the place, and fortified themselves within and around it.
The rebels had destroyed their ram Neuse, and as much material of war as
they could, prior to their hasty retreat: but valuable captures of guns
and ammunition were made by the National forces. The losses, on the
Union side, in these engagements has been stated at about two thousand.
The rebel loss was heavier. Two thousand rebel prisoners were captured.
From Kinston, the rebels having fallen back, and concentrated to oppose
Sherman at Bentonsville, General Schofield pushed on to Goldsboro’,
which he entered on the 21st. Here the junction was effected between his
troops and those of Sherman—as already stated—and from this point the
advance was made, which ended the campaign in the Carolinas.




                      THE SIEGE OF PETERSBURG, VA.


The siege of Petersburg began with a desperate assault, on the evening
of the 15th of June, made by Major-General Smith’s troops, against the
first line of the rebel works, two miles from the city. This assault was
followed up on the 16th, 17th and 18th, and resulted in the capture of
the enemy’s outer line of works. The Ninth, Eighteenth, and Second corps
were engaged, and the Union loss was very heavy—not far, indeed, from
ten thousand men.

The charge on the afternoon of the 15th was made with great gallantry,
by the troops under General Smith, many of whom were negroes. The
Thirteenth New Hampshire, the Eighth Connecticut, and the Ninety-second
and One hundred and eighteenth New York, also participated in this
formidable action, which, prosecuted in the face of artillery fire, was
excessively difficult and perilous.

On the 16th, the assault commenced at daybreak, General Birney taking
the initiative, by driving the rebels out of two lines of rifle pits,
and taking many prisoners. Colonel Eagan, of General Birney’s division,
was wounded in this charge, as also were Lieutenant-Colonel Lewis, of
the One hundred and tenth Pennsylvania regiment, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Warner, of the Fortieth New York. About half-past five o’clock in the
afternoon, the assault was followed up by a tremendous charge of
Hancock’s men. The battle lasted three hours and was desperate and
destructive. The Union line was formed thus: General Smith’s corps, the
Eighteenth, was on the right; General Hancock’s, the Second, was in the
centre, and General Burnside’s, the Ninth, on the left. All the troops
fought well. Miller’s brigade, of the central division, especially
distinguished itself. The Union loss was about two thousand, killed and
wounded. At about eight o’clock the assault was suspended, the National
forces holding the advanced position which they had conquered.

General Hancock, suffering much from a wound received at Gettysburg, was
now relieved of duty, and General Birney assumed command of the Second
corps. The Eighteenth corps, General Smith, was removed to Bermuda
Hundred, and its place supplied by the 5th, General Warren. General
Burnside directed the assault, on the morning of the 17th, and it was
commenced by General Griffin’s brigade, who made an impetuous dash
forward, capturing six guns and four hundred prisoners, including
sixteen officers. General Ledlie’s division made another charge in the
afternoon, capturing a portion of the rebel fortifications. General
Burnside then began to shell Petersburg, being distant about a mile and
a half from the city, but did not long continue the bombardment.

About nine o’clock in the evening of the 17th, the rebels made a sally,
to recover the position they had lost, and a severe hand-to-hand fight
ensued. The First Michigan regiment, sharpshooters, sustained the brunt
of the attack, and, at the outset, captured two hundred and forty
prisoners. But the flank column of the enemy, pushing out to the left,
suddenly charged into the Union works, which the enemy at the same time
shelled from the front, and so drove out the brave Michiganders. The
color-sergeant of this regiment, dreading capture, buried his flag in
the intrenchments. The rebels held the line they had taken, until about
two o’clock at night, when they abandoned it. On the morning of the
18th, the Michigan regiment marched in and took possession, the
color-sergeant disinterring his flag. The National loss was about one
thousand.

The operations of the 18th were particularly directed against a rebel
line of works near the railroad from Petersburg to Suffolk. Wilcox’s
division was assigned the duty of taking these fortifications, and was
supported by Colonel Curtin’s brigade of Potter’s division, General
Ledlie’s troops acting as a reserve. There was a good deal of
skirmishing in the morning, but the general advance was not ordered till
noon. Portions of the Eighteenth corps, together with the Sixth, Second,
Ninth, and Fifth, were engaged in this day’s assault. The fighting was
of the most desperate character in all parts of the field. Up and down
ravines, over ditches, and breastworks, under a destructive fire of
artillery and musketry, the brave soldiers of the Union forced and
fought their way. Desperate and continued charges were made throughout
the afternoon and evening; but with no material success. The slaughter,
on both sides, was tremendous.

“The scenes in our hospitals,” says a contemporary correspondent, in
closing an account of these four bloody days before Petersburg, “during
the past few nights, have been of the most ghastly character. Day and
night our surgeons have been engaged in the sad duties of their
profession. There are not tents enough for the wounded; and numbers of
the poor fellows are stretched beneath the trees, awaiting their turn
upon the operating tables.”

Sunday, the 19th of June, witnessed a lull in this bloody strife. The
enemy’s artillery did, indeed, belch forth now and then—meeting with
prompt response—and there was some skirmishing. A rebel charge made at
nightfall, on the Union centre, was repulsed. General Butler’s forces
also repulsed an attack, made by Longstreet, at Bermuda Hundred. The
rebels had, by this time, reached a clear understanding of General
Grant’s position and design, and were actively opposing him at every
practicable point.

The Siege of Petersburg and of Richmond now began in good earnest—the
quiet, steady circumvallation, that is, of the rebel citadels and
armies—and it was never relaxed, until the rebellion had fallen. Many
important incidents marked its continuance and progress—battles,
skirmishes, success and failure, brave deeds and sad losses. It will be
the province of this narrative, within a brief compass, to touch upon
the most important of these incidents.

An effort to destroy the railroad between Petersburg and Weldon was made
on the 21st of June, and resulted in a battle at Davis Farm, in which
the Unionists, under General Barlow, were defeated, with a loss of about
a hundred men. On the 22d the same effort was repeated, in a more
formidable manner, and a yet fiercer battle ensued, in which the rebels
made many prisoners, while the National troops gained no material
advantage. More fighting took place on the 23d, the 24th and the 25th.




      EXPLOSION OF PLEASANTS’ MINE, AND BATTLE BEFORE PETERSBURG.
                             JULY 29, 1864.


On the 25th of June, at the suggestion of Lieutenant-Colonel Pleasants,
work was commenced with a view to the destruction of one of the most
important of the rebel works before Petersburg, by mining. The work to
be blown up was situated about two thousand yards from Petersburg. The
mine was started in the side of a ravine, and was constructed of the
customary shape—about four feet wide at the base, between four and five
feet high, and sloping towards the top. Near the entrance was a
ventilating shaft. Many of Lieutenant-Colonel Pleasants’ men, the
Forty-eighth Pennsylvania, were accustomed to mining, and so the labor
was prosecuted with skill and ease, as well as energy. As it advanced,
the tunnel was sloped upwards. At length, when the desired point was
reached, the miners were twenty feet beneath the rebels. Wings were then
constructed, so that the fort might be subterraneously encircled. Eight
chambers, separated from each other by sand-bags, and charged with four
hundred tons of powder, completed this device for blowing up the enemy.
Wooden pipes and hose connected the mine with the besiegers without.

Soon after midnight, on the 29th of July, the assaulting force—the Ninth
and Eighteenth corps, the Second and Fifth being held in reserve—were
massed and ready. Generals Ledlie, Wilcox, Potter, and Ferrero were to
lead the charge. At half-past three o’clock, A. M., on the morning of
the 30th, the fuse was lighted. But the dampness of the gallery
extinguished it. Much delay ensued. Daylight came; then sunrise. At
last, at a few minutes before five o’clock, the fuse was successfully
lit, and the mine exploded. The scene was awfully exciting and
impressive. At first the earth heaved and trembled; then the whole mass,
fort, guns, caissons, soldiers, and all surged upward like a tornado
into the air. The next moment there was a yawning pit, a hundred feet
long and half as wide, in which ruins were commingled, ghastly and
terrible; and, all along the line, the guns from the National works
simultaneously brayed out the fury of war. A charge was immediately made
by a brigade of General Ledlie’s division, which rushed through the gap,
and then paused to form for an assault on the enemy’s interior line. But
the rebels, recovering from their dismay and consternation, immediately
rallied, and now poured in an enfilading fire upon the captured fort.
Presently, however, the divisions of Potter, Ledlie, and Wilcox charged
together, in the face of a most terrific fire, which was no less severe
on their flanks than in their front. Their effort was grandly made, but
the fire was too severe, and they finally wavered and fell. The colored
division, under General Ferrero, was next hurled forward, but only to
meet the fate of its predecessors. Ultimately, the National troops were
penned up in the fort which they had taken, and were obliged to endure
the concentrated fire of the enemy. Squads of them, however, succeeded
in making their escape. The rebels made several charges upon the fort,
but were bravely repulsed. In this plight the soldiers of the Union
remained until noon, a steady cross fire being kept up over every yard
of the space between the fort and the Federal lines. At noon a general
retreat was ordered, in which many contrived to get away; but, at two
o’clock, being destitute of ammunition, those who remained surrendered
to the enemy. The National loss was five thousand; that of the rebels,
who fought in intrenchments, was, of course, much smaller.




                          THE DUTCH GAP CANAL.


There is, in the James river, a large bend, forming a peninsula, the
connecting neck of which is less than half a mile wide. This land is
known as Farrar’s Island. General Butler, on the 10th of August, 1864,
commenced the work of severing this projection from the main land by
constructing what is memorable as the Dutch Gap Canal. The object of the
canal was to enable the Unionists to save a circuit of six miles of the
river, filled with obstructions, and to flank the enemy’s batteries at
Howlett House. General Butler’s troops worked at this canal, with
continued pertinacity and skill, for many months, being frequently
subjected to the danger of rebel shells, and obliged to take frequent
refuge in holes in the ground. But, in the end, the work proved a
failure. It afforded much material for criticism, however, at the time,
and for not a little merriment, among the Unionists as well as the
rebels. Had it succeeded, it would have materially strengthened General
Grant’s lines, and lessened the tediousness and toil of the siege.




                        THE WAR SUMMER OF 1864.


During the continuance of the siege of Petersburg and Richmond, a call
was made by the President of the United States, for five hundred
thousand additional troops. The call was dated July 18th. A draft was
subsequently ordered, and was made. Later in the summer, General Grant
wrote the following letter, which concisely sums up what was then the
true condition of affairs in the country:


                    “HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES, }
                            CITY POINT, VA., August 16th, 1864.        }

  “To Hon. E. B. WASHBURNE:

  “DEAR SIR—I state to all citizens who visit me that all we want now to
  insure an early restoration of the Union is a determined unity of
  sentiment North. The rebels have now in their ranks their last man.
  The little boys and old men are guarding prisoners, guarding railroad
  bridges, and forming a good part of their garrisons for intrenched
  positions. A man lost by them cannot be replaced. They have robbed the
  cradle and the grave equally to get their present force. Besides what
  they lose in frequent skirmishes and battles, they are now losing from
  desertions and other causes at least one regiment per day.

  “With this drain upon them the end is not far distant, if we will only
  be true to ourselves. Their only hope now is in a divided North. This
  might give them reinforcements from Tennessee, Kentucky, Maryland, and
  Missouri, while it would weaken us. With the draft quickly enforced
  the enemy would become despondent, and would make but little
  resistance. I have no doubt but the enemy are exceedingly anxious to
  hold out until after the Presidential election. They have many hopes
  from its effects.

  “They hope a counter revolution; they hope the election of the Peace
  candidate. In fact, like ‘Micawber,’ they hope for something to ‘turn
  up.’ Our Peace friends, if they expect peace from separation, are much
  mistaken. It would but be the beginning of war, with thousands of
  Northern men joining the South because of our disgrace in allowing a
  separation. To have ‘peace on any terms,’ the South would demand the
  restoration of their slaves already freed; they would demand indemnity
  for losses sustained, and they would demand a treaty which would make
  the North slave-hunters for the South. They would demand pay for the
  restoration of every slave escaping to the North.

                                       “Yours, truly,      U. S. GRANT.”




                   BATTLES ALONG THE WELDON RAILROAD.


The summer of 1864 was exceedingly hot; and, for that reason, the
enterprise of military life somewhat flagged with the besiegers of the
rebel citadel. Yet many skirmishes, and several heavy engagements, took
place; and the rebels were watched with unceasing vigilance, and were
pressed wherever a point of attack seemed to offer the chance of gaining
desirable advantage. On the 14th, 15th, and 16th of August there was
some fighting in the vicinity of Deep Bottom, the Union loss being
between four and five hundred men. This engagement was brought on for
the purpose of distracting the enemy’s attention from the other extreme
of operations and to draw his forces partially away from Petersburg. The
feint succeeded; and, the Weldon railroad being left exposed, the Fifth
corps advanced, on the 18th of August, and took possession of Reams’s
Station, surprising a body of the enemy that was guarding it, but
losing, in the incidental fight, about three hundred men. The track was
torn up for about one mile. Next day, the 19th, the rebels made a
furious attack upon the National forces holding Reams’s Station, and a
bloody battle ensued. The Union line, being extended to a great length,
was quite thin in the centre. It had been hoped that the rebels would
not discover this weakness; but they did, and their first charge broke
through and divided the Union forces. The conflict that followed was
characterized by the most desperate bravery. Reinforcements arriving—the
First and Second divisions of the Ninth corps—the rebels were finally
repulsed. The most notable feature of this fight was, that, in the
course of events, it became necessary to train the Union artillery upon
a struggling mass of patriots and rebels, and sacrifice friends as well
as foes, in order to hold the position originally taken by the Fifth
corps. This position was held; but the rebels recovered the railroad as
far as Yellow Springs. The loss, on the Union side, including prisoners,
was three thousand seven hundred and sixty-nine.

[Illustration: CHARGING A BATTERY ON THE WELDON RAIL ROAD.]

[Illustration: CAPTURE OF A RAILROAD TRAIN.]




                     THE BATTLE OF REAMS’S STATION.
                            AUGUST 28, 1864.


A desperate battle was next fought, on the 28th of August, a little
southward of Reams’s Station. It was brought on by an effort, on the
part of the enemy, to break and disperse the Second corps, under General
Hancock, posted at that point. The attack was made at about half past
five in the afternoon, against Hancock’s centre, by the rebels under
Wilcox: and against his left, by the rebels under Heth. It was met with
great bravery, and vigorously resisted; but at length the enemy
succeeded in breaking the line opposed to them. Happily, no permanent
advantage was gained by this turn of fortune to the rebels. A portion of
General Gibbon’s division was brought forward to repair the damage done
to the National line. The enemy then fell upon General Hancock’s extreme
left, but were severely repulsed by a dismounted cavalry force, under
General Gregg, who handled his men with great skill—the cavalry, on
their part, behaving with the utmost gallantry. At different points
along the line the fighting continued briskly until dark, when the
battle ended in the enemy’s signal defeat. The rebels then withdrew,
leaving their dead and wounded on the field. Many prisoners were
captured from the divisions of both Heth and Wilcox, and the enemy’s
loss was very heavy. The National loss in killed and wounded did not
exceed twelve hundred.

Few battles of this war have been more determined or sanguinary than
this one. In his official report, General Hancock says: “This has been
one of the most desperate fights of the war, resembling Spottsylvania in
its character, though the numbers engaged gave less importance to it.”
The field of battle, when the conflict was over, has been described as
hideously and repulsively awful to look upon. Such scenes as these,
throughout the whole civil war, bore eloquent testimony to the bravery
and noble self-sacrifice of the gallant men who laid down their lives in
defence of their country.




                       BATTLE OF CHAPIN’S BLUFF.
                          SEPTEMBER 28, 1864.


If not very successful, the movement which led to this battle was very
bold, and was executed with remarkable courage and endurance by the
soldiers of the Union. It began from two points, and was designed to
capture Richmond by a bold push. General Ord, with the Eighteenth corps,
crossed the James river at Aiken’s Landing, which is eight miles above
Deep Bottom, and advanced against the works on Chapin’s Farm. At the
same time, General Birney, with the Tenth corps, moved against the
enemy’s works in front of Deep Bottom, which he captured, thence moving
along the Newmarket road toward Richmond, and, at an early hour,
establishing communication with General Ord. The latter had already
captured the first line of the rebel intrenchments at Chapin’s Bluff,
and with it fifteen pieces of artillery. When General Birney came up, an
assaulting column was organized, of both corps, to carry the heavy
interior line of rebel works. By this time, however, the rebels had
received reinforcements, and hence were enabled—the works being of great
strength—to repel the charge of the Unionists. The attack began early in
the afternoon, the men rushing forward impetuously, and cheering loudly.
A storm of grape and canister was hurled into their faces, which wrought
terrible destruction in their ranks. But they neither flinched nor
halted, but steadily held on their way. Soon a fearful enfilading fire
of artillery swept in upon them, mowing down their ranks like grass; but
still they pressed forward till they found themselves in front of the
enemy’s redoubts, which proved to be of a much more formidable character
than had been supposed. A perfect abattis held them completely at bay,
while the enemy’s infantry leveled their ranks with the ground to the
right and to the left. The few who succeeded in gaining the rebel lines
found them to be utterly unassailable. They were completely surrounded
by a ditch eight feet in depth, and twelve feet in width; and could only
be reached by means of a drawbridge, which, of course, was now drawn up.
The Union men still determined to make an assault if an attack was
within the bounds of possibility, and leaped into the ditch, in hope of
finding a passage to the forts beyond, but found themselves penned in,
and unable to either advance or retreat.

The conduct of the colored troops, under General Birney, deserves the
highest praise. Many of them, by climbing on each other’s shoulders,
succeeded in reaching the parapet, but in numbers far too small to make
an attack on the fort. They therefore, as many as could, effected a
retreat; those who could not, as well as those in the ditch, being
compelled to surrender.

This assault, though a failure, is worthy of commendation for its
exceeding boldness; but it cost the Union troops a heavy price. Over
five hundred men in killed and wounded were lost. The negro troops
suffered very severely; and in General Foster’s division the loss in
field-officers was so great that scarcely a regiment escaped losing its
leader.




                           ARMY OF THE JAMES.


                        BATTLE BEFORE RICHMOND.
                            OCTOBER 7, 1864.

The enemy under General Anderson, on this day, attacked the extreme
right of the army of the James, their object being to distract the
attention of General Grant from his intended operations against the
rebel left. The attack was made at about daylight, and lasted till noon.
Kautz’s cavalry, posted on the Central road, was first assailed, and a
simultaneous charge was made against the line of the Tenth corps,
commanded by General Birney, who took the field on this occasion,
although ill, and suffering severely from malarious fever. The rebel
divisions engaged were those of Field and Hoke.

Their first movement was, in a measure, successful. They succeeded in
almost surrounding Kautz’s cavalry, and driving it back, in a sort of
panic, to the rear, where however, it was immediately rallied.

The artillery in this fight,—Battery B of the First United States, and
the Fifth Wisconsin Battery,—did efficient service, and was handled with
great skill and courage. Colonel Sumner’s New York Mounted Rifles also
distinguished themselves by a bold stand, to cover the confusion of
Kautz’s retreat, and enable General Birney to seasonably perfect his
line of battle. At ten o’clock the rebels made a determined assault on
Birney’s line, and the battle became general. Artillery was employed
with great effect, and the loss in this branch of the service was
uncommonly severe, attesting the fury of the rebel attack. Battery E of
the Third United States Artillery, lost three men killed, and nine
wounded, and fourteen horses killed. Battery D of the First United
States lost one man killed, and four wounded, and ten horses killed.
Battery C of the Third Rhode Island, and the Fifth New Jersey Battery
also suffered severe losses. But the brunt of the battle was borne by
the Second Brigade—in the centre—upon which the rebels made their most
desperate and pertinacious attack. They were met by a destructive fire
from a line of carbineers, which, falling back, gave place to another
line, from which the fire was even more deadly. Still the enemy pressed
over piles of his own dead and wounded, and still the fire of the
carbineers continued, the woods being resonant with the continuous
rattle and roar of musketry. At last, baffled and utterly routed, the
rebels gave up their enterprise, and retreated—only stopping when safe
within their works along the James river, and in Richmond. General Grant
computed the Union loss in this engagement at about three hundred; and
the rebel loss at upwards of one thousand. In effect, the Union forces
repulsed a formidable attack, which, had it succeeded, would have cost
them the loss of very strong and important works, and an advanced
position beyond Deep Bottom. But the rebel movement utterly failed, nor
was General Grant for a moment deterred in his proposed operations
against the rebel left. The Confederate General Gregg was killed in this
battle, and several other rebel officers of distinction were wounded.
About one hundred and fifty prisoners were captured by the Union forces.




                     THE BATTLES OF HATCHER’S RUN.
                  OCTOBER 27, 1864-FEBRUARY 5–7, 1865.


Operations against the rebel position at Hatcher’s Run were among the
most important incidents of the siege of Petersburg. Their object was to
extend the National lines on the left, and, of course, to sever railway
communication with the beleaguered city. An attack on the enemy’s works
at this point was made on the 27th of October, 1864, the Second and
Fifth corps participating. But the battle was comparatively trivial in
extent and in attendant losses. The rebel pickets and cavalry were
driven inside of the main work, and the National forces captured seven
loaded teams, and between seventy-five and one hundred prisoners. Each
party lost about two hundred men. The result of this engagement was to
extend the Union line from Armstrong’s Mill, along the south bank of
Hatcher’s Creek, to a point where Hatcher’s Creek intersects the Boydton
plank road.

To beat the rebels back from this position, and to destroy the Southside
railroad, was an object with General Grant throughout this campaign.
That railroad was, as it were, the main artery of Lee’s army. Many
attempts were made to destroy it, some of which, as has been heretofore
shown, resulted in doing it temporary injury.

A further attempt to carry the rebel works at Hatcher’s Run was made on
Sunday, the 5th of February, 1865. The Fifth and Second corps, as
before, were engaged, the entire movement being led by General Warren.
Early on the morning of the 5th, being Sunday, the march began. General
Gregg’s cavalry led the way, followed by the troops of the Fifth corps,
along the Halifax road, in the direction of Reams’s Station. At the same
time a covering movement was commenced, to blind the enemy as to the
advance of the Fifth corps. This consisted in an advance of the Second
corps, preceded by the Third Pennsylvania cavalry, Major Hess, along the
Vaughn road towards Hatcher’s Run. It was an uncommonly bright and
beautiful day, and the spirits of the soldiers seemed correspondingly
cheerful.

The first object of the march of the Second corps by the Vaughn road was
to cover the movement of the Fifth corps. About midday the head of the
Second corps column reached Hatcher’s Run. Finding the enemy intrenched,
the Third Pennsylvania cavalry essayed to carry the ford, but found the
enemy too strong, and was driven back. The First brigade, Third
division, was next ordered up and deployed, facing the ford. The
Ninety-ninth Pennsylvania, Colonel Biles commanding, immediately
advanced across the Run, scattering the enemy and driving him back under
cover of the wood. The cavalry now gave pursuit, followed by the
infantry, and the line of the Third division was advanced about a mile,
occupying the summit of a hill, upon which they commenced the erection
of fieldworks. During the progress of these demonstrative operations on
the part of the Third division, the Second division struck off through
an untravelled road to the right, towards Armstrong’s ford. The head of
the column, composed of the Nineteenth Massachusetts, encountered the
enemy near the run, and, with the assistance of the Tenth New York,
compelled them to withdraw across the stream. This success effected a
junction of the two divisions, and the whole line of the Second corps
was arrayed in order of battle to meet any offensive movement on the
part of the enemy.

Late in the afternoon the rebels opened a brisk fire of artillery,
without, however, eliciting a reply. Emboldened by this silence, their
infantry, preceded by a heavy skirmish line, advanced in line of battle.

The National troops permitted them to come within easy range, when they
opened a severe fire of musketry, which caused the line to fall back in
considerable disorder. The enemy, not disheartened, repeated his attempt
to dislodge the Federals, and met with a similar repulse. The flank
movement was then attempted, with no better success. Colonel Matthew
Murphy, of the Sixty-ninth New York, commanding the Second brigade, held
the right of the line, his own right flank resting on a swamp. As the
enemy approached he greeted him with an effective shower of bullets,
which caused him to break and retreat out of range. Soon after dark,
having been thwarted in every effort to break the continuity of the
lines, the enemy withdrew to his fortifications. The Second brigade of
the Second division and the Third brigade of the Third division bore the
brunt of the day’s fighting. The officers and men throughout bore
themselves nobly. General Humphreys in person superintended the
operations of the corps. Among the wounded was Colonel Murphy,
commanding the Second brigade, Third division. The sum of the day’s
losses, in the Second corps, was about ninety.

While the Second corps was thus engaging the attention of the rebels, on
the Vaughn road, the Fifth corps pressed on toward Reams’s Station.
After a march of six miles the advance reached Rowanty creek. Videttes
and flying parties could be seen hovering mysteriously on the front,
taking observations, and then suddenly disappearing. The troops,
however, had, thus far encountered no opposition. The Rowanty creek is
about twenty feet wide, and not conveniently fordable. The old bridge
was no longer in existence. The column was accordingly delayed for a
short time, while the pioneers constructed a temporary bridge. The men
worked with difficulty, and, though covered by a detachment of light
infantry, the sharpshooters of the enemy harassed them from the cover of
the wooded banks. Their impromptu bridge having been completed, in order
to secure a lodgment beyond the stream and protect the construction of
bridges for the passage of the whole force, the Third brigade, Second
division, Brevet Brigadier-General Gwynn commanding, advanced in column,
on a trot, across the bridge. The opposite bank was steep and difficult
of ascent, and, a short distance beyond, rifle pits obscured a line of
riflemen. Undaunted by these uncertainties, Gwynn urged his men forward.
A scattering fire ensued, and, in a few minutes after, the patriots
occupied the rifle pits of the enemy, and quiet was restored. General
Gwynn lost but one man. The enemy lost several, besides twenty-two
prisoners.

In the mean time, the cavalry of General Gregg, piloted by a negro, had
ridden onward, and entered Dinwiddie, capturing a rebel train and mail.
From Dinwiddie the cavalry returned and took position in the rear of
Warren’s forces, two miles from Hatcher’s Run.

The losses, on the first day, were about two hundred. Both corps had
secured a position beyond Hatcher’s Run.

Thus affairs stood, on the 6th inst., when the conflict was renewed. The
positions were: Second corps on the right, Fifth corps on the left,
cavalry parties in front. The lines were covered by hasty breastworks,
timber, and the roads filled with mud. The morning was spent in
strengthening the defences and corduroying roads. Generals De Trobriand
and McAllister, of the Second corps, made a reconnoissance and developed
the fact that there was no force between the new lines and the old works
below Petersburg. The Fifth corps passed the morning in taking positions
of attack. General Meade was on the field. Early in the afternoon the
enemy disclosed a column moving towards the right.

At noon the Third division, Fifth corps, moved to the right from the
Duncan road toward the Boydton plank road. The skirmishers were soon
engaged, and a running fight ensued, the main body following up closely
as the enemy retired. In the vicinity of Dabney’s mill the enemy took
position under cover of temporary works. From these he was soon
dislodged. The two lines now engaged in an irregular interchange of
bullets through the timber in front. On the part of the enemy the fire
gradually grew more continuous and heavy. It now became evident that he
was strengthening his lines for a determined stand, and an offensive
strike at the proper moment. It was five o’clock, P. M. To prepare for
emergencies, Ayres’ division was ordered up to the support of Crawford,
and while moving in column was suddenly assailed, in large force, and
driven back. At the same time a brigade of Griffin’s division moved to
the support of Gregg’s cavalry. Subsequent movements of the enemy
developed an intention to cut off Crawford. A column of the enemy was
swung around to envelop him. Crawford, simultaneously, was heavily
engaged on his front.

At six P. M. comparative order prevailed, and preparations were made to
receive the enemy, who, it was evident, felt no disposition to abandon a
slight advantage he had secured. Gregg, during this time, was fighting
his cavalry on foot, and held his own on the Vaughn road against
Mahone’s division.

The enemy had already engaged Pegram’s, Gordon’s and Heth’s divisions.
Mahone, unable to gain any advantage over Gregg, suddenly withdrew in a
northwesterly direction, and fell upon the left of the Fifth corps. The
flank resisted for a moment, but to no avail. It was crumbled on the
centre. The ammunition of part of Crawford’s division at this critical
moment became exhausted. This portion of the line broke off, and in a
few minutes the entire line became a wreck. The Third division
(Wheaton’s) of the Sixth corps, which left its camp that morning,
crossed Hatcher’s run during the height of Crawford’s confusion, and
also lost its self-possession. The fighting now became desultory but
desperate, and both forces entered into the work in earnest—as a matter
of life or death. The country between Hatcher’s run and the mill is
covered with a heavy wood, the ground softened by numerous swamps and
cut up by ravines. The road upon which the columns and trains were
obliged to move was narrow, filled with stumps, and, above all,
knee-deep with mud. A slight crust of frozen surface only multiplied the
difficulties. The column moved forward with the most exhausting
exertions, and, instead of being fresh for battle, was used up by its
conflict with the mud. The men lost their shoes, their clothing was
dampened, and their arms in many instances were rendered unfit for
immediate use. The artillery and trains suffered more than the men.
Animals tossed about in their useless exertions to extricate themselves
and their burdens. This being the case, the operations of the troops off
the road were infinitely worse. The ground was fresh. The timber was
thick and netted with a web of undergrowth. As the men advanced through
this maze many were laid low by the deliberate fire of an unseen
musketeer or rifleman. When they retired the roads and the woods were
alive with disorder. The lines were much broken in the advance; it would
be impossible to convey the formations on the retreat. The men fought
single-handed through the timber from tree to tree. Their alarm was
greatly increased by fear of being intercepted on their rear. No efforts
on the part of officers could stay the men. They were unmanageable. They
were determined to abandon the wood, and only upon reaching the open
country on the Vaughn road and finding the bridges all entire and the
guards perfectly calm, did they recover their presence of mind. The
lines were hastily reformed, and, under protection of the temporary
works thrown up by the Third division of the Second corps the day
before, the men awaited the onslaught of the enemy. A few minutes of
suspense and their anticipations were realized. The skirmishers fell
back hastily. The woods in front were soon bristling with bayonets, and
the enemy dashed undaunted upon the cleared space in front. From their
works the Fifth corps met him with a terrible fire. The opposition was
trifling. The enemy made no persistent effort to carry the works. He
soon withdrew, and was lost in the obscurity of the wood.

During the action of the Fifth corps the left of the Second corps
sustained and repelled an attack near the Armstrong House, on the Duncan
road.

The Union losses, on the second day, were upwards of eleven hundred men,
killed, wounded, and missing. The enemy’s loss was equally heavy. One
hundred and eighty rebel prisoners were taken.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 7th, a reconnoissance of Crawford’s division encountered the
rebels, about half a mile from the Union bivouac. The division now
deployed in line, the right on Hatcher’s run and the left supported by
Wheaton’s division of the Sixth corps. The whole line felt its way
carefully. The enemy soon discovered himself in force. The conflict
which ensued was spirited, but brief. The enemy gave way, though
contesting his ground with vigor, and finally took up his position in
the works at Dabney’s mill. The two forces indulged in a spirited
exchange of musketry. The enemy evinced no desire to repeat the assault
of the day before, and at night Crawford rejoined the main body on the
Vaughn road.

During the next few days the National lines were greatly strengthened
throughout the territory of Hatcher’s Run, which had thus been gained
and occupied. The dense woods were converted into hostile defences, and
the Union line was extended, in safety and strength, over a distance of
five miles.




            CLOSE OF THE CAMPAIGN. BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS, VA.
                            APRIL 1–3, 1865.


In March, 1865, General Canby was moving an adequate force against
Mobile and the army defending it, under General Dick Taylor; Thomas was
pushing out two large and well appointed cavalry expeditions—one from
Middle Tennessee under Brevet Major-General Wilson against the enemy’s
vital points in Alabama, the other from East Tennessee under
Major-General Stoneman towards Lynchburg—and assembling the remainder of
his available forces, preparatory to offensive operations from East
Tennessee; General Sheridan’s cavalry was at White House; the armies of
the Potomac and James were confronting the enemy under Lee in his
defences of Richmond and Petersburg; General Sherman with his armies
reinforced by that of General Schofield, was at Goldsboro’; General Pope
was making preparations for a spring campaign against the enemy under
Kirby Smith and Price, west of the Mississippi; and General Hancock was
concentrating a force in the vicinity of Winchester, Virginia, to guard
against invasion or to operate offensively, as might prove necessary.

The progress and results of the various movements are elsewhere
described. This narrative now concerns itself with the final blow—the
battle and Union victory of Five Forks.

General Grant commenced his final operations on the 29th of March.
Sheridan’s cavalry, from White House, had joined the army of the Potomac
on the 27th. This force was immediately pushed up to Dinwiddie Court
House, and the Union line, on the left, was extended to the Quaker road,
near its intersection with the Boydton plank road. The position of the
troops, from left to right, was as follows: Sheridan, Warren, Humphreys,
Ord, Wright, Parke.

From the night of the 29th to the morning of the 31st the rain fell in
such torrents as to make it impossible to move wheeled vehicles, except
as corduroy roads were laid in front of them. During the 30th Sheridan
advanced from Dinwiddie Court House towards Five Forks, where he found
the enemy in force. General Warren advanced and extended his line across
the Boydton plank road to near the White Oak road, with a view of
getting across the latter; but finding the enemy strong in his front and
extending beyond his left, was directed to hold on where he was and
fortify. General Humphreys drove the enemy from his front into his main
line on the Hatcher, near Burgess’s mills. Generals Ord, Wright, and
Parke made examinations in their fronts to determine the feasibility of
an assault on the enemy’s lines. The two latter reported favorably.

General Grant now determined to extend his line no further, but to
reinforce General Sheridan’s cavalry with an infantry force, enable him
to cut loose and turn the enemy’s right flank, and with the other corps
assault the enemy’s lines. The proximity of the belligerent lines
particularly favored this movement. The lines, indeed, were so close
together at some points that it was but a moment’s run from one to the
other. Preparations were at once made to relieve General Humphrey’s
corps, to report to General Sheridan; but the condition of the roads
prevented immediate movement. On the morning of the 31st General Warren
reported favorably to getting possession of the White Oak road, and was
directed to do so. To accomplish this he moved with one division,
instead of his whole corps, which was attacked by the enemy in superior
force and driven back on the second division before it had time to form,
and it, in turn was forced back upon the third division, when the enemy
was checked. A division of the Second corps was immediately sent to his
support, the enemy driven back with heavy loss, and possession of the
White Oak road gained. The Union losses were about one thousand.
Sheridan, meantime, had advanced from Dinwiddie, and got possession of
the Five Forks, but the enemy after the affair with the Fifth corps,
reinforced the rebel cavalry, defending that point with infantry, and
forced him back towards Dinwiddie Court House. Here General Sheridan
displayed great generalship. Instead of retreating with his whole
command on the main army, to tell the story of superior forces
encountered, he deployed his cavalry on foot, leaving only mounted men
enough to take charge of the horses. This compelled the enemy to deploy
over a vast extent of woods and broken country, and made his progress
slow. General Grant was immediately notified respecting the position of
affairs, and he at once sent General McKenzie’s cavalry and one division
of the Fifth corps to Sheridan’s assistance. Two other divisions of the
Fifth corps were subsequently sent forward to swell that officer’s
force. On the morning of the 1st of April, General Sheridan, thus
reinforced, drove the enemy back on Five Forks, where, late in the
evening, he assaulted and carried his strongly fortified position,
capturing all his artillery and between five thousand and six thousand
prisoners.

During the night of the 14th of April a steady bombardment of the
enemy’s lines was kept up by General Sheridan, whose troops were further
reinforced by General Miles’s division of Humphrey’s corps. At four
o’clock on the morning of the 2nd of April, an assault was ordered on
the rebel line. General Wright led the charge, and, with his whole
corps, broke through the enemy’s defences, sweeping everything before
him and to his left towards Hatcher’s Run, capturing many guns and
several thousand prisoners. He was closely followed by two divisions of
General Ord’s command, until he met the other division of General Ord’s
that had succeeded in forcing the enemy’s lines near Hatcher’s Run.
Generals Wright and Ord immediately swung to the right, and closed all
of the enemy on that side of them in Petersburg, while General Humphreys
pushed forward with two divisions and joined General Wright on the left.
General Parke succeeded in carrying the enemy’s main line, capturing
guns and prisoners, but was unable to carry his inner line. General
Sheridan being advised of the condition of affairs, returned General
Miles to his proper command. On reaching the enemy’s lines immediately
surrounding Petersburg, a portion of General Gibbon’s corps, by a most
gallant charge, captured two strong, enclosed works—the most salient and
commanding south of Petersburg—thus materially shortening the line of
investment necessary for taking in the city. The enemy south of
Hatcher’s Run retreated westward to Sutherland’s Station, where they
were overtaken by Miles’s division. A severe engagement ensued and
lasted until both right and left rebel flanks were threatened by the
approach of General Sheridan, who was moving from Ford’s Station towards
Petersburg, and a division sent by General Meade from the front of
Petersburg. Then the enemy broke, in the utmost confusion, leaving his
guns and many prisoners in the hands of the Unionists, and retreated by
the main road along the Appomattox river. Thus the rout of the rebels
was complete, and nothing now remained to the National forces but to
reap the fruits of their glorious victory.




          SHERIDAN’S EXPEDITION IN THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY, VA.
                      FEBRUARY 27-MARCH 19, 1865.


In the month of February, 1865, before any important movement of the
armies operating against Richmond had taken place, General Grant deemed
it essential that all railroad communication with the city north of
James river should be cut off. At that time the enemy had withdrawn the
bulk of his troops from the Shenandoah valley, to strengthen the forces
then in opposition to Sherman. The cavalry force of that commander was
then far inferior to that of Johnson; and in order to assist Sherman as
well as to destroy the lines of communication and supplies of Lee’s
army, General Sheridan, then at Winchester, was instructed to undertake
an expedition, for the double purpose contemplated. On the 20th of
February General Grant telegraphed to him as follows:


                             “CITY POINT, VA., February 20, 1865—1 P. M.

  “GENERAL: As soon as it is possible to travel I think you will have no
  difficulty about reaching Lynchburg with a cavalry force alone. From
  there you could destroy the railroad and canal in every direction, so
  as to be of no further use to the rebellion. Sufficient cavalry should
  be left behind to look after Mosby’s gang. From Lynchburg, if
  information you might get there would justify it, you could strike
  south, heading the streams in Virginia to the westward of Danville,
  and push on and join General Sherman. This additional raid, with one
  about starting from East Tennessee under Stoneman, numbering four or
  five thousand cavalry, one from Vicksburg, numbering about seven or
  eight thousand cavalry, one from Eastport, Mississippi, ten thousand
  cavalry, Canby from Mobile bay with about thirty-eight thousand mixed
  troops, these three latter pushing for Tuscaloosa, Selma, and
  Montgomery, and Sherman with a large army eating out the vitals of
  South Carolina, is all that will be wanted to leave nothing for the
  rebellion to stand upon. I would advise you to overcome great
  obstacles to accomplish this. Charleston was evacuated on Tuesday
  last.

                                       U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.”


General Sheridan moved from Winchester on the 27th of February with two
divisions of cavalry numbering about five thousand each. On the 1st of
March, he secured the bridge, which the enemy attempted to destroy
across the middle fork of the Shenandoah, at Mount Crawford, and entered
Staunton on the 2d, the enemy having retreated on Waynesboro’. Thence he
pushed on to Waynesboro’, where he found the enemy in force in an
intrenched position, under General Early. Without stopping to make a
reconnoissance, an immediate attack was made, the position was carried,
and sixteen hundred prisoners, eleven pieces of artillery, with horses
and caissons complete, two hundred and ninety wagons and teams loaded
with subsistence, and seventeen battle flags, were captured. The
prisoners, under an escort of fifteen hundred men, were sent back to
Winchester. Thence he marched on Charlottesville, destroying effectually
the railroad and bridges as he went, which place he reached on the 3d.
Here he remained two days, destroying the railroad toward Richmond, and
Lynchburg, including the large iron bridges over the north and south
forks of the Rivanna river, and awaiting the arrival of his trains. This
necessary delay caused him to abandon the idea of capturing Lynchburg.
On the morning of the 6th, dividing his forces into two columns, he sent
one to Scottsville, whence it marched up the James river canal to New
Market, destroying every lock, and in many places the banks of the
canal. From here a force was pushed out from this column to
Duiguldsville, to obtain possession of the bridge across the James river
at that place, but failed. The enemy burned it as the Union troops
approached. The rebels also burned the bridge across the river at
Hardwicksville. The other column moved down the railroad toward
Lynchburg, destroying it, as far as Amherst Court House, sixteen miles
from Lynchburg; thence across the country, uniting with the column at
New Market. The river being very high, Sheridan’s pontoons would not
reach across it; and the enemy having destroyed the bridge by which he
had hoped to cross the river and get on the South Side railroad about
Farmville, and destroy it to Appomattox Court House, the only thing left
for him was to return to Winchester or strike a base at the White House.
Fortunately he chose the latter. From New Market he took up his line of
march, following the canal towards Richmond, destroying every lock upon
it and cutting the banks wherever practicable, to a point eight miles
east of Goochland, concentrating the whole force at Columbia on the
10th. Here he rested one day, and sent through by scouts information of
his whereabouts and purposes, and a request for supplies to meet him at
White House, which communication reached General Grant on the night of
the 12th. An infantry force was immediately sent to get possession of
White House, and supplies were forwarded. Moving from Columbia in a
direction to threaten Richmond to near Ashland station, he crossed the
Annas, and after having destroyed all the bridges and many miles of the
railroad, he proceeded down the north bank of the Pamunkey to White
House, which place he reached on the 19th.




                   EXPEDITION AGAINST ST. MARKS, FLA.
                           MARCH 4–12, 1865.


An expedition set out from Key West about the 1st of March, under
General Newton, having for its main object the occupation of St. Marks.
The troops were landed from Appalachee Bay, near the light house at the
mouth of St. Marks river, and encamped about two and a half miles from
that spot, in order to await the landing of the artillery, and the
cooperation of the gunboats, which were to ascend the river, and assist
in the assault. A dense fog unfortunately occurring at the time, several
of the gunboats went ashore, and none were able to ascend the river. The
enemy, by this delay, received timely information of the movement, and
were prepared to meet it.

Previous to landing the troops an expedition was sent to cut the
railroad bridge and two turnpike bridges over the Oclokony river, and to
destroy the trestle work over the Ocilla river. Another expedition was
sent to cut the railroad between St. Marks and Tallahassee. These
enterprises were unsuccessful. On the following morning an advance was
made along the road towards the bridge over the East river, where it was
found that the planking had been torn up by the enemy, who was posted on
the opposite side, with one piece of artillery, prepared to dispute the
passage.

Two companies of a colored regiment, commanded by Major Lincoln, made a
gallant charge towards the bridge over the open space intervening,
before whom the enemy fled with great rapidity. They were followed by
the two companies, who acted as skirmishers, capturing the piece of
artillery, which was immediately turned on the flying rebels.

The bridge was promptly repaired by the soldiers of the Ninty-ninth
colored regiment, and, crossing, the line of march was commenced towards
Newport. On reaching Newport a dense column of smoke indicated that the
bridge which it was necessary to cross, was destroyed.

Leaving Major Weeks at Newport bridge to guard against any attempt of
the enemy to cross and get in the rear of the Union troops, a service
that he gallantly performed under an incessant fire from the enemy, the
column pushed on towards the Natural bridge, some eight miles above,
with the design of crossing there. Here it was discovered that the enemy
was strongly posted on the opposite side, determined to oppose its
passage.

At daylight on the following morning, Major Lincoln, with two companies
of the Second cavalry, commenced the attack, and succeeded in driving
the advanced posts of the rebels over the bridge; but his further
progress was checked by a superior force, who were strongly intrenched,
besides being protected by marshes, thickets, and other natural
defences.

Reconnoissances were made with the view of ascertaining the
practicability of crossing at some other place, but without success, and
it was determined to attempt to force a passage over the bridge.
Accordingly Colonel Townsend, in command of the Second colored, was
ordered to turn the enemy’s flank, and Major Lincoln to make the direct
assault, supported by Colonel Piersoll, commanding the Ninety-ninth
colored.

Advancing gallantly to the charge, Colonel Townsend drove the enemy
before him. They fled precipitately, abandoning their breastworks; but,
unfortunately, the Union soldiers encountered, right in their way, a
wide deep ditch, impassable to troops, and were compelled to return.

Finding that the enemy were too strong in numbers and position, while
the Union troops were posted in a low, marshy position, it was
determined to withdraw about three hundred yards in the rear, in an open
pine barren, which had been previously selected. This was done in good
order.

The rebels, now supposing that the Federal force were in full retreat,
advanced in force, with artillery and infantry; but, to their surprise,
they were received by a perfect line of infantry supported by artillery.
Two desperate charges were made by the enemy, but they were repulsed
with heavy loss on the part of the assailants, and the Union troops
remained masters of the field. The Federal loss was about one hundred
and fifty in killed, wounded and prisoners.

No further advance was deemed prudent by General Newton, and he
accordingly reembarked his troops, and returned to Key West.




                STONEMAN’S EXPEDITION IN NORTH CAROLINA.
                        MARCH 20-APRIL 13, 1865.


On the 14th of February, General Grant sent the following communication
to General Thomas, containing instructions for a proposed cavalry
expedition, under General Stoneman, from General Thomas’s army. It was
the design of General Grant that this expedition should have started
early in February, and have penetrated as far as Columbia, South
Carolina, in cooperation with General Sherman’s forces in that State at
that time. As General Stoneman’s troops did not move at the time
appointed, it now became necessary to change the plan and route of the
expedition:


                                    “CITY POINT, VA., February 14, 1865.

  “General Canby is preparing a movement from Mobile bay against Mobile
  and the interior of Alabama. His force will consist of about twenty
  thousand men, besides A. J. Smith’s command. The cavalry you have sent
  to Canby will be debarked at Vicksburg. It, with the available cavalry
  already in that section, will move from there eastward, in
  cooperation. Hood’s army has been terribly reduced by the severe
  punishment you gave it in Tennessee, by desertion consequent upon its
  defeat, and now by the withdrawal of many of his men to oppose
  Sherman. Canby’s movement will attract all the attention of the enemy,
  and leave the advance from your stand-point easy. I think it
  advisable, therefore, that you prepare as much of a cavalry force as
  you can spare, and hold it in readiness to go south. The object would
  be three-fold: first, to attract as much of the enemy’s force as
  possible to insure success to Canby; second, to destroy the enemy’s
  line of communications and military resources; third, to destroy or
  capture their forces brought into the field. Tuscaloosa and Selma
  would probably be the points to direct the expedition against. This,
  however, would not be so important as the mere fact of penetrating
  deep into Alabama. Discretion should be left to the officer commanding
  the expedition to go where, according to the information he may
  receive, he will best secure the objects named above.

  “Now that your force has been so much depleted, I do not know what
  number of men you can put into the field. If not more than five
  thousand men, however, all cavalry, I think it will be sufficient. It
  is not desirable that you should start this expedition until the one
  leaving Vicksburg has been three or four days out, or even a week.

                                       “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.

  “Major-General G. H. THOMAS.”


General Stoneman’s expedition started from East Tennessee on the 20th of
March, moving by way of Boone, North Carolina, and struck the railroad
at Wytheville, Chambersburg, and Big Lick. The force striking it at Big
Lick pushed on to within a few miles of Lynchburg, destroying the
important bridges, while with the main force he effectually destroyed
the road between New river and Big Lick, and then turned for
Greensboro’, on the North Carolina railroad; struck that road and
destroyed the bridges between Danville and Greensboro’, and between
Greensboro’ and the Yadkin, together with the depots and supplies along
it, and captured four hundred prisoners.

General Stoneman, in his dispatch to General Thomas, gives the following
account of his operations after leaving Boone:—


                                    “SLATERVILLE, N. C., April 13, 1865.

  “From Boone it became necessary to cross the Blue Ridge into the
  Yadkin river bottom, in order to obtain supplies for men and horses.
  There we were detained three days by freshets. From thence we struck
  for Christiansburg. On the route I detached Colonel Miller, with a
  portion of his brigade, to Wytheville, and Major Wagner, with a
  portion of the Fifteenth Pennsylvania, Palmer’s brigade, to Big Lick.
  These three points were struck almost simultaneously. Colonel Palmer
  attacked, and, after some fighting, captured Wytheville, destroyed the
  depot of supplies at that point, and also at Mair’s Meadow. Major
  Wagner, after striking the railroad at Big Lick, pushed on towards
  Lynchburg, destroying, on his way, the important bridges over the Big
  and Little Otter, and got to within four miles of Lynchburg with the
  main body, and effectually destroyed the road between New river and
  Big Lick, and then struck for Greensboro’, on the North Carolina
  railroad.

  “Arrived near Salem, N. C., I detailed Palmer’s brigade to destroy the
  bridges between Danville and Greensboro’, and between Greensboro’ and
  Yadkin river, and the large depots of supplies along the road. This
  duty was performed with considerable fighting, the capture of four
  hundred prisoners, and to my entire satisfaction. With the other two
  brigades, Brown’s and Miller’s, and the artillery under the command of
  Lieutenant Reagon, we pushed for Salisbury, where we found about three
  thousand troops, under the command of Major-General W. M. Gardiner,
  formed behind Grant’s creek, about two miles and a half from
  Salisbury. As soon as a proper disposition could be made, I ordered a
  general charge along the entire line, and the result was the capture
  of fourteen pieces of artillery, and one thousand three hundred and
  sixty-four prisoners, including fifty-three officers.

  “We remained at Salisbury two days, during which time we destroyed
  fifteen miles of railroad track and the bridges towards Charlotte, and
  then moved to this point. From here we shall move to the south side of
  the Catawba river, and be in a position to operate towards Charlotte
  and Columbia, or upon the flank of an army moving south.

  “The following is a partial list of the public property captured north
  of Salisbury, and destroyed by us: Four large cotton factories and
  seven thousand bales of cotton; four large magazines, containing ten
  thousand stand of small arms and accoutrements, one million rounds of
  small arm ammunition, one thousand rounds of fixed artillery
  ammunition, and seven thousand pounds of powder, thirty-five thousand
  bushels of corn, fifty thousand bushels of wheat, one hundred and
  sixty thousand pounds of cured bacon, one hundred thousand suits of
  gray uniforms and clothing, two hundred and fifty thousand army
  blankets, twenty thousand pounds of harness leather, ten thousand
  pounds of saltpetre; also a very large amount of sugar, salt, rice,
  and other stores and medical supplies. In addition to the arsenals at
  Salisbury, the military workshop was being fitted up, and was filled
  with machinery sent from Raleigh and Richmond, all of which was
  destroyed.”




                GENERAL WILSON’S EXPEDITION IN ALABAMA.
                        MARCH 22-APRIL 20, 1865.


When General Canby received orders in January to advance from the forts
in Mobile Bay, and attack Mobile, he was also instructed to dispatch an
expedition under General Wilson into the interior of Alabama, where the
rebels maintained several important towns, which were garrisoned by
forces of some magnitude.

The expedition under command of Brevet Major-General Wilson consisted of
twelve thousand five hundred mounted men. It was delayed by rains until
March 22, when it moved from Chickasaw, Alabama. On the 1st of April
General Wilson encountered the enemy in force under Forrest near
Ebenezer Church, drove him in confusion, captured three hundred
prisoners and three guns, and destroyed the central bridge over the
Catawba river. On the 2d he attacked and captured the fortified city of
Selma, defended by Forrest with seven thousand men and thirty-two guns,
destroyed the arsenal, armory, naval foundry, machine shops, vast
quantities of stores, and captured three thousand prisoners. On the 4th
he captured and destroyed Tuscaloosa. On the 10th he crossed the Alabama
river, and after sending information of his operations to General Canby,
marched on Montgomery, which place he occupied on the 14th, the enemy
having abandoned it. At this place many stores and five steamboats fell
into Federal hands. Thence a force marched direct on Columbus, and
another on West Point, both of which places were assaulted and captured
on the 16th. At the former place General Wilson captured fifteen hundred
prisoners and fifty-two field guns, destroyed two gunboats, the navy
yard, foundries, arsenal, many factories, and much other public
property. At the latter place General Wilson took three hundred
prisoners, four guns, and destroyed nineteen locomotives and three
hundred cars. On the 20th he took possession of Macon, Georgia, with
sixty field guns, twelve hundred militia, and five generals, surrendered
by General Howell Cobb. General Wilson, hearing that Jeff Davis was
trying to make his escape, sent forces in pursuit, and succeeded in
capturing him on the morning of May 11.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 4th day of May, General Dick Taylor surrendered to General Canby
all the remaining rebel forces east of the Mississippi.

A force sufficient to insure an easy triumph over the enemy under Kirby
Smith, west of the Mississippi, was at once put in motion for Texas, and
Major-General Sheridan designated for its immediate command; but on the
26th day of May, and before they reached their destination, General
Kirby Smith surrendered his entire command to Major-General Canby. This
surrender did not take place, however, until after the capture of the
rebel President and Vice-President; and not till after General Smith had
disbanded a large portion of his army, and permitted an indiscriminate
plunder of public property.

Owing to the fact that many of those lately in arms against the
government had taken refuge upon the soil of Mexico, carrying with them
arms rightfully belonging to the United States, which had been
surrendered by agreement to the Federal commanders, General Grant deemed
it essential that a large army should be maintained in Texas. The
unsettled state of the Mexican country on the Rio Grande at that time,
also rendered this course necessary. Many of the leaders in the late
rebel armies, who had surrendered and given their parole, had also taken
refuge in Mexican territory, feeling distrustful of their personal
safety at the hands of the Federal authorities.




                 CAPTURE OF MOBILE AND THE REBEL FLEET.
                         APRIL 12-MAY 4, 1865.


When Vice-Admiral Farragut left the West Gulf squadron in the autumn of
1864, the command devolved on Commodore James S. Palmer, senior officer
on the station. That officer continued operations until the arrival of
Admiral Farragut’s successor, Acting-Rear-Admiral Thatcher. The
resumption of offensive operations against the city of Mobile, under the
direction of Major-General Canby, was not determined upon until early in
January, when Acting-Rear-Admiral Thatcher was ordered to proceed
immediately to New Orleans, in order to cooperate with the military
commander.

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE PORTRAITS. COOPER. BORHAM. MAFFITT. SEMMES.
JOHN SLIDELL. JAMES M. MASON.]

The force placed under Acting-Rear-Admiral Thatcher was increased by
light-draught iron-clads detached from the Mississippi squadron for
service in Mobile Bay. A joint movement by land and water was arranged
and carried into execution. Indications that the rebels were about to
evacuate the city led to a naval reconnoissance in force, to ascertain
the facts, on the 11th of March, with five monitors, in as close
proximity as the shallow water and obstructions would permit. This
movement drew from the insurgents such a fire as to place beyond doubt
that those defences were still intact.

The principal defence of Mobile was Spanish Fort, an irregular bastioned
work of very ancient structure, connected with fortifications five miles
in length commencing at D’Olive’s creek, and running to Minetta bay.
Beyond Spanish Fort, to the left, on the opposite shore of Minetta bay,
is Fort Alexis, mounting heavy guns. Forts Huger, Bradley, Tracy,
Battery Gladden, Spanish River battery, Blakely, and other rebel
defences frowned defiantly on the Federal army from the land side.

From September, 1864, to March, 1865, important movements of the armies
of the Nation in distant States deterred the Government from sending a
sufficient military force for the reduction of Mobile, which was
garrisoned during that time by about fifteen thousand troops under
General Maury.

After the breaking up of Hood’s army by Thomas, and the successful march
of Sherman through South Carolina, the corps of A. J. Smith and General
Steele were sent to reinforce General Canby, and steps were taken to
insure the capture of Mobile. An army of forty thousand men soon
invested the city on the land side, while the powerful fleet closed up
the waters, and prepared for the perilous attack.

The Sixteenth corps, Major-General A. J. Smith commanding, moved from
Fort Gaines by water to Fisher’s river; the Thirteenth corps, under
Major-General Gordon Granger, moved from Fort Morgan and joined the
Sixteenth corps on Fisher’s river.

The troops were landed on the 21st of March on the left bank of Fisher’s
river, about seventeen miles from its junction with the bay, and
advanced as rapidly as the condition of the road would permit, while the
naval vessels shelled the woods and kept open communication by signals
with General Canby for cooperation.

On the 27th of March, an assault on Spanish Fort was made by General
Canby’s troops, and simultaneously a portion of the fleet crossed
Blakely river bar, an extremely dangerous undertaking, owing to shallow
water, and the number of torpedoes with which that portion of the bay
was filled. The rebels doubtless believed that the naval vessels were
not able to cross the bar of Blakely river; and even if successful in
crossing, that it was in their power to destroy the fleet by their marsh
batteries and the innumerable torpedoes with which the river was filled.
They did succeed in sinking two of the monitors, the Milwaukee and the
Osage, and four wooden gunboats at the entrance of Blakely river, by
these submarine implements of destruction, although the river had been
thoroughly dragged, and many torpedoes were removed before the vessels
went over the bar.

By the 3rd of April, Spanish Fort and Fort Alexis had been completely
invested by the troops, and during the night of the 8th and morning of
the 9th they were, after a short but severe bombardment, captured, and
with them from sixteen hundred to two thousand men, with sixteen heavy
guns. With the key to Mobile thus secured, the other works of
importance, Batteries Tracy and Huger, were within easy reach, and on
the evening of the 11th they were evacuated.

At two o’clock on the morning of April 9th, General Canby’s troops
entered the intrenchments. General Canby’s report, the next morning,
said:

“Spanish Fort and its dependencies were captured last night. We have
twenty-five officers, and five hundred and twenty-eight enlisted men
prisoners, and have taken five mortars, and twenty-five guns. The major
part of the garrison escaped by water. Blakely is already invested and
will be assaulted to-day.”

On the 12th, the troops were convoyed to the west side of the city for
the purpose of an attack, and the fleet gained a suitable position for
performing its share of this work, but it was soon ascertained that the
city was at the mercy of the Union arms, all the remaining defences
having been abandoned. A formal surrender was, therefore, demanded by
General Granger, and Acting-Rear-Admiral Thatcher, which was complied
with, and possession was taken of the city. The works which environed
Mobile were of immense strength and extent. Nearly four hundred guns
were captured, some of them new and of the heaviest calibre.

The rebel army, on evacuating the city, retreated up the Tombigbee.
Preparations to follow and capture them were far advanced, when, on the
4th of May, propositions were received from Commander Farrand,
commanding the rebel naval forces in the waters of Alabama, to surrender
all the vessels, officers, men, and property yet afloat and under
blockade on the Tombigbee. The basis of the terms of surrender, being
the same as those of General Lee, were accepted. On the 10th of May the
formal surrender took place, and the insurgent navy ceased to be an
organization. Four vessels were surrendered, and one hundred and twelve
officers, two hundred and eighty-five men and twenty-four marines were
paroled and permitted to return to their homes.

Sabine Pass and Galveston, the only remaining rebel fortified points on
the Gulf coast, soon capitulated.




  EVACUATION OF RICHMOND AND PETERSBURG, VA. SURRENDER OF GENERAL LEE.


The great Union victory achieved at the battle of Five Forks, on the 1st
and 2d of April, 1865, decided the fate of the city of Richmond and the
city of Petersburg. Both places were immediately evacuated by the
rebels, and were entered and occupied by the National forces on the 3d
of April. Immense excitement and rejoicing was occasioned throughout the
North by the dispatches which announced this news to the country. The
newspapers were filled with letters, descriptive of the great victory
and the great triumph, and, on every hand, salutes and bonfires, and all
manner of demonstrations of gladness announced the conviction of the
people that the civil war was substantially ended. The cities of the
North were gaily decked with the glorious banner of the Republic. All
was enthusiasm and gratitude.


                              PETERSBURG.
                       SURRENDERED APRIL 3, 1865.

Petersburg before the war numbered a population of twenty thousand
people, and was the second city, in size and importance, in the State of
Virginia; but, during the war, its population was greatly reduced, there
not being more than five thousand whites left in the place at the time
of its capture.

General Ely’s brigade, of the Ninth army corps, was the first to enter
the city, on the morning of the 3d of April. This was at daylight; but,
at a quarter past six o’clock the city was formally surrendered to
Brigadier-General Edwards, of the Sixth corps. The retiring rebels had
burned some property in their flight. A good deal of tobacco had been
thus destroyed, together with some railroad rolling stock.

By six o’clock the town was awake and alive. Troops were pouring in from
all directions, shouting, singing, and cheering, but otherwise
preserving the most orderly and commendable bearing. There was no
straggling, no pillaging, no destruction of property or intrusion on
private residences. Guards were stationed thickly in all directions,
with imperative orders to keep the soldiers out of all buildings, public
or private, and protect all property from destruction. The citizens were
showing themselves in large numbers upon the door steps, in the doors
and at the windows of the houses, indicating that but few, if any, had
run away, while most of them manifested, in the expression of their
faces, a gladness at the National success. They seemed, indeed, to be
starved out. While there was plenty of food for the rebel army, it had
been carefully hoarded, and the resident population left to shift for
themselves as best they could. Perhaps it was on this account more than
any other that the citizens were so ready to abandon the rebel cause. On
the main business streets there was every appearance of thrift.

An army correspondent, who entered Petersburg with the Union forces,
alludes thus to the damage which the city had sustained from the
National bombardment: “I had much curiosity to see the effect of the
numerous shellings to which the town had been subjected, and rode
through that portion of the city most exposed. It was certainly
wonderful that so little damage had been done. Nearly every other
building in some localities had been struck; but, with the exception of
now and then a chimney knocked down, or a hole through the building that
a few dollars would repair, the injuries were scarcely perceptible. I
found the people living in the exposed localities, and was told that
they had been there throughout all the siege. But few people had been
killed by the cannonading in the town.”

In the course of the day General Grant entered Petersburg, and
established his headquarters there. But no halt was made by the army.
All day long, with banners flying and “music on the wind,” the soldiers
of the Union marched through Petersburg, in pursuit of the flying forces
of General Lee. The First division of the Ninth corps was, however, left
in the captured city, to do provost duty.




                               RICHMOND.
                       SURRENDERED APRIL 3, 1865.


Meanwhile, on the same memorable morning, the Mayor of Richmond, Mr.
Mayo, had surrendered the capital of the Confederacy to General Weitzel,
whose troops immediately marched in and took possession of the city. A
portion of it was found to be in flames, General Early having caused it
to be fired, on retreating during the night of the 2d instant. Major
Stevens directed the alarm bells to be sounded, and at once assumed
direction of the Fire Department of the city, consisting of a few men,
two steam fire engines, four worthless hand-engines, and a large amount
of hose, ruined by the retreating rebels. The efforts to subdue the
flames were arduous, but finally successful, and before night the city
was exceedingly quiet in all respects.

On personally arriving in the city, General Weitzel issued the following
order:—


                          “HEADQUARTERS, DETACHMENT ARMY OF THE JAMES, }
                                      “RICHMOND, Va., April 3, 1865. }

  “Major-General Godfrey Weitzel, commanding Detachment of the Army of
  the James, announces the occupation of the city of Richmond, by the
  armies of the United States, under command of Lieutenant-General
  Grant. The people of Richmond are assured that we come to restore to
  them the blessings of peace, prosperity and freedom, under the flag of
  the Union.

  “The citizens of Richmond are requested to remain for the present
  quietly within their houses, and to avoid all public assemblages or
  meetings in the public streets. An efficient provost guard will
  immediately re-establish order and tranquillity within the city.

  “Martial law is, for the present, proclaimed.

  “Brigadier-General George F. Shepley, United States Volunteers, is
  hereby appointed Military Governor of Richmond.

  “Lieutenant-Colonel Fred. L. Manning, Provost-Marshal-General, Army of
  the James, will act as Provost-Marshal of Richmond. Commanders of
  detachments doing guard duty in the city will report to him for
  instructions. By command of

                                                 “Major-General WEITZEL.

  “D. D. WHEELER, Assistant Adjutant-General.”


The works in front of Richmond which were occupied by the rebels; and
wholly evacuated previous to the Union occupancy of the city, were found
to consist of three strong lines, strictly enveloping Richmond. The
outer ones were continuous lines; the inner one consisted of a series of
strong redoubts and bastion forts. These works mounted upwards of three
hundred heavy guns, all of which were captured.

General Weitzel also took one thousand prisoners, besides the wounded.
These numbered five thousand, in nine hospitals. He captured cannon, to
the number of at least five hundred pieces. Five thousand muskets were
found in one lot. Thirty locomotives and three hundred cars were also
seized.

The rebels had succeeded in destroying all their vessels of war; but the
well known Tredegar iron works were found to be unharmed. Libby Prison
and Castle Thunder were also captured, and were speedily filled with
rebel prisoners. It was ascertained that the rebels began the work of
destroying the city, by firing the Shockoe warehouse, filled with
tobacco, as well as the large granary establishment on Carey street,
near Twenty-third street. The fire was very destructive; and in addition
to destroying the War Department, the general Post Office, the Treasury
building, several churches, and many stores, likewise destroyed the
offices of the Richmond _Enquirer_, _Dispatch_ and _Examiner_; the
Virginia Bank, the Farmers’ Bank, and the Bank of Richmond. The United
States Custom House was saved, by reason of its being fireproof.

On the 4th of April President Lincoln visited Richmond, where he was
received with great enthusiasm. During his stay in the city, he
occupied, with General Weitzel, quarters in the house which, only a
little while before, had been the residence of the rebel President
Jefferson Davis.




             SURRENDER OF GENERAL LEE, AND HIS ENTIRE ARMY.
                             APRIL 9, 1865.


On abandoning Petersburg and Richmond, General Lee betook himself in the
direction of Danville, which is just upon the border of the State of
Virginia, close to the North Carolina line. Here—or earlier, at
Burkesville—it was designed to make another stand. General Sheridan was
already in full pursuit, and aimed to cut off Lee’s army at Burkesville.
On the 6th of April, he sent the following dispatch:


                                                    “APRIL 6—11:15 P. M.

  “Lieutenant-General GRANT:—

  “I have the honor to report that the enemy made a stand at the
  intersection of the Burkesville station road with the road upon which
  they were retreating.

  “I attacked them with two divisions of the Sixth army corps and routed
  them handsomely, making a connection with the cavalry. I am still
  pressing on with both cavalry and infantry. Up to the present time we
  have captured Generals Ewell, Kershaw, Barton, Corse, De Bose and
  Custis Lee, several thousand prisoners, fourteen pieces of artillery,
  with caissons and a large number of wagons. If the thing is pressed, I
  think Lee will surrender.

                                                     P. H. SHERIDAN,
                                             “Major-General Commanding.”


On the receipt of this message, General Grant was already pushing on in
person, with his whole army, to join Sheridan and strike the deathblow
to the rebellion. But there was no need of further fighting. Sheridan
had captured a large part of the rebel army, and the rest was
demoralized. Lee’s headquarters at this time were near Amelia Court
House. On the afternoon of the 9th of April, finding all hope of success
to the rebel arms to be utterly empty and vain, the rebel commander
finally surrendered to General Grant the entire Army of Northern
Virginia. The letters which passed between the two commanders, upon this
occasion, and which telegraphed to the Northern press, created the
wildest enthusiasm throughout the land, are well worthy of preservation
in the pages of any History of the War for the Union—so graphic and
thorough in their narrative of the closing scene of rebel discomfiture
and national triumph.


                     GENERAL GRANT TO GENERAL LEE.


                                                         “April 7, 1865.

  “General R. E. LEE, Commanding Confederate States Army:—

  “GENERAL—The result of the last week must convince you of the
  hopelessness of further resistance on the part of the Army of Northern
  Virginia in this struggle. I feel that it is so, and regard it as my
  duty to shift from myself the responsibility of any further effusion
  of blood, by asking of you the surrender of that portion of the
  Confederate States army, known as the Army of Northern Virginia.

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                             “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General, U. S. A.”


                     GENERAL LEE TO GENERAL GRANT.


                                                         “April 7, 1865.

  “GENERAL—I have received your note of this date.

  “Though not entirely of the opinion you express of the hopelessness of
  further resistance on the part of the Army of Northern Virginia, I
  reciprocate your desire to avoid useless effusion of blood, and
  therefore, before considering your proposition, ask the terms you will
  offer on condition of its surrender.

                                        “R. E. LEE, General Commanding.”


                     GENERAL GRANT TO GENERAL LEE.


                                                         “April 8, 1865.

  “GENERAL—Your note of last evening, in reply to mine of same date,
  asking the conditions on which I will accept the surrender of the Army
  of Northern Virginia is just received.

  “In reply, I would say that, peace being my first desire, there is but
  one condition that I insist upon, viz.:—

  “That the men surrendered shall be disqualified for taking up arms
  again, against the Government of the United States, until properly
  exchanged.

  “I will meet you or designate officers to meet any officers you may
  name for the same purpose at any point agreeable to you, for the
  purpose of arranging definitely the terms upon which the surrender of
  the Army of Northern Virginia will be received.

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                             “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General, U. S. A.”


                     GENERAL LEE TO GENERAL GRANT.


                                                         “April 8, 1865.

  “GENERAL—I received at a late hour your note of to-day in answer to
  mine of yesterday.

  “I did not intend to propose the surrender of the Army of Northern
  Virginia, but to ask the terms of your proposition. To be frank, I do
  not think the emergency has arisen to call for the surrender.

  “But as the restoration of peace should be the sole object of all, I
  desire to know whether your proposals would tend to that end.

  “I cannot, therefore, meet you with a view to surrender the army of
  Northern Virginia; but as far as your proposition may affect the
  Confederate States’ forces under my command and tend to the
  restoration of peace, I should be pleased to meet you at ten A. M.
  to-morrow, on the old stage road to Richmond, between the picket lines
  of the two armies.

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                           “R. E. LEE, General C. S. A.”


                     GENERAL GRANT TO GENERAL LEE.


                                                         “April 9, 1865.

  “GENERAL—Your note of yesterday is received. As I have no authority to
  treat on the subject of peace, the meeting proposed for ten A. M.
  to-day, could lead to no good. I will state, however, General, that I
  am equally anxious for peace with yourself; and the whole North
  entertain the same feeling. The terms upon which peace can be had are
  well understood. By the South laying down their arms they will hasten
  that most desirable event, save thousands of human lives, and hundreds
  of millions of property not yet destroyed.

  “Sincerely hoping that all our difficulties may be settled without the
  loss of another life, I subscribe myself,

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                             “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General, U. S. A.”


                     GENERAL LEE TO GENERAL GRANT.


                                                         “April 9, 1865.

  “GENERAL—I received your note of this morning on the picket line,
  whither I had come to meet you and ascertain definitely what terms
  were embraced in your proposition of yesterday with reference to the
  surrender of this army.

  “I now request an interview in accordance with the offer contained in
  your letter of yesterday for that purpose.

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                                    “R. E. LEE, General.

  “To Lieutenant-General GRANT, commanding United States armies.”


                     GENERAL GRANT TO GENERAL LEE.


                                                         “April 9, 1865.

  “GENERAL—Your note of this date is but this moment (fifty minutes past
  eleven A. M.) received.

  “In consequence of my having passed from the Richmond and Lynchburg
  road to the Farmville and Lynchburg road, I am, at this writing, about
  four miles west of Walter’s Church, and will push forward to the front
  for the purpose of meeting you.

  “Notice sent to me, on this road, where you wish the interview to take
  place, will meet me.

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                      “U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.”


                     GENERAL GRANT TO GENERAL LEE.


                                      “APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE, }
                                              APRIL 9, 1865.           }

  “In accordance with the substance of my letter to you of the 8th
  inst., I propose to receive the surrender of the Army of Northern
  Virginia on the following terms, to wit:—

  “Rolls of all the officers and men to be made in duplicate; one copy
  to be given to an officer designated by me, the other to be retained
  by such officers as you may designate.

  “The officers to give their individual paroles not to take arms
  against the government of the United States until properly exchanged,
  and each company or regimental commander to sign a like parole for the
  men of his command.

  “The arms, artillery and public property to be parked and stacked and
  turned over to the officers appointed by me to receive them.

  “This will not embrace the side arms of the officers, nor their
  private horses or baggage.

  “This done, each officer and man will be allowed to return to their
  homes, not to be disturbed by United States authority so long as they
  observe their parole and the laws in force where they may reside.

  “Very respectfully,

                                       U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.”


                     GENERAL LEE TO GENERAL GRANT.


     “HEADQUARTERS, ARMY OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA, }
                             APRIL 9, 1865.                            }

  “GENERAL—I have received your letter of this date, containing the
  terms of surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia as proposed by
  you. As they are substantially the same as those expressed in your
  letter of the 8th inst., they are accepted. I will proceed to
  designate the proper officers to carry the stipulations into effect.

  “Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                                   “R. E. LEE, General.”


                  *       *       *       *       *

The national rejoicing over the capture of Lee’s army was, as may well
be imagined, deep and general. Throughout the length and breadth of the
land, thanksgiving to the God of battles—as of Peace—went up from the
hearts of a whole people, happy in the rescue of the American Republic
from division, and from the plague of human slavery.

The following documents were issued from the war office, at Washington,
immediately after the great victory:


                               “WAR DEPARTMENT,                        }
                   “WASHINGTON, D. C., April 9—9:30 P. M. }

  “Lieutenant-General GRANT:—

  “Thanks be to Almighty God for the great victory with which he has
  this day crowned you and the gallant armies under your command.

  “The thanks of this Department, and of the government, and of the
  people of the United States—their reverence and honor have been
  deserved—will be rendered to you and the brave and gallant officers
  and soldiers of your army for all time.

                                             “EDWIN M. STANTON,
                                                     “Secretary of War.”


                                  “WAR DEPARTMENT,                     }
                      WASHINGTON, D. C., April 9—10 P. M. }

  “Ordered—That a salute of two hundred guns be fired at the
  headquarters of every army and department, and at every post and
  arsenal in the United States, and at the Military Academy at West
  Point, on the day of the receipt of this order, in commemoration of
  the surrender of General R. E. Lee and the army of Northern Virginia
  to Lieutenant-General Grant and the army under his command; report of
  the receipt and execution of this order to be made to the
  Adjutant-General, Washington.

                                             “EDWIN M. STANTON,
                                                     “Secretary of War.”




                    SKETCH OF THE REBEL GENERAL LEE.


Robert E. Lee was born in Virginia about the year 1808. He entered West
Point, where he received the usual military education. He graduated
honorably in 1829, and received an appointment as Second Lieutenant of
Engineers. For eighteen years he served in the army, drawing the usual
pay from the government, and rising to the rank of Major and
Lieutenant-Colonel of cavalry. In the Mexican war he was further honored
by a brevet of Colonel, and on the appointment of Albert S. Johnston to
the command of the Utah expedition Lee succeeded him in command of the
Second cavalry. After filling this honorable and agreeable post in the
military service of his country for several years, he was tempted with
others, to desert his flag at the moment of his country’s sorest need.
When the Richmond politicians passed their Ordinance of Secession,
Robert E. Lee threw up his commission, and accepted the rank of General
in the rebel army.

[Illustration: ROBERT E. LEE.]

In Mexico, Lee had been Chief of General Scott’s Staff, and won high
praise for his skill. It was a common remark in our army, before the
war, that “Bob Lee” was the ablest strategist we had. His first
performances in the rebel array did not increase his reputation; he was
eclipsed for a time by both Beauregard and Johnston. After the latter
was wounded, however, at Fair Oaks, Lee took the whole command of the
rebel army in Virginia, and directed its operations during the seven
days’ battles before Richmond. He likewise led the rebels into Maryland,
and commanded them at Antietam, and subsequently at Fredericksburg,
Chancellorsville, the Wilderness, Spottsylvania, and all the other
battles incident to the closing campaign in Virginia.




                  ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN.
                        NIGHT OF APRIL 14, 1865.


A glorious sunburst parted the clouds over Abraham Lincoln’s head just
as he took the inauguration oath which made him President for a second
term—and from that period his life was one series of cheering events.
Was it a promise of redemption to the Nation, or the _halo_ of
martyrdom? The rebellion melted away like snow from that hour. Richmond
was taken; Lee surrendered his grand army. The brave blood which had
crimsoned the wilderness with a terrible rain, bore quick and glorious
fruit all over the land. Lincoln was a good man. Even his enemies said
this, when they found themselves a mere handful among millions that
loved him for his honesty, his simple truthfulness, and that genuine
patriotism which no man doubted and all men revered. Triumphant as a
President, happy in the bosom of a family that adored him, blessed with
an attached wife, a son of fine promise and faultless character, another
son whom he loved with intense affection, and who returned it with all
the touching ardor of early childhood, worshiped by many and respected
by all, the 14th of April found him a happy and triumphant man.

A box had been taken that night for the President and a select party at
Ford’s Theatre, a fashionable place of amusement in Washington, where
Thomas Taylor’s comedy of Our American Cousin was to be performed by
Miss Laura Keene and her company. A private box in the upper tier, on
the right of the audience, had been all that season so frequently used
by the President, that it was generally known as the “President’s box.”
That evening it was richly draped for his reception. The Stars and
Stripes glowed brightly above it, and easy chairs were placed for the
President’s occupancy. It had been announced that General Grant would
accompany the Presidential party and a brilliant audience had assembled,
eager to greet the two most popular men of The Nation.

The first act of the American Cousin had commenced, when President
Lincoln, Mrs. Lincoln, Miss Harris, and Major Rathbon entered the
theatre. General Grant was not of the party; he had left Washington a
few hours before. They seated themselves, with the National flags draped
above them, and the eyes of a brilliant audience turned that way. The
President was always deeply interested in the dramatic performances
before him, and sometimes, doubtless, sought the theatre as a refuge
from political cares. That night no premonition seemed to haunt him. He
was tranquil, silent, and interested. Usually, when he visited any place
of amusement, his youngest son might have been seen hanging about his
chair, whispering his observations in childish confidence, and sometimes
leaning for half an hour together upon his father’s knee. The devotion
and companionship which existed between Lincoln and this warm-hearted
lad was touching in its simple tenderness. No frown was ever seen on
that kindly face when the boy, in his ardent affection claimed what
might have been deemed untimely notice. Whatever thought harassed his
mind, those connected with the boy always brought smiles with them.

But, in mercy, this most ardently loving of sons was spared the horrors
of a scene that soon sent an awful shock through the audience, and threw
the whole nation into bitter mourning.

The play went pleasantly on, and nothing happened to disturb the
cheerfulness of the occasion, till, close on ten o’clock. Then John
Wilkes Booth was first seen in the audience.

This young man was a member of the profession, and had a free entrance
to all parts of the theatre, where he was a great favorite. The son of
perhaps the most talented tragedian known to our country, belonging to a
family of young men all rich in genius, accomplished and endowed with
wonderful physical beauty, he had found a respectable place even in the
best social life of Washington, during the three months that he had
spent in apparent idleness at one of the most fashionable hotels of the
city.

When this man entered the theatre that night, many people knew him, and
some remarked the intense pallor of his face. He was remarked, at this
time, to be slowly working his way through the crowd towards the door of
the President’s box. For a moment he was observed leaning against the
wall, pale, and with a startling wildness of the eyes, looking over the
audience. Then he attempted to enter the box, but was challenged by the
sentry stationed there. Booth answered that he was a senator of the
United States, and that the President had sent for him.

He was admitted; the door closed behind him, which he immediately
fastened by placing a wooden bar, arranged in advance, across it.

He moved toward the President, and stood for an instant behind his
chair. The stage was almost deserted. Asa Trenchard, represented by Mr.
Hawk, was its sole occupant. Mr. Lincoln was watching the scene with his
eyes bent on the stage, quiet, calm, almost smiling. Booth crept closer
to his victim, drew his pistol, and fired. A spring toward the front of
the box, a backward lunge with the bowie-knife, held in one hand, which
pierced Major Rathbon’s arm, wounding him severely; then a wild
dangerous leap over. His spur entangled itself with the flags, and the
impetus flung him forward on the stage, where he fell upon one knee. An
instant, and he leaped up, brandishing the naked bowie-knife in his
hand, which was red with the blood of Major Rathbon. In a strong, clear
voice, thrillingly dramatic, he cried out the old Latin motto of the
State of Virginia, “_Sic semper tyrannis_.” With these defiant words on
his lips, Booth rushed across the stage, down a side passage, where his
red hand almost brushed against Laura Keene, and out of a rear door
which opened to a lane back of the theatre.

There a horse stood ready, held by an accomplice, on which he leaped,
and dashed down the lane. The audience for one awful minute were struck
dumb. The smoke from the President’s box, the excited shrieks of Mrs.
Lincoln, which rang with awful meaning over the crowd, threw the whole
multitude into bewildering confusion. Only one man had presence of mind
enough to understand the awful truth, and pursue the assassin. Colonel
J. B. Stewart, a tall, powerful man, full of cool courage, leaped upon
the stage from the orchestra seats, and rushed after Booth across the
stage to the rear of the theatre. Once his hand almost grasped the
assassin’s garments, but the door which was flung open fell to with
violent force, and Stewart lost a precious moment in attempting to open
it. It swung back at last, but Booth had already leaped to his horse,
and, in an instant, was engulfed in the murky darkness of the lane.

Meantime the crowd swayed wildly to and fro; shrieks of anguish from
distracted wife rang through the multitude with maddening effect. The
President had fallen forward, with his head on his breast, breathing,
but senseless. The ball had entered his head just back of the left ear,
passed completely through the brain, and lodged above the right eye.
Laura Keene rushed to the box, calling for help, and aided Miss Harris
to support the murdered man in his seat. There, pale with terror, one
pleading for help, the other crying out for water, those two frightened
ladies kept him from falling forward with their trembling hands.

The crowd understood the awful catastrophe now, and a mad rush was made
for the stage—all too late. By that time Booth was galloping through the
stormy night, on a horse whose swiftness defied pursuit. Then the inner
bar was forced away from its rude sockets, and there was a rush to the
box where President Lincoln was still supported by those feeble women,
who stood by him firmly, their hands red with his blood, and their
garments wet with the crimson rain which never came from a more
thoroughly kind heart. On the back of the cushioned chair, on the
partition, and on the floor, that martyr blood had fallen. On the carpet
lay a single-barreled pistol.

They lifted the dying man, carried him through the heaving surges of the
crowd, to the house of Mr. Peterson, in Tenth street, close by the
theatre. Then the multitude swayed doorward, and filled the street,
packing it with white, anxious faces. A guard was placed at the door,
who in vain strove to answer the questions urged upon him. All he could
say was, that the President was dying; a few minutes or hours, at least,
must close his life. Then a dreadful stillness fell upon the crowd; some
went away in painful silence; others—stout, strong men, too—turned away
weeping like little children.

At five o’clock on Saturday morning, the President lay in his death
agonies. He was lying upon the bed, apparently breathing with great
difficulty. He was entirely unconscious, and had been ever since his
assassination. His eyes were protruding from their sockets and suffused
with blood. In other respects, his countenance was unchanged. At his
bedside were the Secretary of War, Secretary of the Navy, Secretary of
the Interior, Postmaster-General, and the Attorney-General; Senator
Sumner, General Farnsworth, General Todd, cousin to Mrs. Lincoln; Major
Hay, M. B. Field, General Halleck, Major-General Meigs, Rev. Dr. Gurley,
George Oglesby, of Illinois; Drs. E. N. Abbott, R. K. Stone, C. D.
Hatch, Neal, Hall, and Lieberman. In the adjoining room was Mrs.
Lincoln, her son, Captain Robert Lincoln; Miss Harris, who was with Mrs.
Lincoln at the time of the assassination of the President; Rufus F.
Andrews, and two lady friends of Mrs. Lincoln.

Mrs. Lincoln was under great excitement and agony, wringing her hands
and exclaiming, “Why did he not shoot me instead of my husband? I have
tried to be so careful of him, fearing something would happen, and his
life seemed to be more precious now than ever. I must go with him,” and
other expressions of the intense agony of her coming widowhood. She was
constantly going back and forth to the bedside of the President,
exclaiming in great anguish, “How can it be so!” The scene was
heart-rending, and it is impossible to portray it in its living light.
When General Farnsworth went in, hoping to comfort her, she seized him
by the arm and with touching appeal besought him to save her husband, as
if any human help could avail then.

Captain Robert Lincoln bore himself with great firmness, and while
quivering with anguish himself endeavored to assuage the grief of his
mother by telling her to put her trust in God and all would be well.
Occasionally, being entirely overcome, he would retire into the hall and
give way to most heart-rending lamentations. In his affliction, as in
the sunshine of the greatest prosperity, this young man proved worthy of
the father who was dying—worthy of the nation with whom his after
fortune should be held as a sacred inheritance. Let what will come in
the hereafter, the orphaned sons of Abraham Lincoln have a right to
claim adoption from the American people.

About a quarter of an hour before the President died, his breathing
became very difficult, and in many instances seemed to have entirely
ceased. The surgeons who were holding his pulse supposed him to be dead,
but he would again rally and breathe with so great difficulty as to be
heard in almost every part of the house. Mrs. Lincoln took her last
leave of him about twenty minutes before he expired—she could not endure
to await the awful footsteps of death.

The surgeons and the members of the Cabinet, Senator Sumner, Captain
Robert Lincoln and Rufus Andrews stood leaning over the headboard of the
bed watching every motion of the heaving breast of the dying President.
Robert Lincoln was supporting himself upon the arm of Senator Sumner.
The members of the Cabinet were standing by the side of the
bed—Secretary Stanton at the left of Mr. Andrews—Mr. Andrews near Mr.
Lincoln’s head. Next to him was Mr. Dennison, and the others arranged
along at his left, and the surgeons were sitting upon the side and foot
of the bed, holding the President’s hands, and with their watches
observing the slow declension of the pulse, and watching the faint ebb
of that noble spirit. Such was the solemn stillness for the duration of
five minutes that the ticking of many watches could be heard in the
room. At twenty-two minutes past seven, A. M., the soul of Abraham
Lincoln fled from its earthly tabernacle “to that bourne from which no
traveler returns.” As he drew his last breath the Rev. Dr. Gurley
addressed the Throne of Grace with a fervent prayer for his heart-broken
family and his mourning country.

Mrs. Lincoln sat in an adjoining room, hushing her tears and waiting
solemnly. When they told her in such tender words as pity finds for
grief, that her husband was dead, the growing stillness of her heart
gave way and she cried out in sudden anguish, “Oh, why did you not tell
me that he was dying?” Abraham Lincoln was dead, but scarcely had the
cold hand touched his features when over them dawned that gentle smile
which those who have seen him in his happiest moments will never forget.
Except the blackness of his eyes his face appeared perfectly natural. He
died without a struggle, or even a perceptible motion of the limbs. The
morning was calm, and the rain was dropping gently upon the roof of the
humble apartment where they had laid him down to die. Guards had been
stationed to keep the people from the house, and no sound could be heard
in the streets save the footsteps of the sentry passing to and fro, as
he guarded all that remained of Abraham Lincoln.




            NATIONAL LAMENTATION. FUNERAL OF THE PRESIDENT.


The following dispatch, received in New York city on the morning of the
15th of April, announced to the country and to the world the death of
the President of the United States:—


                                           “WAR DEPARTMENT,            }
                                       WASHINGTON, April 15, 1865. }

  “To Major-General DIX, New York:—

  “Abraham Lincoln died this morning at twenty-two minutes after seven
  o’clock.

                                   “EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War.”


This grievous intelligence fell upon the heart of the Nation like the
storm which follows the thunderbolt. The fierce, mad excitement and
indignation which had fired the bosoms of all Americans at the news of
their beloved President having been struck down by the hand of an
assassin, was instantly followed by passionate grief and lamentation at
the speedy news of his death. A deep gloom hung over the whole North—a
gloom which might be compared to the dark clouds from whose bosoms flash
forth vivid streams of destroying fire. In every heart arose a stern
demand for retribution against the man who had bereaved a great nation
in destroying its leader. This feeling gave force and depth to the
mournfulness which fell solemnly on the land. In every city throughout
the North, in every village,—in every place where men dwelt, strangers
grasped each other by the hand, and with tear-wet eyes bewailed their
country’s loss; for the universal grief made all men feel their
universal fraternity. The whole country was draped in mourning. No man
was so poor that his sorrow did not show itself in some touching
acknowledgment of his country’s bereavement and his own sorrow. For
thirty days the emblems of mourning remained on every public building;
while flags heavily draped with crape were hung in the windows, or
streamed from the flagstaffs of thousands on thousands of private
dwellings.

The body of the martyred President lay in state at the White House for
four days, where, upon the 19th of April, the funeral services were
celebrated in every church throughout the North, and in most of the
Canadian cities. The ceremony at the White House being over, the
President’s remains were removed to the Capitol, where they lay in state
for two days. On the 21st they were placed within a handsome and grandly
imposing funeral car, and proceeded on their melancholy journey,
stopping a certain length of time at each of the following cities:
Baltimore, Harrisburg, Philadelphia, New York, Albany, Buffalo,
Cleveland, Columbus, Indianapolis, and Chicago; arriving in Springfield,
Illinois, at eight o’clock on the morning of May 3d. There—amid the
scenes that had witnessed his manly labors, his successful career, his
prosperity, his home affections, and his honorable progress in the
esteem of his fellow-workers and fellow-citizens, the good President was
laid down to his last earthly sleep. The love and the prayers of a whole
people followed him to his grave, and the veneration of posterity will
hallow it forever.

                  And there his countrymen shall come,
                  With memory proud, with pity dumb,
                        And strangers far and near,
                        For many and many a year.

                  For many a year and many an age,
                  While History on her ample page
                        The virtues shall enroll
                        Of that Paternal Soul.




                 SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN.
              BORN FEBRUARY 12, 1809. DIED APRIL 15, 1865.


Abraham Lincoln was born at Hodginville, Kentucky, on the 12th of
February, 1809. His parents were poor, and his youth was thus a youth of
labor. From the age of seven to that of nineteen, he worked on his
father’s farm—his parents having removed to Indiana, and subsequently
into Illinois. When nineteen years of age he left home and sought labor
on the Mississippi river, as a hired hand on a flatboat plying between
St. Louis and New Orleans. He subsequently built a similar vessel, which
he personally managed, in the river traffic. Until 1832 his life was a
continual struggle against adverse fortune, but it was prosecuted with a
strong heart and firm hand. In 1832 the Indian war with Black Hawk broke
out. Mr. Lincoln raised a company of volunteers in Menard county, Ill.,
and served through the war under General Samuel Whiteside.

The early career of Mr. Lincoln as a pioneer and in camp, had gradually
trained and formed his character for more active life. His prominence in
his county, as the former captain of a company, naturally gave him
additional influence at home, on his return from the war, and, after
beginning life as a lawyer, he soon became, also, a politician. In 1834,
at the age of twenty-five, he was elected on the whig ticket, to the
Illinois Legislature. In 1836, he was re-elected for a second term,
during which he avowed conservative principles on the subject of
slavery, and added much to his popularity by efforts to make Springfield
the capital of the State. He also won credit by his action as Chairman
of the Finance Committee in the Legislature. In 1846, after several
years of retirement from political life, during which he had established
himself as a highly successful lawyer, Mr. Lincoln was nominated for
Congress, and was elected by the largest vote ever given to a whig
candidate in his district. He served until 1849, and was active—in
connection with Seward, Chase and Giddings—in the agitation of the
Wilmot proviso, and in opposition to the Mexican war. From 1849 to 1854
he remained secluded at Springfield, taking, however, an active, though
not prominent part, in the organization of the republican party, and in
1856 he ardently supported its first candidates, Fremont and Dayton. He
had just been defeated in the Illinois Legislature for United States
Senator, and, except during the Presidential canvass for 1856, when he
was brought frequently in contact on the stump with Stephen A. Douglas,
he remained quiet in his office at Springfield until 1858, when he
became a candidate for Senator. During this canvass he made some of the
most remarkable speeches of his life. In 1860 he was elected President
of the United States.

On January 1st, 1863, President Lincoln declared in accordance with a
previous proclamation, the freedom of all the slaves in the rebellious
territory, a work which has since been consummated throughout all the
Union by act of the States and the Federal Congress.

In 1864, Mr. Lincoln was re-elected to the Presidency, and was duly
inaugurated, on the 4th of March, 1865. He will be remembered as long as
the history of the American Republic endures, as a good man, who labored
to do his duty, who bore the honors of a high station with meekness and
humility, and who guided his country through dreadful perils to a happy
and secure peace, upon the safe basis of democratic institutions.




              THE ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE SECRETARY SEWARD.
                            APRIL 14, 1865.


While the murder of Abraham Lincoln was in progress at Ford’s Theatre,
another scene in the bloody tragedy was being enacted at the house of
the Secretary of State. Mr. Seward, suffering from severe injuries,
received shortly before by an accidental fall from his carriage, was
lying in his bed, sick, suffering, and helpless. Within the invalid’s
chamber all was sadness and gloom; for Mr. Seward’s life was the subject
of much uncertainty and anxious fear. About nine o’clock in the evening
the chamber of the Secretary was forcibly entered by a tall, muscular
man, whose face could hardly be distinguished beneath the broad and
drooping brim of his slouched hat, which was drawn over his brow. This
man was Lewis Payne,—who had been procured to murder the Secretary of
State, and who had effected his entrance into the house by stratagem,
and had forced his way from the street-door to Mr. Seward’s chamber,
pretending to be a messenger from the physician with medicine for Mr.
Seward. Payne had pushed past the servant who had admitted him, and met
with no opposition till he reached the Secretary’s door. There he was
confronted by Mr. Frederick Seward, with whom he had a moment’s parley
regarding his message to Mr. Seward; but finding that he could effect
nothing in that way he struck the Secretary’s son on the head with a
pistol, felling him to the floor, and crushing in his skull. Upon the
instant he burst into the Secretary’s room, rushed up to the bed, and
attacked the helpless, sick old man with a knife. Mr. Seward succeeded
in rolling out on the floor; but not until he had received many and
severe cuts about the throat and face.

All this had passed in so brief a time that not even a cry for help had
been raised. The terrified nurses raised screams of distress about half
a minute after the assassin’s entrance to the room, and a soldier,
followed by Major Seward, rushed into the apartment. The soldier at once
leaped upon the assassin, and tried to pull him backward; but Payne
turned upon him, and stabbing him in the side, contrived to break away.
He also struck and wounded Major Seward, and one of the attendants, who
precipitated themselves upon him, and in the dreadful confusion
following he succeeded in making his escape from the house.




                 THE INAUGURATION OF PRESIDENT JOHNSON.


On Saturday morning, April 15th, immediately after the death of
President Lincoln, the following communication was addressed to Hon.
Andrew Johnson, hitherto Vice-President of the Republic:


                                        WASHINGTON CITY, April 15, 1865.

  “SIR:—Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States, was shot by an
  assassin last evening at Ford’s Theatre, in this city, and died at the
  hour of twenty-two minutes after seven o’clock. About the same time at
  which the President was shot, an assassin entered the sick chamber of
  the Hon. W. H. Seward, Secretary of State, and stabbed him in several
  places in the throat, neck and face, severely if not mortally wounding
  him.—Other members of the Secretary’s family were also dangerously
  wounded by the assassin while making his escape. By the death of
  President Lincoln the office of President has devolved under the
  Constitution upon you. The emergency of the Government demands that
  you should immediately qualify according to the requirements of the
  Constitution, and enter upon the duties of President of the United
  States. If you will please make known your pleasure, such arrangements
  as you deem proper will be made.

                                  Your obedient servants,
                              HUGH MCCULLOCH, Secretary of the Treasury.
                              EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War.
                              GIDEON WELLES, Secretary of the Navy.
                              WILLIAM DENNISON, Postmaster-General.
                              J. P. USHER, Secretary of the Interior.
                              JAMES SPEED, Attorney-General.

  To ANDREW JOHNSON, Vice-President of the United States.”


[Illustration: ANDREW JOHNSON.]

Mr. Johnson requested that the ceremonies should take place at his rooms
at the Kirkwood House, in Washington, at ten o’clock on the morning of
the 15th.

The Hon. Salmon P. Chase, Chief-Justice, of the United States, was
notified of the fact, and desired to be in attendance to administer the
oath of office.

At the above-named hour the following gentlemen assembled in the
Vice-President’s room to participate in the ceremony: Hon. Salmon P.
Chase, the Hon. Hugh McCulloch, Secretary of the Treasury; Mr.
Attorney-General Speed; F. P. Blair, sr.; Montgomery Blair; Senators
Foot of Vermont, Yates of Illinois, Ramsay of Minnesota, Stewart of
Nevada, Hale of New Hampshire, and General Farnsworth, of Illinois.

After the presentation of the above letter, the Chief-Justice
administered the following oath to Mr. Johnson:

“I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States, and will, to the best of my ability,
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.”

After receiving the oath and being declared President of the United
States, Mr. Johnson remarked:

“Gentlemen: I must be permitted to say that I have been almost
overwhelmed by the announcement of the sad event which has so recently
occurred. I feel incompetent to perform duties so important and
responsible as those which have been so unexpectedly thrown upon me. As
to an indication of any policy which may be pursued by me in the
administration of the Government, I have to say that must be left for
development as the Administration progresses. The message or declaration
must be made by the acts as they transpire. The only assurance that I
can now give of the future is reference to the past. The course which I
have taken in the past in connection with this rebellion must be
regarded as a guarantee of the future. My past public life, which has
been long and laborious, has been founded, as I in good conscience
believe, upon a great principle of right, which lies at the basis of all
things. The best energies of my life have been spent in endeavoring to
establish and perpetuate the principles of free government, and I
believe that the government, in passing through its present perils, will
settle down upon principles consonant with popular rights, more
permanent and enduring than heretofore. I must be permitted to say, if I
understand the feelings of my own heart, I have long labored to
ameliorate and elevate the condition of the great mass of the American
people. Toil and an honest advocacy of the great principles of free
government have been my lot. The duties have been mine—the consequences
are God’s. This has been the foundation of my political creed. I feel
that in the end the government will triumph, and that these great
principles will be permanently established. In conclusion, gentlemen,
let me say that I want your encouragement and countenance. I shall ask
and rely upon you and others in carrying the government through its
present perils. I feel in making this request that it will be heartily
responded to by you and all other patriots and lovers of the rights and
interests of a free people.”

At the conclusion of the above remarks the President received the kind
wishes of the friends by whom he was surrounded. A few moments were
devoted to conversation. All were deeply impressed with the solemnity of
the occasion.




    THE CLOSE OF SHERMAN’S CAMPAIGN. SURRENDER OF GENERAL JOHNSTON.


In the latter part of March and the first days of April, 1865, the rebel
army under General J. E. Johnston was encamped in the neighborhood of
Smithfield, North Carolina, and was protecting Raleigh. General
Sherman’s forces were at Goldsboro’, and in that vicinity. On the 6th of
April the news of the Virginia victories reached General Sherman. Four
days later, on the 10th inst., at daybreak, his army commenced its final
advance against the enemy. Major-General H. W. Slocum took the two
direct roads for Smithfield; Major-General O. O. Howard made a circuit
by the right, and feigned up the Weldon road, to disconcert the enemy’s
cavalry; Generals Terry and Kilpatrick moved on the west side of the
Neuse river, and aimed to reach the rear of the enemy between Smithfield
and Raleigh. General Schofield followed General Slocum, in support. All
the columns met, within six miles of Goldsboro’, more or less cavalry,
with the usual rail barricades, which were swept away as chaff; and by
10 A. M. of the 11th, the Fourteenth corps entered Smithfield, the
Twentieth corps close at hand. Johnston had rapidly retreated across the
Neuse river, and, having his railroad to lighten up his trains, could
retreat faster than the National forces could pursue. The rains had also
set in, making the resort to corduroy absolutely necessary to pass even
ambulances. The enemy had burned the bridge at Smithfield, but, as soon
as possible, Major-General Slocum got up his pontoons, and crossed over
a division of the Fourteenth corps. News of the surrender of Lee’s army,
at Appomattox Court House, Virginia, was here received, and was
announced to the armies in orders, creating universal joy. “Not an
officer or soldier of my armies,” says General Sherman, “but expressed a
pride and satisfaction that it fell to the lot of the armies of the
Potomac and James so gloriously to overwhelm and capture the entire army
that had held them so long in check; and their success gave us new
impulse to finish up our task.”

Marching still onward in rapid pursuit, General Sherman’s soldiers
passed through Raleigh, on the 13th. Johnston was at Greensboro’, and
his army was retreating from Hillsboro’, on all the roads leading to the
former point.

Such was the position of affairs, when General Sherman received the
first communication from his adversary, in reference to terms of
capitulation. At noon, on the 17th, the two commanders met.

Says General Sherman: “Our interview was frank and soldier-like, and he
gave me to understand that further war on the part of the Confederate
troops was folly; that the ‘cause’ was lost, and that every life
sacrificed after the surrender of Lee’s army was the highest possible
crime. He admitted that the terms conceded to General Lee were
magnanimous, and all he could ask; but he did want some general
concessions that would enable him to allay the natural fears and
anxieties of his followers, and enable him to maintain his control over
them until they could be got back to the neighborhood of their homes,
thereby saving the State of North Carolina the devastation which would
result from turning his men loose and unprovided on the spot, and our
pursuit across the State.

“He also wanted to embrace in the same general proposition the fate of
all the Confederate armies that remained in existence. I never made any
concession as to his own army, or assumed to deal finally and
authoritatively in regard to any other; but it did seem to me that there
was presented a chance for peace that might be deemed valuable to the
government of the United States, and was at least worth the few days
that would be consumed in reference. To push an enemy whose commander
had so frankly and honestly confessed his inability to cope with me,
were cowardly, and unworthy the brave men I led.”

On the 18th, the two Generals again met, and agreed upon a basis of
terms for capitulation of the rebel army, to be referred to the
President of the United States; and, in the mean time, a truce was
declared between the belligerents. General Sherman improved the delay by
rushing on the work on the railroad to Raleigh, and thus strengthening
himself for battle—if battle should come. On the 23d, General Sherman
learned that the government—President Lincoln being dead—disapproved of
his basis for Johnston’s capitulation, and ordered the truce to end. He
immediately notified his opponent, to that effect, and that the truce
would end at noon on the 26th. On the night of the 25th, General Sherman
received a letter from General Johnston, asking for another interview.
By this time General Grant had arrived at Raleigh, and was in
communication with General Sherman. The interview was granted; and, on
the 26th of April, at 2 o’clock, Generals Sherman and Johnston met, and
signed the articles of capitulation, by which the latter surrendered his
whole army to the former.

General Sherman’s conduct, at this stage of the war, has been made the
subject of adverse criticism by official persons of high station. These
pages, however, have not space enough for the details of this
controversy. Yet it should be said, in justice to one of the greatest
warriors of history, that, throughout all his negotiations, and down to
the close of his connection with the war, General Sherman’s conduct was
that of a patriot, a soldier, and a gentleman. The terms finally allowed
to General Johnston were the same that had previously been allowed to
General Lee.

The following is General Sherman’s farewell address to his army:—


               “HEADQUARTERS MILITARY DIVISION OF THE MISSISSIPPI, }
                   “In the Field, Washington, D. C., May 30, 1865.     }

  “The general commanding announces to the Armies of the Tennessee and
  Georgia that the time has come for us to part. Our work is done, and
  armed enemies no longer defy us. Some of you will be retained in
  service until further orders. And now that we are about to separate,
  to mingle with the civil world, it becomes a pleasing duty to recall
  to mind the situation of National affairs when, but a little more than
  a year ago, we were gathered about the twining cliffs of Lookout
  Mountain, and all the future was wrapped in doubt and uncertainty.
  Three armies had come together from distant fields, with separate
  histories, yet bound by one common cause—the union of our country and
  the perpetuation of the government of our inheritance. There is no
  need to recall to your memories Tunnel Hill, with its Rocky Face
  Mountain, and Buzzard Roost Gap, with the ugly forts of Dalton behind.
  We were in earnest, and paused not for danger and difficulty, but
  dashed through Snake Creek Gap, and fell on Resaca, then on to the
  Etowah, to Dallas, Kenesaw; and the heats of summer found us on the
  banks of the Chattahoochie, far from home and dependent on a single
  road for supplies. Again we were not to be held back by any obstacle,
  and crossed over and fought four heavy battles for the possession of
  the citadel of Atlanta. That was the crisis of our history. A doubt
  still clouded our future; but we solved the problem, and destroyed
  Atlanta, struck boldly across the State of Georgia, secured all the
  main arteries of life to our enemy, and Christmas found us at
  Savannah. Waiting there only long enough to fill our wagons, we again
  began a march, which for peril, labor, and results, will compare with
  any ever made by an organized army. The floods of the Savannah, the
  swamps of the Combahee and Edisto, the high hills and rocks of the
  Santee, the flat quagmires of the Pedee and Cape Fear rivers, were all
  passed in midwinter, with its floods and rains, in the face of an
  accumulating enemy; and, after the battles of Averasboro’ and
  Bentonville, we once more came out of the wilderness to meet our
  friends at Goldsboro’. Even then we paused only long enough to get new
  clothing, to reload our wagons, and again pushed on to Raleigh, and
  beyond, until we met our enemy, sueing for peace instead of war, and
  offering to submit to the injured laws of his and our country. As long
  as that enemy was defiant, nor mountains, nor rivers, nor swamps, nor
  hunger, nor cold had checked us; but when he who had fought us hard
  and persistently offered submission, your general thought it wrong to
  pursue him further, and negotiations followed which resulted, as you
  all know, in his surrender. How far the operations of the army have
  contributed to the overthrow of the Confederacy, of the peace which
  now dawns on us, must be judged by others, not by us. But that you
  have done all that men could do has been admitted by those in
  authority; and we have a right to join in the universal joy that fills
  our land because the war is over, and our government stands vindicated
  before the world by the joint action of the volunteer armies of the
  United States.

  “To such as remain in the military service, your general need only
  remind you that successes in the past are due to hard work and
  discipline, and that the same work and discipline are equally
  important in the future. To such as go home, he will only say, that
  our favored country is so grand, so extensive, so diversified in
  climate, soil, and productions, that every man may surely find a home
  and occupation suited to his taste; and none should yield to the
  natural impotence sure to result from our past life of excitement and
  adventure. You will be invited to seek new adventure abroad; but do
  not yield to the temptation, for it will lead only to death and
  disappointment.

  “Your general now bids you all farewell, with the full belief that, as
  in war you have been good soldiers, so in peace you will make good
  citizens; and if, unfortunately, new war should arise in our country,
  Sherman’s army will be the first to buckle on the old armor and come
  forth to defend and maintain the government of our inheritance and
  choice.

                       “By order of
                                           “Major-General W. T. SHERMAN.

  “L. M. DAYTON, Assistant Adjutant-General.”




                          THE BIRKENHEAD RAMS.


During the war the United States consuls in various parts of the world
often rendered important services to the country by detecting the
ungenerous attempts made by European nations to aid the Confederacy by
blockade runners, and by secretly fitting out iron-clads and other
efficient craft for the use of the rebels.

Mr. Hammond, Consul to Dublin in the early part of the war, rendered
efficient service in this respect, having prevented several vessels from
being sent out as blockaders. But perhaps the most important service
rendered by any consul was that which prevented the Birkenhead rams, two
formidable iron-clads, from performing the rebel work for which they
were intended. These rams were supposed for a long time to have been
building in Egypt, for the Pacha of Egypt. That they were not completed
and allowed to depredate on our commerce, is owing exclusively to the
tact and energy of our Consul-General of Egypt, at the time residing in
Alexandria. The history of this unwritten and hitherto unacknowledged
service is this:

Said Pacha, late Viceroy of Egypt, during his European trip in 1862,
visited the shipyard of Messrs. Laird & Co., Birkenhead, England, and
being highly pleased with the works of these great ship-builders, gave
an order on his return home to Mr. Broway, a French merchant widely
known in the East for his extensive business connections with the
Egyptian government, for two iron clads, which were to be constructed by
the Messrs. Laird. Broway conveyed the order, as directed, and the rams
were commenced. While the building of these iron-clads was in progress
the Viceroy died, and his successor, Ismael Pacha, the present ruler of
Egypt, was called upon by Monsieur Broway for the necessary payments,
which that potentate declined giving. But Monsieur Broway being strongly
backed by the Count De Morney, a near relative of the French Emperor,
compelled Ismael Pacha to come to terms. Through this powerful
influence, an arrangement was made, by which the Pacha was released from
all further obligations regarding the same by a payment of two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to Broway, who for that sum took the contract
on his own shoulders. It was, however, understood between the Viceroy
and Monsieur Broway that this arrangement should be kept secret, and the
same continue to be known as the Viceroy’s property until the vessels
were completed and disposed of.

Early in September, 1863, telegrams from the Federal Minister at London
and the Consul at Liverpool were sent to the United States
Consul-General at Alexandria, stating that the two iron clads were ready
for sea and would sail as Egyptian property unless satisfactory evidence
of their real ownership and destination could be produced, as this alone
would enable the United States Minister at London to stop them.

To procure that evidence was a delicate and difficult task, as it could
only be obtained from the Viceroy himself. Great tact and a refinement
of diplomacy was necessary even in approaching the Viceroy, who was
bound to secrecy by his agreement with Broway. Still the evidence could
be obtained from no other source.

The Consul-General, Mr. Thayers, had previously sailed for Europe on
leave, entrusting the affairs of his mission to Francis Dainese, Esq.,
of Washington City, a gentleman of fine capacity, who possessed great
experience in the language and customs of the Orient. The diplomatic
talent of this gentleman had been tested in various responsible
positions which he had held under the government, and being placed on
terms of easy communication with the Viceroy, both by position and a
thorough knowledge of the Turkish language, he was, perhaps, the only
person at that time in Egypt who could have approached that potentate
with any hope of success. With quiet tact Mr. Dainese obtained an
interview with the Pacha, and enlightened him regarding the subtle and
skilful designs which were carried on against the United States under
his name. For the first time Ismael Pacha understood clearly that these
rams were to be delivered under his name, and as his property, to the
enemies of the United States. So vividly and earnestly did Mr. Dainese
represent to His Highness the dangerous position in which this fraud
would place himself and his government, that he obtained from the Pacha
an official denial of his ownership in these rams, or that the Egyptian
government was in any way connected with them.

On the 11th of September, 1863, Mr. Dainese telegraphed to Mr. Adams in
London, that the Egyptian Government officially denied having any
ownership, or being in any way concerned with the iron-clads of
Birkenhead. By the steamer of the 13th of September, a certified copy of
the document itself was forwarded to Mr. Adams.

The telegram reached London on the 12th of September, 1863, and the two
rams were shortly after seized by the British Government, at the urgent
request of our Minister, founded entirely on the intelligence obtained
by Mr. Dainese. This transaction made a good deal of excitement at the
time, both in England and this country, and great credit was certainly
deserved by Mr. Dainese for his timely interference, which saved our
commerce from fresh depredations. There was a degree of boldness in his
action worthy of all praise, for he promptly undertook and accomplished
this important affair, without instructions from Washington, and the
result was communicated by him to the Secretary of State, in whose
department the diplomatic correspondence is now on file. Perhaps this
record will be the first ever made of a transaction so important to the
country, but in a war like that which has swept over our land, all
events bearing upon it should be matters of public history, and the man
who serves his country as a diplomat can be no more overlooked, in
strict justice, than the general who leads its armies to the field.




                     THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION.
           BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
                            JANUARY 1, 1863.


Whereas, on the twenty-second day of September, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-two, a Proclamation was issued by
the President of the United States, containing among other things the
following, to wit:

“That on the first day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and sixty-three, all persons held as slaves within any
State, or designated part of a State, the people whereof shall then be
in rebellion against the United States, shall be then, thenceforth and
forever free, and the Executive Government of the United States,
including the military and naval authorities thereof, will recognize and
maintain the freedom of such persons, and will do no act or acts to
repress such persons, or any of them, in any efforts they may make for
their actual freedom.

“That the Executive will, on the first day of January aforesaid, by
proclamation, designate the States and parts of States, if any, in which
the people thereof respectively shall then be in rebellion against the
United States; and the fact that any State, or the people thereof, shall
on that day be in good faith represented in the Congress of the United
States by members chosen thereto at elections wherein a majority of the
qualified voters of such State shall have participated, shall, in the
absence of strong countervailing testimony, be deemed conclusive
evidence that such State and the people thereof are not then in
rebellion against the United States.”

Now, therefore, I, ABRAHAM LINCOLN, President of the United States, by
virtue of the power in me vested as Commander-in-Chief of the Army and
Navy of the United States in time of actual armed Rebellion against the
authority and government of the United States, and as a fit and
necessary war measure for suppressing said Rebellion, do, on this first
day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-three, and in accordance with my purpose so to do, publicly
proclaimed for the full period of one hundred days from the day first
above mentioned, order and designate as the States and parts of States
wherein the people thereof respectively are this day in rebellion
against the United States, the following, to wit: ARKANSAS, TEXAS,
LOUISIANA (except the Parishes of St. Bernard, Plaquemines, Jefferson,
St. John, St. Charles, St. James, Ascension, Assumption, Terre Bonne,
Lafourche, St. Marie, St. Martin, and Orleans, including the City of New
Orleans), MISSISSIPPI, ALABAMA, FLORIDA, GEORGIA, SOUTH CAROLINA, NORTH
CAROLINA, and VIRGINIA (except the forty-eight counties designated as
West Virginia, and also the counties of Berkeley, Accomac, Northampton,
Elizabeth City, York, Princess Ann, and Norfolk, including the cities of
Norfolk and Portsmouth), and which excepted parts are, for the present,
left precisely as if this Proclamation were not issued.

And by virtue of the power and for the purpose aforesaid, I do order and
declare that ALL PERSONS HELD AS SLAVES within said designated States
and parts of States ARE, AND HENCEFORWARD SHALL BE FREE: and that the
Executive Government of the United States, including the Military and
Naval Authorities thereof, will recognize and maintain the freedom of
said persons.

And I hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be free, to abstain
from all violence, unless in necessary self-defence, and I recommend to
them that in all cases, when allowed, they labor faithfully for
reasonable wages.

And I further declare and make known that such persons of suitable
condition will be received into the armed service of the United States
to garrison forts, positions, stations and other places, and to man
vessels of all sorts in said service.

And upon this act, sincerely believed to be an act of justice, warranted
by the Constitution, upon military necessity, I invoke the considerate
judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of Almighty God.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my name, and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[Sidenote: [L. S.]]


  Done at the City of Washington, this first day of January, in the year
  of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, and of the
  Independence of the United States the eighty-seventh.


                                                        ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

  By the President—WILLIAM H. SEWARD,
                                  _Secretary of State_.




                             PROCLAMATION.


WILLIAM H. SEWARD, SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE UNITED STATES,

  _To All to Whom these Presents May Come, Greeting_:

_Know ye_, that, whereas, the Congress of the United States, on the 1st
of February last, passed a resolution, which is in the words following,
namely:

“A resolution submitting to the Legislatures of the several States a
proposition to amend the Constitution of the United States:

“_Resolved_, By the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled, two-thirds of both Houses
concurring, that the following article be proposed to the Legislatures
of the several States as an amendment to the Constitution of the United
States, which, when ratified by three-fourths of said Legislatures,
shall be valid to all intents and purposes as a part of said
Constitution, namely:

“ARTICLE XIII.

“SECTION 1. _Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,
shall exist within the United States or any place subject to their
jurisdiction._

“SECTION 2. _Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation._”

And, whereas, it appears from official documents on file in this
department that the Amendment to the Constitution of the United States
proposed as aforesaid has been ratified by the Legislatures of the
States of Illinois, Rhode Island, Michigan, Maryland, New York, West
Virginia, Maine, Kansas, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio,
Missouri, Nevada, Indiana, Louisiana, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Vermont,
Tennessee, Arkansas, Connecticut, New Hampshire, South Carolina,
Alabama, North Carolina, and Georgia, in all twenty-seven States;

And whereas, the whole number of States in the United States is
thirty-six;

And whereas, the before specially named States, whose Legislatures have
ratified the said proposed amendment, constitute three-fourths of the
whole number of States in the United States;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State of the United States, by virtue and in pursuance of the second
section of the act of Congress approved the 20th of April, 1818,
entitled “An Act to provide for the publication of the laws of the
United States and for other purposes,” do hereby certify that the
amendment aforesaid HAS BECOME VALID TO ALL INTENTS AND PURPOSES AS A
PART OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.

  In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal
      of the Department of State to be affixed. Done at the City of
      Washington, this 18th day of December, in the year of our Lord
      1865, and of the Independence of the United States of America the
      90th.

                                      WM. H. SEWARD, Secretary of State.


       LIST OF FEDERAL VESSELS CAPTURED BY THE CONFEDERATE NAVY.

                            BY THE ALABAMA.

     _Name of Vessels._    _Where from._      _Date of
                                             Capture._    _Tonnage._
   Alert, bark            New London       Sept.  9, 1862        391
   Altamaha, brig         Sippican         Sept. 13, 1862        300
   Amanda, bark           Manilla          Oct.   6, 1863        595
   Amazonian, bark        New York         June   2, 1863        481
   A. F. Schmidt, ship    St. Thomas       July   2, 1863        784
   Ariel, steamer         New York         Dec.   7, 1862       1295
   Avon, ship             Houland’s Island Mar.  29, 1864        930
   B’n de Castine, brig   Castine          Oct.  29, 1862        267
   Benj. Tucker, ship     New Bedford      Sept. 14, 1862        800
   B. Thayer, ship        Callao           Mar.   1, 1863        896
   Brilliant, ship        New York         Oct.   3, 1862        839
   Charles Hill, ship     Liverpool        Nov.  25, 1863        699
   Chastelain, brig       Guadaloupe       Jan.  27, 1863        240
   Conrad, bark           Montevideo       June  20, 1863        347
   Contest, ship          Yokahama         Nov.  11, 1863       1098
   Corsair, schr.         Provincetown     Sept. 13, 1862        200
   Crenshaw, schr.        New York         Oct.  23, 1862        278
   Dorcas Prince, ship    New York         April 26, 1863        699
   Dunkirk, brig          New York         Oct.  ——  1863        298
   E. Dunbar, bark        New Bedford      Sept. 18, 1862        300
   E. Farnham, ship       Portsmouth       Oct.   3, 1862       1119
   Emma Jane, ship        Bombay           Jan.  14, 1864       1096
   Express, ship          Callao           July   6, 1863       1072
   Golden Eagle, ship     Howland’s Isl.   Feb.  21, 1863       1273
   Golden Rule, bark      New York         Jan.  26, 1863        250
   Har’t Spaulding, bark  New York         Nov.  18, 1863        299
   Hatteras, gunboat      Galveston        Jan.  13, 1863        800
   Henrietta, bark        Baltimore        ——        1863        439
   Highlander, ship       Singapore        Dec.  26, 1863       1149
   Jabez Snow, ship       New York         Mar.  25, 1863       1070
   John A. Park, ship     New York         Mar.   2, 1863       1050
   Justina, bark          Rio Janeiro      May   25, 1863        400
   Kate Cory, brig        Westport         April 15, 1863        125
   Kingfisher, schr.      Fairhaven        Mar.  23, 1863        125
   Lafayette, ship        New York         Oct.  23, 1862        945
   Lafayette, bark        New Bedford      April 15, 1863        300
   Lamplighter, bark      New York         Oct.  15, 1862        279
   Loretta, bark          New York         Oct.  28, 1862        284
   Levi Starbuck, ship    New Bedford      Nov.   2, 1862        376
   Louisa Hatch, ship     Cardiff          ——        1863        835
   Manchester, ship       New York         Oct.  11, 1862       1075
   Martha Wenzell, bark   Akyab            Aug.   9, 1863        578
   Martaban, ship         Maulmain         Dec.  24, 1863        807
   Morning Star, ship     Calcutta         Mar.  23, 1863       1105
   Nora, ship             Liverpool        Mar.  25, 1863        800
   Nye, bark              New Bedford      April 24, 1863        300
   Ocean Rover, bark      Mattapoisett     Sept.  8, 1862        766
   Ocmulgee, ship         Edgartown        Sept.  6, 1862        300
   Olive Jane, bark       Bordeaux         Feb.  21, 1863        300
   Oneida, ship           Shanghae         April 24, 1863        420
   Palmetto, schr.        New York         Feb.   3, 1863        172
   Parker Cook, bark      Boston           Nov.  30, 1862        130
   Punjaub, ship          Calcutta         Mar.  15, 1863        769
   Rockingham, ship       Callao           April 23, 1864        976
   Sea Bride, bark        New York         Aug.   5, 1863        447
   Sea Lark, ship         Boston           May    3, 1863        974
   S. Gildersleeve, ship  Sunderland       May   25, 1863        847
   Sonora, ship           Singapore        Dec.  26, 1863        707
   Starlight, schr.       Fayal            Sept.  7, 1862        205
   Talisman, ship         New York         June   5, 1863       1239
   T. R. Wood, ship       Calcutta         Nov.   8, 1863        599
   Tonawanda, ship        Philadelphia     Oct.   9, 1862       1300
   Tycoon, bark           New York                               735
   Union Jack, bark       New York         May    3, 1863        300
   Virginia, bark         New Bedford      Sept. 17, 1863        300
   Washington, ship       Callao           Feb.  27, 1863       1655
   Wave Crest, bark       New York         Oct.   7, 1862        409
   Weather Gauge, schr.   Provincetown     Sept.  4, 1862        200
   Winged Racer, ship     Manila           Nov.  10, 1863       1767


                          BY THE SHENANDOAH.

   Abigail, bark          New Bedford      May   25, 1865        375
   Adelaide, bark         Boston           Oct.  13, 1864        437
   Alina, bark            Newport, Eng.    Oct.  ——, 1864        470
   Brunswick, bark        New Bedford      June  ——, 1865        226
   Catherine, bark        New Bedford      June  26, 1865        226
   Charter Oak, schr.     Boston           Oct.  ——, 1864        140
   Congress 2d, bark      New Bedford      June  28, 1865        375
   Covington, bark        Warren, R. I.    June  28, 1865        300
   Delphine, bark         London           Jan.  13, 1865        698
   D. Godfrey, bark       Boston           Dec.  ——, 1864        299
   Edward, bark           New Bedford      Dec.   4, 1864        420
   Edward Cary, bark      San Francisco    April  1, 1865        370
   Euphrates, ship        New Bedford      June  21, 1865        597
   Favorite, bark         Fairhaven        June  28, 1865        360
   Gen. Pike, bark        New Bedford      June  22, 1865        425
   Gen. Williams, ship    New London       June  25, 1865        469
   Gipsy, bark            New Bedford      June  26, 1865        390
   Harvest, bark          Honelulu         April  1, 1865        350
   Hector, ship           New Bedford      April  1, 1865         ——
   Hillman, ship          New Bedford      June  27, 1865        600
   Isabella, bark         New Bedford      June  27, 1865        394
   I. Howland, ship       New Bedford      June  28, 1865        900
   James Maury, bark      New Bedford      June  28, 1865        400
   Jireh Swift, bark      New Bedford      June  23, 1865        360
   Kate Prince, ship      Cardiff          Nov.  12, 1864        997
   Lizzie M. Stacy, schr. Boston           Nov.  13, 1864        140
   Martha 2nd, bark       New Bedford      June  28, 1865        298
   Milo, ship             New Bedford      June  28, 1865        500
   Nassau, ship           New Bedford      June  28, 1865        450
   Nile, bark             New London       June  22, 1865        380
   Nimrod, bark           New Bedford      June  25, 1865        340
   Pearl, bark            New London       April  1, 1865        275
   Sophia Thornton, ship  New Bedford      June  23, 1865        400
   Susan Abigail, bark    San Francisco    June  23, 1865        159
   Susan, brig            San Francisco    June   4, 1865         ——
   Waverley, bark         New Bedford      June  28, 1865        450
   W. Thompson, ship      New Bedford      June  22, 1865        600
   Wm. C. Nye, bark       San Francisco    June  26, 1865        388


                            BY THE FLORIDA.

   Aldebaran, schr.       New York         Mar.  13, 1863        187
   Anglo Saxon, ship      Liverpool        Aug.  21, 1863        868
   Arabella, brig         Aspinwall        Jan.  12, 1863        291
   B. F. Hoxie, ship      Mazatlan         June  16, 1863       1387
   Clarence, brig         Bahia            ——        1863        253
   Commonwealth, ship     New York         April 17, 1863       1245
   Corris Ann, brig       Philadelphia     Jan.  22, 1863        235
   David Lapsley, bark    Sombrero         ——                    289
   Electric Spark, str.   New York         July  10, 1864       1400
   Estella, brig          Manzanilla       Jan.  17, 1863        300
   F. B. Cutting, ship    Liverpool        Aug.   6, 1863        796
   Geo. Latimer, schr.    Baltimore        May  18,  ——          198
   Gen. Berry, bark       New York         July  10, ——          469
   Golconda, bark         Talcahuana       July   8, 1864        331
   Greenland, bark        Philadelphia     July   9, 1864        549
   Har’t Stephens, bark   Portland         ——                    500
   J. Jacob Bell, ship    Foochow          Feb.  12, 1863       1382
   Kate Stewart, schr.    Philadelphia     June  ——, 1863        387
   Lapwing, bark          Boston           Mar.  27, 1863        590
   Mary Alvina, brig      Boston           June  ——, 1863        266
   M. A. Schinler, schr.  Port Royal       June  12, 1863        299
   Mary Y. Davis, schr.   Port Royal       July   9, 1864        270
   M. J. Colcord, bark    New York         Mar.  30, 1863        374
   Mondamin, bark         Rio Janeiro      Sept.,    1864        386
   Red Gauntlet, ship     Buena Vista      May   26, 1863       1038
   Rienzi, schr.          Provincetown     July   7, 1863         95
   Southern Rights, ship  Rangoon          Aug.  22, 1863        830
   Southern Cross         Boston           June   6, 1863        938
   Star of Peace, ship    Calcutta         Mar.   6, 1863        941
   Sunrise, ship          New York         July  ——, 1863       1174
   Tacony, bark           Port Royal       June  12, 1863        296
   Varnum H. Hill, schr.  Provincetown     June  27, 1862         90
   Wm. B. Nash, brig      New York         July   8, 1863        299
   Wm. C. Clark, brig     Machias, Me.     June  17, ——          338
   Windward, brig         Matanzas         Jan.  22, 1863        199
   Zealand, bark          New Orleans      June  10, 1864        380


                            BY THE SUMTER.

   Abbie Bradford, schr.  ——               July  25, 1861        180
   Albert Adams, brig     Cuba             July   5, 1861        192
   Alvarado, bark         Cape Town        June  ——, 1861        299
   Arcade, schr.          Portland         Nov.  20, 1861        122
   Benj. Dunning, brig    Cuba             July   5, 1861        284
   B. F. Martin, brig     Philadelphia     June  16, 1861        293
   California, bark       St. Thomas                 1861        299
   Cuba, brig             New York         July   4, 1861        199
   D. Trowbridge, schr.   New York         Oct.  27, 1861        200
   Eben Dodge, bark       New Bedford      Dec.   8, 1861       1222
   Glen, bark             Philadelphia     July,     1861        287
   Golden Rocket, ship    Havana           July  13, 1861        608
   Henry Nutt, schr.      Key West         Aug.,     1861        235
   Jos. Maxwell, bark     Philadelphia     July  27, 1861        295
   Joseph Parks, brig     Pernambuco       Dec.  25, 1861        300
   J. S. Harris, ship     Cuba             —         1861        800
   Louisa Kilham, bark    Cienfuegos       July   6, 1861        468
   Machias, brig          ——               July   4, 1862        250
   Naiad, brig            ——               July   6, 1861        390
   N. Chase, schr.        New York         Sept.,    1861        150
   Neapolitan, bark       Messina          Feb.,     1862        322
   Ocean Eagle            Rockland         Feb.,     1861        290
   Santa Clara, brig      Porto Rico       Feb.,     1861        189
   Sebasticock, ship      Liverpool        Feb.,     1861        549
   Vigilant, ship         New York         Dec.   3, 1861        650
   West Wind, bark        New York         July   6, 1861        429
   W. S. Robbins, bark    Arroya           June,     1861        460


                          BY THE TALLAHASSEE.

   Adriatic, ship         London           Aug.  12, 1863        998
   A. Richards, brig      Glace Bay, C. B. Aug.  11, 1863        240
   Arcole, ship           New Orleans      Nov.   3, 1863        663
   Atlantic, schr.        Addison, Me.                           240
   Bay State, bark        Alexandria, Va.  Aug.  11, 1863        199
   Billow, brig           Calais, Me.      Aug.  10, 1863        173
   Carrie Estelle, brig   Machias, Me.     Aug.  11, 1864        200
   Castine, ship          Callao           Jan.  25, 1863        962
   Coral Wreath, brig     ——               Aug.  11, 1863        260
   Etta Caroline, str.    ——               Aug.  10, 1863        175
   Flora Reed, schr.      ——               Aug.  15, 1863        150
   Glenavon, bark         Glasgow          Aug.  13, 1863        795
   Goodspeed, schr.       Boston           Nov.   2, 1864        280
   Howard, bark           ——               Aug.  15, 1864        598
   Jas. Littlefield, ship Cardiff          Aug.  14, 1864        599
   J. H. Howen, schr.     Gloucester       Aug.  14, 1864         81
   L. Dupont, schr.       Wilmington, Del. Aug.  13, 1864        194
   Magnolia, schr.        ——               Aug.  15, 1864        170
   Mercy Howe, schr.      Chatham          Aug.  15, 1864        143
   N. America, schr.      Connecticut      —         1864         95
   P. C. Alexander, bark  New York         —         1864        284
   Pearl, schr.           ——               Aug.  16, ——          183
   Rasselas, schr.        Boothbay, Me.    Aug.  23, 1863         90
   Roan, brig             Salisbury        Aug.  20, 1864        127
   S. A. Boyce, schr.     Boston           Aug.  11, 1864        220
   Sarah Louisa, schr.    ——                         1864         61
   Spokane, schr.         Calais, Me.      Aug.  12, 1864        126


                            BY THE TACONY.

   Ada, schr.             Gloucester       June  23, 1863         90
   Arabella, brig         Gloucester       June  12, 1863        200
   Archer, schr.          Gloucester       June  24, 1863        100
   Byzantium, ship        London           June  16, 1863       1048
   Elizabeth Ann, schr.   Gloucester       June  22, 1863        100
   Florence, schr.        Gloucester       June  22, 1863        200
   Goodspeed, bark        Londonderry      June  23, 1863        629
   Isaac Webb, ship       Liverpool        June  20, 1863       1300
   L. A. Macomber, schr.  Noank            June  20, 1863        100
   Marengo, schr.         Gloucester       June  22, 1863        200
   Ripple, schr.          Gloucester       June  22, 1863        150
   Rufus Choate,          Gloucester       June  22, 1863        100
   Shattemuc, ship        Liverpool        June  24, 1863        849
   Umpire, brig           Laguna           June  15, 1863        196
   Wanderer, schr.        Gloucester       June  22, 1863        125


                           BY THE CLARENCE.

   A. H. Partridge, schr. Gloucester       June   7, 1863        100
   C. Cushing, cutter     Portland         June  24, 1863        150
   Whistling Wind, bark   Philadelphia     June   6, 1863        349


                            BY THE SALLIE.

   Betsey Ames, brig      Cuba             Oct.  —   1861        265
   Grenada, brig          Neuvitas         Oct.  13, 1861        255


                            BY THE GEORGIA.

   Bold Hunter, ship      Dundee           Dec.   9, 1863        797
   City of Bath, ship     Callao           June  28, 1863         79
   Constitution, ship     Philadelphia     June  25, 1863         97
   Crown Point, ship      New York         May   15, 1863       1053
   Dictator, ship         Liverpool        April 25, 1863       1293
   Geo. Griswold, ship    Cardiff          June  18, 1863       1280
   Good Hope, bark        Boston           June  22, 1863        436
   John Watt, ship        Maulmain         Oct.      1863        947
   J. W. Seaver, bark     Boston           June  22, 1863        340
   Prince of Wales, ship  Callao           July  16, 1863        960


                          BY THE JEFF. DAVIS.

   D. C. Pierce, bark     Remedios         June,     1861        306
   Ella, schr.            Tampico                    1861         92
   Enchantress, schr.     Boston           July  16, 1861        200
   Jno. Crawford, ship    Philadelphia     Aug.,     1861
   John Welsh, brig       Trinidad         July  16, 1861        275
   Rowena, bark           Laguayra         June,     1861        340
   S. J. Waring, schr.    New York         July  16, 1861        372
   W. McGilvery, brig     Cardenas         July,     1861        198


                            BY THE WINSLOW.

   Herbert, schr.                          June  18, 1861        100
   Itasca, brig           Neuvitas         Aug.   4, 1861        300
   Mary Alice, schr.      Porto Rico       July,     1861        181
   Priscilla, schr.       Curacoa          July,     1861        144
   Transit, schr.         New London       July  15, 1861        195


                          BY THE CHICKAMAUGA.

   Albion Lincoln, bark   Portland         Oct.  29, 1864        237
   Emma L. Hall, bark     Cardenas         Oct.  31, 1864        492
   Mark L. Potter, bark   Bangor           Oct.  30, 1864        400
   Shooting Star, ship    New York         Oct.  31, 1864        947


                            BY THE OLUSTEE.

   A. J. Bird, schr.      Rockland         Nov.   3, 1864        178
   Empress Teresa, bark   Rio Janeiro      Nov.   1, 1864        316
   E. F. Lewis, schr.     Portland         Nov.   3, 1864        197
   T. D. Wagner, brig     Fort Monroe      Nov.   3, 1864        390


                          BY THE RETRIBUTION.

   Emily Fisher, brig     St. Jago         Mar.      1863        230
   Hanover, schr.         Boston           Jan.  31, 1863        200
   J. P. Ellicott, brig   Boston           Jan.  10, 1863        231


                         BY THE ST. NICHOLAS.

   Mary Pierce, schr.     Boston           July   1, 1862        192
   Margaret, schr.                         June  29, 1862        206
   Monticello, brig       Rio Janeiro      July   1, 1862        300


                            BY THE CALHOUN.

   John Adams, schr.      Provincetown     May,      1861        100
   Mermaid, schr.         Provincetown     May,      1861        200
   Panama, brig           Provincetown     May   29, 1861        153


                           BY THE NASHVILLE.

   Harvey Birch, ship     Havre            Nov.  19, 1862        800
   R. Gilfillan, schr.    Philadelphia     Feb.  26, 1862        240


                            BY THE BOSTON.

   Lenox, bark            New York         June  12, 1863        370
   Texana, bark           New York         June  12, 1863        588


                           BY THE SAVANNAH.

   Joseph, brig           Cardenas         June  15, 1861        171


                            BY THE LAPWING.

   Kate Dywer, ship       Callao           June  17, 1863       1278


                             BY THE ECHO.

   M. E. Thompson, brig                    July   9, 1862        210
   Mary Goodell, schr.                     July   9, 1862        200


                             BY THE YORK.

   G. V. Boker, schr.     Galveston        Aug.   9, 1861        100


                            BY THE CONRAD.

   Santee, ship           Akyab            Aug.   5, 1863        898


                           BY THE TUSCARORA.

   Living Age, ship       Akyab            Sept. 13, 1863       1193


                            MISCELLANEOUS.

   A. B. Thompson, ship   Savannah         May.  19, 1861        800
   Alleghanian, ship      Baltimore        Oct.  21, 1862       1142
   Alliance, schr.        Philadelphia     Sept.     1863        190
   Boston, tug                             June   9, 1863        100
   Chesapeake, steamer    New York         Dec.   7, 1863        460
   Golden Rod, schr.      Holmes’ Hole     Sept.     1863        130
   Hannah Balch, brig     Cardenas         July   6, 1862        149
   Harriet Lane, gunbt.   Galveston        Jan.  11, 1863        325
   James L. Gerity,       Matamoros        Oct.      1863         90
   J. R. Watson, schr.    New York         July  13, 1861        200
   Lydia Francis, brig                     June  15, 1862        262
   Pearl, schr.           Moriches                   1862        183
   Protector, schr.       Cuba             June,     1861        200
   Sea Bird, schr.        Philadelphia               1863        200
   Sea Witch, schr.       Baracoa                    1861         95
   Union, schr.           Baltimore        Dec.   5, 1862        115

                         —_From the Commercial and Financial Chronicle._




                              CHRONOLOGY.


1862.

=May 7.= A detachment of the 13th Ind., Col. Foster, was led into an
ambush at Somerville Heights, Va., by a superior force of rebels of the
7th Louisiana. After a severe skirmish, Col. Foster made an orderly
retreat, with the loss of 29 men, inflicting equal loss to the enemy.

7. The 23d Ohio, Maj. Canley, drove a rebel force from Giles’s Court
House, and the narrows of New river, W. Va., and captured 20 prisoners
and some stores.

8. Skirmish near Corinth, Miss., by the 7th Ill. cavalry, Maj.
Arlington, in which their commander was killed. 4 Federals wounded.
Rebel loss 30.

8. The iron-clad steamer Galena, assisted by the gunboats Aroostook and
Port Royal, attacked and silenced two rebel batteries a short distance
from the mouth of the James river, Va., called the Upper and Lower shoal
batteries. But trifling damage was experienced by the Federal vessels,
and no casualties.

8. A reconnoissance in force was made by the united forces of Gens.
Schenck and Milroy, near McDowell, W. Va., with 2,300 men, to check the
advance of a superior force of rebels then threatening to attack them.
An engagement of 5 hours’ duration ensued, in which 30 of the Feds. were
killed and 200 wounded. The loss of the enemy is computed to have been
greater. The movement was successful in checking the advance of the
rebs., and the Fed. force was safely withdrawn to Franklin, the rebels
showing no disposition to renew the combat.

8. An address was issued to the democracy of the U. S. setting forth
party organization as essential to the preservation of public liberty.
It was signed by Messrs. Richardson, Knapp, and Robinson, of Ill.; Law
and Voorhees of Ind.; White, Allen Noble, Morris, Pendleton, and
Vallandigham, of Ohio; Ancona and Johnson, of Penn., and Shields, of
Oregon.

8. A bill passed by the U. S. Senate, establishing Beaufort, S. C., as a
port of entry.

9. Two guerrillas were hung at Chester, W. Va., in conformity with
orders based on a proclamat’n of Gen. Fremont.

9. Gen. Hunter proclaimed the persons in the States of Ga., Fa., and S.
C., heretofore held as slaves, “forever free.”

9. Burning Springs, W. Va., was burned by rebel guerrillas.

9. Pensacola, Fla., evacuated by the rebs. after setting fire to forts,
navy yard barracks and Marine hospital.

9. Capt. Connet and 48 men of the 27th Ind., were captured 12 miles from
Athens, Ala., by a superior cavalry force under Col. Woodward. 13 rebs.
and 5 Feds. were killed.

9. At Farmington, 5 miles N. W. of Corinth, Miss., the rebs. in great
force under Ruggles, Price and Van Dorn, attacked Plummer’s and Palmer’s
brigades, attached to Maj.-Gen. Pope’s division, and compelled them to
retreat. A brilliant cavalry charge was made by the 2d Iowa, who lost 90
horses, 2 men killed and 40 wounded. The entire Fed. loss was about 40
killed and 120 wounded. The reb. loss was much greater.

9. The prize steamer P. C. Wallis, while on the way from Ship Isl. to N.
O., with a battery of artillery on board, sprung a leak and sunk. The
crew were saved by the gunboat Saxon.

9. Two recruits for the Fed. army at Washington, N. C., assassinated by
rebs.

9. A company of rebs. under Capt. Walker, attempted to surprise Fed.
officers at Washington, N. C. Capt. Redding’s company of 24th Mass.,
acting as pickets, killed Capt. Walker and 5 men. No Feds. were injured.

10. A spirited naval engagement occurred on the Miss. above Fort Wright.
The Fed. gunboats besieging that place, under the command of
Acting-Flag-Officer Davis, were attacked by the rebel gunboats and rams
then stationed at that post, who after a half hour’s contest were forced
to retire. The Fed. gunboats Cincinnati and Mound City were badly
injured in the contest, and the reb. vessels also were considerably cut
up, though the casualties on either side were small.

10. White House, on the Pamunkey river, Va., occupied by Federal
cavalry, 7,000 bushels of wheat and 4,000 of corn captured.

10. $800,000 in specie seized by Gen. Butler in New Orleans, at the
office of the Consul for the Netherlands.

=May 10.= New Kent C. H., Va., occupied by Gen. Stoneman’s Fed. cavalry.

10. The iron-clad steamer Ironsides was launched at Philadelphia.

10. The reb. schooner Maria Theresa, was captured by the U. S. gunboat
Unadilla.

10. Norfolk, Va., was occupied by Fed. troops under Gen. Wool.

10. A plot discovered in Paducah, Ky. by which the town was to be handed
over to the rebs. within a week. Information was given by one of the
conspirators.

11. The fortifications of Craney I., Va., taken possession of by the
Nat’l forces.

11. 48 freight and 4 passenger cars, and 2 locomotives were captured by
140 reb. cavalry under Col. Morgan, at Cave City, Ky.

11. Col. Phelan’s reb. camp at Bloomfield, Mo., was broken up by the 1st
Wis. cavalry.

11. A reb. lieutenant and 10 men were captured by Maj. Duffie’s command,
Harris’ Light cavalry, near Fredericksburg, Va.

11. The reb. iron-plated steamer Merrimac was abandoned by her crew and
blown up off Craney Island, Va., the retreat of the rebel forces from
Yorktown and Norfolk isolating her from the Confederate forces.

12. The reb. steamer Governor Morton captured.

13. General Fremont, with his command, reached Franklin, W. Va.,
advancing by forced marches. Maj.-Gen. Halleck issued an order expelling
newspaper correspondents from his lines.

13. Martial law enforced in Charleston, S. C.

13. Reb. Gen. Jackson made an unsuccessful attack on Gens. Milroy and
Schenck’s brigades near McDowell, Va., Fed. loss 20 killed and 177
wounded. Reb. loss 40 killed, 200 wounded. Feds. lost their camps,
baggage, and stores.

13. Reb. armed steamer Planter, was run out of Charleston, S. C., by a
negro crew, and surrendered to Commander Parrott, of the steamer
Augusta.

13. Suffolk, Va., occupied by Federal troops under Maj. Dodge.

13. Gen. Butler forbid the opening of churches on the 15th inst. in N.
O., for the purpose of observing a fast day prescribed by Jeff. Davis.

13. Attack on Fort Wright, Miss. river, by reb. mortar and gunboats.

13. Slight skirmish near Monterey, Tenn., by Gen. Smith’s troops. Reb.
loss 10; Union 2.

13. Natchez, Miss., surrendered to flag-officer Farragut.

14. A skirmish near Trenton Bridge, N. C. Col. Amory with 17th and 25th
Mass. defeated a reb. force, killing 10 of them.

14. Rebel steamer Alice captured in Roanoke river by U. S. steamers
Ceres and Lockwood.

14. A party consisting of four officers’ servants and several
convalescent soldiers, in charge of Surgeon Charles Newham, 29th N. Y.
V., when on the road to Moorfield, were attacked while passing through a
gap on Lost river, near Wartonsville. With the exception of Dr. Newham,
who, though severely wounded succeeded in cutting his way through, the
whole party were either killed or taken prisoners.

15. The Fed. iron battery Monitor, together with the mailed gunboats
Galena and E. A. Stevens, attacked Fort Darling, on Watches Bluff, 6
miles below Richmond, on the James river. The fight continued for four
hours, when the ammunition of the Galena having become exhausted, the
Fed. vessels retired. The Galena was badly damaged, and lost 17 men
killed and about 20 wounded. The large rifled gun of the E. A. Stevens
burst early in the action. All the vessels engaged under great
disadvantage in not being able to obtain sufficient elevation of their
guns to bear on the high bluffs occupied by the enemy.

15. A company of infantry from Gen. Geary’s command were attacked by a
body of rebel cavalry. Fed. loss 17.

15. Slight skirmish near Batesville, Ark., by 5th Ill. cavalry, Lieut.
Smith.

16. U. S. steamer Oriental wrecked near Cape Hatteras, N. C.

16. Reb. newspapers suppressed in N. Orleans by Gen. Butler, and the
circulation of Confederate notes prohibited.

16. Skirmish near Trenton, N. C. U. S. cavalry attacked a detachment of
rebs. in ambush, and scattered them, killing 6 or 8, and wounding a
larger number. Maj. Fitzsimmons of the cavalry wounded, and Lieut. Mayes
and four men taken prisoners.

17. A successful movement was made by a portion of Gen. W. T. Sherman’s
division of the army investing Corinth, by which the rebs. were driven
from their position at Russell’s House, two miles from Corinth. 12 of
the rebel dead were left on the field, but all their wounded were
removed. Gen. M. L. Smith’s brigade, of the Fed. army, lost 10 killed
and 31 wounded.

17. Gen. Carleton’s brigade entered Arizona; Col. West’s regiment
arrived at Luczon; and raised the National flag over the ruins of Fort
Breckinridge.

17. The advance of the Army of the Potomac reached Bottom’s Bridge on
the Chickahominy river.

18. Engagement near Searey, on Little Red river, Ark. 150 men of Gen.
Osterhaus’s troops engaged and defeated a superior force of the enemy,
in which the latter lost about 100 men.

18. A fight near Princeton, Va., in which Gen. Cox’s troops were
defeated, with a loss of 30 killed and 70 wounded, by a rebel force
under Humphrey Marshall.

18. Suffolk, Va., occupied by Feds.

19. The Army of the Potomac resumed its march from Cumberland across the
Peninsula towards Richmond.

19. White House, on the Pamunkey, selected as the general depot of
supplies for the Army of the Potomac.

19. Gens. Heintzelman and Keys, with 40,000 men, marched for Bottom’s
Bridge, on the Chickahominy.

19. Gen. McClellan, with his main army, reached Tunstall’s Station.

19. A skirmish near Newbern, N. C. Fed. loss 5; reb. 11.

19. Lieut. Whitesides and 8 men of the 6th cavalry, captured a train of
reb. Gen. Whiting’s, with 100 mules and 8 negroes.

19. John T. Monroe, Mayor of N. Orleans, and other city officers,
arrested by Gen. Butler and sent to Fort Jackson.

19. Pres. Lincoln, by proclamation, declared null and void general order
No. 11 of Maj.-Gen. Hunter, commanding at Hilton Head, S. C., and dated
May 9, in which he pronounced the slaves of the States of Georgia,
Florida and South Carolina “forever free.” The President asked the
serious consideration of the States interested, to the resolution of
Congress of May 6, 1862, offering to aid any State which should adopt a
gradual abolition of slavery.

19. Typhoid and bilious fevers raging among the Fed. soldiers at
Norfolk, Va. Deaths about 10 daily. The steamer Vanderbilt took 500 of
the sick from Yorktown to Baltimore.

19. A boat from the Wachusett, manned by 6 officers and 12 men, with a
flag of truce conveying a surgeon on shore, who had been sent a short
distance above City Point, on the James river, Va., was fired on by a
party of 20 or 30 rebs. while the surgeon and other officers were on
shore. Three of the men in the boat were killed, and 2 wounded; while
the party who had landed were made prisoners, and sent to Richmond.

20. Edward Stanley, of N. C., received a Fed. commission as Military
Governor of that State.

20. Skirmish near Moorfield, Va. A party of soldiers under Lieut.-Col.
Downey, captured 12 and killed 4 guerrillas.

20. 17 wagons and 86 mules with government stores were captured 20 miles
from Rolla, Mo.

20. Reb. works on Cole’s Island, S. C., burned.

20. The advance of Gen. McClellan’s army under Gen. Stoneman, reached
New Bridge, on the Chickahominy creek, 8 miles from Richmond, driving in
the enemy’s outposts. The enemy had then no forces south of the
Chickahominy. Gen. Stoneman lost 1 killed and 3 wounded.

20. Lieut.-Cols. McIlhanny, Rawlings, Thursman, and Davis, four rebel
officers, were captured by Brig.-Gen. Totten, while they were about to
cross the Missouri river, above Jefferson City, on a mission to stir up
rebellion in Missouri.

21. Skirmish near Corinth, Miss., by troops from the 1st and 20th Ky.,
under Fed. Col. Sedgewick. Union loss 25.

22. Lieut. E. R. Colbarn of the Fed. gunboat Hunchback, commander of the
U. S. Naval forces in North Carolina waters, in company with the
gunboats Shansun and Whitehead, destroyed several rebel fortifications
on the Mehirun and Chowan rivers, and captured 3 or 4 vessels laden with
valuable cargoes.

23. The reb. steamer Daniel E. Miller, with military stores and 60
recruits, for Memphis, was captured on the St. Francis river, by the 1st
Wis. cavalry, Capt. Daniels, he having a 6-pounder on shore.

23. Col. J. R. Kenly, with the 1st Md. regiment, part of the 29th Penn.
reg’t, and a small force of N. Y. cavalry, was attacked at Front Royal,
Va., by a large force of rebs. under Gen. Jackson. After brave
resistance the Feds. were defeated, and Col. Kenly, with the larger part
of the Md. reg’t taken prisoners.

23. Gen. Heath, with 3,000 men, attacked the Fed. force under Col.
Crook, at Lewisburg, Va.: after a severe fight the rebs. were routed.
Crook’s force numbered 1,300. Fed. loss 10 killed, 40 wounded, and 8
missing. The loss of the enemy much greater. 4 cannon, 200 stands of
arms, and 100 prisoners were captured.

=May 23.= A portion of the 4th Mich. and 5th U. S. cavalry succeeded in
crossing the Chickahominy, and getting, unperceived in the rear of four
companies of the 5th Louisiana reg’t, which had been drawn toward the
creek by the sight of a portion of the Fed. forces on the opposite bank.
Many of the rebs. were killed, 15 wounded, and 31 taken prisoners. One
Union soldier killed, and 6 wounded.

23. Grand Gulf, Miss., shelled by Fed. gunboats in retaliation for the
firing on Fed. transports by a masked battery near that place.

23. Gen. McClellan’s army crossed Bottom’s Bridge on the Chickahominy,
and his advance was within 7 miles of Richmond.

24. Two Ga. reg’ts under Gen. Cobb, were attacked near Williamsville, by
portions of 4 reg’ts belonging to Gen. Davidson’s brigades, attached to
Gen. McClellan’s army before Richmond. The Fed. soldiers drove the rebs.
from the town, with considerable loss. Fed. casualties 2 killed and 4
wounded.

24. The 4th Mich. encountered the 5th Louisiana a short distance above
New Bridge, on the Chickahominy. 37 rebs. captured, and about 50 killed
and wounded. Fed. loss 10.

24. All the railroads in the U. S. claimed by the government for
military purposes.

24. The steamer Swan, with 1,000 bales of cotton and 800 bbls. rosin,
captured off Cuba by U. S. brig Bainbridge and bark Amanda.

25. Gen. N. P. Banks, with 4,000 men, was attacked at Winchester, at
daylight, by about 15,000 rebs. under Gens. Ewell and Johnson. After a
spirited resistance Gen. Banks made good his retreat to Martinsburg.

25. A riot in Baltimore, created by the excitement caused on hearing of
the defeat and capture of a large part of Col. Kenly’s Md. regiment.
Many secessionists who expressed joy at hearing of the misfortune, were
roughly handled by the friends of the regiment.

26. After a five hours’ chase the English iron steamer Cambria, with a
cargo of stores for the rebs., was captured off Charleston, S. C., by
the Fed. gunboat Huron.

26. Col. Cluseret, with the advance brigade of Gen. Fremont’s army,
overtook the rebel Gen. Jackson’s forces, in full retreat, on the road
from Winchester to Strasburg, Va. 25 of the rebs. were captured. Their
killed and wounded unknown. 7 Fed. soldiers wounded.

26. British steamer Patras captured off Charleston, S. C., by U. S.
gunboat Bienville.

26. N. Y. and Mass. militia left home for Washington at one day’s
notice.

27. The English steamer Gordon, captured off Wilmington, N. C., by the
gunboats State of Georgia and Victoria.

27. Gens. Martindale and Butterfield’s brigades engaged and defeated a
rebel force of 8,000 near Hanover C. H., Va. Fed. loss 54 killed and 194
wounded and missing. Rebel loss between 2 and 300 killed and wounded,
and 500 prisoners.

28. Engagement on the Corinth road, Miss. A reconnoissance by the 10th
Iowa, Col. Purcell, of Gen. Halleck’s forces, met and fought a rebel
force. Federal loss 25 killed and wounded; 30 reb. dead left on the
field.

28. Gens. Denver and Smith of Sherman’s division, and Gen. Veatch,
obtained possession of a strong position within 1,300 yards of the rebel
lines at Corinth, Miss., giving the Federal army command of the enemy’s
lines. Union loss 6 killed, 12 wounded.

29. Capt. Frisbee, commanding a detachment of the 38th Ill. infantry,
and the 1st Mo. cavalry, captured, near Neosho, Mo., 2 colonels, 1
lieutenant, a number of guns and revolvers, 15 horses, and a large train
of forage and provisions.

29. English steamer Elizabeth, captured off Charleston, S. C., by U. S.
gunboat Keystone State.

29. Ashland, Va., occupied by Federal troops, and a large number of cars
with valuable rebel stores were captured.

29. Skirmish at Pocotaligo, S. C. Reb. loss about 20 killed and wounded;
Union loss 11.

30. Booneville, 24 miles S. of Corinth, Miss., occupied by 2 regiments
of Fed. cavalry under Col. Elliott, a large amount of stores destroyed,
with depot, engines, and cars, and 200 rebel sick captured and paroled.

30. Capture of Corinth, Miss., by Gen. Halleck’s army. 2,000 rebel
prisoners, and large supplies taken.

30. Col. Elliott, with the 2nd Iowa cavalry, by forced marches from
Corinth Miss., penetrated the enemy’s lines to Booneville, on the Ohio
and Mobile railway. They tore up the track in many places north and
south of that point, destroyed the locomotives, and 26 cars laden with
supplies for the rebel army. They also took 10,000 stand of arms, 3
pieces of artillery, large quantities of clothing and ammunition, and
paroled 2,000 prisoners.

30. On the Winchester road, six miles from Front Royal, Va., a body of
Fed. troops attacked a body of rebels, who fled at the first fire,
leaving six of their number prisoners, but bearing away their killed and
wounded. 1 English 12-pdr., and 12 wagons were captured; and 6 of the
1st Maryland regiment, who were captured in a previous battle at Front
Royal, were released.

30. A brigade of National troops, with 4 companies of R. I. cavalry,
entered Front Royal, Va., and surprised the 8th La., and 12th Ga.
troops, capturing 6 officers and 150 men, killing and wounding 20, and
securing 2 engines, 11 cars, and various stores. Fed. loss 8 killed 5
wounded.

30. 13 of the 11th Pa. cavalry captured near Zuni, Va.

31. Skirmish at Neosho, Mo. The 10th Ill. cavalry and 300 militia, under
Capt. Richardson, were driven from the town by rebs. and Indians, under
Maj. Wright after a slight resistance, and a quantity of plunder
obtained by the enemy.

31. Baton Rouge, La., occupied by Federal troops under Gen. Williams.

31. Skirmish near Washington, N. C., by a party of the 3rd N. Y.
cavalry, in which reb. cavalry were defeated with a loss of 11. Federal
loss, 22 wounded.

31. Six reb. prisoners ordered to be executed by Gen. Butler, at N. O.,
for violating their parole.

31. Battle of Fair Oaks, Va. General Casey’s division, after a gallant
resistance were overwhelmed by the reb. army. At night the rebs.
occupied the camps of the 4th corps, but their advance was broken. Gens.
Couch, Heintzelman, Kearney, Richardson, and Sedgwick, arrived on the
field at night with reinforcements.

=June 1.= Col. Elliott with the 2d Ohio cavalry, returned to Corinth,
Miss., from a successful raid on the Mobile and Ohio railroad. He burned
2 locomotives and 20 cars loaded with supplies, destroyed 10,000
muskets, and captured 2,000 prisoners.

1. Gen. Dix assigned to command Fortress Monroe and vicinity.

1. Rebel fortification at Pig Point, Va., destroyed.

1. Skirmish between Strasburg and Staunton, Va., between Gen. Fremont
and Gen. Jackson’s troops, with but slight results. Fed. loss about 12,
mostly woun’d.

1. The reb. army renew the attack on the Fed. forces at Fair Oaks, Va.,
when the enemy were defeated and driven from the field, with a loss of
8,000 killed and wounded. Fed. loss 5,739.

1. Gen. Wool promoted to a Maj. Generalship U. S. army.

1. Two boats’ crews from the U. S. bark Kingfisher captured on the
Ocilla river, Florida.

1. Skirmish near Strasburg, Va., by Col. Cluseret’s Fed. troops and
Ashby’s cavalry.

3. Maj.-Gen. Robert E. Lee assigned to the command of the rebel army in
front of Richmond.

4. Skirmish near Jasper, Tenn. Gen. Negley’s troops routed a large force
of reb. cavalry under Gen. Adams, capturing 25, with a large quantity of
arms, and killing and wounding 12.

4. Sixteen hundred of Gen. Prentiss’s troops captured at Pittsburg
Landing, arrived at Nashville, on parole.

4. Forts Pillow and Randolph, on the Mississippi, were evacuated by the
rebs. and occupied by Fed. forces on the ensuing day.

5. The 24th Mass. were attacked from an ambush, near Washington, N. C. 7
men were killed and several wounded.

5. Skirmish at New Bridge, on the Chickahominy, by Gen. M’Clellan’s
forces.

5. Sharp skirmish on James Island, S. C., by the “Roundhead” Pa. reg’t
and the 8th Michigan with rebels.

6. The 1st N. J. cavalry were caught in an ambush near Harrisonburg,
Va., and sustained considerable loss. Col. Windham was captured. Gen.
Bayard’s brigade engaged the rebels at that point and defeated them.

6. Engagement between the Fed. gunboats and rams and a reb. fleet in
front of Memphis, in which 4 of the latter were sunk or captured, and
one escaped. 100 reb. prisoners taken. Fed. loss none. Memphis occupied
by Federals.

7. Wm. Mumford, a citizen of New Orleans, was hung for pulling down the
American flag from the mint.

7. Bombardment of rebel batteries at Chattanooga, Tenn., by Gen.
Negley’s command.

7. Schooner Rowena captured in Stono river by the Pawnee.

8. Lieut. John G. Sprotsden, executive officer of the U. S. gunboat
Seneca, was killed by a reb. named George Huston, captain of a band of
marauders near Black Creek, Fla. The lieutenant had been despatched with
a force of 70 men to arrest Huston and his gang, and had surrounded his
house and demanded a surrender, when he was shot by Huston, who was in
turn desperately wounded and captured.

=June 8.= Battle of Cross-Keys, Va., near Port Republic. Gen. Fremont
drove Gen. Stonewall Jackson with considerable loss.

8. Skirmish on James Island, S. C., by Col. Morrow’s Federal troops.

9. Battle of Port Republic, Va. Gen. Shields with 3,500 men was attacked
by 12,000 rebs. under Jackson. Union troops retreated after severe loss
on both sides.

10. Skirmish on James Island, S. C. About 500 rebs. advanced on the
Federal lines for the purpose of captur’g pickets, when they encountered
the 97th Pa. regiment, and 2 companies of the 45th Pa. The rebs. were
defeated, leaving 15 dead and 2 wounded on the field. Fed. loss, 4
killed and 13 wounded.

10. Fed. expedit’n up the White river, when near St. Charles was fired
into from mask’d batteries, and the gunboat Mound City received a shot
in her boiler which occasioned the destruction of 100 of her crew by
scalding, 23 only escaping. The reb. works were captured by the land
forces under Col. Fitch, who took 30 prisoners.

10. Baldwin and Guntown, Miss., 24 miles from Corinth, occupied by
Federal forces under Gen. Granger, at which places the pursuit of
Beauregard’s army from Corinth terminated.

11. Skirmish near Montgomery, Ky. Feds. under Capts. Nicklin and Blood
engaged a force of guerrillas, and captured 25 of them, several of their
number being killed or wounded. 2 Feds. were killed.

11. A rebel battery of 4 guns captured at James Island, S. C.

12. A rebel cavalry force of 1,400 men, under Gen. J. E. B. Stuart, left
Richmond before daylight, by the Charlottesville turnpike, and
penetrated the Fed. lines to Hanover C. H., and the White House on the
Pamunkey, and then by the way of New Kent C. H., crossed the
Chickahominy near Blind Ford, returning to Richmond by the Charles City
road. In their foray they were eminently successful. In an engagement
with a small force of U. S. cavalry 3 or 4 of the Feds. were killed, and
also 2 teamsters. The rebs. captured about 50 prisoners, burned 2
schooners and 40 wagons laden with supplies, destroyed the tents of the
U. S. cavalry regiment, and also some hospital stores. The mules
attached to the wagons were driven off by the rebs. in their retreat.

12. A fight near Village Creek, Ark. The 9th Ill. cavalry, Col.
Brackett, engaged Hooker’s reb. company, and defeated them with the loss
of 28 killed, wounded and prisoners. Fed. loss 13 w.

12. A daring but unsuccessful attack was made on a reb. fort on James
Island, S. C., by the 79th N. Y., 8th Mich., and 28th Mass., in which
the Feds. were defeated with considerable loss.

12. Forty farmers from Conway Co., Ark., came into the Fed. lines at
Batesville, and enlisted in the army.

13. A negro settlement on Hutchinson’s Island, S. C., was broken up by a
raiding party of 300 rebs. from Fort Chapman.

13. Severe skirmishes in front of Gen. M’Clellan’s lines, from Old
Church to Fair Oaks.

13. The reb. transport Clara Dolsen captured on the White river, Ark.,
by the tug Spitfire.

13. Skirmish on James Isl., S. C. Reb. loss, 17 killed, 8 wounded.
Union, 3 killed, 19 wounded.

14. Capt. Atkinson’s company of 50th Ind. captured 6,200 pounds of
powder at Sycamore mills, 30 miles below Nashville, Tenn.

15. The battle of Secessionville on James Isl., S. C. The Fed. forces
under Gen. Benham, defeated with a loss of 685 men killed, wounded, and
prisoners.

15. Skirmish near Fair Oaks, Va., in which an attempt of the rebs. to
flank the Fed. lines during a thunderstorm was frustrated.

15. U. S. gunboats Tahoma and Somerset, Lieuts. Howell and English,
commanders, crossed the bar of St. Mark’s river, Fla., and destroyed a
reb. fort and barracks, driving out the reb. artillerists with 4 or 5
pieces.

17. The U. S. steamers Bienville, Somerset, and Montgomery, have
captured several vessels recently on the Fla. coast, laden with stores
and munitions for the rebs.

17. An act of Congress passed, forever prohibiting slavery in the
territories of the U. S.

18. A reconnoissance of the 16th Mass. from the Potomac army, engaged
the enemy in a severe fight with great credit, and a loss of about 25
men in killed and wounded.

18. Maj. Zeley’s troops attacked a band of rebs. near Smithville, Ark.,
capturing their leader, Capt. Jones, and 14 of his men. 4 rebs. wounded;
Feds., 2 killed, 4 wounded.

18. Cumberland Gap, Tenn., occupied by Gen. Morgan’s Fed. troops.

19. Skirmish by the 20th Ind. of the Army of the Potomac, in which great
gallantry was shown, and slight loss suffered by the Fed. troops.

19. Reb. schooner Louisa, and two boats laden with rice captured on the
Santee river, S. C., by U. S. steamer Albatross.

20. An attack was made by some of Com. Farragut’s fleet on the reb.
batteries at Ellis’ Cliffs, on the Miss. river. The enemy’s guns were
silenced after a shot from one of them had severely wounded two of the
crew of the Sarah Bruin.

20. Pres. Lincoln signed the bill prohibiting slavery forever in the U.
S. territories.

21. A series of skirmishes took place at the mouth of Battle Creek,
Tenn. Col. Lill’s Fed. troops defeated a body of the enemy with slight
loss.

21. Death of Col. Charles Ellet, of the Miss. ram squadron, at Cairo,
Ill., of wounds.

21. Skirmish at Fair Oaks, Va.

22. Part of the 16th Ill. cavalry captured a train, 25 prisoners, and
10,000 lbs. bacon, near Coldwater, on the Miss. and Tenn. R. R.

22. 3 men killed and 8 wounded of the 8th Vt., at Algiers, near N. O.,
by a party of guerrillas who surprised them.

23. Pres. Lincoln made a hurried visit to Gen. Scott, at West Point, N.
Y., to confer with him in reference to some important changes in the
military departments.

25. Battle of Oak Grove, Va. General Hooker’s forces with a loss of 200
men, defeated the rebs., who suffered more severely.

25. Gen. Pope arrived in Washington, to take command of the Army of Va.

25. Gen. Fremont resigned his command in the U. S. Army.

25. A train of cars on the Memphis and Ohio railroad, with a company of
Fed. troops, 80 mule teams, &c., was captured by the rebs. 10 Fed.
soldiers were killed, and the cars and engine destroyed.

25. Col. George Crook, with 1,750 men from the 36th, 44th, and 47th
Ohio, and the 2d Va. cavalry regiment, returned to his headquarters at
Meadow Bluff, Greenbriar Co., Va., after driving 2,000 rebels under Gen.
Heth, out of Monroe Co., retaking a large supply of provisions, grain,
and forage, which had been seized by the rebs., capturing a number of
the enemy, and restoring 100 refugees to their homes.

26. Skirmish on the Appomattox river, Va. 6 of Capt. Rogers’ gunboat
fleet engaged reb. batteries, 6 miles from the mouth of the river.

26. 3 reb. gunboats burned on the Yazoo river by their officers, to
prevent their capture by the Union ram-flotilla, Lieut.-Col. Ellet, then
in pursuit of them.

26. The great series of battles on the Chickahominy, before Richmond,
commenced at 2 P. M. by the attack by a large force of rebels on
McCall’s division, on the extreme right of McClellan’s army at
Mechanicsville. After losing more than 1000 men, the rebels retreated.
Fed. loss, 80 killed, 150 wounded.

26. Severe losses had occurred in picket skirmishing on the Chickahominy
creek for two weeks previous. 9 Federals were killed on this day.

27. Skirmish on the Amite river, La. 21st Ind. Col. Keith, defeated 2
parties of rebels, after slight skirmishing.

27. Skirmish near Swift Creek bridge, N. C.

27. Battle of Gaines’s Mill, near Richmond, Va. The Federals
successfully resisted an attack by the rebel army and made good their
retreat.

27. Severe fight near Village Creek, Ark. 9th Ill. cavalry, under Col.
Brackett. Fed. loss 2 k. and 31 wounded.

27. The Vicksburg “canal” commenced, intended to isolate that place from
the Mississippi river.

28. 5 clergymen imprisoned at Nashville, Tenn. by Gov. Johnson, for
refusing to swear allegiance to the U. S. Government.

28. Battle of the Chickahominy, Va. Gen. Porter’s troops bore the brunt
of the fighting, the Feds. still successfully retreating.

28. 100 of the Maryland Home Guard were captured at Moorfield, Hardy
Co., Va. by rebel troops under Col. Harness, formerly of Ashby’s
cavalry. The prisoners were paroled.

28. About $100,000 value of Government stores were destroyed by Federal
troops at the White House landing on the Pamunkey river, Va., previous
to evacuating that place, to prevent the rebels from seizing the same.

28. Flag-officer Farragut with nine vessels of his fleet ran by the
rebel batteries at Vicksburg, through a severe fire, losing 4 men killed
and 13 wounded.

=June 29.= The steamship Ann, of London, with a valuable cargo, was
captured in the act of unloading by the U. S. steamer Kanawha, at the
mouth of the Mobile Bay, under the guns of Fort Morgan.

29. Battle of Peach Orchard, Va., in which the rebels were repulsed.

29. Battle of Savage’s Station, Va. The Union troops continuing their
retreat were attacked. A sanguinary engagement ensued which resulted in
heavy loss to both sides.

29. Fight at Henderson, Ky. Andrews’ Mich. battery and Louisville
Provost Guard routed a body of rebel guerrillas.

29. Heavy bombardment at Vicksburg, Miss.

30. Bridges at Harrodsburg and Nicholasville, Ky. burned by rebel
guerrillas.

30. Battle of White Oak Swamp, Va. which lasted the entire day.

=July 1.= In response to a proposition from the loyal Governors of the
States suggesting the employment of additional military force, President
Lincoln called into service 300,000 men, to be apportioned from the
several States.

1. Battle of Malvern Hills, the last of the 7 days’ contests, lasting 2
hours. The rebels repulsed at all points. As the Fed. forces neared
James river, the Fed. gunboats opened fire, and did great execution. The
rebels were driven back discomfitted.

1. Com. Porter’s ram fleet skirmished with the rebel batteries at
Vicksburg, Miss.

1. Col. Sheridan, of the 2d Michigan cavalry, commanding 728 men, was
attacked by a force of over 4,000 rebs. near Booneville, Miss. An
engagement of seven hours’ duration ensued resulting in the total defeat
of the rebels, leaving 65 dead on the field. The Federal loss was 41 in
killed, wounded and missing.

2. Gen M’Clellan’s army reached Harrison’s Bar on the James river, Va.

2. Gen. Halleck left St. Louis to take position as Gen.-in-chief at
Washington.

2. Flag-officer Farragut, with nine vessels of his fleet, passed above
the reb. batteries at Vicksburg, Miss., through a severe fire, thus
forming a junction with the Fed. fleet of the Upper Mississippi. His
loss in the engagement was 4 killed and 13 wounded.

3. The brig Delilah captured by U. S. steamer Quaker City off
Hole-in-the-Wall.

3. Skirmish on the James river, Va. Gen. Davidson’s brigade captured 6
reb. guns and a number of prisoners.

3. Commencement of the bombardment of Vicksburgh, Miss. by the combined
fleets of Coms. Farragut and Porter.

4. The United States flag waving in every State of the Union.

4. Successful skirmish near Little Red river, Ark. by Fed. troops under
Lieut.-Col. Wood.

4. Union pickets defeated in a skirmish at Port Royal Ferry, S. C.

4. The steamers State of Maine and Kennebec left Fortress Monroe with
559 wounded soldiers for New York.

4. 553 reb. prisoners, arrived at Fortress Monroe taken in the late
battles near Richmond.

4. 4,600 Fed. prisoners were confined in Richmond, one-fourth of whom
were wounded or sick.

4. Skirmish near Grand Haze, on the White river, Ark. by 13th Ill.

4. Reb. gunboat Teazer captured on James river by U. S. steamer
Maratanza.

6. A fight at Grand Prairie, near Aberdeen, Ark. Col. Spicely’s infantry
defeated reb. cavalry, routing them with great loss.

7. Steamer Emilie captured off Bull’s Bay, S. C. by U. S. steamer Flag
and bark Restless.

7. Col. Hovey, with 4 companies of his 53d Ill. regiment, 4 of the 11th
Missouri, and a battalion of Ind. cavalry, attached to Gen. Curtis’s
army in Ark., routed 2 Texan regiments at a point between Cotton Plant
and Bayou Coache. Rebel loss 110 killed, left on the field. Fed. 8
killed, 47 wounded.

8. Pres. Lincoln reviewed the army of the Potomac at Harrison’s Landing,
Va.

9. A detachment of 9th Pa. cavalry, 250 strong, under Maj. Jordan, were
attacked at Tompkinsville, Monroe Co., Ky., by about 1,200 rebs. under
Cols. John Morgan and Hunt. The Pennsylvanians were routed after a fight
of 20 minutes, with a loss of 4 killed, 6 wounded and 20 prisoners,
including Maj. Jordan. 10 rebs. were killed, and Col. Hunt mortally
wounded.

9. Hamilton, N. C., captured by Fed. gunboats and 9th N. Y. volunteers.

9. Gold coin commanded a premium of 17 per cent. in New York, silver 10,
and nickel 3 per cent.

10. Ninety rebs. while drilling in an old field between Gallatin and
Heartsville, Tenn., were surprised and captured by Col. Boone’s
regiment, and taken to Nashville as prisoners.

11. Maj.-Gen. H. W. Halleck appoint’d commander-in-chief of the U. S.
army.

11. Skirmish near New Hope, Ky. Fed. troops under Lieut.-Col. Moore,
defeated rebel cavalry.

11. Capt. Cohl, with a company of Mo. State Militia, defeated a band of
rebels commanded by Col. Quantrell, at Pleasant Hill, in which 6 rebs.
were killed and 5 badly wounded. The Fed. loss was 9 killed and 15
wounded; Capt. Cohl being among the wounded.

12. Gen. Curtis’ army arrived in safety at Helena, Ark., on the
Mississippi river, having defeated the rebs. in every encounter during a
five months’ campaign, and frustrated their attempts to impede his march
and cut off his supplies.

12. Fight at Lebanon, Ky. Union troops under Col. Johnson defeated by
Morgan’s cavalry, and the town captured by the rebels.

12. Fairmont, Mo., plundered by rebel guerrillas.

13. Skirmish at Rapidan Station, Va., by Fed. troops under Maj. Deems,
who destroyed the bridge and defeated a party of rebels.

13. Memphis, Mo. robbed by rebel guerrillas.

13. A reb. force of 2,000 cavalry under Cols. Morgan and Forrest,
attacked the 9th Mich., 3d Minn., and Hewitt’s battery under Gen. T. A.
Crittenden, at Murfreesborough, Tenn., capturing the entire force. Reb.
loss, 30 killed and 100 wounded. Fed. loss, 33 killed, 62 wounded.

14. Cynthiana, Ky., captured by Morgan’s rebel troops, and a small force
of Feds., under Capt. Arthur, taken prisoners.

15. Maj. Miller, with 600 men from 10th Ill., 2d Wis., and 3d Mo.,
attacked a superior force of rebs. under Rains and Coffee, at
Fayetteville, Ark., routing them with great loss.

15. Gen. David E. Twiggs died at Augusta, Ga.

15. The reb. iron-clad ram Arkansas, came down the Yazoo river and
engaged the Fed. gunboats Carondelet and Tyler, and ram Lancaster. The
ram succeeded in escaping to Vicksburg with a loss of 10 killed and 15
wounded, including the commander, Capt. Brown. 22 Federals were killed,
and 55 wounded and missing.

15. A large and enthusiastic Union meeting was held in N. Y. city, in
which all classes of citizens were fully represented, and a unanimity of
purpose expressed to sustain the Government to the fullest extent in
putting down the rebellion, and restoring the integrity of the Union.

16. Lieut. Rogers, of the U. S. steamer Huntsville, of the S. Atlantic
blockading squadron, reported capturing the British schooner Agnes, with
60 bales cotton and 40 barrels rosin. Also the rebel steamer Reliance,
from Dobay bar, Ga., bound for Nassau, with 243 bales Sea Island cotton.

17. Skirmish at Cynthiana, Ky., Capt. Glass’ troops.

17. Gordonsville, Va., occupied by Gen. Pope’s Fed. troops.

17. Adjournment of Congress.

17. Confiscation bill signed by the President.

17. Skirmish near Columbia, Tenn. Lieut. Roberts, of 1st Ky. Union
cavalry, kept at bay a superior reb. force in a fight of 6 hours.

18. Twenty-eight men of company A., N. Y. cavalry, were captured at
Orange C. H., on the Orange and Alexandria railway, by rebel cavalry
under Gen. Ewell.

18. Severe fight near Memphis, Mo. 400 Feds. under Maj. Clopper,
defeated a reb. force under Col. Porter. Fed. loss, 15 killed and 30
wounded. Reb. loss, 23 killed besides wounded.

18. The town of Newburg, Ind., robbed by reb. troops under Capt.
Johnson.

19. Fifty-three men of 3d Mich. cavalry captured near Booneville, Miss.

19. The reb. Col. Morgan was attacked on Garret Davis’ farm, near Paris,
Ky., by Gen. Green Clay and Col. Metcalf, with 1,600 cavalry, and routed
with loss.

19. A band of 32 reb. guerrillas crossed the Ohio river from Kentucky to
Newburg, Ind., and plundered the hospital and other buildings,
recrossing the river before the armed forces in the neighborhood could
intercept them.

19. A down train on the Columbia railway, Tenn., when 12 miles below
Reynolds Station, was thrown from the track, and Capt. J. Fatrem of the
6th Ohio, and four others killed, and about 30 wounded.

20. Skirmish on James river, Va., by 8th Pa. cavalry, Capt. Keenan.

20. One hundred and forty men of the Harris Light Cavalry, under Col.
Davis, penetrated the reb. lines on the Virginia Central railway, 12
miles west of Hanover Junction, destroying the military stores and the
railway at Beaver Dam Creek, and returned to Fredericksburg in safety,
marching 80 miles in 30 hours.

21. All the militia in the State of Mo. were ordered to be enrolled by
Gov. Gamble, subject to the call of Gen. Schofield, for the purpose of
destroying the guerrilla bands in the State.

=July 21.= A band of guerrillas under Capt. Reeves surprised a body of
State militia commanded by Capt. Leeper, at Greenville, Wayne county,
Mo., many of whom were killed and wounded and the remainder driven from
the town.

22. A band of 40 rebels attacked a wagon train at Pittsburgh Landing,
Tenn., and captured 60 wagons with army stores.

22. A Union cavalry company fired, by mistake, on a Confederate
detachment with a flag of truce returning under a Union escort from
Cumberland Gap, Tenn. A lieutenant was killed, and 6 privates wounded.
Lieut.-Col. Kregan, commanding the Union escort, and Capt. Lyons, of
Gen. Morgan’s staff, were severely wounded. Several Union soldiers were
killed and wounded.

22. Reb. steamer Reliance captured by U. S. steamer Huntsville.

22. Maj.-Gen. Sherman took command at Memphis, Tenn. 400 citizens took
the oath, and 130 were sent south.

23. Florence, Ala. entered by rebel troops, who burned a large supply of
Fed. stores.

23. 60 wagons, laden with commissary stores, were captured by rebels
near Pittsburg Landing, Tenn.

23. An unsuccessful attempt was made to sink the reb. ram Arkansas, at
Vicksburg, by Col. Ellet, with the Union ram Queen of the West.

23. Fight near Florida, Mo. Fed. cavalry under Maj. Caldwell attacked by
rebs. under Col. Porter. Feds. defeated with a loss of 26.

23. An attempt was made by a portion of the rebel prisoners confined at
Chicago, Ill., to escape from their guards, who rallied and drove them
back, a few only escaping. Several of the prisoners were killed and
wounded.

23. A detachment of four companies of Fed. troops, under Maj. Lippert,
sent out from Rivas Station by Col. Boyd to intercept the guerrillas who
made the raid on Greenville, Mo., met the enemy, and dispersed the band,
taking 16 prisoners, and recovered the booty taken at Greenville.

23. Lieut.-Col. Kilpatrick, with part of the N. Y. Harris Light Cavalry,
left Fredericksburg, Va., on the 22d, and encountered and defeated a
body of rebel cavalry near Carmel Church, on the road to Richmond, whom
they defeated, burned their camps and six cars loaded with corn, and
broke up the telegraph to Gordonsville. An hour later they routed a
large body of Stuart’s cavalry, captured several prisoners and a large
number of horses.

23. Gen. James H. Lane, of Kansas, was authorized by the Government to
organize an independent brigade in Kansas.

24. Ex-President Martin Van Buren died at his residence at Lindenwold,
N. Y., in the 80th year of his age.

24. Rebel raid into Gloucester Point, Va. Citizens impressed, and much
property destroyed.

24. Steamer Tubal Cain captured by U. S. gunboat Octarora.

24. Skirmish at Malvern Hill, Va.

24. Skirmish at Coldwater, Miss.

24. Skirmish near Decatur, Ala. Part of 31st Ohio, under Capt. Harman,
defeated a rebel force, who lost 10 killed and 30 wounded.

24. Lieut.-Col. Starr, with 80 of 9th Va. cavalry, surprised and
captured at Summerville, Va., by rebel cavalry under Maj. Bailey.

25. The steamer S. R. Spaulding arrived at Philadelphia, Pa., with 240
wounded and sick soldiers released from Richmond.

25. 900 paroled wounded prisoners arrived at Fortress Monroe from
Richmond.

25. Col. Magoffin, and 35 other rebel prisoners escaped from the
military prison at Alton, Ill., by digging a tunnel under the wall. 3 or
4 gave themselves up next day, and several were recaptured.

25. A fight on the Hatchie river, near Brownsville, Tenn., between rebs.
under Capt. Faulkner, and cavalry led by Maj. Wallace.

25. 2 companies of Fed. troops under Capt. Davidson, were surprised and
captured at Courtland, Ala.

25. Skirmish near Orange C. H., Va. A skirmish party from Gen. Gibson’s
Fed. command defeated with a loss of 5 killed, and 12 wounded and
prisoners.

26. Dispatch boat Sallie Wood captured by rebels 150 miles above
Vicksburg.

26. Attack on Ft. James, on the Ogeeche river, Ga. by Fed. gunboats,
repulsed.

27. Richmond, Ky., plundered by rebs. under Col. Morgan.

27. Battle near Bayou Bernard, Cherokee nation, between Col. Phillips’
troops, and rebels under Col. Taylor. The latter defeated with the loss
of 125 men and their commander.

28. The office of _The St. Croix Herald_ in St. Stephens, N. B., was
visited by a mob and destroyed. It was the only newspaper in New
Brunswick that advocated the Union cause.

28. Three rebel clergymen, Messrs. Elliot, Ford, and Baldwin, of
Nashville, were committed to jail by order of Gov. Johnson.

28. Col. Guitar of the 9th Missouri Regiment, reinforced by Lieut.-Col.
Shaffer and Maj. Clopper of Merrill’s Horse, and Maj. Caldwell of the 3d
Iowa cavalry, 650 strong, were attacked at Moore’s Mills, seven miles
east of Fulton, Mo., by Cols. Porter and Cobb, with 800 strong. Fed.
loss 10 killed, and 30 wounded. The rebs. left 52 dead on the field, and
had 100 wounded.

29. Russellville, Ky., attacked by rebs. under Col. Gano, and the Home
Guards defeated.

29. Skirmish at Brownsville, Tenn. by Union cavalry under Capt. Dollin,
and reb. troops. Feds. captured 11, and lost 4 killed, and 6 wounded.
Rebs. lost 10 killed and wounded.

30. Between 400 and 500 rebel prisoners confined in Fort Delaware, Del.,
took the oath of allegiance.

30. Hon. John S. Phelps, of Mo., the newly appointed military Governor
of Arkansas, arrived at St. Louis.

30. Reb. raid into Paris, Ky., under Col. Jo. Thompson.

31. Steamer Memphis captured by U. S. gunboat Magnolia, off Charleston,
S. C.

31. 5 men killed, and 4 wounded by shells thrown by the rebs. from the
left bank of the James river into the Fed. camp at Harrison’s Landing.

31. Steamer Ocean Queen sailed from Fort Warren, Mass., for James river,
with 200 released rebel prisoners.

31. A scouting party seven miles from Luray, in the direction of
Shenandoah river, encountered a body of rebel horse, who fled, leaving 5
of their number prisoners, and 1 dead.

31. 250 citizens of Woodville, Rappahannock Co., Va., took the oath of
allegiance before Capt. Baird, of Gen. Milroy’s staff. Five refusing to
affirm were arrested and sent to Gen. Sigel’s headquarters.

=Aug. 1.= Artillery skirmishing on James river, Va., near Harrison’s
Landing, by reb. batteries and Union gunboat fleet.

1. All the buildings opposite Harrison’s landing, Va., were destroyed by
Union troops.

1. Skirmish at Newark, Mo. A company of State troops, under Capt. Lair,
were captured by a superior force of rebs. under Col. Porter.

1. Skirmishing near Orange C. H., Va., by Fed. troops under Gen. Bayard.

2. Skirmish at Ozark, Mo. 75 Nationals under Capt. Birch engaged and
defeated a rebel party.

2. Skirmish at Orange C. H., Va., by Gen. Crawford’s Fed. troops, who
lost 4 killed and 12 wounded.

3. The British propeller Columbia, with a cargo of 12 Armstrong guns,
and several thousand Enfield rifles, was captured off the Bahamas by the
U. S. gunboat Santiago de Cuba.

3. Alexandria, Mo., pillaged by rebel guerrillas.

3. Skirmish near Cox’s river, Va. The 13th Va. cavalry were attacked by
Col. Averill’s Federal troops, and put to flight.

4. Col. Wynkoop’s Fed. troops were defeated in a skirmish near Sparta,
Tenn.

4. Skirmish on White river, 40 miles from Forsyth. Capt. Birch’s company
of 14th Mo. engaged Col. Lawther’s reb. band. Fed. loss 3 killed 7
wounded.

4. An immediate draft of 300,000 men was ordered by Pres. Lincoln from
the militia of the States, for nine months. Also an additional quota by
special draft to fill up the ranks of the 300,000 volunteers previously
called for, should the same not be enlisted by the 15th of August.

5. Reb. Gen. J. C. Breckinridge, with 5,000 men, attacked Gen. Williams,
with 2,500 men at Baton Rouge, La. Rebels defeated. Gen. Williams
killed. Fed. loss 250 killed, wounded, and missing. Reb. loss 600.

5. Skirmish at Malvern Hills, Va. Gen. Hooker’s Fed. troops engaged.

5. Skirmish at Point Pleasant, Mo.

6. Skirmish at Monteralla, Mo. Maj. Montgomery’s troops defeated
guerrillas.

6. Destruction of rebel ram Arkansas by U. S. gunboat Essex, Capt.
Porter, near Vicksburg, Miss.

6. Brig.-Gen. R. L. McCook died in the Fed. camp near Deckard, Tenn.,
from wounds received from guerrillas while in an ambulance.

6. Fed. troops under Gens. Gibbon and Cutler encountered Stuart’s reb.
cavalry 7 miles beyond Mattapony river, Va. 72 Feds. taken prisoners.
The Union forces destroyed several bridges and considerable reb. stores.

=Aug. 6.= Skirmishes near Tazewell, Tenn. Col. De Courcey’s Union troops
repulsed a reb. force.

7. Battle near Fort Fillmore, N. Mex. Col. Sibley’s reb. troops were
defeated by Unionists under Col. Canby.

7. Reb. cavalry under Capt. Faulkner, surprised near Trenton, Tenn., by
2d Ill. cavalry. Reb. loss 20 killed and 30 wounded.

7. Reb. Col. Porter defeated near Kirkville, Mo., by 1,000 Feds, under
Col. McNeill.

7. Fight in Dodd Co., Mo. Maj. Montgomery’s Feds. defeated rebs. under
Col. Coffin. Reb. loss, 11 killed, 4 wounded, and 17 prisoners.

7. Skirmish at Wolftown, near Madison C. H., Va.

7. Malvern Hills, Va., abandoned by Gen. Hooker’s Fed. troops.

9. 26 reb. prisoners shot at Macon City, Mo., for violating their
parole.

9. Porter’s guerrillas routed by Col. McNeill’s Fed. troops at Stockton,
Macon Co., Mo.

9. Battle of Cedar Mountain, Va. Gen. Banks’ corps attacked near the
Rapidan river by reb. Gen. Jackson, with superior force. Rebs. repulsed.
Fed. loss, 1500, k., w. and pris.

9. U. S. steam frigate Lackawanna launched at Brooklyn, L. I.

9–10. Recruiting very brisk throughout the country. Many fled to Canada
and other remote places to avoid being drafted. Traveling restricted, by
order of Government, to prevent fugitives from escaping.

10. U. S. steamer Freeborn brought 25 prisoners and 5 sailboats to
Washington, D. C. captured while engaged in contraband trade on the
Chesapeake.

10. Donaldsonville, La., partially destroyed by men from U. S. sloop
Brooklyn.

11. Bayou Sara, La., seized by national troops.

11. Col. Buell, with 7th Mo. cavalry, was defeated at Independence, Mo.,
by rebels under Col. Hughes, who captured the town.

11. Skirmish 11 miles E. of Helena, Ark. 3d Wis. defeated reb. cavalry
under Jeff. Thompson.

11. Part of 11th Ill. cavalry defeated rebs. at Salisbury, 5 miles E. of
Grand Junction, Tenn. capturing a captain and 27 horses.

11. Skirmishes near Williamsport, Tenn. Maj. Kennedy’s Fed. troops
defeated rebels.

11. Fight near Compton’s Ferry, on Grand river, Mo. Col. Guitar’s Union
cavalry defeated rebs. under Col. Poindexter, who lost 100 k. and w. and
200 pris.

11. A skirmish near Reelsville, Calloway Co., Mo. Col. Smart’s Mo. State
cavalry routed Cobb’s guerrillas.

11. Skirmish near Kinderhook, Tenn. Col. McGowan’s Union troops defeated
Anderson’s rebels, who lost 7 k. and 27 prisoners.

11. Battle at Clarendon, Monroe Co., Ark. Gen. Hovey’s Fed. troops
defeated rebels, and took 600 prisoners.

12. The Fed. garrison at Gallatin, Tenn. captured by, Col. J. H.
Morgan’s cavalry, who in turn were driven out by Col. Miller’s Fed.
troops, who killed 6 rebs. and wounded a number in the charge.

13. Collision on the Potomac river, Va. by steamers Peabody and West
Point. 73 lives were lost.

13. Col. Guitar overtook Poindexter’s reb. troops at Yellow Creek,
Clinton Co., Mo. and scattered them, taking 60 prisoners.

13. 24th Mass., Gen. Stevenson, with gunboats Wilson and Ellis proceeded
from Newbern, N. C., to Swansboro’, and destroyed rebel salt works.

14. Slight skirmish near Helena, Ark.

15. 10 rebel recruits captured in St. Mary’s Co., Md., by Fed. cavalry.

15. Skirmish on the Obion river, Tenn., at Merriwether’s Landing, Col.
T. W. Harris’s Fed. troops routed rebs. under Capt. Binfield, who lost
20 k. and 9 prisoners.

16. Cols. Corcoran and Wilcox, Lieut.-Col. Brown and Maj. Rogers, late
prisoners, reached Fort Monroe, having been exchanged by the rebels.

16. Lieut. Black and 5 men captured by the rebs. on the Rapidan river,
Va.

16. 8 gunboats and rams, under Col. Ellet, with the 57th Ohio and 33d
Ind., in transports, left Helena, Ark., this day, sailed down the
Mississippi to Milliken’s Bend, where they captured the steamer
Fairplay, with arms, &c. for 6000 men. Further captures were made at
Haines’ Bluff and at Richmond, La., and property destroyed.

16. Gen. McClellan’s army evacuated Harrison’s Landing, Va., and removed
to Williamsburg.

16. Fight at Lone Jack, Mo. 800 State militia under Maj. Foster, engaged
a superior rebel force under Col. Coffee. Feds. defeated with loss of 60
k. and 100 wounded. Reb. loss 110 k. and w.

18. The steamers Skylark and Sallie were burned by rebels, and their
crews captured, at the mouth of Duck creek, 50 miles above Fort Henry,
Tenn. river.

19. Union garrison at Clarksville, Tenn., the 71st Ohio, under Col.
Mason, surrendered to a rebel force, under Col. Woodward.

19. Steamer Swallow burned by rebels, 25 miles below Memphis, Tenn.

19. Skirmish near Rienzi, Miss.

19. Maj.-Gen. Wright assigned to command Department of Ohio.

19. Skirmish near Hickman, Mo. Rebs. defeated by cavalry under Capt.
Moore. Fed. loss 2 w. Reb. loss 4 k. 19 prisoners.

19. Sioux Indians destroyed U. S. agencies at Yellow Medicine, and Red
Wood, and partly destroyed New Ulm, Minn., killing and wounding more
than 100 persons.

20. Skirmish at Brandy station, Va. Gen. Pope’s army, retreating to the
Rappahannock river, were overtaken by Lee’s forces, and a fight ensued,
chiefly an artillery duel.

20. Skirmish at Edgefield Junction, Tenn. Part of 50th Ind. and Col. J.
H. Morgan’s reb. cavalry. The latter retreated with a loss of 7 killed
and 20 wounded.

20. Skirmish near Union Mills, Mo. A small force of Feds. under Maj.
Price were ambushed by rebs. but defeated them, capturing 4 men and 16
horses, and killing one man. Fed. loss 4 killed and 3 wounded.

21. Gen. Pope and Gen. Lee’s armies facing each other on the
Rappahannock river. An attempt by the rebs. to cross at Kelly’s Ford was
foiled by Gen. Reno’s troops, who attacked them with artillery and
cavalry.

21. Reb. schooner Eliza captured off Charleston, S. C., by U. S. steamer
Bienville.

21. Union pickets on Pinckney Island, Hilton Head, S. C., were attacked
by rebs. who captured 32, killed 3 and wounded 3.

22. Defeat of Gen. Johnson near Gallatin, Tenn. by Morgan’s Confed.
cavalry. Fed. loss, 64 killed, 100 wounded, and 200 prisoners, including
Gen. Johnson and his staff.

22. Death of Rear-Adm. George Campbell Read, at Philadelphia.

22. Skirmishes near Crab Orchard, Ky. 9th Pa. cavalry, under Gen. G. C.
Smith defeated reb. cavalry under Col. Scott.

22. Gen. Stuart’s reb. cavalry penetrated in the rear of Gen. Pope’s
army, at Catlett’s Station, Va., destroyed sutler’s stores, sacked the
hospital, and captured the wagons and papers of Gen. Pope.

22. Fort Ridgely, Minn. was attacked by a large body of Indians, who
were repulsed with great loss. Fed. loss, 3 killed and 30 wounded.

22. Artillery skirmishing along the Rappahannock river, Va., by the
armies of Pope and Lee. Gen. Sigel’s corps engaged the enemy with
spirit, and inflicted severe loss on the rebs. before they were
permitted to cross the river.

23. The U. S. sloop-of-war Adirondack was wrecked on a coral reef near
Little Abaco, W. I. The crew saved.

23. The schooner Louisa was captured by the U. S. steamer Bienville, at
Charleston, S. C.

23. A train of cars on the Memphis and Charleston railroad attacked by
400 guerrillas 3 miles from Courtland, Tenn., who destroyed the cars.
Part of the 42d Ill. was on board. 8 rebs. killed. Fed. loss 2 wounded
and 2 missing.

23. Mutiny in Spinola’s Empire Brigade at E. New York. 1 man killed and
several wounded.

23. A passenger train was destroyed on the Winchester Va. railroad near
Harper’s Ferry. 4 of the 1st Mich. captured.

24. Continuation of artillery battle on the banks of the Rappahannock
river, Va., between Pope’s and Lee’s armies. Gen. Milroy’s Fed. brigade
suffered severe loss.

24. Skirmish near Lamar, Kansas. Quantrell and Hays’ reb. troops
attacked Kansas troops under Maj. Campbell and Capt. Grund. Fed. loss 2
killed and 21 wounded.

24. Reb. schooner Water-witch, captured off Aransas, Texas, by U. S.
schooner Corypheus.

24. Skirmish near Dallas, Mo. 12th Mo. cavalry, Maj. B. F. Lazear,
defeated Col. Jeffries’ reb. troops with loss.

25. 18 rebs. captured near Mount Sterling, Ky. by Capt. Warren’s Bath
County Guards.

25. Maj. Lippert, with 3 companies of 13th Ill. cavalry was attacked by
300 reb. cavalry under Col. Hicks, 36 miles beyond Bloomfield, Mo. Rebs.
defeated, 20 killed and many wounded and taken prisoners.

25. Col. Woodward, with a strong force of rebs. attacked Fort Donelson,
Tenn. and was repulsed with heavy loss.

25. New Ulm, Minn. was evacuated by the entire population and garrison
under Capt. Flaudrau, after fighting the Sioux Indians for two days.

=Aug. 25.= Skirmish with guerrillas near Danville, Ky., by Danville and
Harrodsburgh Home Guards.

26. Skirmish near Madisonville, Ky. A Union force under Col. Foster
defeated reb. guerrillas.

26. Fifth Iowa cavalry, Col. Lowe, defeated rebs. under Col. Woodward
near Fort Donelson, Tenn. Fed. loss 2 killed and 18 wounded.

26. A large quantity of Government stores were destroyed at Manassas,
Va., by reb. cavalry under Fitz-Hugh Lee, who drove the Fed. forces
towards Alexandria.

26. Gen. Burnside relinquished command of Department of N. Carolina. He
was succeeded by Gen. Foster.

27. Schooner Anna Sophia captured by the gunboat R. R. Cuyler off
Wilmington, N. C.

27. Rebs. under Col. Coffee defeated on the Osage river, near Lone Jack,
Mo., by Gen. Blunt’s troops.

27. At Waterford, Va., part of Capt. Means’ company of Fed. cavalry was
captured by rebs. under Capt. White.

27. Gen Hooker’s division engaged rebs. under Gen. Ewell at Kettle Run,
Va., near Bristow’s station, and drove them from the field; loss about
300 on each side.

28. Fight at Readyville, Tenn. The 23d Ky., Col. Murphy, defeated reb.
cavalry under Gen. Forrest.

28. $500,000 was assessed on wealthy secessionists at St. Louis, Mo., by
Gen. Schofield, for the relief of destitute Unionists.

28. Severe fight six miles west of Centreville, Va. Gens. M’Dowell and
Sigel’s troops defeated rebs. under Gen. Jackson, who was driven back
with loss, including many prisoners.

28. City Point on the James river, Va., destroyed by Fed. gunboats under
Com. Wilkes.

28. Skirmish at Shady Springs, 10 miles from Raleigh C. H., Va. 2d Va.
Fed. cavalry, Lieut. Montgomery, defeated reb. cavalry, taking 5
prisoners.

29. Battle at Groveton, Va. The troops of Gens. Hooker, Sigel, Kearney,
Reno, and King defeated rebs. under Jackson and Longstreet, with great
loss. The fight lasted from dawn till dark.

29. Twelve officers of 71st Ohio dismissed the service for publishing a
card stating they had advised Col. Mason to surrender Clarksville,
Tenn., to the rebs.

29. Eighteen guerrillas captured 12 miles S. E. of Memphis, Tenn.

29. Skirmish near Manchester, Tenn. 18th Ohio, Capt. Miller, defeated
rebel cavalry with loss.

29. Skirmish at Bonnet Carré, La. 8th Vt., Col. Thomas, defeated
guerrillas and captured army stores.

29–30. Battles at Richmond, Ky. Feds. under Gens. Manson and Cruft
compelled to retreat before rebs. under Gen. E. Kirby Smith, after
losing 200 killed, 700 wounded and 2,000 prisoners.

30. Fight at Bolivar, Tenn. 78th Ohio, Col. Leggett, routed a superior
force of rebs. under Gen. Armstrong. Fed. loss, 5 killed, 18 wounded, 64
missing.

30. Buckhannon, Va., captured by rebs., and Government military stores
seized.

30. Fight at M’Minnville, Tenn. 26th Ohio, Col. Fyffe, defeated Gen.
Forrest’s rebel cavalry.

30. Gen. Pope’s forces, consisting of the corps of Gen. Heintzelman,
Porter, M’Dowell and Banks, engaged Lee’s army at the old battle ground
of Bull Run, Va. After severe loss the Federals fell back to
Centreville, where they were supported by Sumner’s and Franklin’s corps.

31. Fredericksburg, Va., evacuated by Gen. Burnside. The three bridges,
foundry and military storehouses burned.

31. Huntsville, Ala., evacuated by Gen. Buell.

31. Great excitement in the north, on hearing of the disaster to Gen.
Pope’s army. Immense quantities of hospital and other stores,
contributed and forwarded this day.

31. Skirmish at Medor Station on Mississippi Central R.R., Tenn.
Armstrong’s reb. cavalry attacked the place, but were driven off with
loss.

31. Stevenson, Ala., captured by rebel troops under Col. McKinstry, and
a large amount of ammunition and stores seized.

31. Reb. steamer Emma, with 740 bales of cotton, grounded and burned on
the Savannah river.

31. Bayou Sara, La., burned by the crew of U. S. gunboat Essex.

=Sep. 1.= Battle at Britton’s Lane, near Denmark, Tenn. 30th Illinois,
Col. Dennis, defeated a superior force of rebs. under Gen. Armstrong.
Reb. loss, 180 killed, 220 wounded. Fed. loss, 200 killed and wounded.

1. Lexington, Ky., occupied by Gen. E. K. Smith’s rebel troops.

1. Natchez, Miss., shelled by Federal gunboats.

1. Severe fight at Stevenson, Ala. Rebs. retire with great loss. Feds.
engaged: Simonton’s Ohio, and Loomis’ Mich. batteries, and 10th Wis. and
13th Mich. regiments.

1. Severe engagement at Chantilly, near Fairfax C. H., Va. Gen. Pope’s
army defeated Jackson, Ewell, and Hill. Heavy loss on both sides. Death
of Gens. Kearney and Stevens.

1. The spirit ration in the U. S. navy discontinued on this day by act
of Congress.

2. Great excitement in Cincinnati, O., and Covington and Newport, Ky.,
in consequence of the approach of Kirby Smith’s reb. army. Business
suspended, and citizens of all classes in the field drilling.

2. A train of 100 wagons, with army stores, captured by rebs. between
Fairfax and Centreville, Va., which necessitated the retreat of the
Union army to Munson’s Hill.

2. Versailles, Ky., occupied by rebel cavalry under Gen. Scott.

2. Fight at Morgansfield, Ky. 8th Ky. cavalry, Col. Shackleford,
defeated guerrillas under Col. A. R. Johnson.

2. Fight near Plymouth, N. C. A party of loyal inhabitants led by Serg’t
Green, of Hawkins’ Zouaves, and some of his men defeated Col. Garret’s
rebel force, who lost 30 killed and 40 taken prisoners.

2. Hutchinson and Forest City, Minn., attacked by hostile Indians, who
were defeated at both places.

2. Winchester, Va., evacuated by Gen. Pope’s army, who retreated to
Harper’s Ferry.

2. The U. S. steamer W. B. Terry captured by rebs. on the Tenn. river,
while aground at Duck Shoals.

2. Skirmish near Slaughterville, Ky. Fed. troops, under Lieut.-Col.
Foster, defeated reb. cavalry, the latter losing 3 killed, 2 wounded and
25 prisoners.

2. Fight near Grieger’s Lake, Ky. Col. Shackelford’s Fed. troops
defeated Col. Johnson with 600 rebels.

3. Gen. Pope asked to be relieved from command of the army of the
Potomac, and was transferred to the Northwest.

4. Gov. Curtin, of Pa., called out the whole of the State militia to
repel an expected invasion.

4. Fed. troops, near Fort Ridgely, Minn., attacked by Indians, 13
soldiers killed and 47 wounded.

4. The Confed. army crossed the Potomac near Poolesville, Md., and
invaded that State.

4. Maj. Wheeler with a detachment of Dodge’s N. Y. Mounted Rifles,
returned to Suffolk, Va., from a scout 12 miles west of South Mills,
where they captured 113 rebs. and 38 negroes, who were prisoners.

4. Three bridges burnt by rebels on Benson Creek, 60 miles east of
Louisville, Ky.

4. Jeff. Davis appointed the 18th inst. as a day of thanksgiving for
Confederate victories.

4. Skirmish near Cumberland Gap, Tenn., in which rebs. were defeated
with loss.

4. Frederick City, Md., evacuated by Feds. after burning hospital and
commissary stores.

4. Joseph Holt, of Ky., appointed Judge Advocate General of the U. S.
army.

4. Ravenswood, Va., sacked by rebels.

4. The ship Ocmulgee burned at sea by rebel privateer “290.”

5. The Fed. army under M’Clellan had advanced from the Capital to the
upper Potomac, Md. side.

6. Washington, N. C., attacked by rebs., who were repulsed with loss of
33 killed and 100 wounded. Fed. loss 8 killed, 36 wounded.

6. Col. W. W. Lowe retook Clarksville, Tenn., driving out the reb.
garrison.

6. The town of Platte, Johnson Co., Kansas, was sacked by rebel
guerrillas, under Quantrell, and several of the inhabitants murdered.

6. Skirmish near Cacapon Bridge, 17 miles from Winchester, Va. Union
troops under Col. M’Reynolds defeated Imboden’s rebel cavalry.

6. Four hundred reb. cavalry attacked an outpost of Gen. Julius White’s
troops near Martinsburg, Va. Reb. loss 50 prisoners, besides killed and
wounded. Fed. loss, 2 killed and 10 wounded.

6. Frederick, Md., occupied by Gen. Lee’s troops.

6. Three hundred Indians attacked Fort Abercrombie, Minn., and were
driven off with loss. Fed. loss, 1 killed and 3 wounded.

6. Washington, N. C., attacked by rebs., who were repulsed with a loss
of 30 killed and 36 taken prisoners. The Fed. gunboat Picket exploded
her magazine during the engagement, killing and wounding 18 men.

6. Forty of the Fed. 4th Va., Maj. Hall, surprised near Chapmansville,
Va., by 300 rebs. under Col. Stratton. Maj. Hall wounded, and Col.
Stratton killed, when Feds. escape with slight loss.

=Sept. 6.= Pikeville, Va., captured and sacked by rebel cavalry.

7. Gen. Banks assigned to command fortifications around Washington.

7. Great excitement on the Pa. border towns by the influx of refugees
from Maryland, and the dread of reb. invasion.

7. Shepherdsville, Ky., captured, and 85 Fed. soldiers taken prisoners.

8. Gens. Lee and Johnson issued proclamations to the people of Md.,
endeavoring to incite them to rebellion. The inhabitants received them
coldly.

8. Skirmish near Poolesville, Md. Maj. Chapman, with 3d Ind. and 8th
Ill. cavalry, defeated rebels, who lost 7 killed. Federal loss 1 killed,
8 wounded.

8. Fight on the Miss. river, 25 miles above N. Orleans. 25th Ind.
dispersed 500 Texans, with slight loss.

9. Schr. Rambler captured by U. S. steamer Connecticut, in lat. 28°,
long. 94° 10′.

9. Skirmish 5 miles N. of Pleasant Hill, Mo. Col. Burris defeated
Quantrell’s reb. troops, with slight loss, capturing most of their
plunder and stores.

9. Middletown, Md., occupied by rebs.

9. Skirmish at Williamsburg, Va. Rebs. under Col. Shingles surprise 5th
Pa. cavalry, Col. Campbell, and capture the town. Col. Campbell, 5
captains, 4 lieutenants, and a few privates taken prisoners. Col.
Shingles and 8 rebs. killed.

9. Gen. Stuart’s reb. cavalry repulsed in an attempt to cross the
Potomac at Edward’s Ferry, with a loss of 90 men, by Gen. Keyes.

9. Gen. O. M. Mitchell appointed to command the Department of the South,
relieving Gen. Hunter.

9. The Fed. garrison at Fayette C. H., Va., surrounded by a large rebel
force. They cut their way out, losing 100 in killed and wounded.

10. Col. Grierson with 300 men defeated rebs. near Coldwater, Miss. Reb.
loss, 4 killed and 30 wounded.

10. The 34th and 37th Ohio, Col. Siber, were defeated at Fayette, Va.,
by 5,000 rebs. under Gen. Loring. Fed. loss over 100 in killed and
wounded.

10. 6th U. S. cavalry, under Captain Saunders, defeated at Sugar Loaf
Mountain, near Barnesville, Md., with slight loss.

11. Hagerstown, Md., occupied by rebs. who seized 1200 bbls. of flour.

11. The Gov. of Pa. called for 50,000 men to repel rebel invasion.

11. Westminster, Md., occupied by reb. cavalry, who robbed all the
stores in the place.

11. Fed. forces under Col. Lightburn retreated from Gauley, Va., after
destroying government stores.

11. Reb. troops under E. K. Smith, advanced within 7 miles of
Cincinnati, O., and skirmished with the Fed. pickets.

11. Bloomfield, Mo., defended by 1,500 State militia, captured by rebs.
after a fight of 2 hours.

12. The reb. army retreated from before Cincinnati, pursued by Gen.
Wallace as far as Florence, Ky.

12. Gen. McClellan’s army entered Frederick, Md.

12. Fight on the Elk river, near Charleston, Va., by Feds. under Col.
Lightburn, and a reb. force, without result.

12. Capt. Harry Gilmore, and 7 other rebs. arrested near Baltimore, Md.,
and sent to Fort McHenry.

12. Frankfort, Ky., occupied by rebel cavalry, under Gen. E. K. Smith.

12. Fight at Middletown, Md. Fed. loss, 80 killed and wounded.

13. 500 rebs. under Col. Porter, released 40 reb. prisoners at Palmyra,
Mo.

14. A fort at Bacon creek, Ky., with 30 men of the 54th Ind., captured
by rebs. under Col. J. J. Morrison.

14. Battle of South Mountain, Md. Fed. troops under Gens. Hooker and
Reno, defeated Lee’s army. Fed. loss 443 killed, 1,806 wounded and 76
missing. Gen. Reno killed.

14. Fight at Munfordsville, Ky. 17th Ind., Col. Wilder, defeated rebs.,
under Gen. Duncan, with severe loss.

14. 2,000 Fed. cavalry, cut their way out of Harper’s Ferry, Va., which
was besieged by rebs., and captured Gen. Longstreet’s train and 100
prisoners.

15. Surrender of Harper’s Ferry, Va., with a large supply of military
stores, and 11,000 men to the rebs. after 3 days’ siege. Col. Miles, the
Fed. commander, killed.

15. Col. M’Neill defeated reb. guerrillas under Col. Porter, near
Shelburne, Mo., taking 20 wagons and other spoils, with slight loss.

15. Fight at Green river, Ky., on the line of the Louisville and
Nashville railroad. Rebs. defeated.

16. Capture of the Fed. garrison at Munfordsville, Ky., under Col.
Dunham, 4,000 strong, with 10 pieces of artillery, by rebs. under Gen.
Bragg. 50 Feds. killed and wounded.

17. Fight near Durhamville, Tenn. 150 of 52nd Ind., Lt. R. Griflin,
defeated rebs. under Lieut.-Col. Faulkner. Reb. loss, 8 killed and 20
wounded. Fed. loss, 2 killed and 10 wounded.

17. Fight at Falmouth, on Kentucky Central R. R. Col. Berry with 10 men
defeated a larger force of Texan rangers, of whom 2 were killed, 4
wounded and 1 prisoner. 1 Fed. wounded.

17. Ship Virginia, of Mass., burned by Alabama, Capt. Semmes.

17. Skirmish near Florence, Ky. 53 of 10th Ky. cavalry, Maj. Foley,
defeated 100 rebs., who lost 5 killed and 7 wounded. Fed. loss, 1 killed
and 1 wounded.

17. Battle of Antietam, Md. The entire Fed. army of Gen. McClellan, and
reb. army of Gen. Lee engaged. Defeat of rebs. with loss of 15,000 men.
Fed. loss, 12,500.

17. Fight at Leesburg, Va. The Ira Harris cavalry, Col. Kilpatrick,
defeated a reb. infantry regiment, capturing several guns and a number
of prisoners.

17. The U. S. gunboats Paul Jones, Cimerone, and 3 other vessels
attacked reb. batteries on St. John’s river, Florida.

17. Cumberland Gap, Tenn., evacuated by Gen. Morgan’s Fed. troops.

18. Ship Elisha Dunbar, of Mass., burned by the Alabama.

18. Rebs. evacuated Harper’s Ferry, Va.

19. Gen. Lee’s army crossed the Potomac river to Va., pursued by Gen.
Pleasanton’s cavalry.

19–20. Battle of Iuka, Miss. General Rosecrans’ army defeated rebs., who
lost 233 killed, 400 wounded, and 600 prisoners. Fed. loss, 135 killed,
and 527 wounded.

19–20. Skirmishes at Owensboro’, Ky. Fed. Col. Netter killed. 1st Ind.
cavalry, Lieut.-Col. Wood, routed rebs. with severe loss. Fed. loss, 2
killed, 18 wounded.

20. Fight near Shirley’s Ford, Spring river, Mo. 3rd Ind., Col. Ritchie,
defeated 600 rebs. and Indians, who lost 60 or 70 killed and wounded.

21. Col. Barnes, with a Fed. cavalry brigade, defeated in an attempt to
cross the Potomac from Md., losing 150 men, in killed, wounded and
prisoners.

21. The town of Prentiss, Miss., burned by Col. Lippincott of the ram
Queen of the West, in retaliation for reb. batteries there firing on
transports.

21. Skirmish at Munfordsville, Ky. Reb. cavalry defeated with loss by
Feds. under Col. E. McCook.

21. 100 reb. troops routed at Cassville, Mo., by part of 1st Ark.
cavalry, Captain Gilstray, who captured 19 rebs.

21. Citizens of San Francisco, Cal. contributed $100,000 in gold to the
U. S. Sanitary Commission.

21. Rebs. defeated at Shepherdsville, Ky., by Feds. under Col. Granger.
Reb. loss 5 killed and 28 prisoners.

22. Skirmish near Sturgeon, Mo. Rebs. under Capt. Cunningham defeated by
Maj. Hunt’s force.

22. Fight at Ashby’s Gap, Va. Col. R. B. Price with 2d Pa. cavalry,
defeated rebs. under Lieut.-Col. Green, capturing the latter officer and
2 lieuts.

22. Pres. Lincoln proclaimed, that on the 1st day of Jan. 1863 “all
slaves in States or parts of States in rebellion” should be forever
free.

23. Col. Sibley defeated a band of 300 Sioux Indians who attacked his
encampment on Yellow Medicine river, Minn. 30 Indians killed and many
wounded. 4 whites killed and 30 wounded.

23. Fight at Sutton, Va. Maj. Withers, with 10th Va., (Fed.) driven from
Sutton to Bulltown, after a gallant resistance.

23. A large quantity of English arms captured at Reynolds’ Ford, Va., by
62d Pa., Col. Switzer.

23. Randolph, Tenn., on the Miss. river, burned by steamers Ohio Belle
and Eugene, in retaliation for firing on transports from that place.

24. Proclamation of Pres. Lincoln ordering the enforcement of martial
law, against all persons discouraging enlistments or giving aid to the
rebellion, and suspending the habeas corpus with reference to all
persons arrested by military authority.

24. The office of the “American Volunteer,” at Carlisle, Pa. was
destroyed by citizens and soldiers for severe reflections on the
Government.

24. A Convention of Governors from 14 loyal States, and 3 proxies from
others met at Altoona, Pa., who endorsed the Emancipation Proclamation,
and advised the Pres. to organize a reserve force of 100,000 men.

24. Gen. Beauregard appointed to command reb. forces in S. C. and
Georgia.

24. Gen. Butler at New Orleans, ordered all Americans in his Department
to renew their oath of allegiance to the Government, and to furnish
returns of their real and personal property, under penalty of fine and
imprisonment.

25. Sabine Pass, Texas, captured by U. S. steamers Kensington, and Henry
Crocker, and schr. Rachel Seaman.

26. Skirmish near Warrenton Junction, Va. Reb. cavalry defeated by Col.
McClean’s troops, who captured rebel commissary stores.

=Sept. 26.= An unsuccessful attempt to capture steamer Forest Queen at
Ashport, Tenn., by rebs. under Capt. Faulkner.

26. Prentiss, Miss., burned by U. S. ram Queen of the West, in
retaliation for firing on that vessel and transports.

27. 34th Ohio, Col. Toland, attacked Col. Jenkins’s reb. cavalry at
Buffalo, on the Kanawha river, Va., but were driven off, after killing
7, capturing 9, and destroying the camp, without loss to themselves.

27. Home Guards at Augusta, Ky., captured by rebs. under Basil Duke,
after a brave resistance, with loss to the enemy.

27. 91 women and children rescued from Indians by Col. Sibley on
Chippeway river, Minn.; 16 Indians captured.

28. Reb. steamer Sunbeam captured by U. S. gunboats State of Georgia and
Mystic, off Wilmington, N. C.

28. Skirmish on Blackwater river, 25 miles from Suffolk, Va. Col. C. C.
Dodge, with Fed. cavalry and artillery, defeated reb. infantry.

28. Augusta, Georgia, captured by 600 reb. cavalry.

29. Gen. Jeff. C. Davis shot Gen. Wm. Nelson, at the Galt House, in
Louisville, Ky., killing him almost instantly.

29. A brigade of Fed. cavalry, under Lieut.-Col. Karge, on a
reconnoissance from Centreville, Va., to Warrenton, captured and paroled
1,650 rebels.

29. Brig.-Gen. Rodman died near Hagerstown, Md., of a wound received at
the battle of Antietam.

29. A spirited cavalry skirmish near Sharpsburgh, Md. Rebs. dispersed,
and a squad of them captured.

29. 363 disloyal citizens of Carroll Co., Mo., were assessed by the
Federal authorities in aid of loyal citizens and soldiers who had been
robbed in that Co.

30. Fight at Newtonia, Mo. A Fed. brigade under Gen. Salomon, attacked a
body of rebs. under Col. Cooper, and were defeated by them, losing 50 in
killed and wounded, and 100 prisoners.

30. Reb. bomb-proof magazines at Lower Shipping Point, Va., destroyed by
sailors under Lieut.-Com. M’Graw.

30. Fight at Russelville, Ky. 17th Ky., Col. Harrison, defeated 350
rebs., who lost 35 killed, and 10 prisoners.

30. Grayson, Ky., occupied by rebel troops.

30. Salt works at Bluffton, S. C., destroyed by 48th N. Y., Col. Barton.

=Oct. 1.= The U. S. gunboat fleet on the western waters turned over from
the War to the Navy Department.

1. Fight on Floyd’s Fork, Ky. A Fed. brigade under Col. E. N. Kirk,
encountered and overcame a rebel force after a slight engagement.

1. Shelbyville, Ky., evacuated by the rebels.

1. Fight near Gallatin, Tenn. 1st Tenn. cavalry, Col. Stokes, defeated
rebs. under Col. Bennett, who lost 40 killed, many wounded, and 39
prisoners.

1. 9 National pickets dispersed some rebs. at Newbern, N. C.

1. Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry engaged reb. forces under Gen. Hampton at
Martinsburg and at Shepherdstown, Va. Reb. loss 60 killed and wounded,
and 9 prisoners. Fed. loss 12 wounded and 3 prisoners.

2. Fight near Olive Hill, Ky. Carter Co. Home Guards repulsed a portion
of reb. Gen. Morgan’s command. Morgan retreated to the Licking river,
destroying 35 houses on his route.

2. Gen. Foster’s Union troops accompanied by gunboats, left Washington,
N. C., taking possession of Hamilton, and driving the rebels towards
Tarboro’.

2. Skirmishing near Mount Washington, Ky., on the Bardstown turnpike, by
Gen. Buell’s army and rebels under Gen. E. Kirby Smith.

3. Rebel fortifications at St. John’s Bluff, on St. John’s river, Fla.,
captured by 1500 Feds. under Gen. Brannan, assisted by 7 gunb’s from
Hilton Head, S. C.

3. Fight on the Blackwater river, near Franklin, Va. 3 Fed. gunboats,
Commodore Perry, Hunchback, and Whitehead, under Capt. Flusser, engaged
a large force of rebs. 6 hours. Fed. loss 19 k. and wounded.

3. 11th Pa. cavalry, Col. Spears, engaged reb. forces at Franklin, on
Blackwater river, Va. Rebs. retreated with loss of 30 or 40 killed and
wounded.

3–5. A series of battles near Corinth, Miss. A reb. army of 38,000 men
under Price, Van Dorn, and Lovell, attacked Rosecrans’ army, under Gens.
Ord, Hurlbut, and Veatch. Rebs. routed with heavy loss of k. and w., and
1,000 pris. National loss also heavy.

4. Richard Howes, inaugurated rebel governor of Kentucky, at Frankfort.

4. A fight near Bardstown, Ky. Fed. advance guard under Maj. Foster,
defeated by rear-guard of Polk’s army.

4. A company of the 54th Pa. captured at Paw-Paw, on the Balt. and Ohio
railroad.

4. Fed. cavalry under Col. M’Reynolds, captured a rebel camp near the
above place, with 2 guns, 10 wagons and 60 horses.

5. Gen. Price’s rebel army, retreating from Corinth, Miss., were
overtaken by Gens. Old and Hurlbut at the Hatchie river, where, after 6
hours’ fighting, the rebels broke in disorder, leaving their dead and
wounded, 400 prisoners, and 2 batteries.

5. Skirmish 6 miles north of Glasgow, Ky. Feds. under Col. Bruce, routed
a rebel force, taking a number of horses and cattle.

5. Jacksonville, Fla., occupied by Union forces under Gen. Brannan.

6. A mob in Blackford Co., Ind., destroyed the enrolling papers and
draft boxes.

6. A rebel battery at Cockpit Point, Va., on the Potomac, destroyed by a
Fed. gunboat.

6. Skirmish near Charlestown, Va. 6th U. S. cavalry and Robertson’s
battery engaged a rebel force with slight results.

6. Fight at Lavergne, near Nashville, Tenn. Gen. Palmer’s Union brigade,
2,500 men, were attacked by rebels under Gen. Anderson, who were
defeated with a loss of 10 killed and wounded. Fed. loss, 18 in killed
and wounded.

7. Lexington, Ky., evacuated by rebels under E. Kirby Smith, who
retreated towards Cumberland Gap.

7. The monitor Nahant launched at Boston.

7. Skirmish near Sibley’s Landing, Mo. 5th Mo. cavalry defeated rebels
under Quantrell and Childs.

7. Gen. Morgan’s Union troops reached Frankfort, Ky.

7. The bark Wave, and brig Dunkirk, were destroyed by the rebel
privateer, Alabama.

8. Battle at Chaplin Hills, Perryville, Ky., by the armies of Gens.
Buell and Bragg. Rebs. retreated across Chaplin river. Fed. loss, 3,200
in killed, wounded and missing. Rebel loss fully as great.

8. 550 Feds. under Major Bradford, 17 government wagons, and a number of
sutler’s wagons, were captured by rebels under E. Kirby Smith, near
Frankfort, Ky.

9. Galveston, Texas, occupied by Feds. under Commander Renshaw.

9. Skirmish near Laurenceburg, Ky. 1st Ohio, Col. Parrott, defeated part
of Gen. Smith’s troops with considerable loss. Union loss, 6 killed, 8
wounded.

9. Gen. Sigel’s cavalry captured 40 rebs. and several wagons at Aldie,
Va.

9. The monitor Montauk launched at Greenpoint, L. I.

9. The rebel steamer Gov. Milton captured on St. Johns river, Fla., by
gunboat Darlington.

10. 1,800 reb. cavalry, under J. E. B. Stuart, crossed the Potomac at
McCoy’s creek, and penetrated to Mercersburg and Chambersburg, Pa., and
after capturing and destroying much property, made good their retreat
with slight loss.

10. Gen. Schofield drove the Confederate forces across the Mo. line into
Ark.

10. 1,600 rebs., the rear-guard of Bragg’s army, captured at
Harrodsburg, Ky., by Lieut.-Col. Boyle, with 9th Ky. cavalry.

10. 100 reb. guerrillas entered Hawesville, Ind., but were driven out by
the Connelton Home Guard.

11. Skirmish near Helena, Ark. 4th Iowa cavalry, Major Rector, defeated
Texan rangers under Col. Giddings, capturing 9 of them. 3 Feds. killed
and 9 wounded.

11. Ship Manchester, of N. Y., captured and burned by the Alabama.

11. 27 rebs. of Col. Imboden’s command, with all their camp equipage,
captured by 300 of Col. McReynolds’ cavalry 17 miles from Winchester,
Va.

11. The U. S. gunboat Maratanza lying off Cape Fear river, N. C., had 2
men killed and 5 wounded by a reb. battery.

11. Gen. Dumont’s Fed. troops captured 350 rebs., a wagon train, and 2
pieces of artillery at Versailles, Ky.

12. Skirmishing on the Potomac river, at the mouth of the Monocacy, near
White’s Ford, by Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry with rebs. under Gen. Stuart.

12. 29 persons arrested and 2 hung at Gainesville, Texas, who were
accused of Union sentiments.

13. More than 100 prisoners taken by Union troops under Gen. Stahel, in
the vicinity of Paris, Snicker’s Gap, and Leesburg, Va.

13. The 6th Mo., Col. Catherwood, returned to camp at Sedalia, Mo.,
after a successful scout, in which several bands of guerrillas were
broken up, and 50 of them killed and wounded.

14. The English propeller Ouachita, captured in the Gulf Stream by U. S.
gunboat Memphis.

14. Skirmish at Stanford, Ky., by scouts of Gens. Buell’s and Bragg’s
armies. 14 rebs. captured, and several killed.

=Oct. 15.= The bark Lamplighter, of Boston, captured by the Alabama.

15. Drafting in Boston and Baltimore.

15. Steamer Hazel Dell captured at Caseyville, Ky., by rebs. under Cols.
Anderson and Johnson.

15. Skirmish near Carrsville, Va. Part of 7th Pa. cavalry, Lieut.
Williams, defeated by rebs., losing several of their number.

15. U. S. Steamer Kensington, Master Crocker, destroyed a railroad
bridge and burned 2 vessels at Taylor’s Bayou, Tex.

16. The sloop-of-war Ticonderoga was launched at Brooklyn, N. Y.

16. Gen. Humphrey’s troops driven from Shepherdstown, Va., by rebs.,
with slight loss.

16. Skirmish near Charlestown, Va. Gen. Hancock’s troops successfully
engaged rebs. Union loss, 1 killed and 8 wounded. Reb. loss, 9 wounded
and taken prisoners.

17. The Fed. garrison on the Tenn. shore, opposite island No. 10
attacked by reb. forces, who were defeated with loss.

17. Morgan’s Confed. cavalry dashed into Lexington, Ky., and attacked
350 Fed. cavalry, under Major Seidel, 3rd O. Fed. loss, 4 killed, 24
wounded, and 120 prisoners.

17. Quantrell’s guerrillas entered Shawnee, Kansas, sacked the town,
burned 13 houses and killed 4 men.

17. Skirmish at Thoroughfare Gap, Va. Gen. Stahel’s troops drove rebs.
toward Haymarket, and captured 100 prisoners.

17. The draft resisted in Berkley, Luzerne co., Pa. 4 insurgents killed.
Resistance also in Carbondale, Scranton, and other towns in the mining
district.

18. Pickets of the 43rd Ind. dispersed by rebs. at Helena, Ark., losing
several of their number.

18. 350 of the 4th Ohio cavalry, Capt. Robey, captured at Lexington,
Ky., by reb. cavalry under Gen. Morgan.

18. 10 guerrillas were shot at Palmyra, Mo., by order of Gen. McNeill,
in retaliation for the murder of Andrew Allsman, an aged Union citizen.

18. Nine Union pickets were shot on the Mississippi, opposite Helena,
Ark.

18. A lieut. with 26 men and a supply train for Gen. Stahel were
captured by rebs. at Haymarket, and taken to Warrenton, Va.

19. A train of 82 wagons was captured by Morgan’s reb. cavalry at
Bardstown, Ky.

19. Fight on the Cumberland river 7 miles from Nashville, Tenn. Col.
Miller’s brigade of Fed. troops routed a force of Confederate cavalry,
and captured a large store of army supplies.

20. 500 cases of yellow fever reported at Wilmington, N. C., 30 or 40
dying daily.

20. Skirmish on the Auxvois river, Mo. Major Woodson, with 10th Mo.
militia dispersed rebel guerrillas with slight loss, capturing their
camp stores and horses.

20. The 10th Illinois cavalry, Lieut.-Col. Stuart, defeated 250 reb.
cavalry, near Marshfield, Mo., taking 27 prisoners.

21. Skirmishing in Loudon co., Va., by Gen. Geary’s Union troops, who
took 75 prisoners.

21. Skirmish at Woodville, Tenn. 2nd Illinois cavalry, Major J. J. Mudd,
defeated guerrillas under Haywood, capturing 40 with their arms, and 100
horses and mules.

21. Fight at Fort Cobb, Indian Terr. Loyal Indians from 6 tribes
defeated rebs. of the Tongkawa tribe, under Col. Leper, with great
slaughter. Col. Leper killed.

22. Gen. Blunt’s army defeated 5,000 rebs. at old Fort Wayne,
Marysville, N. W. Ark., capturing all their artillery and transportation
equipage.

22. Rebs. under Gen. Hindman driven from Huntsville, Ark., by Gen.
Schofield.

22. Battle at Pocotaligo, S. C. Gen. Brannan’s Fed. troops defeated with
a loss of 30 killed and 180 wounded, by rebels under Gen. Beauregard.

22. Skirmish near Van Buren, Ark. Union cavalry under Major Lazear
defeated 450 rebels under Col. Boone, with considerable loss.

22. 30 wagons of the 5th and 9th Ill. cavalry captured by Texan troops
near Helena, Ark.

22. Union pickets defeated in a skirmish near Nashville, Tenn.

22. Brig Robert Bruce, captured off Shallotte inlet, N. C., by U. S.
gunboat Penobscot.

22. Skirmish near Hedgesville, Va. 4th Pa. cavalry, Capt. Duncan,
defeated rebels, capturing 19 prisoners.

23. 200 of the 83d Ill., Major Blott, defeated rebels at Waverly, Tenn.
Rebel loss, 40 killed and wounded, and 30 prisoners. Union loss, 1
killed, 5 wounded.

23. Skirmish near Shelby Depot, Tenn. 55th Illinois, Col. Stuart,
defeated rebels, who lost 8 or 10 men.

23. 500 Fed. cavalry, Col. E. M’Cook, defeated Morgan’s cavalry at Point
Lick, Big Hill, and Richmond, Ky., taking 33 wagons and 200 prisoners.

23. Ship Lafayette, of Conn., burned by the Alabama.

24. A Fed. force of 80 was defeated at Manassas Junction, Va., losing 17
prisoners.

24. Skirmish at Grand Prairie, Mo. Maj. F. G. White’s cavalry defeated a
reb. force, who lost 8 killed and 20 wounded. Fed. loss, 3 wounded.

24. Skirmish on the Blackwater, near Suffolk, Va. Gen. Perry’s troops
defeated rebs. who lost 6 men. One Unionist killed.

24. Sixteen of Gen. Morgan’s men captured by a Federal force at
Morgantown, Ky.

24. Steamer Scotia capt’ed off Charleston, S. C., by U. S. bark
Restless.

25. Gen. Buell removed from the Department of Ky., and Gen. Rosecrans
appointed commander.

25. Part of 43d Ind., on a scout near Helena, Ark., 3 of them killed and
2 wounded by guerrillas in ambush.

27. Steamer Anglia capt’d off Charleston, S. C., by U. S. bark Restless
and steamer Flag.

27. Skirmish near Fayetteville, Ark. Gen. Herron’s Fed. troops defeated
guerrillas, killing 8, and capturing their wagons.

27. Skirmish at Putnam’s Ferry, Mo. 23d Iowa, Col. Lewis, defeated a
large force of rebs., who lost several killed and 40 prisoners.

27. Fight near Donaldsonville, La. Gen. Weitzel’s troops defeated rebs.,
who lost 6 killed, 15 wounded and 208 prisoners. Fed. loss, 18 killed,
74 wounded.

27. Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry drove the rebs. from Snicker’s Gap, Va.

28. Capt. Partridge’s Fed. pickets were captured near Pensacola, Fla.

28. The steamer Caroline captured off Mobile, Ala., by U. S. steamer
Montgomery.

28. Gen. Herron, with 1,000 men attacked a Confederate camp near
Fayetteville, Ark., under Col. Craven, routing them with a loss of 8
killed and their camp equipage.

28. A company of reb. cavalry captured near Cotton Creek, Fla., by Union
troops.

28. The bark Lauretta, of N. Y., captured and burned by the Alabama.

29. Skirmish 5 miles from Petersburg, Va. Lieut.-Col. Quirk routed a
detachment of Stuart’s reb. cavalry, capturing 16 men and 200 cattle.

29. Fight near Butler, Bates Co., Mo. 1st Kansas (colored), Col. Seaman,
defeated reb. guerrillas under Cockerill, with a loss of 30 killed and
wounded. Union loss, 8 killed, 10 wounded.

29. Maj. Keenan, 8th Pa. cavalry captured 100 rebs. while on a scout in
the Shenandoah valley, Va.

29. Ship Alleghanian, of New York, burned on the Rappahannock river,
Va., by rebels.

30. Maj.-Gen. O. M. Mitchell, Commander of Department of the South, died
at Beaufort, S. C.

30. Skirmish at Thoroughfare Gap, Va. 1st N. J. cavalry, Col. Wyndham,
engaged a rebel force with slight loss.

31. The town of Franklin, on the Blackwater river, Va., partially
destroyed by Union batteries, a reb. force stationed there being driven
out with loss.

31. The Wilmington, N. C. salt-works destroyed by Capt. Cushing, gunboat
Ellis.

=Nov. 1.= The U. S. steamer Northerner, and gunboat States of the North,
with a detachment of 3d N. Y. cavalry and 2 pieces of Allen’s artillery,
under Maj. Garrard, captured 2 rebel schooners on Pungo Creek, N. C.
Disembarking at Montgomery, the troops marched to Germantown,
Swanquarter, and Middletown, capturing in those places 25 prisoners and
130 horses and mules.

1. The town of Lavacca, on Matagorda Bay, Texas, bombarded by U. S.
gunboats Clifton and Westfield.

1. Skirmish at Franklin, Va. Gen. Wessell’s brigade, 11th Pa. cavalry,
and other troops, drove the rebels from the town with some loss.

2. Skirmishes near Philomont, Va. by Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry with
Stuart’s rebel forces.

2. Snicker’s Gap, Va. occupied by Gen. Hancock’s troops after a slight
skirmish with the enemy.

2. Col. Dewey’s troops returned to Patterson, Wayne Co., Mo., from an
expedition to Pittman’s ferry, Currant river, where they captured 13
rebels.

2. A skirmish near Williamstown, N. C. between part of the 20th N. C.
rebels under Col. Burgwyn, and some Federal troops.

2. Col. Lee, of Hamilton’s National cavalry, returned to Grand Junction,
Miss. after a three days’ expedition towards Ripley and 10 miles south,
having captured 65 of the enemy with slight resistance.

2. The ship Levi Starbuck captured and burned by the Alabama.

3. A fight in Bayou Teche, La., 5 Union gunboats engaged a large rebel
force and the gunboat Cotton. The rebels retreated after burning 75 cars
and engines, and 1000 hogsheads of sugar. Fed. loss about 14 killed and
wounded.

=Nov. 3.= Tampa, Fla. was bombarded by the Union forces.

3. 300 rebs. under Quantrell attacked a wagon train of 13 wagons,
escorted by 22 of the 6th Mo. cavalry, Lieut. Newby, near Harrisonville,
Mo., killing 8 of the escort, wounding 4 and taking 5 prisoners, and
burning the wagons. The rebel troops were shortly after overtaken by the
5th and 6th Mo. cavalry and defeated with severe loss.

3. The steamer Darlington, with col’d troops under Col. O. T. Beard,
proceeded up Bell river, Fla., to Cooper’s, where they destroyed the
salt works, and all stores that could not be carried off. From thence
they went up Jolly river, destroying salt works, with a large amount of
corn and salt.

3. Skirmish near New Baltimore, Va. Capt. Flint, with pickets from 1st
Vt. cavalry, defeated a reb. party.

3. Piedmont, Va., occupied by Union cavalry under Pleasanton and
Averill.

3. Fight in Webster Co., Ky. Col. Foster captured 3 lieutenants, 22 men,
40 horses, &c.

3. Horatio Seymour elected Governor of New York.

4. 3 Union pickets captured near Bolivar Heights, Va.

4. La Grange, Miss. occupied by Gen. Grant’s forces.

4. Bark Sophia captured off N. C. coast by U. S. steamers Daylight and
Mount Vernon.

4. The U. S. steamer Darlington, with Col. O. T. Beard’s colored troops
destroyed rebel salt works at King’s Bay, Ga., after slight skirmishing
with the enemy.

5. Skirmish at Lamar, Mo. 80 State militia driven from the place by
Quantrell’s rebel troop.

5. Skirmish at Barber’s Cross-Roads, Va. Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry
defeated a detachment of Gen. Stuart’s reb. troops.

5. Maj. Holloway’s Federal cavalry defeated a party of guerrillas under
Col. Fowler, between Henderson and Bowling Green, Ky. Reb. loss 8
killed, including the commander, besides a large number of wounded
prisoners.

5. Skirmish at New Baltimore, Va. Col. Wyndham’s Fed. cavalry defeated
rebels.

5. Skirmish near Nashville, Tenn. Gen. Negley’s Fed. troops defeated
Gen. J. H. Morgan’s forces, capturing 23 Union loss 5 killed, 19
wounded.

5. Gen. McClellan relieved from command of the Army of the Potomac, and
Gen. Burnside appointed his successor.

6. Warrenton, Va., captured by Gen. Reynolds, who took 7 Confed.
prisoners.

6. Fight at Piketon, Ky. Col. Dills routed Confederates, capturing 80,
and securing 150 muskets, 40 horses, wagons, &c.

6. Skirmish near Leatherwood, Ky. Capt. Powell’s Fed. company routed
guerrillas, who fled, leaving 6 of their number dead, and their captain
mortally wounded.

7. At Beaver Creek, Mo., Capt. Barstow’s company of 10th Ill. cavalry,
and 2 militia companies, defended a block house for 5 hours against a
superior force, when he surrendered.

7. Expedition up the Sapelo river, Ga., by U. S. steamers Potomska and
Darlington, and 48th N. Y., Col. O. T. Beard. A valuable salt work
destroyed, and a number of rebs. and slaves captured.

7. Skirmish at Lamar, Mo. State militia successfully resist an attack
from Quantrell’s band.

7. 300 Indians, who were engaged in the massacres in Minnesota, were
sentenced to be hung—most of whom were afterwards pardoned.

8. Skirmish at Rappahannock bridge, Va. Gen. Bayard’s troops captured 12
of Longstreet’s rebels.

8. Skirmish at Hudsonville, Miss. 7th Kansas, Col. Lee, defeated rebels,
who lost 16 killed, and 175 captured.

8. Ship T. B. Wales burned by the Alabama.

8. Skirmish near Marianna, Ark. Part of 3d and 4th Iowa cavalry, Capt.
M. L. Perkins, defeated rebels, who lost 5 killed and several wounded. 1
Fed. wounded.

9. Skirmish at Fredericksburg, Va. Capt. Dahlgren’s troops drove off a
Confed. party, after a sharp skirmish, capturing 39 prisoners and
stores.

9. Gen. Kelley’s Fed. cavalry defeated Imboden’s troops 18 miles S.W. of
Moorefield, Va.

9. St. Mary’s, Fla., burned by U. S. gunboat Mohawk in retaliation for
the treachery of the inhabitants.

9. Skirmish in Perry Co., Ky., on the Kentucky river. Capts. Morgan and
Eversod’s troops defeated guerrillas.

10. Lieut. Ash, 2d U. S. dragoons, defeated part of 5th Va. cavalry, 10
miles south of Warrenton, Va.

10. Capt. G. W. Gilmore captured two wagons and several rebels near
Williamsburg, Greenbrier Co., Va.

11. Skirmish near Huntsville, Tenn. Capt. Duncan’s Home Guards routed a
small band of rebs. who lost 6 killed and several wounded.

11. A fight near Lebanon, Tenn. National cavalry under Capts. Kennett
and Wolford defeated Morgan’s men, who lost 7 killed and 125 prisoners.

11. National pickets driven in with slight loss at Newbern, N. C.

11. 134 prisoners taken and 16 rebs. killed by Col. Lee’s Kansas cavalry
near La Grange, Tenn.

11. Gen. Ransom defeated Confederate forces near Garretsburg, Ky.

12. Gen. Hooker appointed to relieve Gen. Fitz John Porter in command of
the 5th Army Corps.

12. Cavalry engagement near Lamar, Miss. Detachments of 2nd Ill. and
27th Kansas, Maj. J. J. Mudd, routed a force of rebs. with severe loss.

13. Slight skirmish at Holly Springs, Miss. Col. Lee’s cavalry killed 4
rebs. and captured several.

13. Expedition to the Doboy river, Ga., by U. S. steamers Ben Deford and
Darlington, with Col. Beard’s colored troops, who seized a large
quantity of reb. property.

13. A reb. camp near Calhoun, Green river, Ky. was surprised by Col.
Shanks, with 400 men, who captured their arms and camp equipage.

15. Fight near Fayetteville, Va., by Fed. troops under Gen. Sturgis and
a large body of rebs., who were defeated.

16. The remaining corps of the army of the Potomac, excepting the 5th
and Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry, left Warrenton, and proceeded towards
Fredericksburg.

17. Pickets of the 104th Pa. surprised at Gloucester Point, Pa. and 1
killed, 3 wounded, and 2 captured.

18. Skirmish at Rural Hills, Tenn. Col. Hawkins’ troops defeated reb.
cavalry, who left 16 of their number dead on the field.

18. At Cove Creek, near Kinston, N. C., Lieut.-Col. Mix with part of 3d
N. Y. cavalry and Allis’s artillery, defeated the 10th N. C. infantry
and some of the 2d N. C. cavalry, who retreated with the loss of arms
and equipments.

18. Falmouth, Va. occupied by Gen. Sumner’s Fed. troops.

18. The English schooners Ariel and Ann Marie captured off Little Run,
S. C. by U. S. gunboat Monticello.

19. James A. Seddons appointed reb. Sec. of War, in place of G. W.
Randolph, resigned.

19. The 1st Gen. Council of the Epis. Church in the reb. States met at
Augusta, Ga.

20. Col. Carlin’s expedition returned to Nashville, Tenn., from
Clarksville, having captured 43 rebs., 40 horses, &c.

20. Fed. pickets surprised at Bull Run bridge, Va., and 3 captured.

20. Warrenton and Leesburg, Va., occupied by reb. cavalry.

21. Gen. Sumner, commanding right wing of army of the Potomac, in front
of Fredericksburg, Va.

21. Skirmish at Bayou Bontouca, near Fort Pike, La. Capt. Darling’s
company of 31st Mass. defeated rebs. under Capt. Evans, who lost 4
killed and several wounded. Union loss 1 wounded.

22. All political State prisoners held by military authority in the U.
S. released by order of the Sec. of War.

22. Part of 1st N. Y. cavalry, Capt. Harkins, defeated rebs. near
Winchester, Va., who lost 4 men and 30 horses.

22. An expedition into Matthew Co., Va., by steamer Mahaska, Capt. F. A.
Parker, with land forces under Gen. Naglee, destroyed 12 salt works, and
20 or 30 vessels and other reb. property.

22. Skirmish near Halltown, Va., by Gen. Geary’s troops.

23. Lieut. Cushing, U. S. steamer Ellis, captured 2 schrs. on New river,
N. C., but lost his own vessel on the shoals in returning.

24. A reb. picket of 12 men captured by Gen. Kelley’s cavalry 4 miles
from Winchester, Va.

24. A Fed. supply train of 47 wagons, escorted by 50 3d Mo. cavalry, was
attacked by rebs. about 30 miles south of Lebanon, Texas Co., Mo. 5 of
the escort were killed and 20 wagons captured.

25. The U. S. gunboat Lexington, J. W. Shirk, attacked 20 miles below
Helena, Ark. The enemy were repelled, leaving several of their number
killed. Capt. Shirk landed a party of sailors, who carried off 20
negroes and 16 bales of cotton.

25. A slight skirmish at Zuni, on the Blackwater river, Va., by mounted
rifles under Col. Dodge, and a reb. force.

25. A company of Fed. troops captured at Henderson, Tenn., by reb.
cavalry.

25. In Crawford Co., Mo., a company of reb. guerrillas carried off
horses, firearms, clothing, &c., from farmers. Returning, near Huzza
river, Iron Co., they were overtaken by Capt. N. B. Reeve’s company, who
killed 2 of their party and recovered the plunder.

=Nov. 25.= Col. Paxton’s loyal Va. cavalry captured 118 prisoners, 300
stand of arms, 100 horses, and other property, near Sinking Creek, W.
Va.

26. Fight at Cold Knob Mountain, Va. 2d Va. cavalry, Col. J. C. Paxton,
defeated reb. troops, of whom over 100 were taken prisoners.

26. 25 guerrillas, under Evan Dorsey, crossed the Potomac, and robbed
the stores and stables in Urbanna, 7 miles above Frederic, Md. killing a
man named Harris.

26. 7th Ill. cavalry attacked rebs. near Summerville, Miss., and
captured 28 of their number.

27. Indiana troops, under Cols. Hurd and Dodge, defeated rebels near La
Vergne, Tenn., several of whom were killed. National loss 10 wounded.

28. Gen. Blunt defeated Gen. Marmaduke’s Confederate forces _en route_
for Missouri, at Kane Hill, Ark. The battle raged over 12 miles. The
rebels retreated to Van Buren, Ark.

28. At Hartwood Church, 15 miles from Falmouth, Va., 2 squadrons of 3d
Pa. cavalry, Gen. Averill’s brigade, captured by the enemy, after a
brief resistance, in which they lost 4 killed and 9 wounded.

28. A large Fed. expedition, under Gen. A. P. Hovey, left Helena, Ark.,
and arrived at Delta, Miss., cutting the Tenn. and Mississippi railroad,
and destroying 2 engines and 30 cars. Gen. Washburne’s cavalry
encountered the rear of Price’s rebel army, and captured 50 men, near
the Big Black river.

29. The U. S. steamer Star was burned by rebs. 2 miles below Plaqeumine,
La.

29. Gen. Stahl, with 300 cavalry, attacked rebs. at Snicker’s Gap, Va.,
killing 45, capturing 40.

30. A skirmish near Abbeville, Miss., by Col. Lee’s troops with a rebel
force.

30. The schooner Levi Rowe captured off N. Carolina by U. S. steamer
Mount Vernon.

30. The bark Parker Cook destroyed by reb. steamer Alabama in the Mona
Passage.

=Dec. 1.= U. S. Congress convened at Washington.

1. Col. Lee’s cavalry took possession of rebel forts on the Tallahatchie
river. He also captured a battery of 6 guns on the north side of the
river.

1. Skirmish near Horse Creek, Dade Co., Mo. Maj. Kelley’s 4th Mo.
cavalry routed a band of rebs., capturing 5.

1. Skirmish near Charlestown, Va. Gen. Slocum’s Fed. troops defeated
rebel cavalry under White and Henderson, killing 5, and wounding 18.

1. At Franklin, Va., Gen. Peck recaptured the Pittsburg battery, taken
from the Fed. forces on the Peninsula.

2. A fight near Franklin, Va. 11th Pa. cavalry, Col. Spear, with
artillery supports, defeated reb. cavalry with severe loss.

2. Lieut. Hoffman and 6 men of 1st N. J. cavalry, captured while on
picket duty 3 miles from Dumfries, Va.

2. Two companies of 8th Pa. cavalry, Capt. Wilson, defeated with severe
loss at King George Court House, Va.

2. Part of Gen. Banks’ expedition to New Orleans sailed from New York.

2. Gen. Geary defeated rebels near Charlestown, Va., killing and
wounding 70, and capturing 145.

3. Princeton, Ky., occupied by Federal troops, 91st Ind. and 15th Ky.,
under Maj. A. P. Henry, who captured a number of rebels.

3. Skirmishes near Oxford, Miss. Col. Hatch’s brigade captured 92 rebs.
Fed. loss in killed and wounded, 20.

4. Skirmish near Tuscumbia, Ala. Rebs. abandoned their camps, losing 70
men prisoners, and their horses.

4. Winchester, Va., occupied by Gen. Geary’s troops, the rebel garrison
leaving on his approach.

4. A sharp fight at Watervalley, Miss. Col. Hatch and Lee’s Fed.
brigades defeated a rebel force, capturing 300 men and 50 horses.

5. Fed. cavalry under Cols. Dickey and Lee defeated by rebel infantry
after two hours’ fight. Union loss, 100 killed, wounded, and missing.

5. The 30th Iowa and 29th Wis. attacked by rebs. at Helena, Ark., whom
they repulsed, killing 8, and capturing 30.

6. The schr. Medora, with rebel army stores, was captured at Hackett’s
Point Md., by Capt. Kearney’s company.

6. A forage train, in charge of 93d Ohio, Col. Anderson, was attacked by
rebs. near Lebanon, Tenn., who were driven off.

6. Gen. Banks’ expedition sailed from New York to New Orleans.

7. U. S. mail steamer Ariel captured off Cuba by rebel steamer Alabama,
but released on bond for $228,000.

7. Gens. Blunt and Herron defeated 15,000 rebels under Gens. Hindman,
Marmaduke, Parsons, and Frost, at Prairie Grove, N.W. Ark. Federal loss,
495 killed, 600 wounded. Confed. loss, 1,500 killed and wounded.

7. The 106th and 108th Ohio, and 104th Ill., under Col. A. B. Moore,
were attacked by a rebel force under Gen. J. H. Morgan, at Hartsville,
Tenn. After a fight in which 55 of the Feds. were killed, and over 100
wounded, the entire force surrendered to the rebels, who lost about the
same number in killed and wounded.

7. 60 of the 8th Pa. cavalry defeated at King George’s C. H., Va. Loss
20.

9. A body of rebels attacked a forage train, under escort, near
LaVergne, Tenn., but were repulsed with considerable loss.

9. U. S. steamer Lake City was burned by rebels at Concordia, Ark. In
retaliation, the steamer De Soto went to Concordia, and burned 42
houses.

9. Skirmish near Brentville, Tenn. Federals under Col. John A. Martin,
defeated a rebel force.

10. Congress passed a bill admitting to the Union the State of Western
Va.

10. Plymouth, N. C., captured and burned by the Confederates.

11. The U. S. gunboat Cairo sunk in the Yazoo river by a torpedo. The
crew saved.

11. The city of Fredericksburg, Va., bombarded and occupied by Fed.
troops.

12. Skirmish near Corinth, Miss. 52d Ill., Col. Sweeney, engaged a rebel
force led by Col. Roddy. Rebel loss, 11 killed, 80 wounded; Union loss,
1 killed, and 2 prisoners.

12. 1,750 paroled Union prisoners, who had been captured by Gen. Morgan,
arrived at Nashville.

12. Artillery skirmish by Gen. Terry’s Federal troops, near Zuni, on the
Blackwater river, Va.

12. At Dumfries, Va., 35 National pickets and sutlers were captured by
Gen. Stuart’s cavalry.

12. Gen. Foster engaged and defeated Confederates near Kingston, N. C.,
capturing 400 prisoners, 13 pieces of artillery, &c.

12. Rebel salt works at Yellville, Ark., destroyed by Federal troops
under Capt. M. Birch.

12. Rebs. attacked at Franklin, Tenn., by cavalry under Gen. D. S.
Stanley, who drove them from the town, and destroyed mills and other
property. Reb. loss, 5 killed, 10 wounded. One Fed. killed.

13. Battle of Fredericksburg, Va. The reb. works were attacked by the
National army under Gen. Burnside. It consisted of three grand divisions
led by Gens. Sumner, Hooker and Franklin. The Fed. army was repulsed,
losing 1,512 killed, 6,000 wounded, and 460 prisoners. The rebels lost
1,800 men.

13. Jeff. Davis reviewed the reb. forces under Bragg at Murfreesboro’.

13. Two regiments of Union infantry and one of cavalry surprised a rebel
force at Tuscumbia, Ala., completely routing them and capturing 70
prisoners, their horses and baggage. Federal loss, 4 killed, 14 wounded.

13. Gov. Johnson, of Tenn., assessed disloyal citizens of Nashville in
various amounts to be paid in 5 monthly instalments, in behalf of widows
and orphans of that city who had been reduced to want in consequence of
their husbands and fathers being forced into the rebel armies.

13. Skirmish at Southwest Creek, N. C. Gen. Foster’s troops routed
rebels, who lost a number of prisoners and guns.

13. Unsuccessful attack on reb. works on the river, at Kinston, N. C.,
by small boats under Capt. Murray.

14. Two hundred Feds. under Capt. Thornberry, of 39th Ky., were defeated
by 800 rebels at Wireman’s Shoals, 5 miles below Prestonsburg, Ky. Rebs.
captured 700 muskets, as many uniforms, and 40,000 rounds of cartridges.

14. The _True Presbyterian_ and the _Baptist Recorder_, of Louisville,
Ky., were suppressed, and the editor of the _Recorder_ sent to prison.

14. Coffeeville, Miss., occupied by Fed. forces under Cols. Mizner and
Lee.

14. Gen. Foster’s troops engaged and defeated the Confeds. near
Kingston, N. C., capturing 400 prisoners, 13 pieces of artillery, &c.
Reb. loss, 71 killed, 268 wounded. Fed. loss, 90 killed, 478 w.

14. A Confed. cavalry force crossed the Potomac at Poolesville, Md., and
captured 13 Fed. soldiers of the Scott cavalry, killing or wounding
about 20 more.

14. Gen. Banks’ expedition arrived at New Orleans.

14. A picket guard of 24 men of the 6th Mo., were captured by rebs. at
Helena, Ark.

14. Slight skirmish at Woodsonville, Tenn.

14. A wagon train laden with provisions and clothing for Fed. troops at
Ringgold Barracks, Texas, on its way from Fort Brown, under escort, was
attacked by Mexicans and captured, and the escort killed, excepting one
man.

=Dec. 15.= Gen. Hovey’s expedition returned to Helena, Ark.

15. Gen. Butler superseded in command of the Department of the Gulf by
Gen. Banks.

16. Rebs. under Gen. Evans defeated in an artillery duel on the banks of
the river Neuse, near Whitehall, N. C., by Gen. Foster’s troops.

16. Three hundred Ga., Texas and Ky. cavalry captured near New Haven,
Ky., by a detachment of Walford’s cavalry, under Capt. Adams.

16. The army of the Potomac withdrawn to the north side of the
Rappahannock, from Fredericksburg, Va.

17. Baton Rouge, La., occupied by Fed. troops under Gen. Grover.

17. Fight at Goldsboro’, N. C. Gen. Foster’s troops destroyed a valuable
bridge, and defeated rebels under Gen. Evans.

18. Lexington, Ky., occupied by rebs. under Gen. Forrest, after
defeating the 11th Ill. cavalry, Col. R. G. Ingersoll, who fought 2
hours, and lost 40 men and 2 cannon.

18. The steamer Mill Boy, at Commerce, Miss., was fired on by reb.
cavalry and 3 men killed. The U. S. gunboat Juliet and City Belle with
11th and 47th Ind. were dispatched to Commerce and burnt the town and
plantations in the neighborhood.

19. Holly Springs, Miss., surrendered to rebs. with 1,800 men and 150
officers. $1,000,000 worth of commissary stores, &c., destroyed.

19. A lieutenant and 30 men of 10th N. Y. cavalry, with 14 wagons,
captured at Occoquan, Va., by reb. cavalry, who were overtaken by Col.
Rush’s cavalry and compelled to destroy their plunder.

19. Col. Dickey’s Fed. cavalry returned to camp, near Oxford, Miss.,
from a 6 days’ scout, with 150 prisoners. 34 miles of the Ohio and
Mobile railroad were destroyed, with a large amount of rebel stores.

20. Skirmish near Halltown, Va. Capt. Vernon’s Fed. cavalry defeated
rebs., capturing 3.

19–20. A body of reb. cavalry under Col. Forrest attacked a Fed. force
at Davis’s Mills, Tenn., and were repulsed by them. On the succeeding
day, Humboldt, Trenton, Dyers, Rutherton, and Keaton were visited by
them, and telegraph lines and railroad bridges destroyed, thus severing
Gen. Grant’s communication between Columbus and Corinth.

20. Gen. W. T. Sherman’s expeditionary army against Vicksburg embarked
at Memphis, Tenn., in over 100 transports.

21. Gen. Carter, with 1000 cavalry, entered E. Tenn., and captured 550
rebels and 700 stand of arms.

21. Skirmish near Nashville, Tenn. Gen. Van Cleve’s troops with reb.
artil’y.

21. Secretaries Seward and Chase tendered their resignation to Pres.
Lincoln, who informed them that the acceptance of them would be
incompatible with the public welfare; when the resignations were
withdrawn.

21. The 25th Ind., Col. W. H. Morgan, in garrison at Davis’s Mills, Wolf
river, Miss., were attacked by a large cavalry force of rebs. under Gen.
Van. After 3 hours’ contest the rebels withdrew, leaving 22 dead, 30
wounded, 20 prisoners, and 100 stand of arms.

22. Skirmish at Isle of Wight Court House, Va. Lieut. Onderdonk’s N. Y.
mounted rifles defeated by Gen. Pryor’s troops. Rebs. lost 2 men.

22. Maj.-Gen. R. C. Schenck assumed command of the Middle Department and
8th Army corps, headquarters at Baltimore, Md.

23. A proclamation from Jeff. Davis, threatening to hang Gen. Butler, or
any of his officers who should be captured, in retaliation for the
hanging of W. B. Mumford at N. Orleans.

23. Gen. Sigel’s troops attacked at Dumfries, Va. by reb. cavalry, who
were repulsed.

24. Skirmish near Munfordsville, Ky. Capt. Dickey’s company of 2d Mich.
were defeated by rebs. of Gen. Morgan’s army, losing 23 men prisoners.

24. Skirmish on the Blackwater river, Va., 4 miles above Franklin. 11th
Pa. cavalry, Col. Spears, dispersed rebel troops, capturing 4.

24. Gen. M. L. Smith’s Fed. troops destroyed Vicksburg and Texas
railroad 10 miles W. of Vicksburg, and burned stations at Delhi and
Dallas.

25. Skirmish at Green’s Chapel, near Munfordville, Ky. Col. Gray’s Fed.
troops defeated rebs. of Morgan’s army, who lost 9 killed, 22 wounded
and 5 prisoners.

25. Col. Shanks with 12th Ky. cavalry attacked rebs. near Bear Wallow,
Ky. killing 1, wounding 2 and capturing 10.

26. 38 Indians hung at Mankato, Minn, for participating in the late
massacres in that State.

26. Maj. Stevens, with 150 of 4th Ky. attacked a reb. camp in Powell
Co., Ky. capturing 12 men, with most of the camp equipage.

27. A company of Pa. cavalry, under Capt. Johnson, captured at Occoquan,
Va.

27. Elizabethtown, Ky. with a garrison of nearly 500 men under Col. H.
S. Smith, was captured by Gen. Morgan’s reb. army, after a short
resistance. An immense amount of public and private stores were carried
off by the rebs.

27. Fight at Dumfries, Va. Col. C. Candy’s troops were attacked by rebs.
under Gens. Stuart and Fitz Hugh Lee, who were driven off with the loss
of 30 or 40 men in killed and wounded. Fed. loss about 10 killed and
wounded.

27–29. Attack on Vicksburg, Miss. by Gen. Sherman’s army and Fed.
gunboats. Gen. Sherman’s army ascended the Yazoo river on transports,
landed and attacked the reb. works in the rear of Vicksburg, while the
gunboats assailed the batteries at Haines’ Bluff. The Feds., after
sanguinary conflicts, carried the first and second lines of defence and
advanced within 2½ miles of the city, where they were defeated and
compelled to withdraw, with a loss of 600 killed, 1,500 wounded and
1,000 missing.

28. The trestle-work at Muldraugh’s Hill, defended by the 71st Ind.,
captured and destroyed by rebels under Gen. Morgan after 6 hours’ fight.

28. New Madrid, Mo., evacuated by Unionists, after destroying the
barracks and magazine.

28. Skirmish near Suffolk, Va. Col. Gibbs’ troops routed rebel cavalry.

28. Van Buren, Ark., with a rebel garrison of 120 men, 6 steamboats, and
a large amount of ammunition and stores was captured by Gen. Blunt’s
army, with slight loss.

28. Major Foley with 250 of the 6th and 10th Ky. cavalry, surprised a
rebel camp at Elkford, Campbell Co., Ky. 30 rebels killed, 176 wounded,
51 prisoners, and 80 horses taken.

28. Skirmish near Clinton, La. Stuart’s reb. cavalry defeated by a
National force.

30. The Union and Watauga bridges on the E. Tenn. and Va. railroad
destroyed by Gen. Carter’s Fed. troops, who defeated a rebel force, of
whom 400 were taken prisoners, and 150 k. and w. with slight loss to the
Unionists.

30. The iron-clad steamer Monitor, Commander Bankhead, foundered near
Cape Hatteras, N. C. 4 officers and 12 of the crew, and also 8 R. I.
soldiers were lost with her.

30. Battle at Parker’s Cross Roads, Tenn. A desperate conflict of
several hours’ duration between Gen. Sullivan’s troops, and Gen.
Forrest’s rebel cavalry, in which the latter were defeated with a loss
of 600 in killed, wounded and prisoners. Fed. loss, about 200.

31. Beginning of the Battle of Stone river, or Murfreesboro’. 10 hours
continuous fighting without result.

31. Gen. McClernand succeeded Gen. Sherman at Vicksburg and the Fed.
army retired to Milliken’s Bend.


1863.

=Jan. 1.= Pres. Lincoln issued his Emancipation Proclamation, declaring
all the slaves then held in rebellious territory to be forever free.

1. Galveston, Tex., recaptured by rebs. under Gen. Magruder, with its
garrison of 300 men. 6 Fed. gunboats were in the harbor. The Harriet
Lane was captured after a severe fight, in which Capt. Wainwright was
killed, and many of his crew. The Fed. flagship Westfield was blown up
by Commander Renshaw, to avoid capture, by which he lost his life, with
many of the crew.

2. The battle of Stone river, or Murfreesboro’, Tenn., between Gen.
Rosecrans’ army and Gen. Bragg’s rebel troops, which commenced two days
before, was resumed, and after an obstinate and bloody contest, which
lasted all day, the rebels were defeated with great slaughter. Fed.
loss, 1,533 killed, 6,000 wounded, 2,000 prisoners; rebel loss, over
10,000, of whom 9,000 were killed and wounded.

2. Reb. cavalry under Major Herring, captured 10 sutlers’ wagons and
their attendants at Dumfries, Va., belonging to Maine and New York
regiments.

3. A rebel camp near La Grange, Ark., was surprised by Gen. Washburne’s
cavalry. 10 of the rebels were captured, and 10 killed or wounded.

3. Rebs. under Gen. Jones attacked Col. Washburne’s troops at Moorfield,
near New Creek, Va., and captured 65 of them.

5. Fed. troops in Hardy Co., Va., attacked by rebels under Capt. J. H.
McNeill, who captured 33 men, 61 horses and camp stores.

5. The Fed. schr. Home, Capt. Cushing, destroyed a small rebel fort on
Little river, N. C.

6. The iron steamer Antona, laden with arms and medicine, was captured
off Mobile, by U. S. steamer Pocahontas.

7. 450 women and children left Washington, D. C., for Richmond and other
points south, by special permit.

=Jan. 8.= A rebel force of 5,000, under Gens. Marmaduke and Burbridge,
attacked the garrison at Springfield, Mo. They were repulsed by the
Feds. under Gen. Brown and Col. Crabb. Fed. loss 17 killed and 50
wounded. Reb. loss 200.

8. Union force from Yorktown, Va., under Major W. P. Hall, made a raid
to the Pamunkey river, and destroyed a ferryboat, steamers, sloops,
railroad and depots, and large warehouses containing rebel stores.

8. The 20th Ill. cavalry, Capt. Moore, attacked a rebel camp near
Ripley, Tenn., held by Lieut.-Col. Dawson, killing 8, wounding 20, and
capturing 46 prisoners. Fed. loss, 3 wounded.

9. Reb. troops under Gen. Pryor crossed the Blackwater, near Suffolk,
Va., and attacked Gen. Corcoran’s brigade of Gen. Peck’s troops. Enemy
defeated. Fed. loss, 104.

9. Col. Ludlow effected an exchange of prisoners at City Point, Va., by
which 20,000 men were restored to the National army.

10. Skirmish at Catlett’s Station, Va. Col. Schimmelfennig’s troops, and
Hampton’s rebel cavalry.

10. 21st Iowa, Col. Merritt, attacked by Marmaduke’s troops at
Hartsville, Mo. Rebs. defeated. Fed. loss, 35 killed and wounded. Reb.
loss, 150 killed and wounded, and 150 prisoners.

11. U. S. steamer Hatteras, Lieut. R. G. Blake, sunk off Texas, by rebel
steamer Alabama. 100 of the Fed. crew captured.

11. Steamer Grampus, No. 2, at the mouth of Wolf river, Tenn., captured
and burned by 13 rebels.

11. Arkansas Post, Fort Hindman, on the Ark. river, captured by Admiral
Porter’s squadron and Gen. McClernand’s army. Fed. loss, nearly 1,000 in
killed, wounded and missing. Reb. loss, 550 killed and wounded, and
5,000 prisoners.

12. The brig J. P. Ellicott captured by rebel privateer Retribution, and
put in charge of a prize crew. The wife of the mate of the Ellicott
succeeded in getting the rebels intoxicated, put them in irons, piloted
the vessel to St. Thomas, and delivered her and the prisoners to the U.
S. Consul.

12. A rebel raid upon Holly Springs, Miss.

13. Gunboat Major Slidell and 3 boats with wounded troops captured by
guerrillas on the Cumberland river, the wounded robbed, and all but one
of the boats burned.

14. Four Union gunboats under Com. Buchanan, assisted by Gen. Weitzel’s
troops, engaged the rebel iron-clad gunboat Cotton, aided by Col. Gray’s
soldiers, on the Bayou Teche, La. The Cotton was destroyed after several
hours’ combat. Commodore Buchanan was killed.

14. The steamer Forest Queen was burned by guerrillas at Commerce, Miss.

14. The Fed. gunboat Queen of the West, Col. Charles E. Ellet, was
captured on the Red river near Gordon’s Landing.

15. Mound City, Ark., burned by Fed. troops.

15. 17 of the 22d Wis. captured near Clarendon, Ark. 7 rebels killed and
wounded.

16. U. S. steamer Columbia stranded at Masonboro’ Inlet, N. C. Her
officers surrendered to the rebels, under Col. Lamb.

16. Duvall’s Bluff, Ark., captured by Fed. gunboat Baron de Kalb, and
others of Porter’s flotilla, and Gen. Gorman’s troops. 100 prisoners
taken. Lieut. J. G. Walker, 7 prisoners and a large supply of arms
taken.

16. Reb. privateer Oreto escaped from Mobile.

16. U. S. transport ship Planter, with troops, wrecked near Stranger’s
Key, Bahama.

17. Des Arc, Ark., captured by Fed. troops, without opposition.

17. Skirmish at Pollocksville, N. C., the rebels fleeing from the town.

19. Skirmish near Barnesville, Va. Lieut. Vezin and 112 men charged a
large party of reb. cavalry, rescuing 6 of their company who were
prisoners and capturing 4 rebels.

19. The brig Estelle captured by the reb. privateer Oreto, or Florida,
Capt. Maffit.

19. The army of the Potomac, Gen. Burnside, moved down the Rappahannock.

21. The National ship Morning Light and the schooner Velocity were
captured by reb. steamers Josiah Bell and Uncle Ben, near Sabine Pass,
Texas.

21. Reb. camp broken up near Columbia, Mo., by 61st Mo., Col. Douglass,
and 6 prisoners taken. 2 Feds. wounded.

21. Gen. Fitz John Porter dismissed from the U. S. service.

21. Col. Hutchinson, with 100 rebel cavalry, captured a company of U. S.
troops and 30 wagons, at Murfreesboro’, Tenn.

22. Gen. Burnside’s second attempt to cross the Rappahannock foiled by a
rain storm, which made the roads impassable.

22. The brig Windward captured by the reb. privateer Florida, off Cuba.

23. A company of Feds., under Capt. Taylor, was attacked in Johnson Co.,
E. Tenn., by rebs., under Col. Folk. 4 Feds, killed and several wounded
and captured, some of whom were hung.

23. Arkansas Post, Ark., evacuated by Fed. troops, and the fort blown
up.

24. Maj.-Gen. Burnside transferred the command of the army of the
Potomac to Gen. Jos. Hooker. Maj.-Gens. Sumner and Franklin commanding
right and left wings, relieved from their commands.

25. Attack by rebs. on the railroad near Nashville, Tenn. They were
repulsed.

25. Reb. pickets near Kinston, N. C., captured.

26. The bark Golden Rule was captured and burnt by the Alabama, 50 miles
south of St. Domingo.

26. A fight near Woodbury, Tenn. Gen. Palmer’s Fed. troops defeated a
reb. force, who lost 35 killed and over 100 prisoners. Fed. loss 2
killed and 9 wounded.

27. Attack on rebs. at Bloomfield, Mo., by 68th Mo. militia, Col.
Lindsay, who drove the enemy from the town, capturing 52 prisoners, 70
horses and 100 stand of arms.

27. Bombardment of Fort McAllister, Ga., by monitor Montauk, Capt.
Worden, and 3 gunboats.

27. Skirmish at Indian Village, on Bayou Plaquemine, La., by Gen.
Weitzel’s Fed. brigade, who defeated a rebel force.

27. Col. Wyndham’s Fed. troops attacked Stuart’s cavalry near
Middleburg, Va., defeating them, and capturing 26 men and 40 head of
cattle.

28. The reb. steamer Julia Roan, with 300 men, was captured by Col.
Harrison’s Fed. troops, 130 of 1st Ark. cavalry, near Van Buren, Mo.

29. The British iron steamer Princess Royal, laden with arms, was
captured off Charleston, S. C.

29. A fight near Bear river, Washington Territory. Union troops under
Col. Connor defeated Indians with severe loss, after 4 hours’ battle.

29. Gen. McClernand’s troops landed 5 miles from the mouth of the Yazoo
river, in view of Vicksburg.

30. U. S. gunboat Isaac Smith captured in Stono river, S. C.

30. A reb. camp at Trenton, Tenn., in charge of Capt. Dawson, was
attacked by 22d Ohio, Col. Wood, and 34 rebels captured, or killed.

30. 300 rebel conscript soldiers surrendered at Murfreesboro’, Tenn.,
and took the oath of allegiance to the U. S. government.

30. A fight at Deserted House, 9 miles from Suffolk, Va., between Feds.
under Gen. Corcoran, and Gen. Pryor’s troops. Loss in killed and wounded
about 60 on each side.

31. Two rebel gunboats and rams, and 3 steamers, under Com. Ingraham,
came down the Charleston, S. C., harbor, and attacked 3 vessels of the
blockading squadron, the Mercedita, the Keystone State, and the Quaker
City, damaging them severely, and capturing and paroling the crew of the
Mercedita. 30 Feds. killed and 50 wounded.

31. Kennett’s National cavalry attacked Wheeler’s brigade, near
Nashville, Tenn. Reb. loss 12 killed and 12 wounded, and 300 prisoners.
5 Feds, wounded.

31. Attack on Fed. soldiers by deserters and mob in Morgan Co., Ind. The
mob dispersed, and 8 of them captured.

31. Shelbyville, Ky., entered by Fed. troops under Gen. J. C. Davis.

=Feb. 1.= Second attack on Fort McAllister, Ga. Reb. commander Maj.
Galbè, killed. Fed. vessels retire without loss.

1. Franklin, Tenn., occupied by Fed. forces under Col. R. Johnson, with
slight loss.

1. Unsuccessful attack on Island No. 10, in the Miss. river, by a large
force of rebs., with slight loss.

1. Col. Stokes, with loyal Tenn. and Ky. troops, attacked a reb. camp at
Middleton, Tenn., capturing Maj. Douglass and 100 of his men.

2. The Union ram Queen of the West ran by the rebel batteries at
Vicksburg, Miss.

3. Skirmish at Mingo Swamp, Mo. Fed. troops under Maj. Reeder defeated
rebs. under D. McGee, who was killed, with 8 of his men, and 20 wounded.

3. Fort Donelson, Tenn., garrisoned by 83 Ill., Col. Harding, was
attacked by a large force under Wheeler and Forrest, Rebs. repulsed with
a loss of 100 killed, 400 wounded and 300 prisoners. Fed. loss 12 killed
and 30 wounded.

4. Skirmish near Lake Providence, La., in which 30 rebs. were killed and
wounded, and 90 horses taken.

4. Cavalry dash upon Batesville, Ark., under Col. G. E. Waring, driving
rebels under Marmaduke out of the town, with severe loss, and capturing
Col. Adams and other rebels.

=Feb. 5.= Skirmish on Bear Creek, Johnson Co., Mo. Capt. Ranney, of 40th
Mo. militia drove a small rebel force.

5. Skirmish near Stafford’s, Va.

6. Union raid upon Middleburgh, by 5th N. Y. cavalry. Several rebs.
captured.

6. Skirmish between Winchester and Martinsburg, Va. 1st N. Y. cavalry,
Capt. Jones, defeated a small reb. force.

7. A squadron of the 5th Pa. cavalry were led into ambush 9 miles from
Williamsburg, Va., and 35 of their number killed, wounded, or captured.

7. Reb. Capt. Dawson and several of his men were captured by Col. Wood,
22d Ohio, near Dyersburg, Va.

7. Reb. Sec. of State declared Galveston and Sabine Pass, Texas, open to
commerce.

8. A reb. camp attacked near Independence, Mo., by Lieut. Coburn, 5th
Mo. cavalry. 8 rebs. killed, 2 wounded, and all their arms captured.

8. Ram Queen of the West returned from an expedition down the
Mississippi, near Port Hudson, having sunk 3 steamers loaded with
provisions for rebs., and captured 56 prisoners.

8. Gens. Davis’ and Morgan’s troops returned to Nashville, Tenn., from
the pursuit of Forrest. They captured 30 rebs. 7 miles E. of Charlotte,
including Col. Carroll.

8. Lebanon, Tenn., occupied by Fed. troops, who captured 600 rebels.

9. Skirmish near Summerville, Va. Maj. Knox’s Fed. cavalry defeated
rebs.

9. Gen. Rosecrans, in Tenn., ordered the execution of all rebs. caught
in Fed. uniform or carrying the national flag.

10. Fight at Old river, La. Capt. Tucker, 1st Kansas, defeated 3d La.
reb. cavalry, who lost 25 prisoners, and 11 killed or wounded. Union
loss, 8.

10. The 14th Wis. and 11th Ill. attacked near Lake Providence, on the
Miss., by rebs., who were repulsed. 32 taken prisoners.

12. N. Y. ship Jacob Bell burnt by the Florida.

12. Skirmish near Smithfield, Va. 12th Pa cavalry engaged Capt. Baylor’s
reb. troops.

12. Skirmish near Bolivar, Tenn. 4 rebs. killed, 5 wounded, by Fed.
cavalry, who were defeated.

14. Barge New Era, No. 5, captured by Fed. ram Queen of the West, near
Fort Taylor, Red river. The ram was then run ashore by a treacherous
pilot, and captured by the rebels.

14. 5th Mich. cavalry surprised near Annandale, Va., with loss of 15
men.

15. Fight near Canesville, Tenn. The 123d Ill., Col. Monroe, defeated
some of Gen. Morgan’s cavalry, of whom 20 were killed, many wounded, and
6 captured. Also 50 horses and 300 stand of arms. 3 Federals wounded.

15. Serg’t Holmes, with 14 of 2d Minn., escorting a wagon train near
Nolensville, Tenn., repulsed a superior force of rebel cavalry, of whom
8 were killed, 20 wounded, and 4 prisoners.

15. Fight near Arkadelphia, Ark. Feds. under Capt. Brown defeated the
enemy, who lost 14 killed and 12 wounded. Fed. loss, 2 killed, 12
wounded.

17. A forage train in charge of some of 116th and 123d Ohio captured by
rebs. near Romney, Va.

17. U. S. steamer Hercules burnt by rebels near Memphis, Tenn.

18. Mortar boats opened fire on Vicksburg.

18. Clifton, Tenn., burnt by 3d Mich. cavalry.

18. Disloyal State Convent. at Frankfort, Ky., dispersed by military.

19. A party of 1st Ind. cavalry, Lt.-Col. Wood, routed by reb. cavalry
near Coldwater, Miss. Federal loss, 6 killed, 3 wounded, and 15
captured.

19. Hopefield, Ark., opposite Memphis, Tenn., burnt by order of Gen.
Hurlbut.

20. Skirmish near the Yazoo Pass. 5th Ill. cavalry dispersed rebel
troops, killing 6 and capturing 26. Fed. loss 5 wounded.

21. The ship Golden Eagle and bark Olive Jane burnt by rebel steamer
Alabama.

21. Union gunboats Freeborn and Dragon engaged a rebel battery on the
Rappahannock river, Va. Three Feds. wounded.

21. A guerrilla raid upon Shakertown, Ky. Government property and cars
destroyed. 4 rebels captured by Col. Briston.

22. Capt. Cornyn, 10th Mo. cavalry, visited Florence and Tuscumbia,
Ala., and captured horses, mules, negroes, and 100 rebs.

22. At Gatesville, Va., 9 of the 57th rebel Va. were captured by Federal
troops.

22. The Yazoo Pass exped’n reached Moon Lake.

23. Fight near Greenville, Miss. Gen. Ferguson’s rebel troops engaged
Nationals under Gen. Burbridge. Maj. Mudd, 22d Ill., killed.

23. Skirmish near Athens, Ky., with Morgan’s guerrillas.

23. Rebel force of 700 devastating E. Kentucky. A large amount of
government property destroyed at Paris, Ky.

23. An attempt by rebels to capture the steamer Belle at Cottonwood
Landing, Tenn., was repulsed. 1 killed on each side.

24. Gunboat Indianola captured near Grand Gulf, Miss., by 4 rebel
steamers.

25. Skirmish at Hartwood Church, Va., near Kelly’s Ford. Gen. Averill’s
troops defeated Stuart’s rebel cavalry.

25. Rebel troops under Clarke dispersed at Licktown, Ky.

25. The steamer Peterhoff captured off St. Thomas by U. S. gunboat
Vanderbilt.

25. Skirmish 5 miles from Falmouth, Va. 6th U. S. cavalry defeated
Stuart’s cavalry, of whom 40 were captured.

26. Cavalry fight near Woodstock, Va. The 13th Pa. and 1st N.Y. were
defeated by the enemy, who killed and captured 200.

26. Cherokee National Council repealed the ordinance of secession, and
abolished slavery.

26. A government freight train captured by rebels near Woodburn, Tenn.

27. Destruction of rebel steamer Nashville in Ogeechee river, near Fort
McAllister, Fla., by gunboat Montauk, Capt. Worden.

27. Skirmish 15 miles from Newbern, N. C. Capt. Jacobs’ N. Y. cavalry
defeated rebels, who lost 3 killed and 48 prisoners. 1 Fed. wounded.

=March 1.= Union dash into Bloomfield, Mo. Provost-marshal and 20
prisoners taken.

1. Fight at Bradyville, Tenn. 2,500 of Rosecrans’ army drove Morgan’s
reb. division from the town, killing 8, wounding 30, and capturing 89.
Fed. loss, 15 in killed and wounded.

1. English steamer Queen of the Wave captured near Georgetown, S. C., by
U. S. gunboat Connemaugh.

1. Rebs. captured 50 of 1st Vt. cavalry, Capts. Wood and Huntoon, at
Aldie, Va.

2. Sharp contest on the Salem pike, 16 miles from Murfreesboro’, between
the regulars of Rosecrans’ army and a large force from Bragg’s. The
rebs. defeated.

2. Four guerrillas captured 3 miles from Russelville, Ky.

2. Slight cavalry fight near Petersburg, Tenn. Rebels routed with 12
killed and 20 wounded.

2. Capt. Schultze’s Fed. cavalry defeated Mosby’s troops near Aldie,
Va., capturing 30.

3. Fort McAllister, Ga., bombarded without success.

3. The Enrolment and Conscription act passed by Congress, approved. All
arms-bearing men with certain exceptions were to be enrolled by April
1st ensuing, and the President was authorized to call for quotas from
the enrolled names.

4. Fight on Harpeth river, near Chapel Hill, Tenn. Col. Johnson’s Tenn.
Fed. cavalry engaged Col. Roger’s troops, killing 12 and capturing 72.

4. Adjournment of 37th Congress.

4. Skirmishes at Skeet and Swan Quarter, N. C. Rebels beaten, 28 killed
and wounded. Unionists, 3 killed and 15 wounded.

5. U. S. Senate met in extra session.

5. Fight at Thompson’s Station, near Franklin, Tenn. A Fed. force under
Col. Colburn was attacked by a large army under Van Dorn, and defeated
in battle, after which the entire Union brigade was captured, excepting
150 men. Fed. loss, 100 killed, 300 wounded, and 1,200 prisoners. Rebel
loss, 120 killed and 300 wounded.

5. The _Crisis_ newspaper office, at Columbus, O., was destroyed by
soldiers.

6. Successful foray of Fed. troops under Col. Phelps in Northumberland
Co., Va.

6. Ship Star of Peace captured and burnt by rebel privateer Florida.

6. Gen. Hunter ordered the drafting of negroes in the Department of the
South.

7. A scouting expedition from Belle Plain, Va., returned with several
prisoners and much property.

7. A brigade of cavalry under Gen. Manly attacked rebel cavalry of Gen.
Russell at Unionville, Tenn. Rebel loss, 50 killed, 180 wounded, and all
their stores.

8. Mosby (reb.) dashed into Fairfax, Va., and captured Brig.-Gen.
Stoughton and 30 men and 58 horses.

8. 43d Mass., Col. Holbrook, captured a rebel cavalry company near
Newbern, N. C.

9. A small rebel force captured, six miles below Port Hudson, on the
Mississippi.

9. The screw-steamer Douro captured by U. S. gunboat Quaker City.

=March 9.= Guerrillas defeated near Bolivar, Tenn., with the loss of 18
captured.

9. Skirmish at Blackwater Bridge, Va., by Feds. under Col. Chickering.

9. Skirmish on Amite river, La. Rebs. dispersed.

10. Rebel steamer Parallel burnt on the Mississippi with 3,000 bales of
cotton.

10. Several rebels captured at Rutherford’s creek, Tenn., by Gen.
Granger’s troops.

10. Jacksonville, Fla., captured by 1st S. C. (colored) regiment.

10. Skirmish near Covington, Tenn. Col. Grierson’s cavalry attacked Col.
Richardson’s rebel camp, killing 25 and capturing a large number.

11. A skirmish 12 miles E. of Paris, Ky. Guerrillas attacked a Fed.
forage train, and were repulsed.

12. Gen. Gordon’s troops returned to Franklin, Tenn., from pursuing Van
Dorn’s troops beyond Duck river. Fed. loss in skirmishes, 9.

13. Unsuccessful assault on Fort Greenwood, on the Tallahatchie, Miss.,
by Union gunboats Chillicothe and DeKalb, and a land battery.

13. Skirmish at Berwick City, La.

13. The signal station at Spanish Wells, S. C., burnt by a party of
rebels. A lieut. and 8 men captured.

13. Rebel troops under Gen. Pettigrew attacked Gen. Foster’s troops at
Newbern, N. C., but were repulsed.

14. Admiral Farragut, with 7 of his fleet, attacked the rebel batteries
at Vicksburg, Miss. The Hartford (flagship) and the Albatross passed the
batteries and went up the river. The Mississippi was destroyed, and part
of her crew captured.

14. Col. Minty’s Fed. cavalry returned to Murfreesboro’, Tenn., after 11
days’ absence, with 50 rebel prisoners and a large amount of stores.

15. Schooner Chapman, fitted out and manned as a rebel privateer in San
Francisco, was captured while attempting to leave that port. 20 rebels
and 6 brass Dahlgren guns were taken.

15. The _Jeffersonian_ newspaper office at Richmond, Ind., was destroyed
by Union soldiers.

17. A sharp conflict at Kelly’s Ford, Va., between a body of Gen.
Averill’s Fed. cavalry and a rebel force. Gen. Averill’s troops were
defeated, but 86 of the enemy were captured.

17. Attack on rebel works near Franklin, Va. Fed. troops under Col.
Spear driven off, with 1 man killed and 16 wounded.

17. Col. J. B. Fry detailed as Provost-Marshal-General of the U. S.

18. Skirmishing at Berwick Bay, La. Capt. Perkins, 1st Louisiana
cavalry, defeated rebs., who lost 10 killed and 20 wounded.

19. Steamer Georgiana, with arms for the rebels, destroyed off
Charleston.

19. Skirmish on Duck river, near Franklin, Tenn.

20. Col. Hall’s brigade, of Rosecrans’s army, attacked at Vaught’s Hill,
near Milton, Tenn., by Morgan’s and Breckinridge’s cavalry. The rebels
defeated, losing 40 killed, 140 wounded, and 12 prisoners. Fed. loss 7
killed and 31 wounded.

21. Fight at Cottage Grove, Tenn. Rebels defeated with severe loss.

21. Capture of British steamer Nicholas I. while attempting to enter
Wilmington harbor, N. C., by U. S. steamship Victoria. She had 16 tons
of powder and 50,000 Enfield rifles.

21. Skirmish near Seneca, Pendleton Co., Va. A party of loyal men called
“swampers” defeated by rebels.

21. An expedition up the bayous returned to the Yazoo river, after
defeating the rebels at Deer Creek, and destroying 2,000 bales of
cotton, 50,000 bushels of corn, and all the houses on the route.

22. 50 of the 5th Mo. cavalry defeated by Quantrell’s guerrillas, near
Blue Spring, Mo. Fed. loss, 9 killed, 5 missing, and several wounded.

22. Mount Sterling, Ky., attacked by rebels under Col. Cluke. The Fed.
garrison of 200, under Capt. Radcliff, captured, and the town burned.

22. Steamer Granite City captured by U. S. gunboat Tioga, off the
Bahamas.

16–24. Bread riots at Atlanta, Ga., Salisbury, N. C., Richmond, Va.,
Raleigh, N. C., and Petersburg, Va.

24. Pontchatoula, La., captured by Fed. troops under Col. Clark.

24. The schooners Mary Jane and Rising Dawn captured by U. S. gunboats
State of Georgia and Mount Vernon, off Wilmington, N. C.

25. The Fed. gunboats Lancaster and Switzerland attempted to pass the
rebel batteries at Vicksburg. The Lancaster was sunk, and the
Switzerland escaped, much damaged.

25. At Brentwood, Tenn., 300 Federal troops, under Lieut.-Col.
Bloodgood, were captured by rebel forces under Wheeler and Forrest, and
the town sacked. A Federal cavalry force, under Gen. Smith, overtook the
rebels in their retreat, and defeated them, capturing 42 prisoners, and
recovering part of their booty. Loss, about 15 on each side in k. and w.

25. Steamer Dolphin captu’d off Porto Rico by U. S. gunboat Wachusett.

26. Expedition returned to Carthage, Tenn., with 28 rebel prisoners.

26. Gen. Burnside took command of the Department of the Ohio.

27. Fast day in the rebel States.

27. Jacksonville, Fla., burned by Fed. troops.

27. U. S. steamer Hartford passed below the rebel batteries at
Warrenton, Miss.

28. Gunboat Diana captured by rebels at Pattersonville, La. 31 of the
crew killed or wounded, and 170 prisoners.

28. Cole’s Island, S. C., occupied by N. Y. troops, under Col. G. F. B.
Dandy.

28. Steamer Sam. Gaty plundered by rebels at Sibley, Mo.

28. The rebels attacked Williamsburg, Va., and were repulsed by the 5th
Pa. cavalry, Col. Lewis.

29. A party of blockade runners taken at Poplar creek, Md.

29. Sixth Ill. cavalry, Col. Loomis, surprised by rebs. under Col.
Richardson, near Somerville, Tenn. Fed. loss 40 in k. or w. Rebs. driven
off.

30. Battle near Somerset, Ky. Fed. troops under Gen. Gillmore defeated
Pegram’s army of 2600, after a battle of 4 hours. Reb. loss 350. 400
cattle taken.

30. Washington, N. C., was attacked by rebels under Hill and Pettigrew.
The Fed. pickets and skirmishers driven in with loss, and the rebels
driven out of range afterwards by Fed. gunboats.

30. 700 rebels, under Gen. Jenkins, captured Point Pleasant, W. Va., but
were subsequently driven out, losing 12 killed and 14 prisoners. Fed.
loss 1 killed and 1 wounded.

30. Richmond, Miss., occupied by Gen. McClernand’s Fed. troops, after
sharp skirmishing.

31. Gen. Herron appointed to command the army of the frontier.

=April 1.= Admiral Farragut, with the National gunboats Hartford,
Switzerland and Albatross, engaged the rebel batteries at Grand Gulf,
Miss., and passed them without serious loss.

1. Severe fight at Dranesville, Va., between 1st Vt. cavalry, and Capt.
Mosby’s rebel troops. Feds. defeated with a loss of 60 in killed,
wounded, and pris.

1. The town of Palmyra, Tenn., burned by a Fed. gunboat, Capt. Fitz.

2. Women’s bread riot at Richmond, Va.

2. Skirmish at Woodbury, Tenn. Gen. Hazen’s Fed. troops engaged and
defeated rebels, killing 12 and capturing and wounding 30.

2. Admiral Farragut’s vessels proceeded to the mouth of the Red river,
destroying rebel boats.

2. Gunboat St. Clair disabled by rebs. above Fort Donelson, on the
Cumberland river. She was rescued by the steamer Luminous.

2. Hicks’ rebel guerrillas, in Jackson Co., Mo., were attacked by Maj.
Ransom with the 6th Ks. 17 rebels killed, and considerable property
captured.

2. Fight at Snow Hill, Tenn. Gen. Stanley engaged Morton and Wharton’s
rebel regiments, who were defeated, and 15 or 20 killed, and 50
captured.

3. Arrests of Knights of the Golden Circle, at Reading, Pa.

3. Steamer Tampico captured off Sabine Pass, Texas, by U. S. gunboat New
London.

3. Capt. Worthington’s loyal Ark. cavalry returned to Fayetteville,
Ark., after four skirmishes, in which two rebel captains were k., 1 w.,
22 men k. and 7 taken.

4. Unionists under Gen. Potter repulsed with loss of 5 men in attempt to
capture rebel battery on Pamlico river, N. C.

4. Palmyra, Tenn., burned by the gunboat Lexington.

4. U. S. steamer Sylvan Shore fired on near Washington, N. C., and
several of her crew killed or wounded.

5. Ship Louisa Hatch captured by the Alabama.

5. Troops sent from Newbern to rescue Gen. Foster, besieged in
Washington, N. C.

5. Skirmish in Black Bayou, La.

6. Col. Wilder’s Fed. command on an expedition within the rebel lines in
Tenn. destroyed much provision, and brought in 350 negroes.

6. Rebel camp at Green Hill, Tenn., broken up; 5 killed and 15 taken.

7. Bombardment of Fort Sumter by Admiral Dupont; the fleet driven off;
fort little injured.

7. U. S. gunboat Barataria lost in Amite river, La.

7. Successful foray into Gloucester Co., Va.

8. Gunboat George Washington, stranded in Broad river, S. C., attacked
by rebs. and blown up.

=April 8.= The Tallahatchie fleet returned to Helena, Ark., after an
absence of 43 days, with the divisions of Gens. Ross and Quimby. 30
soldiers were killed and a number wounded.

8. 60 rebels captured in Loudon Co., Va., by Gen. Copeland’s brigade.

8. U. S. steamer Lovell and propeller Saxonia captured 15 miles below
Clarksville, Tenn.

9. Pascagoula, Miss., taken by a Union force from Ship Island, but
abandoned the same day.

9. Fight at Blount’s Mills, N. C. Unionists driven off with small loss.

10. Battle at Franklin, Tenn. Van Dorn’s attack repulsed. Union loss
about 100. Rebel, 300 k. and w.

10. Rebels routed near Germantown, Ky.

10. Skirmish near Waverly, Tenn. 21 Unionists taken prisoners.

11. Col. Streight’s raiding force left Nashville for Georgia.

11. Union cavalry camp near Williamsburg, Va., broken up by rebel
attack.

12. Ironclad fleet leaves Charleston harbor.

12. Skirmish near Gloucester Point, Va.

12. Lieut.-Col. Kimball killed by Gen. Corcoran.

13. Transport Escort ran the batteries below Washington, N. C., bringing
aid for Gen. Foster.

13. Skirmish near Suffolk, Va.

13. Gen. Stoneman’s cavalry advanced in detachments to Warrenton,
Bealton, Rappahannock bridge, Liberty, and all the fords of the Rapidan,
Va., preparatory to a general advance of the army of the Potomac against
General Lee.

14. Battle at Bayou Teche, La. Rebs. defeated and their three gunboats,
Diana, Hart, and Queen of the West, destroyed. Union loss about 350.
Reb. much larger.

14. Gen. Foster escaped from Washington, N. C., by running the rebel
blockade in the steamer Escort.

14. Rebel battery on Nansemond river silenced by gunboats.

14. U. S. gunboat West End attacked by a reb. battery near Suffolk, Va.,
and considerably damaged. 5 of her crew killed and 18 wounded.

15. Col. Evans routed 200 Indians, 75 miles south of Daybreak, in Utah,
killing 30. Fed. loss, 8.

15. Franklin, La., occupied by Union troops.

15. Rebs. raise the siege of Washington, N. C.

15. Fighting continued on the Nansemond river.

15. Dash upon Pikeville, Ky., by 39th Ky., Col. Dills. 17 reb. officers
and 61 privates captured.

15. Destruction of reb. steamer Queen of the West, in Berwick’s Bay,
La., by U. S. gunboat Estella. 90 rebs. captured, and 30 lost.

16. Admiral Porter’s fleet of 8 gunboats and several transports ran pass
the Vicksburg batteries, losing only 1 transport and no men.

16. Fight with Indians at Medalia, Minn.

16. Steamer Gertrude captured off Harbor Islands, W. I., by U. S.
steamer Vanderbilt.

17. The 99th and 130th N. Y. engaged reb. troops near Suffolk, Va. 2
Feds. killed and 3 wounded.

17. Gen. Donelson (reb.), nephew of Andrew Jackson, died at Knoxville.

17. Col. Grierson’s famous cavalry raiding force started from La Grange,
Tenn.

17. Skirmish at Bear Creek. Rebs. defeated by Gen. Dodge’s troops.

17. Skirmish at Vermillion Bayou, La. Rebs. driven off by Gen. Grover’s
troops, who took 1,000 prisoners.

18. Gen. Getty’s troops, in conjunction with gunboats on Nansemond
river, N. C., under Lieut. Lamson, captured a reb. battery of 8 pieces
and 200 prisoners, at the West Branch.

18. The siege of Washington, N. C., raised, after an investment of 3
weeks by a large Confederate force.

18. Fayetteville, Ark., attacked by a reb. army under Gen. Cabell, who
were repulsed by 2,000 Feds, under Col. Harrison.

18. Reconnoitering party at Sabine Pass captured by concealed rebs.
Capt. McDermott, of gunboat Cayuga, killed.

18–19. Cols. Graham and Riley defeated reb. forces in several skirmishes
on Cumberland river, Tenn., killing and wounding 40.

19. Cavalry skirmishing near Hernando, Miss., with varying success.

19. Severe fight on the Coldwater, near Hernando, Tenn. A Fed. brigade
under Col. Bryant defeated rebel troops in a series of skirmishes. Reb.
loss, 20 killed, 40 wounded. Fed. 10 killed, 20 w.

20. Opelousas, La., occupied by Union forces.

20. Cavalry skirmish near Helena, Arkansas.

20. Fight at Patterson, Mo. Feds. under Col. Smart defeated with loss of
50 in killed and wounded.

20. Bute a la Rose, La., captured by Union gunboats. 60 prisoners taken.

21. Skirmish and capture of a few rebs. near Berryville, Va., by Capt.
Laypole, of 6th Va.

21. An expedition under Gen. Graham returned to Louisville, Ky., after
proceeding to Celina on the Cumberland, and destroying a large amount of
rebel stores and 40 boats. 60 rebs. killed and wounded.

22. Reb. raid on Tompkinsville, Ky. The Court house burned, and 5 Union
men killed.

22. Reb. steamer Ellen captured near Courtableau, La.

22. Seven of the 8th Mo. cavalry, and a Baptist minister shot by
guerrillas in Cedar Co., Mo.

22. Occupation of McMinnville, Tenn., by Union troops under Gen.
Reynolds and Col. Wilder.

22. Majs. McGee and White’s troops encountered 300 rebs. near Strasburg,
Va., and defeated them. Rebel loss 5 killed, 9 wounded, and 25
prisoners. Union loss, 2.

22. Six gunboats and 12 barges passed the rebel batteries at Vicksburg.

23. Lieut. Cushing, with a party of men from the gunboat Commodore
Barney, had a skirmish with rebel cavalry near Chuckatuck, Va., with
small loss.

23. Skirmish at Beverly, Va. Loyalists under Col. Latham.

24. Tuscumbia, Ala., occupied by Federal forces under Col. Dodge.

24. 4 rebel schooners captured off Mobile, Ala., by gunboat De Soto.

24. Two rebel schooners captured near New Inlet, N. C., by U. S. steamer
State of Georgia.

24. Rebels defeated at Weber Falls, Ark., by Col. Phillips’ troops.

23–27. Gen. Ellet’s Maine Brigade made a successful expedition up the
Tennessee river, destroying the towns of Hamburg and Eastport, and a
large stock of war material. The rebels were defeated in an attack on
the vessels while returning, losing 10 killed and 20 wounded. Federal
loss, 2 killed, 4 wounded.

24. Skirmishing near Suffolk, Va.

24. Unionists defeated at Beverly, Va.

25. Rebel shore batteries at Duck river shoals, Tenn. river, silenced by
gunboats. 25 rebels killed and wounded.

25. Fight at Greenland Gap, Va. Rebels severely punished by 23d
Illinois, Capt. Wallace.

26. 30 rebel cotton-gins and mills and 350,000 bushels of corn destroyed
by a raid to Deer Creek, Miss.

26. Cape Girardeau, Mo., attacked by Marmaduke’s rebels, who were
defeated with heavy loss by Gen. McNeil’s troops. Rebel loss 40 killed
and 200 wounded.

26. Gen. Burnside assumed command of the Department of Ohio.

27. A body of Texan Rangers were attacked 8 miles from Franklin Tenn.,
by 700 Federal cavalry under Col. Watkins, of the 6th Kentucky, who
defeated them, capturing 200 prisoners.

27. The steamship Anglo Saxon, from Liverpool, wrecked 4 miles off Cape
Race, with 360 passengers, and a crew of 84. Only 190 persons saved.

27. Fight at Philippa, West Virginia, by Col. Mulligan’s Federal troops.

27. Gen. Hooker’s army began its march towards Fredericksburg, Va.

28. Hooker’s army crossed the Rappahannock.

28. Capture of 4 companies of Federals at Morgantown, West Virginia.

28. A rebel regiment surprised and captured near Jackson, Missouri, by
artillery and 1st Iowa cavalry.

28. Skirmish near Mill Spring, Kentucky, by Col. Adams’ Federal cavalry.

29. Two companies of the 106th New York, in garrison at Fairmount, W.
Va., were captured by rebels under Jackson and Imboden, after a brave
resistance in which the rebels suffered severely.

29. Gen. Jackson destroyed the railroad bridges on the Monongahela
river.

29. Bombardment of Grand Gulf, Miss., by Porter’s fleet. Rebel works
greatly damaged. Fleet considerably injured. 20 killed and many wounded.

30. Gen. Grant’s army lands near Port Gibson, Miss.

30. Rebel battery on the Nansemond river silenced.

30. 52 Union cavalry, the 6th N. Y., Lieut.-Col. McVicar, captured near
Spotsylvania, Va. 58 others cut their way out. Col. McVicar was killed.

30. Skirmish near Williamsburg, Va. Rebels defeated by Col. R. M. West’s
troops.

30. A portion of Gen. Hooker’s army crossed the Rappanannock at
Fredericksburg, Va., and after slight resistance took possession of the
rifle-pits below the city and captured 500 prisoners.

=May 1.= Attack on Van Dorn’s rebel pickets by Fed. cavalry under Col.
Campbell, near Franklin, Tenn. 30 of the enemy killed and wounded, and
11 captured.

1. Skirmish on the Nansemond river, near Suffolk, Va, The 99th N. Y.,
Col. Nixon, defeated rebs. with severe loss. Union loss 41 in killed and
wounded.

1. Battle of Port Gibson, Miss. Gen. Grant’s army defeated the troops of
Gen. J. S. Bowen. Reb. loss 1,500 in killed, wounded and prisoners.

1. Fight at Monticello, Ky. 5,000 Feds. under Gen. Carter defeated Col.
Morrison’s troops, with small loss on either side.

1. Heavy artillery skirmishing between the armies of Gen. Hooker and
Gen. Lee, at Chancellorsville, Va.

1. Skirmish near La Grange, Ark. 3rd Iowa cavalry, Capt. De Huff,
defeated, with loss of 41 killed, wounded, and missing.

2. Gen. Sedgwick’s corps of the Army of Va. attacked the reb. works on
the heights, in the rear of Fredericksburg, and carried them after a
desperate struggle, in which the Fed. loss was over 2,000 in killed and
wounded.

2. Marmaduke’s reb. army overtaken by Gen. McNeill at Chalk Bluff, on
the Ark., and driven into Ark.

2. Col. Grierson’s cavalry arrived at Baton Rouge, La., after a raid of
15 days through Miss., defeating the rebs. in several encounters.

2. Artillery skirmish on the Nansemond river, Va., by Gen. Getty’s
troops and reb. forces.

2–3. Battle of Chancellorsville, Va. The army of Gen. Lee attacked the
Fed. forces under Gen. Hooker, and after a series of sanguinary
contests, the Union army was compelled to retire, and recrossed the
Rappahannock. Very heavy loss on both sides.

2–7. Great Fed. cavalry raid within the rebel lines, from Gloucester
Point, Va., on the south, and the Alleghany ridge on the west. Many
bridges, and an immense quantity of telegraph lines throughout the
route, were destroyed, and many prisoners, and 1,000 horses taken.

3. Col. Streight, with 1,500 Fed. troops, after inflicting serious loss
to the enemy, by a raid of 20 days through Georgia, and Alabama, was
captured near Gadsder, Ala.

3. Skirmish near Suffolk, Va. 13th N. H., and 89th N. Y., captured reb.
rifle pits.

3. Gen. Mosby’s reb. cavalry attacked Col. de Forest’s cavalry at
Warrentown Junction, and were defeated by the latter with heavy loss.

3. Fed. gunboats repulsed in an attack on Haines’s Bluff, on the Miss.
Several of the vessels badly damaged, and 80 of their men killed and
wounded.

3. Reb. batteries at Grand Gulf, Miss., evacuated by the enemy, and
taken possession of by Admiral Porter.

3. The ship Sea Lark burned by the Alabama.

3. Col. Montgomery’s colored troops returned to Beaufort, S. C., from a
raid up the Combahee river, having captured 800 slaves, and destroyed
$1,500,000 of property.

4. Capt. H. Dwight killed by rebels after surrendering, near Washington,
La.

4. The battle near Fredericksburg, Va., continued, the rebs. recovering
nearly all the defences back of the town.

5. Riot at Dayton, Ohio, consequent on the arrest of C. L. Vallandigham,
by military authority.

5. A rebel company captured at Pettie’s Mills, N. C., by 3d N. Y.
cavalry.

5. Fort de Russy, on the Red river, captured by Admiral Porter.

6. All of Gen. Hooker’s army retreated to the north bank of the
Rappahannock river.

6. Alexandria, Miss., occupied by National forces under Admiral Porter.

6. Fight near Tupelo, Miss., between Gen. Ruggles’ reb. cavalry, and
Col. Cornyn’s troops. Rebs. defeated, losing 90 prisoners.

6. Steamer Eugenia captured by Fed. gunboat Cuyler, off Mobile, Ala.

7. Steamer Cherokee captured off Charleston, S. C., by U. S. gunboat
Canandaigua.

7. Col. Kilpatrick’s cavalry, after marching around Lee’s army, arrived
at Gloucester Point, Va.

7. Reconnoissance from the Peninsula to White House: some prisoners
retaken from the rebs.

8. The ship Crazy Jane captured in Tampa Bay, Fla., by U. S. gunboat
Tahoma.

8. Rebel Gen. Earl Van Dorn was killed by Dr. Peters, of Maury Co.,
Tenn.

8. An attack on Port Hudson commenced by Fed. fleet.

9. Col. McCook’s 2d Ind. cavalry captured 8 rebels scouting near Stone
river, Tenn.

10. Death of rebel Gen. “Stonewall” Jackson, from wounds received at the
battle of Chancellorsville.

10. Port Hudson assault renewed; rebel batteries silenced.

11. Fight at Greasy Creek, Ky. Col. Jacobs’ Fed. troops defeated by
Morgan’s cavalry. Union loss, 25 killed and wounded. Rebel loss greater.

11. Crystal Springs, Miss., burned by Fed. cavalry.

12. Raymond, Miss., captured by Gen. McPherson’s Fed. troops. Union
loss, 51 killed, 181 wounded. Rebel loss, 75 killed, 250 wounded, 186
prisoners.

12. Skirmish near Franklin, Ky. Rebs. defeated.

12. Col. Breckinridge’s Fed. Tenn. cavalry defeated rebels at Linden, on
Tenn. river, capturing 40 and killing 3.

13. Rebel guerrillas and Indians attacked at Pontchatoula, La., by Col.
Davis, who destroyed their camp, and took 17 prisoners.

13. Skirmish at South Union, Ky. Rebels attack a train, and are worsted.

13. Yazoo City, Miss., was captured by Fed. gunboats under Lieut.
Walker, and $2,000,000 of property destroyed.

14. Gen. Johnston’s army defeated near Jackson, Miss., by Gen. Grant’s
Fed. army. Rebel loss, 400 men, 17 pieces of artillery.

14. Skirmish at Fairfax Court House, Va., by Fed. troops with Black
Horse cavalry.

14. Hammond Station, La., destroyed by Fed. troops.

15. Jackson, Miss., occupied by Fed. troops.

15. Rebels defeated at Camp Moore, La., by Col. Davis’s Fed. troops.

15. Wm. Corbin and T. P. Graw hung at Johnson’s Island, O.; found guilty
of recruiting for the rebel service within the Union lines.

15. Fed. dispatch boats Emily and Arrow captured by rebels on the
Albemarle and Chesapeake canal.

15. The ship Crown Point burnt by the privateer Florida.

15. Several severe cavalry skirmishes near Carrsville and Suffolk, Va.,
by Gen. Peck’s troops with rebels.

15. A detachment of U. S. cavalry captured at Charleston, Va., who were
afterwards rescued by a force from Gen. Milroy’s command, who also took
40 rebel prisoners.

16. A skirmish at Bradyville Pike, near Cripple creek, Tenn. Gen.
Palmer’s Union Tenn. cavalry attacked part of 3d Georgia, under Col.
Thompson, killing several, and taking 18 prisoners.

16. Skirmish at Berry’s Ferry, Va. 16 of 1st N. Y. cavalry, Lieut.
Vermillion, defeated 22 rebels, killing 2, wounding 5, and capturing 10.

16. The 1st N. Y. mounted rifles routed with considerable loss near
Suffolk, Va.

16. Rebel steamer Cuba destroyed by gunboat De Soto in the Gulf of
Mexico.

16. The battle of Champion Hill, or Baker’s creek, Miss. Gen. Grant’s
troops defeated rebel army under Gen. Pemberton, who lost 4,000 men and
29 cannon, and retreated behind Big Black river.

16. Battle at Big Black river, Miss. Gen. Pemberton’s army defeated with
loss of 2,600 men and 17 cannon and driven within the intrenchments at
Vicksburg, by Gen. Grant’s army.

16. Jackson, Miss., evacuated by Fed. troops.

16. Rebel schooner Isabel seized off Mobile, and 16 men captured, by U.
S. steamer R. R. Cuyler.

16. Rebel guerrillas destroyed oil springs and other property at Burning
Springs, Wirt Co., Va.

16. Col. Breckinridge, with 55 loyal W. Tenn. cavalry, attacked a rebel
force at Linden, on the Tenn. river, capturing 35 prisoners, and
destroying their camp and stores.

17. Richmond, Clay Co., Mo., was attacked by rebel troops, who captured
2 companies of the 25th Mo.

18. Vicksburg invested by the Union army.

18. Two companies of 2d Kansas artillery, Maj. Ward, defeated by rebels
near Sherwood, Mo., and 26 of the soldiers killed, wounded, or taken
prisoners.

18. Haines’ Bluff, on the Yazoo river, captured by Admiral Porter.

18. National troops fired into each other by mistake near Deserted
House, Va. 3 killed and 4 wounded of the 170th N. Y.

19. Skirmish near Winchester, Va. Gen. Milroy’s Fed. cavalry killed 6
and captured 7 of the enemy.

19. Spanish steamer Union captured by U. S. gunboat Nashville.

20. Rebel rifle-pits on the north side of Vicksburg captured by Gen.
Steele.

20. Skirmish by pickets between Fayetteville and Raleigh, Va.

20. Skirmish near Fort Gibson, Ark. Price’s troops defeated by Feds.
under Col. Phillips.

20. Steamer Eagle captured near Nassau, N. P., by gunboat Octorora.

20. Two rebel regiments attacked at Middletown, Tenn., by Fed. cavalry
under Gen. Stanley. The enemy routed, losing 8 killed, 90 pris. and 200
horses.

21. Richmond and Plattsburg, Mo., plundered by rebels.

21. Vicksburg fully invested by Union troops.

21. A rebel camp broken up near Middletown, Tenn., by 103d Ill. 11
rebels captured.

21. Port Hudson, Miss., besieged by Fed. troops under Gen. Banks, after
sharp skirmishing with the enemy while marching from Baton Rouge.

22. Gen. Grant’s army repulsed with heavy loss in an attempt to storm
the fortifications at Vicksburg.

22. Col. Kilpatrick’s Fed. cavalry returned to Gloucester Point, after a
successful raid into Gloucester and Matthew counties, Va., destroying
much property.

22–23. Col. Jones, 58th Pa., engaged and defeated the rebels at Gum
Swamp, N. C., capturing 165 prisoners with military stores. Fed. loss, 2
killed, 6 wounded.

24. Austin, Miss., burned by Union forces under Gen. Ellet.

24. A Fed. wagon train with 30 colored troops was captured near Shawnee
creek, Kansas.

24. Gen. Schofield appointed to supersede Gen. Curtis in command of the
Department of the West.

24. Skirmish on the Mississippi river, 6 miles above Austria. Gen.
Ellet’s marine brigade defeated a rebel force, who lost 5 killed, 3
prisoners. Union loss 2 killed, 19 wounded.

25. Skirmish near Hartford, Ky.

25. Skirmish at Senatobia, Miss. Col. McCrellis defeated a rebel force,
who lost 6 killed and 3 wounded.

26. Col. Wilder’s Fed. regiment defeated Breckinridge’s cavalry near
McMinnville, Tenn., and captured a number of prisoners.

25–27. Fed. gunboats under Lt. Walker, after capturing Haines’ Bluff,
ascended to Yazoo City, Miss., and destroyed 3 rebel steamers and a
large ram, not finished. Also the navy yard and naval stores.

26. Destruction of the U. S. gunboat Cincinnati by rebel batteries at
Vicksburg. 35 of her crew killed and w.

27. Gen. Banks’ army defeated in an assault on the reb. works at Port
Hudson.

27. Col. Cornyn’s Fed. command defeated Gen. Roddy’s troops at Florence,
Ala., capturing 100 soldiers, 300 negroes, 400 mules, and destroying
reb. property.

28. First colored regiment from the North left Boston.

28. The 8th Ill., Col. Clendenin, returned to the army of the Potomac
from an expedition on the banks of the Rappahannock and Potomac rivers,
below Fredericksburg, Va., having destroyed one million dollars of
property, and brought into camp 810 negroes.

28. Wolford’s Fed. cavalry defeated near Somerset, Ky.

28. Skirmish near Doniphan, Mo. 13th Ill. cavalry, Major Lippert,
defeated with loss of 80 of their number in killed, wounded, and
missing.

29. Skirmish by 1st Vt. cavalry with Stuart’s cavalry, near Thoroughfare
Gap, Va.

30. Rebel Col. Mosby, with 200 cavalry, after destroying a Government
train at Catlett’s Station, Va., was overtaken near Greenwich by Col.
Maur, of the 7th Mich. cavalry with N. Y. and Vt. troops, and dispersed
with the loss of their cannon. Fed. loss, 17 killed and wounded.

30. A train of 16 cars from Alexandria, Va., was destroyed by rebel
guerrillas near Warrenton Junction.

30. A rebel camp near Carthage, Tenn., surprised by the 26th Ohio, who
captured 22 prisoners and 35 horses.

30. The town of Tappahannock, Va., captured by Fed. gunboats, who
destroyed rebel stores.

31. Guerrillas defeated with the loss of 10 men by militia in Lincoln
Co., Mo.

31. Fed. gunboat Alert exploded and sunk at Norfolk, Va.

31. Cavalry expedition captured 16 rebels near Monticello, Ky.

31. Successful raid of Col. Kilpatrick’s Fed. cavalry from Yorktown to
Urbana, Va., bringing in 1000 negroes and 300 horses.

=June 1.= Blair’s reconnaissance in search of Joe Johnston returns,
having been unsuccessful.

1. Skirmishing in Howard Co., Mo.

2. 3,000 rebel prisoners arrive at Indianapolis, Ind.

2. Gen. Burnside prohibited the circulation in his Department of the _N.
Y. World_ and the _Chicago Times_.

2. West Point, Va., evacuated by the Union troops.

3. Indian (rebel) prisoners arrive in New York.

3. New York Supreme Court decide against legal tender notes.

3. Mass convention of Peace Democrats at New York.

3. Admiral Foote ordered to relieve Admiral Dupont at Charleston.

3. Skirmish near Manchester, Tenn.

3. Bombardment of Port Hudson continued.

4. Rebel guerrillas defeated near Fairfax, Va.

4. Bluffton, S. C., burned by Union troops.

4. Fight at Satartia, Miss. 100 rebels taken by Gen. Kimball.

4. Simmonsport, La., destroyed by Federal gunboats.

4. Simultaneous attacks on the Federal garrisons at Franklin and Triune,
Tenn., which were repulsed in both instances with severe loss to the
rebels.

4. Col. Wilder’s mounted infantry broke up a rebel camp at Liberty,
Tenn., capturing 62 men and their horses.

5. A division of Hooker’s army cross the Rappahannock and captured 96
prisoners. Fed. loss 35 in k. and w.

5. Raid to Warwick river, Va. Rebel boats destroyed.

6. Fight at Milliken’s Bend, Miss. Reb. Gen. McCullough, with 2,500 men,
attacked 3 negro regiments and 23d Iowa. Heavy loss on both sides. Rebs.
defeated.

8. District of the Frontier set off and given to Gen. Blunt.

8. 2 reb. spies shot at Franklin, Tenn.

8. Reconnoissance on the Chickahominy.

9. Explosion in Fort Lyon, near Alexandria, Va. 30 men killed.

9. Skirmish at Triune, Tenn. Rebels repulsed.

9. Severe cavalry fight at Beverly Ford, on the Rappahannock river, Va.,
in which Gen. Buford’s Fed. troops defeated Gen. Stuart’s command with
heavy loss on both sides.

9. Gen. Carter’s Fed. troops defeated Gen. Pegram’s army at Monticello,
Tenn.

10. An enrolling officer murdered at Manville, Ind.

10. Rebs. repulsed at Lake Providence by negro troops.

11. Preparations in Pa. to repel rebel invasion.

11. Rebel cavalry crossed the Potomac at Poolesville, Md., but were
driven back.

11. Peace Democratic meeting in Brooklyn.

11. Vallandigham nominated for Governor of Ohio.

11. Lee’s army began to move up the Rappahannock.

11. Rebels attack Triune, Tenn., and are repulsed.

11. Steamer Maple Leaf, while conveying rebel officers as prisoners from
Fortress Monroe to Fort Delaware, was seized, and 64 effected their
escape.

11–16. Gen. Lee’s army crossed the Potomac, and invaded Md. and Pa.

13–20. Forced march of the army of the Potomac from the Rappahannock to
Frederick, Md., in which many lives were lost from heat and exhaustion.

12. Union gunboats shell the shores of James river.

12. Darien, Ga., burned by Federalists.

12. Union cavalry captured near Port Hudson.

12. Skirmish near Middletown, Va. Rebels defeated.

12. Rebel privateer Clarence captured 6 vessels off the Chesapeake.

12. Attack on Morris Island by Fed. gunboats.

12. Rebels attack Fed. troops on Folly Island.

13. Rebels plunder a railroad train at Elizabethtown, Ky.

13. Skirmish on Slate creek, Ky. Union defeat.

13. Skirmish and rebel defeat near Boston, Ky.

14. Assault on Port Hudson by Gen. Banks’ troops, in which they were
repulsed with heavy loss.

14. Capture of Winchester, Va., by reb. troops. Defeat of Gen. Milroy’s
army, who lost 2,000 men, and all his artillery and stores.

14. English and Austrian consuls sent away from Richmond, Va.

14. Rebel raid upon Maysville, Ky.

15. President Lincoln calls for 100,000 men for six months from Pa.,
Md., W. Va., and Ohio, to resist invasion, which were promptly
furnished.

15. Enrollment resisted in Boone Co., Ind.

15. The rebel troops who attacked Maysville were overtaken; their
plunder and one hundred prisoners taken.

15. Rebel troops entered Chambersburg, Pa.

17. Severe cavalry skirmish near Aldie, Loudon Co., Va., in which the
rebels were defeated with loss, and eighty-five taken prisoners.

17. Capture of rebel iron-clad ram Fingal, or Atlanta, by monitors
Weehawken and Patapsco, in Warsaw Sound, S. C., 180 prisoners taken.

17. Cavalry fight at Thoroughfare Gap, Va.

17. Skirmish on the Blackwater.

17. Rioters in Holmes Co., Ohio, resist the enrollment.

17. Skirmish near Big Black Bridge, Miss.

17. Fight with guerrillas near Westport, Mo.

18. 1700 of Milroy’s men arrive safely at Bedford, Pa.

18. Skirmishing near Aldie.

18. Rebels burn canal boats at Hancock, Md.

18. Small skirmishes with Lee’s invaders in Maryland.

18. Union defeat near Hernando, Miss.

19. Rebel cavalry cross the Ohio into Harrison Co., Ind.; 50 of them
captured.

20. Gen. Schenck suppresses disloyal papers in Baltimore.

20. Vicksburg bombarded.

20. N. Y. packet ship Isaac Webb captured by rebel steamer Tacony, and
released on bond.

21. Gen. Pleasanton’s cavalry engaged rebel cavalry near Middleburg, Va.
Feds. victorious, capturing 80, and killing or wounding 150 of the
enemy.

21. Brilliant cavalry fight, and rebels whipped at Aldie Gap.

21. Skirmish near New Baltimore. Union repulse.

21. Skirmish at Low Creek, W. Va. Rebels beaten.

21. Rebs. defeated at Lafourche crossing, La.

22. Skirmish at Frederick, Md. Rebs. driven out.

22–23. Twelve fishing vessels destroyed off Martha’s Vineyard, Mass., by
rebel steamer Tacony.

23. Col. S. H. Saunders arrived at Boston, Ky., with his command, after
a successful raid into E. Tenn., having destroyed the railroads and
bridges in many places, and captured several cannon, 1,000 stand of
arms, and 500 prisoners.

23. Skirmish near Gettysburg.

23. Gunboat Sumter sunk by accident off Cape Henry.

24. Rebels advance to Shippensburg and Hagerstown.

24. Union raid force returned from N. Miss., after much success.

24. Gen. Rosecrans’ army in motion. Skirmishes at Guy’s Gap and Liberty
Pike.

24. Col. Hoover’s mounted infantry defeated the rebels at Hoover’s Gap,
Tenn., routing them with heavy loss. Fed. loss, 45 killed and wounded.

24. Gen. Willich’s Fed. brigade defeated rebels at Liberty Gap, Tenn.
Fed. loss, 50. The fight renewed next day, and rebs. defeated with
severe loss. Fed. loss, 40 killed, 100 wounded.

25. Rebels near Carlisle, Pa.

26. Rebels occupy Gettysburg.

26. Unionists evacuate Carlisle.

26. Skirmish at South Anna, Va. Gen. W. F. Lee (rebel) and 110 men, 300
horses, and 35 wagons captured by Col. Spear, 11th Pa. cavalry.

26. Death of Admiral Foote.

26. Rebels occupy York and threaten Harrisburg.

26. The inhabitants of York, Pa., were levied on by rebel Gen. Ewell for
large sums of money, clothing, and provisions.

26. Gen. Meade superseded General Hooker in command of the army of the
Potomac.

27. The Potomac army northwest of Baltimore.

27. Cavalry fight at Fairfax. Union defeat.

27. Rosecrans’ army occupy Manchester, Tenn., after slight resistance.
Also, Shelbyville.

28. Rebels capture a train near Rockville, Va., with 150 wagons and 900
mules. Also, sutler’s stores at Annandale, Va.

28. Skirmish at Columbia bridge, on the Susquehannah, Pa. 200 of Col.
Frick’s Fed. troops captured.

28. Enrollment in Indiana enforced by military.

28. Rebels defeated at Donaldsville, La.

29. Rebels driven from Decherd, Tenn.

30. Mines exploded and rebel outworks breached at Vicksburg.

30. Cavalry fight at Hanover.

=July 1.= Rebels repulsed in attack on Carlisle, Pa.

1. First conflict at Gettysburg. Rebel advance checked. Gen. Reynolds k.

1. Bragg retreats before Rosecrans. Tullahoma occupied by Fed. advance.

1. Engagement at Hanover Junction, Pa., between Gen. Pleasanton’s Fed.
cavalry and Gen. Stuart’s forces. Rebs. defeated.

2. Skirmish at Bottom’s Bridge, Va.

2–3. Defeat of rebel Gen. Lee’s army, near Gettysburg, Pa., by Gen.
Meade’s army, after a sanguinary conflict, in which 40,000 men were k.
or w.

4. Surrender of Vicksburg, Miss., to Gen. Grant, with 30,000 men, under
Gen. Pemberton, and a large supply of arms and ammunition. The rebel
army was paroled.

4. Assault on Helena, Ark., by rebel Gens. Marmaduke, Price and Holmes,
with 6,000 men, who were signally defeated by Gen. Prentiss’s garrison,
who took 1,000 prisoners, and killed or wounded 500 of the enemy.

3–10. Raid of Gen. Morgan into Ind., destroying a large amount of
property.

5. Rear-guard of Gen. Johnston’s army, numbering 4,000 men, captured by
Gen. Grant’s forces, near Bolton, Miss.

5. Vallandigham arrives at Halifax.

5. Raid from Newbern to Warsaw, N.C.

7. Great excitement in Louisville. Morgan said to be coming.

7. Two steamboats captured by rebels at Brandenburg, Ky.

7. Bragg retreats across the Tennessee, destroying the Bridgeport
bridge.

8. Surrender of Port Hudson, Miss., with its garrison of 5,500 men,
under Gen. Gardner, to Gen. Banks.

8. Cavalry skirmish near Boonsboro, Md.

10. Gilmore lands on Morris Island, taking all the rebel works except
Forts Wagner and Gregg, which are shelled by the monitors.

10. Union forces occupy Jackson, Miss.

10. Rebels defeated at Big creek, Ark.

10. Cavalry fight on the old Antietam field.

10. Lee in fortifications opposite Williamsport.

10. Morgan burns depot at Salem, Ind.

11. Morgan burns railroad bridge at Vienna, Ind.

11. Repulse of Gen. Gilmore’s forces assaulting Fort Wagner, S. C.

12. Col. Hatch’s 2d Iowa cavalry defeated a body of rebel cavalry near
Jackson, Miss. Fed. loss, 13 killed and wounded. Rebel loss, 175 killed
and wounded, and 400 conscripts released.

12. Morgan gets into Ohio.

12. Martial law in Cincinnati, Newport and Covington.

12. Fight at Jackson, Miss.

13–17. Great Draft Riot in New York. 25 or 30 buildings destroyed. The
_Tribune_ office assailed. Colored Orphan Asylum burned, several negroes
killed, and 120 stores and dwellings were sacked by the mob. The city
railroads were stopped, and all the principal factories and shops
compelled to suspend work for several days. The disturbance was quelled
by the military and police, after 25 of the military and officers were
killed or seriously wounded, and 150 of the rioters.

12. Gen. Laumann’s division of Gen. Sherman’s army corps incautiously
advanced to an exposed position in front of the rebel works at Jackson,
Miss., and lost 300 men in killed and wounded.

12. Yazoo City taken by Fed. troops.

12. Union defeat at Bayou Lafourche, La. 210 taken prisoners.

12. Lee’s army crosses the Potomac.

14. Fight at Falling Waters, Va. Gen. Kilpatrick’s cavalry attacked a
reb. force of infantry, artillery, and horse, defeating them, and
capturing 1,300 prisoners, and killing and wounding 130. Fed. loss, 29
killed, 36 wounded.

15. Cav. skirmish near Charlestown, Va.

15. Draft riots in Troy and Boston.

15. A universal conscription of all the white men in the Confederate
States between the ages of 18 and 45, subject to military duty, ordered
by Jeff. Davis.

16. Rebels defeated near Fort Gibson, Ark.

16. Rebel dash upon Hickman, Ky.

17. Orders given to enforce the draft at all hazards.

17. Huntsville, Ala., taken by Union troops.

17. Rebels evacuate Jackson, Miss., which was occupied by Gen. Sherman’s
forces after severe fighting for 4 days with Johnston’s army.

17. Defeat of rebel Gen. Cooper’s army at Elk creek, Ark., by Gen.
Blunt’s forces. Rebel loss, 400 killed or wounded, 60 prisoners. Federal
loss, 10 killed and 25 wounded.

18. Raid from Newbern into N. C.

18. 400 rebels captured at Rienzi, Miss.

18–19. Bombardment and assault on Fort Wagner, S. C., in which Gen.
Gilmore’s troops were repulsed, with the loss of 700 men, k., w. and
missing.

19. Engagement at Wytheville, W. Va., by Fed. cavalry under Cols.
Tolland and Powell, who destroyed the Va. and Tenn. railroad and
defeated the rebel force. Fed. loss, 65 killed and wounded. Rebel loss,
75 killed, and 150 prisoners.

19. Fighting with Morgan at Buffington Island. 300 of his men taken.

20. Basil Duke and a portion of Morgan’s force taken near Pomeroy, O.

21. Joe Johnston retreats to Brandon, Miss.

21. Union raid to Tar river and Rocky Mount, N. C.

22. Skirmish near Nolan’s Ferry on the Potomac.

22. Skirmish at Chester Gap, Va. by Gen. Spinola’s Fed. brigade.

22. Brashear City, La., recaptured by Union gunboats.

23. Engagement at Manassas Gap, Va. 300 rebels killed or wounded, 60
pris.

24. Skirmish with Morgans men at Washington, O.

25. The furloughs granted to the majority of rebel paroled prisoners at
Vicksburg, rescinded by Gen. Pemberton, and the men ordered to report at
headquarters within 15 or 20 days.

26. Rebs. defeated at Lexington, Tenn.

26. Capture of Gen. Morgan with the remainder of his cavalry (400) near
New Lisbon, O., by Col. Shackleford.

27. Rebels drive Union forces out of Richmond, Ky.

28. Death of Senator W. L. Yancey, near Montgomery, Ala.

29. Capture of 29 wagons with sutlers’ stores at Fairfax Court House,
Va., by Mosby’s guerrillas, which were recaptured by 2d Mass. cavalry on
the next day.

29. Defeat of Gens. Pegram’s and Scott’s rebel forces while attacking
Fed. troops at Paris, Ky.

30. Death of Brig.-Gen. Strong, in New York, from wounds received in the
attack on Fort Wagner, S. C., July 19.

30. Pres. Lincoln by proclamation, ordered the imprisonment at hard
labor of rebel prisoners, in retaliation for violation of the laws of
war toward colored soldiers.

31. Lee’s and Meade’s armies again on the Rappahannock.

31. Rebels take Stanford, Ky., but are quickly driven out.

=Aug. 1.= Severe engagement near Culpepper, Va., by Fed. cavalry,
infantry, and artillery, under Gen. Buford, with a similar reb. force,
in which the loss was heavy on both sides.

1. 60 wagons loaded with forage were burned by rebs. at Stamford, Ky.

1. Reb. Col. Ashby and 350 men were captured near the Cumberland river,
Ky., by Col. Sanders.

2. The Enfans Perdus, of N. Y., capture 500 rebs. at Folly Island.

3. Skirmish near Kelly’s Ford.

4. Steamer Ruth accidentally burned below Cairo.

4. Skirmish near Brandy Station.

4. Reconnoissance up the James river, Va., by monitor Sangamon, gunboat
Com. Barney, and tug Cohasset. The vessels met with a severe fire from
the enemy’s troops lining the banks, but returned with slight loss of
life; the Barney badly injured.

5. Union raid upon Woodville, Miss.

6. Gen. Sibley reported 3 battles, and defeat of hostile Indians in
Minnesota.

6. A day appointed by Pres. Lincoln for National thanksgiving and
praise, in gratitude for signal victories obtained by the Fed. armies.

10. Admiral Farragut arrived with his flagship at N. Y.

12. Robert Toombs publishes a letter of this date exposing the
bankruptcy of the Confederacy.

14. Several Union signal officers captured near Warrenton, Va.

14. Gen. Gilmore tried the range of his heavy guns toward Fort Sumter.

15. Union cavalry returned to Corinth, Miss., with 250 prisoners just
conscripted by Forrest.

16. Explosion of the “City of Madison,” ammunition boat at Vicksburg;
about 150 men killed.

16. Severe bombardment of Fort Sumter by the monitors and Fed. batteries
on Morris Isl. Com. Rogers killed on board the Catskill.

17. Great destruction of railroad property and ordnance stores at
Granada, Miss., by Federal troops under Col. Phillips.

18. Union raid in North Carolina. 30 rebs. killed near Pasquotank.

19. Union raid upon Grenada, Miss. Great destruction of railroad
property.

19. Recommencement of the draft in the city of N. Y., which had been
suspended owing to the riot a month previous. 10,000 Fed. troops were
stationed in the vicinity of the city, during the drawing, which was
completed Aug. 28.

20. The town of Lawrence, Kansas, was sacked by rebs. under Quantrell.
130 citizens murdered, and a large portion of the town burned.
Quantrell’s band was pursued by Fed. troops, and over 100 of them
killed.

21. Brig Bainbridge foundered. Only 1 man saved.

21. Chattanooga, Ala., besieged by Gen. Rosecrans’ army.

22. A raid to Pocahontas, Ark. 100 rebs. captured, including Gen. Jeff.
C. Thompson and staff.

22. Charleston, S. C., shelled by rebel batteries on Morris Isl.

23. Gen. Blunt crosses Ark. river. Rebs. fall back without fighting.

24. Cavalry skirmish below Fredericksburg, Va.

24. A squad of Union cavalry captur’d near Annandale.

24. Cavalry skirmish near Fairfax, Va.

25. U. S. gunboats Satellite and Reliance captured by rebs. at the mouth
of the Rappahannock, Va.

25. Rebs. under Price and Marmaduke defeated at Bayou Metiare, Ark.

26. Union expedition to Bottom’s Bridge, Va.; rebs. defeated and bridge
destroyed.

27. John B. Floyd died at Abingdon, Va.

27. Belle Boyd, a reb. spy, arrested in Va.

27. An army train captured near Philippi, W. Va., by rebs.

28. Union camp captured at Edwards’ Ferry, Va.

28. Fight near Warm Springs, Va. Reb. loss 200.

29. 5 deserters shot in the Army of the Potomac.

30. Rosecrans’ army crossed the Tennessee near Chattanooga.

31. Swarms of guerrillas in Western Tenn., and on both sides of the
Miss. riv’r, down to Baton Rouge.

31. Fort Smith, Ark., taken by Gen. Blunt.

=Sept. 1.= Union expedition in W. Va., under Gen. Averill, returns after
general success.

1. Knoxville, Tenn., occupied by the advance of Gen. Burnside’s army.

1. Rebel raid upon Brownsville, Tenn. The place plundered.

2. Skirmish at the Holston river bridge on the E. Tenn. and Ga.
railroad. The bridge burnt by Gen. Burnside’s troops.

2. Gunboats Satellite and Reliance, lately taken by the rebels,
destroyed by a Union force.

3. Kingston, Tenn., taken by Burnside.

3. Gen. Sully’s Fed. troops defeated Indians at Whitestone Hall, on the
upper Missouri, many of whom were killed, and 156 taken prisoners. Fed.
loss, 20 killed, and 38 wounded.

4. Enthusiastic reception of General Burnside and his army by the
inhabitants of Knoxville, Tenn.

5. Skirmish near Moorfield, W. Va. No loss.

5. Woman’s bread riot in Mobile.

7. Gen. Burnside tendered his resignation, which was not accepted.

7. A magazine exploded in Fort Moultrie by Union shells.

7. Morris Island was evacuated by reb. forces, and Fort Wagner and
Battery Gregg were seized by Gen. Gilmore, who took 75 prisoners, and 19
pieces of artillery.

7. An assault was made on Fort Sumter by 450 men in 20 boats from the
Fed. fleet, under Commander T. H. Stevens. The sailors were defeated
with the loss of 114 men.

8. The gunboats Clifton and Sachem attached to an expedition under
General Franklin, grounded on the bar at Sabine Pass, Texas, and were
captured by the enemy.

8. Skirmish at Bath, Va.

8. Rebels defeated near Arkadelphia, Ark.

9. Union defeat at Tilford, Tenn. 300 captured.

9. Surrender of Cumberland Gap, Tenn., to Gen. Burnside, with 2,000
prisoners, and a large supply of army stores.

9. Cavalry skirmish at Alpines, near Chattanooga, Tenn. 4 Feds. killed,
and 12 wounded.

9. Chattanooga occupied by Gen. Crittenden’s corps of Rosecrans’ army.

10. Little Rock, Ark., captured by Fed. troops under Gen. Steele, and
Gen. Davidson appointed military commander.

12. Gen. Negley’s division was attacked and driven through one of the
gaps of Pidgeon Mountain, Tenn., by the troops of Witters and Stuart, of
Bragg’s army. Fed. loss in killed and wounded, 40.

12. Union cavalry raid into Miss’ppi.

12. Sabine Pass expedition returns to N. O., having utterly failed.

13. Cavalry fight beyond Culpepper. 40 rebels and 2 guns taken. Gen.
Pleasanton advanced to the Rapidan.

13. Rebel works at Grant’s Pass, near Mobile, shelled.

14. Arkansas being rapidly cleared of rebels by Gen. Blunt.

15. The President suspended the writ of habeas corpus.

16. Skirmish along Rosecrans’ lines. Little damage.

17. Cavalry fight at Raccoon Ford. Union repulse.

18. White’s rebel cavalry routed at Warrenton, Va.

18. Fight at Reid’s bridge on the Chickamauga creek, Tenn. Cols. Minty
and Wilder’s troops were driven back by rebel infantry.

19. Battle of Chickamauga commences.

20. Battle of Chickamauga rages furiously. Union army defeated.

20. Fight at Zollicoffer, Tenn.

21. At night Rosecrans’ army withdrew from Chickamauga to Chattanooga.
Bragg did not follow.

21. Madison C. H., Va., occupied by Gen. Meade’s cavalry.

21. The rebels seized a steam-tug at Southwest Pass, but it was rescued
by Union troops.

22. Cavalry fight and Union victory at Madison C. H., Va.

22. Confederate cavalry crossed the Potomac near Rockville, but were
driven back.

23. Meade’s army reached the Rapidan.

23. 1,200 rebel prisoners who were captured at Cumberland Gap, arrived
at Louisville.

25. Mosby breaks the railroad near Fairfax.

25. Rebels driven out of Donaldsonville, La.

27. Steamer Robert Campbell burned by rebels at Milliken’s Bend. 25
lives lost.

28. Rebels attack Burnside’s right wing near Knoxville, but are
repulsed.

20. Gen. Hooker arrives in Cincinnati.

29. Two Union regiments defeated above Port Hudson, La,

30. Delegation from Missouri visit the President to ask a change of
commander in the Western Department,

30. Rebel cavalry repulsed in trying to cross the Tennessee near
Harrison’s Landing.

=Oct. 1.= Frequent skirmishes with guerrillas south of the Potomac.

2. Battle at Anderson’s Cross-roads, Ky. Rebel cavalry whipped.

2. Explosion of an ammunition train near Bridgeport, Tenn.

2. Gen. Gillmore moves his headquarters to Folly Island.

3. Fight at McMinnville, Tenn.

3. Greek fire thrown into Charleston.

3. Guerrillas active near Glasgow, Ky.

4. Four steamers burned at St. Louis by rebel incendiaries.

4. Expedition from Fortress Monroe to break up guerrilla bands.

4. Rebels attempt to destroy Shelbyville, Tenn.

5. Rebels destroy a large railroad bridge south of Murfreesboro’

5. The rebels bombard Chattanooga from Lookout Mountain.

5. Cavalry fight near New Albany, Ala.

5. Rebels repulsed in an attack on Murfreesboro’.

6. Rebels whipped near Shelbyville, Tenn.

6. Skirmish at Como, Tenn.

6. Rebels attempt to destroy the New Ironsides with a torpedo. They
fail; their men taken.

7. Federal cavalry ambuscaded near Harper’s Ferry by Imboden.

7. Part of Gen. Blunt’s escort whipped by the rebels near Fort Scott.
All who surrendered were murdered.

7. Rebel steamers destroyed on Red river.

8. Coffee and Shelby, with rebel guerrillas, plundering in Central
Missouri.

8. Fight near Farmingham, Ky. Rebs. defeated.

8. Fight at Salem, Miss. Rebels driven off.

9. Rebels make great efforts to cut Rosecrans’ communications, but fail.

9. The overland Texas expedition from New Orleans reaches
Vermillionville.

10. Skirmish near Madison Court House, Va.

10. Fight at Blue Springs, near Knoxville.

10. Union raiding expedition, under Col. S. H. Mix, leave Newbern, N. C.
Return in a few days entirely successful.

11. About this time much fighting along the Memphis and Charleston
railroad. Rebels generally defeated.

12. Skirmishing along the lines on the Rappahannock. Gen. Meade
withdraws all his army to the north bank.

12. Skirmish at Blackwater, Mo.

12. Fight at White Sulphur Springs, Va.

13. Skirmish at Arrow Rock, Mo.

13. Brisk fight from Catlett’s Station to Manassas.

13. Rebels under Shelby, in Missouri, defeated by Gen. Brown.

13. Skirmish on the Big Black, below Vicksburg.

14. Fight at Bristow Station. Rebels defeated. 450 taken prisoners.

15. Skirmishing on the Bull Run battle-field.

15. 300,000 volunteers were called for by the President, the men to
receive all government bounties. A draft was ordered, at the same time,
for the deficiency in any State quota on January 5, 1864.

16. Rebel raid upon Brownsville, Mo.

16. The Department of the Tennessee, the Cumberland, and the Ohio were
formed into the Military Division of the Mississippi, and Maj.-Gen. U.
S. Grant appointed the commander.

17. Active volunteering for the Union army in Arkansas.

18. Skirmishing near Stone Bridge and Manassas Junction.

18. Jim Keller, a noted guerrilla, taken near Sharpsburg, Ky., and shot.

19. Lee recrosses the Rappahannock, and marches southward.

19. Secret meetings in New Orleans to revive the rebel State government.

20. Gen. Rosecrans relieved. Gen. Grant takes command.

20. Gen. Blunt relieved of Army of the Frontier, Gen. McNeil taking his
place.

20. Kilpatrick’s cavalry on a raid toward Warrenton.

21. Fight near Philadelphia, East Tennessee.

21. Fight at Cherokee Station, near Corinth, Miss. Rebels defeated.

22. Skirmishes at Columbia and Kingston Spring, Tenn.

22. Gen. Averill’s Union cavalry near Covington, Va.

23. Rebel raid upon Danville, Tenn.

23. Fighting at Beverly Ford, on the Rappahannock.

23. Unionists land at Bay St. Louis, Miss., and recapture some
prisoners.

24. Guerrillas driven out of S. Mo.

25. Whole of 1st Ala. cavalry said to have been captured near Tolanda,
Miss., about this date.

26. Grant starts his movement upon Lookout Mountain. A flanking force
crosses the river.

27. Hooker defeats the rebels at Brown’s Ferry.

27. Arkadelphia, Ark., occupied by Union forces about this date.

28. Flanking and capture of Lookout Mountain. It is soon after
abandoned, and reoccupied by the rebels.

29. Union prisoners from Richmond, in a state of starvation, arrive at
Annapolis. Some die on the trip from Fortress Monroe.

29. 60 rebels taken near Columbia, Tenn.

30. Charleston, Mo., robbed by guerrillas.

30. Guerrillas routed near Piney Factory, Tenn.

30. Burnside’s forces cross the river at Knoxville, and occupy Loudon
Heights.

30. Heavy bombardment of Charleston, S. C.

31. Banks’ expedition lands at Brazos Island.

31. Plot in Ohio to overthrow the government comes to light.

31. Rebel cavalry repulsed at Warrenton.

31. Gen. Hooker wins an important victory at Shell Mound, Tenn.

31. Fight at Leiper’s Ferry, Tenn.

=Nov. 1.= Much anxiety in Richmond about food.

1. Union raid in N. Ala. They reach Florence.

1. Skirmish near Washington, N. C.

1. Collision on Opelousas railroad. 16 soldiers killed and 65 wounded.

2. Rebels routed at Roan Springs, Tenn.

2. Rebels capture 2 trains and destroy railroad, near Mayfield, Ky.

2. Unsuccessful attempt upon Sumter by a boat expedition.

3. Rebel cavalry defeated near Columbia, Tenn.

3. Rebels defeated at Colliersville, Tenn. Their Brig.-Gen. Geary
captured.

3. Gen. Washburne’s advance attacked.

4. Banks’ expedition take peaceable possession of Brownsville, on the
Rio Grande.

4. E. Tenn. said to be clear of rebs.

5. Rebels continue to shell Chattanooga.

5. Skirmish at Motley’s Ford, E. Tenn.

5. Union camp at Rogersville, E. Tenn., surprised, and 4 guns and nearly
800 men taken.

6. Guerrillas plunder Blandville, Ky.

6. Much excitement about the starvation of Union prisoners at Richmond.

7. Meade’s army begins an advance. Sharp fighting at Kelly’s Ford and
Rappahannock Station. The rebels driven across the river.

7. Rebels break up the Memphis and Charleston railroad near Salisbury.

7. Rebels defeated at Lewisburg, W. Va.

8. Meade advances, the rebels retiring toward Gordonsville.

8. Successful reconnoissance returns from Chowan river, N. C.

8. Banks’ expedition in possession of Brazos, Bienville, and Point
Isabel.

9. Skirmish near Culpepper. Meade’s army in line of battle all day. Lee
declines a fight.

9. Rebel dash upon Bayou Sara, La.

9. Fight on the Little Tenn. A rebel regiment repulsed with 50 killed
and 40 prisoners.

10. Skirmishing near Culpepper.

10. Rebels concentrate along the south bank of the Rapidan.

10. Supposed conspiracy in Canada to set free rebel prisoners on
Johnson’s Island.

11. Charleston and Fort Sumter regularly shelled day by day.

12. Union meeting held in Arkansas. Rebellion dying out.

13. Rebel foray across the Potomac at Edward’s Ferry.

14. Longstreet crosses the Tenn., and attacks Burnside, who retires
toward his works at Knoxville.

14. Banks captures Corpus Christi Pass.

15. Reconnoissance and skirmish on the Rapidan.

15. Skirmish near Holston, Tenn. Burnside falls back to Lenoir.

16. Gen. Sherman’s corps forms a junction with Thomas at Chattanooga.

16. Fighting near Mount Jackson, Va.

16. Burnside falls back to Bell’s Sta’n.

17. Seabrook Island occupied by Gillmore.

17. Charleston again shelled.

17. Burnside reaches Knoxville.

18. Skirmish at Germania Ford, Va.

18. Capture of Mustang Island by Gen. Banks.

19. Gettysburg Cemetery dedicated.

19. Fighting at Knoxville.

20. Mosby’s guerrillas, in Union uniform, attempt to capture Fed. forces
at Bealton, Va. The trick discovered in time.

21. Skirmishing along Burnside’s and Longstreet’s lines.

22. A portion of Knoxville burned. The city closely invested by
Longstreet.

22. Successful scouting by negro troops at Pocotaligo, S. C. A grandson
of John C. Calhoun killed.

23. Reconnoissance in force by Gen. Thomas. Rebels driven back.

23. Guerrillas whipped in Loudon Co., Va.

24. Storming and capture of Lookout Mountain. Hooker’s “fight above the
clouds.” Defeat of Bragg.

24. Skirmishing near Knoxville.

25. Capture of Missionary Ridge. Bragg’s army routed and driven back
toward Ringgold.

25. Colored troops doing good service in N. C.

25. Rebel cavalry repulsed at Kingston, Tenn.

26. Bragg’s army pursued by Fed. victorious troops.

26. Meade’s army crosses the Rapidan with no serious opposition.

27. Brisk skirmishing between Meade and Lee. Heavy fighting on the left.

27. Wheeler’s rebel cavalry whipped at Cleveland, Tenn.

27. Mosby captures part of one of Meade’s trains.

28. John Morgan and 6 of his officers escape from the Ohio penitentiary.

28. A rebel battery discovered, built behind the Moultrie House while
they kept a hospital flag flying from the roof.

29. Siege of Charleston progresses regularly.

29. Longstreet attacks Knoxville, and is beaten after a heavy battle.

=Dec. 1.= Hooker retires from Ringgold, and Army of the Cumberland again
concentrates at Chattanooga.

1. Meade recrosses the Rapidan.

2. Bragg superseded by Hardee in command of the rebel army in Georgia.

3. Union cavalry make a foray toward Canton, Miss.

3. Sherman’s cavalry near Knoxville.

4. Longstreet raises the siege of Knoxville, Tenn., and retreats toward
Va.

6. Chesapeake, steamer, seized by reb. pirates on board, engineer shot,
and crew landed at St. Johns.

6. The monitor Weehawken founders at Charleston harbor, with all on
board.

7. Jefferson Davis issues his annual message.

7. U. S. Congress reassembles.

8. Pres. Lincoln issues his Message and Proclamation of Amnesty.

11. Fort Sumter vigorously bombarded and partly set on fire.

14. Bean Station, Va. Longstreet attacks Union cavalry under
Shackleford. Rebels lose 800 killed and wounded. Union loss, 200.

15–20. Extensive destruction of salt-works by vessels from the Eastern
Gulf Squadron in West Bay, St. Andrews Sound, Fla. Property of the value
of $3,000,000 destroyed.

16. Maj.-Gen. John Buford died at Washington.

16. Averill destroys 15 miles of Va. and Tenn. railroad.

17. Rebel cavalry attack Meade’s communications at Sangster’s, and are
repulsed.

17. Com. G. J. Van Brunt died at Dedham, Mass., aged 64.

17. The Chesapeake recaptured in Sambro Harbor by the Ella and Annie.
All of the crew but 3 escape.

18. Col. Phillips, with Indian brigade beats and scatters Quantrell’s
force near Fort Gibson, killing 50.

19. Fort Gibson, Ark., attacked by Standthwaite with 1,600 men.
Standthwaite repulsed.

22. Gen. Corcoran killed by a fall from his horse.

22. An expedition from Beaufort starts inland under Gen. Seymour.

22. An expedition of 1 white and 3 colored regiments, starts for Red
river from Port Hudson, under Gen. Ullman.

23. Longstreet’s soldiers are deserting 20 to 50 per day.

23. Union raid on Luray. Large quantities of leather, bacon, &c.,
captured.

23. Ferryboat at Memphis attacked by guerrillas who killed the captain.
The boat escaped.

24. Choctaw Indians and their Chief abandon the rebel cause.

24. Reeves, with 150 guerrillas, surprises Centreville, Mo., and
captures garrison of 50 men, 3d M. S. M.

24. Legareville, S. C., attacked by rebs., who are driven off.

25. Fight between the gunboat Marblehead, and rebel batteries on Stone
river, S. C. Rebels defeated. Fed. loss, 3 killed, 4 wounded.

25. At Pulaski, Tenn., 50 of Forrest’s guerrillas captured by Gen.
Dodge.

25. Gen. Sullivan’s expedition from Harper’s Ferry returns with 100
prisoners and 100 horses.

25. Gen. Banks establishes Department of the Frontier on the Rio Grande.

25. British bark Circassian seized in North river by U. S. Marshal.

26. Dr. Segar, Mr. Perez, and Mr. Carter sent to Fort Lafayette for
smuggling arms to rebels.

26. The Dictator, turreted iron-clad, launched at New York.

26. At Charleston, Tenn., rebel Gen. Wheeler, with 1,500 men attacks
Colonel Liebert and supply train; captures the latter. Col. Long
reinforces Liebert and rebels are beaten, losing 121 prisoners.

29. Part of Union train captured by rebels at Williamsport, Va.

30. Great naval expedition leaves N. O., supposed for Mobile.

31. McChesney’s expedition meets rebels near Washington, N. C., routs
them, kills a lieut. and 5 men, captures 1 cannon and 10 men.


=1864.—Jan. 1.=

                    ARMY CORPS COMMANDERS—GENERALS.

                     1st. John Newton.
                     2d. W. S. Hancock.
                     3d. W. H. French.
                     4th. Gordon Granger.
                     5th. George Sykes.
                     6th. John Sedgwick.
                     7th. Consolidated with others.
                     8th. H. H. Lockwood.
                     9th. A. E. Burnside.
                     10th. Q. A. Gilmore.
                     11th. O. O. Howard.
                     12th. H. W. Slocum.
                     13th. E. O. C. Ord.
                     14th. John M. Palmer.
                     15th. John A. Logan.
                     16th. S. A. Hurlbut.
                     17th. J. B. McPherson.
                     18th. B. F. Butler.
                     19th. W. B. Franklin.
                     20th. } Consolidated to
                     21st. } form the 4th.
                     22d. S. P. Heintzelman.
                     23d. G. L. Hartsuff.
                     Cavalry Corps—George Stoneman.

                         DEPARTMENT COMMANDERS.

             Dep’tm’t of the Tenn.—Maj.-Gen. W. T. Sherman.
               „ the Cumberland—Maj.-Gen. Geo. H. Thomas.
               „ the Ohio—Maj.-Gen. J. T. Foster.
               „ the East—Maj.-Gen. John A. Dix.
               „ the Gulf—Maj.-Gen. N. P. Banks.
               „ N. C. and Va.—Maj.-Gen. B. F. Butler.
               „ the Northwest—Maj.-Gen. John Pope.
               „ Washington—Maj.-Gen. S. P. Heintzelman.
               „ the Monongahela—Maj.-Gen. W. T. Brooks.
               „ the Susquehanna—Maj.-Gen. D. N. Couch.
               „ Western Virginia—Brig.-Gen. B. F. Kelly.
               „ New Mexico—Brig.-Gen. J. H. Carleton.
               „ the Pacific—Brig.-Gen. George Wright.
               „ Kansas—Maj.-Gen. James G. Blunt.
               „ Middle Department—Brig.-Gen. Lockwood.
               „ the South—Maj.-Gen. Q. A. Gilmore.
               „ Missouri—Maj.-Gen. John M. Schofield.

1. Gov. Bramlette of Ky., ordered the arrest of 5 rebel sympathizers for
every loyal man captured by rebel guerrillas.

1. Arrest of a contractor of the Confederate government in New York who
was engaged in manufacturing notes and bonds. The plates and engraving
tools seized, and $7,000,000 in notes and bonds.

1. Departure of a Fed. cavalry reconnoissance to Front Royal, Va.

1. Fed. pickets driven in at Winchester, Va.

2. Gen. Curtis took command of Kansas Military Department.

2. A Fed. train attacked near Moorfield, Va. Rebels defeated, losing 13
killed, and 20 wounded.

3. Fight at Jonesville, Va. 60 Fed. troops killed or wounded, and 300
captured.

3. Death of Archbishop Hughes, in New York.

4. Gen. Grierson pursuing Forrest’s rebel troops south of Coldwater,
Miss.

4. Trial of the crew of the Chesapeake for piracy.

5. Gen. Stoneman made Chief of cavalry under Gen. Grant.

6. Marmaduke and Price at Arkadelphia, Ark., with 7,000 men.

6. Skirmish at Newtown, W. Va.

6. Gen. Kirby Smith takes command of rebels west of Mississippi river.

7. Death of Caleb B. Smith, U. S. Secretary of the Interior.

7. Gen. Grant made Maj.-Gen. in the regular army.

7. Gen. Thomas made Brigadier in the regular army.

8. Gens. Meade and Sherman made Brigadiers in the regular army.

8. Petersburg, Va., attacked by rebels under Fitz Hugh Lee, who were
driven off.

8. Chase and destruction of the Anglorebel steamer Dare.

8. Death of Com. Stover, U. S. navy.

9. Madisonville and St. Francisburg, La., occupied by Fed. troops.

9. Gen. Wild’s colored troops made a raid into N. C., releasing 3,000
slaves, and capturing or destroying an immense quantity of stores.

10. Gen. Rousseau left Decatur, Ala., for a raid in the rear of Gen.
Hood’s reb. army.

10. A severe fight at Strawberry Plains, E. Tenn. Rebels repulsed with
severe loss.

10. A battalion of Cole’s Md. cavalry attacked by rebels under Mosby, in
Loudon Co., Va. Rebels defeated.

11. Madisonville, La., captured by Fed. troops.

11. Longstreet’s rebel army fortifying Bull Gap, Tenn.

11. Capture of rebel salt-works at Tampa Bay, Fla.

11. Battle at Smithfield, Va. Federal troops defeated.

11. Gunboat Iron Age aground and under reb. fire in Wilmington Harbor.

12. Raid by Fed. troops under Gen. Marston in Westmoreland Co., Va. Much
property destroyed.

12. Rebel cavalry defeated at Mossy Creek, Tenn., by Gen. McCook’s
troops, who killed 14 and took 49 prisoners.

13. Gen. Herron’s troops crossed the Rio Grande into Mexico, and
escorted the American Consul to Brownsville with $2,000,000, belonging
to Americans and the Government.

14. Fed. pickets at Three Mile Station, Va., attacked by rebel cavalry,
who were repulsed.

14. A Fed. train of 23 wagons captured near Tenisville, Tenn., by rebels
under Gen. Vance, who are pursued by Col. Palmer, who retook the wagons,
and captured the rebel general, and a portion of his force.

14. Rebel steamer Mayflower captured in Sarasote Pass, Fla.

14. Skirmish at Bainbridge, Tenn.

14. The American ship Emma Jane captured by the Alabama, off Trivandrum,
while on her way from Bombay to Mouhnein.

17. Fight near Dandridge, Tenn. National troops defeated, losing 150
killed or wounded.

17. Longstreet’s force moving towards Knoxville, Tenn.

17. Rebels attack Union lines at Bainbridge, Tenn., but are defeated
with heavy loss.

18. Gen. Butler pronounced an outlaw by rebel Congress.

19. Gen. Sturgis’ Fed. troops retreated from Strawberry Plains to
Knoxville.

19. Mosby defeated at Thoroughfare Gap, Va., by 1st Mass. cavalry.

20. Guerrillas attacked Col. Sweitzer’s brigade of 5th Corps, and were
repulsed, leaving 8 dead on the field.

21. Extensive conflagration of hospital buildings at Camp Winder, near
Richmond, Va.

21. A large number of rebel deserters arrive at Chattanooga.

23. Brandon, Va., on the James river, destroyed by Fed. troops, who
captured 100 negroes, and much rebel property.

23. Union raid to Lake Phelps, N. C. 200,000 lbs. of pork destroyed.

23. Rebel Gen. Rhoddy driven south of Tenn. river, by Col. Phillips,
with loss of his train, 200 cattle, 600 sheep and 100 horses and mules.

25. Athens, Ala., attacked by 600 rebs. under Col. Harrison, who were
defeated.

20. Successful Fed. raid in Onslow and Jones Co., N. C., by Col.
Palmer’s troops.

27. Rebel cavalry under Armstrong and Morgan defeated near Seviervillle,
Tenn., by Gen. Sturgis.

27. Rebels defeated in an attack on Florence, Ala.

28. A meeting at Nashville, Tenn., to restore the State Government.

28. Destruction of rebel salt works at St. Andrews Bay.

28. Rebels defeated at Tunnel Hill, Ga. 32 killed and 1 company
captured.

29. Skirmish 13 miles from Cumberland Gap, Tenn. Fed. cavalry with reb.
troops under Gen. Jones.

29. Bridges and other property destroyed by Union troops at Windsor, N.
C.

29. Major Johnson’s Ky. troops drove rebels out of Scottville, Ky.,
killing 40 and taking 20 prisoners.

30. A Fed. supply train of 80 wagons, guarded by Col. Snyder’s troops,
captured near Petersburg, W. Va., after a 4 hours’ fight. Fed. loss, 80
killed or wounded. The Fed. garrison evacuated the place that night.

30. Skirmish near Cumberland Gap, Tenn. Rebels defeated by Col. Love.

30. Fight at Smithfield, Va.

FEB. 1. Union repulse at Bachelor’s Creek, near Newbern, N. C. Steamer
Underwriter destroyed.

1. President Lincoln calls for 500,000 men for 3 years. Draft for
deficiency to be made March 10.

1. Burlington, W. Va., occupied by rebels.

1. Fighting in the New Creek (Va.) valley.

1. Fed. outposts at Bachelor’s Creek driven in by a rebel force
threatening Newbern, N. C.

1. Fighting at Smithfield, Va.

2. Fight at Mechanicsburg Gap, near Romney, W. Va. Rebels retreat.

2 Rebel troops burn a bridge at Patterson’s Creek, Va., and were next
day driven off by the guard.

2. Union reinforcements arrive at Newbern, N. C., and rebels are driven
back to Kinston.

2. U. S. steamer Levi burned in Kanawha river, W. Va., and Gen. Scammon
and staff captured by rebels.

3. Sherman’s advance defeated rebels in a skirmish at Bolton, Miss.
Union loss, 12 killed, 35 wounded. Rebel loss larger.

3. Gen. Smith’s cavalry expedition starts from Corinth, Miss.

4. Col. Mulligan drove rebels from Morefield, W. Va., after 6 hours’
fighting.

4. A party of rebels captured near White Oak river.

4. Gen. Sherman’s troops skirmish near Champion Hill, Miss.

4. Cavalry skirmish at Canton, Miss.

4. Gen. Averill defeats rebels at Woodfield, W. Va.

4. Rebel battery defeated at Clinton, Miss. Union killed 15, wounded 30.

4. Gen. Seymour’s expedition left Port Royal, S. C., for Jacksonville,
Fla.

5. Engagement between Gen. Sherman’s troops and rebels, at Bear Creek,
near Clinton, Miss.

5. Navajo Indians defeated near Fort Sumner, with loss of 50 killed and
25 wounded.

6. Col. Kit Carson brings 280 Indian prisoners to Santa Fe.

6. Skirmish at Bottom’s Bridge, W. Va., by Gen. Butler’s troops.

7. Rebels driven across the Rapidan by the army of the Potomac.

7. A Federal expedition returned to Knoxville, Tenn., having defeated a
reb. force, killing and wounding 215, and taking 50 prisoners.

8. Rebel regiments at Dalton, and at Decatur, Ala., mutiny when required
to re-enlist. Several soldiers are killed.

8. Gen. Seymour’s expedition arrived at Jacksonville, Fla.

9. Rebels abandon Jacksonville, Fla., losing 100 men prisoners, and 8
guns.

9. Union gunboats arrive at Sartartia, on the Yazoo river.

10. Col. Streight, and 110 other officers, escaped from Libby prison by
tunnelling.

11. Guerrillas rob a train on Balt. and O. railroad, near Harper’s
Ferry.

11. Gens. Grierson and Smith’s Fed. troops start on a raid through Miss.

11. Gen. W. L. Smith’s cavalry expedition started in the direction of
Colliersville, Tenn.

11. First 20-inch gun cast at Pittsb’g, Pa.

12. Fed. pickets at Manassas attacked by Mosby.

12. Smith’s Fed. expedition reaches Okolona, Miss.

12. Passage of the Enrollment bill by the House of Representatives.

13. The line of the Memphis and Ohio railroad evacuated by the Fed.
forces.

14. Negro garrison of 400 at Waterproof, La., was attacked by a large
rebel force, which was repulsed 3 times, and retired.

14. Rebel Col. Ferguson surprised in Wayne Co., W. Va., losing 60
prisoners, with arms and supplies, and releasing 500 Union captives.

14. Meridian evacuated by the rebels.

14. Guerrilla attack at Tecumseh Landing, Miss.

14. A company of colored troops, save 2, surprised and murdered at Grand
Lake, Miss.

14. Gainesville, Fla., attacked by 40th Mass., Capt. Roberts. Rebels
routed with loss of 100.

14. Meridian, Miss., occupied by Gen. Sherman’s Union forces, who
destroyed the State arsenal, and great quantities of ammunition.

15. Chesapeake steamer surrendered to her owners by colonial authorities
at St. John’s.

16. Rebel Gen. Pickett captured at Newbern, N. C.

14–20. Sherman sends various expeditions from Meridian, Miss., who
destroy adjacent towns, and immense quantities of stores.

18. Sherman’s army reaches Quitman, Ga., without opposition.

18. Gen. Seymour left Jacksonville, Fla., with 5,000 troops, and
established a depot of supplies at Baldwin.

18. Gen. Smith’s Union expedition reached Okolona, 75 miles south of
Corinth, Miss.

18. Sloop-of-war Housatonic sunk at Port Royal by a rebel torpedo.

20. Longstreet retreats from Bull’s Gap to Strawberry Plains.

20. Rebels hang Rev. Dr. Cox, chaplain of Corps de Afrique, near
Donaldsonville.

20. Skirmish with Mosby’s rebel cavalry, at Piedmont Station, Va. 17 of
his men taken.

20. Gen. Smith defeated by Forrest at West Point, Ga., and driven back
towards Memphis.

20. Battle of Olustee, Fla. Gen. Seymour’s troops encountered a superior
force of rebels 55 miles beyond Jacksonville, Fla. After a severe
contest of 3 hours, the Union troops were defeated, and retreated to
Sanderson. Union loss, 1,500. Rebel loss about the same.

21. A force of Fed. troops left Hilton Head, and proceeded up the
Savannah river, without result.

21. Heavy fighting at Pontotoc, Miss.

21. Ringgold, Ga., occupied by Gen. Palmer.

22. Mosby defeats 150 Fed. cavalry near Drainsville, Va., who lose 8
killed, 7 wounded, and 75 missing.

22. 28 of Mosby’s men captured near Warrenton by Major Cole.

22. A “Border State Convention,” convened at Louisville, Ky., for the
purpose of adopting harmonious action on important issues then pending
in National affairs. Representatives from six States were present.

22. Rebel train destroyed near Poplar Bluffs, Mo.

22. Louisiana State election. Michael Hahn elected Governor, by 6,830
votes, against Fellows, 2,720, and B. F. Flanders, 1,847.

23. Rebel Gen. Forrest repulsed in an attack on Smith, near Memphis,
Tenn.

23. Bombardment of Fort Powell, Mobile Bay, by Fed. mortars.

23. Skirmish near Tunnel Hill, Ga.

24. Passage of a bill by Congress authorizing the appointment of a
Lieut.-Gen.

25. Skirmish at Bean Station.

25. Rebel raid on Maysville, Ky.

26. Grierson and Smith’s forces return to Memphis. Results of expedition
are 200 rebel prisoners, 1,500 negroes, 300 horses taken; 3,000,000
bushels corn, 4,000 bales cotton, 2,000 hides, and 40 miles of Mobile
and O. railroad destroyed.

26. Tunnel Hill occupied by column from Chattanooga, after heavy
skirmishing.

26. Fire opened upon Fort Powell by Admiral Farragut.

27. Col. Jourdan makes another dash into Jones and Onslow Cos., N. C.,
captures 3 prisoners, and destroys stores and ammunition.

27. Fed. troops withdrew from Tunnel Hill, Ga., to Ringgold.

27. Sherman’s expedition returns to Vicksburg, after 22 days’ raid,
devastating many towns, burning bridges, seizing or destroying vast
quantities of stores, liberating 10,000 negroes, breaking up many miles
of railways, and taking 600 prisoners. Union loss, 170 k. and w.

27. Gov. Goodman, of Arizona, with exploring party, fights with Indians,
killing 5, and wounding many.

28. Colonel Richardson, a notorious guerrilla, captured near Cumberland
river.

28. Seymour’s retreating army reaches Baldwin, Fla., which it evacuates,
burning stores.

28. Gen. Kilpatrick, with 5,000 picked men, leaves Culpepper for a raid
on Richmond, crosses the Rapidan at Ely’s Ford, surprising rebel pickets
at Spottsylvania Court House, and capturing 15 men and 2 officers.

29. Kilpatrick’s exped. passed through Louisa C. H., to Pamunkey Bridge,
destroying as he went. A force is sent by Butler to reinforce him.

29. Expedition of Custar’s cav. crosses Rapidan and Rivanna, destroys an
artillery camp, burns caissons, &c., and recrosses Rivanna bridge,
burning it. Reb. cavalry charged and scattered at Burton’s Ford and
Stannardsville roads, and Custar safely returns with 60 prisoners,
horses, &c.

29. Rebels in force attack Newbern, N. C., and were repulsed. Garrison
ultimately relieved by reinforcements.

=March 1.= A lieut. and 15 men of the 5th Pa. cavalry captured while
reconnoitering in the Dismal Swamp, Va.

1. A force under Gen. Kilpatrick and Col. Onderdonk, left Yorktown, Va.,
on an expedition to King and Queens C. H. Near Carlton’s store the
troops encountered 2 regiments of Virginia cavalry and a body of
citizens. The enemy was routed and driven from the town. After
penetrating to the inner fortifications of Richmond, Kilpatrick’s troops
were repulsed.

1. Reb. Government salt works at St. Marks, Fla., destroyed by
expeditions from gunboat Tahoma.

1. Gen. Thomas, reinforced, marching against Dalton, from Tunnel Hill.

2. Reinforcements reaching Gen. Seymour at Jacksonville.

3. Kilpatrick’s expedition moves to Williamsburg to rest. Many prisoners
and stores captured and destroyed during this raid.

4. Kilpatrick returns within Union lines, having destroyed large
portions of the Va. Central R. R., and burned several mills on James
river. Loss 150, including Col. Dahlgren.

4. Gen. Custer, with 500 men, made a reconnoissance to Ely’s Ford, on
the Rapidan.

5. Reb. cavalry still scouring country E. of Knoxville.

5. Reb. cavalry, in force, attack 93 of 3d Tenn. at Panther Springs.
Union loss 2 k. 8 wounded, 22 prisoners. Rebel, 30 k. and wounded.

5. Battle in Yazoo City, between 11th Ill. and 8th La., and 4 reb.
brigades. Rebs. defeated with considerable loss. Union, killed 6;
wounded 20.

6. Gunboat Peterholf sunk off Wilmington, N. C.

6. 23 Union soldiers, captured from Gen. Foster’s command, hung by rebs.
at Kinston, N. C.

6. Sherman’s main army at Jackson, commencing to cross Pearl river.

7. Sherman’s cavalry enter Brandon after skirmishing, and camp two miles
east.

8. Reb. cavalry driven from camp near Carrolton. Grain mills and stores
burned.

9. Sherman at Hillsboro’, N. C.

9. 40 of 30th Pa. cavalry captured by guerrillas at Bristow Station, Va.

9. An outpost of national troops near Suffolk, Va., was attacked by 4
regiments of infantry, a squadron of cavalry, and 2 batteries of
artillery, and driven to Baner’s Hill. A column of national troops
arrived to the support, and the enemy in turn was attacked, driven back
and pursued. Fed. loss 200.

10. Suffolk, Va., captured. Reb. loss 25 killed. Union, 10 k.

10. A body of 10,000 troops under Gens. A. J. Smith and Thomas Kilby
Smith, left Vicksburg on transports, destined for the mouth of Red
river, at which point a force under Gen. Banks was being rendezvoused,
in view of a campaign in the Red river region.

10. A naval expedition from Brashear City captures camp, arms, flag at
Atchafalaya river.

10. Pilatka occupied by Union forces.

12. Gen. Grant appointed Commander-in-Chief of the armies of the U. S.

13. Indianola evacuated by Union troops.

13. Gen. Smith’s army at Semmesport.

13. Alexandria, La., captured by Fed. fleet.

14. Capture of Fort de Russy, on the Red river, by 1st and 3d divisions
of 16th corps, under Gen. Mower. The fort was blown up at night.

15. President calls for 200,000 men, and a draft ordered for the
deficiency on the 15th of April.

15. Reb. plot to assassinate Pres. Lincoln discovered.

15. Sherman repulses rebs. near Chunky Creek.

16. Gov. Bramlette of Ky., remonstrates against employment of slaves as
soldiers.

16. Battle near Fort Pillow. Rebs. defeated, loss of 50 k. and w.

16. Arkansas votes herself a free State.

16. Gens. Smith and Banks at Alexandria. Rebs. retreat to Shreveport and
burn 2 steamers with 3,000 bales of cotton.

16. Rebs. attack a train from Nashville near Estelle Springs, Tenn.

17. Reb. raid on Magnolia, Fla.

19. Reb. attack on Port Royal, S. C., fails.

21. Gen. Mower captures reb. camp at Henderson’s Hill, 282 prisoners,
guns, &c.

21. Banks captures 306 rebs. near Alexandria.

21. Engagement at Natchitoches, La., between Gen. Mower’s troops of A.
J. Smith’s command, and reb. cavalry under Gen. Lee. 200 rebs. captured,
with but small loss in killed or wounded on either side.

22. The gunboat Petrel captured by rebs. on the Yazoo river.

22. Gen. Thayer, with an army of 5,500 men left Fort Smith, Ark., to aid
Gen. Steele’s army.

23. Union City, Ky., captured by reb. Gen. Forrest. Col. Hawkins, with
the 7th Tenn. cavalry, 400 men, surrendered after repulsing 2,000 rebs.
3 times.

25. Reb. Gen. Forrest, with 7,000 men, attacked the Fed. fort at
Paducah, Ky., defended by Col. Hicks, with 500 men. Aided by 2 gunboats,
Col. Hicks defeated Forrest, who retired with a loss of 1,000 killed and
wounded. Fed. loss 14 killed and 46 wounded. The town was nearly
destroyed by the bombardment.

26. Col. Clayton captured 370 rebs., 35 wagons, and 300 horses, at
Longview, Ark.

29. Battle of Cane river, La. Rebs. defeated.

30. Fight in Arkansas with 1,200 rebs., who are defeated.

30. Riots by disloyalists at Charleston and Mattoon, Ill.

31. Rebs. defeated at Crump’s Hill (Piney Woods).

=April 1.= Fight near Snyder’s Bluff, on the Yazoo.

1. S. S. Maple Leaf blown up by torpedo in St. Johns river.

1. Rebel ram Tennessee sunk near Grant’s Pass.

2. Shelby defeated by Steele near Camden, in Ark.

2. Grierson’s cavalry engages Forrest near Summerville, and falls back.

4. Fight at Roseville, in Ark.

4. Col. Gooding engages Harrison’s guerrillas at Compti, and withdraws
with loss.

4. Marmaduke defeated by Steele on Little Missouri river, Ark.

4. N. Y. Metropolitan Sanitary Fair opened.

5. Fight between gunboats and guerrillas at Hickman, Ky.

5. Banks’ Texas expedition at Grand Ecore.

5. Gen. W. P. White, reb., of Georgetown, S. C., assassinated by his own
men.

6. Fort Halleck, Columbus, Ky., attacked by rebel Gen. Buford. Surrender
refused by Col. Lawrence.

6. Maryland Constitutional Convention on Slavery met.

7. U. S. Senate pass the resolution to submit to States’ Legislatures
the Constitution amendment abolishing slavery.

8. Gen. Franklin’s command of Banks’ expedition defeated at Mansfield,
La., by Gen. Taylor’s army, losing 24 guns and nearly 2,000 men, and
falling back to Grand Ecore. Gen. Smith, next day, relieved Franklin,
defeated the rebels, and captured 36 guns and 2,000 prisoners.

8. Shelbyville entered by 40 guerrillas.

9. Battle of Pleasant Hill, La. After severe fighting the Union troops
retreated at night in good order.

10. Cape Lookout lighthouse seized by 40 rebels.

11. Banks retires to Grand Ecore.

11. Rebels repulsed in an attack on Roseville, Ark.

12. Capture of Fort Pillow and massacre of garrison.

12. Admiral Porter’s Red river fleet attacked by 2,000 rebel infantry on
shore, who are beaten off.

12. Horrible murder of a farmer by guerrillas at Osage river, Mo.

13. A portion of Banks’ army attacked near Blair’s Landing, La. Rebs.
repulsed with loss.

13. New York Soldiers’ Voting Bill passed New York Senate. Yeas 29, nays
none.

14. Gunboat expedition from Butler’s army capture prisoners and stores
at Smithfield, Va.

14. Nebraska Constitution and State Government Bill passed by U. S.
Senate.

15. Chenango, gunboat, exploded.

16. Gunboat Eastport sunk by snag above Grand Ecore.

17. Bread riot by women in Savannah, Ga.

18. Rebel attack on Fort Wessell, near Plymouth, N. C. Gunboat
Southfield sunk. Com. Flusser killed and most of crew drowned. Ram also
destroys the gunboat Bombshell.

18. Baltimore Sanitary Fair opened.

19. Guerrillas driven from Burksville.

19. Transports and gunboats aground above Grand Ecore, Red river.

19. Fort Wessells, N. C., evacuated by Feds.

20. Plymouth, N. C., surrendered to rebels by Gen. Wessels, after severe
loss by rebels. Gen. Wessells and 2,500 men surrendered.

21. North Carolina salt works, worth $100,000, near Wilmington,
destroyed.

22. Rebels captured gunboat Petrel on the Yazoo river, and burnt her.

22. Forrest moving toward Alabama, followed by Grierson.

22. Banks’ army left Grand Ecore for Alexandria, La., by land.

23. Brisk engagement near Camden, Ark. Feds. defeated.

23. Rebels capture and murder Union pickets at Nickajack.

23. N. Y. Metropolitan Sanitary Fair closed. Sword voted to Grant by
30,291, against 14,509 for McClellan.

24. Battle at Cane river, La. Rebels losing 1,000 men and 9 guns.

25. A supply train of 240 wagons, and the 26th Iowa, 73d Ohio, and 43d
Ind. regiments, under Col. Drake, 2,000 men, were captured after a brave
resistance on their return to Pine Bluff, Ark., after an unsuccessful
effort to reach General Steele’s army.

26. Gen. Steele’s army left Camden for Little Rock, Ark.

26. Rebels in strong force attack Admiral Porter’s gunboats on the Red
river, and were defeated with severe loss.

28. Little Washington, N. C., evacuated by Fed. troops.

28. A detachment of Fed. cavalry under Col. Lowell, encountered a
portion of Mosby’s command near Upperville, Va., and defeated them,
capturing 23, killing 2 and wounding 4. Fed. loss, 3 killed, 4 wounded.

30. Gen. Steele’s army in Ark. crossed the Sabine river after a fight
with rebs.

30. Madison Court House, Va., was burned by a Union expeditionary force
while engaged in a skirmish with a rebel company at that place.

=May 1.= Death of Commodore W. D. Porter.

1. Gen. Steele’s army 40 miles from Little Rock, Ark. His cavalry
reached that city.

2. Advance of the Army of the Potomac across the Rapidan towards
Chancellorsville and the Wilderness.

2. West Point, Va., occupied by Feds.

2. Gen. Sturgis’ cavalry encountered a band of the rebel Forrest’s men,
near Bolivar, Tenn., and, after a severe fight, defeated them.

3. The crossing of the Rapidan by the army of the Potomac effected,
without opposition, at Culpepper, Germania, and Ely’s Fords.

3. The Sec. of the Navy sentenced Ad. Wilkes to be reprimanded and
suspended for three years, for insubordination, &c.

4. The crossing of the Rapidan by the army of the Potomac continued.

4 Gen. Warren’s headquarters at the Wilderness.

4. A fleet of transports on Hampton Roads commenced embarking troops.

4. Rebel raid into Princeton, Ky.

5. Battle of the Wilderness commenced. A day of terrific fighting, on
most difficult ground, in the Wilderness, near Chancellorsville, Va.
Night closed in without any definite result. Gen. Hayes killed.

5. Gen. Butler’s army passed Fortress Monroe in transports, on their way
up the James river.

5. Gen. Kautz forced the Blackwater, and burnt the railroad bridge at
Stony Creek.

5. Naval engagement between the reb. ram Albemarle and Fed. fleet, near
the mouth of the Roanoke river.

5. Skirmish at Thoroughfare Gap, Va. Burnside’s cavalry attacked the
enemy on their passage through the Gap.

6. Battle of the Wilderness continued. Another day of terrible fighting,
resulting in the falling back of Lee’s army. Gen. Wadsworth killed. Loss
of both armies about 15,000 each in the 2 days fighting. The rebel Gen.
Longstreet wounded. Fed. wounded, who had been removed to
Fredericksburg, fired on by citizens.

6. Gen. Butler’s forces effected a successful landing near Fort Fisher,
N. C., without resistance.

6. Gunboat Com. Jones blown up by rebel torpedo on James river.

7. Gen. Grant’s army in pursuit of Lee, having marched 15 miles on the
night of the 6th.

7. Tunnel Hill, Ga., taken by Gen. Thomas.

7. Severe fight at Todd’s Tavern, between Custar’s and rebel cavalry.
Loss, 250 on each side.

7. Battle near Petersburg, Va., between Gen. Butler’s army and the
rebels.

7. Tazewell salt-works destroyed by Gen. Averill.

8. General Hancock’s corps passed through Spottsylvania C. H. at
daylight, and, at noon, his headquarters were 20 miles south of the
battle-field of the 6th.

8. Battle of Spottsylvania C. H., Va., commenced. The armies near
Spottsylvania C. H. engaged from 8 to 12 M., at which time Fed. forces
gained the point for which they contended. At 6 P. M., 2 fresh divisions
were thrown in, and, after a severe engagement of an hour and a half,
the rebel position was carried, and their first line of breastworks
occupied.

8. General engagement at Mill Creek Gap, Ga.

8. Union troops held possession of Fredericksburg, Va.

9. Battle of Spottsylvania C. H., Va., continued. Lee’s army made a
stand, but no general engagement occurred in the morning. Maj.-Gen.
Sedgwick killed. The fight in the evening was brought on by Hancock, who
crossed the river Po, and established himself on the south bank.

9. Gen. Butler at Bermuda Landing, in a strong position. His forces
defeated a portion of Beauregard’s army under Gen. Hill. The fight
commenced at noon, and continued till night. The rebels driven back 3
miles.

9. Night attack on Gen. Butler’s lines. The rebels repulsed.

9. Gen. Sherman marched around the rebel right flank, and reached the
North Anna river in safety in the evening. In the night he destroyed a
great quantity of rebel stores, and recaptured 378 Feds.

9. Battle of Cloyd Mountain. Rebels defeated.

9. U. S. transport H. A. Weed blown up by torpedo near Jacksonville,
Fla.

10. Gen. Sheridan crossed the South Anna river.

10. Battle of Spottsylvania C. H. continued. A general advance of Fed.
army ordered at 5 A. M. A tremendous conflict ensued. In the afternoon
an attack was made on the rebel batteries. After the assault had
continued some time it was found that the rebel batteries could not be
carried without great loss, and the effort was abandoned. The battle
ceased about 9 P. M., and was one of the most terrible and bloody of the
war. The 6th corps carried the enemy’s works, and captured 1,000
prisoners. Loss, 10,000 on each side on this day.

10. Gen. Sheridan reported that he had turned the rebel right, reached
their rear, and destroyed from 8 to 10 miles of railroad and other
property.

10. Gen. Averill’s force fought a battle near Wytheville, Va., defeating
Gen. Jones and destroying railroad.

10. Crooke defeated rebels near Newbern, capturing 7 guns and many pris.

10. Sec. Stanton reported that Gen. McPherson was within 7 miles of
Resaca, Ga.

10. Gen. Sherman in front of Buzzard Roost Gap, Ga.

11. The armies under Grant and Lee engaged with varied success until 11
A. M., when Fed. line was somewhat advanced. Gen. Grant reported to the
War Department, that, after 6 days’ fighting, the result was much in
favor of the Union arms.

11. After 3 days of skirmishing Feds. drove the rebels back to Rocky
Ridge and Buzzard Roost Mountain, Ga.

11. Gen. Sheridan captured Ashland Station, destroying a large amount of
stores. He attacked Gen. Stewart at Yellow Tavern, near Richmond, and
penetrated the 1st and 2d lines of the rebel defences.

12. The battle between Grant?s and Lee’s army renewed 5 miles below
Spottsylvania C. H., Va. Gen. Hancock opened the battle, and made a
brilliant assault on A. P. Hill’s division, which he routed. Gen. Grant
reported that the day closed leaving between 3,000 and 4,000 prisoners
in his hands, including 2 general officers, and over 30 pieces of
artillery. In the night Lee abandoned his position.

12. Gen. Sheridan’s army encamped at Walnut Grove and Gaines’ Mills.

12. Gen. Butler’s army engaged.

12. Rebel position at Dalton, Ga., carried and held by Sherman.

13. Gen. Butler’s army advanced toward Petersburg, Va. Skirmishing with
the rebels in the afternoon.

13. Gen. Sheridan’s forces encamped at Bottom’s Bridge.

13. Gen. Sherman’s army in line of battle in Sugar Valley.

13. Gen. McPherson captured 9 trains, with rebel military stores, at
Dalton.

14. Gen. Smith carried the 1st line of rebel works at Petersburg, Va.
The rebels attacked the 5th corps, army of the Potomac, but were finally
driven back with severe loss, after a furious cannonade.

14. Gen. Sherman’s forces actively engaged. Gen. Hooker’s corps attacked
by the rebel Gen. Hood’s division. The rebels repulsed. General battle,
which lasted till midnight, each party holding its respective position.

15. Battle of Resaca, Ga. An all day battle, in which Feds. were
successful. The rebels forced to evacuate Resaca. Gen. Johnston retreats
from Fed. front in the night.

15. Rocky Faced Ridge taken by Sherman.

15. Gen. Sigel fought a battle at Newmarket, Va. The rebels successful.
Union forces fell back to Strasburg, Va.

15. Gen. Banks’ gunboats arrived at Fort de Russey, La.

16. The rebel army encamped around Spottsylvania C. H., Va.

16. The rebels in force attacked Gen. Smith’s lines in Va., and forced
them back with considerable loss.

16. Gen. Butler’s force attacked by troops from Petersburg. Furious
fighting. The rebels made a desperate onslaught in a fog, but were
repulsed.

16. Resaca, Ga., occupied by Gen. Sherman.

16. Admiral Porter’s fleet above Alexandria Falls, released by Col.
Bailey’s dam.

17. Gen. Kautz reached City Point, Va., returning from his raid on the
Danville railroad.

17. Gen. Sherman’s army at Colburn, Ga.

17. General Banks’ forces reached Semmesport, La.

18. Ewell attacked Union baggage train in rear of Grant’s right flank,
but was repulsed.

18. Heavy engagement between the armies in Va. Gen. Hancock charged the
enemy, and carried the first line of rebel intrenchments.

18. Gen. Sherman reached Adairsville. Ga., where he was engaged in
skirmishes.

18. Sec. Stanton announced that a draft would be ordered, to take place
July 1.

18. A pretended proclamation of the President calling for 400,000 men,
and announcing the Spring campaign closed, published in the Journal of
Commerce and the World. The 2 papers suppressed for 3 days, and the
author of the forgery, Jos. Howard, of Brooklyn, arrested.

19. Gen. Ewell attempted to turn Grant’s right, but was repulsed.

19. Gen. Sherman advanced on the enemy, who retreated. Kingston, Ga.,
reached. General Sherman pushed a column as far as Cassville, Ga.

20. Torpedoes explode at Bachelor’s Creek. Many N. Y. soldiers killed
and wounded.

20. Sherman in possession of Kingston and Rome, Ga.

20. Rebels attack Ames’ division of Butler’s army. Heavy losses on both
sides.

20. Arrest of Howard, the forger.

21. Gen. Hancock’s troops entered Bowling Green, Va.

23. U. S. tugboat Columbine captured on St. John’s river by rebs.

24. Rebels destroy bridge over North Anna. Grant’s headquarters at
Jericho Mills. Sheridan destroyed Danville railroad near Richmond, Va.

24. Fitzhugh Lee repulsed at Wilson’s Wharf by Federal negroes under
Gen. Wild.

24. Sherman flanks Johnston at Altoona.

24. 1,000 rebels captured by General Grant’s army at Mt. Carmel Church,
Va.

25. Battle near Dallas, Ga. Hooker drives rebels 2 miles. Union loss,
1,500. Reb. about same.

25. Gen. Birney ascends the Ashepoo river.

26. Grant’s army moves toward Hanovertown.

26. La. State Convention abolishes slavery.

27. Eight steamers and several river craft burned at New Orleans Levee,
by incendiaries.

27. Lee evacuates position on South Anna, and retreats toward Richmond.

27. Sheridan captures and holds Hanovertown and Ferry.

28. Longstreet attacks Sherman at Dallas, and is driven toward Marietta.
Rebel loss, 2,500 killed and wounded, and 300 prisoners. Union loss,
300.

29. Grant’s army crosses the Pamunkey river, Va.

30. Trains of refugees attacked near Salem, Ark. 60 men and several
women killed.

30. Lee attacks Grant north of Chickahominy, and is repulsed. Hancock
drives him out of intrenched line of rifle-pits and holds it.

31. Grant’s and Lee’s armies confronting each other from Hanover C. H.
to Cold Harbor.

31. Gen. Fremont nominated for President and Gen. Cochrane for
Vice-Pres. of U. S.

=June 1.= Expedition under Gen. Sturgis in Miss., defeated, with loss of
wagon train, artillery, and ammunition.

1. Reb. attacks at Cold Harbor, Va., repulsed.

1. Rebs. twice attack Butler, and are repulsed.

2. Schofield and Hooker at Marietta. Cavalry take Allatoona Pass.

3. Battle of Cold Harbor.

4. Reb. night attack on Hancock repulsed.

4. Grant’s cavalry defeated Hampton’s cavalry at Howes’ Store, Va.

5. Reb. attack on left (Hancock’s) repulsed.

5. Sherman’s army fall back toward the Chattahoochie and Atlanta.

5. Marmaduke, with 3,000 men, defeated at Columbia, Ark.

5. Battle of Piedmont, Va. Reb. loss 1,500 prisoners, 3 guns, 3,000
stand of arms, and stores, and a large number k. and w.

5. Gens. Crook and Averill entered Lexington, Va.

5. Rebs. driven through Ripley, Miss., by Gen. Sturgis’ troops.

6. Reb. midnight attack on Burnside repulsed.

6. Sherman’s headquarters at Acworth.

7. Rebs. defeated at Lake Chicot on the Miss. river, by Gen. A. J.
Smith’s troops.

7. The 9th corps, on Grant’s right, attacked briskly, and rebs. driven
back.

7. Morgan, with 3,000 men, commences a raid into Kentucky.

7. Philadelphia Sanitary Fair opens.

7. Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson nominated President and
Vice-President of the U. S.

8. U. S. troops defeated at Mount Sterling, Ky., by Gen. Morgan’s
forces.

8. Paris, Ky., taken by a portion of Morgan’s forces.

8. Sherman’s whole army moves forward toward the Kenesaw range.
McPherson occupies Big Shanty, and rebels fall back with left on Lost
Mountain, and right on Kenesaw.

8. Gilmore’s raid on Richmond fortifications.

9. Gen. Burbridge defeats rebels at Mount Sterling, and captures 700
pris.

10. Gen. Sturgis’ Fed. troops defeated at Guntown, Miss., and again at
Ripley, by Gen. Forrest. Feds. destroy their supply train, and 10
cannon, and retreat towards Memphis, after spirited contest and severe
loss.

10. Lexington, Ky., robbed by Morgan.

10. Rebel guerrillas repulsed at Princeton, Ky.

10. Frankfort, Ky., unsuccessfully attacked by 1,200 rebels.

10. Gen. Hunter, with Crook and Averill, moves from Staunton, Va., after
destroying over $3,000,000 worth of rebel property.

10. Reb. Congress adjourned.

11. Fed. troops defeated near Cynthiana, Ky., and the town burnt by Gen.
Morgan.

11. Gen. Hobson’s Ohio militia captured by Morgan, after a short combat
near Cynthiana.

11. Battle of Trevillian Station, Va. Rebs. badly beaten by Sheridan.

12. Gen. Burbridge defeats and scatters Morgan at Cynthiana, with great
loss.

12. Grant crosses the Chickahominy.

13. Grant’s headquarters at Wilcox’s Landing.

13. The Fugitive Slave Law repealed in the House of Representatives.

13. Gen. Hobson and staff recaptured.

13. Sheridan recrosses the North Anna.

14. Destruction of reb. canal boats and stores at Buchanan, Va., by Gen.
Averill.

14. Grant’s army crossed to south of the James.

14. Reb. Gen. Polk killed.

14. Sherman advancing toward Kenesaw.

15. Battle of Baylor’s Farm. 16 rebel guns, 300 prisoners taken.

16. Gen. Hunter entered Liberty, Va., and destroyed a long bridge. Also
7 miles of railway.

17. Gens. Crook and Averill routed Imboden’s rebel cavalry between
Quaker Church and Lynchburg, Va.

16. A portion of the southern defences of Petersburg, Va., carried by
Hancock and Smith’s corps.

17. Burnside captured 2 redoubts in the Petersburg works, 450 prisoners,
and 4 guns.

17. Severe fighting by Gen. Hunter’s army, 7 miles from Lynchburg, Va.
No decisive result.

18. Simultaneous and desperate assault on the rebel works at Petersburg,
by the Armies of the Potomac and the James.

18. Gen. Wilson’s Federal cavalry took position on the extreme left of
the Union lines at Petersburg.

18. The battle at Lynchburg, Va., renewed. The rebels driven into their
works, and Gen. Hunter retreated.

19. The Army of the James reoccupy Bermuda Hundred, and repair the
railroad.

19. The rebel privateer Alabama was sunk near the Harbor of Cherbourg,
France, after an engagement of over an hour with the U. S. sloop-of-war
Kearsarge, Capt. Winslow. 70 of the rebel crew were taken on board the
Kearsarge, and 115 reached England and France. 3 persons only were
wounded on the Kearsarge.

20. Reb. cavalry defeated at the White House, Va.

21. Rebs. assault Gen. Sherman’s army in Ga. several times, and lose 800
men.

21. Gen. Foster crossed the James river, and intrenched near Aiken’s
Landing.

21. Gen. Hunter’s artillery train retreating from Lynchburg, Va.,
attacked by rebs. He destroys a portion of the guns and caissons, Gen.
Hunter retreats to the Ohio river.

22. A sudden attack on the Union lines at Petersburg, which are broken
by the enemy with severe loss to both sides.

22. Wilson and Kautz’s cavalry destroy 4 miles of the railroad north of
Petersburg, Va.

23. Severe battle on the Weldon R. R., Va. 2 rebel trains captured.

23. Railroad junction at Burksville, Va., destroyed by Feds.

24. Battle of Staunton Bridge, Va. Wilson and Kautz’s Federal cavalry
repulsed.

24. Rebs. attack Gen. Sheridan at White House, Va., and are beaten.

24. Maryland State Convention abolishes slavery.

24. Rebs. attack Feds. at Lafayette, Ga. and are beaten.

25. Reb. night attack on Gen. Burnside’s troops on the James river
repulsed.

27. Fight near Kenesaw Mountain, Ga. Union loss 1,500.

28. Sherman flanks Johnston at Kenesaw Mountain, Ga.

28. Fight at Stoney Creek, Va. Wilson and Kautz’s Fed. cavalry retreat
to Reams’s Station.

29. Battle at Reams’s Station. Fed. cavalry defeated.

30. Johnston evacuates Kenesaw Mountain, Va.

=July 1.= Gen. Wilson’s force reaches Grant’s lines, having lost all
their guns and wagons.

1. An expedition left Hilton Head, S. C., in direction of North Edisto
river.

1. The southern side of James Island, S. C., occupied by Gen. Foster’s
troops.

1. Col. Hoyt and 137 men captured on Johnson’s Island.

2. The expedition from Hilton Head disembark at Seabrook Island.

2. An unsuccessful attempt to take the rebel Fort Johnson on the north
end of James Island.

1. W. P. Fessenden accepts Secretaryship of U. S. Treasury.

2. Rebel Gen. Ewell invades Shenandoah valley in 3 columns.

2. Martinsburg, Va., evacuated by Feds.

3. Sherman’s army entered Marietta, Ga.

3. A part of the expedition from Hilton Head repulsed.

3. Rebels defeated by Sherman, 2 miles south of Marietta, Ga.

3. Winchester, Va., taken by rebs. and Gen. Sigel falls back to Harper’s
Ferry.

4. The rebels took possession of Bolivar Heights, half a mile from
Harper’s Ferry, on their advance into Md., where they were attacked.

4. Sigel arrived at Sandy Hook.

4. Gen. Mulligan evacuated Bolivar Heights.

4. The rebels make a raid to Point of Rocks, Md.

4. Naval operations in Stono river.

5. Slocum’s expedition routed rebels east of Jackson, Miss.

5. Ellicott’s marine colored brigade attacked by rebels near Port
Hudson. Rebels defeated with loss of 150.

5. Martial law declared in Ky. by the President, and the writ of habeas
corpus suspended.

6. Hagerstown, Md., evacuated by Union troops.

6. Gen. Wallace’s troops repulsed near Middletown, Md.

6. Hagerstown, Md., plundered by rebels.

7. Rebel Gen. Johnston crossed the Chattahoochie.

7. Gen. Sigel’s Union forces evacuate Harper’s Ferry.

7. Rebel raiders near Frederick, Md.

7. The rebels checked at Monocacy Bridge.

7. Proclamation issued by President Lincoln appointing the first
Thursday in August as a Fast Day.

8. Harper’s Ferry reoccupied by Fed. forces.

8. The rebel cruiser Florida captured the bark Golconda.

8. Capture of Platte City, Mo., by guerrillas.

8. Rebels enter Fredericksburg, Md.

8. Parksville, Mo., sacked by rebels.

9. Battle at Monocacy, Md., lasting from 9 A. M. to 5 P. M. Fed. forces
overpowered and forced to retreat in disorder, losing 1,000 men.

9. Fed. forces on John’s Island, S. C., twice repelled a rebel assault.

9. Gen. Sherman reached the Chattahoochee.

9. Gov. Brown, of Georgia, ordered all the militia of the State into
active service.

9. Rebels capture Westminster, Md. Couch reoccupies Hagerstown, and
Hunter, Frederick.

10. Gen. Rousseau leaves Decatur with 2,700 men on an expedition in
rebel Gen. Hood’s rear.

10. Gen. Johnston retreats to fortifications around Atlanta.

11. The rebels near Washington, D. C. They capture a railroad train at
Magnolia Station, between Philadelphia and Baltimore, and Maj.-Gen.
Franklin, who was on the train.

11. Burning of Gunpowder bridge, Md., by the rebels.

11. Rebel salt works at Tampa Bay destroyed.

12. Engagement near Fort Stevens, one of the defences of Washington. The
rebels driven off with severe loss.

13. Gen. Rousseau defeated 4,000 rebs. under Clanton, near Coosaw river.

13–15. Gens. Smith and Slocum defeat Forrest in 5 battles in Tenn.,
driving him from Pontotoc to Tupelo. Rebel loss, 2,000. Union loss, 300.

15. Rebels drive 1,000 horses and 5,000 cattle from Montgomery Co., Md.,
into Va.

16. A rebel force captured the Fed. stockade at Brownsboro’, on the
Memphis and Charleston railroad.

17. Gen. Sherman’s command moved forward to within 5 miles of Atlanta,
Ga. His advance crossed the Chattahoochee river.

17. Gen. Joseph E. Johnston turned over the command of the rebel army at
Atlanta to Gen. J. B. Hood.

17. Severe fight near Grand Gulf.

17. Indian raid on Fed. post at Fort Larned.

17. Col. Jacques and Mr. Gilmore visited Jeff. Davis at Richmond, by
permission of Fed. authorities.

17. Wirt Adams defeated at Grand Gulf, by Fed. Gen. Slocum, with heavy
loss.

17. Gen. Rousseau defeated 1,500 rebs. under Clanton, at Chewa Station.

=July 18.= Crook defeated by Breckinridge at Island Ford, Va. Loss, 300.

18. Gen. Duffie defeated at Ashby’s Gap, Va., losing 200 wagons and many
prisoners.

18. Gen. Crook defeats Early at Snicker’s Gap, capt’g 300 wagons and
many pris.

18. Decatur, Ga., occupied by Federal forces.

18. President Lincoln issued an order for a draft of 500,000 men to take
place immediately after Sept. 5, the term of service to be one year.

18. The President sent his famous “To whom it may concern,” dispatch.

19. Sherman’s forces reached Peachtree creek, 4 miles north of Atlanta,
Ga. They were attacked by Hood’s troops, who were defeated. Rebel loss,
6,000, including 3 generals. Fed. loss, 1,713.

20. Gen. Smith’s forces reached La Grange, Tenn.

20. Gen. “Baldy” Smith took leave of his command before Petersburg, Va.,
and Gen. Martindale assumed command.

20. Gen. Averill attacked and defeated the rebel Early in front of
Winchester, Va. Rebel loss, 300 killed and wounded, and 200 prisoners.
Early was reinforced and repulsed the Union troops.

21. Henderson, Ky., attacked by 700 rebels.

21. The rebel lines contracted close to Atlanta.

21. Skirmishing on the James river.

22. Great battle before Atlanta. The rebels assaulted Sherman’s lines
near Atlanta with great fury seven times, and were as often repulsed
after a terrible struggle. Fed. loss was 3,521; the rebel loss estimated
at 10,000. Gen. McPherson was killed.

22. Skirmishing in front of Burnside’s corps of the Army of the Potomac.

23. Louisiana State Convention abolish slavery.

23. Burial of the dead before Atlanta.

23. Atlanta shelled.

23. Heavy fighting in the Shenandoah Valley.

23. Averill defeated at Winchester.

24. The cavalry expedition which left Decatur, July 10, arrived at
Marietta, Ga., having been completely successful in a raid on the
Montgomery and West Point railroad.

25. The rebels again occupied Martinsburg, Va.

26. Battle near Helena, Ark. Federal forces at first were unsuccessful,
but afterward repulsed the enemy and charged through their lines.

26. Engagement at Point of Rocks, Md.

26. The rebels made an attempt to flank Gen. Butler’s position.

26. Gen. Stoneman dispatched a cavalry force to destroy the Macon and
Western railroad. They succeeded in destroying 18 miles of track, and in
capturing 500 rebels, when they were in turn attacked, the prisoners
released, and 1,000 of Gen. McCook’s troops captured.

27. Fed. army attacked while crossing James river. A spirited engagement
in which the rebels were driven back.

27. Gen. O. O. Howard assumed command of the Department and Army of the
Tennessee, lately commanded by Gen. McPherson.

21. The siege of Atlanta commenced. The 15th corps of Sherman’s army
assaulted the rebels in force and defeated them. The rebel army under
Hood was repeatedly hurled against Sherman’s army, but as often rolled
back and cut to pieces. The rebels suffered severely without gaining any
advantage.

28. An expedition sent into N. C.

28. Gen. Hooker relieved of his command at his own request.

28. Fed. gunboats in Louisiana destroyed a large amount of rebel lumber
and 2 saw mills.

29. The rebels crossed the Potomac on a raid into Maryland and
Pennsylvania.

29. Fed. cavalry occupy Fayetteville, Ga. They cut the Atlanta and Macon
railroad.

29. Fights with the rebels near Morganzia, La.

30. Explosion of an immense mine by Union troops in front of Burnside’s
position before Petersburg. Its explosion was the signal for the
discharge of every piece of artillery on the line from the Appomattox to
the extreme left. After the discharge of the artillery the army advanced
and assaulted the rebel works, but after a desperate attempt to carry
them was repulsed, with a loss of over 4,000 men.

30. The rebels entered Chambersburg, Pa., where the rebel commander
demanded $500,000 under threat of burning the city. His demand not being
complied with, the city was burned.

31. Gen. Stoneman and part of his command captured by the rebels in
Georgia.

31. The rebels occupied Frederick, Md.

=Aug. 1.= Bradley Johnson and McCausland defeated at Cumberland, losing
part of their plunder from Pennsylvania.

2. Fed. Col. Stout, with 500 men, posted to intercept the retreat of
McCausland and Johnson, was captured by them, losing 90 men.

3. Return to Norfolk, Va., of a cavalry expedition sent into N. C., July
28, after having visited 5 counties and captured considerable property.

4. Fast day in the U. S.

4. Exchange of the Union and rebel officers, under fire, at Charleston,
S. C.

4. Gen. Kelley repulsed rebels under Johnson and McCausland at New Creek
Md. The fight continued until after dark, the rebels retiring in the
night.

5. Great battle at the entrance of Mobile Bay. Fort Gaines opened on
Fed. fleet at about 7 A. M., the monitor Tecumseh having opened the
attack a short time before. The rebel ram Tennessee captured after one
of the fiercest naval battles on record. In the night the rebs.
evacuated and blew up Fort Powell. The monitor Tecumseh was blown up by
a rebel torpedo.

5. Explosion of a rebel mine near Petersburg, Va. But little damage
done. A terrific fight in front of Petersburg, lasting from 5:30 to 7:30
P. M. It commenced by a charge of the enemy, which was repulsed with
slaughter.

6. Com. Farragut shelled Fort Gaines, Mobile Harbor.

6. Battle of Atlanta. The rebels made a demonstration on the 16th corps,
and were heavily punished, and driven back. The 23d corps were driven
from the reb. lines, losing 500 men.

6. Indian massacre near Beaver Creek.

7. Gen. Averill overtook rebels under McCausland, Gilmore, and McNeil,
near Moorefield, in the Shenandoah Valley, and attacked them with great
success, routing the rebels, capturing their artillery, a large number
of prisoners, horses, and arms.

7. Gen. Sheridan assumed command of Middle Military Division.

8. Surrender of Fort Gaines, Mobile Bay, to Com. Farragut.

8. Steamboat Vanderbilt sunk in the Hudson.

8. Indians capture 9 wagons at Plumb Creek, and kill the teamsters. They
also burn 21 wagons at Point Ranche.

8. Gen. Burris returns to New Madrid after 17 days’ scout in S. E. Mo.
and N. E. Ark. 50 rebs. killed, 40 wounded, 57 prisoners.

9. Dutch Gap Canal, Va., commenced by Gen. Butler.

9. Terrible explosion of a boat loaded with ammunition at City Point,
Va.

9. Heavy shelling of Atlanta.

10. Gen. Sheridan’s army skirmishing near Winchester, Va. Sharp fight
near Martinsburg.

10. Steamer Empress fired into by reb. batteries on the banks of the
Mississippi.

10. Sharp skirmish near Abbeyvale, Miss.

11. The Tallahassee scuttled the sch’r S. A. Boyce, burnt the pilot-boat
James Funk, brig Carrie Estelle, bark Bay State, brig A. Richards, and
bonded the schooner Carrol for $10,000; burnt the pilot-boat Wm. Bell
and the schooner Atlantic.

11. Battle of Sulphur Springs Bridge.

12. The Tallahassee bonded the bark Suliote, burnt the schooner
Spokelane and ship Adriatic, scuttled the brig Billow, bonded for
$30,000 the schooner Robert E. Pecker.

12. Attack of guerrillas on the gunboat Reliance in Northumberland Co.,
Va.

13. Gen. Grant threw a powerful force, under Gen. Hancock, across the
river at Deep Bottom. Hancock took position 10 miles from Richmond. Gen.
Birne assaulted the rebel works in his front.

13. Gen. Burnside relieved.

13. Guerrillas attacked Selma, Ky.

13. Gen. Smith attacked the rebels at Hurricane Creek, Miss., and
defeated them.

13. The Tallahassee scuttled the bark Glavomore, and burned the sch’r
Lamot Dupont.

13. Mosby attacks Sheridan’s supply train near Snicker’s Gap, Va.

13. Rebel cavalry captured 5 steamers with governm’t cattle at
Shawneetown.

14. The rebel Gen. Wheeler demanded the surrender of Dalton, Ga., which
was refused by Col. Siebold. The rebels entered the town, but were kept
at bay by the garrison.

14. The Tallahassee scuttled the ship James Littlefield.

14. Battle of Strawberry Plains, Va. 10th corps take rebel line of
breastworks, 4 guns, and 100 prisoners.

15. Gen. Sheridan falls back toward Charlestown, Va.

15. Fighting near Richmond.

15. The Tallahassee scuttled schooners M. A. Howe, Howard, Floral
Wreath, Restless, Etta Caroline, and bonded sch’r S. K. Harris.

15. Gen. Steadman reinforces Dalton, and rebels are driven out of town
in confusion.

15. Kilpatrick cut West Point, Ga., road at Fairburn, and burned depot.

15. 10th corps threaten Malvern Hill.

16. Fighting on the north bank of the James at Deep Run. The engagement
resulted favorably, though not decisively, for the Feds. The enemy
somewhat driven back from their position.

16. Cavalry fight between a division of Sheridan’s army and the rebels,
near Front Royal, Va.

16. Fight near Chattanooga.

16. The Tallahassee scuttled the bark P. C. Alexander, and burned the
sch’rs Leopold, Pearl, Sarah Louisa, and Magnolia.

17. The Tallahassee scuttled the sch’r North American, and bonded the
brig Neva for $17,500.

18. A furious attack on Burnside’s corps at Six Mile Station, on the
Weldon railroad, near Petersburg, which was repulsed with great loss to
the rebels.

18. General Warren moved his corps across the Weldon railroad, in doing
which he was engaged in considerable fighting.

18. The Tallahassee arrived at Halifax, after having burned the
schooners Josiah, Acorn, Diadem, Sea Flower, and brig Roan.

19. The rebels drove in Warren’s pickets and forced back 2 divisions of
Fed. army at Six Mile Station. A heavy fight took place, resulting in
re-establishing Union lines and capturing 1,500 prisoners. Fed. loss,
3,000.

19. Martinsburg robbed by rebels.

20. Guerrillas raid on Woodburn, and set fire to depot.

21. Rebels attack Union position on Weldon road, and after great loss
(over 2,000) withdraw. Union loss about 600.

21. Battle of Summit Point, Va. Early driven 2 miles.

21. Memphis entered by Forrest with 9 regiments and 4 guns; took 250
prisoners. Union forces arriving, Forrest left; was overtaken near
Lanes’, and severely punished in a 2 hours’ battle.

22. Cannonade of Fed. works near Petersburg. The rebels charged, but
finding themselves in a trap, retreated in confusion.

22. Rebel force on Weldon road withdrawn from front of 5th and 9th
corps, and intrenches 3 miles from Petersburg.

22. Rebel Johnson’s forces whipped at Canton, Ky., by Col. Johnson, and
himself killed.

22. Action at Rogersville, Tenn.

23. Rebels fall back to their lines 2 miles from Petersburg, and Gen.
Warren’s lines advanced.

23. Shelby captures nearly all 54th Ill. near Duval’s Bluff.

23. Fort Morgan, Mobile Bay, surrendered unconditionally. By its
surrender Feds. captured 200 prisoners, 60 pieces of artillery.

24. Skirmish on Sheridan’s left.

24. Reconnoissance of Gen. Crook’s command in the Shenandoah Valley.

24 Clinton, Miss., taken by Generals Herron and Lee.

25. Severe battle on the Weldon railroad near Reams’ Station. A
desperate attempt of the rebels to retake the road. Hancock’s corps was
several times attacked, the enemy being each time repulsed. At 5:30 P.
M., a combined attack on his centre and left was repulsed, the enemy
withdrawing, leaving their dead and wounded on the field. Union forces
afterward fell back. Fed. loss, 1,000 killed and wounded, 3,000
prisoners and 9 guns. Rebel killed and wounded 1,500.

25. Gen. Butler’s picket-line driven in, but re-established.

25. Torbert encounters Early’s forces at Leetown, narrowly escaping
flanking. He falls back to near Shepardstown.

26. The rebel Gen. Early attempted to cross the Potomac, but was driven
back by Averill.

26. Kilpatrick destroyed 14 miles of Macon railroad, and stores,
capturing 6 guns, 4 flags, and 200 prisoners; afterwards forced to
abandon most of his captures.

26. Rebels fall back from Sheridan’s front toward Smithfield.

27. Guerrillas defeated at Shelbyville, Ky.

28. Early driven through Smithfield.

28. Gen. Sherman’s army reached the West Point railroad at Red Oak, 13
miles from Atlanta, and began the destruction of the road from that
point.

29. McClellan nominated for President and Geo. H. Pendleton for Vice.

30. Sherman interposed his whole army between Atlanta and Hood’s army
intrenched at Jonesboro’.

31. Great battle near Atlanta. During the afternoon, Fed. artillery kept
up a cannonade to provoke the rebels to an assault. In the afternoon the
rebels assaulted Union lines, but were repulsed with great loss. The
rebel loss in the attack on Ransom’s and Logan’s lines estimated at
3,000. In the evening the 14th corps struck the railroad, 5 miles south
of Jonesboro’. The work of destruction commenced immediately.

=Sept 1.= The battle of Atlanta continued. A brilliant charge was made
at 5 P. M. by Gen. Davis’ force, resulting in the discomfiture of the
rebels and surrender of a large number. Great destruction by the rebs.
of large magazines of stores accumulated at Atlanta. They blew up, in
addition to other things, 80 car-loads of ammunition. Gen. Slocum’s
corps assaulted the enemy’s works around the city, in the afternoon.

1. Panic and evacuation of the city.

1. Rebels driven from Jonesboro’ to Lovejoy’s Station, losing 1,000
prisoners and 10 guns.

1. Gen. Rousseau drives 10,000 rebels, near Murfreesboro’ pike 3 miles.

2. Atlanta, Ga., occupied by Sherman’s army at 11 A. M.

2. Sharp fighting near Martinsburg, Va.

3. Milroy attacks 3,000 rebel cavalry near Murfreesboro’, and drives
them toward Triune.

3. Sheridan’s army again moves forward from Charlestown. Battles of
Darkesville and Perryville, Va. Rebels were repulsed, losing 70 pris.
Union loss, 300. Mosby captured an ambulance train which had left the
field.

4. John Morgan’s forces routed, and Morgan killed by Gen. Gillem, at
Greenville, Tenn. Killed, 100; prisoners, 75, including Morgan’s staff.

5. Steamer Elsie captured in running the blockade at Wilmington.

5. The President issued a proclamation, recommending that Sunday, Sept.
11, be observed as a day of Thanksgiving.

6. Battle of Matamoras.

7. Dibbel’s rebel brigade surprised at Readyville, Tenn., by 220 of 9th
Pa. cavalry, losing 130 prisoners.

8. Rebel Col. Jessie and 100 men captured near Ghent, Ky.

8. Brownsville, Texas, attacked by Cortinas, and the rebels driven from
the town.

8. Gen. McClellan accepted the nomination for the Presidency.

8. Gen. Sherman ordered the removal of the inhabitants of Atlanta, and
proposed a truce of ten days.

9. Spirited attack on the rebel pickets near Petersburg, in the night.

10. Gen. Sheridan’s forces in the Shenandoah Valley attacked at
Darksville, Va.

10. Grant drives picket line across Plank Road, and advances his
permanent line half a mile.

10. Steamer Fawn burned by rebels on Dismal Swamp Canal.

11. An expedition left Fort Morgan, near Mobile, and proceeded up White
river, destroying a large amount of lumber at Smith’s Mills.

13. Attack on the rebels near Occoquan creek by some of Sheridan’s
forces. A South Carolina regiment captured.

14. Secretary Stanton ordered the draft to be commenced Sept. 19.

14. Price, with about 10,000 men, crosses White river, en route for Mo.

14. Gov. Brown, of Ga., withdraws 15,000 Ga. militia from Hood’s army.

16. 2,500 cattle, the 13th Pa. regiment, with arms, wagons and camp,
captured at Sycamore Church, Va.

18. Averill drives rebels out of Martinsburg.

19. Battle at Powder Mill, on Little Rock river.

19. Steamer Island Queen captured and sunk on Lake Erie, and the Philo
Parsons burned by rebels on British soil.

19. Battle of Bunker Hill, near Winchester, Va. A great battle fought by
Sheridan in the Shenandoah Valley. Sheridan made the attack and won a
splendid victory, capturing over 2,500 prisoners, together with 9 battle
flags, and 5 pieces of artillery. The reb. Gens. Gordon and Rhodes were
killed, and 3 other general officers wounded. All of the rebel killed
and most of the wounded fell into Fed. hands.

20. Gen. Sheridan crossed Cedar creek, having pursued the enemy 30
miles.

20. Athens, Ala., captured by Forrest. 500 Union soldiers forced to
surrender.

21. Fremont and Cochrane withdrew their names as candidates for
President and Vice-President.

21. Battle of Fisher’s Hill, Va. Sheridan’s army defeated the rebels.
Early loses 1,100 prisoners and 16 guns.

21. Torbert’s cavalry defeats Wickham at Luray, capturing some
prisoners.

23. Rebel Gen. Price occupies Bloomfield, Mo.

23. Montgomery Blair resigned his office of Postmaster-General.

23. A part of the rebel Gen. Forrest’s force, about 400 strong, crossed
the Tennessee river, at Bates’ Landing.

25. Gen. Sheridan’s advance passed beyond New Market. His forces drove
the enemy from Mount Jackson.

25. Athens, Ala., occupied by the rebel Gen. Forrest’s troops.

25. The rebels at Luray attacked.

25. A force of rebel cavalry occupied Frederickstown, Mo., 20 miles east
of Pilot Knob.

26. Battle at Pilot Knob.

26. Gen. Sheridan’s headquarters at Harrisonburg, Va. His cavalry
entered Stanton, Va., and destroyed a large quantity of rebel government
property. They then proceeded to Waynesboro’, destroying an iron bridge
over the Shenandoah and a large amount of property. Gen. Early’s reb.
army routed and demoralized, fled through Brown’s Gap toward
Gordonsville. Gens. Merritt and Powel were driven back when they
attacked Early at Brown’s Gap.

27. Skirmish with Forrest’s troops in Tenn.

27. The rebels attacked Fed. forces at Mineral Point, Mo.

27. Gen. Ewing arrives at Rolla, Mo., after being surrounded at Harrison
by Price’s forces.

28. Rebel night attack on Hancock’s front, on Jerusalem Plank Road
repulsed.

29. Gen. Ord’s corps of Grant’s army advanced and carried a very strong
fortification and line of intrenchments below Chapin’s Farm, taking 15
pieces of artillery and 200 or 300 prisoners.

29. Gen. Barney advanced from Deep Bottom and carried the Newmarket
road.

30. Gen. Butler’s forces assaulted the rebels in 8 columns near Chapin’s
Farm.

30. Warren captures first line of rebel works at Preble’s Farm,
capturing 50 men, and 1 gun. Rebels retired half a mile back to strong
positions, and repulsed an attack thereon, capturing 1,500 prisoners,
and killed and wounded 500.

30. The 10th and 18th corps concentrated at Newmarket Heights, furiously
attacked by rebels, and swept back with terrible loss 3 times, losing
1,000, beside 200 prisoners and 2 flags.

=Oct. 2.= The rebels attacked at Saltville, Va., and were driven into
their works.

2. Rebels in front of Warren fell back to their main lines, from
Petersburg lead works, to Southside Road.

3. Lieut. Meigs murdered by guerrillas in Shenandoah valley.

3. Sherman’s forces crossed the Chattahoochie with 15 days’ rations,
moving toward Marietta.

3. Gen. Thomas ordered to Chattanooga after Forrest, and Gen. Corse to
Rome.

5. Hood captured small garrisons at Big Shanty and Ackworth, and burned
7 miles of railway; then moving on Allatoona.

6. Gen. Sheridan commenced moving back from Port Republic, Mount
Crawford and Harrisonburg, Va., previous to which the whole country from
the Blue Ridge to the North Mountain was made untenable for the rebel
army by destroying an immense quantity of stores, grain, &c.

6. Allatoona unsuccessfully attacked by Hood.

6. Fed. Gen. Lee captures Clinton, La., and 30 prisoners.

7. Battle at Darleytown Road and New Market Heights. Rebel loss 1,000;
Union 500. Gen. Kautz’s cavalry attacked by rebels, who suffered
considerably. They afterwards attacked Birney’s division, who also
repulsed them with very heavy loss. In the afternoon Gen. Butler took
the offensive and recaptured some of the intrenchments which had been
taken from Kautz.

7. Reb. privateer Florida captured at Bahia, Bay of San Salvador, by U.
S. S. Wachusett, Commander Collins.

7. The advance of the rebels from Osage river, Mo., spiritedly contested
by Union cavalry.

7. Gen. Sheridan’s forces reached Woodstock, Va.

7. A band of 200 rebels captured a steamboat and crossed into Ky.

8. Rebels at Woodville attacked by expedition from Gen. Dana, killing
40, and capturing 3 guns and 56 men.

8. The Fifth and Ninth Corps, Army of the Potomac, advanced their lines
half a mile, driving the rebel skirmishers into their breastworks.

8. The rebels drew up in line of battle near Jefferson City, Mo., but
afterwards moved off toward the west.

9. An engagement took place near Fisher’s Hill, Va., in which the rebels
were defeated, leaving 11 pieces of artillery and other munitions of
war.

10. Engagement with the rebel Gen. Forrest at East Point, Tenn.

11. Gen. Curtis drove the rebels out of Independence, Mo.

11. Bloody fight with guerrillas near Winchester, Va.

11. Successful reconnoissance from the Army of the Potomac to Stony
Creek.

11. Reb. Gen. Buford, with 1,200 cavalry, crosses Cumberland River,
Tenn., at Harpeth Shoals.

11. Col. Weaver, with 90 colored troops, attacked by 200 rebels near
Fort Nelson, Tenn. Defeats them, and kills and wounds 27.

12. Death of Chief-Justice Roger B. Taney.

13. Reconnoissance in force from the Army of the James.

13. Attack on Resaca, Ga., by rebel Gen. Hood. The rebs. repulsed.

13. Engagement at Greenville, East Tenn.

15. The rebel army under Longstreet having appeared near Strasburg, Va.,
Gen. Sheridan advanced and found them drawn up in four lines of battle,
but, on charging, the rebels fled.

16. Hood’s army at Lafayette.

16. Gen. Sherman took Ship’s Gap.

18. Maj.-Gen. Birney died at Philadelphia.

18. Gen. Blunt, with 2,000 cavalry and 4 howitzers, entered Lexington,
Mo.

19. Battle of Cedar Creek, Shenandoah Valley. Gen. Sheridan’s army was
attacked before daylight and its left turned and driven in confusion,
with a loss of 20 pieces of artillery. Gen. Sheridan afterward arrived
on the field and drove the rebels, taking 48 pieces of artillery and
many prisoners, gaining a great victory. Sheridan pursued the rebels to
Mount Jackson, which he reached in the night.

19. The rebel Gen. Price attacked Gen. Blunt at Lexington, Mo., with an
overwhelming force, and after a sharp fight drove him from the city.
Gen. Blunt fell back to the Little Blue river, fighting desperately, and
retarding the advance of the enemy.

19. The rebels entered Mayfield, Ky.

20. Capture of 10 of the St. Albans robbers.

20. Skirmishing between the Little and Big Blue river, Mo.

21. A very gallant fight between Little Blue river and Independence, Mo.
Fed. troops fought Price’s army 5 hours. The Union forces evacuated
Independence, falling back on the Big Blue.

22. Col. Emmerson was attacked at Bryan Ford, Mo., by a heavy column of
rebels, at 10 A. M. At 3 P. M. the rebs forced the ford. Fed. troops
fought the rebels until after dark, driving them 4 miles. Gen.
Pleasanton pursued Price with 2,000 men, fought him on the battle-field
of the day before, drove him from Independence, and pursued him sharply.
Pleasanton captured a large number of prisoners and 3 pieces of
artillery.

25. Price defeated at Fort Scott Road, losing camp equipage, 20 wagons
of plunder, 1 gun, and cattle.

26. Price driven from Mine Creek by Pleasanton, and loses 1,000
prisoners, and 1,500 stand of arms. Gens. Marmaduke and Cabell captured.

27. An advance in force on a reconnaissance, made by Warren’s corps of
Grant’s army. In the evening the enemy attacked Hancock’s corps
vigorously, but were repulsed. Feds. retire. Union loss 3,000. Reb. loss
1,500.

27. The reb. ram Albemarle sunk by Lieut. Cushing, in the Roanoke river.

27. Arrest of Col. North on charges of fraud in the matter of soldiers’
votes.

27. Price forced to retreat from Marais des Cygnes, Ark.

28. Reb. Gen. Forrest captured a Fed. gunboat and 3 transports at Fort
Hieman, on the Tennessee river.

28. Price again defeated at Newtonia, destroying more wagons, and losing
250 men.

28–30. Rhoddy’s cavalry attack Col. Morgan’s colored troops at Decatur,
and lose 400 prisoners and many killed and wounded. Union loss 100.

28. Gen. Gillem had a fight with the rebels under Vaughn at Norristown,
East Tenn., completely routing them, and capturing 200 prisoners and 8
pieces of artillery.

28. A reb. force of 2,500 attacked Fayetteville, Ark., but was repulsed
with heavy loss.

29. Maryland proclaimed a Free State by Gov. Bradford.

30. Fed. fleet shelled Plymouth, N. C.

31. Nevada admitted as a State by proclamation of the President.

31. Capture of reb. batteries and their ordnance and ordnance stores, at
Plymouth, N. C.

=Nov. 3.= The rebel army under Hood attempted to cross the Tennessee,
near the mouth of the Blue Water, and were repulsed by Gen. Sherman.

3. The rebels bombarded Fayetteville, Ark.

4 Johnsonville, Tenn., a depot for Fed. supplies on the Tennessee river,
was attacked and destroyed by rebels under Col. Forrest, and $1,500,000
value of property destroyed. 3 “tin-clad” gunboats and 7 transports were
destroyed by the rebels.

4. The siege of Fayetteville, Ark., by the rebels, raised.

4. Revelation by one of the conspirators of a plot to overthrow the
Government, release and arm the rebel prisoners, and kill Gov. Morton,
of Ind.

5. Gen. Butler assumed command of the troops arrived and to arrive in
New York city to protect the city during election.

5. Rebels unsuccessfully attack Fort Sedgwick, on Jerusalem Plank Road,
southeast end of Petersburg, Va. Union loss, 70. Rebel, 120.

6. Rebels attack Mott’s and Gibson’s pickets; capture 30 and a mile of
intrenchments, but are driven out and lose 47 prisoners. Several such
attacks and repulses at this time.

7. A rebel attack on Fed. pickets south of Atlanta.

8. Atlanta attacked by the rebs. under Gen. Iverson.

8. President Lincoln re-elected, and Andrew Johnson elected
Vice-President of United States. Hon. Reuben E. Fenton elected Governor
of New York, over Seymour.

8. Gen. McClellan resigns his commission in the U. S. army.

8. Sheridan created Major-General of regular army.

9. Sheridan moved all his army back to Newtown from Cedar Creek.

9. Advance and repulse of a small reb. force near Fort Steadman, army of
the Potomac.

10. Arrest on board of the vessel, of a party of rebels, conspiring to
seize the Panama Railroad Co.’s steamship Salvador, on the Pacific.

10. Rebels engaged 2d corps’ pickets all night, without success, on this
and 2 next nights.

11. U. S. S. Tulip destroyed by boiler explosion off Ragged Point. 49
officers and men killed (all of crew but 10).

11. Reconnoissance by the rebels in the Shenandoah Valley.

11. Commencement of the burning of Atlanta, Ga.

12. Burning of Atlanta continued. The public buildings destroyed.

12. About 10,000 prisoners exchanged near Fort Pulaski.

12–16. Several unimportant skirmishes between Gen. Sheridan and rebel
Gen. Early. Both armies looking for winter quarters.

12. Rebel Gen. Lomax defeated near Nineveh, Va. by Powell, losing 150
prisoners and 2 guns.

12. Custer captures 150 and Merritt about 200 prisoners on
reconnoissance from Cedar creek.

13. Battle of Bull’s Gap. Gen. Gillem defeated with loss of baggage
train, and all his artillery.

13. Gen. Sherman’s right wing, under Gen. Howard, moved out of Atlanta
and began its march through Ga.

14. Gen. Sherman’s left wing left Atlanta.

14. A division of Price’s rebel army assaulted the works at
Fayetteville, Ark., but were repulsed.

15. The last of Sherman’s army left Atlanta.

16. Gen. Sherman’s right wing passed through Jonesboro’, Ga.

16. The rebel cavalry under Wheeler, engaged Fed. cavalry at Bear Creek
Station, Ga.

16. Jackson, Ga., reached by Sherman’s right wing.

16. Howard drives rebel Gen. Iverson at Rough and Ready.

17. Part of Butler’s picket line captured, at night, near Chester’s
Station, Va.

17. A column of Sherman’s army occupied McDonough, Ga.

17. Fed. cavalry occupied Griffin, Ga.

17. Sherman’s left wing reached Covington, Ga., the cavalry pushing on
to Social Circle.

18. Sherman’s cavalry drove Wheeler out of Barnesville, Ga.

18. Gov. Brown and the Georgia Legislature fled from Milledgeville, Ga.

18. Exchange of prisoners at Savannah.

18. Macon railroad cut by Slocum at Forsyth.

19. Gov. Brown, of Georgia, issued a proclamation, ordering a levy _en
masse_ to oppose Sherman.

19. The advance of Beauregard’s army at Waynesboro’, Tenn. Beauregard’s
headquarters at Corinth, Miss., and Hood’s at Florence.

19. Mosby’s force captured a party of Union cavalry in Va.

19. Madison captured by Sherman. Depots, &c., burned.

20. Gen. Giliem’s retreating force arrives at Knoxville.

20. Sherman crossed the Oconee, arriving at Greensboro’.

20. Gen. Sherman attacked East Macon, Ga. His troops crossed the
Ocmulgee river, and his cavalry advanced to Griswoldsville, 8 miles E.
of Macon, Ga.

21. Thomas’ army at Pulaski.

21. Rebels badly whipped at Liberty, La., losing 3 guns and 200
prisoners.

21. Heavy skirmishing near Cumberland Gap.

21. Gen. Sherman’s right wing captured Milledgeville, Ga. Gordon, Ga.,
occupied. Slocum’s column reached Etonville, Ga.

22. Battle of Rood’s Hill, Va., between Sheridan’s and Early’s forces.
Union troops retreated.

22. The rebel armies under Hood and Beauregard, having been reinforced
by 9,000 men, advanced and encamped 20 miles from Pulaski, Tenn. Gen.
Thomas fell back to Franklin.

22. Sherman’s rear guard at Griswoldville attacked. Gen. Slocum’s column
reached Milledgeville, Ga., where both wings united.

22. Sheridan reconnoiters towards Rood’s Hill, where rebels are found in
force. Rest of Early’s army at Mt. Jackson and Newmarket.

23. Fed. forces withdrew from Pulaski, Tenn.

23. Gen. Sherman’s cavalry occupied Toomsboro’, on the Georgia Central
railroad.

23. Fight near Griswoldville, Ga.

23. Hood’s infantry at Waynesboro’ and Lawrenceburg.

23. Fight at the Oconee river, Ga.

24. Second day of fighting up the Oconee river, Ga.

24. Severe skirmishing near Columbia, Tenn.

24. Sherman’s rear guard left Milledgeville, Ga.

24. Slocum’s column at Devereaux, Ga.

24. Fed. troops made a flank movement on Jackson, Miss.

24. Potomac, James, and Valley armies celebrate Thanksgiving with aid of
thousands of turkeys and other delicacies from New York, &c.

25. Severe fighting west of Columbia, Tenn., between Hood’s and Thomas’
armies. Thomas falls back to Franklin.

25. A large number of Fed. prisoners confined at Salisbury, N. C.,
attempted to escape, but were overpowered by the guard, who opened upon
them with grape and canister.

25. Cavalry battle at Sandersville, Ga.

25. Rebel attempt to burn New York. 15 hotels, Barnum’s Museum, and
shipping fired.

26–29. Decatur besieged by Beauregard, who is repulsed, losing 500 men.

26. Columbia, Tenn., evacuated by Gen. Thomas’ army.

26. Gen. Slocum’s column of Sherman’s army at Warrenton, Ga.

26. Gen. Howard’s column reached Sandersville, Ga., and cut the
railroad.

27. Fed. stores and sick and wounded removed from Columbia, Tenn., to
Nashville.

27. Capture of Roger A. Pryor near Petersburg, Va.

27. Gen. Canby’s troops reached and destroyed Big Black bridge on the
Mississippi Central railroad.

27. Steamer Greyhound burned on James river.

28. Rosser captures Fed. Fort Kelly, at New Creek, Va., with guns and
prisoners.

28. Fed. forces evacuate Columbia, Tenn.

29. Sharp fight at Spring Hill, 12 miles south of Franklin, Tenn. Fed.
cavalry were driven back on the infantry, who checked the progress of
the rebels.

29. Gen. Foster’s expedition, cooperating with Sherman, landed at Broad
river.

30. Battle of Franklin, Tenn. The rebels under Hood attacked Thomas’
army at Franklin, but were repulsed at all points. The rebels commenced
advancing on Fed. lines at 4 P. M. They charged furiously on the lines,
but were driven back and a great victory gained. Rebel loss, 5,000
killed and wounded, and 1,000 prisoners. Fed. loss, 1,000. Gen. A. J.
Smith’s army passed through Nashville and reinforced Thomas.

30. Battle of Grahamsville, on the Charleston and Savannah railroad.

30. Howard’s column of Sherman’s army passed through Louisville, Ga.

30. A cavalry expedition arrived at Tangipahoe, La.

30. Hon. Joseph Holt appointed Attorney-General U. S.

=Dec. 1.= The army near Nashville engaged in heavy skirmishes.

1. Death of Hon. Wm. L. Dayton, U. S. Minister to France.

1. Blockade of Norfolk, Fernandina, and Pensacola ceased.

1. Gen. Banks resumes command of Department of the Gulf.

1. Creek Station, Va., captured by Gen. Gregg. 2 guns, 190 prisoners,
depot burned, &c.

2. Sherman’s army passed through Millen, Ga.

3. Sherman attacked by Wheeler near Haynesborough, Ga.

3. Portions of Hood’s army cross the Tenn., between Florence and
Decatur.

3. An expedition sent from Roanoke Island, N. C., which met with perfect
success in destroying rebel property.

3. Heavy skirmishing before Nashville, Tenn.

4. Merritt’s expedition in Loudon Valley, Va., returns with 2,000 cattle
and 1,000 sheep. The Valley stripped of stock and forage.

4. Lieut.-Com. Fitch defeated and drove the left wing of Hood’s army on
the Cumberland river, with heavy loss to the rebels. He also recaptured
2 transports.

4. Capture of rebel works and cannon near Pocotaligo, S. C., by Gen.
Foster’s troops.

4. Cavalry battle in Ga. Sherman’s army started for Savannah.

5. U. S. Houses of Congress meet in 2d Session, 38th Congress.

5. Blockhouses at Murfreesboro’ unsuccessfully attacked by rebels.

5. Brig Lizzie Freeman captured by pirates off Warwick river. Passengers
robbed; 1 murdered.

6. Ex-Secretary Chase appointed Chief Justice Supreme Court.

6. Hood skirmishing 5 miles from Nashville.

6. Rebels defeated near the Charleston and Savannah railroad.

7. Rosseau routs Forrest near Murfreesboro’, capturing 207 prisoners and
14 cannon.

8. Rebels establish a battery on Cumberland river. Gunboats fail to
dislodge it.

8. Five divisions, under Maj.-Gen. Warren, made a raid on the Weldon (N.
C.) railroad. The Nottoway was reached about midday, Dec. 8th, and
destroyed; thence the railroad track was destroyed nearly to Bellfield
Station, 20 miles south.

9. 500 Indians killed near Fort Lyon by Col. Chivington’s force.

9. 4,000 rebels, under Gen. Lyon, cross the Cumberland river, 20 miles
above Fort Donelson.

9. Reconnoissance of Gen. Miles to Hatcher’s Run, on the right of the
rebel forces defending Petersburg. He captures the rebel works and holds
them during the night.

9. Direct communication with Sherman re-established. His army in the
vicinity of Savannah.

9. A reconnoitering expedition, under Col. Frencle, leaves Plymouth, N.
C.

10. Gen. Sherman’s troops 5 miles from Savannah.

10. Rebel reconnoissance toward the army of the Potomac.

10. Gen. Warren commences starting homeward, and in the evening reaches
Sussex C. H. Destroyed, during the trip, over 20 miles of the Weldon
railroad, all the stations and depots along the line of march, numerous
mills, barns, and dwellings. Entire loss in the expedition about 40
killed and wounded, and a few missing.

10. Gen. Miles returns to his camp. The rebels attack him, but are
repulsed.

10. The gunboat Otsego sunk by a rebel torpedo in the Roanoke river.

12. Arrival of Gen. Howard’s messengers at Hilton Head, S. C.

12. Skirmishing between the National and rebel forces before Nashville.
The rebels fall back to their main line.

12. Expedition under Gen. Burbridge starts from Bean’s Station, E. Tenn.

12. Fight at Kingston, E. Tenn. The rebel Col. Morgan and 85 of his men
captured.

13. The St. Albans robbers released by the Canadian Judge Coursol.

13. The rebels before Nashville reoccupy their advance works.

13. Gen. Burbridge routs the rebel brigade under Basil Duke, at
Kingsport, E. Tenn. Rebel loss, 150 men and the train.

13. Gen. Hazen’s division, of the 15th corps, captures Fort McAllister,
commanding the entrance of the Ogeechee river, 15 miles southwest of
Savannah.

13. Sherman’s report on his great march. “Not a wagon lost on the trip.”
200 miles of railroad destroyed. Total loss during the march about
1,000.

13. Departure from Hampton Roads of land and naval forces under Gen.
Butler and Ad. Porter.

13. A raiding expedition under Gen. Robinson leaves New Orleans for Ala.

14. An expedition threatening Mobile reached Pascagoula.

14. Gen. Thomas assumes the offensive.

14. Capture of Bristol by Gen. Burbridge. 300 rebels captured.

15. The St. Albans raiders ordered by the Attorney-Gen. of Canada to be
rearrested.

15. Raid of Gen. Stoneman in Southwest Va. Surprise and capture of Glade
Springs, 13 miles from Abingdon.

15. Defeat of Forrest near Murfreesboro’. Loss, 1,500 killed and
wounded.

15. Raiding expedition of General Granger into Alabama starts from East
Pensacola, Fla.

15. Battle of Nashville commenced. Gen. Thomas attacked Hood’s army at 2
A. M. Fed. lines advanced on the right 5 miles. The rebels were driven
from the river, from their intrenchments, from a range of hills, on
which their left rested, and forced back upon the right and centre. The
rebels lost 17 cannon and 1,500 prisoners, and a whole line of
earthworks. In the night Hood withdrew his right from the river.

16. Another battle near Nashville. Hood completely routed. Prisoners and
cannon captured on every part of the field. Hood’s loss before
Nashville, 13,189 prisoners, 2,207 deserters, 30 guns, 7,000 small arms.
An entire rebel division (Ed. Johnson’s) captured. Union loss, about
6,500. Total loss of the rebs. about 23,000.

17. Gen. McCook defeated rebel Gen. Lyon in a sharp fight at Ashbyville,
Ky.

17. Fed. troops entered Wytheville, S. W. Va., destroyed the depot and
other buildings, and injured the lead mines in the vicinity.

17. A detachment of Union artillery cut up near Millwood, Va.

17. The rebel army of Hood driven through and beyond Franklin. 1,500
wounded rebels captured in the hospital of Franklin.

18. Hood’s army driven as far as Spring Hill, 30 miles from Nashville.
The rebel Gen. Quarles captured.

18. The rebel raiders in Ky. defeated at Hopkinsville by Gen. McCook.
All their cannon captured.

19. Gen. Custer’s cavalry started on an expedition up the Shenandoah
Valley.

19. A call and draft for 300,000 men. All soldiers fit for duty ordered
to join their regiments.

19. Hood driven to Duck river. 9,000 rebels captured from Dec. 15 to
Dec. 19, and 61 (out of 66) pieces of artillery.

20. Gen. Sherman demanded the surrender of Savannah. The city was
evacuated by Hardee’s army in the night. The rebels blew up their rams
at Savannah.

20. Capture of rebel salt-works at Saltville, Va.

21. Admiral Farragut appointed Vice-Admiral.

21. Gen. Custer’s force in the Shenandoah Valley engaged with rebel
cavalry.

21. Occupation of Savannah by Sherman. He captures 800 prisoners, 150
pieces of artillery, 33,000 bales of cotton, 3 steamers.

21. Madison C. H., Va., occupied by Gens. Torbert and Powell.

21. Gen. Grierson starts from Memphis for a raid on the Mobile and Ohio
R. R.

22. Loss of the U. S. transport North American, by foundering, at sea.
194 lives lost.

23. Fight near Gordonsville, Va.

24. The fleet of Ad. Porter before Fort Fisher, N. C. Furious attack on
the fort.

25. Attack on Fort Fisher renewed. 3 brigades of Union infantry landed 2
and a half miles above the fort. They are repulsed, and reembark.

26. Heavy cannonading on Broad riv., between Sherman’s and Hardee’s
forces.

26. Ensign Blume cuts loose and takes out from Galveston harbor the
blockade running schooner Sallie.

26. The blockade-runner Julia, with 450 bales of cotton, captured by the
gunboat Accacia.

26. A dispatch from Hood reports his army south of the Tenn.

27. Destruction of a fort and artillery at Chickasaw, Ala.

28. Hood’s rear guard crosses the Tenn. river at Bainbridge.


1865.

=Jan. 1.= The head of Dutch Gap Canal, Va., blown out, but without
effect.

1. Admiral Farragut commissioned Vice-Admiral.

1. San Jacinto, sloop-of-war, wrecked on Bahama Banks.

2. Passport system established on U. S. frontier.

2. Steamship George Washington burned at New York. Loss $500,000.

3. Hood’s pontoon train captured.

4. Rebel powder and torpedoes destroyed on the Rappahannock.

5. John Thompson expelled, for disloyalty, from the Missouri
Legislature.

5. Gen. Grierson arrives at Vicksburg, having destroyed on his raid 70
miles of the Mobile and Ohio railroad, and 30 miles of the Miss.
Central, and captured 600 prisoners and 1,000 negroes.

5. “Sue Munday,” a guerrilla, murders 5 soldiers near Lebanon, Ky.

6. Owensboro’, Ky., evacuated by the rebels.

6. Magruder’s guerrillas burn the Lebanon train, and murder 4 discharged
soldiers.

6. Gen. Sherman and his army crossed the Savannah river.

6. Missouri Constitutional Convention organized.

6. Steamship Knickerbocker, of N. Y., sunk on the Chesapeake.

6. Steamer Potomac, of N. Y., burned off Cape Elizabeth.

6. Gen. Terry’s expedition sailed for Wilmington from Fortress Monroe.

7. Gen. Thomas appointed Maj.-Gen. U. S. A., vice Fremont, resigned.

7. Julesburg, Colorado Territory, attacked by Indians, who were
defeated, after killing 19 soldiers and citizens, and destroying much
property.

7. Hon. F. P. Blair left for Richmond, on a self-constituted Peace
mission.

8. Gen. Butler relieved from command of the Army of the James.

8. Steamer Venango captured and burned by guerrillas on the Mississippi
river.

8. The steamship Melville foundered at sea; over 6O drowned.

8. Gen. Terry’s expedition arrived off Beaufort, N. C.

9. Picket line of Second Division A. C. Potomac army attacked.

10. Rebel storehouses, &c., at Charlotte, N. C. burned.

11. Foraging party on Jerusalem Plank Road, Va., repulsed by
bushwhackers.

11. Beverley, W. Va., captured and partially burned by Gen. Rosser. 200
Fed. soldiers captured.

11. Gov. Thomas Swan, of Md., inaugurated.

11. H. S. Foote arrested by rebel authorities while attempting to escape
from Richmond.

12. Missouri declared a Free State.

18. Disembarkation of troops to attack Fort Fisher.

14. A reconnoissance pushed within 500 yards of Fort Fisher, and small
work captured.

14. Gen. Sherman recommences movement from Savannah.

14. Pocotaligo, S. C., captured by Fed. Gen. Blair.

14. Slavery abolished by Tenn. State Convention.

14. Steamship Rebecca Clyde sent from N. Y. with relief for Savannah.

15. Gens. Sherman, Sheridan, and Thomas confirmed Maj.-Gens. U. S. A.
and Gen. Hancock, Brig.-Gen. U. S. A.

15. Rebs. defeated at Dardanelle, Ark.

15. Grand assault on Fort Fisher, which is captured with entire
garrison. Union loss 110 killed, 536 wounded. Reb. loss 2,500 prisoners,
72 guns.

16. Fort Fisher magazine explodes, with great loss of life.

16. Rebels blow up and abandon Fort Caswell and works on Smith’s Isl.,
N. C.

16. S. S. Cox’s Peace Resolution tabled by House.

16. Reb. Congress debate question of Peace.

16. Mr. Blair returns from Richmond.

16. The monitor Patapsco sunk by a rebel torpedo in Charleston Harbor.
60 of the officers and crew were lost.

17. Steamers Chickamauga and Patapsco blown up by rebels.

18. Gen. Ord placed in command of the Army of the James.

18. Smithville, N. C., captured.

18. The Harriet Lane, rebel vessel, destroyed at Havana.

18. 200 of rebel Gen. Forrest’s cavalry defeated, 10 miles from
Columbus, Ky.

18. Gen. Terry appointed Maj.-Gen.

19. Fatal explosion at Hazard Powder Mills.

19. Gen. Schofield captured Fort Anderson, the main defence of
Wilmington.

20. Rebel Secretary Seddon resigns.

20. Gen. Schofield fighting on this and next day at Wilmington.

21. Rebel Gen. Roddy pardoned by Pres. Lincoln.

22. Wilmington captured by Gen. Schofield; rebels retreat towards
Goldsboro’.

23. Rebel Gen. Hood superseded by Dick Taylor.

23. Charles A. Dana appointed Assistant-Secretary of War.

24. Rebel iron-clads attempt descent of the James; are driven back, and
the Virginia blown up.

24. H. S. Foote expelled by the rebel Congress.

24. The Smithsonian Institution destroyed by fire.

25. Mr. Blair returns from Richmond, his Peace Mission having failed.

25. Reb. Gen. Lee appointed General-in-Chief by Jeff. Davis.

26. Steamer Eclipse explodes her boiler on the Tennessee, killing 140
persons.

26. The steamer Dai Ching attacked by rebels on the Combahee river; gets
aground, is abandoned and burned.

26. Emancipation Acts of Missouri and Tennessee celebrated in New
Orleans.

26. Part of the 75th Ohio captured by treachery.

27. Gen. Robert E. Breckinridge appointed rebel Secretary of War.

28. Rebel House resolves to arm negroes.

28. Valley Station, Omaha, attacked by Indians; 12 men killed and 650
head of cattle stolen.

30. Messrs. Stephens, Campell and Hunter enter Union lines as Peace
Commissioners.

30. Jackson Burroughs, a Treasury clerk, shot by Miss Mary Harris.

31. The Anti-Slavery Constitutional Amendment passed by House, 19 to 56.

=Feb. 1.= Secretary Seward leaves for Fortress Monroe to meet rebel
Commissioners.

1. Sherman’s whole army in motion for Savannah.

1. Constitutional Amendment ratified by Maryland House and Illinois.

2. President Lincoln proceeds to meet rebel Commissioners.

2. Constitutional Amendment ratified by Michigan and Rhode Island; also
by New York Senate.

2. Julesburg, Omaha, fort attacked by Indians, and station burned.

2. Midway, Ky., robbed and partially burned by guerrillas.

3. Sherman’s advance crosses the Salkehatchie river.

3. Constitutional Amendment ratified by Massachusetts, West Virginia and
Pennsylvania; also by New York Assembly and Maryland Senate.

4. Failure of the peace negotiations. President Lincoln and Secretary
Seward return to Washington.

4. Rebels flanked at Branchville by Gen. Sherman.

4. Lieut. Cushing with 4 boats and 50 men takes possession of All
Saints, on Little river, S. C., capturing a large amount of cotton.

4. Great battle at Mud Springs, Mo., between Col. Livingstone and 2,000
Indians, who are defeated with loss.

5. The New York pilot-boat Favorita sunk by collision at sea.

5. Rebels driven from rifle-pits at Rowanty creek, Va., by 5th Corps;
and the 2d Corps advance to Hatcher’s Run. Severe fighting at both
places. Repulse of rebels.

6. Harry Gilmer, the notorious guerrilla, captured near Moorfield, Va.

6. Constitutional Amendment ratified by Missouri.

6. Severe fight at Dabney’s Mills. The rebels driven back, but in their
turn force back Crawford’s division, to be again finally driven back.
Casualties in 5th Corps, in 2 days, 500. In the 2d Corps, 750.

6. Jefferson Davis makes a great war speech at Richmond.

6. Gen. Ord assigned to command Department of Virginia.

6. 2 blockade runners captured at Galveston by Ensign French.

7. Rebels attack the 5th Corps, and are repulsed.

7. Kilpatrick’s cavalry drives rebels from Blackville, S. C.

7. Constitutional Amendment ratified by Maine.

7. Rebel Senate votes against arming negroes.

7. 225 rebel prisoners at Camp Chase refuse to be returned to the rebel
army by exchange.

8. Occupation of Branchville, S. C.

8. Lieut. Cushing, with 15 men, captures Shallotte, N. C.

8. Ohio, Minnesota and Kansas ratify Constitutional Amendment. Delaware
refuses.

8. The electoral vote for President and Vice-President counted in the
House of Representatives, the result being 212 votes for Lincoln and
Johnson, and 21 for McClellan and Pendleton.

8. Great fire in Philadelphia, commencing in petroleum oil warehouse. 47
buildings destroyed, and about 15 persons burned.

9. A large force of Indians at Mud Springs again defeated by Col.
Livingston.

10. Constitutional Amendment ratified by Indiana.

10. Rebels repulsed from Fort Meyer, Fla.

10. Gen. Gillmore resumes command Department of the South.

10. Gen. Grierson confirmed Major-General by Senate.

10. Gen. Sherman’s troops occupy James Island, 2 miles from Charleston.

11. Gen. Terry advances towards Wilmington, N. C., and engages rebel
works. Rebel loss, 100. Fed., 60.

11. Wheeler defeated by Kilpatrick at Aiken, S. C. Feds. occupy the
town.

11. Gen. Lee assumes command of the rebel armies.

11. Gen. Terry commences his advance toward Wilmington.

13. Louisiana House ratified the Constitutional Amendment.

15. Destruction of Charlotte Iron Furnace, on Water Lick creek, by 1st
and 6th Michigan cavalry.

15. F. W. Smith, a Boston merchant, fined $25,000 for frauds on
government.

16. Slavery Constitutional Amendment ratified by Nevada.

17. Charleston evacuated by rebels who burned vast quantities of stores,
&c.; an explosion of powder kills 200 persons. 2 rebel iron-clads blown
up.

17. Columbia, S. C., captured by Gen. Sherman.

17. Rebel flag of truce boat, William Ashson, blown up by rebel torpedo
on the James river.

17. Charlotte, N. C., crowded by rebel refugees and placed under martial
law.

17. Pres. Lincoln ordered an extra session of Congress, to commence
March 4.

17. Louisiana Senate ratifies the Constitutional Amendment.

18. Charleston occupied by Union forces. 200 pieces of artillery and
much ammunition captured.

18. Gen. Lee calls upon rebel House for negro soldiers.

19. Gen. Schofield and Admiral Porter capture Fort Anderson, N. C.,
after severe bombardment. Fed. loss, 30.

20. Gen. Cox routs rebels 4 miles from Wilmington, N. C.

20. Repulse of rebel attack on Fort Myers, Fla.

21. The rebels evacuate Wilmington at night, after burning cotton,
resin, &c.

21. Gens. Crook and Kelly captured in their beds at Cumberland, Va.

21. Wisconsin ratifies the Constitutional Amendment.

21. Bridgeport, Ky., almost destroyed by fire.

22. Gen. Schofield occupies Wilmington.

22. Constitutional Amendment rejected by Kentucky.

22. Georgetown, S. C., surrenders.

23. Capture of Camden, S. C.

23. Gen. Johnston appointed to command troops operating against Sherman.

23. A passenger train from Nashville captured by guerrillas.

24. Columbia, S. C., burned.

25. Fatal explosion at Dupont’s Powder Mills, at Wilmington, Del.

26. 20 guerrillas captured in Ky., tried by drum-head court martial, and
shot about this date.

27. Sheridan moved from Winchester with 10,000 men.

27. Hickman, Ky., robbed and partly burned by guerrillas.

27. Flagship Arizona burned at New Orleans.

28. Six hundred million loan bill passed by House.

28. Lord Lyons resigns as British Minister to Washington, and is
succeeded by Sir Frederick Bruce.

28. Admiral Thatcher takes command of the West Gulf Squadron.

=March 1.= Sheridan secures the bridge over the Shenandoah at Mt.
Crawford.

1. The 600,000,000 loan bill passed by Senate.

1. The Constitutional Amendment rejected by N. J. House.

1. Lovelaceville, Ky., robbed by guerrillas.

1. Gen. Bailey starts on a cavalry raid from Baton Rouge.

2. Sheridan captures nearly the whole force of Early, consisting of
1,800 men and 11 guns, between Charlottesville and Staunton.

2. Steamer James Watson sunk with government stores on the Miss. 30
lives lost.

3. Skirmish between Sherman’s cavalry and that of Wade Hampton. The
rebel Col. Aiken killed.

3. Occupation of Cheraw, S. C., by Sherman’s advance.

3. Close of the 38th Congress.

3. Charlottesville, Va., captured by Sheridan.

3. Ten soldiers killed by train on the Opelousas railroad. 40 wounded.

4. Reinauguration of Pres. Lincoln.

4. U. S. transport steamer Thorne blown up by a torpedo in Cape Fear
riv.

4. Parson Brownlow elected Governor of Tenn.

4. Rebels worsted at Natural Bridge, Fla.

6. Expedition up the Rappahannock. Capture of 400 prisoners and 95 tons
of tobacco at Fredericksburg. Extensive contraband trade broken up.

7. Hugh McCulloch confirmed Secretary of the Treasury, succeeding Hon.
W. P. Fessenden.

7. Five persons killed by collision on the Camden & Amboy R. R.

8. Sherman at Laurel Hill, N. C.

8. The rebel Senate passes the negro enlistment bill.

8. Engagement between Cox and Bragg 4 miles from Kinston, N. C. Bragg
captures a large number of prisoners and 3 pieces of artillery, but is
ultimately driven back.

8. The passport restrictions to Canada removed.

9. A transport, with 2,000 Union troops, enters Mobile Bay through
Grant’s Pass.

9. Steamboat Munroe captured by rebels on the Big Black river.

9. Senator Harlan confirmed Sec. of the Interior, vice Mr. Usher,
resigned.

10. Jefferson Davis’ fast day celebrated by the rebels.

10. Gen. Sheridan at Columbia, Fluvanna Co., Va., 50 miles west of
Richmond. He reports having destroyed all the locks for a considerable
distance on the James river canal, an immense number of bridges, many
miles of railroad, mills, factories, and vast quantities of merchandise;
also, having captured 12 canal boats, 14 pieces of artillery, and an
abundance of provisions.

10. Desperate attempt of Bragg to break the National lines at Kinston,
N. C. The rebels lose 1,200 killed and wounded, and 400 prisoners. 2,000
rebs. captured from March 8 to 10. The entire Union losses about 1,000.

10. Gen. Lee urges the work of raising and organizing negro troops.

10. Gen. Stoneman, with 4,000 men, starts on a cavalry raid from
Knoxville, Tenn.

10. Engagement between the cavalry forces of Wade Hampton and Kilpatrick
near Fayetteville, N. C. Nearly all the members of Kilpatrick’s staff
captured. The rebels finally beaten back, and most of the officers
recaptured.

11. Extra sessions of the U. S. Senate closed.

11. Sheridan at Beaver Mills Aqueduct, 20 miles north of Richmond.

11. Hoke’s division of rebels repulsed at Kinston. Loss, over 2,000.
Union loss, 300.

11. 21 Union vessels in sight of Mobile, Ala.

11. Sherman arrives at Fayetteville. Reports having captured at
Columbia, S. C., 43 pieces of artillery; at Cheraw, S. C., 25 pieces,
and 3,600 barrels of gunpowder; at Fayetteville, N. C., 20 pieces, and
large quantities of ammunition.

12. Occupation of Kinston by Schofield. The rebels throw many pieces of
artillery into the river, and burn the ram Neuse.

12. Gen. Stoneman at Wytheville, Chriansburg, and Salem, Va.

13. Sheridan tears up the railroad between Richmond and Hanover.

15. Fight at Brandenburg, Ky., between a small Union garrison and a
party of rebels.

15. Sheridan reports having rendered useless the James river canal as
far as Goochland.

16. Rebels blow up Fort Hell at Petersburg, with little effect.

16. Sue Monday (Jerome Clark), the notorious guerrilla, hung at
Louisville.

16. Lieut.-Com. Eastman destroys 3 rebel schooners in Mattox Creek, Va.;
large stocks of tobacco, guns, ammunition captured.

16. Fight at Averasboro’, N. C., (20 miles north of Fayetteville),
between a portion of Sherman’s army and the rebs. under Hardee. Union
loss, 74 killed, 477 wounded. Rebel loss, 327 killed and wounded, and
373 prisoners.

17. Mr. Bigelow succeeds Mr. Dayton as Minister to France.

17. Mohawk Valley inundated. Immense damage to property.

17. Formal notice of the termination of the Reciprocity Treaty given by
Mr. Adams to the British government.

17. Gen. Canby’s movement against Mobile commences. Portions of the 13th
and 23d corps in motion.

17. Gen. Wilson leaves Nashville with 15,000 men on a cavalry expedition
into Central Ala. and Ga.

18. Joe Johnston attacks Sherman’s advance at Bentonville, captures 3
guns, and drives it back on main body.

18. Reb. Congress adjourns in a panic.

18. Gen. Sheridan’s advance reaches White House, on the Pamunkey river.
His entire loss during the raid 50 men and 2 officers.

19. The rebel Congress issue a despairing appeal to the people.

19. Engagement at Bentonville, N. C., between Gen. Sherman and Gen.
Johnston. Repulse of the rebels. Union loss, 1,646. Rebel loss, 167
dead, 1,625 prisoners.

19. The rebel schooner Anna Dale, in Matagorda Bay, cut loose from under
2 rebel batteries and burned.

20. Gen. Stoneman’s expedition moves from E. Tenn., and pushing to
Salisbury, defeats Gardiner, capturing 14 guns and 1,364 prisoners.

20. Gen. Steele’s forces leave Pensacola, Florida.

21. Goldsboro’, N. C., occupied by part of Schofield’s army.

21. Johnston retreats at night from Bentonville, leaving his wounded.

21. The rebels flanked and overpowered at Mount Olive, N. C.

21. Roddy’s division of Forrest’s cavalry routed by Gen. Wilson’s forces
at Marion and Plantersville.

22. Sherman forms junction with Schofield at Goldsboro’.

22. McDougal’s gang of Ky. guerrillas broken up west of Paducah. He and
20 others killed.

22. Gen. Wilson moves from Chickasaw, Ala., toward rebel Gen. Forrest.

22. Passenger train on Nashville railroad burned by Harper’s guerrillas.
16 persons wounded.

24. Sheridan moved from White House toward Petersburg.

25. Capture of the Union Fort Stedman, of Gen. McLaughlin and 500 men,
in front of Petersburg, by 3 reb. divisions under Gordon. They are
driven out again by Gen. Hartrauft, with a loss of 1,758 prisoners, and
total loss of 2,500. Total Union loss about 1,500.

25. Assault on the rebel lines by the 2d and 6th corps. The first line
of the rebel works captured and held.

25. Engagement between the Union cavalry and the 6th and 8th Ala.
cavalry at Mitchell’s Creek. The rebel General Canton, with 275 men,
captured.

25. Robert C. Kennedy, the rebel spy and incendiary, hung at Fort
Lafayette.

26. Judge Radcliffe, of Madison Co., Ark., hung by rebels near his own
home.

26. Sheridan’s cavalry reaches City Point.

27. Sherman visits Grant at City Pt.

27. Spanish Fort and Fort Blakely, Mobile, invested by Union troops.

27. Boone, N. C., captured by General Stoneman.

27. Gen. Getty’s division, of the 6th corps, attacked by 400 reb.
sharpshooters. Repulse of the rebels.

27. Sheridan’s cavalry takes position in Gregg’s old cavalry camp, on
the left and rear of Grant’s army.

27. Portions of the 24th and 25th corps cross the James to join Meade’s
army.

28. The monitors Milwaukee and Osage sunk by torpedoes in Mobile Bay.

29. The St. Albans raiders are released at Montreal.

29. Grant’s army in motion.

29. Sheridan’s command makes a detour to Dinwiddie C. H. Occupation of
the town. Further advance on the Boydton Road. 2 corps of the infantry
(2d and 5th) thrown across Hatcher’s Run, the former on the Vaughan
road, the latter on the Halifax road. Battle of Quaker road, near
Gravelly Run, between Bushrod Johnson’s rebels and the 5th corps. Rebels
retire. Loss, 500 on each side.

30. The 2 armies before Petersburg, after severe skirmishing, confront
each other their whole length.

30. A railway train robbed and burned by guerrillas near Cumberland, Va.

31. Gen. Warren attacked the enemy at White Oak road, but, after severe
fighting, is forced back to his 3d division. The rebels are driven back
with heavy loss, and White Oak road gained. Sheridan captures Five
Forks, but is forced back to Dinwiddie C. H. Fed. loss, 2,500; rebs.
less.

31. The transport Gen. Lyon burned off Hatteras, over 500 lives being
lost.

=April 1.= Sheridan, reinforced by Warren, drives rebels to Five Forks,
carries the position and captures over 5,000 prisoners and all their
artillery. Fed. loss, 3,000. This night Davis flies from Richmond.

1. Forrest defeated by Gen. Wilson at Ebenezer Church, Ala., losing 300
prisoners and 3 guns.

1. Boone, N. C., captured by Stoneman’s advance.

1. Hazard Powder Mills, at Canton, Conn., blew up.

2. Rebel lines assaulted at Five Forks, and forced near Hatcher’s Run;
then the main line carried, and two strong works commanding south of
Petersburg, were captured. The rebels south of Petersburg were severely
beaten, and fled toward the Appomattox. At night, Lee evacuated
Petersburg and Richmond, retreating toward Danville. Many thousands of
prisoners were captured by the Union forces on this day.

2. Selma, defended by Forrest, captured by Gen. Wilson, with 3,000
prisoners, stores, &c. Forrest and Roddy taken prisoners.

3. Gen. Weitzel, with his colored troops, enters Richmond.

3. Richmond fired by rebels, and one-fourth of the city destroyed.

3. Fed. cavalry pursue rebels 20 miles from Richmond, Va. 2,000
prisoners taken.

4. Skirmishing by McKenzie’s division with rebels at Bethany, Va.

4. Tuscaloosa captured and destroyed by Gen. Wilson.

4. The Harriet Deford captured by rebels on the Pawtuxet.

4. President Lincoln holds a levee in Jeff. Davis’ house at Richmond.

5. Secretary Seward thrown from his carriage at Washington, breaking his
arm and jaw.

5. Lee is intercepted by Sheridan at Burkesville, Va.

6. Lee is struck near Farmville, and gains partial success, but Sheridan
defeats him at Sailors’ creek, capturing over 6,000 prisoners, 16 guns,
400 wagons, &c. Rebel Gens. Ewell, Kershaw, Corse, and Custis Lee
captured.

6. H. S. Foote returns to New York by the Etna.

6. Hedges and Downes, guerrillas, executed at Louisville.

6. J. L. Clinton, of Texas, robbed of $54,000 in gold by highwaymen.

7. Pursuit of Lee continued; he crossed to the north of the Appomattox,
and is constantly harassed. He is attacked by the 2d corps at Farmville.
Gen. Grant writes him that escape is impossible, and proposes to receive
his surrender.

8. Lee replies, inquiring terms of surrender. Sheridan makes more
captures at Appomattox Station.

8. Spanish Fort, Mobile, bombarded. The rebels evacuate at night.

9. Gens. Grant and Lee meet at Appomattox Court House, and the rebel
army of Northern Virginia, numbering 26,115 men, is surrendered, with
its arms and material of war, and the officers and men paroled.

11. Mobile evacuated by the rebels.

11. Engagement at Sumter, S. C., between guerrillas and Union troops.

11. Fort Blakely, at Mobile, taken by assault, with 300 prisoners, and
32 cannon. Rebel loss in siege of Mobile, 500 in killed and wounded.
Union loss, 2,000.

11. Lynchburg, Va., captured by Union scouting party.

12. Mobile occupied by Union forces.

12. Montgomery, Ala., surrenders to Gen. Wilson, with 2,700 prisoners
and 100 guns.

12. A rebel force defeated at Grant’s creek, near Salisbury, N. C., by
General Stoneman. 1,400 rebels, and 14 cannon taken.

13. Sherman pushes forward against Johnston and occupies Raleigh.

13. The draft and recruiting ordered to cease.

14. President Lincoln shot at Ford’s Theatre, by John Wilkes Booth, an
actor. Secretary Seward attacked at his house, while in bed, and
seriously wounded by another assassin, who also dangerously wounded Mr.
Frederick Seward.

14. Correspondence opened between Sherman and Johnston on the latter’s
surrender.

14. Wilberforce University, Green Co., Ohio, burned.

14. The anniversary of the capture of Fort Sumter celebrated by imposing
ceremonies at the fort, and replacing the flag by Gen. Anderson.

15. President Lincoln died at 7:20 o’clock, A. M., having remained
insensible since his wound.

15. Vice-President Andrew Johnson becomes 17th President of the U. S.

16. Columbus and West Point, Ala., captured by assault of Gen. Wilson.
1,500 prisoners and 100,000 bales of cotton taken.

16. 1,500 prisoners, 52 guns, 2 gunboats and vast stores taken at Selma,
and much railroad stock, &c.

17. Capture of Mrs. Surratt and Lewis Payne. Edward Spangler arrested,
implicated in the murder of Pres. Lincoln.

18. Sherman agrees to suspension of hostilities with Johnston.

19. A. G. Atzeroth arrested near Germantown, Md.

19. Steamship blown up by torpedo in Dog river.

19. Funeral of President Lincoln in Washington.

20. Occupation of Macon, Ga., by Gen. Wilson. Gens. Howell Cobb,
Gustavus W. Smith, Robertson, Mercer, and McCall, made prisoners. 132
guns in position, and 100 in arsenals, with immense amounts of ordnance
and stores captured.

20. The War Department offers $50,000 for the arrest of Booth, and
$25,000 each for the arrest of Atzeroth and Harold.

20. Rebel Secretary Mallory surrendered to the navy at Pensacola.

21. Sherman’s agreement with Johnston disapproved by the President.

21. Proclamation of Gen. E. Kirby Smith. He asserts his ability to
continue the rebellion.

22. Gen. Banks resumes command of the Gulf Department.

22. The Constitutional Amendment ratified by the New York Assembly.

22. The Mississippi Squadron flagship Black Hawk burned at Mound City.

22. Reception of the remains of President Lincoln at Philadelphia.

23. Jeff. Davis leaves Charlotte, N. C., for Georgia.

23. The rebel ram Webb escapes past the Union fleet on the Red river; is
run ashore, deserted and blown up.

25. A collision on the Potomac, occurring between the steamer
Massachusetts and a barge; many soldiers jump overboard in a panic, and
50 are drowned.

25. R. B. Hamilton, steamer, sunk by torpedo near Mobile. 15 persons
killed.

26. Surrender of Gen. Johnston and his army, numbering about 27,500 men.

26. Funeral ceremonies of Pres. Lincoln in N. Y., and departure of his
remains.

26. John Wilkes Booth and David C. Harrold, discovered in a barn of
Garrett’s farm, near Fredericksburg, Va. Booth refuses to surrender, and
is killed by Sergt. Boston Corbett, of the 16th N. Y. cavalry; Harrold
surrenders.

27. Railroad track near Charleston, S. C., torn up by guerrillas.

28. Danville, Va., occupied by Gen. Wright. 13 locomotives, 117 box
cars, ironwork, machinery, etc., were captured.

28. The boilers of the steamship Sultana, with 2,000 paroled soldiers,
burst near Memphis; she then took fire; over 1,500 persons were burned
to death or drowned.

29. Pres. Johnson removes trade restrictions over most of the south.

29. Armistice agreed upon between Gens. Dana and Dick Taylor.

30. The paroling of Gen Johnston’s troops commenced at Greensboro’.

=May 1.= Reception of the remains of President Lincoln at Chicago.

1. Surrender of 1,200 of Morgan’s old command to Gen. Hobson, at Mt.
Sterling, Ky.

1. Tenn. Senate offer $5,000 reward for Ex-Gov. I. G. Harris.

2. Surrender of Jeff. Thompson to Capt. Mitchell, U. S. N.

2. Reward offered for the arrest of Jeff. Davis, J. Thompson, C. C.
Clay, B. Tucker, G. N. Sanders and W. C. Cleary.

4. Burial of Abraham Lincoln in Oak Ridge Cemetery, near Springfield,
Ill.

4. Rebel Gen. Dick Taylor surrendered to Gen. Canby all the remaining
forces west of the Miss.

5. A train on the Ohio and Miss. railroad, 14 miles from Cincinnati,
captured by 20 guerrillas.

9. The Confederate Com. Farrand surrenders 12 vessels, and all his
command to Commander Edward Simpson, fleet Captain of the West Gulf
squadron, at Nanna Hubba Bluff.

9. Pres. Johnson announces the war at an end, and rebel belligerent
rights ceased.

9. Rebel Gen. Forrest disbands his troops, advising them to go home
peaceably.

10. The trial of Pres. Lincoln’s assassins commenced.

10. Jeff. Davis and the Confederate Postmaster, Gen. Reagan, captured at
Irwinville, Ga., by Lieut.-Col. Pritchard, commanding the 4th Mich.
cavalry.

10. The Confed. Gen. Sam. Jones surrenders his forces to a division of
Gen. Wilson’s cavalry.

10. Surrender of Capt. Mayberry, commanding the irregular bands of
Confederates in Arkansas and Monroe Cos., Ark., at Pine Bluff.

11. A rebel camp at Palmetto Branch, Texas (15 miles above Brazos),
captured and burned by Col. Barrett.

12. Engagement near Boco Chico between 400 Union troops under Col.
Barrett and 500 Confed. cavalry under Gen. Slaughter. This was the last
engagement of the war. Union loss, 70 men.

12. Surrender of the rebel forces under Gen. Wofford, in N. Ga., at
Kingston.

13. R. M. T. Hunter, Ex-U. S. Senator, arrested for treason.

13. Over 30,000,000 of the Seven-Thirty Loan subscribed for on this day.

18. Dr. Luke P. Blackburn arrested at Montreal for plotting to infect N.
Y. and other cities with yellow fever.

19. Jeff. Davis and his fellow prisoners arrived at Fortress Monroe.

20. Surrender of the ram Stonewall to the Spanish authorities in Cuba.

22. Belligerent rights withdrawn, and all ports opened, but Texas, by
President’s proclamation.

23. The army of the Potomac, nearly 100,000, passed in review at
Washington, before the President.

24. Capt. Mayburn, commanding all irregular bands of Confeds. in
Jackson, Prairie, and White Cos., Ark., surrenders at Duvall’s Bluff.

24. The main ordnance department at Mobile exploded, killing about 300
persons and wounding many others. The whole city injured by the
explosion.

25. Forts Mannahasset and Griffin, and the defences of Labone Pass,
occupied by Rear-Admiral Thatcher.

26. Surrender of Gen. E. Kirby Smith and his army (about 20,000).

27. Military prisoners ordered released by the President.

27. Sabine Pass forts surrendered to U. S. troops.

29. Amnesty proclamation issued by President Johnson.

31. Brazil withdraws belligerent rights from the rebels.

31. Rebel Gen. Hood and staff surrendered.

31. Gen. Sherman bade farewell to his army.

=June 1.= Occupation of Brownsville, Texas.

1. Day of humiliation and prayer on account of the murder of Pres.
Lincoln.

2. Kirby Smith and Magruder formally surrender their forces at
Galveston.

2. The British Government officially withdraws belligerent rights from
the rebels.

2. Occupation of Alexandria, La. Capture of 22 pieces of artillery.

3. The rebel iron-clad Missouri, in Red river, surrenders to Com. W. E.
Fitzhugh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page Changed from                     Changed to

  105 and 00 in arsenals, with         and 100 in arsenals, with immense
      immense

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold or blackletter font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR FOR THE UNION, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


