The Project Gutenberg eBook of Sketches of lowly life in a great city
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Sketches of lowly life in a great city

Author: Michael Angelo Woolf

Editor: Joseph Henius

Release date: February 5, 2025 [eBook #75295]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899

Credits: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES OF LOWLY LIFE IN A GREAT CITY ***





Transcriber’s Note: This is a picture book. Most of the captions use
slang and dialect.

Italics are enclosed in _underscores_.




[Illustration:

  _Yours faithfully,
      M. Angelo Woolf_
]




                         SKETCHES OF LOWLY LIFE
                            IN A GREAT CITY


                                   BY
                              M. A. WOOLF


                               EDITED BY
                             JOSEPH HENIUS

                             [Illustration]


                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

                 NEW YORK                        LONDON
        27 AND 29 WEST 23D STREET      24 BEDFORD STREET, STRAND




                            COPYRIGHT, 1899
                                   BY
                             JOSEPH HENIUS


                   The Knickerbocker Press, New York




                                   To
                           ELIZA WOOLF HENIUS




INTRODUCTION


In presenting this volume, I have endeavored to honor the memory
of a good man and a dear friend. In the tenderness, sincerity, and
simplicity of his work are to be found the elements which were most
conspicuous in the personality of the late M. A. Woolf, together with
unostentatious charity and a humor, unique in contemporary art, which,
while always manly and honest, possessed the power to move as well to
tears as to laughter.

The following selections were made from among the most characteristic
of Mr. Woolf’s contributions to _Life_ and _Judge_, and a number of
hitherto unpublished drawings.

To all who by kindly suggestion and personal effort have assisted me
in this compilation, I extend the assurance of my deep thanks and
appreciation.

                                                          JOSEPH HENIUS.

  BROOKLYN, October, 1899.




BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


Michael Angelo Woolf was born in London, England, August 27, 1837. His
father was Edward Woolf, a musician of eminence, and a man of versatile
talent in both art and literature. Michael Woolf was brought to America
in his infancy; his talent manifested itself early, and he contributed
as a young man to many prominent periodicals. For a number of years
he turned aside from draughtsmanship to pursue an actor’s career, and
two charming autobiographical reminiscences of this period of his life
appeared in the _Saturday Evening Post_, of Philadelphia, shortly
after his death. At the close of the Civil War, Mr. Woolf resumed his
original profession, but turning his attention more to painting, was
hampered by the remissness of his early training, and sought regular
art instruction, for the first time in his life, at the hands of
Edouard Frère in France. Upon his return to America he exhibited a much
admired painting, “How It Happened,” at the National Academy of Design.
In his later years he turned his endeavors almost entirely to the
delineation of child life among the poorer classes; and his drawings,
with their peculiar combination of humor and pathos, have become widely
known here and abroad.

Mr. Woolf died suddenly of heart disease at the home of his sister in
Brooklyn, N. Y., March 4, 1899.




[Illustration: HARD HIT.

Miranda (oh, so deeply in love): “I can’t stand this suspense no
longer! Ask her if all marriages is failures.”]


[Illustration: HARD HIT.

“I say, mister, have yer got a penny walentine what rhymes ter
Maggie?”]


[Illustration: LOVE IS A FEARFUL THING.

“If you please, sir: none uv us ain’t able ter sleep uv a night, an’
we want ter know if yer ain’t got suthin what’ll cure us, an’ we can’t
tell what’s de matter wid us.”]


[Illustration:

The innocent cause, who is paying a visit to friends in the village.]


[Illustration: A POINT IN ETIQUETTE.

“Kin I give him flowers if I’ve not been interdooced ter him?”

“No, it ain’t good form even ter reckernize a man wot yer don’t even
know. The best way is ter get ackwainted with the Dutch grocer where he
buys his ’taters an’ herrinks, an’ let the interduction come through
him.”]


[Illustration: A TERROR.

“Jim, giv’ us a interduction.”

“No, Tom, no. Yer don’t know her, an’ yer don’ want ter. She’s de
ice-cream fiend of de ward; she’s beggared two newsboys an’ a Italian
bootblack, an’ she’s a looking roun’ for another wictim.”]


[Illustration: GALLANT.

Girl.--“Don’t be frightened. He won’t bite you.”

Boy.--“I ain’t askeered o’ the dog. I’m a envyin’ him, that’s all.”]


[Illustration: EXCEPTIONAL VALUE.

Nurse (in continuation, speaking of her brother in the wagon).--“Yes,
an’ he ain’t got no wices at all; he don’t smoke, drink, or chew
terbacker, an’ he don’t want no latch-key.”

Friend (on right).--“Lor’, what a husbant he’d make.”]


[Illustration:

“What is it, Lizzie, a boy or a gal?”

“A gal.”

“Dear, dear me! There’s some one else who’s got to worry about gettin’
a husband.”]


[Illustration: A MYSTERY SOLVED.

“Clara, it’s the likes o’ them w’ot makes so many of us young bodies
ole maids. The fellers gets askeered o’ the milliners’ an’ the
dressmakers’ bills.”]


[Illustration: THE ONE THING LACKING.

Patsy: “W’ot do de gals admire uv dose milingtary chaps, I wonder?”

Jimmy: “It’s deir mustarchers, Patsy, deir mustarchers. If I had one
dat bloke wouldn’t be in it wid me.”]


[Illustration: HARD HIT.

Marriageable Young Man (on left): “What a wife such a woman would
make.”]


[Illustration:

Lillian: “’Ain’t that your brother?”

Maud: “Yes!”

Lillian: “Why don’t yer interdooce me?”

Maud: “He’s a misant’rope; he’s been crost in love, and he’s giv’ our
sex the cold shake!”]


[Illustration:

“Good morning, Adolph de Belfort. How comes it you are not at church
this fine Thanksgiving morn. Have you nothing to be thankful for?”

“For nothing as much as being able to count myself one of your most
ardent admirers, believe me!”]


[Illustration: A SURE WINNER.

Mentor (behind rock): “Hand her de bokay, Jimmy, an’ den t’row yerself
at her feet an’ tell her yer life is mizzerable, an’ dat yer’ll chuck
yerself in de ocean if she don’t have yer; an’ don’t forgit de sooicide
rackit. Dat fetches de wimmin every time.”]


[Illustration: C’EST L’AMOUR.

“Mary, there is warious kinds o’ love. There is that love wot never
wants nothin’ but love; then there’s a love wot’s simply lovely, it’s
so pure an’ good. Such a love is like the stars wot shines in the
infirmary in circumambulance space, an’ this is the hour for love, the
sunset hour. Do you remember Gray’s ‘Elegy’ begins with the line ‘Wot
Curtius told to Nell at parting day’?”]


[Illustration:

“Look at me, Lizzie; the gal wot gets me’ll have a snap, for I don’t
chew, smoke, or git drunk!”]


[Illustration: IN A TERRIBLE FIX.

Young and Bashful Admirer: “If she should turn ’round and say to me
that she loves me as she does that doll, what would I say?”]


[Illustration: A TRYING MOMENT.

Maggie: “Lizzie, wuz you ever kissed?”

Lizzie: “Only wunst in my life, an’ that wuz when I wuz in the
horspital wid a broken arm; an old lady kissed me an’ I blushed like a
child!”]


[Illustration: IN SUSPENSE.

Genevieve (at upper window): “Them’s Teddy’s legs if ever Teddy lived;
what could ha happened; I wonder could he have committed soo-incide
’cause I rejected him this mornin’?”

(No! The afternoon was warm, and Teddy was taking a siesta.)]


[Illustration: TO STOP GOSSIPS’ TONGUES.

Horatio (to Lucretia): “As our engagement is not made public yet,
you had better let go o’ my arm when we get a little nearer to the
village!”]


[Illustration:

“Tommy, the doctors is sayin’ that kissin’ is apt to breed sickness!”

“I know. But we men have to take risks in everythink!”]


[Illustration: NOT DEAD SURE OF HER.

“I wonder if she’d sic de dorg on me if I wuz ter fall on me knees an’
tell her I love her?”]


[Illustration:

“In this stocking, Letitia, you will find the hard savings of my
lifetime,--two half-dollars, a silver spoon, a briarwood pipe, and
a bottle of red ink; not much, I will admit, but enough to start
house-keeping with if you will only say the word!”

“Reginald Overbeck, you embarrass me! Think of the difference in our
ages,--what will the world say?--take me, I am your’n!”]


[Illustration: NO TRIFLERS WANTED.

She: “I don’t mind walking with you, but for goodness’ sake don’t say
you love me and ask me to wait for you--they all do that. If there’s
any waiting to be done, wait yourself until you’re a man, and then come
right down to business.”]


[Illustration: HOME, SWEET HOME.

“Look, Adelaide, look! The boat is ready! Let us fly to yon foreign
shore!”

“Marmion Bludwurst, your appeal is in vain; I kinnot leave my home. It
is unpossible!”]


[Illustration: CHANGED HER OPINION.

Ethelwynde: “They say she married a common mechanic.”

Heliotroype: “Common, Ethelwynde? Why, he had spent all his life in a
bicycle manufactory!”

Ethelwynde: “Oh, heavens! Although a man-hater for years, I feel that I
could love such a man as that with my innermost soul!”]


[Illustration: PATRIOTIC.

Boy (reading “Personals”): “A young man of means wishes to meet a young
and attractive lady who would be willing to marry and spend part of the
year abroad.”

Young Lady (matrimonially inclined): “That’d suit me izzackly,
exceptin’ the livin’ abroad. I’d rather go roun’ wid me basket in
America, dan be presented to de nobility in London.”]


[Illustration: T’ROWN DOWN.]


[Illustration:

“Genevieve Cassidy, you ask me why I have brought you to this spot.
Look! That ball of snow contains the body of my rival, Homer Gallagher.
The vengeance I have wroke on him fills my heart with joy, for I feel I
am a step nearer my one great ambition.”]


[Illustration:

He: “Hortense Vaseline Debris, from this hour henceforwardforth we
ain’t to each other what we wuz a week ago. I brand yer as a flirt an’
a croquet!”

She (haughtily): “As you please, Reginald Overton. There are others!”]


[Illustration: PROOF CONCLUSIVE.

Mediator: “He’s bin goin’ on like dat fer a week. He don’t get no
sleep, but keeps moanin’ an’ mentionin’ yer name.”

Lizzie: “Does he refuse his wittles?”

Mediator: “Oh, no!”

Lizzie: “Den it isn’t love w’ot’s a-worryin’ him. W’ot he wants is
exercise.”]


[Illustration: WHY IT WAS OFF.

“W’ot’s de matter, Billy--is de engagement broke off?”

“Yes; it’s no use payin’ intentions to a gal w’ot kin knock de head off
yer with a simple lick, an’ dat’s w’ot she come near doin’ de last time
I called on her. If I marries a gal I wants ter be boss, an’ if dere’s
any fightin’ to be did I wants ter be champion.”]


[Illustration: A GUILTY PALM.

“Feodora, yer have been a deceivin’ of me. Yer hand tells me yer have
been married twicet!”]


[Illustration: A BIT OF ROMANCE.

“What’s the matter, Tom--is yer engagement off?”

“Aye, Simeon, it’s the old, old story. Famerly interference,
mother-in-law, an’ all that sort o’ thing. It druv me ter drink, an’ I
become a wreck, an’ she--she took to the Salwation Army!”]


[Illustration: THAT’S WHY.

Boy (in background, to chum): “Why don’t yer go an’ knock de stuffin’
out un yer rival?”

Chum: “I’ll tell yer why. Did yer ever see him fight? I have.”]


[Illustration: MEN WERE DECEIVERS EVER.

Lopez Donovan (putting his face under cover): “By de holy smoke! if it
ain’t my fiancee, Loriena Brady. W’ot will she do w’en she finds out
dat my heart is marble an’ I’se t’rown her down for de little angel
w’ot I’se a-pullin’?”]


[Illustration:

“Tom, she giv’ me the marble heart, the cold shake; them baloom sleeves
is too much for her. (In a whisper): I want you to let me pull your
sister ’round on that sled for a little while. I want ter make that gal
jealous--it’ll break her heart!”]


[Illustration: TERRIBLE.

Pamela O’Duffy (in wagon): “A clandesting meetin’! Oh, Algernon! Oh,
the perfigiousness of man! And with a or’nary butcher’s daughter, too!
Oh, this is much more than too much! (With theatric action and force):
By yon flossy cloudlets w’ot wanders over yon Asia sky, I register an
oath to jolt his jaglets’ footsteps night an’ day, to taunt him with my
frenzied thumb until his life becomes a bird’n, an’ he seeks death in
hor-r-r-rer, ’r-retchedness, an’ r-r-r-remorse!” (Faints.)]


[Illustration: “THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE,” etc.

He: “There’s the only girl I ever loved, an’ I dassent go near her
’cause she’s gittin’ the measles.”]


[Illustration: AFTER THE QUARREL.

Niobe MacGonigal (on extreme left): “If he on’y knowed w’ot a wretched
night I passed I wonder if he’d let me took back dem words I spoke?”]


[Illustration: INGRATITUDE.

Pythias: “Come along, Damon. She ain’t worth a second thought!”

Damon: “To think she should treat me like this! Why, I started her in
business; I stole that basket for her w’ot she goes a-beggin’ with.”

Pythias (with disgust): “Bah! Wimmin is ingrates; they make me tired!”]


[Illustration: AN APPEAL.

“Maud Percy Sidney, listen to me. Me an’ my child is desolate since you
have took from us our purtector an’ surport. If my words cannot move
you, let the wasted form of this poor child melt your heart, if it be
not made of adamank or cast iron.”]


[Illustration: IN DOUBT.

“Lizzie, you’re a woman o’ the world and what I’m a’ askin’ you is in
strick conferdence, o’ course. Jim, there, has offert me his hand. (In
a hoarse whisper): Do you think a woman would be happy with a man with
legs like his’n?”]


[Illustration: AT THE END OF THE SEASON.

“Billy, now that she’s agoin’ away, I want ter tell yer that I wuz all
broke up on that gal, an’ I would have married her if she had only
given me some encouragement.”]


[Illustration: BY THE SAD SEA SHORE.

Argument: The last boat of the season is leaving, carrying away a host
of summer boarders.

Party on Rock (in tones of deepest anguish): “Farewell, Mercedes,
farewell! In six short months you will have forgotten Vacopo the
fisherman’s son, and my old age will be made a wreck!”]


[Illustration: ’TWAS EVER THUS.

Smitten Youth (who has been very attentive with flowers and
huckleberries for a month past): “Hevings, Horatio, she must be agoin’
to leave the place!” (Swoons.)]


[Illustration: THE LOVERS.

She (on right of picture, timidly): “Will Sidney forgive his birdie if
she asks a favor of him?”

He (warmly): “Sidney kin refuse his Hortense nothink.”

She (with a choking emotion): “Then ask him to play a weddin’ march.”]


[Illustration:

“Say, Dago, could yer get a weddin’ breakfust ready at a hour’s
notice?”]


[Illustration:

  THE FATHER’S DAY OFF           THE CHILD’S DAY OFF
    A FRESH BOTTLE.                   FRESH AIR.
]


[Illustration: APROPOS OF THAT $50,000 TO CLOTHE THE ARMENIANS.

Father Knickerbocker: “When you send to Armenia, let it be by way of
Mulberry Bend!”]


[Illustration:

“I wonder if I wuz all dressed up an’ put in a winder, if anybody would
long to have me?”]


[Illustration:

“Has father got here yet?”]


[Illustration:

“Them’s for a funeral, I guess!”

“Sure!”

(With a sigh): “Ah, there’s some pleasure in bein’ a Fi’th Avenyer
corpse!”]


[Illustration:

(At the ash-can): “De story-book says dat de prince married Cindyrella,
but I don’t believe it; I don’t think he took no notice of her!”]


[Illustration: THE DIFFERENCE.

James: “Wot’s de matter; has he bin a-workin’ de growler agin?”

Larry: “No; dis time de growler has bin a-workin’ him.”]


[Illustration: RARE INNOCENCE.

She: “Jimmy, is dere enny rinks open now?”

He: “Naw, dey all closed more ’n a mont’ ago.”

She: “So I t’ought. I wondered wo’t mother meant by sayin’ father came
home last night wid a skate on.”]


[Illustration: THE DAY WE CELEBRATE.

First Boy: “Too much Santa Claus, eh?”

Second Boy: “No, too much Santa Cruz.”]


[Illustration: HIS NATURAL BENT.

Father (in high glee): “Vell, Repecka, unt vat do you t’ink ohf our
Ikey now? Look ad him. He’s put on mine coat unt vest to make him look
like a man, unt den got dree lemons for a sign, unt he’s shtarted a
pawnbroker’s shtore on der sidewalk. Mark mein vords, he’ll haf der
clothes off dem Cristian poys’ packs before dey goes away.”]


[Illustration: PATERNAL PRIDE.

“If there’s a child in the sixt’ ward kin bate that wan o’ moine at
dhrinkin’, fetch him along, and I’ll set up the licker for the house.
Ah! but it’s a proud woman his mother’d be this day if she wuz on’y
aloive to see him!”]


[Illustration:

“Agnes, does your father drink, too?”]


[Illustration:

“She must be getting better. It is the first time she has smiled.”]


[Illustration: TOO MUCH FOR HIM.

“Come away, Nellie, come away! I can’t stand it no longer. The sight
an’ smell o’ them cakes make me desperit.”]


[Illustration: TO BE ENVIED.

“Hey, Jimmy, dat shop’s mighty lucky dese hard times.”]


[Illustration: THAT’S WHERE THE IRON ENTERED.

“Jimmy, it ain’t the walue o’ the dorg w’ot I’m a-thinkin’ of, although
that’s enough to break one’s heart, but it’s the chicking an’ the party
o’ four grasses w’ot he’s got on his insides!”]


[Illustration: LOST HER PASS.

Boy (on extreme right of picture, to sister): “Wot have yer did wid de
pennies w’ot I giv yer ter save fer de ice cream?”

Sister: “Ow--boo-hoo-hoo! I put ’em in me mout fer safety, and I’ve
swallered em. Boo-hoo-hoo!”]


[Illustration: TOO BAD.

“Talk about cruelty ter young folks! I want ter know if dere’s anyting
worse dan ter come acrost one er dem posters when yer dat hungry you
could almost eat yer shoes.”]


[Illustration: HER SMALL WISH.

“See w’ot I found in the ash-barril. What a pity it ain’t got no
stummick!”

“I envies it. If I didn’t have no stummick I wouldn’t want
no grub!”]


[Illustration: TERRIBLE.

“Yes, it’s just too awful to think I’ve got to grow so old that gents
won’t make room for me in the cars!”]


[Illustration: ON THE FRESH-AIR EXCURSION.

Tillie (overcome of her free lunch): “Say, Maggie, run a pin in me. I
must be a-dreamin’. This is too good to be true!”]


[Illustration: AN ANXIOUS MOMENT. (_AT THE FRESH-AIR EXCURSION._)

“Please, sir, I’s lost me ticket.”]


[Illustration: SIMPLE STRATEGY.

Emily: “Wot’s the use of yer standin’ an’ lookin’ in the winder when
yer ain’t got no money?”

Sophy: “Well, I’ll tell yer. I stand an’ aggrawate myself to that
extent that the excitement of it gets me hungry, an’ I rushes home an’
eats me dry crust o’ bread wid an appetite.”]


[Illustration: THE TEMPTATION TOO GREAT.

Ellen: “Why don’t you put a couple of oysters on those black eyes o’
yourn?”

Tom: “I did. I tried it twiced, but somehow I can’t never get them no
furder up than my mout.”]


[Illustration:

Boy: “He kin scare us with his racket, now, Em’ly, but in a couple o’
days our stummicks will be his cemetary!”]


[Illustration: BAD LOOKOUT FOR JOHNNY.

“Come, Mariar--come quick! Johnny Atkins is a-buyin’ a apple!”]


[Illustration:

“I seen yer buy de apple, Susy Roach, an’ if yer don’t gimme half I’ll
rub aginst yer, an’ yer’ll catch der measles.”]


[Illustration: A BONANZA.

“Mattie, come quick, an’ bring everythink yer can with yer! There’s bin
a New Year’s party, an’ they’re a-givin’ away all the pidgins, toast,
an’ wegetables what’s bin left over!”]


[Illustration: A GOOD TIME.

“Bill, you wuzzent in it when you didn’t go to de picnic; dat’s right!
Dere wuz pie--an’ cake--an’ limonade--an’ red an’ yaller ice-cream, an’
I eat so much dat when I got t’rough I felt as dough dere wuz a duzzent
angels a-sittin’ on me ribs a-fannin’ me stummick to sleep.”]


[Illustration: A MOMENT OF ANXIETY.

“Will he dewour us, Jimmy?”

“I dunno. He takes the Christmas turkey I got inside o’ me for quail,
an’ you never can tell wot a game dog will do.”]


[Illustration: AN EYE TO BUSINESS.

“Hey, Chimmy, how’s dat for a t’roat ter holler extrys wid?”]


[Illustration: QUITE HUMAN.

“What makes a rooster crow, Billy?”

“He’s got ter giv’ way ter his feelin’s. He can’t help hisself.”

“But when the hen lays a egg he makes the most noise.”

“Ah! That’s pride.”]


[Illustration:

Nanny: “Drop that, Billy; drop it, I tell you! I don’t want you to get
a taste for that sort o’ thing!”]


[Illustration: PRIDE OF ANCESTRY.

Rover: “My father took the first prize at the exhibition!”

Towzer: “That’s nothing; my mother’s remains took a gold medal at the
health-food fair!”]


[Illustration: ALONE.

Susy: “What’s he cryin’ for?”

Nelly (in a whisper): “That dead dog wuz his chum.”]


[Illustration: TOO MUCH.

Sue: “Maggie, would you rather die an’ be a angel with a harp, or have
that weddin’ dress?”

Mag: “Oh, don’t ask me! The temptation is too terrible!”]


[Illustration: IN DOUBT.

“What’s the matter, Tom?”

“I’m in trouble. I don’t know whether I ought to die while I’m young,
and become a angel, or wait an’ grow up to be a man an’ have a
mustarche an’ side-wiskers.”]


[Illustration: NAUGHTYCAL.

“Tom, wot’s a spanker boom?”

“Is yer mother a-livin’?”

“Yes!”

“Does she wear slippers?”

“Yes!”

“Well, then, you must be an awfully good feller if you don’t know what
a spanker boom is!”]


[Illustration:

“Mother, I’ve a favor to ask of you. If you are a-goin’ to lick me,
don’t do it with a slipper; it always unmans me.”]


[Illustration:

“My! But your boy do be growin’, Mrs. Cafferty!”

“Faith, an’ that’s thrue for yez, Mrs. Owens! He’s outgrown all his
owld clothes, an’ it’s a pair of his father’s pants he do be wearin’,
an’ by that same token I do hate to cut thim, for I don’t think it will
be long afore the boy fills thim intirely!”]


[Illustration: A PLEASANT PROSPECT.

“Say, pop, come out an’ down him. Jimmy Ryan said his pa could lick
mine, and I said he couldn’t, and they’re waitin’ for you outside.”]


[Illustration: LOOKING FORWARD.

Aunt: “Well, Tom, how do you like your new little sister?”

Tom: “Oh, she’s good enough as a kid, but just think what a trouble
she’ll be when she gets a little older, and I’ve got to chase whistlers
away from the front stoop!”]


[Illustration:

Little Jimmy Carrol (to infant brother): “Oh, just wait till you git
old enough to lick! Won’t you catch it? Mother ain’t give me a cent
since you arrived.”]


[Illustration: A WORD OF ADVICE.

“Knock him out wid an uppercut, Jimmy; an’ if in de excitement of de
moment yez finds yez has got ter strike below de belt, hit so hard
he’ll have spazzums an’ won’t know de differ’nce.”]


[Illustration: A DIVISION OF LABOR A CAPITAL IDEA.

“I tell yer wot, Jimmy: tackle de dorg first, an’ when you’ve laid him
out go fer de feller, an’ after you’ve got him on de groun’ wid yer
foot over his mout’ ter keep him from a-hollerin’, I’ll sneak up an’
grab de flowers wot he’s got an’ run home wid ’em.”]


[Illustration:

Peacemaker: “Just read that motter, an’ then go an’ make up fren’s
agin!”

Hopeless: “Oh, that sayin’s good enuff to read, but yer can’t make me
berlieve that a small piece of chewin’ gum is plenty for two, nohow!”]


[Illustration:

“You dassent come over on this side of the street, so you dassent!”

Voice from over the way: “Why dassent I?”

Voice from barrel (in whisper): “Make it a objict for him to come
acrost: tell him you kin lick him wid yer little finger!”]


[Illustration: JUST THE THING.

Boy (calmly): “Say, Tilly, I want ter tell yer somethink: you’re so
full o’ fight you ought ter go ter some recruitin’ office an’ offer yer
services ter the government. Uncle Sam is just a-dyin’ ter git hold o’
such folks as you.”]


[Illustration: PRECAUTIONARY.

“Who’s he, Bill?”

“I dunno. I never see him afore.”

“Well, let’s slug him, anyhow, or else he’ll be puttin’ on airs.”]


[Illustration:

Vendor: “You leetel girla musta move away!”

Miss Casey (from de Fourt’): “Move away? You Dagos is a puttin’
on airs, ain’t you? I may not be a millyunyair, an’ I may not eat
charlotty roosters or drink lemon phosphiks, but I ain’t a-goin’ to
let no Dago give me points wot to do, an’ doan’t yer forgit it!”
(Exits, muttering something about “bringin’ de gang aroun’ an’ cleanin’
somebody out.”)]


[Illustration: STARS AND STRIPES.

First Little Girl: “My father was fighting for three years. He carried
the stars and stripes, and he’s got the flag yet.”

Second Little Girl: “My father was in for fighting for six years, and
he carries stripes yet. He’s got a striped suit now.”]


[Illustration: A CLIPPING FROM DOOGAN’S “MIRROR OF FASHION.”

“Madame Duffi, Corque, has opened a millinery establishment in Doogan
Alley, and her door is besieged the entire day by the bon-ton of that
swell neighborhood.”]


[Illustration: THE ENVY OF THE ALLEY.

An Easter hat and a bunch of violets.]


[Illustration: OH! THE SHAME OF IT.

Polly: “See here, Feodora, it’s a no use o’ your standin’ there wid
your arms crosst like a Wenus der Milo a-puttin’ on airs. I’ll give
you a pointer: nusses has feelinks just the same as other folks, an’ I
won’t take none o’ your sass, an’ don’t yer forgit it!”

Feodora (with intense bitterness): “Nothink can’t be expected better of
no one who so far forgits herself as to take care of Chinee h’infants.”]


[Illustration: VERY APPARENT.

“It’s easy to see, Hattie, that she hasn’t moved in the best
society!”]


[Illustration:

“My own cousin, an’ she didn’t reckernize me!”

“Don’t mind it, Sally; wimmin isn’t accountable for what they does when
they gets a Mary de Medicine collar on for the first time!”]


[Illustration:

“Hey, Jimmy, ain’t yer a-rushin’ the season?”

“Rushin’ the season? Naw! When I picked out a suit at the clothin’
fund, it was a warm day, an’ I wanted to look swell!”]


[Illustration: THE DIGNITY OF POWER.

Chorus: “Who is she, anyhow?”

Tilly MacAllister: “She comes from Philadelphia, an’ her father’s a
butcher. She wants to get into our set, but we ain’t got no use for
butchers’ daughters nor Quakers.”]


[Illustration: A GENEROUS OFFER.

“I say, mister, how’s that fer a dog-cart, eh? Jump right in an’ I’ll
take yer where yer a-goin’, an’ I won’t charge yer a cent. An’ yer’ll
have the company of the lady the whole way.”]


[Illustration:

“It’s a wonderful sight, eh, Susanne?”

“Won-der-ful!”

“I dunno how it is with you wimmin folks, but it makes us men feel
awful insiggernifikint!”]


[Illustration: “EVEN SUPPOSING.”

Bleak House Boy (to Digby, who set out to enjoy in quietness a sand
and sun bath): “Supposin’ I wuz to tell you the entire willage is gone
on a pic-nic, an’ supposin’ I wuz to brace you for fifty cents, an’
then supposin’ you cussed a bit an’ refused to giv’ it, wot’d you do
supposin’ I set my dog on you?”]


[Illustration: A HOLIDAY DREAM.

Em’ly: “Yer see I wuz carried away on a yaller cloud into a big open
blue place where there wuz nothin’ but dolls--blondes, bluenettes,
niggers, an’ Chinese; and Santa Claus took me by the hand an’ led me up
to one o’ the most beautifullest dolls I ever seen, all gold lace an’
spangles, an’ it could talk an’ sing, too. (In rapture): Oh, it wuz too
loverly for anythink! An’ Santa Claus wuz just puttin’ it into my hands
when I woked up!”

Chorus: “Oh, what a shame! Didn’t yer want ter die?”]


[Illustration: A MOMENT OF ENVY.

Boy (from Country Circus tent): “Hey fellers, run home an’ get de money
to come in even if yer have ter steal it! It’s immense! De clown’s
a-standin’ on his head an’ de baby elephant’s a-chuckin’ a pint o’ pop
corn into his ears! Don’t yer wish’ t yer wuz me?”]


[Illustration: HER FIRST RIDE.

“Oh, this is heavinkly, perfectly heavinkly!”]


[Illustration: A REGRET.

“Oh, Milly, what a pity it is that our folks is so healthy, an’ sich
long livers!”]


[Illustration: HER CONSERVATORY.]


[Illustration:

“Say, miss, don’t yer want ter fight dogs?”]


[Illustration:

“Say, boss, I’s got ter raise five cents for chewin’ gum, even if I has
to put me child in hock.”]


[Illustration: TEN CENTS’ WORTH.

Consuelo (reading): “The viz-count entered the apartment with a languid
h’air, and puffed his cigaroot with wiolence. ‘Air you alone?’ he
inkwired in a nongshallnot manner of the countiss. She rose from the
turkeys otterman with a diluted nostril, her eyes flashed with a fire
which almost consoomed their lids, and shakin’ her jewilled left hand
in the viz-count’s face, she gave a majestic sweep with her right foot
an’ lef’ the room.”

Omnes: “My!”]


[Illustration: WHEN THE THERMOMETER IS MELTING IN THE SHADE.

“Oh! But this is bully; it’s more coolin’ than ice-cream, an’ makes me
feel better ’n pink leminade does!”]


[Illustration: A LIFE SAVER.

“Sam, will yer go out inter deep water an’ make believe yer drowdin’? I
want ter try my dog.”]


[Illustration:

Boy: “Hey, Juliet, is you a-postin’ dat to yer Romeo?”]


[Illustration: A BAD PART.

“Say, Tom, pretend yer a Spaniard, an’ let de gang play wid yer fer
five minits.”]


[Illustration: HIS SIMPLE WISH.

Jacky: “Hey, Jimmy! Wot’d yer do if yer wuz as strong as dat?”

Jimmy: “Why, I’d go down ter de school an’ take de teacher atween me
teet’ an’ knock de stuffin’ out him.”]


[Illustration: TONY DUFFY’S ORATION.

“Fellers! De gang has lost its pup! He scrapped wid a bull tarrier, an’
got it in de neck. He wuz a torrowbred, a chim dandy; a t’ree-times
winner way up to de limit. He had a head on to him wot wuz almost
hooman. I ain’t a-talkin’ troo me hat; I ain’t a-givin’ guff; I’m
a-givin’ it to yer straight--he wuz a corker. Der Wanderbilts or Asters
didn’t have de plunks ter buy dat pup--dat’s straight. He wuz way up in
G--are yous wid me? His deat’ has broke me up; don’t jolly me--not on
yer life. Yous wot has lungs chip in wid a song, sunthin’ sollum,--‘Ole
Dog Tray,’ or ‘Sweet Maree,’--an’ den we’ll plant him. Fellers, I’se
lost me grip; me name is Dennis--I’m all broke up. I’ll go chase myself
an’ have a game o’ craps. S’ long!”]


[Illustration:

“I tell yer Sandow isn’t in it wid him. He takes de kid an’ chucks him
in de air, den he turns a han’spring an’ drinks a can o’ cold tomatter
soup afore de kid reaches de groun’.”]


[Illustration: A PRIVATE EXHIBITION.

Master of Ceremonies: “De nex’ shot which me brudder de infant
phenomenal will preform is to carrum wid de ball on de bottle an’ de
lamp, an’ take de chimney off de lamp widout breakin’ of it, or puttin’
de light out. De shot is not on’y differcult, but marvelyous!”]


[Illustration: A SAD STATE OF AFFAIRS.

“It’s no use talking, Ellen Jane, the young men are not as sociable as
they were when we were girls. I haven’t had a solitary visitor this
week. How to account for it I don’t know; such a thing hasn’t happened
for years!”]


[Illustration: A WARNING.

Boy (reading paper): “The war cloud between the States and Italy has
not dispersed as yet--”

Patriot Youth (falling on knees): “Let forrin despots tremble, for in
case of war I solemmy promise to raise a rigimint an’ lead it merself;
let mer oath be registered!”]


[Illustration: SIC EUNT FATA HOMINUM.

Judge (on box): “Read the charges against Vladimir Casey!”

Clerk (reading): “Firstly: He is charged wid losin’ interest in de
gang, an’ has been stealin’ from de corner groceries for strange
parties; An’ whereover: It has bin discover’t dat he kin be bribed wid
a lemon; An’ whereas: He has given Mag Skelly de marble heart an’ has
nearly kilt her; An’ fourthly: When de gang had a pedlar down on de
sidewalk an’ was goin’ t’rough him, he refoosed to take a han’; An’ ter
conclood: He ain’t fit ter be our capt’in no longer, an’ it is moved by
de gang dat he gits it in de neck, an’ is furdermore removed from his
official office!”]


[Illustration:

Girl: “Please, ’m, give me an’ me brudders an’ sisters suthin’?”

Lady: “Why, you’re not all one family, surely?”

Girl (unblushingly): “Yes, ’m, we’s all twins!”]


[Illustration:

“Is your father goin’ to take in boarders this summer?”

“I guess so”; (with a wink) “he took in a lot last year, you know.”]


[Illustration:

Dennis (a green hand, to whom the speaking-pipe is an unexplored
mystery): “I’d give me month’s wages to foind out how the divil the
boss iver managed to shqueeze himself into that bit iv a poipe!”]


[Illustration:

“Well, Tom, what sort o’ Fourth did you have?”

Tom: “Are yer blind?”]


[Illustration: ALONE AT THE RAILROAD STATION.--THANKSGIVING DAY.]


[Illustration: CHRISTMAS FESTIVITIES: LIVING PICTURES AT DOOHIGAN’S
HALL.

_Adam and Eve in the Garden of Paradise._

Adam: Master Phelim Grogan.

Eve: Miss Daisy Shaughnessy.]


[Illustration: THE NIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS.

“Oh, if he would only look this way!”]


[Illustration: THE EMPTY STOCKING.]


[Illustration: HOPE.]


[Illustration:

“If yer please, mum, Santa Claus can’t get into our room ’cause they
ain’t no chimley, an’ I want ter know if yer won’t hang up this
stockin’ when yer a-hangin’ up the children’s, an’ I’ll call in the
mornin’ fer it.”]


[Illustration: ST. VALENTINE’S DAY AT THE “BEND.”

Tom (to Alice): “If he knew he had that pinned to him he’d be wild.”]


[Illustration: THE FINAL REHEARSAL.--THE SUPREME MOMENT.

Author and Stage Manager (to Orchestra): “When de lady says, ‘Lord
Ashleigh Baxter, I am a orfun, but I never kin be yourn,’ an’ he says,
‘Ha, ha, ha, you are alone beneat’ my roof an’ unpurtected,’--I want
you to rattle off some music wot’ll giv’ Biddy, de fait’ful servant,
lots o’ time to rush in an’ t’row Baxter to de groun’.”]


[Illustration: THE WORLD BEFORE HER.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES OF LOWLY LIFE IN A GREAT CITY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


