The Project Gutenberg eBook of Corrie
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Corrie

Author: active approximately 1876-1880 Ruth Lynn

Release date: January 3, 2025 [eBook #75031]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society, 1929


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRIE ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: "OH, ROBIN, HOW COULD YOU BE SO WICKED?" SHE CRIED.]



                             CORRIE


                               BY

                           RUTH LYNN

                           AUTHOR OF
           "CITY SPARROWS," "THE MYSTERIOUS LOCKET,"
                              ETC.


                             LONDON:
                  THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
       4 BOUVERIE STREET AND 65 ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD, E.C.4



                   PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN



                            CONTENTS

                         [Illustration]


CHAP.

   I. WHY THE BELLS SANG

  II. A WALK IN THE WOOD

 III. A RAINBOW IN THE NURSERY

  IV. FATHER CHRISTMAS

   V. THE GARDENER'S LESSON

  VI. A TEMPTING BAIT

 VII. THE BROKEN VASE

VIII. THE BIRTHDAY QUEEN

  IX. CAUGHT!

   X. SET FREE!

  XI. FOREST LODGE

 XII. CONCLUSION



                             CORRIE

                         [Illustration]

CHAPTER I

WHY THE BELLS SANG

TIRRA-ling-a-ting-ding-dong!—Sang the bells, and the stars sparkled
in the sky. The silver moonlight shone down softly on the streets of
the city, making the weathercock on the blackened steeple glitter like
gold, and throwing a tender radiance on the resting-places of the dead
beneath. Silently the light stole along the street like the touch of an
angel's wing, while the footsteps that sounded sharply on the smooth
pavement told that rest comes late to many of earth's toiling ones in
the busy town.

The bright patches on walls and roof still crept on, till the light
shone straight down into one of the windows, as if moon and stars had
an especial errand in there. And so they had; for there was no candle,
and the small fire, though burning clear and red, did not flame, so the
moonbeams came in and did duty for both.

They lighted up Corrie's bright curls as she lay quietly hugged in
Robin's arms, and showed him the smiles on her pretty pale face as he
talked to her in a low tone.

"Hark! Corrie! Do you hear the bells?"

"Pretty bells," whispered Corrie; "why do they ring to-night?"

"Because Christmas is coming, Corrie, and the ringers want to practise
so that the bells may sing prettily on Christmas morning."

"Do they sing words, Robin?"

"Yes, I think so, Corrie, but it is not everybody that hears them; they
are telling about Jesus Christ and the angels. You might think they
would get tired of saying it over and over again; but you know, every
year there are more little babies born who have never heard about it
before; and so they will always sing."

"What is the story, Robin?"

"Why, it begins about when the dear Lord Jesus lived up in heaven with
His Father and the angels. Look! Corrie! At the twinkling stars, how
they shine! That is only a little peep of the glory and beauty of the
happy home above the bright blue sky."

"Shall we go to that home some day, Robin? You and I and mother?"

"Yes, darling little sister, we shall, for Jesus has promised to take
us there; and He always does what He says."

As the boy whispered this, a rush of hot tears came into his eyes, for
he could not help thinking that the time might not be so very far off
for Corrie, his poor little ailing sister, who had never known how to
use her small feet: they did not seem to belong to her at all. For,
alas! both legs were quite paralysed and helpless. All day long she had
to sit motionless in her chair, or make feeble efforts to creep about
on the floor. Robin knew he could never see her playing with other
children of her own age among the daisied meadows out beyond the smoky
town.

When she was a baby-child, he used to carry her out of doors for long
distances, to let her breathe the pure country air. But at last the
weight became too much for even his patient loving strength. And now,
although she was four years old, there was no improvement in the state
of her health. The doctor had told mother yesterday she would be a
cripple all her life. This was why the boy's tears fell on Corrie's
silky hair to-night; but he brushed them away, and went on with the
story as the child nestled closer in his embrace—

"The holy angels live up there," he continued, "and we shall see them
all some day; and you will never cry any more, Corrie, when you get
there, because Jesus is going to take away everybody's pain."

Corrie gave a sigh of relief.

"Please go on," she pleaded.

"I heard a great deal about it from teacher last Sunday," continued
Robin; "she said she was going to tell us a Christmas story, that we
might think about it on Christmas Eve; so I listened to every word,
that I might be able to tell you."

A transient smile flitted across the face made wan and small through
suffering, and one white thin hand was raised to stroke Robin's cheek.

He kissed it, and went on—

"She told us first about the shepherds. They were the men who took care
of the sheep and lambs, you know. And in that far country where they
lived, there were wild beasts—wolves and foxes—who used to prowl about
at night round the fold; so the shepherds lighted fires to frighten
them away. No harm could happen while they kept guard. Who is the Good
Shepherd, who always takes care of us?"

"Jesus," murmured the child.

"Yes, Corrie; and He is the best of all, because He never sleeps, but
is always looking at the little ones who love Him and try to please
Him. Well, these good men sat talking together that Christmas time so
long ago, when all of a sudden a very bright light shone round them—a
light brighter than the brightest sunshine; they could not look at it,
it was so dazzling. It was a peep at glory—glory, Corrie, that you sing
about in the hymn."

"What did the shepherds say, Robin?" asked Corrie, with an earnest look
in her dark eyes.

"They did not say anything, for they were dreadfully frightened; but
while they were wondering where the beautiful light came from, a holy
angel began speaking to them; and what do you think he said?"

"What?" said Corrie, with parted eager lips.

"Teacher gave us the words to learn; so I can tell you exactly without
looking in the Bible. The angel said, 'Fear not: for, behold, I bring
you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto
you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour which is Christ
the Lord.' That night, little sister, while they had been watching the
sheep, a baby had been born in a stable where the cows were feeding.
The grand people would not let them come into the inn; there was no
room there; so the King of Glory was laid in a common stable, with the
oxen feeding round Him."

"Did they go to find Him, Robin?"

"Yes, they went at once; and when they saw the baby, they knew they
were looking at the promised Saviour, whom they had read about and
expected. He had come into the world to save poor sinners by washing
them white in His precious blood; and they longed to tell everybody the
good news. That is why we may be glad too, because we love Him as the
shepherds did; and we know He loves us. We can sing—

   "'I am so glad that Jesus loves me.'"

"Yes, I do love Him," said Corrie, stretching out her arms. "I do, very
very much. I wish He would take me home to live in heaven now; I want
to see His face."

"So you will some day, darling," answered Robin, clasping her tighter.
"But you know we can be His servants here on earth; He has got work for
each of us to do."

"Work for me, Robin! Oh, what is it? What can I do for the dear Lord
Jesus?"

"You can try to bear your bad pain patiently, dear little sister, for
His sake, and not be cross and fretful, to worry poor mother when she
is busy. The best work of all is, I think, to see how happy you can
be, because then you make everybody else happy. Oh, this will be the
brightest Christmas we have ever had! We have got so many things to
make us glad, Corrie."

Yet, looking into that dismal room with its scanty furniture, how few
would have said that! True, everything was clean, from the boarded
floor to the cracked cups and saucers neatly arranged on a shelf. But
poor Robin knew well there was only just enough to make both ends meet,
as his mother said. And it was indeed a hard struggle to the poor
widow, ever toiling, never resting from Monday morning to Saturday
night. But the peace of God was in that dwelling; and where that light
shines, it can never be all dark.

"There is mother!" cried Robin, rising gently, to lay Corrie in the
sort of sofa he had made for her by tying two old chairs together and
placing cushions on them.

"Oh, mother! Why did you carry that heavy basket? I could have fetched
it in the truck."

The poor woman set down her load on the floor with a sigh of relief,
and sank down on the nearest chair. Yet her white face had a smile for
her two children, as the boy, having lighted a candle, put his arm
round her neck.

"I shall be better presently, after a cup of tea. Good Robin, to have
the kettle boiling! I am so tired! You will have to go out to Oaklands,
my son, the first thing to-morrow morning. The family has returned, and
Jonathan spoke for me, and got the washing promised; so that will be a
good bit for us this winter, as there are some children."

"All right, mother; I'll be off as early as you please. Why, it will be
Christmas Eve! What shall we do to keep Christmas this year?"

"I don't know, my boy. We must be content with such things as we have,
and make the best of them. The Lord never forgets us."

"Mother, the grand rich people do something on Christmas Eve to keep
it, don't they?"

"Oh yes; when I lived at Oaklands long ago, as nurse, we had fine
doings there. There was always a Christmas tree, and all sorts of games
and fun; but that is only for rich people, Robin."

"Yes, I suppose so, mother; but how I wish Corrie could see something
like that; I should like her to have a Christmas tree of her own. And
why not?" he added, at seeing his mother shake her head.

He ran off to do a household errand in an adjoining street. "I must
think of something to make this Christmas a very happy one for poor
little Corrie, because she has so few things to make her glad!"

And Robin gave sundry leaps in the air as scheme after scheme presented
itself, for he felt quite sure he could manage something for her.

Corrie! It was always Corrie in Robin's heart; and if he could only
succeed now and then in letting bright glints of sunshine into that
little shaded life, there was not a happier boy in the town. Ah! Yes,
because he possessed the secret of true happiness, which consists in
finding no time to think about self. Only those know this secret who,
by the Holy Spirit, have been led to give their hearts to Jesus. He
then teaches them to be like Him, when He walked about as the tender
gentle Healer and Helper on this sorrow-laden earth. Robin prayed to
Him every day to teach him to do His will; and Jesus will help you too,
my readers, if you ask Him.



CHAPTER II

A WALK IN THE WOOD

CORRIE was breathing softly in a sound sleep long before Robin followed
her into dreamland. He had so much to think about: first, it was mother
sitting there so patiently beside the dimly-burning candle, stitching
on another patch to the jacket he had just taken off. Dear mother! What
a sad patient look sat on her peaceful face! That look had never gone
away since the night strange feet were heard on the threshold, and
husky voices told the tale, the mournful tale, of the hungry sea: "All
hands gone down—a total wreck!"

"'God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble,'"
was heard above the agony of that night of weeping. "'Therefore will
not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof roar and
be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God,
the holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High. God is in the midst
of her; she shall not be moved! God shall help her, and that right
early.'" (Ps. xlvi.).

Robin always called it father's psalm after that, and often used to
repeat part of it to himself and Corrie; for mother had told him there
was "no more sea" now for father! He had sailed away to the river of
life—"the river that makes glad the city of God, proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb," where neither storm nor tempest can
ever come.

Robin was thinking about the golden city to-night; and its brightness
seemed to come down to him as he lay planning his happy schemes. "The
angels sang about 'goodwill towards men,'" thought he; "so I know Jesus
means us to be very glad." And his thoughts drifted on till he dreamed
a happy dream.

His one sound sleep came to an end earlier than usual, for he had gone
to bed with the determination to be up and stirring betimes. Robin,
like other busy happy people, found there was nothing like the prospect
of having plenty to do, to arouse the desire for a long day and put
sloth and idleness to shame.

The boy rose softly so as not to disturb mother and Corrie in the next
room, and peeped out in the cold dim dawn of that December day.

"I must be sharp," he said, hastily dressing himself, "or I shall not
catch old Jonathan. Oh, dear! I forgot to bring in the sticks last
night to dry, and they're ever so wet in the yard. Mother must find a
good fire this cold morning."

Robin did not forget to kneel down and speak to God, to ask His help
and guidance before beginning his duties for the day. If he had not
done this, he would not have got on at all, for the provoking sticks
hissed and refused to light until his patience had been sorely tried
for a very long time. However, all was at length finished, and the
newly-filled kettle set on the stove. Then Robin fetched his truck
from the outhouse, and, having placed the large empty flasket upon it,
started off.

He had two miles to go beyond the town before he could reach the
large old-fashioned house called Oaklands, that stood within its high
shrubberies and well-kept grounds. The sun's face was rosy red, as
if he was quite ashamed of getting up so late; but as the clouds and
mists dispersed, bright golden rays came shooting down between the bare
branches that stood up straight and tall above the hedges, making the
more lowly leaves and grasses glitter with a bright diamond tracery.

Robin enjoyed the crackling noise his feet made as he stepped into
one iced pool after another, or trod on the firmly-edged ruts of that
roughly-kept country road. When the robins sang, he whistled, and the
blackbirds and thrushes did not mind hopping quite close to him as he
trudged along so cheerily to the rattle of his one-wheeled barrow.
Through the belt of firs that skirted the grounds of Oaklands, Robin
could see blue smoke rising from the gardener's cottage.

"I'll leave my truck here, inside the gate," thought he, "and run
across the short way to the kitchen garden; he's safe to be there." And
Robin, with freed hands, at a single bound cleared the little stream
that fed the large pond, and in a few minutes entered the high-walled
garden by a low door.

Yes, there was old Jonathan at his work, as he expected. Now, old
Jonathan was a well-known character for many miles round. There was
not a child in the hamlet hard by that would not look up in his face
with a smile as he patted its head, or took the little one on his knee.
Those mysterious pockets of his seemed to have a never-ending supply of
halfpennies and farthings, sweeties and nuts, or maybe a ripe apple now
and then. Age had lined his face with many a wrinkle, and his back was
a trifle bent; but he could still handle a spade with a vigorous will,
and knew what it was to do a hard day's work as well as a younger man.

You had only to look into his honest eyes to know he could be a good
friend, a friend for cloud as well as for sunshine, as many a one could
testify who had felt the comforting grip of his horny hand in a time of
trouble. The old gardener had seen several changes at Oaklands since
the death of his old master and friend sixteen years ago; but he still
held on to the place, the successors being only too glad to secure the
services of such a trustworthy servant.

Robin's mother had lived in the house in former days as nurse to
the children, who now had grown up and gone out into life. She was
therefore an old friend of Jonathan, and her son could reckon upon the
kind old man now as always, for he was in the habit of helping him
in various ways, and was his beloved friend and counsellor in every
emergency.

"Good-morning, Mr. Jonathan," said Robin, running quickly across the
garden to where the gardener was pulling up something from one of the
beds.

Jonathan did not hear him at first, for he was a little deaf, so the
salutation was repeated, when the stooping figure raised itself, and
the kind hearty face met Robin's eager look with a friendly smile.

"Well, you are early enough, youngster, anyway," said he. "What sort of
a worm are you up to catch this fine morning? A bit of horse-radish is
about all I've got to give you to-day, and I hope you'll have a good
piece of beef to need the flavour. How is your mother?"

"Not very well, thank you; she feels the cold on her chest most days;
but she wanted me to thank you for speaking about the washing up at the
house. I've got the basket here now to fetch the clothes."

"All right, my boy, and welcome, though 'tis nothing to thank about. I
would always do your mother a good turn if I could. Before you go up
with the flasket, just lend me a hand, will you? I want to dig up one
of those trees in the copse yonder."

Robin gave a hearty assent, and as they stepped together across the
crisp ground and out to the open field beyond the garden wall, he
ventured to ask—

"Mr. Jonathan, what are you going to do with the tree?"

"Why, 'tis for the young ones at the house; there are children there,
you know, and they are preparing for some grand doings to-night: a
Christmas tree to hang the pretty things upon, and neighbours coming
from all round with their little ones to see it."

"Oh," said Robin, "that is what mother told us about; they used to
have it long ago when she was in service there; it must be grand, Mr.
Jonathan. I wish our little Corrie could see it; but she can never
never come so far, even to peep in at the window. The doctor says she
will never walk."

"Poor little lass!" answered Jonathan sadly. "But do not fret about it,
my boy; the Lord will make it up to her somehow; if not in this life,
when He takes her above. I must try to get her a pretty Christmas posy.
She always smiles when she sees flowers. Never fear, she shall have a
happy Christmas, if old Jonathan can do his part towards it."

"I knew you would help me if you could," cried Robin gleefully, as his
companion pointed to a well-grown young fir tree, and proceeded to dig
about its roots.

"There! Steady, my boy! We shall have it up as clean and clear as
sixpence. Stay! Before we carry it up to the house, I must chop off one
or two of the lower branches; that will make it a better shape."

"Mr. Jonathan," asked Robin wistfully, "may I have this one?" And
taking up one of the freshly-cut fir boughs, he held it out to view.
"If I may have this," he continued, "and you will give me a pot and
some earth to stick it into, I will take it home to Corrie and make a
Christmas tree for her."

"Have it, my boy, and welcome; and what should you say to a pen'orth of
sweets to hang on it, if I can find a copper? Now run and fetch your
barrow and the flasket; we'll go up to the house together. Fine-grown
trees," he added, pausing to point proudly to the wood, whose
boundaries he and Robin were skirting. "Different sorts there, and many
a lesson to be learned from them."

"Lessons from the trees, Mr. Jonathan?"

"Yes, my boy; they are always teaching something new to me, and
explaining God's Holy Word in a wonderful way. We must live and grow
like those trees if we want to be worth anything. Our good minister
told us last Sunday that the man who is not in Christ is like the grass
that grows up to be cut down at last with the scythe. It is only those
who are planted in Christ that can grow up into trees of righteousness,
and bear fruit to the praise and glory of His name."

"I never thought of that before," said Robin.

"Maybe not, child; you are young, and have much to learn. A lifetime is
not long enough to find out the wonders of His grace. But mind you, my
boy, we must have the root of the matter in us before we can be right
for God's garden. Some people are like plants put into the ground with
their heads downwards; their lives are all wrong and topsy-turvy, and
nothing can be done with them until they are turned right round, which
is what is meant by being converted. When you ran up to me just now,
I was thinking over the Apostle Paul's wonderful prayer; I had been
reading it in my Bible before I set out for my day's work; I was saying
ft over and over again for fear I should forget it:

   "'That He would grant you, according to the riches of His glory,
to be strengthened with might by His Spirit in the inner man; that Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded
in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth
and length and depth and height; and to know the love of Christ which
passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of
God.' (Eph. iii. 16-19).

"Ah, Robin, my boy, God grant you that blessing, and then you will
grow up a rare plant and noble tree,—'the tree planted by the rivers
of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season, and whose leaf
shall not wither.'

"Yet, however far down our roots may strike, we shall never reach the
bottom of Christ's love. But we can grow in it. 'It is the Spirit that
quickeneth;' and He can give us all in and through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now run away, my lad, and fetch your barrow. I will wait for
you at the turn of the shrubbery nigh the house."



CHAPTER III

A RAINBOW IN THE NURSERY

THE kitchen at Oaklands was a warm and cheery place to turn into on
that frosty morning; at least so thought Robin, as, standing beside his
friend Jonathan in the doorway, he watched the cook pour steaming bread
and milk into the basins that were going up into the nursery. The scent
of fragrant coffee, mingled with the savoury smell from the rashers
of bacon sputtering and browning in the great frying-pan, made a most
inviting combination.

"This is Widow Campbell's son," said the gardener, pushing Robin
forward a little; "he has come to fetch the clothes for his mother."

"Then he must wait a while, if you please," said the housekeeper,
who entered at that moment. "We are very busy this morning, and I am
behindhand with several things. Cook, give the lad a cup of coffee and
something to eat with it. It may be an hour before I can send him home
again."

Robin, nothing loth, sat himself down as directed at a side table in
the midst of this stirring scene, and the sharp morning air having
given him a fine appetite, he lost no time in commencing an attack
upon the plentifully heaped plate set before him. It was seldom indeed
the poor boy got a chance of fried bacon and potatoes at home for
breakfast. Before he had quite finished, he heard the sound of happy
voices in the garden mingled with shouts of laughter; and presently two
boys with their merry-looking sister chased each other past the kitchen
window.

"Have you seen the Christmas tree?" shouted one.

"No; where is it?"

"Here! Old Jonathan has got it round by the kitchen door."

"Oh, what a beauty! Where is mamma? She must come and see It. Won't
it look lovely with all the things hung upon it to-night? I wish they
would make haste and finish breakfast in the dining room."

"Where did you get such a grand one, Jonathan? And what are you going
to do with that branch stuck in a pot?" cried Clarice, laughing.

"That is a Christmas tree for a poor sick child, my little missie. She
will never run about as you do, for her legs are no use whatever to
her, and the doctor says she cannot get better."

"Oh, I am so sorry for her, Jonathan!"

"She has a kind brother, though," continued Jonathan, "who wants her
to have as happy a Christmas as she can, so he has begged this bough
from me, and I have found an old pot to put it in. Maybe, miss, among
your things in the nursery you can find a broken toy or so and a bit
or two of coloured ribbon, if I might make so bold. It will deck it up
gay-like for the poor little creature."

"Oh yes, Jonathan, that I will! We have heaps of things that nurse
calls rubbish in our toy drawers. I will ask mamma about it. But how
shall we send them? You have not told me her name. Where does she live?"

"They call her Corrie, miss, though I believe her right name is
Coralie. Widow Campbell named her after the youngest little girl she
used to have charge of when she lived in this house as nurse many years
ago. Corrie's brother is in the kitchen now, miss, if you would like to
see him."

"Ask him to wait until we speak to mamma. She has sent us to get ivy
for her now to decorate the rooms with, but we will be back very soon."

And away scampered the children.

Millicent, a little lady five years old, stood at the nursery window
watching her brothers and sister as they ran races across the frosty
lawn, trying who should be first to reach the wood. But the blinding
shower of tears falling from her blue eyes soon hid them from view.

"They are very unkind indeed," she cried, stamping her foot, "when they
know I cannot go with them. Papa and mamma are very cross not to let
me. I want to go and get ivy too."

From low sobs, the crying swelled into a passionate roar, which reached
even Robin's ears as he sat below in the kitchen.

"Miss Milly! Hush! Stop crying, dear," said nurse. "You will make your
cough so bad. Look! Baby is quite frightened at the noise you are
making."

"I don't care, nurse! Everybody is very unkind. I want to go out now
and pick the ivy!" And the child's slight delicate frame trembled with
the passion she was giving way to.

"Milly!"

It was her father's voice; and in one instant the screaming ceased.

"Milly!" he repeated, in a grave sorrowful tone. "Nurse, please take
baby into the next room. I must talk to my little girl alone."

Gently he drew the naughty child into his arms, and placed her on his
knee, beside the fire.

"Milly has made papa's heart very sore to-day; she has quite forgotten
Sunday night."

"No, I haven't, papa."

"I see dark heavy clouds and streaming rain on my little girl's face,
but no smiling sunshine. I hope it will come soon."

"I wanted to go out," she began; but a bad fit of coughing prevented
the end of the sentence.

"Do you want to be in bed again, Milly, and have more biting mustard
on your chest? Remember, the doctor said if you were not a great deal
better, you could not go downstairs to see the Christmas tree to-night.
I think I must tell nurse to undress you and put you to bed again."

"No, no, please not, papa!" pleaded the little invalid, with her arms
clinging about his neck. "I have been very naughty; but I am good again
now. I don't like being ill at all."

"Do you like being miserable, Milly?"

"No!"

"Oh, I thought you did. When people want to be very unhappy all day
long, they have only to do one thing, and they will be sure to succeed.
Can you tell me what that is?"

Milly's face was now quite hidden on her father's shoulder, but no
answer came.

"They have only to think about themselves from morning to night, and
cry me, me, for everything. That is a very ugly picture, is it not?
Suppose we look at another: How to be happy all day long instead?"

"How?" whispered the little penitent, with a tighter clasp.

"Why, never to think about self at all, but try and see how many other
people can be made happy. If everybody did that in the world, there
would be much less sorrow. Suppose we try, Milly, you and I? I wonder
who will succeed best? What does mamma say? Here she comes, and Clarice
too; they look as if they had something to tell us."

Mamma smiled, while Clarice knelt down to whisper something in her
sister's ear.

"But I want to hear too," said papa.

"Oh, very well, we will say it out loud!

"Papa, Robin Campbell, the washerwoman's son is here, and Jonathan has
been telling me all about his poor little sister Corrie. She is quite
lame, and never never can walk; and they are very poor. He wants to
make a Christmas tree for her with a fir branch Jonathan has put into a
pot and given to him. Mamma says Milly and I may have it up here in the
nursery and dress it, and then Robin can come again to fetch it in the
afternoon. Won't it be nice, Milly?"

Such a bright smile came over Milly's face on hearing this, that papa
said, "Ah! There is the rainbow! I thought it would come; and here is
nurse with the fir bough to be decked for Corrie. You will have a happy
morning now, my little girls!" he added as he left the room.

And it was a happy morning, for its hours sped so swiftly away that
neither of the children could believe it was over when dinner-time
came. First there was a golden star to be cut out of some gilt paper
that had adorned a cracker. This was fastened to the top of the bough.

"There are more dolls than we want in our dolls' house family," cried
Clarice. "Let us take two of those, and put fresh sashes on them; and
here is an old tin soldier, to keep them in order. Oh, I forgot this
bag of sweeties! This will tie on here, and just fill up the bare
space. What next, Milly?"

"My little sugar lamb, I think, Clarice. I do love my little lamb, and
I have kept him so carefully. No; I really cannot let him go. But yes,
yes I will. It will make poor little Corrie so happy. There! I have
tied it on; and here is a pink rose to go next to it, and all these red
and yellow crackers mamma sent up just now."

And so the miniature tree grew gay by degrees up in the nursery, while
papa and mamma worked away at the big one in the dining room with
locked doors.

Not even one peep could Alfred and Arthur obtain, though they hovered
outside the windows all the morning!



CHAPTER IV

FATHER CHRISTMAS

CORRIE sat with clasped hands before her Christmas tree, her large
eyes fixed upon it in speechless admiration. Robin stood beside her,
waiting anxiously for the first word; he had persuaded her to shut her
eyes as he carried her in from the adjoining room and placed her in her
chair before the gaily-decked fir bough. It seemed as though some fairy
vision had enthralled the child's senses as each green tip was gazed at
in wondering awe.

Presently one small hand was raised gently to touch the sugar lamb, as
if to make quite sure of its reality, and a deep sigh of satisfaction
preceded the smile that broke over her features as she whispered, "Oh,
Robin!"

As her arms stole round his neck, he saw there were tears in her eyes.

"Robin, did God send me my Christmas tree?"

"Yes, dear little sister. He put it into the hearts of those kind young
ladies at Oaklands to get it ready for you; and they are all so glad
to think you are having a happy Christmas. They are coming some day to
see you, Corrie; and they have promised to bring you pretty flowers
from the garden. Oh, mother, it made me so glad to bring home the tree
yesterday, and the basket of meat and plum-pudding! Miss Clarice came
down into the kitchen to watch her mamma and the housekeeper pack the
things that were to be given away; and everybody was so kind and merry,
that I wished I could run the whole way home to tell you about it."

"God bless them all!" murmured the widow. "I think they would be
rewarded if they could see our darling now."

"Is the pretty wood you told me about like this, Robin?" said Corrie as
she touched the spiky green.

"Yes, something like that, little sister, only ever so much taller.
You look up and up, right through the green branches to the sky; and
the trees stand all thick together, so snug and warm that the cold
winds cannot hurt them. I wonder how the fir tree liked being dug up
yesterday by Mr. Jonathan, and carried away from its companions? It
could tell a pretty story after seeing all the grand things last night."

As Robin said this, a secret longing stole over him to have been there
himself, to take one peep at the lighted rooms.


If he had, he would have seen a happy little girl carried in at the
door, wrapped in a warm shawl; and Milly's smiling face would have
revealed some of the gladness resting in her heart that forgetfulness
of self and thought for others had awakened.

That castaway and seemingly useless fir branch had been as God's
messenger, doing its work faithfully in both homes. It was like the
olive branch of peace plucked off by the gentle dove that made Noah's
heart glad, because it held the promise of a bright and living hope.

Milly joined in the general shout of admiration as children of every
size and age trooped in from the hall.

"Father Christmas cut fruit from his wonderful tree for everybody
that night; young and old, rich and poor, alike were remembered. To
'send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared' is his special
prerogative, as year after year he distributes his bounties, filling up
the overflowing measure with plenty of hearty goodwill and Christmas
cheer.

"I am so happy!" whispered Milly into her father's ear. "I should like
to kiss Corrie for making me so glad. I forgot all about myself when I
was doing things for her."

"Ah! You have found out the secret, my pet. Papa's darling must never
forget it all her life. She will then always be able to find the
rainbow among darkest clouds."


Robin had made his round rosy face shine with the soap he had scrubbed
it with on Christmas morning. And now, in his neatly patched Sunday
best, he left mother and sister to the enjoyment of a quiet morning
at home, and followed the sound of the melodious bells up the street
to the old grey church, whose porch invited all to enter and hear the
sweet message of God's goodwill towards men. The holly leaves glistened
bright among the woodwork, and blessed words were written in evergreen
letters on the walls. Robin spelt them out reverently from his free
seat:

   "'Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; and the government
shall be upon His shoulder: and His name shall be called Wonderful,
Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of
Peace.'" (Isa. ix. 6).

The minister knew what wondrous tidings he had to tell the people, and
his eye beamed with joy as he read the story of Bethlehem. He begged
each one of his hearers not to be content with merely looking at the
holy Babe in His humble manger cradle, and going away to their work in
the world to forget all about Him. Christ must be born in each heart
by the Holy Spirit of God, and then the life will be a Christ-life,
because Jesus will be dwelling there.

The Lord Christ now, as then, stoops from the throne of His glory to
knock at the door of every heart. Oh, do not let us say, "There is no
room for Him in the inn;" rather let us open the door and invite Him to
enter, to dwell with us as Lord of our whole life and being; so shall
we walk with God.

"I hope He will come into my heart," thought poor Robin, "and never
never leave it." And he prayed, "O Lord Jesus, I want to love Thee.
Bless me now, and mother, and Corrie. Amen."

It was a long winter that year, and many a heart yearned wistfully for
the genial spring sunshine, especially in homes where coals were scarce
and garments thin and scanty, and the money which procured them hardly
earned.

Milly thought it was bad enough to be a constant prisoner in her warm
and comfortable nursery, and was at times sorely tempted to give way
to peevish complainings and fretful temper. But the precious plant of
love, which blooms brightly in the soil of unselfishness, began to take
root in her young heart, to bear now and in after years much fruit
to the glory and praise of God. Will those who read this story try
each one to plant a slip of it in their life's garden? It is the true
heartsease, for where it blossoms, there is always a contented happy
spirit, rejoicing in the sunshine of God's love.

At last the snowy border of Nature's ermine robe began to fold away,
and flowers were decking her green kirtle. The bulbs had lain so many
weeks under their white covering that they had almost forgotten how
long they had been asleep. But at last, the pale snowdrop and gleaming
crocus peeped shyly up to nod to each other in the sunshine which had
called them from their hiding-places.

One day, Milly's papa brought in a poor little motherless lamb from the
field, nearly dead with cold and hunger.

To the great delight of the invalid child, it was wrapped in flannel
and laid in a basket before the nursery fire, to be fed and warmed by
her loving hands. What joy when the stiffened limbs began to move and
the eyes to open!

"May I have it for my own?" cried Milly in ecstasy. "Oh, you darling!"
she whispered. "You are much better than the sugar lamb I gave away at
Christmas. I shall call you Daisy, because you are white and your eyes
shine so brightly."

So Daisy grew and flourished, until he was too big to visit Millicent
in the nursery any more. Fan, the black retriever, having been bereaved
of her puppies, had taken kindly to the motherless stranger, and given
it a warm welcome. The two would lie curled up in the straw together,
in a snug corner of the stable; and on warm days, Daisy was tethered on
the lawn in sight of the nursery window.

This new object of interest, and many indoor pleasures, planned by
the thoughtful love of her parents, reconciled Milly to a necessary
imprisonment of months; and she no longer looked with envy at Clarice
and her sturdy brothers, equipped for walking or riding. They paid many
a visit to the widow's humble dwelling, to take little delicacies to
Corrie, and such cheer and brightness as would make the small pale face
light up with a glow of pleasure whenever she heard the patter of their
footsteps.

And all this joy had its beginning in Corrie's happy Christmas!

At the close of March, after a week of mild damp weather, there dawned
a day of such rare sunshine and blue sky that the nursery windows at
Oaklands were thrown open, and nurse looked in vain for the captive
bird. For while she was engaged elsewhere, and mamma had baby in
the drawing room, papa had been upstairs and stolen his white dove,
as he called his delicate child. What fun to get out hat and jacket
surreptitiously from the wardrobe, and the warm shawl to wrap over all,
and the little boots that had not been on for so long! Milly laughed a
merry laugh as she ran up and down on the smooth gravel path, holding
her father's hand, while mamma smiled approvingly through the window
with baby on her knee.

"You will carry me down to the wood, won't you, papa, when they are in
sight? What will Corrie say when she sees the primroses?"

"Why, there are the boys, Milly; come along, little woman, we shall be
in plenty of time." And papa's long legs went quickly over fields and
ditches by a cross-cut to the meeting-point.

"Hurrah!" shouted Alfred and Arthur. "Look at Milly and papa! Make
haste, Robin!"

But Robin at this moment had eyes only for the occupant of the neat
and pretty basket perambulator he was steering carefully as Clarice
walked by the side talking to Corrie. The use of this small carriage
for the first time was to the children as important an event as the
launching of a lifeboat; for had they not all combined since that happy
Christmas-tide to obtain it for the poor sick child, who was shut away
from all the country sights and sounds that would so delight her?

The money-box in mamma's room had grown heavier and heavier as pennies
and threepenny-bits, and a bright shilling now and then, found their
way through the small slit in the lid. These children were permitted
to earn money in various ways, and all vied with each other in their
interest and self-denial in this good cause. Papa and mamma finally
completed the required sum by a handsome donation, after a prolonged
trial of their children's labour and patience.

And to-day all these hopes and good wishes were realised; and the
happy workers felt the reward fully recompensed the sacrifice. It
had required no small amount of perseverance and self-denial in many
ways, which children alone can understand. Yet they were far happier
than the petted spoilt autocrats of some nurseries, whose wants are so
abundantly supplied. There is nothing left to wish for; no channels
open to them for the flowing out of a free God-like charity, the
possession of which has power to make the desert places of any heart
"rejoice and blossom as the rose."

When Robin heard of the prospect of a carriage for his little sister,
his heart seemed almost too full for words. Was it a dream? Would
Corrie actually see the flowers growing he had so often brought home
to her in handfuls? He could picture in anticipation her eager hands
reaching out after the countless treasures which he had not been able
to carry her to look at since she was quite a baby-child.

No wonder, then, that his little sister's face was a study to him now
as he heard her cry of delight when the woodlands appeared in view.
A flush of gladness overspread her features, giving for the time an
appearance of health. What the ecstasy of joy was to the poor sickly
child only Robin knew fully. To be taken out of that dark street past
budding hedges into the pure fresh country had long been a beautiful
vision, which neither he nor Corrie had ever expected could be so soon
realised. She had tried to content herself with seeing the glory and
the beauty of rural haunts with Robin's eyes as he faithfully recounted
each ramble; now she beheld them for herself, and rejoiced as a
butterfly does who has found its wings.

Corrie was a little shy of the pretty ladies, as she called Clarice and
Milly, who ran about close to her on the greensward, filling her basket
with tufts of moss and flowers. Suddenly, as they passed round a clump
of trees, a glade opened to view, the ground of which was studded thick
with primroses. There was a universal scream of delight as Corrie's
carriage halted on the soft flower-strewn carpet.

"Oh, the pretty golden stars!" she cried. "Robin, let me pick them
myself. Oh, Robin, take me in your arms!"

The boy did so, after spreading mother's big shawl carefully beside a
bright clump of primroses, that Corrie might gather for herself.

Ah! how quickly the little hands were filled as each slight stem
yielded to the pull of eager fingers! All too soon the happy hour
passed away, and it was time to go back to mother, hard at work, yet
all the while thinking of God's goodness to herself and her crippled
child in raising up such kind friends.



CHAPTER V

THE GARDENER'S LESSON

OLD Jonathan's home was a picture worth studying. It consisted of two
small rooms, one over the other, in the little round house which stood
at the entrance to Oaklands. Its name, "The Lodge," seemed given in
irony. Passers-by often wondered why such a crazy old tenement should
be allowed to remain on the boundary of so fine an estate; for it
was more like a battered old pepper-pot than anything else, with its
rounded roof and sides, and its cracked slates, which often, parting
company in a high gale, left holes for the wind and rain to enter, thus
making the resemblance more painfully exact.

Yet the old man loved his dilapidated cottage, and could never have
felt at home in a new lodge, though faultless it might be within and
without. How tenderly he would twine the tendrils of the vine still
higher each year, and encourage the merciful ivy to creep up and up, to
cover all defects, and shield the cracked walls from rude blasts, which
sometimes threatened to shake them down!

"Let us crumble away together," was old Jonathan's speech to the
proprietor of Oaklands whenever there was any talk of a new house. "It
would break my heart, dear master, to have a stone of her touched. Let
be, let be. Don't ye touch a stone till I am gone. One of the many
mansions in glory will be my new home. I don't want any other till I go
there."

And so Jonathan always had his own way, for his kind-hearted employer
could not resist such pathetic pleading.

The aged pilgrim and his house were indeed a match for each other;
and as he went in and out through the rustic porch day after day,
the tender green tints of vine and Virginian creeper deepened and
crimsoned, and grew golden with happy autumn tints, until they
fluttered away on the wings of a wintry wind.

Robin often crossed the threshold, and the ideas of order and neatness
which he found so useful in after life were chiefly gained from
his observations in the old man's home. For here was a place for
everything, and everything in its place. All was neatly arranged and
scrupulously clean; and on the round table in the window was the great
Bible that had belonged to Jonathan's mother, with the silver-rimmed
spectacles beside it.

There was a small lean-to room behind, which was full of gardening pots
and tools; also boxes with divisions, to keep the bulb roots and flower
seeds separate. Knots of bass and twine hung from the wall, for tying
up stray branches, and a great pair of scissors sat astride on a nail
above. There were also bunches of dried and sweet-smelling herbs, of
which Jonathan well knew the properties. His practical knowledge of
simple remedies he was often called upon to use on behalf of his humble
neighbours, who all looked up to him as an authority on most matters.

The villagers wondered how he could live there all alone from year
to year, doing everything for himself. Only a few of the oldest
inhabitants remembered the sad story he brought with him of the
fever-stricken town he had fled from, a widower and childless. His
Maggie would never grow old. She had gone away to the better land with
her two little ones, just at the beginning of the life-journey which
both husband and wife had thought would be such a long one together.
Not many knew why he brushed away the tear that was ready to fall on
the golden-haired child he would take upon his knee, as the little ones
crowded round the porch of his house on their way home from school.
There were three locks of hair in the old Bible, and sprigs of rosemary
and lavender beside them. They were laid upon the page that told of a
happy spring-time: "My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my
love, my fair one, and come away. For, lo, the winter is past, the rain
is over and gone; the flowers appear on the earth; the time of the
singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land. The fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the
tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come
away." (Cant. ii. 10-13).

Those withered tokens were the old man's only "in memoriam." But they
kept his heart tender and child-loving as now and then he touched them
reverently, and thought how long it was since his loved ones had gone
to dwell in the presence of the King.

It was in spring-time his great life-sorrow had touched him; yet he
always seemed to love that season best. Keenly alive to the beauties of
Nature, he would study her ways minutely in trees and flowers, birds
and insects. The fruit trees in spring were as a poem to the aged man
in their lovely blossoming.

One day Robin found him looking lovingly at some pale almond flowers
flushed with faint pink. He was reading a lesson from their delicate
petals.

"Isn't it beautiful?" said Jonathan as he bent the blossom-laden branch
towards Robin. "Aaron's rod must have looked like that, my boy, when it
brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms. What a wonderful lesson for
the Christian heart!"

"I don't remember about that, Mr. Jonathan. Is it in the Bible?"

"Ay, that it is; and you may read it for yourself, my lad, when you
get home. Find out the 17th chapter of Numbers, and there you will get
the whole account. There were twelve rods laid before the Lord, but
only one was chosen—the one that belonged to the priest. Christ is
our Priest, and He is the Ark of Safety, where we, as lost and guilty
sinners, may hide ourselves and be safe in Him; then He decks us in His
robe of righteousness, which is far more beautiful than these lovely
perishing flowers, and we not only blossom, but bear fruit."

"But what is meant by 'bearing fruit,' Mr. Jonathan?"

"Well, my boy, I think kind words and looks, and struggles against sin,
are fruits that God likes to see in us. When we give up doing what we
like, and try to please God and everybody around us, I think He smiles
and says, 'There is fruit, pleasant fruit on that tree.' But we must
keep the branch inside the Ark; there the east wind of sin can never
blight its fair promise. Out of that shelter, the blossoms must fall
and perish, and there will be no fruit. 'Abide in Me, and I in you. As
the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine, no
more can ye, except ye abide in Me.'

   "'They who in appointed duty
       Live most secretly with God,
     Shall come forth in fullest beauty,
       Blossoming like Aaron's rod.
     Plants can flourish in the dark,
     If within the Golden Ark.'"

Robin never forgot that lesson, learned among the fragrant trees. The
old man was delighted to have so interested a listener beside him, as
day after day he sought to open Nature's book before the boy in the
light of God's revelation. The fig tree and the vine each had their
instructive story as the work of cutting and pruning or dressing went
on.

"Even the thorny bramble in the wood puts us to shame," said Robin's
kind teacher, one September day; "for, look! How glad it makes the
children as it offers its ripe blackberries to them as they pass. Can
we do as much as that poor prickly thing? Or is it only thorns we have
to offer?"

Jonathan's teaching was all given by parable and allegory, and Robin
was only one of the many who benefited by it. The children of his
beloved master shared in its happy influence as they played beside him
or worked in their garden plots. Every opportunity was turned into a
golden one, and much seed sown that for the time seemed trampled down,
but which was destined hereafter to spring up and have its blossoming
and fruitage in hearts that would bless the friend who had sown and
watered with such loving careful patience.

The good man connected everything around him in some way with God's
truth; and this it was that made his lessons so real and living. The
children of Oaklands could never read about the wearied Saviour and the
woman of Samaria without recalling the moss-grown well in the corner of
the garden, with its rusty chain and buckets, where Jonathan had told
that sweet story of old as he filled his water-cans.

The water of life, that in its freshness slakes all thirst for ever,
had its earthly illustration in the dark depths of their own spring-fed
well, and it was a life-long association.

But my readers will like to hear how it happened that Robin was able to
be with his kind friend and teacher so constantly. After that sunny day
of primrose gathering in the wood, the master of Oaklands had a long
conversation with Jonathan about Robin.

The under gardener had been suddenly dismissed the previous week, and
as the place was now vacant, there was an opportunity for saying a good
word for the widow's son.

"I would like to find someone trustworthy, who would grow up under my
eye and take my place when I am gone," the old man had said. "I am not
so young as I once was, and the rheumatics, especially in winter, tell
me the old tree must come down some day. But as in the forest I never
mark a tree for felling without first planting a sapling beside it, so
I would now like to find one of a good stock who will grow up faithful
to your service, sir, when these hands can no longer work for you and
yours."

Jonathan's advice was taken, and Robin duly installed in his new post.
What a big man he felt the first time he put his week's wages into
his mother's hand! He was to be the bread-winner of the family now,
and mother could afford to pay a smaller boy to fetch and carry the
clothes from the various houses. At church the following Sunday, who
felt happier or more elated than Robin, dressed in the new suit given
him by his master? Ah! how many good things grew out of Corrie's happy
Christmas! It had certainly turned a bright page in the history of
Robin's life.

Jonathan's words awakened many new thoughts in the boy's heart as day
by day he listened to them in the garden at Oaklands. But Robin's
youthful inexperience made some of the things uttered by his wise
teacher hard to be understood, and roused doubts and questions which
had not existed before.

One day he had been hearing much about the inborn corruption of the
human heart, described in Scripture as "deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked." Robin remembered more than once having paused on
the threshold of the lodge on hearing the prayer of faith being poured
forth within; and he thought it strange that such agonising pleadings
against sin should have such a prominent place in his friend's petition.

Jonathan seemed perfect in the boy's eyes; good, kind, generous, and
a never-failing friend. There might be wicked people in the world;
but it would be easy to keep separate from them. Could not Robin look
with complacent satisfaction on his own life? Was he not a good son
and loving brother, taking home his earnings on Saturday night with
a punctuality that never failed? The public-house, with its crowd of
idlers going in and out, had no attraction for him, thanks to the
earnest and careful training of his good mother. He knew that not a
more sober industrious lad could be found in the whole parish than he
was.

But he had yet to learn that he carried the world in his heart, and
that it was on this battlefield that he must war against its trinity of
evil, "the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life." Robin began to think old Jonathan was over-conscientious in the
discharge of duty, and over-strict about little faults.

Why had he spoken so sharply to him that very day about the watering
of a few plants? "I did not mean to forget them," ought to have been
a sufficient plea to justify him. Was forgetting a sin? A slip in the
memory was surely to be excused. Why should Jonathan say the narrow
path was thickly hedged with thorns, ready to prick on the right hand
and on the left? It seemed such an easy thing to be a Christian!

What did old Jonathan mean by the east wind of sin coming to nip the
early buds? Robin found the answer to his questions in a bitter and
most painful experience.



CHAPTER VI

A TEMPTING BAIT

ONE morning, Robin entered the kitchen at Oaklands, carrying a basket
of freshly-cut vegetables, which the cook stepped forward to take from
his hand.

"Good-morning, Robin," quoth she; "you are a good boy, and never keep
me waiting; your mother will find there are not many young men in the
world like you."

The lad crimsoned to the roots of his hair, while a secret swell of
pride inflated his heart, and echoed back the flattering words, as he
thought over them with delight. Cook had called him a young man; no one
had ever done this before! He felt several inches higher as he looked
up and gave a bright smile by way of answer.

"Oh yes," added the cook, "you are just the sort of fellow that will
always be a favourite. No one can deny that for a moment! I think there
is a nice piece of cold apple-tart in the larder that will just suit
you." And she disappeared to fetch it.

Now Robin was extremely fond of nice things, all the more so because
he rarely got them. His good mother had always been too poor to
provide many luxuries for her children. It was only by hard shift
and toil that the wholesome loaf was placed before them. The baked
joint, so temptingly surrounded by potatoes, which Robin fetched from
the bakehouse every week, exciting often the envy of thoughtless
neighbours, had to be eked out by dint of many a painful saving effort
on the mother's part; and Robin could often have eaten a great deal
more it there had been plenty on the table.

It is not to be wondered at that, under these circumstances, when a
tempting bit of apple-tart was offered to him, a greedy pleasure filled
his heart as he accepted the proffered dainty. There was no question in
his mind whether it was right or wrong to take it, for Robin knew it
was the recognised custom of the house to give away scraps in this way.
The housekeeper had often desired cook to give him something to eat as
he stood and waited.

The boy had yet to learn that the evil of the matter lay in the good
things being offered him as a bribe to do wrong. But at the present
time he was wholly unaware of such a motive, and only thought, as
he munched away outside the door, that cook was very kind. He often
wondered why Jonathan had so little to say in the kitchen. Robin had
even seen him look severely at the woman sometimes as he gave her his
short answers.

"She must be too full of fun," he thought, "for the sober old man;" for
her loud laugh was constantly heard.

The boy had made his observations quietly, and, though he had never
been told it, knew instinctively that cook detested the head gardener.

She had indeed reason to fear him, for Jonathan was only waiting till
something should happen which would prove his surmises correct to speak
plainly his opinion of her character.

Robin now began to think his dear old friend was too particular, and
hoped he would not appear round the corner before he had finished his
bit of tart. Both Jonathan and Robin's mother had warned the boy not to
be more in the kitchen than was absolutely necessary, as they knew it
was through a quarrel with the cook that his predecessor had lost his
place.

But there was surely no need to be too strict! Alas! Poor Robin! How
warily and subtly does the tempter take possession of the heart! When
Robin had finished, he heard cook calling to him again, and went in to
obey the summons.

"Here," said she, with a coaxing smile, "you will not mind doing an
errand for me when you go home to the town by and by, will you?"

"Certainly not," replied the boy. "I shall be very glad to do it. What
is it?"

"Well," said the woman, producing a good-sized covered basket, "I want
you to be kind enough to take this to No. 15 Andover Street. There is
a note inside for my mother, about something very particular. You can
just hand it in, and call for the basket again on your way here to work
to-morrow morning. But," she added, "don't let Mr. Jonathan see it or
know anything about it. It is just a little errand for me, that need
not concern anybody else."

Robin looked perplexed and uncomfortable. He had not been accustomed
to do underhand things; his mother had always brought him up to be
quite open; he had never concealed anything from her in his life. Why
should he now? Yet, if he refused, cook would never give him anything
nice again, and he should not be able to let Corrie have a share of the
dainty morsels. That would not be kind, and yet—

A faint remonstrance rose to his lips; but cook did not hear it, as she
said, "I will put the basket behind the knife-house door; you can fetch
it from there when you leave work; and mind! not a word to anybody."

She was gone, and so was Robin's opportunity of fighting the good
fight. He turned away, with a guilty feeling at his heart, to join old
Jonathan in the kitchen garden. There was so much digging and planting
to be done that day, that Robin's abstracted manner did not attract
attention; and the boy set himself to work with double diligence, by
way of relieving his conscience, which would awake again and again to
trouble him with her stings.

"I have done nothing wrong," persisted Robin's heart; "why should I be
unhappy?"

How strange it was that old Jonathan's talk to-day should be of the
allurements of sin! "'My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou
not.' 'Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed
according to Thy word.'"

"The wise man's eyes are in his head," quoth the gardener, with a frank
and sunny smile at Robin. "When you are going on a strange road, you do
not walk along staring at the sky. No; your eyes are straight ahead, to
see which way you are going. By this means, if there are any pitfalls,
you can avoid them; and the finger-posts at the cross-turnings prevent
any mistake as to the direction. So with the Christian. The Word
of Life is his lamp and guide-book in one, and if he looks into it
earnestly enough, he will never go wrong. That is what is meant by
'taking heed according to Thy word.' 'For the commandment is a lamp,
and the law is light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life.'
The Holy Spirit feeds the flame in the lamp; and when it shines on the
directions in the Word the path is as straight as an arrow."

"Yes," answered Robin, but so absently that his companion stuck his
spade into the ground and looked at him.

"Is the little sister more ailing than usual to-day?"

"Oh no, Mr. Jonathan; but I want to get back to her as soon as I can
this evening."

"Well, my boy, and so you shall; we have only got to finish this
border, shut the glass-houses, and do a bit of watering; then I will
walk down with you to my house on your way home. I asked master to-day
if I might send a rose plant to Corrie in a pot, and he said, 'Yes;
let her have one with plenty of buds on it.' Master is always good and
kind. So it is all ready for you to take home to-night; that will be
better than the fir branch."

But the gleeful sparkle that usually came into Robin's eyes when any
pleasure was in store for Corrie was lacking now; and his old friend
noticed it, wondering what was wrong, as the boy answered hurriedly—

"Oh, thank you! How glad she will be Master is very good."

How he wished old Jonathan would not walk down with him to the lodge.
What excuse could he possibly find to go back and fetch the basket?
There was none; and it seemed to get more and more hopeless as they
walked down the avenue.

"There! Take care of the buds, my boy. Carry it steadily; the little
lass will love to see them opening every day. Good-night, and God bless
you!"

Robin carried the pot down the road a little way, until out of sight of
the lodge; then, setting it down dose to the hedge, where it would be
hidden by a tree, he climbed a fence, and by a short cut across fields
and meadows soon found himself on the back premises of Oaklands. Like
a thief, he went stealthily to the outhouse named by cook, snatched up
the basket, and ran off again. He had to cross part of the avenue, and
while doing so observed his master coming up on horseback, with Miss
Clarice on her little white pony cantering by his side.

A dive! A leap! And he was crouching down behind a tree, where he
remained in hiding until the riders had passed. He had never before
felt ashamed to be found anywhere on the premises of Oaklands. Well, it
would only be for this once! Cook would probably never want him to do
it again; then it would be all right.

Robin felt greatly relieved when he had rid himself of the basket in
Andover Street; but to go there he had to deviate considerably from his
homeward route, so that he was later than usual.

"What has kept you, my son? You are a good hour behind time."

"There was some extra work to do, mother; we did not leave work
punctually this evening."

Now this excuse was true to a certain extent, though the working hours
had not been exceeded beyond ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. Yet
Robin felt he had told a lie. Why should his mother have asked that
question to-night? She so seldom seemed to notice the hour he got in.
But further questioning was cut short by Corrie's exclamations of
delight over her rose tree, and in gladness of heart for her poor sick
child, Mrs. Campbell forgot all else.

So Robin's remark about the extra work was met by no comment. But
when the boy knelt down as usual to pray that night, how strange it
was that no words would come! That covered basket was the only object
that danced before his eyes! He had not looked into it, and knew no
more than Corrie what it contained. Yet he felt it was not all right.
He could think of nothing else. He rose from his knees and opened his
Bible; but the texts seemed just black print, and nothing more. He did
not even remember what he had read a moment after the book was closed.
Hastening into bed, he went off to sleep as fast as possible, and awoke
next morning feeling as if something dreadful had happened.

It was later than usual, and he must hurry off without lighting the
fire or filling the kettle for mother, because he had to go round
by Andover Street for the basket. It was a great relief on reaching
Oaklands to see old Jonathan afar off at work in the garden, so that
Robin could skirt along by the avenue without being noticed.

Cook received the basket with a nod and a smile, saying—

"Come in after breakfast."

The old gardener stopped for a moment in his work as Robin ran up the
path to join him.

"You are late, Robin," he said quietly; "this must not happen again.
Remember, we rob our master if we do not give him the full time that he
pays us for."

"I could not help it," murmured the boy as he met those kind eyes
looking sadly at him.

"There is something the matter," muttered his quick-sighted old friend.
"Out with it, Robin! What is troubling you, my lad?"

Ah! how often and often did the boy wish afterwards that he had
responded to this loving appeal; but his heart seemed growing as hard
as a stone, as, making some trivial excuse about Corrie, he continued
his work, and even tried to assume a careless cheerful manner, talking
and whistling by turns.

But Jonathan was not deceived, though he made no further comment.

"I must go in presently and ask cook what vegetables are wanted
to-day," said the elder man, after working away for some time in
silence.

"Oh, let me go!" answered Robin with alacrity; and, almost before his
companion could look up, the boy was off at full speed towards the
kitchen door.

Cook met him with a smile of approbation. "It is all right," she said.
"Mother was so glad I was able to send her that note. I can trust you
again to do errands for me. See! here is a good hunch of plum-cake,
which you can put in your pocket; and if it is too much for you now,
save a bit for your poor little sister. Another day you will go again
to mother's house for me, won't you? I cannot get out very often; there
is so much to be done in this family."

Robin was thankful she did not ask him to go again to Andover Street
that day. It would be time enough to refuse the next time she asked
him to do it; he would not make her angry to-day. Thus he silenced the
inward monitor once more.

"Has mother been out long, Corrie?" was his first question that evening
on returning home, to find the little sister playing alone on the floor
with her toys.

"No, Robin, only a few minutes; she said you would be coming directly,
and she was obliged to go and get the money from some of the houses.
Oh! what is that?" she added, looking with unfeigned satisfaction at
the piece of cake.

"Nice cake for Corrie," replied Robin; "you like plum-cake, don't you?"

"Yes, very very much; may I eat it now? We must keep some for mother."

"No," said Robin, as the uneasy thought struck him that it was the
price of sin. "You may eat it all; I will bring mother some more
another day. Make haste, Corrie, and then I will tell you a story."

"A pretty Bible story?" queried Corrie with a wistful smile.

"Yes, if you like."

So Corrie ate her cake and then curled herself up into her old attitude
in Robin's arms, as on that happy night before Christmas, while he
began to hunt in his memory for a story.

But somehow it seemed as though he were trying to sing a song and had
forgotten the words; each Bible incident that came to his mind brought
a condemning meaning with it.

"Tell me about the naughty people in the beautiful garden, Robin, who
stole the fruit from the tree God told them not to touch!"

Her brother obeyed; and when he had finished, she looked up into his
face and said—

"They would not have been afraid of God, would they, Robin, if they had
not been naughty?"

"No!" groaned Robin.

"Does God see us all day and all night too?" continued Corrie. "Even in
the dark, when we are under the bedclothes?"

"Yes," answered the boy. "It is never dark with God. He is always
looking at us."

"But we need not be afraid," persisted the child, "because you have
often told me, Robin, He loves us very much. Mother says she loves me,
even when I am naughty, only it makes her heart sore when I do bad
things. Does God love like that?"

"Yes, little sister, He does."

And putting up her hand, Corrie felt that Robin's eyes were wet.

At that moment their mother returned, and stories were over for
to-night.

"Such nice cake!" whispered Corrie as she was being undressed.

"Did you bring it home for her, Robin?" asked Mrs. Campbell.

"Yes," answered her son; "they gave it to me up at the house."

The answer was scarcely heeded, for with a preoccupied air, the poor
woman kissed her little girl as she covered her over in bed, and then
sat down at the table to count her earnings, and consider what she
could afford to buy the following day.



CHAPTER VII

THE BROKEN VASE

TO free himself from the accusations of conscience, Robin determined to
keep out of cook's way for a few days. But resolutions made in human
strength are but as grass: "The sun is no sooner risen with a burning
heat, but it withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and
the grace of the fashion of it perisheth."

Repentance without a root will only endure for a while; and so the poor
boy found.

Cook soon made an opportunity, and silenced his well-meant excuses
by the most plausible reasoning, as well as by unlimited promises of
dainty bits for himself and Corrie.

Again and again the covered basket was placed in readiness for removal
from its place of concealment, and frequent practice made Robin very
expert in eluding Jonathan's sharp eyes; so much so that the old man
began to think his suspicions were groundless as far as the boy was
concerned, especially as he had seldom now reason to find fault with
his work.

Robin often noticed the clink of glass bottles as he was carrying back
the basket to Oaklands, but as the cover was always securely tied
down with cord, he did not feel tempted to look inside. It was not
until long afterwards that he connected this sound with the woman's
frequently excited manner, which at times quite frightened him. Yet the
poor lad felt himself enthralled in a hard bondage. Cook had at first
made him her slave, and now kept him so chiefly through well-timed
flattery. So, though he often thought of rebelling, Robin still
continued to obey her secret orders, having little reward beyond that
of seeing his little sister's face brighten up when he produced a nice
piece of cake or pudding for her. This pleasure could be enjoyed in
some cool green spot beyond the town, where Robin would take her in her
little carriage of an evening when his day's work was over. Yet the boy
was miserable, and the prattle of his innocent sister made him more so.

"Why should I be afraid of cook?" he reasoned with himself. "I will
tell old Jonathan all about it, and he will help me."

This sage plan would have been put into execution, if something had not
happened the following day which tightened yet more closely the chains
that bound him. Robin had put on the fetters when he first listened to
the tempter's voice.

Some friends were invited to dine at Oaklands, and Jonathan had
begged, as a special favour, to be allowed to arrange the flowers for
the centre of the table. Robin had carried in the basket, and now
stood beside the old man in the china pantry, watching him select the
choicest blossoms for the handsome china vase placed ready to receive
them.

The lovely bouquet was soon complete, and Jonathan went off again
to the garden. Robin lingered behind for a few minutes, gazing with
delight on the pretty cups and plates and glittering glass, all so
neatly arranged upon the shelves. It was seldom he had an excuse for
coming farther into the house than the kitchen. Alas! His curiosity
cost him dear, for, turning round suddenly, his arm came in contact
with the lovely vase, knocking it against an awkwardly projecting
corner of a cupboard. One of the handles snapped off and fell to the
ground. The boy stood aghast for one moment; then, snatching up the
fragment, flew with it to the kitchen.

"Oh, cook, help me!" he cried. "What shall I do? Look what has
happened! I didn't mean to break it; it just chipped off as I turned
round. Please don't tell master or mistress: I might lose my place if
they heard of it!"

"Yes, that you would," cried the cunning woman triumphantly, with a
sharp look in her eyes, though she well knew that an accident such
as Robin had just met with would not be considered in the light of a
crime, but would only elicit a sorrowful regret and a request to be
more careful in future from the gentle mistress of Oaklands. But at the
present moment it suited her purpose to terrify the lad with the fear
of consequences; so, raising both her hands with a deprecating gesture,
she continued, "Well! You have got yourself into a fine scrape; but as
you are a good lad, and always do what I ask you, I will be a friend in
need. I know where the housekeeper puts the diamond cement; the handle
shall be mended so that no one shall know it was ever broken; it will
never show."

"Oh, thank you!" said Robin, in the relief of the moment feeling
grateful enough to be always her willing slave. "Can I do anything for
you to-day?"

"No, not to-day, but to-morrow perhaps."

And Robin went out feeling that now he was completely in her power.
And so it proved. From that day his excuses were of no avail. The vase
had been so well mended that no one knew of the breakage except cook;
and she had only to threaten a disclosure of the fact if there was the
least hesitation in the carrying out of her commands.

The poor boy found that the way of transgressors is hard, and that
one false step leads to many more. He was very miserable now, though
keeping up an outward appearance of good by being extra diligent at his
work. Fear of man was the one thing that spoiled Robin's character; he
lacked the courage to say no, and present a bold front to the enemy.
He had not yet learnt how "to add to his faith virtue," that fearless
valour for the truth without which no Christian soldier can fight the
good fight, and as a conqueror obtain the victory over the world, the
flesh, and the devil.

Some weeks after the accident in the china pantry, Clarice sat in the
drawing room practising at the piano. It was a hot day in July, and the
French windows were open down to the ground. The lazy hum of bees, and
the sweet breath of flowers, and the sunshine outside made the child
feel idle. A sudden fancy impelled her to leave her music and flit out
through the open window.

She presently returned with some roses off a bush she was allowed to
gather from. Looking about she perceived the china vase in the centre
of the table, and proceeded to turn out some of the fading flowers, and
replace them with those she had brought in. This was a disobedient act,
for she knew well that neither she nor any of the children were allowed
to touch that vase. However, she did not think of this until too late,
so engrossed was she in her self-imposed task.

The withered rose leaves fell in a shower on the crimson cloth, and
in one instant the child resolved to lift the vase to a side table,
and gather up the fallen leaves to throw them away. Poor Clarice! The
handle that had been so cleverly mended was the first she took hold of,
and with a smash the costly china ornament fell upon the table, while
the water streamed among the scattered flowers down to the carpet.

Clarice uttered a loud scream, which quickly brought her mother to the
room, who stood in consternation at seeing the wreck before her.

"Oh, mother!" sobbed Clarice. "Indeed I didn't do it; it was not my
fault. I don't know how it happened. I was lifting it so carefully."

"Clarice dear, you know quite well you are never allowed to touch
anything in the drawing room. Your disobedience was the cause of this
accident; and my favourite vase cannot be replaced. I am grieved that
my little girl was tempted to do what she knew was wrong. You wasted
your time instead of practising your music. How true it is that:

   "Satan finds some mischief still
    For idle hands to do."

"But I did not break it, mother; it broke by itself!" pleaded the child
in a tone of the deepest distress.

"Hush! Clarice darling. Do not say what is untrue. My beloved child
must be careful to keep to the exact truth, come what may. I am not
angry with you for breaking the vase, because an accident may happen
sometimes even to the most careful. Your fault lies in the disobedient
act. Go away upstairs now by yourself, and think about it quietly. By
and by you will tell me you are sorry. I shall not be able to take you
out driving with me this afternoon, as I intended."

Clarice did not wait to hear any more, but ran off to the night
nursery, to fling herself on her bed and have her cry out there.

"It is very unfair!" she sobbed, pushing back the hair from her flushed
face. "Mamma won't believe me. Oh, dear! What shall I do? Why did I
look at those roses?"

"You were disobedient," suggested Conscience, that faithful monitor, as
Clarice began to feel the force of her mother's words. Yet she did not
wish to give up the idea that she had been unjustly condemned. It was
pride alone that prevented her going at once to her mother's room to
confess her fault.

The dinner hour arrived, and Clarice took her place in silence with
the other children. Still there was the same sulky tear-stained face,
though her mother looked with such loving sadness at her naughty child.

Clarice watched her go upstairs to get ready for the afternoon drive,
and longed, in spite of herself, to run and say just the little word
that would put it all right again. But no, she lingered and hesitated
until it was too late; and from the schoolroom window downstairs she
watched the carriage drive away, with Milly seated beside mamma. With
her eyes full of tears, Clarice sat down to prepare her lessons for the
morrow.

While so doing she heard steps on the gravel path, and knew old
Jonathan was at hand. He had heard about the accident from the
servants, and felt very grieved that his dear little Miss Clarice
should be in trouble. She was so seldom naughty that it was a great
puzzle to him how such a thing could have happened. The child gave one
look, to make quite sure it was her dear old friend, and then held out
both hands towards him.

"I have been naughty, Jonathan," said the honest little offender; "but
it was not quite my fault, though nobody believes me."

Then followed a faithful narration of facts, exactly as they had
occurred.

"Well, my dear little lady," replied the gardener, twisting the rose
off the empty watering-pot he held in his hand; "old Jonathan is but
a poor comforter; yet he always likes to look for the rainbow in a
shower. Dry up the tears, and let us see what can be done. God knows
all about everything, and that is why it is such a comfort to go and
tell Him. There! There! Don't cry any more," added the affectionate old
man, taking up a corner of the child's white pinafore to wipe away the
blinding tears, which flowed all the faster for this loving sympathy.

"Mamma loves her little girl more than a thousand flower vases. She
is not angry with you for breaking it, my love. Bless her dear, kind,
gentle heart, she is the last to punish for that sort of thing. It was
only because you did not mind your music, my dear, and what she told
you about keeping from touching the things in the drawing room.

"My mother used to tell me when I was a little chap that I had no eyes
in my fingers; and 'twould be a good thing if all children remembered
that wholesome lesson. It would save them from many a mishap. Now, when
mamma comes back, let her find her little girl with a sunny face and
lessons all ready for to-morrow. Why, some day perhaps you will be able
to buy her another vase; that will be something for you to save up your
pennies for. Crying will not mend the broken pieces. When we have done
a naughty thing, the best way is to be very sorry for it, and then turn
over a new leaf and to begin again quite fresh."

As Clarice began to see the force of this sound reasoning, a happy
light broke over her face, and the sobbing ceased.

"Oh, Jonathan!" she whispered. "You always make me want to be good."

"It is not me, dear child; it is not me! It is God's Holy Spirit, which
is promised to all who ask for it. This is the candle of the Lord; and
when it lights up our dark hearts, we see our faults as God would have
us see them, and we are so sorry. Then He makes us good again, and the
darkness all passes away, and we are happy once more. O Lord, help Thy
dear lamb!" murmured the aged man, looking up into the blue sky as he
moved away to continue his work.

Now Robin happened to be weeding a path close by, and consequently
overheard most of this conversation. Every word had pricked him like a
sharp thorn, for he knew well that if it had not been for his concealed
transgression, Clarice's trouble would not have been so great.

Yet he dared not confess the truth. A guilty feeling made him tremble
and turn pale as he passed that window and caught sight of the
tear-stained face within. He could watch the quickly moving lips, as
Clarice set herself resolutely to master her lessons; yet, though it
touched him and made his heart sore, he had not the moral courage to
say the word that would free her from much of the blame. He dared
not face the consequences involved in such a course of action, and
therefore still determined to keep his unhappy secret.

That night the silver moonlight shone down alike into hall and cottage
window. Dear little Clarice knelt by her white bed, with her hands
clasped and a happy smile upon her face as she looked up into the
starry sky. She was thanking God for making her good again. The burden
had been lifted off her heart by her mother's kiss of forgiveness, and
"the peace which passeth all understanding" left its seal upon her brow
as she fell asleep.

Not so Robin: he looked out of his bed into the moonlight, and turned
away from it quickly with his face towards the wall. The brilliant
beam seemed too pure for his eyes to-night, and he could only think of
the words his mother had been just reading aloud from her Bible: "'The
light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole
body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee
be darkness, how great is that darkness!'" (Matt. vi. 22, 23).



CHAPTER VIII

THE BIRTHDAY QUEEN

IT was like a musical alarum, when Carolus, a bright golden canary,
began to trill one morning early to Mistress Clarice. His companion,
Chérie, who shared with him the pretty blue and white cage, thought
the song was meant for her, and began to stretch her wings and plume
herself as she listened. Blackbirds and thrushes called and chirruped
from the garden below; but the canaries could not see them, as the
nursery blind was not yet drawn up. Those merry singers on swinging
boughs outside in the clear morning sunshine made Carolus very
restless. He hopped from perch to perch, pecking up seeds faster and
faster, and peering through the slender wires with his bead-like eyes,
as if longing that the sleeper in the small white bed near the window
would awake and talk to him.

But Clarice was still in dreamland, and so was Milly in the opposite
cot; for it was only six o'clock, and even nurse, who was an early
riser, had not yet begun to stir.

Poor Carolus grew desperate, for the sunlight came slanting in between
the bars of the venetian blind in the most provokingly tempting manner.
At last, he piped his loudest, shrillest notes, and actually succeeded
in making Clarice open her eyes.

"Thank you, Carolus," she whispered, springing up lightly; "you are
the first to wish me many happy returns of my birthday. Oh, it is a
fine day! I so am glad. Is Milly awake, I wonder? Yes, the clothes are
moving."

In another moment two little feet were standing on the cane chair by
the window, and Carolus came to the bars of his cage to take some hemp
seed from a pair of red lips. One peep through the blind, out into the
garden lying in sunlight and cool shadow, a happy look towards the
rosy-tipped clouds in the blue sky, and Clarice skipped across the
floor to the other cot.

"Hush! Don't wake nurse and baby," said the elder child gravely, with
upraised finger. "Come into my bed. I want to talk to you about so many
things."

Milly rubbed her eyes as if she could not quite tell what was
happening, then her arms were round her sister's neck in a loving
clasp. "Do you know what I am going to give you for a birthday
present?" was Milly's first question.

"No. Shall I guess?"

"Yes, you may guess it; but I cannot tell you if you are right, because
it is a great secret."

"One of your white rabbits?"

"No."

"A gardening-basket?"

"No."

"A story-book?"

"No."

"Something to use?" suggested Clarice.

"Oh, please don't guess any more! I am so afraid you will find it out;
and you must not ask me about any of the parcels I saw in mamma's room
last night. One was such a funny shape, I wanted to open it, and peep."

"Who is awake so early, I wonder?" laughed nurse, for it was in vain to
try any longer to close her ears to the whispering buzz. "Many happy
returns of the day, my dear Miss Clarice."

"Oh, nurse!" pleaded Milly. "Please dress me very early to-day, because
I want to go to my garden before breakfast. You know what for, nursey
dear."

"Oh yes, I know," answered nurse; "but you must have a little patience.
There! You have wakened baby with your chatter. I thought you would.
Now I wonder if you two little girls can keep him quiet, and amuse him,
till I am ready."

"Oh yes! Oh yes!" chimed in both voices. "Come here, you darling
baby-brother!"

Baby allowed himself to be transferred from the cradle to his sister's
bed with the greatest equanimity, only opening his large solemn eyes a
little wide as they laughed and played with him.

"Baby George has only had one birthday since he was born," cried
Clarice, kissing him. "I have had eight; that is seven more than he. I
don't think he cared much about his presents, not even the pretty coral
and bells that grandmamma gave him. Did you, darling?" she added, proud
of the responsibility of holding him in her arms. "One, two, three,
four, five kisses more for the sweetest baby that ever lived."

A merry shout from the adjoining room told the sisters that Alfred and
Arthur were also awake.

"Many happy returns of the day!" they cried, peeping in at the door.
"Make haste, Milly; we want you in the garden."

Just then mamma appeared to give the birthday kiss and carry off baby.
When the chatter ceased, the children were got ready for breakfast; and
Carolus went on with his song through everything, trilling out his full
clear notes in the summer sunshine, which now flooded the room.

Pale blush roses, with the dew still upon them, nodded in at the
window, and ivy-twigs bent and trembled as the free birds alighted
on them every moment, charmed and attracted by the clear song of the
captive canary.

The four elder children were allowed to breakfast downstairs with papa
and mamma on birthday mornings; and this was considered a special
treat. Clarice felt quite shy when Milly met her at the dining room
door with a wreath of flowers, wherewith to crown her queen of the day,
and papa led her to the chair beside him.

A number of tempting unopened parcels half-buried in flowers quite
covered her plate, as though she were not expected to eat any
breakfast. Then all the servants came in to prayers, and papa asked God
especially to bless his dear little girl on her birthday by giving her
His Holy Spirit, to teach her to walk in the heavenly way all the years
of her life.

Clarice herself joined earnestly in the petition, for she had lately
learned by experience that being happy meant being good, and this
made her long that God would teach her the way. It was a great puzzle
to know which packet to open first, there were so many. A reference
Bible from papa; a writing-case from mamma, fitted up with everything
a little girl could want to write a letter with; a birthday text-book
from Milly; a silver thimble from Alfred and Arthur; a blue sash
from Aunt Emily; and last of all, in a little box to itself, an
old-fashioned embroidered silk purse, with a golden sovereign shining
inside.

Clarice gave a cry of delight, and clasped her hands together. Papa
looked grieved as he saw the fascination the piece of gold had for her,
and said, "I hope my Clarice is not too fond of money?"

"No, papa dear; I am sure you would not think that, if I could only
tell you something. I am so glad I can do it now. I thought I should
have to wait for months and months."

"Do what?" inquired mamma.

"Oh, mother, please don't ask! It is a real secret—only old Jonathan
knows about it; and he will be so glad too. Papa, I shall whisper to
you about it by and by. There! I won't talk about it any more now,"
said the delighted child, closing the snap of the purse resolutely, and
beginning to admire the other presents over again.

"There is the postman coming up the avenue," said Alfred. "Let me go.
Three letters for Clarice!" he cried, after a speedy return. "One
from grandmamma, one from auntie, and here is another with the London
postmark, and a roll of music. That must be from Uncle George. How rich
you are, Clarice! I wish my birthday was coming soon!"

Breakfast over, and the presents removed to a side table, Clarice sat
herself down in one of the bay windows to read her letters over and
over again, for one contained an invitation from Uncle George to go to
London with papa next month. The other children had left her alone,
to run off and watch the erection of a large white tent on the lawn;
for Clarice had begged, as her birthday treat, that she might have the
school children and their parents to tea. To this request her father
and mother had willingly consented, so glad were they to encourage kind
thought for others in their little ones. The shouting and laughing
outside soon drew Clarice from her retreat; and, as it was a whole
holiday, the morning was spent in decking the interior of the tent with
evergreens and flowers, Jonathan and Robin assisting.

"Jonathan," whispered the birthday queen, after enumerating to him
her various presents, "only think: grandmamma has sent me a golden
sovereign. Will that be enough to buy mamma another vase?" she added
wistfully.

Robin heard the question and the assenting reply. "Ah, if Miss Clarice
could only know the truth about the broken handle!" thought he. "I hate
cook for making me so wicked," he said, half aloud, as he went off to
the shrubbery for more green boughs. "I never was so unhappy in my
life."

And all through that bright birthday there hung a gloom over the boy
that he could not shake off; its shadow pressed upon him as he watched
the merry groups of people trooping through the gate by Jonathan's
cottage, and saw their smiles of satisfaction and delight as the white
tent appeared in view. He had scarcely any heart to go home and fetch
Corrie and mother, though Miss Clarice had herself told him how glad
she should be to see them.

Once more he tried to forget as he watched the bright face of his
little crippled sister, and saw that in his mother's eyes the weary
look of toil had given place to one of real enjoyment and delight.

"It would break her heart if she only knew how bad I am; if it were not
for that, I think I would make up my mind to tell her all."

"Robin does not look a bit glad," said Clarice to Arthur as she ran
forward to welcome the trio. "Has Jonathan been scolding him, I wonder?"

"Mountains of cake!" shouted her brother in answer. "Look, Clarice, at
the trays going into the tent. They will never eat all that."

It certainly did seem an endless supply.

Nevertheless the trays returned again and again to the house to be
replenished, as the happy entertainers went in and out among those
seated at the long tables, to see that everybody had plenty and enjoyed
themselves.

Milly took especial care of poor little Corrie, and sat beside the
basket carriage, holding her plate and cup. She had not forgotten the
lesson of unselfishness learned while decking Corrie's fir bough. It
had formed a link between the two children, that would never be broken.

A few kindly words were spoken by the master of Oaklands at the close
of the feast. He said he hoped they would all remember the greatest
birthday that had ever dawned upon this world, the birthday of the King
of Glory, without whose presence and blessing no life could be a real
true life.

"Everybody," continued he, "who loves God has had two birthdays in
their history: the first, when they were born into this world; the
second, when God opened their eyes by His Holy Spirit to know and love
Him in believing on His dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who loved us,
and washed us from our sins in His own blood. For those who, in the
power of this new birth, have entered the true life of the children of
God there can be no doubt; for, when their earthly life is over, God
will Himself open to them the gate of everlasting life. I want you all
to remember about this wonderful soul-birth. You may all of you have it
if you will, for the Holy Spirit waits to breathe upon you the breath
of life; and God has promised to give that blessed Spirit to those who
ask—'Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.' May
our heavenly Father, who loves you, bless you one and all."

Clarice stood by her father to shake hands with everyone as they went
away; and in that calm summer evening, as the happy village folk wended
their way to their several homes, that message of peace and goodwill
echoed in their hearts, causing many of them to covet earnestly the
best gift—that blessing of the Lord which maketh rich, adding no sorrow
with it.

"'Truly the Lord is good,' 'and His tender mercies are over all His
works,'" said old Jonathan to himself as he lifted the latch of his
cottage door, after bidding good-night to the last straggler at the
gate.

It was not till the festivities of the birthday were over, that Clarice
returned to the dining room to fetch her presents from the side table,
where she had left them in the morning. She began gathering them up one
by one, and only lingered yet another moment to unsnap her purse, and
take one more look at her golden sovereign. It was gone! The pretty
purse was quite empty. A look of dismay crossed the hitherto untroubled
face; tears welled quickly into the blue eyes, and, a few minutes
after, the little birthday queen was sobbing bitterly in her mother's
arms.

"Oh, mamma! You don't know how dreadful it is to bear, because I can't
tell you my secret. Who can have touched it? I put it so carefully into
the purse this morning. Surely nobody can have come in from the garden
to steal it!"

The poor excited child was gradually soothed and calmed, till nurse,
with a pitying look, suggested she should go to bed. The search
continued through the house. The servants were diligently questioned,
and all set to work to look for the lost money, but in vain.

"Little missy must have thought she put it back into the purse," said
cook, who, down on her knees, feeling all over the dining room carpet,
was foremost in the search. "It must have rolled away into a corner."

Poor little Clarice dried her tears, and said good-night to her father
with a desperate effort. She knew well that no one could be more sorry
than he that a dark cloud should have come to overshadow her happy
birthday. Yet when the nursery door was shut, and Milly asleep, another
shower of tears wetted the tired child's pillow ere she sank into
forgetfulness of her trouble.

"I never heard before that a piece of money had legs to walk away
upon," said Jonathan the next morning, as the tale of the lost
sovereign was repeated to him by cook. "Let those who hide find, say I."

"You don't suppose the thief is In the house!" replied the woman
tartly. "I am as honest as yam, old Jonathan."

"I am glad to hear it," was the gardener's quiet comment as he went out.



CHAPTER IX

CAUGHT!

"GOOD-NIGHT, my boy."

"Good-night, Mr. Jonathan," said Robin as he turned the corner by the
lodge to go towards his home the following evening.

The old man shaded his eyes with his hand as he watched the retreating
figure for some distance, until a bend in the lane hid him from view,
then said aloud as he entered his house, "There is something wrong with
the lad, and I cannot come at it; he is no more like the same boy he
was three months ago than a fresh rose is like the withered one I have
just thrown away. What can it be? Bad companions, perhaps; but I never
see him about with any of the town lads. I wonder if his mother notices
the difference."

Jonathan was about to seat himself in his big arm-chair for a good
rest, when suddenly he recollected there was something he had forgotten
to see to in one of the glass-houses; so, taking his knotted stick from
behind the door, he once more began to trudge slowly up the avenue.
Did his eyes deceive him? It was surely Robin that he saw leaping over
the fence and running across the field as if for his life. Why did he
come that way? Was he going to the house? Yes; he opened the white gate
leading to the back premises, and presently disappeared.

Jonathan's first impulse was to meet him in the field on his return,
and question him as to his errand; but the old man knew his stiff legs
would not reach thus far in time, the boy was flying at such a rate.
He therefore hid himself behind a large tree, and from his place of
concealment saw Robin a few minutes after return through the gate, and
by the same short cut regain the high road. But he had a basket on his
arm! Where was he taking it to? Why did he come back to fetch it? Here
was an explanation of the boy's restless impatient manner when detained
at the lodge gate for a few moments before wishing him good-night.

"There is something underhand going on," muttered old Jonathan sadly.
"I was sure of it. The poor lad could not look me in the face to-day
when I asked him a question; he got scarlet when I mentioned cook's
name. What can it be? He has got into a thorny path, and I must see him
out of it, even though my own hands get torn. I will be his friend,
whatever it costs; and I pray God we may see the right side of this
business before long."

While his dear old teacher and friend was thus sadly musing over what
he had just seen, Robin, wholly unconscious of detection, was doing his
utmost to make up for the time so unwillingly lost while talking to
Jonathan at the lodge. But he had not got more than half-way when he
heard the sonorous tones of a church clock warning him that the hour
had come when he had promised his mother he would try to be at home.
She had said she wanted him particularly.

There was therefore no time to go round by Andover Street, though cook
had urged the necessity of his doing so. He must carry the basket home
with him, and take it there in the morning. Thus resolved, he sped
swiftly up the street leading to his own home; and, lest his mother
should question him about the basket if she saw it, he ran quickly
through to the court, and deposited it in a corner hidden by a stack of
sticks, before entering the room where she and Corrie were sitting.

Mrs. Campbell greeted her son with a bright smile, saying, "Ah! Robin,
you are a good boy. I hoped you would not keep me waiting long, for I
have to go and see a lady to-night who owes me some money for washing.
Take Corrie out for a bit to the green fields. It has been so hot here
all day for her. I am obliged to keep up the fire for the ironing."

"All right, mother," was Robin's quiet response. And she, hastily
putting on her bonnet and shawl, had not time to observe how miserable
he looked.

After her departure, Robin carefully considered whether he could not
first take Corrie to Andover Street and leave the basket. But he
knew that the house his mother was bound for was in that immediate
neighbourhood. What if she met and questioned him? He dared not risk it.

Besides, she had often said she did not wish Corrie to be taken into
close dirty streets; and there had been a great deal of fever in the
town of late. The child, too, would be sure to tell mother about the
basket if she saw it. No; he must leave it until to-morrow morning; but
meantime, for greater security, he would remove it from the backyard
and hide it away under his bed. So Robin kept Corrie waiting in her
carriage outside the door while he did this.

   "Oh, what a tangled web we weave
    When first we practise to deceive!"

He went sadly and quietly along towards the fields, which lay some
distance beyond the town. At last they turned off the high road to a
favourite spot beside a running brook, where were grassy hollows and
tall shady trees.

Robin was so busily occupied gathering wild flowers for Corrie, and so
preoccupied with his own thoughts, that he did not notice the gardener
of Oaklands was trudging, quite close to them, the other side of the
hedge, along the white dusty road. But old Jonathan's sharp eyes had
spied out the brother and sister, though he passed by without any sign
of recognition, muttering, "There is no time to be lost."

Mrs. Campbell was disappointed In not finding the lady at home, and
therefore returned sooner than she expected. Great was her surprise
after reaching home to hear old Jonathan's voice at the door.

"Come in, Mr. Jonathan," she answered cheerily, on catching sight of
the wrinkled face. "It is many a long day since I have seen you down as
far as this. I hope nothing is wrong at the house, or that Robin is not
wanted, for he is gone out with Corrie; but I expect them in soon."

The old man seated himself, and paused for a moment to wipe his
forehead with his red handkerchief and regain his breath, for he had
walked quicker than was his wont. Then he said, "Did Robin not tell you
about the lost sovereign?"

"No," replied the widow, turning pale at the thought of her son being
suspected of a theft. "Indeed, he has had no time, for I went out
directly he got back this evening. Pray tell me about it."

The gardener accordingly proceeded to recount the story of the missing
money as he had heard it in the kitchen that morning.

"You don't think Robin touched it, do you?" said his listener, aghast
and trembling.

"No," replied her true-hearted friend, "I don't, for I believe he is
honest to the backbone; but, for all that, there is something wrong
with the boy, Mrs. Campbell; and I've failed as yet to find it out. I
can only see he is miserable and unhappy; and I've a notion that cook
has beguiled him into underhand ways. I have long suspected this, but
could prove nothing until this evening, when I watched him return by a
short cut over the fields to fetch a basket from the back premises."

"He brought no basket here, Mr. Jonathan. Of course I should have seen
it if he had," added the poor woman hotly, for she felt her temper
rising.

"Then he did not come straight home," said the gardener.

"Oh yes, he did; he was in much earlier than usual, and there was
nothing in his hand."

The conversation continued until it was suddenly interrupted by
Corrie's voice in merry chatter as Robin brought her in. Jonathan was
the last person he expected to see, and he looked both ashamed and
foolish on perceiving him seated by the fire. The boy's guilty fears,
bred of an accusing conscience, nearly made him drop his sister after
lifting her from the carriage. Mrs. Campbell saw the look, and, taking
Corrie from his arms, she carried her into the adjoining room to put
her to bed.

"Robin," said Jonathan sternly when they were left alone, "tell me the
truth at once: what did you do with that basket I saw you fetch from
the house?"

"The basket?" stammered the boy, hoping to evade the question by
gaining time to frame a suitable answer; but, meeting the piercing
look of those keen grey eyes, his own fell before it. The whole truth
must come out now, and Robin burst into tears. "Oh, Mr. Jonathan!"
he sobbed. "I am so glad you know about it! I have been so very very
miserable? There it is," he added in a husky tone of voice—"there it
is, hidden away under my bed, because I could not take it to Andover
Street to-night for cook. But oh, Mr. Jonathan, I know no more than you
do what is inside it!"

Then followed a full and free confession of the sin that like a
millstone had been weighing him down for so many weeks. Mrs. Campbell
entered the room unobserved by her son, so great was his agitation.

She listened in silence for some minutes, then sat down upon a chair,
to cover her face with her bands and weep bitterly.

"Oh, Robin, how could you be so wicked?" she cried. "What would father
have said if he had been here? Oh, that I should have lived to see my
son act so deceitfully!"

A piteous glance at his mother was the only answer he could make.

"Give me the basket," said Jonathan, stretching out a hand, which shook
as though palsied. "Robin, you must return with me to Oaklands. I must
see the master to-night. There can be no sleep for either of us until
this matter is cleared up."

"Oh, Mr. Jonathan, I dare not see master! He will turn me from his
service directly he hears what I have done."

"Don't be a coward, Robin! 'Dare and do the right!' is the Christian's
motto, whatever the consequences may be," said the old man resolutely.
"Master is a just and upright man, and ever a friend to those who need
one. Commit your cause to God, and He will plead it for you."

But the boy's agony of mind was so great that he still sought for a
subterfuge, and said, "But there may be nothing wrong in the basket. I
never looked inside to see what cook put there. She said it was only
something for her mother. Do open it and see."

"Not for the world," replied Jonathan. "Nobody but master shall cut
that cord. Ah, Robin, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift
you like wheat; but the Lord Jesus is praying for you, I am sure of
that, though you are now too miserable to pray for yourself. If there
was nothing wrong about that basket, there would have been no need to
send it away secretly. You know that as well as I do. I quite believe
you did not know what terrible trouble you were bringing upon yourself
when you promised to obey that dishonest woman; but that is another
matter altogether."

"It will be in the hands of the police to-morrow!" sobbed the poor
mother as her head bent still lower.

"Well, I believe there will be a piece of work for them here," said
Jonathan, pointing to the basket, "if ever they were wanted; but I
hope, for your sake, master will not expose it publicly. Come, Robin,
we are wasting precious moments."

But the boy still lingered, though his old friend had moved to the door.

"Mother, forgive me!" he cried, melted into the deepest contrition, and
quite overcome at sight of her hopeless stricken expression. His arms
were round her neck now. "I never never will do such a thing again! Do
believe me!"

"Robin," she said slowly, and raising her tear-filled eyes to his,
"you have sinned deeply against God, and brought a stain on our good
name which can never, I fear, be wiped out. Your master could not keep
anyone in his service who had acted as you have."

"Do not add to the lad's distress," said kind old Jonathan, returning
to lay his hand upon her arm. "Rather encourage him to face his duty
like a man. Master is a Christian gentleman, who will do the right,
whatever that may be. Pray for Robin; and may God send you an answer
of mercy and peace! But take heart to believe your prayer will be
answered, or it will not be the prayer of faith. I will do my best to
speak up for the lad, you may be sure."

So saying, he went slowly out.

The boy gave one more look at his mother, and followed Jonathan with a
sinking heart.

The two walked on together for some time in silence, Robin feeling as
though he were being led to execution, while Jonathan lifted up his
heart at every step to entreat the Father of the fatherless to look
down in pity, and avert the shadow of evil now resting upon those in
whom he took so deep an interest.



CHAPTER X

SET FREE!

THE master of Oaklands was somewhat surprised late that evening to
receive a message from his gardener requesting to speak with him in his
business room.

"Say I will be there in a few minutes," was the answer. "I hope there
is nothing wrong," said the gentleman to his wife. "It is most unusual
for Jonathan to ask for me at this time in the evening."

The few minutes seemed like hours to poor Robin as he sat waiting with
Jonathan, his ear attent for the first footstep along the passage, his
eye fixed on the handle of the door, watching for it to turn. Even the
clock on the mantelpiece seemed to be pronouncing a severe sentence
as it ticked loudly, and presently struck the hour with a sharp
decisive clang like the strokes of a hammer. Before Robin had finished
counting it, the master entered; and one look at the lad's downcast
shame-covered face caused him to inquire quickly, "Why, what is the
matter, Jonathan? Is Robin in disgrace?"

"Ah, sir, he is in sore trouble," replied Jonathan, rising to speak,
"and there can be no relief for him till you know all about it. I will
tell you the whole matter from beginning to end, and may God guide your
judgment."

So the master listened patiently to every word, only interrupting
the gardener now and then to ask Robin some questions, which were
truthfully answered.

"Say to your mistress, I should be glad if she would come here
immediately," said the gentleman to a servant, after ringing the bell;
"and tell cook I wish to speak to her."

Robin ventured to lift his eyes to the gentle lady's face as she
entered, hoping to find pity and sympathy there. As he did so, cook
appeared, looking very red and uncomfortable, yet with a bold stare
on her face, as though she could not imagine why she was wanted. She
darted a keen look of hatred at her victim, when she caught sight of
the fatal basket on the table, which so terrified the poor boy that he
shook from head to foot.

"Cook, will you tell me what is in that basket?" said her master
quietly.

The woman muttered something indistinctly about mother wanting a few
things; then, trying to cover her defeat by an outburst of passion,
said fiercely, "That is my basket. No one has a right to touch it but
me. That boy is a sneak and a liar, and—"

"Silence!" interrupted the master. "Before you say any more, I will, in
the presence of these witnesses, open the basket; and if it is found to
contain nothing but what belongs to you, all shall be returned."

The string that had so carefully secured the cover was then cut,
and the contents exposed to view. There was a large piece of bacon,
with some lard, half a pound of butter, two pots of jam, and a
good-sized cake. Nor was this all. On searching further, a small box
was discovered containing a sovereign, and beside an empty bottle
marked "Gin" lay a note addressed to her mother, and signed by cook.
It directed that fifteen shillings of the money should be taken to a
certain pawn-shop in Andover Street, with the enclosed numbered ticket,
to redeem a certain valuable ring her mistress had dropped in the
hay-field three weeks ago. Further instructions were added about the
refilling of the bottle, and a special request that all might be ready
for Robin to bring back the following morning. This was read aloud.

And the woman, seeing now there was no hope of escape, confessed to
the whole of her misdeeds, imploring forgiveness, as the sudden terror
seized her that the affair would be made public in the police-court.
She said she had been tempted to take the sovereign from the
embroidered purse on the morning of the birthday, when everybody was
engaged in the tent on the lawn. She had heard her master promise a
handsome reward to the finder of the lost ring, and therefore wished to
redeem it quickly, that she might receive the promised sum.

The truth was all out now; but the master and mistress soon discerned
there was no real repentance connected with cook's confession. It was
only made under fear of the retributive justice she expected would
swiftly follow. This was evident from the fact that, though the reading
of the note had proved Robin to be no accomplice in the theft, she did
her utmost to involve him in her own disgrace by telling tales of his
frequent visits to the kitchen, the half of which were untrue.

"You have said enough, cook," said her master sternly. "I do not wish
to hear any more. You have nothing to do with Robin; he has his own
punishment. You will leave my service to-morrow. A cab will take you to
your mother's house. For the sake of Mrs. Campbell, whom I respect, and
whose son's ruin you have sought, I will not bring the case before the
police; but let me never see you on these premises again."

The sentence was received with an expression of dogged indifference,
which changed to a look of defiance as she left the room. Long and
earnestly did her gentle mistress plead with the woman before her
departure, trying in vain to awaken the hardened heart and conscience
to a sense of sin. Those words of loving reproof and counsel fell upon
an ear of stone—an ear that some years afterwards longed for that voice
of Christian love, when none were nigh to speak a word of hope, as she
sat a wretched prisoner in a county jail.

Robin did not lose his place. His humble and penitent confession, given
without reserve as soon as cook had left the room, convinced the master
that his was genuine sorrow. Another chance of gaining an honourable
character must be given to the boy. This kind decision was confirmed by
Jonathan's entreaties, who pleaded for Robin as if he had been his own
son.

"Go home," said the old man after the interview was concluded, and he
was walking down the avenue with Robin. "Go to your knees in humble
thankfulness, and pour out your heart to your loving Father, against
whom you have sinned. If you want words, turn to the fifty-first Psalm.
You will find everything there; and God has said, 'If we confess our
sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness.'"

So Robin went home; and there, after saying good-night to his mother,
who had awaited his return in much anxiety, and receiving her
forgiveness, he knelt down beside his bed, with his Bible open before
him, to cry with his whole heart:

   "'Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy loving-kindness;
according unto the multitude of Thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions. Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me
from my sin. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever
before me. Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil
in Thy sight. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and
I shall be whiter than snow.'"

That prayer rolled back the cloud's dark face, and showed its silver
lining. The load was gone from Robin's heart, and he could rest in
peace.

Jonathan's master did not forget to thank his faithful servitor for all
the trouble he had taken in discovering the theft. But the ring was
still to be redeemed. Would Jonathan go to the pawn-shop and fetch it
back?

To this, he willingly consented.

"It will be best for me to go," said he. "They are a rough lot down in
that part of the town."

Accordingly, the following morning, he trudged off upon his errand,
and slowly threaded his way with his trusty staff through long close
streets, every turn of which he knew well.

At last he stood before a house, above whose doorway swung the familiar
sign of the three gilt balls. Jonathan had to wait ten minutes before
he could be attended to, as the shop was rather full, even at this
early hour.

"What a history some of those things could tell!" thought he, as he
stood and surveyed the various articles hanging one above another
without reference to sort or kind. Those little petticoats and shoes!
Where were the poor helpless children who once had worn them? Alas!
Perhaps hungry and barefoot, because the huge public-house at the
corner had tempted fathers and mothers to rob their little ones for the
sake of that cursed drink. A small hungry-eyed girl, with a tattered
pinafore and no frock, who held on by her mother's dirty gown, glanced
up at the kindly old man, as if the smile she found on his good-natured
face was something new in her experience.

At length there was a movement and shuffling of feet towards the door.
Jonathan's turn to be served had come. Several of the rough customers
eyed him askance as they passed out. His honest respectable face
looked as if it had no business in such a place. A sullen-visaged
woman scowled suspiciously when he made known his errand by presenting
the ticket. Some low-muttered words passed between her and the
rascally-looking man who held out his hand to receive the money. The
pearl ring was in Jonathan's possession; and he clutched it nervously,
lest by any mischance it should slip through his big fingers before he
had restored it to its rightful owner.

Robin met Jonathan as he went to his work, and the old man noticed
that the lad looked into his face with glad fearless eyes. The guilty
shame was no longer there. Ah! How happy Robin felt as he ran along
the road after that morning greeting! The birds' merry matin song made
true music in his ear, for he was in tune with it now. The hardest work
would be light to-day.

But it was some time before the shadow of that dark experience left the
boy's heart. In his calm review of the past, each wrong step showed
clear before him; he could see how pride had been his stumbling-block,
because he had been "wise in his own eyes." How easy he had thought it
was to be a Christian!

"The grass is always greenest in the valley of humility," he had heard
old Jonathan say, and wondered what he meant. It is there that the Good
Shepherd maketh His flock to lie down in the sultry noon, beside the
still waters. The boy recalled the lesson taught by the fragrant almond
boughs, and awakened to its meaning. Out of the shelter of the golden
ark, the rod had remained bare and fruitless. It was the work of the
Holy Spirit alone to revive and freshen, by leading him back to the
ever-open door.

One day, to Robin's great delight, he saw Miss Clarice running
through the garden gate towards him, rake in hand. There had been no
opportunity of speaking to her since the day cook departed, and there
was still something on his heart which made it heavy; so, moving
forward to meet her, he said, with a downcast look, "Please, miss,
I wanted to tell you it was I who broke the vase, and got you into
trouble. Mr. Jonathan knows about it."

"Oh yes, Robin! And so does mamma now; but she is not angry with you,
because you are sorry. I was naughty, you know," added the child, with
a sad look, which, however, quickly changed to a bright smile as she
ran to her garden, calling out, "It is all right now, Robin."

Ah! How free and unfettered did the boy feel now! That gentle touch had
healed the wound remorse had kept open.

"The birds have never sung so merrily before," thought he, as he worked
away with a happy will. "Surely the sky was never so blue!"

Certainly the mother had not heard her boy whistle so blithely for
weeks, or noticed such a bright smile on his face, as she did that
evening when he ran in and put his week's wages into her hand.

"I am so glad to think you know about everything, mother, and that
there is nothing to hide now," he whispered.

"You will tell me a nice story to-night, Robin," pleaded Corrie, who
had caught the reflection of her brother's smile.

"Yes, darling. Come away to the green fields. You shall fill your
basket with beautiful flowers to-night, and we will be so happy!"

"Happy and good," said Corrie, repeating a favourite household word.

Its significance sent a strange thrill through Robin's heart as he bent
down to kiss the pale face.



CHAPTER XI

FOREST LODGE

THERE was great excitement in the small hamlet near Oaklands when one
day some passers-by observed that bricks and mortar lay in heaps close
beside Jonathan's cottage, and that workmen had already begun building
just behind it.

"The old man's home was going to be pulled down," they said. "It was
too bad, after he had lived in it so many years."

Jonathan smiled at the gossip, and patted the children's heads as
they stopped to stare or climbed upon the railings; yet no amount of
questioning could make him give the information so eagerly sought.

"Those who live longest will see the most," was his conclusive answer;
and nothing further could be got out of him, though everybody tried by
turns.

Day by day the walls of the dwelling-house grew higher and higher,
until it was ready for its roof and chimneys. Not much could be seen of
it from the road, as it was partially hidden by Jonathan's cottage, and
faced the forest trees he loved to muse among. The setting sun would
glide over their waving tops and fill the rooms with a happy evening
glow, and the wood-pigeons would coo their dreamy song close by, all
the summer day.

So thought the old man, for it was spring-time again before the last
workman departed. But though the new house stood ready for use, who was
to occupy it still remained a secret. Neither had any orders been given
to pull down the old lodge,—that was the strangest part of all, people
thought.

And Robin was as much in the dark as anyone else, though every evening,
he recounted in his own home what was going on at Oaklands.

The mystery was solved a little sooner than was intended, through the
following circumstance.

Mrs. Campbell, hard at work as usual, was one morning interrupted in
her occupation by the entrance of the rent collector, who with his
cross red face and inevitable book was seldom a welcome visitor among
the poor.

"Called for the rent," said he gruffly.

"It is quite ready," replied the widow, reaching down a cracked teacup,
into which she had put the required sum the night before, to be at hand
when wanted.

"All right, missus! I've come to tell you the rent is to be raised five
pounds a year."

"Oh no surely not," replied the poor woman, aghast. "I cannot pay more,
and you promised it should not be raised for three years."

"Then you must be off; property is rising in this part of the town,"
was the only answer as he tore off the receipt; "plenty of room in the
workhouse, failing other lodgings."

This parting piece of insolence went to the poor woman's heart like
a sharp arrow, though she concealed her feelings till the man had
departed. How dared he say such a thing, when she had always paid her
rent like an honest woman! For the moment she forgot to lift her heart
above, and her tears fell fast.

But Corrie's arms were soon about her neck, and the child's touch
recalled her to herself.

"I will go to Oaklands this evening when Robin comes home, and ask to
see the master; he will help me, I am sure, if he can, and will tell me
what I had better do."

Thus setting aside her care, and asking her Father in heaven to give
her strength and guidance, the widow went briskly to work again, and by
the time Robin returned, was quite ready to set forth on her errand.

"'God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble,'" was
the reassuring whisper she seemed to hear as she walked along, though
fears innumerable would crowd into her heart. "He has never failed me
yet; and I will not distrust Him now, for He has promised to help me."

Meeting her kind old friend Jonathan at the gate, she told her tale to
him first.

"The master is just gone up the avenue," he said. "Follow him at once,
and you will be able to speak to him."

Mrs. Campbell obeyed, and ten minutes after found herself sitting
waiting in the business room, where the gentleman did not keep her long
in suspense.

"Well," said he cheerily, "good-evening, Mrs. Campbell. Nothing wrong,
I hope? But it is unusual to see you so far from town at this hour."

The poor woman then told her story without interruption; and as soon as
she had finished, her patient listener looked at her with a kind smile,
saying—

"I do not think you need distress yourself. I was coming to-morrow to
tell you something that I think you will be glad to hear, and which
will quite set your heart at rest about the landlord. The new cottage
has been built for you and your children. You are to live there rent
free as our laundress."

"Beg pardon, sir?" said Mrs. Campbell, in her sudden joy believing she
could not have heard aright.

Robin's kind master repeated his speech, adding, "We want you to move
into your new quarters next week."

"Oh, sir!" she faltered, in an unsteady voice, and feeling completely
overcome. "I have done nothing to deserve such kindness. Robin has
often told me about the new cottage; but I never paid much heed to what
he was saying, not thinking I should have anything to do with it."

"Neither did he, my good woman. Jonathan and I have kept it a secret;
and in concluding my bargain, I shall ask you to be a good neighbour
to the dear old man, and look after him in his old age. He is failing
sadly; and I much fear we shall not have him with us many years longer.
Now go home and tell Robin about it. It will be convenient for him to
be near his work; and Corrie will, I hope, get some colour into her
pale cheeks in this fresh country air."

Oh, what a light heart did the glad mother carry back with her that
evening to the smoky town! The distance seemed as nothing to her eager
feet. Could it be really true? It must surely be a dream. But no; the
sight of the two joyful faces at home when the news was told made her
begin to realise the fact. Neither Robin nor his mother could sleep
till late that night for thinking it over. The stern landlord might do
what he pleased now; they would soon be out of his power.

The evening before the departure to the new home, Robin sat with Corrie
in the old window-seat. His arms were round her, and she was looking up
into the sky, watching the twinkling stars.

"Do you remember that Christmas Eve, Robin, when you told me what the
bells sang about?"

"Yes, Corrie; that was a happy time for us all. God has sent us good
things ever since, and now the best of all is coming. Mother need not
work so hard; and you will be always in the beautiful country, instead
of coming back from the green fields into this dark street. Perhaps you
will get well."

Corrie looked at her helpless feet, and shook her head.

"I don't think so, Robin," she said in a grave sad tone, far beyond
her years. "The doctor told mother I should never run about like other
girls."

Her brother kissed her, and could make no answer. He knew it was true.

Presently the child looked up again and said, "Will going to heaven be
like that, Robin?"

The boy did not catch her meaning at first.

"Like what, Corrie?" he asked.

"Like going to Oaklands," she replied, watching his lips for the answer.

"Yes, something like it, because the Lord Jesus will take us to a
brighter, fairer home than we have lived in before. But heaven is more
beautiful, little sister, than anything we can think of on earth."

And with this explanation, Corrie was content.

The day of the flitting was quite a festival, the children coming down
from the big house to give their willing help and hearty welcome to
the new occupants of Forest Lodge, for so Clarice had named the house.
There were bright pictures to be nailed up on the spotless white walls
for Corrie to look at, and pots of flowers to arrange, that Jonathan
had brought in for the window-sills.

A comfortable old couch had been found and placed in one corner, for
the invalid child to lie on. It was drawn close to the window that
looked towards the wood, so that she might watch the green trees
waving, and see the gay flowers in the pretty garden, that Jonathan and
Robin had put into such neat order. It was indeed as perfect a home
as anyone could desire; and Mrs. Campbell thought so again and again,
after taking joyful possession of it. Old Jonathan was there also to
give her the word of welcome.

"So glad to see you back again at Oaklands! I remember when you first
came here as under-nursemaid; you were quite a young girl then. It is
not many that can look back as far as we can into the history of the
dear old house. Every stick on the place is dear to me."

"Yes," answered Mrs. Campbell; "I little thought to return to such rest
and peace after all my troubles. 'Hitherto hath the Lord helped me,' I
can truly say."

"'The Lord is thy keeper,'" responded her aged friend, "'the Lord is
thy shade upon thy right hand. The Lord shall preserve thy going out
and thy coming in, from this time forth, and even for evermore.'"

The fresh country air soon told favourably upon poor little Corrie, and
it was indeed a new life for her. She revelled in the rural sights and
sounds around her, and flowers were her perpetual delight. The fretted
wistful expression that pain and weakness had stamped so early on her
face began to wear away, and a bright contented look to come instead.

In summer she liked to lie among the fragrant swaths of hay, while
Clarice and Milly played beside her; and when the days were very hot
they would take her to the shady wood, to gather wild strawberries or
fill her basket with flowers. The sick child was a source of continual
interest to the little ladies of Oaklands, and scarcely a day passed
without their paying a visit to Forest Lodge. They taught her by
degrees and with much patience how to read and write, and sew and knit,
that she might, as well as the stronger ones, enter into the life of
busy occupation, and know how to work for others.

And whenever there was any special treat or pleasure, the crippled
child was always remembered. So, although she never got quite well,
Corrie's childhood grew brighter and brighter; and in her happy home,
those earlier years in the dark street faded away into a dim and
uncertain remembrance.

And when Robin's work was done, and he would sit beside her of an
evening to tell the favourite stories, he often said, "Ah, Corrie, our
happy days all began that winter when you had your first Christmas
tree. Do you remember it?"



CHAPTER XII

CONCLUSION

THE setting sun shone through the windows of Forest Lodge, and rested
lovingly upon Corrie Campbell lying on her couch. It was Sunday evening
in early spring, and she had been quietly thinking as she watched the
bright gleams dancing on the wall.

Some long years had passed since she quitted the dark street for her
bright home in the country. That time was a new starting-point in her
shaded and uneventful life; and though suffering had formed part of
the daily training in the growth of years, much fruit had abounded to
the glory of God. The doctor was right. She could never get well; yet
her life was a constant lesson of quiet patience to her young friends
at the big house, to whom she grew dearer each year, as in continual
self-forgetfulness, they ministered to her wants and pleasures.

Old Jonathan was sitting by the fireside thinking too, and it was
evident that time had not stood still with him either. His silver locks
were few now upon his furrowed brow, and the wrinkled hand that grasped
his stick shook visibly as he leant upon it. It seemed but the other
day he had given his welcome to the new tenants; he often wondered now
how he ever got on without them. Their coming wrought a marvellous
change in his lonely life, and had been the cheer and comfort of his
failing years.

His kind master saw the shadows of age and infirmity creeping over the
faithful old servant, and made due provision for it. How tenderly was
he nursed and cared for through long months of illness, which entirely
robbed him of his strength! Gradually they coaxed him in to spend the
greater part of his days by their cheerful fireside; and the plea that
Corrie wanted him was always sufficient. He would come in and out to
bring her woodland treasures, or to lay a freshly-gathered flower
beside her. He always found out exactly what she was longing for, and
if possible gratified the wish.

As Robin grew into manhood and became more competent for his work, so
surely did he see his dear old friend and teacher decline in strength
with the advancing years. No one liked to admit the fact; but at last
it became evident to all that the aged gardener was quite past work,
and could only walk about the garden paths leaning heavily on his
knotted stick, while younger hands succeeded to his labour.

Yet both Jonathan and Corrie had work to do for the heavenly King, and
their lives were a study to the thoughtful heart. They both laboured,
but it was passive labour, for they had learned that:

   "They also serve who only stand and wait."

"This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the
Son of God might be glorified thereby," was what Corrie's life said to
all who watched it; and on that day when all things are manifested, it
will be found that more true service has been wrought on sick-beds than
on earth's battle-fields.

"The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow like a
cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall
flourish in the courts of our God; they shall still bring forth fruit
in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing; to show that the Lord
is upright." That was Jonathan's work now, for he was old and well
stricken in years.

On this Sunday night he had been talking to Carrie about heaven; and as
he paused to take another look at the glowing sky and calm woods, light
footsteps were heard approaching the cottage.

"We are come for our Sunday talk," cried Clarice and Milly. "Have you
something nice for us this evening?"

"Yes, my dear young ladies; God's lessons are in everything we see upon
His beautiful earth. I was thinking what the Bible tells us about a
garden. It begins with the beautiful garden of Eden. Read it, dear Miss
Clarice, will you?"

So Clarice read, "'And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden;
and there He put the man whom He had formed. And out of the ground made
the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good
for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the
tree of knowledge of good and evil. And a river went out of Eden to
water the garden.'"

"Ah! How fresh and beautiful it must have been then," murmured
Jonathan, "before sin came in to spoil it all! And how glad we should
be that God is going to make it all fair again some day! Turn now to
the last book in the Bible, and see what the garden will be like when
Jesus comes again and takes His people to live with him."

"Here it is!" said Milly. "Let me read it."

"'And He showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of
the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree
of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit
every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
nations. And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and
of the Lamb shall be in it; and His servants shall serve Him: and they
shall see His face; and His name shall be in their foreheads. And there
shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the
sun; for the Lord God giveth them light; and they shall reign for ever
and ever.'"

"'No more curse,'" said old Jonathan with emphasis. "Oh, how lovely
that garden will be! I sometimes fancy I can see it all. The tree of
life will be growing there again in everlasting beauty. That river will
never run dry. How I long to be there! We may be very near it now. Our
Master will perhaps call us soon into the upper garden of the King.
Some people talk about the dark and gloomy grave; but the Saviour has
not left us without comfort about that. He Himself lay down to sleep in
a garden; a pleasant place, enclosed, and carefully watched and tended.

"The grave is a sweet fragrant place, since Jesus rested in it. If we
belong to Him, whether waking or sleeping, we are still the plants
of God's care; and each flower He knows by name. And when our Lord
Jesus comes down into His garden to gather lilies, He takes one and
another, to put them into the shelter of His pierced hand. It is not
death to lie there, dears. Ah, no! It is the gate of glory leading into
everlasting life.

"'My Beloved is mine, and I am His. He feedeth among the lilies, until
the day break and the shadows flee away.'"

"I have brought you a branch from your favourite almond tree,"
whispered Clarice, putting the fragrant blossoms into the wrinkled
hand. "Can you see it, dear old Jonathan?"

"Yes, my dear young lady, yes. How good of you! I have not been up
to that corner of the garden for a long time. Ah!" said he, half
to himself, yet aloud. "'The almond tree shall flourish, and the
grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goeth
to his long home.' Yes, it is a long home, because when once inside it,
we shall stay there always, and go no more out.

"'Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life,'—that is the promise for earth; 'and I will dwell in the house of
the Lord for ever,'—that is the promise for heaven."

"Papa told us, Jonathan, that the word almond in Hebrew means 'to
waken,' because it is the first tree to wake up out of its winter
sleep."

A glad smile of surprise overspread the face of the aged man when he
heard this; and, looking up, he said—

"The first to wake? Yes, that is it. 'I sleep, but my heart waketh;
it is the voice of my Beloved.' 'The Lord Himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the
trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Blessed and holy
is he that hath part in the first resurrection.'"

Was it the setting sun that cast such a bright light on the aged
features as these words fell from his lips?

Clarice and Milly felt a strange awe as they watched him, and at last
rose to wish him an affectionate good-night.

They never forgot that Sunday evening, for it was their last with him.
On the page where lay the locks of hair and the rosemary, the silver
spectacles were found. Old Jonathan did not need them more, for his
eyes were no longer dim. He had gone to the land where—

   "Everlasting spring abides,
    And never-withering flowers."

The good old man was long and sincerely mourned by those who had proved
his faithful friendship, and by the children who had loved to win his
smile and blessing.

The family at Oaklands, with Mrs. Campbell and Robin, followed him to
the quiet corner in God's garden where he was laid to sleep.

The little ones of the hamlet often strayed to the spot, and played
with the daisies on his grave. He had loved them in his lifetime, so
they naturally lingered near him now; and his white tombstone was a
favourite primer, as they slowly spelt out the words underneath his
honoured name:

   "Blessed are they that do His commandments, that they may have right
to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city."



                             THE END



PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED, EDINBURGH








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRIE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


