The Project Gutenberg eBook of The pyrotechnist's treasury
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The pyrotechnist's treasury
        or, Complete art of making fireworks

Author: Thomas Kentish

Release date: September 29, 2012 [eBook #40892]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Paul Clark and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
        produced from scanned images of public domain material
        from the Google Print project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PYROTECHNIST'S TREASURY ***

    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including some inconsistencies in hyphenation. Some
    changes of spelling and punctuation have been made. They are
    listed at the end of the text.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.




THE PYROTECHNIST'S TREASURY.




"The Secret Out Series."


Crown 8vo, cloth extra, profusely Illustrated, price 4_s._ 6_d._ each.

     Art of Amusing. A Collection of Graceful Arts, Games, Tricks,
     Puzzles, and Charades, intended to amuse everybody. By FRANK
     BELLEW. With nearly 300 Illustrations.

     Hanky-Panky. A Wonderful Book of Very Easy Tricks, Very Difficult
     Tricks, White Magic, Sleight of Hand; in fact, all those startling
     Deceptions which the Great Wizards call "Hanky-Panky." Edited by W.
     H. CREMER. With nearly 200 Illustrations.

     Magician's Own Book. Ample Instructions for Performances with Cups
     and Balls, Eggs, Hats, Handkerchiefs, &c. All from actual
     experience. Edited by W. H. CREMER. With 200 Illustrations.

     Magic No Mystery: Tricks with Cards, Dice, Balls, &c., with fully
     descriptive working directions; How to train Performing Animals;
     the art of Secret Writing, &c. Numerous Illustrations.

     Merry Circle (The), and How the Visitors were Entertained during
     Twelve Pleasant Evenings. A Book of New Intellectual Games and
     Amusements. Edited by Mrs. CLARA BELLEW. With numerous
     Illustrations.

     Secret Out; or, One Thousand Tricks with Cards, and other
     Recreations; with Entertaining Experiments in Drawing Room or
     "White Magic." Edited by W. H. CREMER. With 300 Engravings.

⁂ _The above Series of Books contain Explanations of all the
most startling feats of legerdemain performed by the celebrated
Prestidigitateurs, Robert Houdin, Frikell, Dr. Lynn, Professor Anderson,
and others._


CHATTO & WINDUS, Piccadilly, W.




 THE PYROTECHNIST'S TREASURY;

 OR,

 _COMPLETE ART OF MAKING FIREWORKS._

 BY

 THOMAS KENTISH.

 [Illustration]

 Flammas Jovis, et sonitus imitatur Olympi.

 VIRGIL, Æn. vi. 586.

 London: CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY. 1878.

 [_All rights reserved._]


 LONDON:
 PRINTED BY J. OGDEN AND CO.,
 172, ST. JOHN STREET, E.C.




PREFACE.


Until within the last few years there was scarcely any work in English,
that I am aware of, on the subject of Pyrotechny, worth reading, with
the exception of an Article in "Brewster's Cyclopædia," by MacCulloch;
and this, besides being accessible to only a few, having been published
in 1830, made no mention of colours, which form the most beautiful part
of the art.

In the first year of the present century a treatise was written by a
Captain Jones, which has been copied, in whole or in part, into almost
every work since published. The greater portion of it is absurd and
impracticable, and shows that it was written by a person who undertook
to teach what he had not learnt.

The first work of any real utility that came under my notice was a
series of papers by "Practicus." This was soon followed by another,
varied by the new chemical nomenclature.

The subject is far from being treated exhaustively in either of these
works, so that I trust the reader will find in the following pages a
fund of information, both in the repertory of recipes and the methods of
manipulation.

To Chertier belongs the great improvement in colours. He was, as I was
informed by the late Mr. Southby, who knew him personally, and who
derived much information from him while in Paris, a retired French
Artillery Officer, who made colours "his study and theme." His "New
Researches," published in 1856, nearly thirty years after his first
pamphlet, is an excellent work, that leaves little to be desired in the
way of colours. Gunpowder attracted but little of his attention.

Tessier, of Paris, has written, since, his "Pyrotechnic Chemistry," and
a new edition of the "Firework-Maker," by Hutstein and Websky, was
published three or four years ago at Breslau.

I have neglected none of these sources of information, but do not know
that I have been able to learn much from them with which I was not
previously acquainted.

Gibbon's "Artillerist's Manual," and Benton's "Ordnance and Gunnery,"
published at New York, have furnished me with a hint or two; also Owen's
"Practice of Modern Artillery," Scoffern's "Projectile Weapons of War,"
and his "New Resources of Warfare;" but as all these works are on
Military Pyrotechny, they have not been available to any great extent. I
mention their names, that anyone desirous of a knowledge of Rockets and
Shells, as instruments of destruction, may know the books from which to
gain the information.

It is possible that, as Chemistry advances, a few new substances may be
discovered; meanwhile, nearly every shade of colour may already be
produced.

The extensive use of these colours, from their beauty and variety, for
stars and lancework, has very materially altered the class of fireworks,
and necessitates the employment of an enormous quantity of quick-match.
The preparation of this is one of the most disagreeable parts of
Pyrotechny, besides demanding a great amount of manipulative skill. Most
amateurs are deterred from attempting to manufacture it, and so have to
content themselves with only the simplest pieces.

I have, therefore, set myself sedulously to work to devise a different
plan of preparing it; and have succeeded--not till after many years,
however, and numerous failures, simple as it now seems--in discovering a
process of producing a splendid and perfect match, that leaves nothing
to be desired; which is easy and expeditious, and does not even soil the
hands. Amateurs will now find no trouble in making any pieces they may
desire.

Dangerous chemicals, that might produce spontaneous combustion, have
been rigidly excluded; the fullest information throughout has been
furnished for preparing the mixtures with safety; the mode of projecting
balloons, and the manner of constructing steelyard scales, and every
kind of tool used in the art, has been added; and no pains have been
spared to make the work as complete and comprehensive as possible.

In conclusion, I may say that I have had thirty-five years' experience;
and there is nothing I have not tried repeatedly: the reader may,
therefore, place the greatest confidence in everything recommended. He
has only to imitate to succeed.

T. K.




_CONTENTS._


                                                                 PAGE

 ROMAN CANDLES:
     To Make a 5/8 Roman Candle                                     1
     To Make a Roman Candle Star                                    5
     To Damp Stars                                                  7
     To Make Lac Solution                                           9
     To Make Wax Solution                                          10
     To Make Stearine Solution                                     10
     To Make Gum Solution                                          11
     To Make Dextrine Solution                                     11
     To Make Paste                                                 13
     Roman Candle Scoops                                           15
     To Charge Roman Candle Cases                                  19
     To Make Touchpaper                                            23
     To Make Slowmatch                                             24
     To Make Quickmatch                                            24
     A New Method                                                  26

 ROCKETS:
     To Make a 6/8 Rocket                                          34
     To Charge Rocket Cases                                        39
     Rocket Stars                                                  53
     To Make Cut Stars                                             54
     Dry Pill-box Stars                                            54
     To Fill the Boxes with Dry Colour                             56
     Another Way                                                   56
     Bottomless Pill-boxes                                         57
     Enveloped Stars                                               58
     Rocket Heads                                                  59

 WHEEL AND FIXED CASES                                             66

 GERBES                                                            69

 FLOWER POTS                                                       72

 PORT FIRES AND SHELL FUSES                                        73

 TOURBILLIONS:
     To Make a Tourbillion                                         75

 SAXONS                                                            81

 FIVE POINTED STARS                                                83

 SQUIBS                                                            84

 SERPENTS                                                          90

 PINWHEELS                                                         91

 CRACKERS:
     To Make a Cracker                                             98
     Leader Pipes                                                 103

 MAROONS:
     To Make a Maroon                                             105
     Another Method                                               106

 GOLD AND SILVER RAINS                                            107

 PEACOCK'S PLUMES                                                 108

 SAUCISSONS                                                       109

 PEARL STREAMERS                                                  111

 BLUE LIGHTS AND STAR CANDLES, OR STAR LIGHTS                     111

 PRINCE OF WALES' FEATHERS                                        112

 LANCES:
     To Make a Lance                                              112
     To Form a Device, or Design                                  115
     To Preserve Steel Filings, or Cast-iron Borings              116

 SHELLS:
     To Make the Shells                                           119

 CYLINDRICAL SHELLS                                               125

 ASTEROID ROCKETS                                                 131

 COMPOUND FIREWORKS:                                              135
     To Fire a Girandole of 100 Rockets at once                   153

 TOOLS                                                            154

 TO CONSTRUCT A STEELYARD SCALE                                   155

 MONTGOLFIER BALLOONS:
     To Cut the Gores                                             161
     To Join the Halves Together                                  161
     To Paste Two Gores Together                                  161
     To Paste the Pairs Together                                  162
     To Make the Last Joining                                     162
     To Wire the Balloon                                          163

 WINGED ROCKETS:
     To Make Winged Rockets                                       168
     To Construct a Slot-Tube, or Rocket-Guide                    170

 LIST OF PRICES                                                   172

 CONCLUDING REMARKS                                               173

 FUSES:
     Roman Candle                                                 185
     Rocket                                                       185
     Bursting Fire                                                185
     Starting Fire                                                185
     Wheel and Fixed Case                                         186
     Squib and Serpent                                            186
     Pinwheel                                                     186
     Saxon                                                        187
     Five-Pointed Star                                            187
     Spur-Fire, for Flower-Pots and Star-Candles                  187
     Tourbillion                                                  187
     Bengal Light                                                 188
     Blue Light                                                   188
     Wasp Light                                                   188
     Portfire                                                     188
     Shell Fuse                                                   188
     Gerbe                                                        188
     Tailed, Streamer, or Comet Stars, for Rockets, Shells,
       and Roman Candles                                          189
     Oiled Tailed Stars for Rockets and Shells                    189
     Steel Stars for Rockets and Shells                           190
     Pearl Streamer                                               190
     Gold Rain                                                    190
     Silver Rain                                                  191
     White or Bright Stars and Lances                             191
     Sugar Blues for Stars and Lances                             191
     Blue Stars and Lances without Sugar                          192
     Crimson and Scarlet Stars and Lances                         193
     Green or Emerald Stars and Lances                            194
     Deep and Pale Yellow Stars and Lances                        195
     Mauve and Lilac Stars and Lances                             196
     Purple and Violet Stars and Lances                           196
     Magnesium Colours for Stars and Lances                       197
     Slow Fires, to be Heaped upon a Tile in the shape
       of a Cone, and Lit at the Top                              197




THE PYROTECHNIST'S TREASURY.




_ROMAN CANDLES._


TO MAKE A 5/8 ROMAN CANDLE.

Procure a straight piece of brass tube, 6/8 of an inch external
diameter, and 16-1/2 inches long. Saw or file off a piece, 1-1/2 inch
long, fig. 1. This is for the star former, and is drawn of the correct
size.

In the other piece, of 15 inches, fix a handle, as shown, in diminutive,
in fig. 7. This is for the case former. It should be filed smooth at the
end.

Take another piece of brass tube (4-1/2)/8 or 9/16 of an inch external
diameter, and about 16-1/2 inches long. In this also fix a handle, or
fix it into a handle, fig. 4. Invert it, and set it upright in a
flower-pot, filled with sand or loose mould. Melt some lead in a ladle,
and pour it slowly into the tube, leaving room for the air to escape up
the side, till it is full. If the lead is poured in rapidly, the
confined air, expanding, jerks the metal up, and may cause serious
injury. A pound or more of lead will be required. When cold, drive the
end of the lead in with a hammer, and file it smooth. This is for a
rammer.

Take a piece of deal, fig. 6, about 12 inches long, 6 broad, and 3/4
thick; and, on the top, screw a handle, like one on a copper-lid, or
black-lead brush. This is for a rolling-board. An iron door-handle would
serve, and may be obtained at any ironmonger's, for about 2_d._ or 3_d._
A wooden one, however, about an inch thick, not cylindrical, but
slightly flat, and rounded at the edges, is preferable, as it gives more
purchase for the hand.

Cut a piece of tin, or zinc, or thin board, into the shape of fig. 8, in
which the distance between the arms a and b, across the dotted line,
shall be 7/8 of an inch. This is for a gauge, with which to measure the
external diameter of the case. Write upon it, "7/8 space."

Procure some 60 lb., 70 lb., or 84 lb. imperial brown paper: the size of
a sheet will be 29 inches by 22-1/2. Cut a sheet into 4 equal parts,
each 14-1/2 by 11-1/4: paste the 4 pieces on one side, and lay them one
on another, with the pasted face upwards, putting the fourth piece with
the pasted side downwards, upon the pasted side of the third piece. Turn
them over: take off the now top piece, and lay it flat on the near edge
of a table, pasted side upwards. Take the former, fig. 7, and paste the
tube all over. Lay it along the edge of the paper, bend the paper over
with the fingers of both hands, and roll it tightly up, until the
external diameter of the case about fits the gauge, fig. 8. If the paper
should be too long, of course a piece must be cut off; if it should not
be long enough, more must be added, taking care to bind in the second
piece with 3 or 4 inches of the first piece; for if the whole of the
first piece be rolled up before beginning the second, the latter, when
dry, will probably slip off, and spoil the case. The case having been
rolled up, take the handle of the former in the left hand, lay the case
flat on the near side of the table, take the rolling-board, fig. 6, in
the right hand, press the front part of it on the case, and drive it
forwards 5 or 6 times, like a jack-plane, letting the handle of the
former slip round in the left hand. This will tighten the case, and
render it, when dry, as hard as a book-cover.

The former must always be pasted, before rolling a case, to prevent its
sticking. It should, likewise, be wiped clean with a damp sponge, before
being laid aside. Brass tubes keep clean a much longer time if
lacquered. To lacquer them, clean them with very fine glass-paper; make
them hot by the fire, till you can just bear them on the back of the
hand; then, with a camel's-hair pencil, wash them over with thin lac
solution. The cases may be either 14-1/2 or 11-1/4 inches long; but
11-1/4 is the best, for when the cases are too long, the fuse, as it
approaches the bottom, is apt, if slow, to smoke; if fierce, to set the
top of the case in a flame. If the learner decides upon 11-1/4 inches,
the former and rammer may each be 2 or 3 inches shorter.

After the first case has been rolled up to fit the gauge, it may be
unrolled, and the paper measured. Future pieces of the same quire of
paper can then be cut of the right size at once, so that the case will
fit the gauge without further trouble.

A large slab of slate is convenient for rolling upon; but a smoothly
planed board will answer every purpose.

When a number of cases are finished, hitch a piece of flax two or three
times round each of them, and hang them up to dry, in a place free from
draught, that they may not warp.

Flax is sold in balls; the thick yellow, at 2_d._, is the best. It is
named, indifferently, flax, or hemp. It is much used by shoe-makers; and
is sold at the grindery, or leather shops. Two or three thicknesses of
this, waxed, or drawn through the hand with a little paste, is very
convenient for passing round the necks of small choked cases, tying
cases on wheels, &c.


TO MAKE A ROMAN CANDLE STAR.

Take the former, fig. 1, which, as said before, is 1-1/2 inch long; have
a cylindrical piece of turned wood, box, beech, or mahogany, fig. 2,
about 2 inches long, and of a diameter to just fit easily into fig. 1.
At a point a, at the distance of about 7/8 of an inch from the end d,
with a bradawl, or very small gimlet, or nosebit, make a hole, and drive
in a piece of brass wire, to project just so much as to prevent the
tube slipping over it. A piece of a brass rivet, such as used by
shoe-makers, is convenient for the purpose. The part with the head on
is best; a quarter of an inch length will be sufficient, filed or cut
off with the nippers. It is evident that upon inserting fig. 2 into the
tube fig. 1, a vacant space of 5/8 of an inch will be left at the
bottom. Fig. 3 is a piece of turned wood, or, better still, of turned
brass, exactly like fig. 2 without the side-pin a. Now to pump a star,
insert fig. 2 in fig. 1; press the tube into damped composition, turn it
round, and withdraw it. Rest the tube on a flat surface, insert fig. 3,
and give it two or three taps with a small mallet, like fig. 26. A
convenient size for the mallet is 1-1/2 inch square, 3 inches long, with
a turned handle. The mallet is best made of beech or mahogany. The
slight malleting consolidates the star, and prevents it from getting
broken in charging; it will compress it to about (4-1/2)/8 or 9/16 of an
inch in height. Push it out and set it by to dry.

Stars are best made in summer, and dried in the sunshine; when dry they
should be put into clean pickle-bottles, furnished with tight-fitting
bungs. A piece of wash-leather passed over the bottom of the bung,
gathered up round the sides, and tied at the top like a choke, makes a
good stopper. Shot, shaken up in bottles, with water, soon cleans them.


TO DAMP STARS.

Stars containing nitrate of strontian must be damped, either with lac
solution, or wax solution; anything containing water destroys the
colour. Nitre stars may be damped with gum water, dextrine solution, or
thin starch. Most other stars with either of the solutions. Crimsons and
greens _will_ mix with boiled linseed oil, but they cannot then be
matched, as oil renders meal-powder almost uninflammable. With all
stars, not a drop more of the solution should be used than is sufficient
to make the composition bind; and it is advisable not to damp more than
half an ounce at a time; this is particularly the case in using the lac
solution, as it dries rapidly; and if a large quantity of composition is
damped, and gets dry, and has to be damped over and over again, it
becomes clogged with the shellac, and the colour is deteriorated. If it
should get dry, and require a second damping, it is best to use pure
spirit only, the second time.

Before mixing compositions, every article should be as fine as wheaten
flour, and perfectly dry. Nitrate of strontian, if purchased in the
lump, should be set over the fire, in a pipkin; it will soon begin to
boil in its water of crystallization; it must be kept stirred with a
piece of wood, till the water is evaporated, and a fine dry powder left.
A pound of crystals will yield about 11 ounces of dry powder, which
should be immediately bottled. Even then, if used in damp weather, it is
best dried again, and mixed with the other ingredients while warm. This
second drying may be in a 6-inch circular frying-pan.

Articles, separately, may be reduced to powder, with the pestle, in a
mortar. See that it is wiped clean every time, as there is danger of
ignition with chlorates and sulphurets. When the articles are to be
mixed, they may be put into the mortar, and stirred together with a
small sash-tool. A 3/8 inch is a convenient size. The mixture must then
be put into a sieve, and shaken in the usual way; or it may be brushed
through with the sash-tool. Return it to the sieve, and brush or shake
through again. As it lies in a heap, level or smooth it with the blade
of a table knife, or any straight-edge; if thoroughly mixed it will
present a uniform colour; if it appears darker in one part than in
another, it must be sifted again. A sieve with a top and receiver is
very desirable, as nearly all mixtures are either black or poisonous;
the dust from star mixtures is very injurious to the lungs. If a top and
receiver cannot be readily purchased, both may easily be constructed out
of a sheet of millboard, fastened with a bradawl and waxed yellow flax,
and neatly covered with paper.

Mixtures may be damped on a Dutch-tile, a marble slab, or a slate
without a frame. They may be stirred about with a dessert knife, pressed
flat, and chopped, or minced as it were, and again pressed flat.


TO MAKE LAC SOLUTION.

Put 1/2 an ounce of flake shellac into a tin pot, and pour upon it a
quarter of a pint, or 5 ounces of methylated spirit; or, preferably, a
like quantity of wood naphtha. Let it stand for about a day, stirring
it occasionally till dissolved. Then half fill a basin with boiling
water; set the tin containing the lac, in it, and leave it till it boils
and curdles. If the water does not remain hot long enough to make it
boil, set it in a second basin of boiling water. As soon as it has
curdled, remove it; and when cold, pour it into a vial, and cork it.
Spirit must never be boiled over a fire, nor near one, as the vapour
might inflame. Keep the pot, therefore, while in the hot water, at a
distance from a fire, or flame of a lamp or candle.


TO MAKE WAX SOLUTION.

Put into a vial 1/2 an ounce of white wax, (bleached bees' wax), pour
upon it 5 ounces of mineral naphtha, (coal or gas tar naphtha), keep it
tightly corked.


TO MAKE STEARINE SOLUTION.

Dissolve a piece of composite candle in mineral naphtha, in the same
way. Mineral naphtha must not be used near a candle or fire, as it gives
off an inflammable vapour, at less than 100° Fahrenheit.


TO MAKE GUM SOLUTION.

There is no better way of preparing this than simply to put cold water
upon gum arabic, and let it stand till dissolved. If for sticking
purposes, as much water as will just cover the gum will be sufficient;
but, for making quickmatch, 1 ounce or 1-1/4 ounce of gum to a pint of
water. If required in a hurry, put the gum into _cold_ water, in a
pipkin, or tin saucepan, set it on the fire, make it boil, and keep
stirring till dissolved. When cold, bottle, and cork it.


TO MAKE DEXTRINE SOLUTION.

Take half an ounce of dextrine, and 5 ounces, or a quarter of a pint of
cold water, put the dextrine into a cup or basin, add a little of the
water, and mix it well with a teaspoon, rubbing it till all is
dissolved; then add the remainder of the water, stir well together a
second time, pour it into a vial, and cork for use. Dextrine, wetted to
the consistency of honey, may be used instead of thick gum-arabic water,
for pasting. For this purpose it is advisable to keep either in a
wide-mouthed bottle, and to set the bottle in a gallipot containing a
little water; the brush, a camel's-hair pencil, or very small sash-tool
with 1/3 of the bristles cut away on each side, to render it flat, can
then be kept in the water, when not in use; this will prevent it, on the
one hand, from becoming dry and hard; and, on the other, from getting
clogged and swollen. It can be squeezed between the thumb and fingers,
when wanted for use. The flat gum brushes now sold, bound with tin, are
not pleasant to use, as the tin oxidises, and turns of a disagreeable
brown colour. If there is a difficulty in obtaining a graduated water
measure, one sufficiently correct for pyrotechnic purposes may be made
with a vial. Paste a narrow strip of paper up the outside of the vial,
weigh 4 ounces of water in a cup, in the scales: pour it into the vial,
mark the height, and divide it into 4 equal parts, for ounces; of
course, it can be graduated into half and quarter ounces, and increased,
if large enough, to 5 or more ounces. A gallon of distilled water weighs
exactly 10 pounds. Consequently, a pint of pure water weighs a pound
and a quarter. This is also near enough for spirit, though, of course,
spirit is a trifle lighter. Doctors' vials are often marked with ounce
divisions.


TO MAKE PASTE.

Paste is most economically made in a zinc pot, which may be 4 inches
deep, and 3-1/2 inches diameter. Any zinc worker will make one to order
for about 6_d._ Put into it 2 ounces of wheaten flour, add a little cold
water, rub the two together with a spoon till smooth and free from
lumps; pour in more water till the pot is full within about an inch; set
the pot in half a saucepanful of water, put it on the fire; make the
water boil, and keep it and the paste boiling for 4 or 5 minutes,
stirring the paste the while. Remove it from the fire, and set it by to
cool. The paste is to remain in the zinc pot, in which it will keep good
for a length of time, and beautifully white.

Some recommend alum in paste, I think it best avoided, especially in
cases intended to receive coloured fires. Alum is a double salt, a
sulphate of alumina and potassa; it has an acid reaction; and, coming
in contact with chlorate of potash and sulphur, may cause spontaneous
combustion. A drop of sulphuric acid instantly ignites stars containing
them. At theatres, the clown sometimes fires a cannon, with what appears
to be a red hot poker; but which, in reality, is only a piece of wood,
painted red. A mixture is made of chlorate of potash and sulphur, or
sugar, a glass bead is filled with sulphuric acid, and the hole stopped
up with wax. This is laid in the mixture, and when it is struck with the
poker, the liquid escapes, and inflames the potash and sulphur. Sulphate
of copper is a particularly dangerous salt, and must never be used, as
it is almost certain to cause spontaneous combustion. Chertier, to whom
pyrotechny otherwise owes so much, introduced an empirical preparation,
by dissolving sulphate of copper in water, together with chlorate of
potash, drying it, and wetting it with ammonia: but this, however dried,
when again wetted, turns litmus paper red. Practicus has named it
Chertier's copper. I discommend its use.

Two paste brushes will be sufficient for an amateur, sash-tools, one
about an inch diameter, the other smaller for light purposes. Let them
stand in the paste. If they get dry, the bristles fall out. For
convenience, one may be kept in the paste, and one in water.

Dry clay, powdered and sifted as fine as possible, is used for plugging,
or stopping up the bottoms of cases. I have, for some time, discontinued
its use, and employ plaster of paris in preference. Directions will be
given for each, so that the learner can adopt which he pleases: but
plaster is infinitely preferable. It is an American improvement.


ROMAN CANDLE SCOOPS.

No species of fireworks require greater care in their construction than
roman candles. In the first place the stars must be fierce, that they
may light thoroughly: next, they must not be driven out with too great
velocity. For this purpose the blowing-powder must be carefully
adjusted. The stars, also, must be of so easy a fit that when put into
the case they may fall to the proper depth of their own accord. If they
require pushing, they are too tight, and will probably be blown out
blind. When made as directed they will, necessarily, be of an easy fit,
as they will be of the inner diameter of the brass tube, while the bore
of the case is equal to its external diameter.

To regulate the blowing powder, prepare a number of little scoops, like
fig. 5, which is about the right size for the bottom star. They are
formed of pieces of tin, zinc, or copper. Cut a long strip of tin, 1/2
an inch broad; cut this across into 7 pieces, of the following lengths,
1-5/8, 1-6/8, 1-7/8, 2, 2-1/8, 2-3/8 and 4 inches. Round off the
corners. Take a piece of brass wire, or stair-rod, about 1/4 inch
diameter, and with the wooden mallet, before mentioned, fig. 26, bend
each of the pieces round the rod into a half cylinder, or gutter. Take
up the smallest, and hold 5/8 of an inch of the end of the stair-rod in
the end of the semicylinder, to keep it open; put the other part from a
to b, fig. 5, in a vice, and pinch it up; it will assume the form
represented; the bowl part will be 5/8 long, and the handle 1 inch long.
Make the bowl of the next scoop 6/8 of an inch long, the next 7/8, and
so on; the handle will always be 1 inch long. The last, for the top
star, will have a bowl of 3 inches. The smallest scoop ought to hold as
much grain powder as will weigh about 1/12 of the star; but to have the
scoops accurate, it will be necessary to charge a roman candle, fire it,
and observe whether the stars go a uniform height. For measuring the
interval fuse, or fuse between the top of one star and the bottom of the
next, a large scoop of the size of fig. 10 will be required. The tin may
be an inch broad, and the bowl part 2-1/2 inches long, bent round the
rammer, fig. 4. To adjust it, take a roman candle case, fit it on the
foot, fig. 9, which is a piece of wood, or brass, turned with a tenon to
fit tight in the bottom of the case. Fill the scoop, and strike it
level, with a straight-edge; empty it into the case, rest the foot on a
flat surface; insert the rammer, fig. 4, and jolt it up and down, a
dozen times, or more, lifting it about 1/2 an inch at a time; put in
another scoopful, and jolt it in like manner. If the 2 scoopfuls, thus
compressed, fill an inch of the case, the scoop will be correct. If more
or less, the scoop must be shortened, or lengthened, accordingly.

A piece of writing-paper may be pasted and wound twice round the handle
of each scoop, as from a to b, fig. 4. One dot can be put upon the
scoop, for the first, or bottom, star; two dots, for the second scoop,
&c., or any memorandum can be written upon them, for future guidance.
Should they get soiled, they may be cleaned with a soaped damp piece of
sponge.

Gunpowder, for fireworks, is used in two forms; meal-powder, and
grain-powder. Meal-powder is a fine black dust, and is employed in all
cases of mixing. Grain-powder is of three kinds, F, FF, and FFF, fine,
double fine, and treble fine. FFF is best for crackers, simply because
it runs rapidly down the pipes: for driving stars, shells, &c., F will
be sufficient; but FFF may be employed: FF need not be purchased. All
kinds of powder may be obtained of Pinnell, 214, Whitechapel Road. If,
in any place, there should be a difficulty in obtaining meal-powder, F
grain-powder may be crushed in a leather bag, by laying the bag on a
hard surface, and beating it with a hammer. The leather should be of the
same kind as shoes are made of.


TO CHARGE ROMAN CANDLE CASES.

Pour some F grain-powder into a wooden bowl, or platter, represented by
fig. 11. Round the edge lay the little blowing-powder scoops, side by
side, beginning with the smallest at a, the next at b, and so on to g.
Put some roman candle fuse into a large tin scoop, made to stand on a
flat bottom, like fig. 12, the same, in shape, as used by tea-dealers;
and, on the right-hand of it, lay the charging-fuse scoop, fig. 10. If
the roman candle is to contain different-coloured stars, set seven in a
row, in the order desired. When the cases are intended to be fired in
threes or fours, the stars in one may be all blue, in another crimson,
in another green, in another white. Fit the foot, fig. 9, in the bottom
of the case, put in a scoopful of clay, insert the rammer, fig. 4, and
jolt it till the clay is well compressed. The clay should fill 1/2 an
inch. This being done, invert it, and shake out any little dust that may
remain. Put in the little scoopful a, of F grain-powder; then lay the
scoop at A. Now put in a star. As previously stated it ought to fall of
its own accord; but make sure that it has reached the blowing-powder,
by putting in the rammer. Having ascertained this, put in a scoop of
fuse, fig. 10; lay the scoop on the left of fig. 12; insert the rammer
and jolt it; put in another scoop of fuse, fig. 10; lay the scoop on the
right of fig. 12; insert the rammer and jolt it, as before. Then proceed
with the scoop b of grain-powder, and lay it at B, and so on, till the
case is filled. The fuse on the top star is best driven in with a short
solid rammer and mallet, as it is difficult to jolt the long rammer in
so small a space. The last 1/8 of an inch, near the mouth of the case,
should be fine meal-powder, as it binds better than the roman-candle
fuse, and also blows off the leader pipe.

The blowing-powder scoops, having been laid at A, B, &c., all that is
required is to turn the bowl or platter, a little round to the left, and
they will come in rotation, ready for the next case. Also, by putting
the scoop, fig. 10, alternately to the left and right of the scoop, fig.
12, it will always be known whether the proper quantity of fuse has been
put in.

Coloured stars, from their fierceness, have a tendency to burn in the
cases. This defect may be remedied by putting upon each star a small
scoopful of Starting Fire, No. 1, before putting in the interval fuse;
as much as will fill round the sides of the star. This composition is
somewhat fiercer than would suit for the regular fuse, so catches the
blowing-powder sooner.

A roman candle is well charged when the stars isochronise, or come out
at equal intervals of time: they should, also, theoretically, ascend to
equal heights; but, with coloured stars, this cannot be perfectly
insured, as some shrink more than others in drying, and, of course, fit
more loosely; some are heavier, some fiercer than others.

The interval fuse must always be driven in at twice, never at once. Each
star, with its blowing-powder and fuse, occupies about an inch and a
half; perhaps a trifle more.

Instead of driving in clay at the bottom, plaster of paris may be used,
and then the foot, fig. 9, will not be required. Have some plaster of
paris in a wide-mouthed bottle; a glass of cold water with a salt-spoon
in it; and a number of pieces of paper, about 4 inches square. Put a
small quantity of the plaster on one of the pieces of paper; indent the
middle with the finger; put to it a little water, and work it up with a
dessert-knife. Just as it gets to the consistency of mortar, and is
about to set, mould it with the fingers, to the shape of a cork; push it
into the end of the case; rest the case on a flat surface; insert the
rammer, and give it two or three slight jolts; turn it round a few
times, and withdraw it. If the plaster sticks to the end of the rammer,
it shows, either that you have used the plaster too wet, or have not
turned the rammer round a sufficient number of times.

No more plaster must be mixed at a time than will suffice for one case.
When plaster has once set, it cannot be mixed up a second time;
therefore take a fresh piece of paper, and let the knife be cleaned
every time. It is advisable to have two dessert-knives, then one can be
used with which to scrape the other. As much plaster should be used as
will fill the case up about 1/2 an inch. They must be set by to dry;
their not requiring the use of the foot will be found a great
convenience.

Roman candles are usually made from 3/8 to 6/8; but 5/8 is a very
satisfactory size. If a roman candle is intended to be fired singly,
twist a piece of touchpaper round the mouth. If the cases are intended
to be fired in threes, fours, &c., to form a bouquet, or to be placed
round a mine, jack-in-the-box, or devil-among-the-tailors, omit the
touchpaper, and envelope the case in double crown, made to project an
inch beyond the mouth, to receive the leader, or quickmatch.

A steel-pen inserted, nib backwards, in the end of a small paper tube,
rolled round the end of a penholder, makes a neat little scoop. It may
be fastened in with a little plaster of paris. A scoop may also be made
with a quill.

Cracks in wooden bowls may be stopped with the same material; and, if
painted over with linseed oil, after getting dry, will remain waterproof
for a long time. A screw may be made to hold in brickwork, by drilling a
hole in the brick, and pushing in the screw, covered with plaster.


TO MAKE TOUCHPAPER.

Dissolve 1/2 an ounce of nitre in 1/2 a pint of hot water. Procure some
12 lb. double crown blue; cut each sheet into four equal parts, 15 by
10. Lay them smooth upon each other, and, with a sash-tool dipped into
the nitre solution, wash them over on one side, and hang them up to dry.


TO MAKE SLOWMATCH.

Dissolve 1 dram of nitrate of lead in 1/2 an ounce of boiling water. Cut
a sheet of blotting paper into six equal parts, and wet them on both
sides, with a sash-tool, with the solution. When dry, paste a piece all
over, and upon it smoothly press another piece; upon this, pasted, put a
third piece; and so on, till all the six form a stiff board. Lay
them under a heavy weight; and, when dry, with a sharp knife and
straight-edge, cut the whole into strips 1/4 of an inch broad. Four
inches will burn about a quarter of an hour. Narrow tape, boiled in the
solution, makes excellent slowmatch.


TO MAKE QUICKMATCH.

Put into a pan 1 lb. of grain-powder, or meal-powder; pour upon it some
thin hot starch, and stir it well about, breaking all lumps, till the
mixture is of the consistency of paint. Procure some lamp-cotton, such
as forms the wicks of candles. It will probably consist of sixteen or
twenty-four strands. Divide it carefully into lengths of eight strands.
This is not so easy a task as might appear. The best way is to act the
reverse of a man spinning string. Divide the end of the cotton, say of
sixteen strands, into two of eight each; fasten them to two screw-hooks,
a few inches apart. Take one in each hand, and walk backwards, gently
pulling them apart, and when they catch, untwist them: with care they
will separate without breaking or entangling. Drop the end of one of the
pieces into the pan; and, as it keeps falling, coil it round and round
in the mixture, and press it down with an iron spoon, until as much is
pressed in as the quantity can saturate. Be very particular that it is
thoroughly soaked. Have ready a wooden frame, fig. 13, of deal,
resembling a swing looking-glass, with the glass taken out. It may be 5
feet by 4. The frame is to be supported on pivots between two uprights.
Fix a nail or hook at the left-hand corner of the frame, and tie the
end of the cotton to it which has been hanging outside the pan. Get a
person to slowly turn the frame and hold it steady. Take hold of the
cotton in the right hand, shut the hand, and allow the cotton to slip
gradually and slowly through it, as the frame is turned; squeeze it very
gently, so as to allow it to come out well coated, and contrive to make
it as round as possible. When all the cotton is wound upon the frame,
spread some sheets of paper--old newspapers--on the floor; at each
corner place a brick; lay the four corners of the frame upon the four
bricks; sift dry meal-powder all over the match, turn it over and sift
over the other side. Prop the frame against the wall, and leave it to
dry. One ounce of white starch will be sufficient for a pint and a half
of water. Rub the starch up smooth with a little of the water, then add
the rest, and boil it.


A NEW METHOD.

Put into a gallipot, or basin, some hot starch, made as before directed,
or some cold gum-water, or cold dextrine solution; and with a small
stencil-brush, or a 3/8 sash-tool, cut across the middle to make the
bristles short and stubby, stir in some meal-powder, till it is well
mixed and looks like black paint. To avoid repetition, it will be
convenient to refer to this under the name of Meal-paste. Take two
towel-horses, fig. 14, and set them parallel 5, 10, or 20 feet apart. In
the top rail of each, drive four nails 1/2 an inch asunder. Fix the dry
cotton to the nail a, carry it across to the opposite nail b, pass it
round the second nail c, bring it to the opposite second nail, and so
on, till the cotton lies in four parallel lines, like the strings of a
harp placed horizontally. Hitch the cotton, without cutting it, to the
hook of the weight, fig. 15. This weight is made by taking a piece of
brass tube, 1 inch diameter, and 4 inches long. Stop one end with a
bung, fill it with melted lead; and before it sets push in a lucifer
match, having previously cut off the priming. As soon as the lead is
cold, pull out the match, which having been partially burnt smaller,
will come out easily, and in the hole left by it screw a cup-hook, as
drawn. Invert the weight, pick out the bung, and fill its place with
more melted lead. Now procure two pieces of planed deal board; one 4
inches square, the other 6 inches square. With the left hand hold the
smaller piece close underneath the cotton; and with the sash-tool or
stencil-brush, work the meal-paste _well into the fibres of the
threads_, pressing the cotton on the board till it is thoroughly soaked,
and rolling it over, laterally, to make it as round and smooth as
possible. It is best to begin on the left, and work towards the right.
If the wetting slackens the threads, pull them tight. Now brush some
meal-powder through a fine sieve, to free it from lumps; put a
tablespoonful or two upon the larger board; hold it close under the four
threads, as the other, with the left hand, and move it laterally
forwards and backwards, and down the whole length, at the same time
brushing the meal over the threads, with a soft, dry, sash-tool, till
they are smothered, and giving them an occasional jar to shake off the
superfluous meal. By a little practice they may be made as smooth and as
round as a piece of wire. Leave the weight hanging to them till they are
dry. Instead of four nails on each rail, a dozen may be put; and if the
towel-horses are set 12 yards apart, 144 yards may be soon made. In this
case, three or four heavier weights would be required. These
contrivances, however, are by no means necessary for an amateur; four
hooks or nails opposite four others, anyhow supported, will be
sufficient; and six or eight feet apart is a good distance. A small
quantity may thus be made one day, and a small quantity another; and for
this purpose it is best to use gum-water, as it is always ready, and a
little can be added to the dry left the day before, and a little fresh
meal stirred in. Three or four threads of white darning-cotton, which is
of two twists, make very good match; knitting or crochet cotton, which
is of three twists, produces, alone, excellent match; two or three
pieces of the first, or two of the latter, put into a leader pipe, side
by side, blow through with a violent report. Match may also be made of
the very narrowest white tape, 3/16 of an inch broad; this, from its
flatness, is peculiarly suited for enveloped stars. For general
purposes, however, lamp cotton is decidedly the best, as it is most
loosely twisted, and therefore the most absorbent. If match is liable
to be exposed to damp, it should be cased in thick leaders, and be
prepared with starch; in other respects, nothing can surpass gum-water.
Of course iron pound-weights, with a ring in them, will answer the
purpose, or an iron pestle tied to the cotton, or anything heavy; but
the kind I have advised are most convenient. They will weigh about a
pound and a quarter each. The weight may hang over a chair-back.

Match, to be perfect, ought, when cut across, to look black throughout;
it should, also, be stiff, straight, and round; but, to test it, cut off
about 10 inches; put one end of this into a leader pipe, so that 5
inches will be in the pipe, and 5 out. Hold the end of the leader with a
pair of tongs, or lay it on the ground; light the naked end. If the
match is good it will burn gradually, though swiftly, till it gets to
the pipe; it will then blow through with a bang. The nearer the leader
pipe fits the match the better, only it ought to be large enough to
allow it to go easily in, without force: if laid in a roman candle case
it would hardly puff: the smaller and smaller the tube becomes the
louder and louder the report: the increase of power being in the
inverse ratio of the diminution of space. A train of gunpowder laid in
the open air, or confined in a tube, comports itself in the same way, as
is well known. Match, when dry, should be kept straight; for, if it gets
broken, it acts like a cracker, snapping at every break.

A piece of zinc rainwater pipe, of suitable length, furnished with a
bottom and lid, or a couple of bungs, is convenient for keeping it in;
but a far better contrivance is a deal box, 5 feet long, 3 inches deep,
and 3 broad, made of 1/2-inch pine. The lid of this box can be readily
furnished with three or five hinges, like a piano, only made with string
instead of brass. Take two pieces of string, fig. 57, and tie them in a
knot near the end, as at k. At x, fig. 58, make a bradawl hole through
the back of the box, near the top, and push the strings through it; make
another hole through the lid, put the string through it, and tie in a
knot on the top, as at z: and so with the other four. This will render
the explanation easier to understand; but, practically, a single piece
of thicker string is best, if you can manage to tie the second knot in
the exact spot you wish. The knots must not be too close to each other,
as the lid requires a little play. For safety, the box ought to be
furnished with a lock.




_ROCKETS._


Rockets are charged in choked cases, on a spindle, to leave a hollow up
the middle, through which the fire may be communicated to nearly the
whole of the composition at once: this causes the sudden generation of
an enormous quantity of elastic vapour, which, being unable to escape
instantly through the contracted aperture left for its exit, exerts its
pressure in the contrary direction, and hurries the rocket forward. A
stick, attached to it, guides it, like the rudder of a vessel, or tail
of a bird, or fish; while its weight and leverage keep the centre of
gravity a little below the case, and prevent the rocket from pitching
over. Its manufacture, therefore, from the commencement of cutting the
paper for the case, to its finish of fitting on the stick, requires an
accurate adjustment of all its parts. Disregarding the trade names of
pound, ounce, &c., which, now that moulds are dispensed with, are
useful only for enabling the makers, from tradition, to understand each
other; the internal diameter, instead of the external, as formerly, may
be selected, from which to compute the relative measures. Taking the
bore of the case as unity, the proportions will be as follow:--

 1 Internal diameter of case.
 1-1/2 External diameter.
 8 Length of case.
 6 Length of spindle.
 3/5 Bottom diameter of spindle.
 64 Length of stick.
 1/2 by 1/2 Thickness and breadth of stick.

These proportions are most readily calculated by taking the diameter in
eighths of an inch. Selecting, for instance, a 6/8 rocket, we have, 6/8,
inner diameter; half as much again, 9/8, outer diameter.

Taking the numerator as inches: 6 inches, length of case; 3/4 of this,
or, which is the same, 1/2 the outer diameter, as inches, 4-1/2 inches,
length of spindle; putting 20 for the denominator, instead of 8 (8 being
2/5 of 20), 6/20 of an inch, bottom diameter of spindle; 6 × 8,
(numerator multiplied by denominator) = 48 inches, length of stick; 3/8
by 3/8, size of stick.

The following table exhibits the usual sizes in inches.

 Key to Column Labels:

     A: Name of Rocket.
     B: Inner Diameter.
     C: Outer Diameter.
     D: Length of Case.
     E: Length of Spindle.
     F: Bottom Diameter of Spindle.
     G: Length of Stick.
     H: Size of Stick.

 +----+-----+------+----+---+------+----------------+-------------+
 | A  |  B  |   C  |  D | E |   F  |      G         |      H	  |
 +----+-----+------+----+---+------+----------------+-------------+
 |10/8| 10/8|  15/8| 10 | 7½| 10/20| 10 times 8 = 80|  5/8 by  5/8|
 | 9/8|  9/8| 13½/8|  9 | 6¾|  9/20|  9 times 8 = 72| 4½/8 by 4½/8|
 | 8/8|  8/8|  12/8|  8 | 6 |  8/20|  8 times 8 = 64|  4/8 by  4/8|
 | 7/8|  7/8| 10½/8|  7 | 5¼|  7/20|  7 times 8 = 56| 3½/8 by 3½/8|
 | 6/8|  6/8|   9/8|  6 | 4½|  6/20|  6 times 8 = 48|  3/8 by  3/8|
 | 5/8|  5/8|  7½/8|  5 | 3¾|  5/20|  5 times 8 = 40| 2½/8 by 2½/8|
 |4½/8| 4½/8|  6¾/8|  4½| 3⅜| 4½/20| 4½ times 8 = 36| 2¼/8 by 2¼/8|
 | 4/8|  4/8|   6/8|  4 | 3 |  4/20|  4 times 8 = 32|  2/8 by  2/8|
 | 3/8|  3/8|  4½/8|  3 | 2¼|  3/20|  3 times 8 = 24| 1½/8 by 1½/8|
 +----+-----+------+----+---+------+----------------+-------------+


TO MAKE A 6/8 ROCKET.

Have the former, fig. 7, a brass tube 6/8 of an inch external diameter;
the gauge, fig. 8, with a 9/8 aperture; procure some imperial brown
paper, 70 lb. or 84 lb., the thicker and heavier the better. The best
kind is made of old ropes, is air-dried, and rough. This is not easily
obtained now. The smooth machine-made, cylinder-dried answers very well.
The sort used for laying under carpets, and which is 5 feet broad, is
almost equal to the original rough imperial, and should be procured, if
possible, in preference to the smooth. Cut it into strips 6 inches wide.
Paste the pieces well, and roll the cases as hard as possible, with the
rolling board fig. 6, till they fit the gauge. Lay them by for a few
hours to get partially dry. They must, then, be choked or strangled,
about half a diameter from one end of the case, that end that lay
nearest to the left hand in rolling, till they assume the shape of the
neck of a vial. For this purpose have a cylindrical piece of deal,
alder, or any kind of wood, fig. 24, about 9 or 10 inches long, made to
fit easily into the case; cut it into 2 pieces, a and b; b may be an
inch and a half long; round off the ends, just cut. In a, fasten a
screw, the solid wire, or uncut part of which, is 1/4 of an inch thick;
saw, or file off the head, and slightly taper the part projecting; in
the piece b bore a hole to just fit the wire of a. Slip b upon a, and
push them into the case, so that the interval between the two reaches
within about 1/2 an inch of one end of the case; slightly draw out b, to
leave a neck, or hollow, round which to form the choke; fix a staple, or
screw-eye in a post: tie to it one end of a piece of cord, about a yard
long, and 1/10 of an inch thick; fasten the other end round the middle
of a stick, for a handle; take hold of the stick with the right hand;
hold the case in the left; pass the cord round the space left vacant and
gradually tighten it, turning the case round and round, so as to pinch
it in equally on all sides, till it assumes the shape of fig. 23. Hitch
a piece of string, about 1/16 of an inch thick, a few times round the
neck, until it is filled up flush with the other part of the case,
remove the choker, and hang the case up to dry. A hitch is made by
simply bending the string backwards into a loop, like fig. 22; passing
it round the choke; pulling it tight; looping it again, again passing it
round the choke, and so on. The first loop is called a half hitch, and
will not hold of itself; the second loop completes the hitch, and makes
it hold: the remaining hitches are for filling up the choke, and
restoring the cylindrical shape. Practise, by hitching the string upon
your thumb, 4 or 5 times: it will hold after the second loop; but push
it off at the end, and it will all fall loose again.

A case must not be choked when wet, or it will tear; nor must it be too
dry, or it will be difficult to choke it at all. The drier, however, it
can be choked, the better. Experience is the only guide. If properly
dry, the wrinkles of the choke will be small, and perfectly regular.
Should the string stick to the case, chalk it; but this is not likely to
occur unless the paper is too wet. Have a foot, fig. 16, turned of ash,
or beech, or box, with a hemispherical nipple, 6/8 of an inch diameter,
as drawn. Bore it with a twist drill, or nosebit, to the depth of an
inch and a half. Procure a brass, iron, or steel wire, but preferably
brass, 6 inches long, and 3/10 of an inch diameter, and perfectly
straight. Cut, on one end of it, a screw, 1-1/2 inch long, fix it in a
vice, wet the screw with glue, and screw the foot on. File the 4-1/2
inches gradually tapering. The object of tapering it is simply to make
it deliver. A cylindrical hollow up the rocket would answer as well, but
the spindle could not be got out. The more conically true it is tapered,
of course, the better. Finish it off with a very fine file, and smooth
it with glass paper. The block into which it is screwed may be larger
than drawn; the bottom should be turned slightly concave, to make it
stand firm, on the same principle as the bottoms of plates, cups, &c.,
are made with a rim. The block and spindle are better if cast in
gun-metal, in one solid piece: the pattern to give to the caster should
be in one solid piece of wood. After casting, the rough parts must be
filed smooth; not many turners will be found willing to undertake to
turn it.

The next articles required are a setting-down piece, fig. 17; three
hollow rammers, or drifts, figs. 18, 19, and 20; and one solid rammer,
fig. 21. They are simply cylindrical pieces of wood, turned with a head,
to bear the blows of the mallet. Beech, or box free from knots, will
answer. The lengths of figs. 18, 19, 20, and 21, are to be 8, 6, 4, and
2 diameters, respectively, exclusive of the head; that is, 6, 4-1/2, 3,
and 1-1/2 inches. The hollow drifts are to have a cylindrical, not
conical, hole, bored up them, with a nosebit, or twist drill, to within
one inch of the handle, so as to clear the spindle by 1/2 an inch, to
allow of any dust being driven up it. The hollow in figs. 17 and 18 must
be large enough to fit the spindle loosely at a; in fig. 19, a trifle
smaller, to fit loosely at b; and in fig. 20, a trifle smaller still, to
fit loosely at c.

The next requisite is a mallet, fig. 25, which may be of ash, or beech.
It may be a cylinder, 5 inches long, and 3 inches diameter, with a
handle about 5 inches long, and 1 inch diameter. Let it be turned at the
end slightly concave, like the bottom of fig. 16, that it may be set to
stand upright, like a wine bottle. Or the head may be made 3 inches
square, like fig. 26; or, a small carpenter's mallet, about a pound and
a quarter weight, will answer.


TO CHARGE ROCKET CASES.

The first requisite is a solid block of wood, 6 or 8 inches square, and
18 or 20 high. This is indispensable. A piece of an old oak gate post,
answers well. It must be set upon the ground, or on a flag stone, not on
a floor. It is impossible to ram a rocket properly on the floor, because
of the vibration. It is, also, necessary to sit, not stand, at the work.

Put the setting down piece, fig. 17, into the case; press the case over
the spindle, and give the head a few blows with the mallet; this will
smooth out the wrinkles of the choke, which is all that fig. 17 is used
for. Now put in a very little powdered clay, and mallet it with fig. 18;
as much clay as will reach up 1/12 of an inch will be sufficient; its
object is to preserve the choke from burning, and getting enlarged. One
cannot be too precautious with rockets. Now put in a scoop of rocket
fuse, insert drift, fig. 18, and mallet the fuse in firm, with about a
dozen and a half blows, or till it offers a resistance to the hand. The
blows must be light and numerous, not slow and heavy, like driving a
post into the ground. 18 blows with a momentum of 3, will consolidate
the fuse: 3 violent blows, with a momentum of 18, would perhaps bend the
case, or drive the dust up into your eyes. The mallet need not be
lifted above 4 or 5 inches at a time. If the rocket is not rammed firm
throughout, it will, upon lighting, explode.

As soon as the case is charged about 1-1/2 inch, make a pencil or ink
mark, round the drift, where it stands level with the top of the case,
for future guidance; then charge another 1-1/2 inch with the second
rammer, fig. 19, and mark it in like manner; proceed in the same way
with fig. 20. It is obvious that if fig. 19 were used too soon it would
get split by the spindle being driven up it, and the spindle would be
bent or broken, hence the advisability of marking the drifts to know
when to lay aside one, and take the other. Just before you get to the
top of the spindle, put in the solid rammer to feel how high the spindle
reaches near the top of the case; hold it by the thumb and finger to
keep the distance, and mark it down the outside of the case, by
indenting the case with the edge of the drift. Exactly 1-1/3 diameter,
that is, in this case, exactly 1 inch, above this indentation make
another mark: then as soon as you have covered the spindle, till you can
no longer see it, with the use of fig. 20, begin charging with the
solid drift, fig. 21, till the composition inside is level with the top
mark. This being done drive in a little dry clay, till the case is full.
Remove the rocket from the spindle, by giving it a turn or two round to
the right, not backwards; then bore a hole through the clay, till you
can see the composition, with a 3/16 inch shell-bit. The shell-bit
should be fixed in a handle, and kept for the purpose. It is not
advisable to use a stock and bit, unless the bit is shielded, as it is
apt to bore too deeply. The bit may be fixed in a handle, by boring a
large hole in the handle, and pouring in melted lead, or pressing in
plaster of paris.

Instead of driving in dry clay on the top of the composition, a little
plaster of paris may be pressed in; this, when dry, will allow of a
perfectly clean hole being bored through it; whereas the clay is apt to
crumble, and chip out. The object of the clay, or plaster, is to prevent
the composition, which, containing much charcoal, does not bind well,
from getting disturbed, and the solid part diminished, which would cause
the stars to be ignited while the rocket was ascending, or the fuse,
perhaps, to blow through at the beginning. A piece or two of naked
quickmatch is to be inserted in the hole through the clay or plaster,
and a long piece is to be pushed up the core, or hollow, of the rocket,
as far as it will go; it is, then, to be cut off flush with the mouth,
and fastened to the side with a little dab of wetted meal powder,
pressed on it with the blade of a knife. If the rocket is intended to be
lit with a port-fire, take a circular piece of touch-paper, about 2
inches diameter, slightly paste it all over, lay it in the left hand,
press the mouth of the rocket down upon it, and smooth the edges of the
touch-paper up round the case. Otherwise, smear the end of the case with
the sash-tool dipped into meal paste, and when dry, paste a bit of
touch-paper round it, and twist to a point, like a squib. The appearance
of the rocket is shown at fig. 36; the dotted line round the mouth shows
the touch-paper.

In driving with the hollow rammers, it generally happens that a little
of the fuse gets driven up the hole; this, if allowed to accumulate, is
very troublesome to remove; it should, therefore, be knocked out every
time, by holding the drift in the left hand, and giving the head a rap
or two with the mallet.

The whole of the composition ought to be put in in about 12 scoops: try
2 or 3 scoops till you get one of the right size, then write upon the
handle what-sized rocket it belongs to. These directions may appear
minute, but they will save much trouble if attended to.

As it is convenient to know, beforehand, about what quantity of
composition will be required for any particular rocket, the following
formula will be useful:--

E³ / 9 = drams.

Where E denotes the size of the rocket, in eighths of an inch.

Required the quantity of fuse for a 6/8 rocket.

(6 × 6 × 6) / 9 = 4 × 6 = 24 drams = 1-1/2 ounce.

For a 3/8 rocket?

(3 × 3 × 3)/9 = 3 drams.

The same weights denote the quantity of stars which the rocket will
safely carry: thus an ounce and a half of stars may be put into the
head of a 6/8 rocket; and 3 drams into a 3/8 rocket. Along with the
stars is to be put in 1/9 the weight of the stars of bursting powder;
this may be pure meal powder; or a mixture of 8 meal powder, 1 fine
charcoal, well sifted together: or half meal, half grain; thus the
quantity of bursting powder for a 6/8 rocket will be 24/9 = 2-2/3 drams;
and for a 3/8 rocket, 3/9 = 1/3 of a dram. It is advisable to keep
nearly to these directions, for the weight of the stars; but it is not
necessary to be minutely exact; but to ascertain whether the head is too
heavy or not, take a table knife, or any thing an inch broad, and lay
the rocket flat and horizontally upon it in such a manner that the
commencement of the head lies close to the back edge of the knife, the
cutting edge lying towards the choke: if the head pitches over, it is
too heavy, and some of the stars must be taken out; if it balances, it
is correct.

Rockets should be fired from two staples, or two screweyes, fixed in a
post, one near the top, the other half a yard below, as in fig. 70. They
should never be propped against a wall, a chairback, a gate, or
railing, as they might fall, especially on a windy night, after the
touch-paper was lit, and before the fuse had caught. Every possible care
should be taken in guiding them, as it is too late to think about any
mischief they may cause, after they have once started.

In making rockets, it is essential, above all things, to have good nitre
and charcoal. The best way, with fresh materials, is to weigh out as
much nitre, charcoal, and sulphur, as will make one small rocket. Have
the nitre as fine as possible, and dry it over the fire in a 6-inch
frying pan, which should be kept for the purpose. If the rocket ascends
well you will know that the articles are pure, and you can proceed to
use them; but if the rocket does not rise, you may conclude the articles
are adulterated, the nitre with salt, or that the charcoal is perhaps
merely deal sawdust, burnt in a retort. In this case you must buy the
nitre in crystals, and the charcoal in sticks. To powder the nitre, put
it into a pipkin, pour on it a little water, set it on the fire, make
the water boil, and keep stirring the nitre with a piece of wood, until
it is dry and of a fine powder. Charcoal is best ground up in a
coffee-mill. It must first be broken into small pieces, about the size
of coffee-beans. After being ground it should be sifted through the
sieve, the interstices of which are about 1/40 of an inch square. To get
a correct idea of this size, lay down a line on paper, an inch long:
mark it off into eight equal parts by taking the divisions from a
foot-rule; then carefully divide one of the eighths into five equal
parts. But the best way is to make a square deal sieve, about 8 inches
square, and 3 inches deep; then nail on the bottom a piece of perforated
zinc, with quarter-inch flemish tacks. The perforations are circular,
and should be 20 to the inch, measured diagonally; that is, a
diamond-shaped inch, or inch rhombus, consisting of 20 oblique rows,
each row containing 20 holes; 20 times 20 = 400. These holes will be
about the same size as the ones mentioned in the sieve, because the
solid parts between the perforations are also about 1/40 of an inch. A
strip of deal, 1/4 of an inch thick, should be nailed round the bottom,
to keep the zinc tight. A square box for a receiver, and another for a
lid, should also be constructed, otherwise you will be smothered in
sifting charcoal. Making use of the perforated zinc sieve just
described, all the charcoal that goes through, fine and coarse, should
be used for rockets. It need not be shaken much, but brushed through
with a sash-tool. Construct a second sieve with 15 perforations to the
lineal inch. Iron borings for gerbes should be sifted through this; use
all that goes through. Construct, also, a third sieve with 9
perforations to the lineal inch. Nothing can equal iron and steel for
making sparks; but neither will keep long from rusting, after coming in
contact with nitre. Coke grains, about the size of pinheads, are a fair
substitute. Beat coke into lumps about as large as peas, then grind it
in a coffee-mill, and brush it through the 9-perforation sieve; sift the
fine dust from what passes through: throw the dust away, and keep the
grains. Porcelain may be powdered in an iron mortar, for gerbes; brush
through the 9-perforation sieve; sift out the dust with a fine sieve;
throw it away and keep the grains. The intense heat of the focus of the
choke renders them incandescent; and, from their weight, they are
projected to a considerable distance. They are inferior, however, to
coke grains, as the latter are to steel filings. We may say,
alliteratively; positive, porcelain; comparative, coke; superlative,
steel.

Zinc may be obtained with half-inch perforations; a size useful for
garden sieves, bottoms of soap boxes, &c.

Before grinding a fresh substance in a coffee-mill, it must be taken to
pieces, brushed clean, and screwed up again. Fine lawn or hair sieves
should be used for sifting chemicals; excellent sieves may be made with
book-muslin: the cylinders may be 4 inches diameter, 3 deep; the muslin
should be cut into a circular form, and hemmed round a piece of string;
it may then be slipped over the drum or cylinder, and secured; or it may
be pasted up and round the sides, and if above 4 inches diameter, two
pieces of string may be crossed over the middle to strengthen it.

Charcoal may be made by putting some dry pieces of willow, alder,
poplar, sycamore, maple, or almost any kind of wood, except the pine or
turpentine tribe, into an old iron saucepan, covering them with
perfectly dry sand, and setting the saucepan in the middle of a fire, to
remain red hot till the wood is completely burnt through. Remove when
judged sufficiently charred; and when cold, not before, pour away the
sand.

Sulphur is used in the state of sublimed sulphur, sulphur sublimatum, or
flowers of sulphur, and, when mixed with nitre, requires no preparation;
but as it is always more or less impregnated with sulphuric acid, as is
readily shown by testing it with litmus paper, it might, on coming into
contact with chlorate of potash, cause spontaneous combustion. To
prevent this, it is necessary to wash the sulphur. For this purpose put
it into a pan, and pour upon it boiling water, in which some salts of
tartar (carbonate of potash) have been dissolved; stir it well and break
down all lumps. Let it stand to subside; pour off the supernatant
liquor; fill up with cold water and let it stand, to again subside. Make
a conical bag, fig. 33, with a piece of linen or calico, sewed at the
top, round a ring or hoop of wire, or cane, or whalebone; fasten a
string to it, by which to hang it up. Put the washed sulphur into it,
and hang it under a water-tap; turn the water gently on, and let it drip
all night; this will wash away every trace both of acid and alkali.
Afterwards hang the bag up three or four days till the sulphur is dry;
it may then be bottled, and kept exclusively for colours.

Oxalate of soda may be made thus--procure 3 lbs. of carbonate of soda,
the common washing soda used by the laundress, not bicarbonate of soda;
boil it up in a saucepan with just as little water as will suffice to
dissolve it. Dissolve, in another vessel, 1 lb. of oxalic acid in
boiling water, and pour it into a deep jar, capable of holding two or
three quarts; a wash-hand jug will answer. Now put to this the dissolved
carbonate of soda, with a table-spoon, a spoonful at a time. A violent
effervescence takes place. The soda is to be slowly added till
effervescence ceases. It should be tested with a strip of litmus paper,
to see if the acid is perfectly neutralized.

To prepare litmus paper, dissolve 1/4 of an ounce of litmus in an ounce
and a half of water; when thoroughly dissolved, and the water is of a
dark blue colour, take some white blotting paper, and with a sash-tool
or camel's-hair pencil, go over it on both sides with the litmus
solution. When dry, wet some of these prepared pieces, with the brush
dipped into vinegar: this will turn them red. Dry, and preserve both.
They may be cut into strips, half an inch broad; the blue strips will be
tests for acids; the red, for alkalies. Wet a strip of the blue, and
touch it with oxalic acid, it will turn red; wet a strip of the red, or
the piece just reddened, with carbonate of soda, it will turn blue.

To make sulphuret of copper, procure some thin sheet copper, about as
thick as a card; cut it into pieces, and put it into a crucible, with
sulphur, a layer of sulphur, and a layer of copper alternately, till
full. Set the crucible in a clear fire, and keep it red hot for an hour.
Remove it; when cold, break it up, and grind it in a coffee-mill. Sift
it in a lawn or book-muslin sieve as fine as possible. Half-a-pound of
copper and a quarter of a pound of sulphur may be employed.

There is a black sulphide or sulphuret of copper produced by passing
sulphuretted hydrogen through a solution of protoxide of copper: this is
useless.

For want of a coffee-mill, charcoal may be beaten in a leather bag, with
a hammer.

A variety of rocket fuses will be found in the Tables; the first is as
good as any, and will answer for all sizes from 3/8 to 12/8. As a rule,
the fiercer fuses, containing meal powder, may be used for small
rockets; but are, by no means, necessary.

A rocket, when starting, makes a roar; but this is not on account of the
fierceness of the fuse, but of the extent of the surface ignited. Rocket
composition, laid in a train, burns very slowly.


ROCKET STARS.

Rocket stars are made in three or four ways. First cut, or chopped, or
naked stars. This mode is used for nitre stars only: chlorate of potash
stars require different methods. It is a singular circumstance that,
though chlorate of potash stars are much fiercer than nitrate of potash
stars, yet the latter light without any trouble, while the former, if
made in the same way, would be almost sure to miss.


TO MAKE CUT STARS.

Wet the composition with thin starch, or dextrine solution, or gum
water, sufficiently to bind; press it into a flat mass, on a slate, or
Dutch tile, with a knife, or small trowel, till about 3/8 of an inch
thick. Indent the surface with the edge of the knife, in parallel lines,
about 3/8 of an inch apart, and cross these with equidistant
indentations, at right angles. Set the mass by, to dry gradually. When
nearly dry, break it up into little 3/8 cubes, and lay them out, to dry
thoroughly. The broken edges will be rough, and will catch easily.


DRY PILL-BOX STARS.

Take a sheet of note paper, and cut it into four equal parts; each part
will be about 4-1/2 inches by 3-1/2. Paste and roll them on a (3-1/2)/8
brass tube, so as to have the cases 4-1/2 inches long. To make these
into pill-boxes, perfectly true, like those used by the druggist, they
must be cut in the lathe. For this purpose, turn a cylindrical piece of
wood, fig. 27, which is to fit easily into the case, except at a, where
it is to be turned sloping a little larger, so that when the case is
slipped over it, it will bite at the part a; otherwise, on putting the
chisel to it, it would slip round, without getting cut. Mark the case,
with a black-lead pencil, at every half-inch; suspend it in the lathe;
and cut it at the marks. Next procure a 7/16 inch punch, with which to
cut out the bottoms. These are to be made of card, or bristol-board. Lay
the card on a piece of sheet-lead, or the grain end of a piece of beech,
and give it a smart blow or two with a hammer; keep on punching till the
punch contains a dozen or more discs, then push them out. When a number
are ready, press them into the pill-boxes, with a rammer that fits
loosely.

The composition is to be put into these dry, and driven in with a solid
rammer, and the little mallet, before described.

This was the original way of making them, but is perfectly unnecessary.
Roll the tubes as directed, of two thicknesses of paper, with a little
bit to lap over. Cut them across, with one sharp clip, with a strong
pair of scissors. This will slightly flatten them; but they may readily
be restored to the cylindrical form, by slipping them on a piece of
wood, and rounding them to shape with the fingers. No bottoms need be
provided, no punch used.


TO FILL THE BOXES WITH DRY COLOUR.

Rest the box on a flat surface, put in some composition, and drive it in
with a brass or boxwood drift and the little mallet, till half full, as
in fig. 28. Then fill up the box with more colour, set a little bit of
match upright in the side, and mallet it in, till the box is almost
full. The drift for this must be cut flat on one side, to allow for the
match. On the top put a very little dry meal powder, or shell-fuse, and
press it in with the finger. Cut a piece of double-crown, about an inch
broad, and long enough to go rather more than once round the pill-box:
paste it all over; lay the pill-box on it, and roll it up; tuck in one
end, to make a bottom, and press the other end round the match, and on
the meal powder, or shell-fuse, till it assumes the form of fig. 29.


ANOTHER WAY.

Set the pill-box on a flat surface, put in a very little meal powder or
shell-fuse, then some composition, and mallet it in till full. Roll
this up in a piece of double-crown as before; tuck in the bottom, and
set by to dry; when dry, put into the other end--the end containing the
film of meal or shell-fuse--a piece or two of thin match, and tie it in,
as in fig. 30. Dry pill-boxes are best for making chameleon stars; these
are half one colour and half another. Make a dozen stars, half yellow
and half green, and a dozen more half blue and half crimson; put these
into a rocket; they will burst green and crimson, and change to blue and
yellow.


BOTTOMLESS PILL-BOXES.

The cases are the same as before. To fill them, damp the composition as
for Roman candle stars; put a bit of quickmatch into the case, as at
fig. 31, and press in the composition. This is usually done with the
fingers, but is not very pleasant work, especially with lac solution. A
cleaner way, though more tedious, is to fit the case on to a little
foot, with a side notch in it, fig. 60; then slightly mallet in the
composition. Or a notch may be cut in the side of the box, fig. 61, and
the match put in, as fig. 62, and slightly malleted.

Instead of making the cases entirely of writing paper, they may be made
half of writing paper and half of coloured double-crown, to indicate the
colour of the star.

Another way is to sift a thin layer of French chalk over a sheet of
paper, and to roll the stars in it, one by one, as they are punched.
When dry, brush off the superfluous chalk, and prime with a bit of
match, tied across the mouth.


ENVELOPED STARS.

Pump and drive the stars exactly as for roman candle stars, They may be
(3-1/2)/8 diameter, and 5/8 long; or they may be formed with figs. 1, 2,
and 3, and the side pin of fig. 2 may be removed to c, in which case the
stars will be 5/8 diameter, and (3-1/2)/8 deep; the former will be an
oblong cylinder, the latter an oblate. Cut a strip of red, blue, green,
or yellow double-crown, of a suitable breadth, and long enough to go
twice round the star. Paste the strip all over, or gum it at the edge
only, and lay the star upon it, as at a, fig. 41, with a bit of match
behind it; then roll it up and put by to dry. When pasted, it shrinks
and holds the match tight; when gummed at the edge this is not always
the case; it may then have a piece of thin binding-wire twisted round
it. It will have the appearance of fig. 32. In fig. 31, the match is
embedded, and dries in the damped composition; in the enveloped stars
the stars are dried first, and the match lies outside and blows through.
Enveloped stars show well in the air.

The word envelope, as used in these pages, must not be confounded with
the same word as applied to the coverings for letters. It is rather
synonymous with the term wrapper; you lay an ounce of tobacco on a piece
of paper, roll it up and tuck in the ends. So with cases: you roll them
up in a piece of paper, and leave an inch vacant at each end to receive
quickmatch, &c. This is termed the envelope, that is, the wrapper.


ROCKET HEADS.

Heads for small rockets may be made of two or three rounds of paper
rolled dry, and secured on the inner and outer edges with paste. After
sticking it on the case, which it may be made to fit, as in fig. 36,
pinch the top in like a choke, only tight, and tie it round with twine
or flax. For coloured rocket heads, 6/8 and upwards, the head may be
enlarged by fixing a collar round the top of the case. To make the
collar for a 6/8, roll a case on a 9/8 former, and when dry cut it into
short lengths in the lathe, as recommended for pill-boxes; if unprovided
with a lathe, saw it with a fine-toothed saw. The advantage of the
enlarged head is, that it brings the stars nearer to the rocket, and
prevents it from being top-heavy. Another way is to make the heads
tapering, and the tops conical, as in fig. 39. One part is rolled on
fig. 34, the other on fig. 35; or, a cone may be made of a circular
piece of paper, without a former. Cut the circle, along the radius, to
the centre; bend it into a cone; secure the edge with sealing-wax, and
paste paper over it to overlap the rim: snip the edge with the scissors;
paste it inside, and secure it to the other part. But the quickest way
of all is to make a long paper bag, which may be made to fit to the
greatest nicety. For this purpose take a tape-measure; or lay down, on
the edge of a strip of writing paper, 7 or 8 inches long, and 1 inch
broad, 6 inches, divided into eighths, transferred from a foot-rule.
Suppose the 6/8 rocket has a collar, which, on being measured by the
paper just alluded to, is found to be 4-2/8 inches round; add to this
3/8 for lapping over, making 4-5/8 inches. Cut a piece of imperial brown
4-5/8 broad, and as long as the case, 6 inches. Make this into a paper
bag, 2-1/8 inches broad. Be careful that the corners are perfect; a
strip of double-crown may be pasted over them. When dry, pinch the mouth
open till cylindrical, and merely allow the stars to drop in without
forcing them; this will keep the top edge of a wedge shape, fig. 37, and
answer the purpose of a cone. If the paper is thin, the bag must be made
of two thicknesses; the paper will, then, require to be 9 inches by 6;
4-3/8 of this will have to be kept dry, and the other 4-5/8 pasted.

A head, made in this way, if required to hold gold rains, or serpents,
can instantly be reduced to a cylindrical shape, by pushing the
rocket-case right up it, to the top; this will cause the corners to
stick out, like two horns; press them down, and secure them with
sealing-wax. Attach a cone, if desired.

Heads made like figs. 38 and 39 may be of three thicknesses of paper,
pasted all over.

Fig. 39 shows the manner of tying on the sticks. No variation must be
made in their lengths, and it is not advisable to alter their size. To
adapt it to the wood, however, a slight alteration might be permitted.
For instance, instead of 3/8 square, it might be (2-1/2)/8 by (3-1/2)/8,
a slight increase one way, compensated by a slight diminution the other.
It must, however, on no account, be so increased and diminished, as to
approach the shape of a lath, as such stick would vibrate, and cause the
rocket to quiver. When the heads are a paper bag of the shape of fig.
37, the stick must be tied on, as indicated by the dotted lines.

If the stick is suited to the rocket, it will, when suspended on the
finger almost against the mouth, as at f, fig. 40, lie, not quite
horizontal, but slightly sloping downward. The wood should be dry pine,
free from knots. The sticks are generally cut with a carpenter's
cutting-gauge. If the learner has a lathe he will find a 6-inch
circular saw convenient for cutting them.

For amateurs, a 6/8 rocket is a good size; large enough, and small
enough. If 5/8 and 4/8 are made, two hollow drifts will be sufficient;
for 3/8, one hollow drift. Very small rockets, 2/8, are made for
children; they are rammed solid, and a hole is pushed up them with a
bradawl.

Rockets in former times, before the present days of competition, were
charged in moulds. These were of gun-metal, bored truly cylindrical,
furnished with hinges, to open and admit the case; they were then
screwed up, and might be charged as hard as possible. Names were given
them according to the bore of the mould, that is, the external diameter
of the cases; a 4/8 was termed an ounce rocket; a 5/8, a two ounce; a
6/8 a quarter pound; a (7-1/2)/8 a half pound; a 9/8, a pound; a 12/8, a
two pound.

These names were determined by the weight of a leaden ball of the same
diameter as the bore. Now a sphere of lead, 7-1/2 inches diameter = 90
lbs., or 1440 ounces; consequently one of 15 inches = 720 lbs., similar
solids being to each other as the cubes of their like dimensions: the
latter sphere being twice the diameter from top to bottom; twice the
diameter from left to right; and twice the diameter from front to back;
2 × 2 × 2 = 8.

The external diameter of the rocket being 7-1/2 inches, the internal
would be 5 inches, and this would be a 90-pounder: hence, for an inch
rocket, we have the proportion,

          oz.           oz.
    5³ : 1440 :: 1³ : 11·52

so that a 12-ounce, or 3-quarter-pound rocket, ought to be a trifle
above an inch.

Required the weight of a 6/8 rocket. 5 inches = 40/8.

           oz.          oz.
    40³ : 1440 :: 6³ : 4·86

So that a 6/8 is a trifle too large for a quarter-pound.

If, conversely, we require to know the size of a half-pound, or 8-ounce
rocket,

     oz.         oz.
    1440 : 40³ :: 8 : 3200/9

and ∛(3200/9) = ∛(9600/27) = (∛9600)/3 = 7·08

So, properly, a half-pounder is a trifle over 7/8. The names in use
enable the makers to understand each other, but they are not
mathematically correct, and are of no utility to an amateur.

The following table shows the true weight of leaden spheres, the
dimensions being taken in inches.

 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+
 | Weight.| Diameter.|| Weight.| Diameter.|| Weight.| Diameter.|
 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+
 | 1 dram |  ·264    ||  1 oz. |  ·664    ||  1 lb. |  1·672   |
 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+
 | 2 drams|  ·332    ||  2  "  |  ·836    ||  1¼ "  |  1·8     |
 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+
 | 4   "  |  ·418    ||  4  "  | 1·056    ||  1½ "  |  1·91    |
 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+
 | 8   "  |  ·528    ||  8  "  | 1·328    ||  1¾ "  |  2·02    |
 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+
 |12   "  |  ·604    || 12  "  | 1·52     ||  2  "  |  2·112   |
 +--------+----------++--------+----------++--------+----------+

And 2/3 of the above numbers multiplied by 8, give the correct names for
rockets in eighths of an inch.

Required the true size of a half-pounder.

    1·328 × 2 × 8
    ------------- = 7·08.
          3

A trifle above 7/8, as before stated.

A cast-iron ball 6 inches in diameter weighs 30lb.

Cast iron is about 40/63 the weight of lead.

5280 feet = 1 mile; 3280 feet = 1 kilometre.




_WHEEL AND FIXED CASES._


Wheel cases may be 5-5/8 inches long. Cut the paper, without waste, into
4 strips, each 29 inches long. Fixed cases may be 7-1/4 inches long: cut
the paper the other way of the sheet, into 4 strips, each 22-1/2 inches
long. The extra length, for fixed cases, is to allow of their being
reported; that is, filled at the end, with an inch, or more, of grain
powder, to make a bang like a squib. The cases are to be gauged to the
thickness of roman candle cases, but choked like rockets; 5/8 internal,
and 7/8 external, are a good size. Two solid drifts will be required for
wheel cases; one 5-1/2 inches long, besides the head; the other 3
inches: for the fixed cases it will be necessary to have one of 7-1/4
inches. They may be turned of box, beech, or ash; but gun-metal drifts
are best, though by no means indispensable. If they are cast in
gun-metal, they will simply require filing in the rough places. The
cases are to be rammed solid throughout, on a foot, fig. 42, turned in
one piece, with a nipple, and a pin 1/3 of a diameter thick, and just
high enough to keep the choke clear.

In all wheel and fixed cases, whatever the remainder of the fuse may be,
begin by putting in one scoop of starting fire; this, when malleted
firmly in, should fill about 3/8 of an inch in the case. The subsequent
fuse can be selected from the Tables. The choke may be protected with a
little clay, before the starting fire, like rockets, if thought
desirable: no clay is to be used anywhere else. Wheel cases containing
steel-filings are termed brilliant.

To prime the cases, very slightly damp some meal powder, by sprinkling
it with a few drops of water; mix and chop it up, or mince it, as it
were, with a knife: put a little into the mouth of the case, press the
nipple, fig. 42, into it, and work it round; this will prime the choke
and the mouth at once, still leaving the choke clear; or, paint the
choke and mouth with the sash-tool, with meal paste, just sufficient to
wet them, then plunge them into dry meal, give them a rap to shake off
the superfluous dust, and lay them by to dry.

Wheel and fixed cases need not be choked at all, but plugged 1/4 of an
inch, with plaster of paris, as directed for roman candles. When dry,
charge them by setting them flat on the block, without using the foot.
Mallet in a scoop of starting fire, then the other. Afterwards, when a
number are charged, bore through the centre of the plaster, with a
shell-bit, 1/3 the diameter of the case; insert a piece of match in the
hole; wash the face of the plaster over with meal paste, and plunge into
dry meal. A sheet of double-crown makes 8 wheel case envelopes (2.2.2)
10 by 7-1/2, so that the void at each end, to receive the match, is
nearly 1 inch.

It is not possible to devise a formula that will indicate the exact
quantity required for wheel cases, as the fuses vary; but, representing
the length, in inches, by I; and the diameter in eighths by e, the
following will help to serve as a guide.

(I e²)/7 = drams.

Suppose a wheel case 5-5/8 inches long, and 4 eighths diameter,

(5⅝ × 4 × 4)/7 = 90/7 = 13 drams.

Suppose a fixed case 7-1/4 inches long, and 5 eighths diameter,

(7¼ × 5 × 5)/7 = 181/7 = 26 drms. = 1 oz. 10 drms.




_GERBES._


Gerbes, so called from the French word for wheat-sheaf, which they
resemble, are fixed choked cases: they do not show well on wheels. As
they contain grains of iron, they must not be under 6/8; for private
exhibitions a good size is 9/8, 9/8 internal diameter; 12/8 external;
3/8 the diameter of the choke; 11-1/4 inches, length of case. Charge the
case on a nipple, exactly like a wheel case. It is advisable to put in,
first, a little clay, to protect the choke, as the fire, being fierce,
would, otherwise, enlarge it, and diminish the ascent of the sparks.
Upon the clay drive in a scoop of starting fire, and fill up with gerbe
composition. This, when containing iron borings, is termed Chinese fire;
the pieces, Chinese trees.

The most magnificent of all, however, is the coloured gerbe. For this,
some green, blue, and crimson grains, or small stars must be prepared.
They may be quarter-inch cubes, cut as directed for the chopped nitre
stars. A far better way, however, of preparing them, is to remove the
pin a, of fig. 2, up to c, so that the stars, driven in the tube, will
be 5/8 inch diameter, and 3/8 thick. When these are dry, chop them into
4 pieces, by holding a knife, or chisel, across them, and giving it a
smart blow with the mallet. They are harder made this way.

To charge the cases: having driven in the clay, and the starting fire,
put in 7 or 8 stars, then a scoopful of fuse No. 1 or 2, then 7 or 8
more stars, and another scoop of fuse; mallet the whole 4 layers down
firm, with blows not too heavy at a time, but many times repeated. Then
put in 7 or 8 more stars, another scoopful, 7 or 8 more stars, and
another scoop, and mallet the 4 layers as before; and so repeat. The two
layers and the two scoopfuls may fill up, when malleted in, 3/4 of an
inch, in a 9/8 case.

Instead of choking the cases, plaster of paris is far preferable. Let
it be 3/8 of an inch thick, and well dried, before charging. After the
cases are charged, bore a hole through the plaster, 1/3 of a diameter,
that is, with a 9/8 case, 3/8 of an inch diameter. For this purpose it
is not necessary to have another shell-bit; bore it with the 3/16, and
enlarge it with a penknife. It is better arched under, till conical, as
shown in fig. 48. Prime with 4 or 5 pieces of match, and wash with the
sash-tool.

The gerbe being finished, make a cylindrical box, or paper bag, of 2 or
3 thicknesses of paper: fill it with a number of crackers, and a
scoopful of meal powder, and fasten it to the gerbe.

No single piece is more effective than a coloured gerbe; the stars will
be projected 30 feet, or more: they may be put in, mixed; or, one layer
may be blue, another green, another crimson. Twist a piece of wire,
deprived of its elasticity, round the neck, and another piece round the
bottom, and leave long ends; it can then be fastened by them to the top
of a post. To remove the elasticity from iron wire, lay it in the fire
till red hot; withdraw it with the tongs, and put it aside, to cool
slowly. If copper wire is used, it will bend without preparation. String
must not be employed, as it might burn, and let the case fall. Common
pins, patent short whites, deprived of their elasticity, are useful for
connecting the parts of lustres together.




_FLOWER POTS._


These are choked cases, charged with spur fire: the fire is somewhat
slow, so the cases must be short: 4 inches long, and 5/8 diameter is a
good size. Rub the composition thoroughly up in the mortar; the
vegetable black produces beautiful star-like sparks, totally dissimilar
to any other. Put a little composition, at a time, into the case, and
jolt it with the roman candle rammer.

Vegetable black, introduced into a star, causes it to tail, like linseed
oil. Light such star on the hob; it will burn, and leave a residue,
unaltered in shape; blow upon this continuously with the mouth, or,
better still, with a pair of bellows: the supply of oxygen will cause
it to boil up, in a state of fusion, when it will begin to throw out
clusters of the peculiar starlike sparks, before mentioned, bright and
yellow as new sovereigns.

Vegetable black is a pure lamp black; some samples of lamp black make
equally good stars, but others are worthless. Greater reliance can be
placed upon vegetable black. Vegetable black and lamp black must not be
mixed with linseed oil, as such mixture is liable to spontaneous
combustion.

Roll up a tube for pill boxes, of two thicknesses of brown paper. When
dry, cut it into pieces about 1-1/8 inch long: choke one end, like a
wheel case; set it on a nipple,and charge it with spur fire, till full
within 1/16 of an inch: fill up flush with a little plaster of paris,
pressed in flat with a knife: prime the choked end, and put a number of
such cases into a rocket head, or shell.




_PORT FIRES AND SHELL FUSES._


These are unchoked cases, like roman candles; 6 inches long, 3/8
internal, (4-1/2)/8 external, is a good size. They should be rammed, as
hard as possible; and, for this purpose, it is best to have a mould.
Now, if a case is rolled of such a size that it will exactly fit into a
brass tube, and is charged, in it, very hard, it will swell, and it will
be almost impossible to get it out again; but if it be made a trifle
smaller, so as to just slip through the tube; then, if a piece of
writing paper be rolled, dry, round it, once or twice, so as to make it
a tight fit, and the case is charged, it can be pushed out, like a
pellet from a popgun, leaving the writing paper, generally, in the tube,
or mould, and the case will come out without a wrinkle.

Let the composition be put in, very little at a time, and well driven
with a solid rammer and mallet. Fig. 59 represents the mould; the foot b
fits the tube a; the tenon c fits the case; a wire, d, goes through 2
holes in the brass tube, and a hole through the foot; a nut, e, to keep
the wire from jarring out, is made of a piece of indiarubber: make a
hole through it, with a bradawl, and slip it on the wire; or, a
screw-eye may be passed through and held with a leaden, or wooden nut.




_TOURBILLIONS._[A]


A tourbillion, so called from the French word for whirlwind, is a case
made to rotate and ascend at the same time, forming a spiral of fire,
and ending in the shape of an umbrella.


TO MAKE A TOURBILLION.

Roll the case like a roman candle case, but gauge it to the thickness of
a rocket case. Let the inner diameter be 6/8; the outer 9/8; the length
of the case 7-1/4 inches, fig. 43. To charge the case, have a mould, as
directed for port-fires; and let the tenon rise exactly 3/8 of an inch
up the case. Put in a little composition at a time, and mallet it as
firmly as possible, till within exactly 3/8 of an inch of the top of the
case; so that there will be a vacancy of 3/8 of an inch, at each end.
Fill each of these ends flush with plaster of paris. It is, better,
too, if you can manage to fill the middle half-inch of the case with
plaster of paris. It can be effected with care, and will hold the screw,
hereafter to be described, more firmly.

Construct a wooden box, fig. 44, consisting of a bottom and two sides
only, firmly screwed together. Each of the pieces of wood is to be 7-1/4
inches long, and 1/2 an inch thick. The internal breadth of the box is
to be exactly 9/8 of an inch; and its internal depth exactly (4-1/2)/8
or 9/16, so that when the tourbillion is laid evenly in it, and pressed
down to the bottom, half of the case will be in it, and half out of it.
At a point b, fig. 44, on the top of the side, half an inch from a, make
an ink mark: and, at a point d, half an inch from c, make another ink
mark. Fig. 45 is the bottom of the box. At a point w, 5/8 of an inch
from the end; and, at a point z, 5/8 of an inch from the other end, make
holes with a fine bradawl, truly, in a line down the middle of the wood,
as between side and side. The distance w z is 6 inches; divide it into 3
equal parts, in the points x and y, two inches asunder. Bisect x y in
the point s. Procure 5 carpet pins, fig. 47: they will, probably, be
3/4 of an inch long. Drive them through the holes w, x, s, y, z,
inverting the box for the purpose, so that they shall stand bolt upright
in the box. Now screw, or nail a piece of wood over the bottom of the
box, entirely to cover it, to prevent the carpet pins from getting
displaced. It will be seen, that, if the tourbillion be now laid evenly
in the box, and pressed down till it rests on the bottom, the projecting
pins will make 5 holes, in the under part of the case. While it is thus
lying, with a stiletto, such as used by sempstresses, for making eyelet
holes, prick the side of the case over the line b, of fig. 44; and,
also, over the point d. There will now be 7 holes; 5 underneath, 1 to
the right, and 1 to the left: the latter are the places for the
whirlers, or holes of rotation: 4 underneath, for the lifters, or holes
of ascension; the centre one, s, receives a nail or screw. Take a
bradawl, fig. 49, 3/16 of an inch diameter; and slip over it a shield,
consisting of a piece of wood with a central hole up it, like a pop-gun,
of such a length, that, when it is slipped on, only 1/4 of an inch of
the bradawl protrudes; or, instead of a bradawl, fix in a handle, a
wire of equal length, namely 1/4 of an inch, and file it to a point.
Push this into all the holes, except s, making 4 holes underneath, and 2
horizontal holes, one left, one right: all these holes will be exactly
of the same depth, on account of the shield: see that they are bored
perfectly true, the horizontals exactly 90 degrees above the others, or
1/4 of the circumference.

The next thing required, is a piece of hooping, or curved stick, about
6/8 of an inch broad, and as long as the case, 7-1/4 inches. In the
centre of this, bore a hole, and countersink it; then, with a screw, an
inch and a quarter long, screw the hooping, at right angles, on the
bottom of the case, through the point s of fig. 45, which must be
enlarged to receive the screw. A touch of glue may still farther hold
the wood in position. It will now assume the shape of a cross, like
figs. 50 and 51. Fig. 50 shows the under side of the case; fig. 51 the
upper. From w to x lead a bit of naked match; push the ends into both
holes, and secure with a little wetted meal, pressed in with a knife. Do
the same with y and z. Paste a piece of double-crown, 3/4 of an inch
broad, and of sufficient length, and cover each of the two pieces of
match, with two layers of the paper. Turn it over, like to fig. 51;
connect the holes a and b with a bit of naked match; and, under the
centre of it, slip another piece of naked match, having a piece of
touch-paper round the protruding end: cover the match with two
thicknesses of pasted paper, in the same manner as the under holes. The
tourbillion is now complete. See that it will balance, and swing round
easily, when laid upon a level surface. The proper way to fire it, is
from a flat sheet of iron, or a flagstone. Light the touch paper; the
fire will communicate to the side holes, and set it in rotation. As soon
as 1/8 of an inch of fuse has burnt from each end, and the piece has got
well into action, the 4 under holes will catch, and cause it to ascend.

Instead of this mode of making a tourbillion, some charge it with an
inch of solidly rammed clay, in the middle; fasten the stick, by
crossing it with binding-wire; bore a hole through the middle of it, and
of the clay, and slip it over a tapering-wire, standing upright in a
block, like the spindle of a rocket. Four holes only are then used; two
of rotation, and two of ascension; and the whole are fired at once, the
match starting from one of the under holes, going to the side hole;
over, across, to the other side hole, and on to the other under hole.

Instead of making them with clay in the middle, there is yet a better
method of having two cases, each about 4 inches long; and gluing, or
fastening them with tin-tacks on a centre-piece, turned with a tenon at
each end, fig. 52; two balancing arms, one on each side, must then be
fixed to the centre-piece.

In a windmill, as is well known, the vanes, or sails, are set at an
angle. There is a toy, made of two slips of tin, forming a cross, and
set at an angle, sloping upwards, called the flying dutchman; this, when
spun with a string, from a handle like a humming-top, flies up into the
air, on escaping from the string. Steel Fliers, with two vanes, are used
by sportsmen to practise shooting flying. Small balloons, some years
ago, in a room in the Polytechnic Institution, free from a current of
air, were guided or driven by a similar contrivance, moved by
clockwork. The screw-propeller of a ship acts on the same principle. I
think it possible that, if two vanes were fixed in the central piece of
wood, set at an upward angle of 10, 15, or 20 degrees from the
horizontal, they might assist the ascension, and so cause the
tourbillion to reach a greater height; or, the vanes alone might cause
it to rise, upon 4 side holes, two to the left, and two to the right,
causing it to rotate. The design is shown at fig. 54, the shape of the
vane at fig. 53. I have not yet tried it, so offer it only as a
suggestion.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] Tourbillion, from _tourbillon_, like postillion, from _postillon_,
the i being inserted to approximate the pronunciation of the French. In
pavilion, from _pavillon_, and vermilion, from _vermillon_, one l is
dropped; so in battalion, from _bataillon_; while medallion, from
_medaillon_, retains the ll.




_SAXONS._


These are unchoked cases, charged like a tourbillion, but pierced only
with holes of rotation, for the purpose of turning a coloured fire.
Drive them in a mould, as directed before. A good size is, 5/8 internal,
7/8 external, 6 or 7 inches long. Let the tenon enter the case 3/8 of an
inch: charge the composition firm till within 1/2 an inch of the top,
which leave vacant. Remove it, and fill the 3/8 occupied by the tenon,
with plaster of paris. Have a centre-piece, turned like fig. 55, with a
tenon, 5/8 diameter at each end, 1/2 an inch long. Glue a case on each
tenon. Let the centre-piece be 6 inches long, exclusive of the tenons;
so, if the saxon cases are 7 inches long, each, the entire length, as
fig. 56, will be 20 inches. Make a hole at a, and another at c, with a
shielded bradawl, 3/16 of an inch diameter. Put a bit of naked match in
the hole a, carry it round x and y, along to c and on to z. It must be
pushed into c with a blunt wire. Cover it with two thicknesses of pasted
paper, like the tourbillion. Leave the match exposed at x, y, and at z,
and brush it over with meal paste. If the central piece of wood were now
put on a horizontal spindle, and fire communicated to the match z, the
holes a and c would cause it to rotate, and produce a white circle of
fire. This, however, would be hardly worth making; but, by fixing at b,
a little case of coloured fire, a splendid effect is produced. This case
of colour is usually tied to a nail, driven in at b; but a little tenon
of wood may be glued there instead, and the case of colour must be then
charged, with a vacancy at the bottom, to fit on the tenon. The case of
colour must be timed to burn as long as the saxon; rather more than an
inch will be sufficient.

Saxons are sometimes made by charging a roman candle case with an inch
of clay in the middle, and boring a hole through the clay, to receive a
spindle. Only one half of the case burns at a time; a leader, placed at
the bottom, near the central clay, conveys the fire to the other end;
and continues the rotation. For distinction, they are called Chinese
fliers.




_FIVE-POINTED STARS._


These are cases about 2-1/2 inches long, and 1 inch diameter. Make a
bottom to the case with 1/4 inch thickness of plaster of paris, so that
it looks like a large pill box. Charge it solid, and at 3/8 of an inch
from the extremity, that is, 1/8 of an inch beyond the plaster bottom,
round the circumference make five holes, as for saxons; run a bit of
match round, connecting the holes. These, when fired, stand out at right
angles, the plaster towards the spectator, so that the fire resembles a
gas star, with 5 points, as in fig. 130.




_SQUIBS._


Take a sheet of 60-lb. imperial brown, and a sheet of 12-lb. white demy.
The imperial, as said before, is 29 by 22-1/2. Cut it into 24 equal
parts (2, 4, 3), that is, first into two equal parts, down the natural
fold of the paper; then each into four equal parts, at right angles to
the first fold; and each of these into three equal parts, at right
angles to the second fold. Each piece will then be 5-5/8 by 4-5/8. The
demy is 22-1/2 by 17-1/2. Cut the sheet into sixteen equal parts (2, 4,
2), each piece will be 5-5/8 by 4-3/8. A piece of brown and a piece of
white will make a case 5-5/8 inches long. For a former, procure a piece
of brass wire, or stair-rod, about a foot long, and 1/4 inch diameter.
Lay eight pieces of the demy evenly on each other; draw the thumbnail of
the right hand from the farther edge of the paper straight over the
middle towards you, a few times. If properly performed, this will draw
piece behind piece; proceed till about 1/8 of an inch of each is left
exposed, in the same manner as a pack of cards would arrange
themselves, if set upright, and allowed to fall forwards; something
after the manner of the laths of a venetian blind, or slates upon a
roof, imbricated. If you cannot acquire the knack of doing this, you
must so lay them, one by one. Paste the edges of all the eight pieces
thus lying. Place one of the pieces of brown paper before you; lay the
former, or stair-rod, across it, nearly in the middle; bend the paper
over it, and press it in with the fingers of both hands; roll for an
inch, or so; lay it on the middle of a white piece; bend the white over;
infold the brown in it, and roll forward, till it catches the pasted
part, and sticks. After a number have been prepared, and are dry, choke
them, as directed for rockets. The wire of the choker, fig. 24, should
be about 1/16 of an inch thick. Now take a piece of square steel, or
iron wire, 12 inches long, the thickness of the wire being about 3/5 the
diameter of the stair-rod, that is, 1/4 x 3/5 = 3/20 of an inch; if it
be found difficult to procure square wire, file a round piece. Bore a
hole down a bradawl or chisel handle, 2 inches in depth, and 1/4
diameter; fix the square wire in it, with melted lead, like fig. 4; the
lead is for the purpose of giving weight to the blows in charging. Black
the wire all over with ink, and allow it to dry. The next requisite is a
tin funnel, without a neck, of the size and shape of fig. 65. Any tinman
will readily make one to order; but if the learner procure a
soldering-tool, he can construct one himself. For this purpose, dissolve
a piece of zinc in a little hydrochloric or muriatic acid, till the acid
is saturated: heat the tool, and dip the tip end, momently, into it; the
acid combines with the oxide of copper formed by heating, and the zinc
adheres to the clear surface of copper produced; it will now easily take
up the solder: the joint to be soldered must be clean, and also touched
with a feather dipped into the acid. It is best to make a funnel with a
piece of writing-paper, first, for a pattern; when this is got correct,
the tin can be cut according to it. By describing a circle with a 3-inch
radius, and cutting out a sector of 100°, the correct size is obtained
at once; 1/8 of an inch breadth, outside the radius, is to be allowed to
lap over. The bore of the squib is 5/20 of an inch; the size of the
ramming wire 3/20; the hole at the bottom of the funnel may be half way
between, 4/20 or 1/5 of an inch diameter. Push the wire rammer through
the funnel, till it protrudes 2 inches beyond the bottom; observe the
part of the wire which is now level with the top of the funnel; withdraw
it, and file a bright mark round the part: it will be about 4-1/2 inches
from the end. The wire, having been inked, shows the bright mark more
plainly.

Make a deal box, 3 inches square, and 4 inches deep, and nail a bottom
to it. Also have a little nipple, fig. 73, with a wire, as drawn; it can
be secured to a flat board.

To charge the cases. Set the choked end of one on the nipple, insert the
funnel in the other end, put the wire rammer down through the funnel,
and let it fall to the bottom of the case: put in some fuse, and jolt
the rammer up and down, till the case gets so far filled, that the
bright, filed notch, before described, is on a level with the top of the
funnel. It is necessary to sit at a table to charge the cases; the eye
is, then, on a proper level to see the mark. As the cases are thus
charged, set them in the square box, choked end downwards, till a number
are filled. Now take out a handful, invert them over a sheet of paper,
and give them a few taps with the rammer; this will shake out a great
deal of loose composition, that has got puffed up, in the case. Return
them to the deal box.

The next operation is to bounce, or bang them. For this purpose take a
long slip of paper, 7 inches broad. Stretch it lengthwise before you.
Lay a number of the cases upon it, so that all the choke ends lie flush
with the left edge of the paper; then roll them up in the paper; turn
and set them upright on the choke ends; the paper will now stand up more
than an inch above the cases, as a tumbler, three parts full of water,
stands up with an empty space above the water. Rest them on a sheet of
paper, and pour in a quantity of F grain powder; this will fill every
case; loosen the paper wrapper, and allow the superfluous grain powder
to fall on the paper. Set the cases, choke downwards, in the square box.
As they are all full, it is necessary to get a little out of each. For
this purpose, lay the square box, containing them, horizontally on a
sheet of paper, on one of its sides; turn it gently over, and lay it on
the next side; a little of the gunpowder will spill out; turn it gently
over again, and lay it on the next side; and so proceed, till every case
has about 3/8 of an inch empty. The ends of the cases are now to be
closed. Take a case, in the left hand, as in fig. 63, and wind a piece
of string, or whipcord, three or four times round it, holding the end of
the string, a, firmly with the thumb; then, with the right hand, bring
the end, b, back over all the folds, as in fig. 64; pull the end, B,
tight, and the case will be closed.

Melt some common bottle sealing-wax in a pipkin; carry it to a distance
from the fire, and dip the ends of the squibs into it. Next, prime them,
by pressing the choked ends into very slightly damped meal powder, as
directed for wheel cases. Take a piece of touch-paper, 15 inches by 10.
Divide it into 48 pieces (2, 2, 3, 4); each piece will be 2-1/2 by
1-1/4. Roll a piece round the primed end, twist to a point, and fasten
it with a bit of carpet thread, hitched three times round it.




_SERPENTS._


These are simply squibs, made short, in order to burn out quickly, as
they are intended to be thrown from mines, and would otherwise lie too
long on the ground. They are best made entirely of brown paper, pasted
all over, exactly like wheel cases, and choked in the same manner. Cut
the paper 6 inches by 2-1/2, and roll them on the squib former, so that
they shall be 2-1/2 inches long. Ram them with the funnel and wire, but
continue the ramming till the guide-mark stands a little higher than the
level of the funnel; until, in fact, the cases get half full. Bounce,
close, and dip them in melted wax, like squibs. The best way to prime
them is to paint them with the sash-tool, slightly, then plunge them
into dry meal, so that they may be, as nearly as possible, like
quickmatch. If they were pressed into wet meal powder, of the
consistency of mortar, and then rubbed smooth on a Dutch tile, or
slate, or plate, they would dry hard and glazed. In this case, if they
were fired from a mine, in all probability three-fourths of them would
miss. In brushing them with the sash-tool, with meal paste, turn the
brush well round, to leave little in; so that, after being pressed into
the dry meal, they may not be choked up, but the cup shape still be
left. They are not to be touch-papered, being intended only for mines,
rockets, or shells.




_PINWHEELS._


Procure some 16-lb. double-crown white paper.

    A sheet is      30 × 20 inches.
    Cut off a strip 30 × 3
                    -------
    Leaves a piece  30 × 17

The small strip may be used for odd purposes. Divide the 30 by 17 into
10 strips, each 3 by 17, for penny pinwheels. If the paper were cut the
other way of the sheet, it would not wind smoothly, but crumple up. The
fibres, from some cause or other, appear to arrange themselves in one
direction, like the grain in wood. For halfpenny wheels, divide the
sheet into two pieces, each 10 by 30; then cut each of these into 12,
each 10 by 2-1/2. For a former, have a straight piece of iron, or steel,
wire, 1/8 of an inch thick, and 24 inches long. One end of this must
have a basil, or sloping enlargement upon it, which is thus made. Take a
piece of double-crown 4 inches square; lay it straight before you, and
cut it diagonally, from the right top corner to the left bottom corner;
remove the left half; paste the right; lay the wire upon it, so that the
rectangular corner is 5 inches from the right end of the wire; roll it
up, and press it smooth; the sloping edge will now form a spiral,
commencing at 9 inches from the right end of the wire, and being
enlarged at 5 inches from the end. Paste a thin strip of paper over the
whole, to protect the spiral edges. It will now be something of the
shape of fig. 27, only turned the reverse way. The 5 inches at the end
are for a handle. To roll the pinwheel pipes, lay the strips of paper
evenly upon each other, and work them back with the thumbnail, as
before. Paste the edges; lay half-a-quire of double-crown, or of
blotting-paper, flat upon the table, to roll on. Place one of the strips
of pasted paper upon it; lay the wire upon it, the basil end being
towards the right hand; the wire is to be laid, not quite parallel with
the near edge of the paper, but slightly sloping, about an inch and a
quarter distant from it on the left, and not quite an inch on the right,
or basil end. So much of the basil must lie on the paper as will make
the mouth of the pipe large enough for the nozzle of the funnel to enter
half-an-inch. The basil, of course, gathers up the paper more quickly
than the wire, and brings the edge straight, on the completion of the
pipe. Now to roll, bend the paper over the left end of the wire, press
it in with the fingers, and begin immediately to move it forward; at the
same time draw the fingers of the right hand rapidly along, pressing in
the paper, and rolling forward, keeping the right, or basil, end of the
wire tight, and slightly pulled towards you: the paper round the
left end of the wire will have thus become rolled half round the
circumference of the wire, before the basil end has begun. There is
very great difficulty, at first, in rolling so long a pipe as 17 inches;
it is advisable to begin with the halfpenny pipes, which are much
shorter; the same wire-former will serve for both. If you cannot
succeed, get a person to help you; sixteen fingers can manage the matter
easily; but it is best to master the difficulty yourself. Have a funnel
as nearly the size and shape of fig. 66 as possible. It is best with a
lid soldered on the top, with a circular hole in the middle, about the
size of a shilling, to prevent the composition from getting spilt. A
slightly tapering neck is also to be soldered on at the bottom. Take
especial care that the mouth of the funnel dips into the neck, and not
have the neck sticking up in the funnel. The joint inside must be
perfectly smooth. A charging wire will now be required; this should be a
square steel wire, as large as the neck of the funnel will admit, to
move easily up and down; let it also have a piece of lead at the end, to
give it weight. Take a piece of brass tube, about 3/8 of an inch
diameter, and an inch long. Hold the wire in it, with a piece of
flannel, or woollen cloth, and pour in melted lead. To charge the
cases, first bend a quarter of an inch of the small end of the pipe,
over the edge of a knife, into a hook, to prevent the composition
running out; insert the nozzle of the funnel in the enlarged end; hold
the part of the pipe now round it, with the thumb and forefinger of the
left hand, slip the wire, through the funnel, down to the bottom of the
pipe, which must rest, for a moment, on the table; pour in the
composition, jolt the wire up and down; lift the pipe from the table,
keep jolting the wire, at the same time turning it round, and let the
pipe swing slightly to and fro, till filled. A guide-mark must be filed
round the wire, as for squibs, at such a distance as that, when it is
level with the top of the funnel, the bottom may protrude about 3/8 of
an inch. When a number of pipes are charged, close the large, or
basilled, end, which is the one to be lit, by means of a piece of
whipcord, or thin twine, wound round it, as directed in figs. 63 and 64.
Soak a towel in water; wring it as dry as possible; spread it out flat;
lay the pipes in a row, side by side, upon it, like rushes in a chair
bottom; roll them up in it, and leave them for 10 or 15 minutes. Then
wind them upon the usual circular blocks, and fasten the end with
sealing-wax. Be careful that the wax is not in a flame at the moment of
touching the case; if necessary, blow it out. Accidents will arise, both
from the wax and from the candle, if care is not used. Measure, with a
tape, round the wheel, now wound; suppose 4 inches; cut a piece of blue
double-crown, 4 inches broad, and any length: cut this into strips about
3/16 of an inch broad, and 4 inches long; paste a slate all over; lay
these strips, 7 or 8 of them, side by side, flat upon it; paste their
upper surface; lay one across each pinwheel, and bend it over to make
the ends meet in the centre on the other side. If you wish the pinwheel
to be of double or triple size, after you have charged one pipe, paste
the small end of a second pipe, outside, and stick it in the other. Let
it dry; then charge the additional pipe. Observe, the pipes must not lie
too long in the towel; if the nitre gets dissolved, it soaks into the
paper, which becomes, virtually, touchpaper, and one pipe ignites the
other. The wire formers must not be allowed to get rusty; therefore,
before laying them aside smear them with tallow, or olive oil. The wire
is much facilitated, too, in delivering, if, just before using it, it is
slightly oiled, and then wiped, apparently, perfectly dry. After the
wheels are finished, they should be spread out to dry, as soon as
possible. It is not usual to prime them; and, as sold, they are very
difficult and troublesome to light; for private use, they may have a
short piece of match inserted in the mouth, and a small bit of
touch-paper wound round it. French nails are now made, of wire, very
thin; those, about an inch long, are much better than pins, for firing
the wheel upon, as they have larger heads, and prevent its falling off.
Pinwheel blocks may be obtained of Merrick, Shuttle Maker, 155, Bethnal
Green Road; the same person sells triangular and vertical wheels;
caprice, furilona and pigeon frames; rocket sticks; mine bottoms; saxon
centres, &c.; also, plait mills, made to order.




_CRACKERS._


A good tough paper for these is 24 mill, 19-lb. double-small hand.

    A sheet is       30 × 20 inches.
    Cut off a strip  30 × 4
                     -------
    Leaves a piece   30 × 16

The strip 30 by 4 may be used for squibs, or any odd purpose. For penny
crackers cut the 30 by 16 into 8 strips, each 3-3/4 by 16. For halfpenny
crackers divide the sheet into 2 pieces, each 10 by 30. Cut each of
these into 10, each 10 by 3. For a former have a straight piece of iron,
or steel, wire, 3/20 of an inch diameter, and 24 inches long. This will
not require a basil. Have, also, another wire, of half the thickness,
for an opening wire. Lay the strips on blotting-paper, as before; and
place the wire parallel with the edge of the strip, as there is now no
basil. When a number of pipes are rolled and dry, hold one flat on a
table; and, with the handle of a knife, or tooth-brush, rub the pipe
flat along, all except the first half-inch, held in the left hand, to
form a little cup. Now push the opening wire through it, to partially
open it. Bend the bottom, over a knife, into a little hook, as before
directed, for pinwheels. Take up a quantity; wind a strip of paper round
them, as in banging squibs, and pour in a quantity of FFF, or canister
powder. Unless the powder is very fine it will not run down. Pipes may
be filled with F grain powder, one at a time, by putting a funnel into
the cup part, and tapping the pipe with a wire. You can hear the powder
run down, and easily judge when the pipe is full. The powder is now to
be crushed into meal, by rolling the pipes through a plait mill, fig.
71. This is furnished with a wooden screw, at top; the screw presses
upon a cross-bit, which bears upon two movable collars: these rest on
the axis of the top cylinder, by which means the pressure can be
adjusted as desired. The cylinders of plait mills are of beech, or
boxwood; the latter are, of course, the best; but for making great
numbers of crackers, it is necessary to have the frames of iron, and the
cylinders of steel. If a mill cannot be procured, the pipes may be
rolled with a brass tube, or rolling-pin, or passed through an American
mangle; but a very good, and far less expensive plan, is to lay them on
an anvil, or flat-iron turned upside down, and beat them with a
smooth-faced hammer; this is a tedious process, but it makes good
crackers. The cup end, having served its purpose, is to be flattened,
and bent into a hook. Now lay the pipes in a damp towel, like the
pinwheels. Take two pieces of deal, each about 6 inches long and 1-1/2
inch broad: let the one for the halfpenny crackers be 3/4 of an inch
thick; the other, for the penny, 1 inch thick. Saw and chisel a piece
out of each, about 4 inches long and 1/2 an inch broad, as drawn, fig.
67, so that it looks like the first and third fingers of the hand held
straight up, with the second finger, between them, shut. Next procure 20
pieces of wire, each 2 inches long, and about 1/16 of an inch thick.
Support the cracker-frame in a vice: lay the cracker across the opening;
place a wire upon it, as at a, fig. 68; bend the pipe over it; lay on it
another wire, on the other side, as b; bend back, and lay on it the wire
c; and so on, alternately, till the cracker is bent up. Lift it out of
the frame, and let the wires drop. The distance between the wires, in
the halfpenny crackers, will be 3/4 of an inch; in the penny, 1 inch; if
made according to the directions given. The outside of the frame should
be very slightly tapered, or it will be difficult to lift the cracker up
out of it. The penny size will probably take 14 wires; the halfpenny 10
wires. Cut the end flush, to expose the crushed powder; wind round it a
piece of touch-paper, about 1-3/4 inch long, 1-1/4 broad; it need not be
pasted; fold up the cracker; pass a piece of flax or thread twice round
it; twist the thread in and out, backwards and forwards, among the
folds; and the cracker is complete. If the paper does not appear
sufficiently thick to make a good report, cut the strips broader, and
fewer to the sheet; but always cut them up the short way of the paper,
or they will not bend properly. The paper for pinwheels and crackers is
30 inches by 20; the longest pipe that can be cut is 20 inches: as an
experiment, try a pinwheel and cracker the other way of the paper. If
the cracker is intended to be put into a jack-in-the-box, shell, or
rocket head, push a bradawl up the mouth, insert a bit of quickmatch,
to project a quarter of an inch, and secure it with a little wetted
meal, pressed in with a knife. The way of bending it is shown at fig.
69. It is not necessary that a cracker should contain very much powder;
the loudness of the bang depends more upon the thickness of the paper
than upon the quantity of the powder. So with maroons; more string and
less powder, are better than more powder and less string. A very good
paper for crackers is 30-lb. royal cartridge; cut the strips 3 inches
broad; 16-lb. double-crown may also be used, the strips 5 inches broad.
Crackers for mines may be made with brown paper.

To make a cracker with 30 or 40 bangs, it is necessary to join 3 or 4
pipes together, before putting in the grain powder: the mode of making a
joining will be understood by attending to the following directions. Cut
a piece of paper 3 inches square, and lay it straight before you. At one
inch from the right top corner, make a mark; at one inch from the left
bottom corner, make a mark; draw an oblique straight line from one to
the other, and cut along it with a pair of scissors. Without disturbing
the relative position of the two pieces, draw the right piece a few
inches towards the right; paste the farther edges, as usual; lay the
wire close along the near edge of the right piece, and roll it up; it
will have an external spiral; roll up the left piece in the same manner;
it will have an internal spiral; when both are dry, paste the external
spiral, and screw it, as it were, into the other piece. If managed
carefully, and brought up till the edge of the paper forms a straight
line, the joining will be as firm as if the paper had not been cut,
presenting only a spiral edge, going once round the pipe.


LEADER PIPES.

These are for piping quickmatch; they are rolled exactly like pinwheel
pipes, on wires of different thickness, to suit the size of the match.
They must be large enough to admit the match easily, without much
pushing, which would break it; otherwise, the more nearly they fit the
match, the more rapidly it blows through. The fire is conveyed from the
tail of one case to the mouth of another, by a short piece of pipe, d,
fig. 80, with the match projecting at both ends; when the fire has to
be conveyed to two other cases at once, a fresh bit of piping is slipped
on, and the match left exposed, as at a; or a piece is cut out of the
side, as at b; each end should be bent into a hook, as at c, to prevent
its slipping back. Wheel cases are to be enveloped by rolling a piece of
double-crown twice or thrice round them, two inches longer than the
case, as fig. 82, shown by the dotted lines. Suppose you have six wheel
cases ready charged; lay six pieces of double-crown flat before you, and
work them back with the thumbnail, as before described; paste the 6
edges; lay the 6 wheel cases in a row, side by side, and draw the paste
brush across the middle, as if pasting your knuckles; then roll one in
each envelope, so that it projects an inch at each end. Put the leader
pipe in, and tie it with a piece of carpet thread, thin twine, or waxed
yellow flax or hemp, as at fig. 83. To join one pipe to another, to
lengthen it; suppose you have a piece of match 40 inches, long, and two
pipes of 20 inches each. Slip both the pipes on the match, so that they
touch in the middle; take the end of one, so touching, gather it round
the match; pinch the end of the pipe tapering, push it into the other,
and bind a piece of pasted paper round, to secure the joint. In cutting
a matched pipe straight across, of course the match inside gets cut
flush; do not leave it so, but, with a pair of pointed scissors, cut
away a quarter of an inch of the pipe all round, and bend the exposed
match, as at c, fig. 80, before putting it into the envelope of the
case. Besides a strong pair of pointed scissors, a small pair, 3 inches
long, with rounded ends, to carry constantly in the waistcoat pocket,
will be found convenient for many purposes.




_MAROONS._


Take 3 inches of a 6/8 or 3/8 rocket case. Fix, in one end, a cork, half
an inch long; put in 2 inches of F grain powder; on this, another cork.
Wind string tightly round it, lengthwise, 6 or 8 folds, side by side;
bend it to a right angle, and wind 6 or 8 more folds; and so on, till
covered; then wind crosswise; and again, at right angles, as in fig. 74.
Dip it into melted glue, and put by to dry. When dry, make a bradawl
hole through one part, to reach the powder. Make sure of this, by
inverting it, and letting a little drop out. Insert a short port-fire,
having a piece of match at the bottom, and touch-papered at the top.


ANOTHER METHOD.

Take a rocket case, 5 inches long, and unchoked. Put in one solid inch
of plaster of paris. When this is dry, pour in 3 inches of F
grain-powder; on this put another solid inch of plaster of paris. When
dry, wind string tightly round it, up and down the cylindrical part, not
the ends, till of two thicknesses. Paint the string over with melted
glue. Make a bradawl hole in the middle of one side; fasten to it a
squib, without a bang, having a piece of quickmatch at the end, to enter
the hole. Cover the joining with two layers of pasted paper. On the
other side, below, fasten a short piece of deal, like a rocket stick,
with a point, to put into the ground, fig. 72. After lighting the
touchpaper, remove to a distance; as bits of string are likely to get
driven into the face, on the explosion.

To fire a salute with maroons, at regular intervals of time. Charge a
port-fire, and saw it into inch lengths; envelope each in a piece of
double-crown, 3 inches broad, and long enough to go thrice round the
port-fire. Hang the maroons to hooks, or otherwise suspend them, on a
frame, a foot distance from each other, as a, b, c, fig. 75. Underneath
them fasten, with binding screws, or tie to nails, the port-fires x, y.
Connect the port-fires with one another, and with the maroons, by
leaders, in the usual way. On lighting at w, the first maroon explodes,
and the first port-fire catches; this, having burnt, lights the second
maroon and the second port-fire; and the port-fires being of the same
length, the intervals of time between the explosions of the maroons will
be the same.




_GOLD AND SILVER RAINS._


These are little cases, 2-1/2 inches long, rolled on a 1/4-inch former,
and filled with the funnel and wire. They may be primed like fig. 29 or
30, or like squibs. Put them, mouth downwards, into rocket heads.




_PEACOCK'S PLUMES._


These are a combination of rain and star. Roll them like pill-box cases,
on a 3/8 inch former, about 1-3/4 inches long; charge one end, 3/8 of an
inch deep, with coloured fire, driven in dry; fill up with gold, or
silver rain, with a film of shell fuse at the top, to bind. Cut a bit of
match, 2-1/4 inches long, lay it outside the case, so that it projects
3/8 of an inch at one end; envelope it in a piece of double-crown, fig.
90; tuck in the paper, to press the match, at one end, on the colour;
twist the other to a point. Both ends thus light at once; and the rain
appears, like a coloured star, with a tail.

To prime a case with match laid flat on the mouth. Take a piece of
thread, or fine string, and fold, or bend it, in the middle, as at fig.
76. Tie a knot near the bent end, as at a, fig. 77. Bring the knot, a,
up to the side of the case, as at fig. 78; pass the loose ends round,
and tie in a knot, at b. Lay the bits of match flat across, as at e,
fig. 79; bring the threads together, and tie them at c. Or bend tape
match across, and tie, as at d.

To get a fine thread through a long pipe, or the hem of a bag. Take a
piece of copper wire, and bend it round at one end, as z, fig. 88. Pass
the end, z, forward, and push it through to the other end of the bag,
&c., then bend it to the form of x, fig. 89; pass the string through the
loop x, and pull the wire back.




_SAUCISSONS._


These are a large kind of serpent, charged on a nipple, like a wheel
case, with solid drift and mallet. They may be 5/8 or 6/8 or larger;
about 3-1/2 inches long. Drive in brilliant fire, or gerbe, fig. 84,
1-1/2 inch; fill up to within 1/2 an inch of the top with F grain
powder; and plug the end with plaster of paris, or a bit of wood,
fastened with a tack or two. Press a piece of touch-paper, or
double-crown, into the shape of a deep pill-box; fill it with F grain
powder; fit it to the mouth of the saucisson; tie round the choke;
brush, with meal paste, the outside, at bottom, and dip into dry meal.
These saucissons are to be fired in a volley. Procure, say 2 dozen, iron
tubes, a, b, c, &c., each a foot long; fit them with a wooden bottom,
fig. 92, having a tenon, t, an inch long; let it be fastened with a
screw on each side. Bore a hole through, to make a communication with
the mortar formed by the tube. Take a board, an inch thick, of suitable
length and breadth; bore in it 2 dozen holes, of a size to fit the
tenons; glue these in, so that the tubes, or mortars, stand upright, in
rows, side by side, like the pieces on a chess-board. Invert it. Nail a
rim all round, so as to make a box, 2 or 3 inches deep. Cut a groove
from hole to hole of the tenons; connect all the holes with naked match,
also push a bit of match up all the holes in the tenons; now fill the
box with sawdust, and nail a board on, to serve for a bottom, and to
keep the sawdust in. Invert it; and put a saucisson, mouth downwards,
into each mortar. Fig. 84 represents a single saucisson; w, w, w, fig.
85, saucissons in the mortars. On firing the match at s, it is evident
the cases will be driven out rapidly, one after the other. The sawdust
prevents the flash igniting the whole at once.




_PEARL STREAMERS._


Paste brown paper all over, and roll up a case, of four or five
thicknesses, on an inch and a quarter, or an inch and a half former,
like a rocket or other case; when dry, cut it in the lathe (see fig. 27)
into inch lengths--inch-deep bottomless pill-boxes. Set one on a foot,
fig. 9, to enter about 1/8 of an inch; mallet in the pearl streamer
fuse, till nearly full, then a little meal powder; remove it from the
foot, and press in flat, with a knife, a little plaster of paris, to
form a bottom. They will have the appearance of bungs; fire them in
volleys, like saucissons, from suitable-sized mortars. Primed end
downwards, of course. Match may be tied on, as in figs. 78 and 79.




_BLUE LIGHTS & STAR CANDLES, OR STAR LIGHTS._


These are little cases, charged with the funnel and wire; the latter are
filled with spur fire.




_PRINCE OF WALES'S FEATHERS._


These are simply pinwheel pipes, usually of coloured double-crown,
charged with pinwheel fuse, and not wound on a block, but kept straight.




_LANCES._


These are little cases charged with white or coloured star composition.
They should be of white or coloured double-crown paper, rolled dry on
the squib former, and secured at the edge with paste in the usual way.
They may be from 2-1/2 to 4 inches long, as may be required; press in
one end to make a bottom. To do this, bore a hole through a piece of
cork or a small bung, and through it push a piece of brass wire or
stair-rod, fig. 81, of a suitable diameter. It can then be set to any
distance, like a cutting gauge. If the lance case is 2-1/2 inches long,
set the bung at rather more than 2-1/4 inches from the end. Put it up
the case, and, holding it with the left hand, with the right, with a
piece of wire push in the end to make a flat bottom. Charge with the
squib funnel and wire; and prime the mouth with very slightly damped
meal. Lances are used for forming letters and designs, similar to gas
jets. Frames for letters and devices are made with pieces of thin wood
and cane, or hooping, for straight lines and curves. A number of wires,
3 inches apart, are driven into the frames so as to stand forward, at
right angles, and the lances are fixed on them. The following is the way
of proceeding. Procure some inch French nails, or inch rivets; the
former at the ironmonger's; the latter at the grindery shops. Drive them
in, at the proper distances; then, with a pair of cutting pliers or
nippers, cut off their heads. Drive a piece of wire, the same thickness
as the nails, into a bradawl handle, and leave it projecting 3/8 of an
inch; file this triangular, or three-sided, and pointed. Push this
triangular bradawl up the bottom of the lance, then fix the lance on the
wire destined to receive it; it will be more secure if the wire is
touched with a dip of glue before pressing the lance on. Having
completed the letter or device, proceed to leader it. For this purpose
have a supply of 1/2-inch rivets; they may be purchased at the grindery
shops for about 5_d._ per lb. Take a length of leadered or piped
quickmatch; lay one end of it on the mouth of a lance; push the
triangular bradawl through the match and down into the lance; turn the
bradawl round, which will insure the breaking of the match and of the
priming; withdraw the bradawl, and push in a rivet; and so proceed. Take
a strip of flannel 3 inches broad, roll it into the shape of a cork, and
secure it from untwisting with a bit of string. Dip this into a
solution of gum arabic or thick dextrine, and rub it over a sheet of
double-crown. When dry, cut the sheet into pieces about half an inch
broad and an inch and a half long, something like postage stamps. Take
one of these, damp it like a postage stamp, and press it over the
joining, and smooth it round the lance. Or a strip of paper may be
pasted, and pressed round. The match will thus be nailed, as it were, to
the lances; and prevented from slipping off by the gummed or pasted
strip of paper. A common bradawl will not answer the purpose so well as
a triangular one, as the sharp edges of the latter break the match and
priming, and insure the ignition.


TO FORM A DEVICE, OR DESIGN.

Take a sheet of paper, and draw upon it a representation of whatever is
intended, as a temple, a mosque, a ship, a horse, George and the dragon,
&c.; then cross the design with lines, at regular distances, and at
right angles, so as to cover it with squares, as fig. 86. It is now
requisite to have a floor, of a considerable size; but not necessarily
so large as the design intended to be fired, as a part can be done at a
time; this floor must be divided into large squares, and the device from
the small pattern, fig. 86, transferred to it, and the outlines chalked
on the floor, fig. 87. After this a number of frames are to be made, of
deal, or other wood, like square lattice-work, as fig. 91. A frame is
then to be laid on the floor, so as to cover _a portion_ of the design;
and the French nails, or inch rivets, before mentioned, driven in, at
distances of 3 inches, to receive the lances. Every frame must be
numbered, and a copy kept in miniature, so that they may be correctly
fitted together, to form the figure, without delay or error. To
distribute the fire rapidly, over an extensive piece, it is necessary,
at points, to make one leader light several, simultaneously. Suppose 10
are to be lighted at once: bring the 10 ends together and tie them;
envelope them with a piece of double-crown, projecting a couple of
inches; in the void put a scoop of meal; bring in the single match that
is to light them, and tie as usual. Paste a piece of paper over all, to
make secure.


TO PRESERVE STEEL FILINGS, OR CAST-IRON BORINGS.

Put 1 lb. into a frying-pan, or iron ladle, with 3 ounces of marine
glue; set it over the fire; and, as the glue melts, stir it about till
thoroughly incorporated with the filings, or borings. When cold, bottle
them, and cork. Marine glue may be obtained at Pattrick and Sons, 51,
High Street, Whitechapel. It is 1_s._ per lb., which is the smallest
quantity sold. Marine glue is made by putting pieces of india-rubber
into mineral naphtha; the caoutchouc swells up; it is then to be
triturated into a uniform mass, mixed with shellac, and melted. Wax
solution, or stearine solution, rubbed up in a mortar, with steel
filings, or cast-iron borings, also preserves them. The nitre of the
gunpowder, however, attacks them, and ultimately rusts them; so that
fireworks are never so brilliant as when recently charged.




_SHELLS._


Shells are hollow paper globes, fired vertically, from mortars, or iron
tubes. They are made of various sizes, from 3 inches in diameter to 16
inches. To make a 3-inch shell. Turn a wooden ball, 3 inches diameter;
and, round the middle, that is, the equatorial circumference, cut a V
groove, or triangular channel, deep enough to receive a piece of raw or
naked match. Remove it from the lathe, and cut it into two halves at
right angles to the groove, that is, round a meridional circumference.
Construct a deal box, 4 inches square, 2 inches deep. Place one of the
half globes, flat surface downwards, on the middle of the bottom of the
box, and secure it with screws from underneath. Brush it, and the
inside of the box, all over, with sweet oil, with a camel's-hair pencil.
Put some water into a basin; sprinkle into it as much plaster of paris
as judged necessary; about 4 tablespoonfuls; pour off the water which
floats above; stir up the plaster till homogeneous; pour it into the
box; and, with a sash-tool held upright, beat the plaster in with the
points of the bristles. Leave it to set.

Instead of having a wooden ball turned, a hemispherical concavity may be
made by pressing, half way, into sand, one of the painted india-rubber
balls sold at the toyshops; and pouring plaster over it. Or, a basin, an
inch diameter larger than the intended shell, can have the plaster mixed
up in it, till about three-parts full; and then the bottom of an oil
flask can be pressed into it. A narrow strip of blue paper should be
previously pasted round the oil flask, at the proper height, as a guide
to know the proper depth to which it may be pressed. The plaster, when
partly dry, must be neatly trimmed; and may be left, permanently, in the
basin. Or, a stiff paper cylinder, or a tin cylinder, may be made, an
inch larger in diameter than the diameter of the intended shell: put
the oil flask into this, neck downwards, and pour in dry sand, till only
the hemispherical bottom of the flask is left exposed; level the sand;
oil the flask; and pour in plaster, as before. Be careful that the mould
is not less than half-an-inch thick in any part. Or, one or two, or more
halves of the zinc, or copper globes, used for ball-taps, may be
obtained of the plumber, and used for moulds, without further
preparation.


TO MAKE THE SHELLS.

Procure two kinds of paper; one imperial brown; the other sugar paper,
printed paper, paper hangings, or any paper of a different colour from
brown. The shell is supposed to be 3 inches; half as much again is
4-1/2; add to this 1-1/2 for a flange, gives 6. Cut out a circular piece
of the brown paper, 6 inches in diameter. Snip it all round with the
scissors, in slits, reaching from the circumference, half way towards
the centre; soak it in water, and lay it on a towel to drain. Have a
piece of sponge, about the size of an orange; soak it also, and wring
it. Place the piece of brown paper in the plaster concavity, and press
it in neatly with the sponge, in all directions; it will fill up the
mould, and overhang all round; press the overhanging part flat, so that
it forms a flange. Cut a piece of another coloured paper, into a strip,
about 2 inches broad, and paste it well; then cut it across, backward
and forward, like the letter W, which will reduce it to V-shaped
triangles. Take these up, one by one; lay them in the brown paper,
pasted side downwards, and press them neatly in with the sponge, making
each slightly overlap the other. Let these also overhang to thicken the
flange. This being done, proceed with a layer of brown; and so on,
alternately, till it gauges about 2-3/4 inches across. The shell will,
then, be about 1/8 of an inch thick. Remove it, and proceed with others.
The different-coloured papers enable the eye to detect, in a moment,
whether any part is left uncovered. When dry, cut off the flange; make
the edge straight: rub it on a sheet of glass paper, spread flat on a
board. With a 9/16 inch punch, cut a hole in the middle of one
hemisphere; to it, glue another hemisphere: and cover with two more
layers of paper, or pieces of calico. The shell may, then, when dry, be
filled with any kind of stars, or rains, that can be got through the
hole. Along with the stars put 1/16 of their weight of meal powder for a
bursting charge: that is, if the stars weigh 4 ounces, as they probably
will, put 4 drams of mealpowder. Charge a roman candle case, 3/8 inch
internal, (4-1/2)/8 external diameter, with shell fuse (see fig. 59);
saw it into inch lengths. Cut a piece of calico, 2 inches broad, and
long enough to go twice round the fuse: paste the calico all over, and
roll the fuse in it, so that the envelope is flush at one end, and
overhangs one inch at the other. Glue this in the hole of the shell, the
flush end, a, fig. 93, of course, inward: the enveloped end, b, being to
receive the match, 3/4 of the fuse may be pushed in, 1/4 of an inch left
to project. With a printer's bodkin, or a stiletto, make a hole through
both sides of the envelope, as at c and d; these holes are to be in a
line with the groove; put through them a piece of raw match, in such a
manner that it shall lie across the mouth of the fuse, and go, in the
groove, round the shell underneath, and reach to e and f. Paste strips
of paper over the match, the same as with tourbillions and saxons; or,
the part of the match lying in the groove, may be in a leader pipe.
Weigh the shell, and take about 1/5 of its weight of coarse grain
powder, for a blowing charge. Make a cone of two or three thicknesses of
paper; put the blowing charge into it; stick the cone on the bottom of
the shell, and set by to dry. In the calico mouth of the fuse, tie a
long piece of leadered match, and paste a strip of paper round, to make
secure. If the mould has been made with the indentation of an oil flask,
or with the globe of a ball-tap, it will, of course, not have a groove
to receive the match; but this is of little consequence; the match can
be drawn round outside, and covered, so as to appear as it does on
tourbillions and saxons, like a vein on the back of the hand, when the
fingers are held downwards.

Formerly mortars were made of sheet iron, riveted and bound round with
cord, which latter would not prevent them cracking, if they were not
thick enough: they are now made on an improved principle: the iron is
rolled, by powerful machinery, of three thicknesses, exactly like a
squib case; it is, then, made white-hot, and the three are welded
together, with a steam hammer. Large mortars, also, have an iron bottom,
or breech fixed in them, and are farther strengthened with a couple of
rings, put on hot, and shrunk by cold, like tires on wheels; a third
ring is put over the other two, as in the Armstrong guns. The mortar is
placed in a hole, dug in the ground, a few inches left standing out; the
earth is shovelled in, and driven down firm; a penthouse lid, to keep
out rain, dirt, and insects, renders it complete. Amateurs require
nothing of this kind. A small mortar may be a tube, open at both ends,
and fitted with a wooden bottom, to which it is to be firmly screwed.
Fig. 94 represents such mortar: it may be 4 diameters high; and the foot
should have a conical hole turned in it to receive the cone fastened to
the shell. The match is lit at t; but this may have a long bit of
touch-paper attached to it, if preferred.

Instead of making a plaster mould, to form the shells in, the shells may
be made by covering a wooden sphere, with paper, on the outside; when
dry, they may be cut round in the lathe (a cross mark, with a pencil,
having previously been made, as a guide to bring the same parts together
again); the wooden mould removed; the cut edges glued; and the shell
fitted up, in the usual way. Clean oil flasks may be covered with six or
eight thicknesses of paper: paste an inch, or two, round the neck; when
dry, cut through the cover, near the spherical part; file a notch all
round, and snap it off. I have made excellent shells this way; the chief
objection against them is their limited size. Glass globes might be
blown, of uniform size, in moulds, like bottles. Another ready way of
making shells, is to cover the india-rubber air-balls, of the toyshops,
almost as thin as soap-bubbles; when the cover is dry, a hole may be
cut, for the fuse, with a penknife, and they are ready, at once, to
receive the stars. Their shape is that of a prolate spheroid, fig. 106.
After eight thicknesses, or more, of paper have been pasted on, measure,
with a tape, round the equatorial circumference, b e d, which suppose 17
inches; add 1 to this=18 inches. Measure from the pole, a, down the
meridian by e to the opposite pole c, suppose 11 inches. Cut a piece of
double-crown, 18 by 11; fold it down the middle, to a double thickness
of 9 by 11; fold-again to 4-1/2 by 11; again to 2-1/4 by 11; there will,
now, be eight thicknesses. Pencil the shape fig. 107 upon the top, and
cut through the whole. Paste the eight gores on, as in fig. 106; for
ornament, half may be pink; half, green. If these air-balls could be
blown in a spherical mould, of uniform size, they would obviate the
gluing process, which is, at present, a tedious and necessary evil; they
would, also, be much cheaper, as they could be supplied for about 4_d._
per dozen, and save the cost of a great deal of needless labour.




_CYLINDRICAL SHELLS._


A sphere is, by no means, the best shape for a projectile; no one would
think of making a roman candle star like a marble; the Minie bullets and
the bolt-shot for our great guns are cylindrical, and far better fitted
than globes for straight and rapid flight. Why not adopt the same shape
for shells? I find cylindrical shells answer excellently. Have a
former, for a small one, 2-1/2 inches diameter, and about 6 inches long,
and with a handle like fig. 25. Roll a case upon it, 5 inches long, till
the outside gauges 2-3/4 inches, or a trifle more. Turn a wooden bottom,
3/4 of an inch thick; half of it a tenon to fit the inside of the case,
and half of it a flange, equal to the external diameter, a, fig. 95.
Glue this firmly in, and farther secure it with 4 inch French nails;
though, perhaps, this is not necessary. The top may be of the same
shape; half-an-inch thickness will be sufficient. A hole, an inch in
diameter, may be bored in it, with a centre-bit, to receive the fuse.
This fuse may be a cotton reel, with one of the flanges sawed off, and
the end filed slightly tapering, as fig. 105; the enveloping piece of
calico, or glazed lining, can then be passed to the bottom, as indicated
by the dotted lines; but a better way is to turn a piece of beech of the
shape of fig. 96, with a collar, to prevent its being blown through, and
a groove, by which the calico envelope can be tied. The length of the
fuse may be about 1-1/4 inch; charge it by putting in very little at a
time, and well mallet it. Pass a piece of naked match over the mouth of
the fuse, and down the sides of the cylinder, as indicated by the dotted
lines, fig. 95, having previously cut out a notch, at each corner, top
and bottom, e, e, e, e, to guide it in a straight line. Take a piece of
double-crown, about 20 inches long, and 7 broad; paste it all over, and
roll the cylinder in it, in such a way that it shall be flush at top,
and project at the bottom; press it round smooth with a cloth, or
sponge, till the leaders form a vein on each side. When dry, invert it;
put in the blowing powder; press the ends over, neatly, to form a
bottom; and cover the whole with a circular piece of pasted paper. A
shell of this size will hold forty gold rains, and a score or more blue
stars, which have a very pretty effect. The head and the fuse may be in
one solid piece, if preferred, as fig. 104; if the hole is longer than
1-1/4 inch, only 1-1/4 inch of it must be filled with fuse; a piece or
two of match may fill up the rest. The mortar for this shell should be
18 or 20 inches high, and 3 inches internal diameter. The shell, when
fitted up, will probably weigh about 14 or 15 ounces. The blowing
powder may be 2 or 2-1/2 ounces of F grain, according to the fit in the
mortar. The hole, in the wooden fuse, should be 3/8 of an inch diameter.
See that the match is everywhere carefully covered. A shell of this size
will be amply sufficient for amateur purposes. Perhaps it will be
advisable to try a fuse an inch long the first time; it will be better
that the shell should burst, while still ascending, than that it should
pitch. One or two trials are, in all cases, necessary; but as these
shells go a great height, they will bear a little longer fuse.

A cylinder holds half as much again as a shell of equal diameter;
consequently, when the depth is twice the diameter, which is the best
proportion, it holds three times as much as the spherical shell. If the
latter be 3 inches diameter, it may be represented by the numbers 3 × 3
× 3 = 27. If the cylinder be 3 inches diameter, and 6 inches deep, it
will be as 3 × 3 × 6 × 1-1/2 = 81. Practically, it will hold more,
especially of rains, or serpents, as they pack better in a cylinder.

The spheroidal shell, like the spherical, is, also, 2/3 of its
circumscribing cylinder.

Putting D, the diameter of a spherical; and d, that of a cylindrical
shell, the length being always double the diameter; then D³ = 3 d³.
Required the diameter of a cylindrical shell, that shall be of equal
capacity with a spherical shell, of 12 inches diameter.

    12³ = 1728; 1728 ÷ 3 = 576 = d³, and

    ∛576 = 8·3 = d.

so the cylindrical shell will be 8-3/10 inches diameter, and 16-3/5
inches long.

The same computation is more readily effected by multiplying the
diameter by ∛(1/3);

    ∛(1/3) = ∛(9/27) = 1/3 ∛9 = ·693.

    Then ·693 × 12 = 8·3, as before.

Shells, for war purposes, are both spherical and cylindrical; the latter
are, sometimes, built up in pieces, which dovetail into each other; they
are, then, set in a cylinder, and melted lead is poured round to bind
the pieces together. For lighting up the country, to discover the
movements of the enemy on a dark night, shells are fired, containing
strong calico parachutes, carrying blue lights. Magnesium lights are, of
course, more effective.

The bottoms and tops of the cylindrical shells, previously described,
may be turned out of a plank of wood: elm, ash, common mahogany, or good
yellow deal; and, as many amateurs who possess a lathe, know of no
contrivance for holding flat pieces of board without making a hole
through them, the following plan may be adopted. On the screw-chuck,
fig. 102, screw a piece of deal board, previously sawn nearly circular,
and as large as the lathe will take: let it be of a thickness to
entirely hide the point of the screw; turn it to a circle; and over the
face of it, with a blacklead pencil, while it is revolving, make a
number of concentric circles, as in fig. 103. Also, cross it with two
straight lines, passing through the centre, at right angles to each
other. Cut the wood, intended for the bottom of the shell, into a
square; make a hole at each corner, and with 4 screws, or 4 French
nails, screw or nail it on the face: the concentric circles, and the two
diametrical lines crossing them, will act as guides to centre it. I have
thus been able to cut into a circle, in the lathe, so thin a substance
as a piece of writing paper. It may be held on with 4 tin-tacks, or a
touch of gum.

A nest of 6 or 9 little shells, each containing a separate colour,
rains, serpents, crackers, &c., may be enclosed in a large shell: the
fuse of these may be a very short piece of a squib-case, with the string
wound 7 or 8 times round the choke, to form a flange, to prevent its
blowing through.

Cylindrical shells should, of course, be filled before the head is glued
in; this can have the fuse previously fixed in, and ready.




_ASTEROID ROCKETS._


These differ from other rockets only in the head, which contains a
parachute for floating a coloured case, attached to the strings. The
parachute is best formed of silk, or alpaca; it may also be made of
black glazed lining, or of tissue paper, carefully rubbed, till the
stiffness is removed. The colour should be dark, that it may be
invisible. If of silk, or alpaca, the parachute may be 20 inches square,
with 4 strings attached to the corners; or it may be made of 6
triangular pieces, sewed together, like an umbrella. If of tissue paper,
the paper may be 6/8 of a circle, or 6/8 of an octagon, as fig. 97. The
tissue paper must be strengthened with a piece of crochet cotton,
running round the edge, as shown by the dotted lines, fig. 101. It is
simply laid on, and the paper snipped at each corner, with the scissors,
pasted, and turned back. The radius of the circle may be 15 inches.

For the lance, or colour, roll the case of 3 thicknesses of writing
paper, on a 5/8 former: it may be 2-1/2 or 3 inches long, and pasted all
over. Turn a little wooden pulley, a, fig. 98, of a diameter to nearly
fit the cylindrical head of the rocket; a hole in the centre of this
pulley receives the colour; round the pulley, in the groove, lay a piece
of chenille, fig. 100; twist the wires of the chenille 2 or 3 times
together, and cut off flush. To charge the lance, set it on a flat
surface, and drive in a film of meal powder, or shell fuse; then 1/3 of
an inch of crimson star composition; 1/3 of an inch of green, &c., till
nearly full; stop the end with plaster of paris, pressed in flat, with a
knife. Paste a strip of paper round the mouth, so as to overhang not
more than 1/8 of an inch; lay in two short pieces of match, one across
the other, and tuck in, or press down, the pasted overhanging edges;
this will keep the match from dropping out. Glue the pulley on, about
midway of the case; envelope the end b with a bit of glazed lining. Take
a piece of string, fig. 99; bring the ends together, and tie in a knot.
Insert the knot in the envelope, and tie round above it, as at fig. 100,
leaving the loop out, to which to attach the strings of the parachute.
Let the strings be 2 feet long: fasten them to the loop; gather them
together; wind them round the colour, above the pulley; fold the
parachute neatly, and bring the edges down over the strings, nearly to
reach the pulley: this will keep the parachute a little open, and help
it to expand. Both the tissue paper and the glazed lining should be well
rubbed, to get the stiffness out of them. To ascertain how a parachute
will act, the learner can take the colour case, and stop one end with
plaster, fill up with sand, and stop the other end with plaster. Fire it
in the day time. Silk, alpaca, and glazed lining parachutes I can vouch
for; tissue paper I have never tried, but am told it answers if it has
not remained folded so long as to get set.

Between the top of the rocket and the mouth of the colour is to be a
little pad of grain powder. Make a little square or circular paper bag
with double-crown, and having put in the grain, and made the joining
secure, smear both sides in the usual way, and sift dry meal over. If
the rocket is to be fired at home, the parachute may be put into a long
cylindrical paper bag, and left quite open at the top; but if intended
to be carried to a distance, a thin bung may be put in at top, or a
piece of turned wood: or a thin piece of paper may be pasted on it. In
this case, be careful that it does not get stuck to the parachute.

Instead of the cylindrical head and the chenilled pulley, the head, fig.
39, may be used; and the protecting power from the fire to the strings
supplied by putting a quantity of bran or sawdust. The cone must be held
on, with not more than two thicknesses of double-crown.




_COMPOUND FIREWORKS._


Fig. 108. A triangular: 3 wheel cases and a case colour, at a. These
cases are tied either to a hexagonal piece of deal board, or to three
spokes, radiating from a nave. The colour is sometimes tied to a nail,
driven in to receive it; or, it may be fixed on to a little peg. The peg
is shown, by the side, at b. It is turned with a tenon, c; this tenon is
glued in a hole, bored in the spoke; the part b may be half an inch in
length; through it bore a small hole; charge the case colour on a foot,
that enters the case half-an-inch; this void fits on to the peg b;
pierce the case, through the hole in the peg, with a bradawl; push a bit
of binding wire through, and twist. This is a far better way than tying
it to a nail, as it cannot drop off. If the colour gets blown off, as it
often does when tied, the piece is half spoilt. The colour may either
stand at right angles, so as to face the spectator; or it may be fixed
so as to lie in a plane with the wheel cases, very slightly sloping
upwards; the mouth of the colour should point the same way as the mouth
of the cases; if it were placed in the opposite direction, it would
meet the current of air, be blown back upon itself, and burn the case
rapidly. With respect to the wheel cases, it is obvious that the mouths
must all point in the same direction; the slightest consideration would
suggest this; it is necessary, therefore, to have some certain rule of
proceeding, so as to avoid mistakes. Now supposing, for the mere sake of
illustration, if you had a case in your hand, it were to take fire, you
would naturally wish the fire to be directed _from_ you. Let this, then,
be the guide. You are about to tie the cases on a wheel. Sit, to do so;
take the wheel between your knees: place a case upon it, with the choke
end _from_ you; tie, near the choke, also near the end; turn the wheel,
place another case upon it, choke end _from_ you; and so forth. Without
this certain way of proceeding, you would be very embarrassed with the
12 cases on fig. 112; but, by attending to it, not the slightest
difficulty will be experienced. Some of the cases will point obliquely
upwards; some downwards; but they will all point _from_ you. In the end
of the last case, as at x, fig. 108, put a little dry clay, to prevent
a stray spark igniting it, and tie the envelope; or, tuck in the
envelope, like as with an ounce of tobacco. Avoid every source of
failure. Even the knots of the strings, with which the cases are tied
on, are apt to come undone; they should either be touched with a dab of
glue, or have a piece of paper pasted over them.

Fig. 109. A double triangular: 3 cases tied to the spokes; 3 to the
previous 3. Double triangular frames are also made, with 6 spokes, on a
long nave, 3 behind 3.

Fig. 110. A vertical wheel, illuminated. This is a wheel, with spokes,
and a rim, or felly. The wooden hoops of the toyshops will furnish the
latter. The illumination, as it is called, is made by lances, nailed
with 1/2 inch Flemish tacks to the nave. The lances should be of
different colours, but they ought, as nearly as possible, to keep time
with each other. To effect this, it is necessary previously to adjust
them; thus. Charge a number of cases, exactly two inches long, with
different colours; use the same scoop to all, and give each the same
number of blows, that they may be rammed as uniformly as possible.
Fasten a string to the end of a leaden bullet, and tie a loop at the
other end of the string. Let the length from the top of the bullet to
the top of the loop be 39 inches. Suspend this from something, and set
it swinging. Light the lances, one after another, and count the number
of oscillations each endures. Keep a list of these, and write against
them 10, 12, &c., or 5 per inch, 6 per inch. The bullet will indicate
seconds, with the length of string recommended; and it matters not
whether you give it a start of 6 inches, or 12 inches; for, if it goes
twice as far, it goes twice as fast, so that the swings isochronise; the
inestimable discovery of Galileo, which led to the invention of the
pendulum. In order that the lances may be nailed on, they should be
charged upside down, and left with 1/2 an inch vacancy; they can then be
pinched flat, to receive the tack. Scrape out a little from the other
end, and prime with very slightly damped meal.

Fig. 111. A rainbow wheel. This is a vertical wheel, generally with 3
colours, as drawn; the tail of the second, or mouth of the third, lights
a; the mouth of the fourth, b and c; but any arrangement may be made.
Place the colours, red, green, blue, at different distances from the
centre, so as to form rings, equidistant, when burning. Suppose the
spoke 12 inches long; place the colours at 3, 6, and 9 inches from the
centre. It receives its name from its resemblance to the rainbow.

Fig. 112. A caprice, or furilona, according to the number of the cases.
A caprice, from the capricious manner in which it turns, up, down, and
round about, now this way, now that. A furilona, possibly, from the fury
with which it plays, when 4 cases are burning together, at the end:
though some call it a fruiloni, said to be from the name of its
inventor. A furilona and caprice wheel are much the same; the former,
generally, has fewer cases on it than the latter. A coloured gerbe,
placed on the top, is very effective; or, it may have a mine, or
jack-in-the-box. The cases are to be placed so that some of them play
horizontally, some obliquely upwards, some obliquely downwards; the
spokes, which are concave at the end, are glued in, so as to determine
the slope of the cases. If there are 10 cases, they may be fired thus,
h, u, d, hud, hudp; that is, 1 horizontal, 1 up, 1 down; 3 at once,
horizontal, up, down; 4 at once, horizontal, up, down, perpendicular. If
13 cases, thus: h, u, d, hu, hd, ud, hudp. While tying the cases on the
frame, it should be on a short wire, held perpendicularly in a vice, or
block of wood; properly, the wire should be tapering, so that the frame
should bite, when dropped on; the tapering will allow it to be turned
round, easily, by slightly lifting it. Let the leaders be drawn
straight, and not left dangling in curves, nor crossing each other.
There must be _enough_ match, but there ought to be no more. Look well
to the mouths and tails of the cases; it is best to put a piece of
pasted paper over each, for as the piece dashes round with great
violence, if a stray spark falls on any composition filtering out, the
whole is spoilt.

Fig. 113. A horizontal wheel, with mine and roman candles; the cases on
the wheel are to be tied so that some play horizontally; some, obliquely
upwards; some, obliquely downwards. To make a case play thus, tie it on
the wheel, across the middle of the case; this being done, turn the
mouth upwards or downwards, and tie it again, making the strings cross
the previous ones, so as to form a letter X.

Fig. 114. A turning sun: two concentric hoops nailed to spokes, or a
frame; the cases lying on the hoops, slope; 3 or 4 may light at once;
the spokes carry triangular, or vertical wheels; at the centre is a
double triangular, or larger vertical.

Fig. 115. A rayonant star piece: a wheel with six spokes; at the end of
each spoke, two fixed cases, forming a V, the alternate spokes carrying
saxons; at the centre, a double triangular, half-way between the
triangles and the saxons, six five-pointed stars. A very beautiful
piece.

Fig. 116. A chequer-piece: a true-lover's-knot in the middle, 16 fixed
cases, 4 on each side the true-lover's-knot; and 4 saxons at the
extremities. The fires cross, and chequer into squares.

Fig. 117. A scroll wheel: six or more cases on the wheel, to play in
pairs; lances arranged on cane or hooping to form a scroll as
indicated.

Fig. 118. A pyramidical piece: a scroll wheel in the middle; five
horizontal wheels, or triangulars, at intervals, as represented by the
rings; brilliant fixed cases playing obliquely upwards: at the bottom
may be a row of cases playing downwards; these form what is called a
cascade. Gerbes make the most effective cascades, but they require to be
placed at a great height from the ground, if containing iron: the coke
grains will be found suited for 8 or 10 feet.

Fig. 119. A spiral wheel: six cases on a horizontal wheel; lances
arranged in a spiral, on cane, or hooping.

Fig. 120. A true-lover's-knot: six 6/8 wheel cases, playing in pairs;
three saxons, one carrying a blue; one, a green; one, a crimson colour.
Light at a; this leader blows across, and lights the opposite starting
case. The tail of this case lights the saxons: the ends of the saxons at
c, c, c, before enveloping them, are to be smeared with meal; the end,
b, is also to be smeared with wetted meal, to insure the ignition of the
leader. This is a most beautiful piece: the colours, on the saxons, form
loops, and represent, in a slight degree, the compound motions of the
moon and planets, with regard to the earth. The centres of the saxons
are carried round in a circle, like the earth in her orbit; the colours
on the saxons revolve round the flying centres, like the moon round the
earth. The wheel must not be less than 3 feet diameter.

Fig. 121. A revolving globe. This is, also, a most beautiful piece. The
bottom is a horizontal wheel, carrying a strong half hoop, a b c; a
skeleton globe, formed with hoops, is suspended in this. This globe is
driven by cases placed upon it, round a hoop, crossing the other hoops,
at right angles, like the equator, at right angles to the meridians. The
meridional hoops are covered with lances, white or coloured. The globe
revolves vertically, while the wheel below turns it horizontally; the
compound motion produces a peculiar oblique tumbling convolution,
exceedingly perplexing to spectators, ignorant of its construction.
Instead of a globe, the top piece may be a revolving cylinder.

Fig. 122. A mine. This is a cylindrical case, containing serpents. The
bottom of the mine should be a circular piece of wood, glued in. On it,
place a circular bag, containing F grain powder. The bag is made with
two circular pieces of paper, one half-an-inch diameter larger than the
other; lay the small one on the top of the large one: paste, or gum, the
exposed rim of the bottom piece, and bend it up, and press it down on
the small or top piece, all round, leaving a part through which to put
the powder; when dry, put in the powder, and stop up the hole. Put it
into the mine, smear it with the brush, dipped into meal paste, in the
usual way; and, with a pepper-box, shake in a little dry meal. Take a
fixed case, charged; envelop it, so that the paper projects about an
inch at the bottom: take a piece of squib-case, the same length as the
serpents; put through it a piece of match, long enough to protrude at
the top, half-an-inch, and to bend over, to form a hook: tie this in the
envelope of the fixed case. Fill the mine with serpents, naked primed
mouth downwards: with the scissors, or a pair of pliers, draw out the
middle serpent; put in the matched squib-case; hold the fixed case
upright, in the mine, and ram pieces of torn paper tight round it, to
offer resistance, and cause the serpents to be blown higher. To adjust
the blowing powder in the bag, use the following formula, I denoting the
diameter in inches.

    I x 2I = drams.

Required the quantity of powder for a mine 1-1/2 inch diameter.

    1-1/2 x 3 = 4-1/2 drams = 1/4 oz.

For 1-3/4 inches?--1-3/4 x 3-1/2 = 7/4 x 7/2 = 49/8 = 6-1/8 drams = 3/8
oz.

For 2 inches?--2 x 4 = 8 drams = 1/2 oz.

For 2-1/2 inches?--2-1/2 x 5 = 12-1/2 drams = 3/4 oz.

For 3 inches?--3 x 6 = 18 drams = 1-1/8 oz.

It is by no means necessary to be exact; but the formula will serve as a
guide.

Fig. 123. A jack-in-the-box. This is a case formed on a square prism of
wood. The paper is to be pasted all over, but as it cannot be rolled, it
must be folded over, one side at a time, and rubbed smooth with a
tooth-brush handle, or pressed with the fingers. The bottom may be
formed by bending in, to a right angle, two opposite sides, and pressing
them flat; then, upon them, the two remaining sides, like packets of
cocoa, &c. Or a square piece of wood may be glued in for a bottom. The
same blowing charge as for mines.

Fig. 124. A devil-among-the-tailors: a mixture of crackers and serpents;
a roman candle in the middle, having its bottom stopped with shell fuse,
instead of plaster of paris: 3, or 4, or any number of roman candles, at
regular distances, round the outside: these are to be tied with string,
and a strip of pasted paper fastened round.

Fig. 125. A line-rocket: two rockets tied to a piece of roman candle
case, head to tail: that is, one rocket tied in one direction, the
other, in the reverse. This simply runs up and down a line.

Fig. 126. A pigeon frame (of which fig. 127 is a cross section) may be
made by taking a piece of deal, or alder, say 6 inches long, and 1-1/2
inch square: bore a hole through the length to receive the line upon
which it is to run; plane off the corners, lengthwise, and channel them
with a gouge, to form 4 semi-cylinders for the rockets to lie in: in the
middle glue 4 spokes, each about 4 inches long; and round the spokes
nail a wheel. A piece of cane makes good spokes, light and strong. Tie
on the frame, lying in the channels, four 6/8 rockets, two pointing one
way; two, the other: the clay or plaster of paris, in these rockets, is
not to have a hole through it, as usual, but to remain perfectly closed.
On the wheel, tie four 5/8 wheel cases, charged with wheel case fuse,
No. 1 or No. 10. Leader it thus: touchpaper the mouth of one wheel case.
From the tail of this first wheel case, carry two leaders; one to the
next wheel case, and one to the rocket whose mouth is nearest: the tail
of the second wheel case lights the third wheel case and second rocket;
and so on. A long clothes line must be stretched tight for this to run
along; it should start 3 or 4 yards, at least, from the post to which
the line is tied: and the rope should be so long that the first rocket
could not carry it to the end; otherwise the leaders are apt to snap and
spoil the piece. Towards the end, as the piece gets lighter, it will run
the whole length of the rope, without injury. It is necessary to
indicate the first, or starting rocket, by some means; a piece of red
paper may be pasted round the mouth; or, an inch or two of string may
be tied to it; or the match may be bent and tied so as to project an
inch or two longer than the others. On fixing it on the line, in the
dark, you can then feel which is the starting rocket, and place its
mouth _towards_ the starting post, without hesitation. Of course the
pigeon runs away in the opposite direction.

Fig. 128. A pigeon-house, made with lances; this may be fixed in a
central position, and have 4 lines running from it: east, west, north,
and south. As soon as the lances are well alight, start the pigeons.
This is not necessary for amateurs. One pigeon is sufficient, without
any pigeon-house.

The piece, fired at the Crystal Palace, termed a comet, is a combination
of the pigeon, fig. 126, and the turning sun, fig. 114. Construct a
pigeon frame, with two hoops, one at each end; to these hoops, attach
brilliant cases, or gerbes, placed obliquely: point the mouths of all
the rockets and gerbes in the same direction. The whole of the cases may
be lit at once; or a short case may fire the rockets after the piece has
partly descended the line, by its own weight. The line, at the Crystal
Palace, is stretched from the top of the northern tower to the ground.

Fig. 129. A double guilloché, or windmill piece. This represents two
windmills, turning in opposite directions; and imitates the engine
turning, on the backs of watches.

Fig. 130. A five-pointed star. This has been already described.

It is desirable, sometimes, to convey the fire from a movable or
rotating piece, to a fixed, or second rotating piece, which is effected
thus. A leader, a, fig. 131, comes from the tail of the last case of the
first rotating piece. This leader is tied, in one or more places, to one
of the spokes of the wheel, and to the nave; and is left protruding at
b. A tin box, or a bit of a mine case, d e f g, is attached to the
fixed, or second movable piece in such a manner, as to surround, but
stand clear of, the end of the match, b, as it revolves, with the wheel.
A hole is made at c, and the end of a leader, from the second piece,
brought through it. The inside surface of the box, d e f g, is smeared
with meal-paste. When the leader catches at a, it blows through to b;
this lights the smeared surface of the box; the flash communicates the
fire to c, and this carries it where desired.

Sometimes a piece is made to drop, which is thus effected. Suppose a
cylindrical piece of iron, 6 inches long, 3 inches diameter, standing
upright; on this a second cylinder, 12 inches long, 2 inches diameter;
and, on this, a third cylinder, 2 inches long, and 1 inch diameter. If
now a brass ring 1-1/4 or 1-1/2 inches diameter be put on the top, it
will slip down, and rest on the 2-inch cylinder; if a ring 2-1/2 inches
diameter be slipped over the top, it will fall, and rest on the bottom
3-inch cylinder. It is obvious that, if a horizontal wheel, having a
hole in the nave, 2-1/2 inches diameter, be slipped on, it will drop,
and rest on the bottom cylinder; and that a second wheel, with a 1-1/2
inch hole in the nave, will rest on the second cylinder. The two wheels,
then, may be placed on, and held together with a piece of thickly
leadered match; the top wheel plays for a while, and carries the second
wheel with it; the tail of the first, or other case, lights the bottom
wheel, and at the same time blows the match to pieces, and the wheel
drops. Of course three or more wheels may drop, one after another. See
the design, fig. 166.

Sometimes a horizontal motion is changed to a vertical, thus. Suppose an
upright wooden post, 3 inches square. Saw off the top 18 inches, and fix
it on again, with a hinge; drive a staple, on the other side, into the
top piece; also one into the bottom piece; and connect the staples with
a piece of string, to prevent the top piece falling. In the top drive a
spindle, as usual, to receive a horizontal wheel. On the side of the
fixed post, against the hinge, fasten an iron bracket, to stand forward,
so that the top part, when the string is cut, can fall down, and rest on
the bracket. Now slip over the spindle a brass tube, 3 inches long, and
almost a fit; then put on it a horizontal wheel, carrying a smeared box,
as above described, to convey the fire to a fixed piece; on the top of
the spindle screw a nut. To the bottom post, tie a piece of shell fuse,
and let the string, that prevents the top piece from falling, be drawn
over the mouth of this, and secured. It is obvious that if, after the
wheel has played awhile horizontally, the shell fuse is lit by a
leader, the string will be burnt in two; the top part will fall on to
the bracket; and the horizontal motion will be changed to a vertical
one.

Roman candles are best fired in bouquets of three or more; connect them
with leaders about 3 inches long; and set them in a block of wood,
containing three or more holes, diverging right and left; or tie them to
struts of wood, nailed together, like the supports for garden flowers.

Two vertical wheels may be made to run round the outside of a table, to
imitate the motion of the machine for grinding drugs, crushing clay,
&c., like two parallel grindstones going round in a circular trough.
Conceive a circular table, 20 inches diameter. With a gimlet bore a hole
in the centre, large enough to admit a screw-eye, with liberty to turn
easily round; slip through it a stair-rod, 2 feet long; it will overhang
2 inches at each end, and may be swung round. At the distance of about 4
inches from each end of the rod, imagine a cotton reel, or a pulley;
when the rod is moved round, the reels or pulleys will roll round in a
circle, like the cylinder-crushers, above mentioned. Now, if a vertical
wheel were fixed at each end of the rod, so as to hang outside the
table, it is obvious that, upon firing it, the wheels would run round.
Of course it must not be a screw-eye and a stair-rod; but anyone will
understand, from this description, how to effect it.

These contrivances have fallen somewhat into disuse, since the
introduction and variety of colours, but it is well to understand them.


TO FIRE A GIRANDOLE OF 100 ROCKETS AT ONCE.

Suppose a cubical tea-chest. In the top, bore ten rows of holes, ten in
a row, with a centre-bit; the same in the bottom, in such a way that the
bottom holes fall perpendicularly under the top holes. Fasten the box
upon four legs, one at each corner. Sift from a pepper-box a layer of
meal powder over the top; put in the rockets, with their primed mouths,
naked, to rest on the sifted meal. It is evident that, upon conveying
fire to the meal, by a leader, the flash will ignite the whole of the
rockets, at once. Of course it ought not to be a tea-chest, but a box
constructed on purpose, with a penthouse lid, to fall over, and protect
the rockets, till desired to be fired. It may be furnished with four
legs, as in fig. 173. The shelf, fig. 172, fits in at a b c, fig. 173.




_TOOLS._


Fig. 132. A port-fire holder. This is made of steel, somewhat after the
manner of a pair of pliers. The ends a and b are fluted, or channelled
(semi-cylindrical) to receive the port-fire: a spring, riveted at c,
holds it tight; by pressing on d, the burnt case drops: the end e is
pointed, to enter a long stick, bored to receive it, and strengthened
with a brass ferrule.

As an instrument of this kind can be obtained only when made to order,
the following contrivance will serve the purpose of most amateurs. First
charge some little port-fires, 3 inches long and 1/4 inch diameter, till
within about 1-1/4 inch full: having filled a couple of dozen, or so,
invert them, and knock out the dust, as with squibs; then encircle the
whole, as if going to bang them; but pour in dry sand instead; empty a
little sand from each, and stop the end with plaster of paris. Scrape
out a little composition from the other end, and prime it with damped
meal. Take two inches of a roman candle case, or a piece of turned wood,
with a hole through it, fig. 133, two inches long. Have a long stick,
fig. 134; cut the end, a, so that it will fit the hole in fig. 133, and
enter half way up. At the other end fix a wire, z, two and a half inches
long. By slipping fig. 133 on fig. 134 it is evident one inch vacancy is
left to receive the sand end of the port-fire; when this is burnt out,
it can be pushed out with the wire, z.




_TO CONSTRUCT A STEELYARD SCALE._


The numerous formulæ for coloured fires, renders the use of very small
scales excessively troublesome; and there is perpetual danger of losing
the little weights for grains and pennyweights. By constructing a
steelyard scale, the greatest facility is attained, one weight answering
for all.

Take a piece of deal, fig. 135, about as thick as a venetian-blind lath;
it may be 20 or 24 inches long; an inch broad, at the left end; and
about 1/2 an inch broad in the main length. Make a hole at a, twice the
diameter of a pin: the same at b. It is necessary to observe that the
hole, a, must be on a level with the top of the long arm; if it should
be a little higher, it would not be of any consequence; but it must, on
no account, be lower. Have a piece of deal, fig. 136, about an inch
square, and mortise a hole in it, as drawn. Fix 135 in 136 so as to
appear like 137. A bit of a common pin, or needle, is to go through the
mortise and through the hole, a, of 135. See that it plays easily. At s,
fig. 137, insert a piece of wire, bent like the figure 8; and to it, tie
the strings fastened to w, which may be a copper bowl, or a tin
patty-pan. The mode of fastening the threads to the figure of 8 wire, is
simply to slip them through, bend them down, and tie round with thread,
as at z.

Take a piece of brass tube, an inch, or so, long, fig. 138, and with
some lead, melted in the bowl of a pipe, fix a bit of wire in it, bent
like a staple, or the capital letter U, as drawn. This is for a weight.
Slip it on the arm of fig. 137; put a wooden pin in the hole y, to keep
the weight from falling off. Slip the weight along, till it balances
the patty-pan w: suppose this point is at m. This will be the
starting-point. From m to y lay off a number of equal distances, as
eighths of an inch. Number them, and the scale is complete. If it be
desired that 100 of these divisions should weigh 1 ounce, an ounce
weight must be put in the patty-pan w, and the weight shifted along,
until it balances; the intervening space must, then, be divided into 100
equal parts. It is desirable to construct two; one with a large weight,
that will weigh 8 or 10 ounces; one with a small weight, to weigh the
1/100th part of an ounce. This may be of wood, with a wire staple, about
the thickness of a patent short-white pin. Nothing can be more
convenient than these steelyard scales, as one weight answers for all,
and never drops, and gets lost. It is well to have even a third
steelyard scale. This may be made very thin, with a piece of wire, bent
to the shape of fig. 171, for a weight. It may be made to weigh only the
fifth part of an ounce; so that if divided into 100 equal parts, it will
weigh the 1/500th part of an ounce; so that in trying a new colour, as
little can be mixed as will charge only one or two pill-boxes. A little
notch should be made, at every division, with a fine, triangular file,
to prevent the weight from slipping: every tenth division can be
numbered; this is best done with a blacklead pencil, as ink runs; and on
the end s, fig. 137, mark how many to the ounce. Possibly the trade, if
desired, would make them to order. There is an instrument, somewhat
similar, the chondrometer, for estimating the quality of grain; only
this is constructed upon the principle of the log; the leverage and
counterpoise showing the weight of a pint, but indicating that of a
bushel; as the half-minute sand-glass times the running out of the knots
of the line, and indicates nautical miles. Goods-weighing-machines, at
the railways, are on the steelyard, or shifting leverage principle; also
the machines warranted to furnish you with "your correct weight."




_MONTGOLFIER BALLOONS._


To project a pattern gore. With a radius of 5 inches, fig. 139, from the
point a, on the line b o, describe a semicircle; divide the upper
quadrant into three equal parts, in the points g, e, c. Carry the same
distance, once down, to k. Draw the lines f g, d e, a c, h k, parallel
to each other, and at right angles to the line b o. Draw the line a k,
and prolong it to s, so that the distance k s shall be 10 inches,
_viz._, twice the radius. From s, with the radius s k of 10 inches,
describe the arc k n p. Draw o s parallel to h k; and, halfway between,
m n.

As the distance from a to c is 5 inches, twice this will be 10, for the
equatorial breadth of the gore; and, as it is intended to have 12 sheets
of tissue paper (3 of each colour, yellow, blue, green, and red), and,
consequently, 12 gores, 12 times 10 = 120, the half of which is 60, for
the semi-circumference. Tissue paper is a very thin double-crown, 30 by
20. Lay down a straight line, b x, fig. 140, 60 inches in length, and
divide it into 6 parts of 10 inches each; and draw parallels f g, d e,
&c., at right angles to the meridian line b x. Measure the distance f g,
fig. 139, and make f g, fig. 140, twice as much, half on each side; the
same with d e, &c. Draw lines, connecting the extremities, till the fig.
140 is complete.

Instead of taking the trouble to construct fig. 139 with the compasses,
the following measures will describe the pattern gore, fig. 140, at
once; f g will be 5 inches, half to the left, half to the right, of the
line b x; d e = 8-2/3 inches; a c = 10 inches; h k = 8-2/3 inches; m n =
7 inches; and o p = 6-3/4 inches.

These numbers are chosen to suit the size of the paper, to get the gores
as large as possible, with the least waste: 60 inches are selected as
the length of the gore, being twice the length of a sheet; 10 inches are
1/6 the length, and exactly half the breadth of the sheet; so the length
and breadth are both employed, without the slightest waste.

The pattern gore should be of cartridge or imperial brown.


TO CUT THE GORES.

Lay the twelve sheets of tissue paper flat upon each other, as at fig.
141; cut the pattern gore into two pieces, along the line a c, fig. 140,
and lay them on the tissue paper, fig. 141. Mark round them with a
blacklead pencil, and cut them through with a strong pair of scissors.


TO JOIN THE HALVES TOGETHER.

Lay the bottom part of the gore, fig. 142, flat upon the table, and the
top part upon it, so as to leave 1/4 of an inch along the edge exposed,
as shown by the shaded part. Paste this; and, without removing either
piece, bend the pasted part of the lower half gore upon the top, and
press it smooth down.


TO PASTE TWO GORES TOGETHER.

Lay one gore with the point towards the _left_ hand, and another upon
it, a quarter of an inch back, as in fig. 143. Paste the shaded part of
the lower gore, bend it over, and press as before. One of the gores,
having been drawn in by pasting, is now narrower than the other. Finish
the six pairs, and lay them by to dry.


TO PASTE THE PAIRS TOGETHER.

Lay one pair with the points towards the _right_ hand, thus keeping the
widest gore upwards; and another upon it, in the same manner, as fig.
144. Bend the top gore back upon itself, by folding it down the middle,
as shown by the bottom shaded part, and lay a book or weight upon it, to
keep it out of the way; paste, and double, as before; and so proceed,
till the whole twelve are finished, and lying upon each other. Be
careful to disturb none of the gores.


TO MAKE THE LAST JOINING.

Turn the points towards the _left_ hand: lift up the top, and bend the
ten inner gores back upon themselves: draw the top gore over, so as to
make it lie upon the bottom. Paste as before. This is a somewhat
troublesome operation, and it is advisable to have the assistance of a
second person.


TO WIRE THE BALLOON.

Select a coil of iron wire, a little thicker than a pin; and remove the
elasticity, as recommended with coloured gerbes. Before applying it to
the balloon, practise the method of making a joining, as shown by fig.
145, simply bringing the ends together, crossing them about an inch from
the extremity, and winding them tight round each other. Now lay the
balloon, as in fig. 146, with a book, or a flat weight, upon it, to keep
it down: curve the wire to the shape of the bottom of the balloon, and
lay it about half an inch from the edge. Notch the paper, at the
joinings of the gores; paste, and fold back. When perfectly dry, not
before, turn the balloon over: cut the wire 2 inches longer than to
meet; bend the ends together, and make the joining; paste, and bend
over, the remaining half; and shape the wire to a circle. A star, of
double-crown, may be pasted on the top, and a thread passed through it,
to hold it by. To effect this, open the balloon, pass a book up it,
spread the top flat on the book, and paste on it a star, or a circular
piece of paper, the size of a penny. If a hole gets torn in it, it can
be repaired in the same way.

Take two straight pieces of wire, a little longer than the diameter of
the mouth of the balloon; pass them, half way, through a piece of
sponge, at right angles to each other; fasten these wires across the
mouth; saturate the sponge with wood naphtha, or methylated spirit,
taking especial care that not a drop falls on the balloon; get someone
to set fire to some pieces of paper on the ground; hold the balloon at a
good height above the flame, to prevent the spirit, in the sponge, from
catching. Three persons ought to assist in the start: one to manage the
burning paper; two to hold the balloon steady, and to keep the mouth
open, for the hot air to inflate it. As soon as the balloon gets
expanded, set fire to the spirit; and directly it begins to pull against
the hand, which it will do, let it go. A balloon of this size will
require an ounce of spirit, and as much sponge as will absorb it. See
fig. 167.

To project a gore for 24 sheets of tissue paper, let the radius be 7-1/2
inches; for 48 sheets, 10 inches. The shape of the balloon, when
expanded, will be the same as fig. 139, rotating on the axis b o. If the
pattern gore be projected from fig. 147, the balloon will be
pear-shaped, and may be filled with gas, like those started from the
Crystal Palace. The paper, 16-lb. double-crown, must have a coat of
boiled linseed oil. The bottom should be open, and fitted with a
cylindrical neck, about an inch diameter, and 3 inches long, made of
writing paper of three thicknesses. Fig. 168 shows the magnesium light
attached.

A flat weight may be constructed by making a thin deal box, the size and
shape of a lucifer-match box; fill it with melted lead; nail a lid on
it, and cover it with pasted paper. The same will serve for a
paper-weight.

A spindle, on which to fire wheels, is shown at fig. 148; it is
furnished with a fly-nut, which can be taken off, and put on, without
trouble. As there is considerable difficulty in obtaining an article of
this kind, its place may be supplied by a carriage-bolt, of which
hundreds, if necessary, may be procured at the ironmonger's, of lengths
varying from 1 inch to 12, or more. One of 6 inches will be suitable for
most purposes. As the nut is small, and would be difficult to find, if
dropped on the ground, on a dark night, proceed as follows. Turn a piece
of beech, about 1-1/2 inch square, and 2-1/2 inches long, into a
cylinder, with hemispherical ends, and a hole through it, like a popgun.
Cut it, while yet in the lathe, or saw it across into two pieces, one an
inch long, the other, an inch and a half. In the flat end of the inch
length, mortise a hole, and sink the nut in it; take a circular piece of
wood, with a hole bored in the middle, and screw it flat on, over the
nut. Fig. 150, a, shows the turned piece; b, the circular piece, screwed
on, to keep the nut from falling out. This serves the purpose of the
fly-nut of fig. 148. The carriage-bolt is shown, first at fig. 149; then
at fig. 150, with the nut screwed on. Take a piece of deal, fig. 155,
about 1-1/2 inch square, and 20 inches long: make a hole through at a,
and drive the carriage-bolt from behind; the shoulder, being square,
will hold firm; in front, at c, slip on the above turned piece of wood,
an inch and a half long: the piece, with the nut embedded in it, is, of
course, put on at the end, b. The hole through this inch piece should be
1/8 of an inch, or more, larger in diameter than the female (or counter)
screw of the nut, in order that it may slip on and off with ease. At
the top fix a strong wire, d, and file the end round and smooth: at s
and x, in the side, fix two screw-eyes, or staples, to receive rocket
sticks. At m and n bore two holes, through which it can be screwed to a
post. The screw-eye at s ought to be about level with the top of the
post. If there is too great a space between w and z, pieces of a roman
candle case may be slipped on; but a popgun, sawed into short lengths,
is better. Several should be kept in readiness, of different lengths, to
suit the naves of different wheels. A piece of iron rod, about half an
inch long, and to fit the hole, ought to be driven up furilonas, &c., to
rest on the top of d, fig. 155; and the wire should be a little longer
than the hole, that the piece may play clear of the upright, the top of
which should be hemispherical, as drawn. Fig. 151 is a screw-ring; 152,
a screw-eye: 153, a screw-hook; 154, a cup-hook. If a little bit, s, of
152 be sawed, or filed out, it makes a stronger cup-hook than the brass,
for match-weights.




_WINGED ROCKETS._


An 8/8 rocket is the smallest size worth making: it is, also,
sufficiently large; and, as it requires a machine to fire it from, it is
best to keep to one size. The head, fig. 156, may be the same as the
external diameter of the case, or it may be slightly enlarged: to
receive a parachute, it may be 12, or even 16 inches high; and the top
may be closed with a lid, fig. 163, formed of a case choked tight; or by
simply stopping it with a piece of turned wood, or with a thin bung,
pushed in, as a cork into a bottle. A bung may be readily sawed thin
with a fine-toothed saw; if required to be made smaller in diameter, it
must be cut round sidewise, not longitudinally. If the head is to
receive stars, it must not be above 8 inches high. To construct the
wings, take a thin piece of deal, or tin, and cut out a right-angled
triangle, fig. 157. Make a b = 7-1/2 inches, b c = 1-1/2 inch. Take a
piece of imperial brown paper, 8 inches long, 4 broad, and fold it down
the middle lengthwise, so as to become 8 by 2. Lay the sloping edge, a
c, of fig. 157 along the folded edge of the paper, a c, fig. 158, and
mark round it, with a pencil. About 3/8 of an inch distant, draw the
line d e parallel to a b. Cut through with the scissors, and the paper
will be of the shape of fig. 158. Bend the shaded parts flat, to form a
flap, or kind of hinge. Paste the surface of the two triangles, and
press them together to form a double thickness. If this does not make
the wing stiff enough, insert, between them, a triangular piece of
cardboard, to make it of three folds, like a shirt-collar. Take a piece
of sheet tin, or a piece of cardboard, fig. 161. Let m n be 7 inches;
and m p such that it shall exactly wind round the rocket. Divide it into
3 equal parts, by the parallel lines r and s, and at each end cut out
little pieces, as shown at a a, &c. Now, if this be wound round the
rocket, marks can be made through the slits a a, with a blacklead
pencil, or with a stencil-brush, dipped into blacklead powder, such as
used for polishing grates. These marks will indicate the places for the
wings. Paste or glue them on, and secure the joinings with another slip
of paper pasted over them, as shown by the dotted lines, beside the
wings, fig. 156. The wings will branch out at angles of 120° divergence
from each other, like the lines a a, b b, c c, fig. 162. The rocket is
thus winged; and, so far, complete.


TO CONSTRUCT A SLOT-TUBE, OR ROCKET-GUIDE.

Procure 3 pieces of planed deal, 1/2 an inch thick, 2 inches broad: let
one piece be 6 feet 3 inches long; the other two, each 6 feet. Get a
smith to make 4 triangular iron holdfasts, k m n, fig. 162, 5 inches
along each side; the iron may be a trifle above 1/8 of an inch thick,
and 6/8 broad: in each side, let two holes be made, as in the usual
holdfasts, to receive screws. The screws are represented at z z, fig.
162, which is a cross section of the tube. Fasten the 4 iron holdfasts
round the 3 pieces of deal, as represented by w w, fig. 160, at equal
distances. The pieces of wood will thus form a triangular spout, with
open corners. The pieces are to be level at the top; the longest one, of
6ft. 3in., will, thus, be 3 inches below the other two, as at r r, fig.
160. At s s bore two holes, about 1/8 of an inch diameter. Take a small
piece of deal, fig. 159, and fix in it two pieces of wire, so as to have
the appearance of a tuning-fork. These wires are to go through the
holes s s, of fig. 160, to form a resting-place, or support for the
rocket, after it has been pushed up the tube. At the top of one of the
short pieces, is to be a hook, k, by which to suspend it from a post.
This post ought to be 9 or 10 feet high, that the rocket may be fired
without having to stoop. Everything being ready, the rocket is to be put
up through the bottom of the tube, and the wires of fig. 159 pushed
through, for it to rest upon. It may then be fired.

These rockets are peculiarly fitted for asteroids, as, from their
lightness, they rise to great heights, with immense rapidity, not in a
continuous curve, of uniform flexure, but with a sweeping serpentine
motion, as indicated by the line, fig. 164. They might be employed, with
great advantage, for distress rockets at sea.

They could also be made with four wings, and fired in volleys, from
batteries constructed with square tubes. See the design, fig. 165.




_LIST OF PRICES._


 Ammonia, Muriate, or Salammoniac, 6_d._ per lb.

 Antimony, Sulphuret, 6_d._

 Arsenic, Red Sulphuret, or Realgar, 1_s._

     "    Yellow Sulphuret, or Orpiment, 1_s._


 Barytes, Chlorate, 6_s._

   "      Nitrate, 8_d._

 Cast Iron Borings, 4_d._

 Charcoal, 3_d._

 Coal tar naphtha, or mineral naphtha, 4_d._ per pint.

 Copper, Black Oxide, 3_s._

   "     Oxychloride, 4_s._

   "     Sulphuret, 4_s._

 Dextrine, 1_s._

 Gunpowder, F, 8_d._;
   FF, 9_d._;
   FFF, 10_d._
   Meal, 9_d._

 Lamp Cotton, 2_d._ per oz.

 Lead, Chloride, 2_s._ 6_d._

   "   Nitrate, 1_s._

   "   Protoxide, or Litharge, 6_d._

   "   Deutoxide, Minium or Red Lead, 6_d._

 Litmus, 2_d._ per oz.

 Magnesium Filings, 7_s._ per oz.

 Mercury,  Chloride,  or Calomel, 6_s._

   "   Sulphuret, or Æthiop's Mineral, 6_s._

 Methylated Spirit, 6_d._ per pint.

 Oxalic Acid, 1_s._

 Plaster of Paris, 3_d._ per packet.

 Potash, Chlorate, 1_s._

   "     Nitrate, Nitre, Saltpetre, Sal-prunella, 6_d._

 Shellac, in Flake, 1_s._ 3_d._

   "      in Powder, 2_s._

 Soda, Bicarbonate, 4_d._

   "   Oxalate, 2_s._

 Stearine, Composite Candle, 1_d._

 Steel Filings, 8_d._

 Strontian, Carbonate, 3_s._

     "      Nitrate, 8_d._

 Sugar, 5_d._

 Sulphur, Flowers. Sublimed Sulphur, 4_d._

 Vegetable Black, 10_d._

 Wax, 1_d._ per cake.

 Wood Naphtha, 7_d._ per pint.

 Zinc Filings, 3_s._ per lb.




_CONCLUDING REMARKS._


Sublimation is the volatilization of solid substances by heat, and their
crystallization by cold again into solids.

The products of sublimation (sublimates) have received the name of
flowers from their soft efflorescence, or aggregation of minute spicular
crystals into flakes; as flowers of sulphur, the crystallized
refrigerated vapour of burning brimstone; flowers of benzoin, benzoic
acid; corrosive sublimate, bichloride of mercury; sublimed arsenic,
camphor, sal-ammoniac; vegetable and lamp black, the condensed fumes of
burning oils and resins; soot, the flakes deposited in chimneys from the
smoke of burnt wood and coals.

Distillation is the evaporation of liquid substances by heat, and their
condensation by cold again into liquids.

The products of distillation (distillates) are usually termed spirits;
as spirit of wine, alcohol or brandy; spirit of grain, gin, hollands, or
whiskey; spirit of molasses, rum; spirit of naphtha; benzine, &c.

Water heated and cooled, combines in resemblance the effects
of sublimation and distillation; aqueous vapour by congelation
crystallizing into snow; and by condensation liquefying into water.

The condensation of steam into water is familiar to everyone. It is
stated that in St. Petersburg, upon the sudden admission of a current of
cold air into a crowded assembly-room, the vapour in the air was
immediately congealed, and fell in the form of snow flakes. Probably
snow might be produced artificially by driving steam into a vessel
preparatively cooled below the freezing point.

Gums are the exudation of trees, vegetable mucilage thickened by
exposure to the atmosphere; as gum from cherry and plum trees; gum
arabic, from varieties of the acacia, Turkey, East India, Senegal, or
Barbary; Turkey gum arabic is the best.

Resins are the exudation of trees, generally evergreens, essential oils
inspissated by oxygenation: as mastic, sandarac, benzoin.

Gums are soluble in water; resins in alcohol and essential oils.

Gums dry and swell up by heat; resins soften and melt.

Gum resins are partly resinous and partly mucilaginous; as lac,
assafœtida, galbanum. In submitting shellac to the action of alcohol,
the whole is never entirely dissolved; as the lac contains, besides the
resin, a mucilage which floats about in the liquid, and renders it
turbid.

Many substances which go under the name of gums in commerce, are in
reality resins or gum-resins.

Native turpentine, the juice of trees of the fir tribe, of the
consistency of honey, yields on distillation spirit of turpentine,
called also oil of turpentine, and by painters turps; the dry mass left
behind in the retort is colophony or rosin. Rosin is soluble in alcohol,
and is therefore a resin; rosin and resin, however, are not synonymous;
all rosin is a resin; but all resins are not rosin. Rosin has been tried
in pyrotechny, but is of no use: a solution of it in spirit will bind
stars; but it renders them white and smoky.

Volatile, ethereal, or essential oils are obtained from plants by
distillation with water; as oil of roses, lavender, thyme, peppermint,
aniseed, &c.

Fixed oils are obtained from animal fat by heat; and from seeds of
plants by pressure and percussion; as, train oil, cod-liver oil; palm
oil, croton, linseed, cottonseed, &c.

Oxychloride of copper, if difficult to procure, may be made by laying
thin pieces of copper in a dish, and pouring upon them a mixture of half
water, and half hydrochloric or muriatic acid. The next day remove them,
and lay them on a board in the shade to dry. When dry, brush off the
green powder which will be found on the outside, with a toothbrush, into
a basin of water. After a quantity is obtained, wash it as directed for
sulphur, and dry it in the bag, fig. 33. Test it with litmus paper to
ascertain if free from acid.

Saw a piece of coke or charcoal in two, and on the flat surface place a
few copper filings; direct upon them the flame of a lamp or candle with
the blow-pipe; they will simply become red-hot. Lay a few more filings,
and on them a little calomel or sal-ammoniac: now direct the flame, and
a beautiful blue colour will be produced. Any of the salts of copper
may be used to obtain the same effect, the chlorine gas liberated from
the calomel (chloride of mercury) or from the sal-ammoniac (ammonic
chloride) giving a blue colour to all preparations of copper burnt in
it.

Weights for quickmatch may be made by nearly filling the brass tube with
useless rusty old nails, tacks, screws, or odd bits of iron, or brass;
then pouring in melted lead. If the ladle will not hold enough lead to
fill it at once, it may be poured in at twice, thrice, four or more
times. A tube 1-1/4 inch diameter and 6 inches long will weigh 2-1/2 lb.
This will keep a great length of match tight and straight. Half-an-inch
at each end of the tube should be solid lead, one to receive the screw,
and one to make a firm bottom.

If at any time the basil end of a pinwheel pipe should be too small to
admit the nose of the funnel, it may be enlarged by binding a gum strip
round it. If pinwheels are too dry, they break in winding, from the
hardness of the composition; if too damp, from the softness of the
paper. As paper cannot be relied upon for being always of uniform
thickness, if it be found that a pinwheel pipe is too thin, cut the
strip a little broader. Discretion may be used in all cases.

Coloured lances may be primed with meal powder very slightly damped with
thin lac solution. Leader pipes may, if preferred, be fastened to lances
with patent short whites: they may be procured at the haberdasher's; the
price of them is 2_d._ per oz. Push the pin through the side of the
leader, down into the side of the lance; then make a triangular hole
through the middle of the leader, down into the middle of the lance,
turning the tool round to break the priming, and secure the leader with
a gum strip. The gum strip, bent round, assumes the shape of the capital
letter T. The best tool for making the holes is a steel bradawl,
ground triangular and to a sharp point; another bradawl ground to a
tapering point like a needle, about 3/4 of an inch long, may be used
for making holes up the lances to receive the wires. Scissor-grinders
will shape them, if you have not a grindstone; or they may be rubbed on
a stone, such as used by mowers to whet their scythes. Afterwards set
them sharp on a hone.

Fig 169 is a wasp-light. The proper composition will be found among the
fuses: drive it into a roman candle case with the rammer, fig. 4. Bring
the leader from the mouth b, backwards along the outside of the case,
and tie it in a couple of places, as drawn. Evening is the best time to
use it: push the end b into the nest, light at a, and retire.

Instead of a five-pointed star, a seven-lance star, fig. 170, may be
employed. To form it, have a piece of deal board, half-an-inch thick,
6-1/2 inches square: draw the diagonals, to find the centre; and, with a
pair of compasses, stretched to a 3-inch radius, describe a circle.
Carry the radius 6 times round it; and in the points and the centre
drive 7 French nails; cut off their heads, and fix on them 7 lances: the
middle one, crimson; the others, 3 green and 3 blue, placed alternately.

In forming a rocket spindle, taper it no more than will just make it
deliver: the thicker it is left at the top, the stronger of course it
will be. For small rockets, 3/8 or 4/8, a brass, iron, or steel wire,
with a few notches filed in it, or made jagged with a cold chisel and
hammer, driven into a block, will hold firm without a screw. I have
seen them driven into a piece of thick plank, and the nipple formed with
an inch-length of wood, cut cylindrical, bored and slipped over the
spindle, like c in fig. 155. Indeed, a spindle might be formed from a
5-inch or 6-inch carriage-bolt. At Woolwich Arsenal rockets are charged
solid. The fuse is shaped into pellets, something like large peppermint
lozenges, or cylindrical cakes of paste blacking, by hydraulic pressure
in a mould. These pellets, discs, or cakes, which are almost as hard as
a stone, are put into the case, and pressed in tight: the rocket is then
fixed upright, and slowly drilled, as I have seen, with a conical borer,
working vertically, to let the dust fall and clear itself. This mode
must not be imitated by an amateur; indeed, without accurate machinery,
the desired object could not be effected, and there is constant
liability to danger.

The fuse of a rocket, when consolidated, assumes the form of fig. 18,
with the head sawn off, except that the hollow is tapering, instead of
cylindrical; and the rocket stands thus--

1/3 cup + 6 choke & hollow + 1-1/3 solid + 1/3 plaster = 8 diameters.

In the trade, meal powder, saltpetre, and charcoal, go by the names of
meal, petre, and coal. Common coal, for burning in fires, is never
employed in pyrotechny; it would produce only dull red sparks and smoke.

Meal, or petre, added to a fuse quickens it; sulphur slackens it. 6
meal, 1 sulphur, make a quickmatch that blows through a leader with
great violence. 1 meal, 1 sulphur, will scarcely burn; pure meal only
should be used for match, or grain powder with hot starch. It has
already been stated that nitre in powder is sometimes adulterated with
salt, and that it is impossible to make a rocket with such stuff.
Powdered chlorate of potash is sometimes adulterated with nitre: with
such mixture it is equally impossible to produce good colours: nitre
whitens flame, and overpowers colour.

Chlorate of potash, charcoal, sulphur, stearine, used separately, with
discretion, vivify colours; calomel deepens the colour, but slackens the
flame.

Star compositions which inflame vigorously in dry summer weather, will
often scarcely burn at all in damp weather; this is especially the case
with stars containing nitrate of strontian.

In washing sulphur, stir it with a wooden spoon; if a silver one were
used, a black sulphide would be formed on the surface, very difficult to
remove. If silver coins in the pocket get tarnished while using sulphur,
rub them with salt, or chalk, or whiting.

A magnet is convenient for lifting tacks, small screws, &c., from
divisions in nail boxes.

If the brass tube formers get tarnished, scrape off the lacquer with a
knife, sand paper them anew, and give them a fresh coat of lacquer.

Let all wheel frames and woodwork be coloured black, either with paint,
or with a mixture of vegetable or lamp black and size, or thin glue, to
prevent their being seen. A white thread hung upon a bush, is visible
many yards off; a black one can scarcely be seen a few feet distant.
Black is not only invisible, but it throws the brilliancy of sparks, and
the vividness of colours, into stronger relief.

Let every article be dried, reduced to a fine powder, put into a clean
bottle, and carefully corked: also let every bottle be labelled: the
labels are best stuck on with paste, not gum: gum labels are apt to drop
off in damp weather.

Let all metallic articles, liable to rust, be wiped with a rag dipped
into olive oil, before being laid by for future use.

Before putting aside the six-inch circular frying-pan, set it over the
fire till warm, put into it a lump of tallow, and smear it with a rag:
when wanted for use, set it on the fire, put into it a cupful of water
and a piece of soda; make the water boil, and stir it well round; pour
away the water, and dry the pan over the fire.

Let muslin sieves always be dried before being put aside; also, again,
before use. Zinc sieves may simply be wiped dry.

Have a place for everything; and keep everything in its place.

Faraday, the great master in experimental lectures, always devoted many
hours to the preparation of his experiments for each lecture. No point,
however trifling, bearing upon the success of the experiment, was
considered unimportant: he used to try the stoppers of all the bottles
he had to use, to see that they had not become fixed, and thus would
cause delay by requiring forcible opening. His example cannot be too
carefully copied. Before firing a display, all posts, spindles, lines,
staples, screws, touch-paper, portfires, pieces of leadered quickmatch,
&c., should be carefully provided. A yard of tape slowmatch, hung to a
nail at the top of a post, will supply fire for a long time.

A book should be kept for future guidance, in which should be written
the quantity of composition required to make a certain number of
articles of a certain size: by attending to this, much waste will be
prevented.

Never, upon any account, leave compositions lying about; and let nothing
be done by candlelight, except making cases. Quickmatch, especially,
ought to be kept locked up, so that nobody can get to it.

Never put squibs, crackers, &c., into the pockets: a stray spark might
ignite the whole, and cause most serious mischief.




FUSES.


_ROMAN CANDLE._

 +---------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number         | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|
 +---------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur        | 4| 2| 3| 1| 1| 2| 7| 3| 4| 6| 8| 3| 8| -|
 |Charcoal       | 3| 3| 3| 2| 1| 3| 8| 1| 1| 7| 9| 3|11| 2|
 |Nitre          | 8| 2| 8| 4| 3| 9|21| 4| 5|18|18|10|32| 1|
 |Meal powder    | 8| 8| 3| 3| 2| 4|12| 5| 4| 4| 4| 7| -| 3|
 +---------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_ROCKET._

 +---------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number         | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|
 +---------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur        | 1| 1|12| 4| 8| 4| 2| 4| 2| 2| 1| 1| 8| 1|
 |Charcoal       | 4| 2|17| 5|11| 7| 4| 8|12| 8| 2| 2|27| 2|
 |Nitre          | 8| 5|50|16|32|16| 9|16|20|16| 4| 4|36| 4|
 |Meal powder    | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3| 1| 1| 1| 2| 6| 2|
 |Steel-filings  | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1|
 +---------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_BURSTING FIRE._

 +---------------+--+--+--+
 |Number         | 1| 2| 3|
 +---------------+--+--+--+
 |Meal powder    | 1| 1| 8|
 |Grain powder F | -| 1| -|
 |Charcoal       | -| -| 1|
 +---------------+--+--+--+


_STARTING FIRE._

 +---------------+--+--+
 |Number         | 1| 2|
 +---------------+--+--+
 |Charcoal       | 1| 3|
 |Meal powder    | 8|16|
 |Sulphur        | -| 4|
 |Nitre          | -| 6|
 +---------------+--+--+


_WHEEL AND FIXED CASE._

 +----------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number          | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|15|16|
 +----------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Meal powder     | 8|24| 8|36| 4|18| 8|12|42| 4|16|10|13|16|20|40|
 |Sulphur         | 1| 1| -| 1| -| -| 1| 1| 3| -| -| -| 1| -| 1| 4|
 |Charcoal        | 1| 4| 1| 4| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3|
 |Nitre           | 2| 3| -| -| 2| 2| 1| 3| 8| -| 2| -| 1| -| -|24|
 |Steel-filings   | -| -| -| -| -| 5| 3| 3| 5| 1| 5| -| -| -| -| 6|
 |Vegetable black | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| 2| -| -| 1|
 |Realgar         | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| -| -| 1|
 |Litharge        | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3| 3| 2|
 +----------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_SQUIB AND SERPENT._

 +----------------+--+--+--+
 |Number          | 1| 2| 3|
 +----------------+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur         | 1| -| -|
 |Charcoal        | 1| 1| -|
 |Nitre           | 2| -| -|
 |Meal powder     | 8| 8| 4|
 |Steel-filings   | -| -| 1|
 +----------------+--+--+--+


_PINWHEEL._

 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number               | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|
 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur              | 1| 3| 5| 3| 7|14| 4| 4|2 |2 |3 |2 | -|
 |Nitre                | 1| 4| 9| 5| 9|16| 8| 4| 5| 2| 3| 2| -|
 |Meal powder          | 2| 9|15| 8|20|32|26|16|36|26|35|18| 3|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony| -| -| -| -| 1| 3| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Beech sawdust, fine  | -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Oxalate of Soda      | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Litharge, fine       | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 2| -| -| -| -|
 |Orpiment, or Realgar | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 2| 3| -| -|
 |Vegetable black      | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| 2| -| -|
 |Nitrate of Lead      | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3| 1|
 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_SAXON._

 +----------------------+--+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2| 3|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur               | 1| 3| 5|
 |Nitre                 | 1| 4| 9|
 |Meal powder           | 2| 9|15|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+


_FIVE-POINTED STAR._

 +----------------------+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2|
 +----------------------+--+--+
 |Meal powder           | 3| -|
 |Sulphur               | 8| 2|
 |Nitre                 |12| 5|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony | 1| 1|
 +----------------------+--+--+


_SPUR-FIRE, FOR FLOWER-POTS AND STAR-CANDLES._

 +--------------------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                          | 1| 2| 3| 4|
 +--------------------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Vegetable black                 | 7| 2| 3| 4|
 |Sulphur                         |14| 5| 4|16|
 |Realgar, or Sulphuret of Arsenic| 2| 1| 1| 2|
 |Nitre                           |32|16|10|32|
 |Meal powder                     | -| 3| -|17|
 |Charcoal                        | -| -| -| 4|
 +--------------------------------+--+--+--+--+


_TOURBILLION._

 +-----------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number           | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|
 +-----------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur          | 1| 3| 3| 7| 3| 4| 4| 4| 2| 4| 1| 7| 4|
 |Nitre            | 4| 5|16|10| 8|32|17|17| 4| 8| 8|20|14|
 |Charcoal         | 2| 3| 8| 4| 3| 6| 4| 5| -| -| -| -| 3|
 |Meal powder      | 1|11| 8|24|16|32| -| -| 4| 9|10|23|13|
 |Steel-filings    | -| -| -| 8| 6| 5| -| -| -| -| -| -| 2|
 |Cast Iron Borings| -| -| -| -| -| 8| 6| 8| 3| 4| 7|14| 5|
 +-----------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_BENGAL LIGHT._

 +------------------------------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                                    | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6|
 +------------------------------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphuret of Arsenic, Realgar, or Orpiment| 1| 1| 2| 1| -| -|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony                     | -| -|10| 5| 1| 1|
 |Minium, or Red Lead                       | -| -| 1| 1| -| -|
 |Sulphur                                   | 4| 2| 6| 3| 4| 2|
 |Nitre                                     |14| 6|24|14|14| 6|
 +------------------------------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_BLUE LIGHT._

 +----------------------+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2|
 +----------------------+--+--+
 |Nitre                 |12| 5|
 |Sulphur               | 4| 2|
 |Meal powder           | 3| -|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony | 1| 1|
 +----------------------+--+--+


_WASP LIGHT._

 +------------------+--+
 |Number            | 1|
 +------------------+--+
 |Nitre             |14|
 |Sulphur           | 5|
 |Meal powder       | 3|
 |Realgar           | 1|
 +------------------+--+


_PORTFIRE._

 +------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Number            | 1| 2| 3| 4|
 +------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Meal powder       | 3| 1| 1| 5|
 |Sulphur           | 4| 2| 2| 8|
 |Nitre             |12| 4| 6|25|
 +------------------+--+--+--+--+


_SHELL FUSE._

 +------------------+--+
 |Number            | 1|
 +------------------+--+
 |Meal powder       | 4|
 |Nitre             | 2|
 |Sulphur           | 1|
 +------------------+--+


_GERBE._

 +------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number            | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|
 +------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur           | 2| 3| -| 1| -| 2| 3| 2| 2| 2| -| -|
 |Nitre             | 2| 2| -| -| -|10| 6| 4| 9| 4| -| -|
 |Meal powder       |16|36| 4| 8|16| -| 9|16| 2| 2| 8| 3|
 |Steel-filings     | 1| 6| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Cast Iron Borings | 5| 8| 1| 3| 8| 7| 5| 8| 5| 3| -| -|
 |Charcoal          | -| -| -| -| 1| 2| 2| 1| 2| 2| -| -|
 |Coke grains       | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| -|
 |Porcelain grains  | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1|
 +------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_TAILED, STREAMER, OR COMET STARS, FOR ROCKETS, SHELLS, AND ROMAN
CANDLES._

 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Vegetable black       | 1| 3| 3| 6| -| -| -| -| 3|
 |Charcoal              | 2| 8| 2| 3| 1| 3| 6|12| 2|
 |Sulphur               | 5|24| 2| -| 2| 4| 1| 2| 2|
 |Nitre                 | 5|24| 9| -| 8| 9|10|20| 9|
 |Meal powder           | 8|30| 6|16| -|20| 5| 7| 6|
 |Oxalate of Soda       | -| -| -| -| 4|12| -| -| -|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 4|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_OILED TAILED STARS FOR ROCKETS AND SHELLS._

 +----------------------+--+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2| 3|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+
 |Charcoal              | 9| 6| 2|
 |Sulphur               | 9| 5| 2|
 |Nitre                 |32|18| 9|
 |Meal powder           |24|12| 5|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony |16| 9| 4|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+

To 1 ounce add twenty-four drops of boiled linseed oil: rub them
thoroughly together in a mortar; then spread out the mixture, for a few
days, to dry. When dry, mix with starch, dextrine solution, or gum
water, and chop into 3/8 or 1/2 inch cubical blocks.


_STEEL STARS FOR ROCKETS AND SHELLS._

 +------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Number            | 1| 2| 3| 4|
 +------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Nitrate of Lead   | 8|24|28| -|
 |Chlorate of Potash| 3| 5| 6| 5|
 |Charcoal          | 2| 6| 6| 1|
 |Steel-filings     | 2| 6| 6| 3|
 |Nitre             | -| 4| 3| -|
 |Shellac, fine     | -| -| 1| -|
 |Sulphur, washed   | -| -| -| 1|
 +------------------+--+--+--+--+

Mix together on paper, damp with lac solution, and chop into cubical
blocks. The composition may also be pumped into roman candle streamer
stars.


_PEARL STREAMER._

 +----------------+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number          | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5|
 +----------------+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Nitre           |12|26| 2| -| -|
 |Charcoal        | 5|11| 1| -| -|
 |Zinc-filings    |14|28| 4|10|15|
 |Meal powder     | -| -| 1| 8|12|
 |Vegetable black | -| -| -| 1| 1|
 +----------------+--+--+--+--+--+


_GOLD RAIN._

 +------------+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number      | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5|
 +------------+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Sulphur     | 1| 1| 1| -| -|
 |Nitre       | 2| 2| 2| -| -|
 |Charcoal    | 6| 1| 5| 1| 3|
 |Meal powder |16| 6|18| 4| 8|
 +------------+--+--+--+--+--+


_SILVER RAIN._

 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Number               | 1| 2| 3| 4|
 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+
 |Steel-filings        | 1| 2| 2| 3|
 |Meal powder          | 4| 7| 8| -|
 |Nitre                | -| 1| -| 2|
 |Sulphur              | -| -| 1| -|
 |Charcoal             | -| -| -| 3|
 |Nitrate of Lead      | -| -| -|10|
 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+


_WHITE OR BRIGHT STARS._

 +-----------------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                       | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|
 +-----------------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Meal powder                  | 3| 3| -| 1| 1| 1| 1| 1| 3| -| -| -|
 |Sulphur                      | 4| 6| 4| 2| 3| 2| 2| 1|11| 5| 7| -|
 |Nitre                        | 8|14|14| 5|10| 6| 9| 4|48|24| -|18|
 |Sulphuret of Antimony        | -| -| 1| -| 3| -| 2| 1|10| 5| 6| 3|
 |Sulphuret of Arsenic, Realgar| -| -| -| 1| -| 1| -| -| -| 3| 5| -|
 |Minium, or Red Lead          | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 2| -| -|
 |Nitrate of Lead              | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3|
 |Chlorate of Potash           | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|28|
 |Shellac                      | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 5|
 +-----------------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_SUGAR BLUES FOR STARS AND LANCES._

 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number               | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|
 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of Potash   | 8|36|40|40|36| 9|44|40| 6|
 |Calomel              | 4|18|24|24|12| 3|12| -| 5|
 |Sugar                | 3|12| 9|12| 4| 1|12| 9| 4|
 |Sulphuret of Copper  | 5|22|22|12| 4| 3|12|22| -|
 |Stearine             | -| 1| 2| 1| 3| 1| 1| 2| -|
 |Oxychloride of Copper| -| -| -| 3| 4| 2| 5| -| -|
 |Sal Ammoniac         | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 6| -|
 |Copper-filings       | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1|
 +---------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

No substance combines better with salts of copper, than sugar. Sugar,
put into the bowl of a tobacco pipe, and placed in the fire, burns
fiercely, and is converted into caramel. This, poured on to a plate,
slightly smeared with butter, to prevent its sticking, hardens on
cooling; and is used for colouring brandy, vinegar, gravy, porter,
coffee, &c. Stearine must be scraped very fine from a composite candle.


_BLUE STARS AND LANCES WITHOUT SUGAR._

 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number        | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Potash      | 5|40|18|40| 6| 8|48|40|24|16|30|24| 8|22|40|
 |Calomel       | 4|20| 8|28| 2| 2|12|12| 6| 8|10| 8| 1| 8|20|
 |Sulphuret of  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Copper      | 4|20|10|28| -| 2| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3| 6|25|
 |Shellac       | 1| 5| -| -| -| -| 2| 2| 1| -| -| 1| -| -| 5|
 |Oxychloride   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Copper   | -| 2| -| -| -| -| 8| 9| 6| 5|10| 4| 1| 2| -|
 |Dextrine      | -| -| 5|10| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 2|
 |Sulphur       | -| -| -| -| 3| 4| 4| -| 1| 2| 3| 2| 3| 5| -|
 |Stearine      | -| -| -| 3| -| -| 1| 1| 2| 2| 3| 1| -| -| -|
 |Black Oxide   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Copper   | -| -| -| -| 1| 1| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Copper-filings| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Sal Ammoniac  | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number        |16|17|18|19|20|21|22|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Potash      | 6|16|24| 2| 5|40|40|
 |Calomel       | 3| 1| 8| -| -| -| -|
 |Sulphuret of  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Copper      | 5| -| -| -| 1|20|22|
 |Shellac       | -| -| 1| -| -| 5| -|
 |Oxychloride   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Copper   | -| 2| -| 1| 1| -| -|
 |Dextrine      | 2| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Sulphur       | -| 4| 2| 1| 2| 5| 5|
 |Stearine      | -| -| -| -| -| -| 3|
 |Black Oxide   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Copper   | -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Copper-filings| -| -| 5| -| -| -| -|
 |Sal Ammoniac  | -| -| -| -| -| 6| 6|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_CRIMSON AND SCARLET STARS AND LANCES._

 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number        | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Potash      |16| 8|16|16|24|16| 5|16| 8|16|25| 4|32| 6|16|
 |Nitrate of    |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Strontian   |16|16|32|32| -|16| 4|24| 5| 6|30| 7|48| 5| -|
 |Sulphur,      |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  washed      | 5| 6| 9|12| 6| 5| 2| -| 1| -|10| 1| 6| -| -|
 |Charcoal,     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  fine        | 1| 1| 1| 1| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Shellac       | -| 1| 4| 2| 2| -| -| 7| 1| 4| 3| 1|12| 1| -|
 |Calomel       | -| -| 7| -| 6| 1| -|14| 2| 2| 9| 2|12| 5| -|
 |Sulphuret     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Copper   | -| -| 3| 1| -| -| -| 1| 1| 1| 3| 1| -| 1| -|
 |Realgar, or   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Orpiment    | -| -| -| -| -| 1| 1| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Vegetable     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  black       | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| -| 1| -| -|
 |Loaf Sugar    | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 7|
 |Carbonate     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Strontian| -| -| -| -|10| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|11|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number        |16|17|18|19|20|21|22|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Potash      |28|32|26|96| 8|24| 8|
 |Nitrate of    |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Strontian   | -|42|10|72|12|18|12|
 |Sulphur,      |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  washed      | -|13| 5|24| 2| -| 2|
 |Charcoal,     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  fine        | -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Shellac       | -| 4| 3|21| 4| 5| 3|
 |Calomel       |12|12|10|42| -| -| 4|
 |Sulphuret     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Copper   | -| 4| 1| 4| 1| 5| -|
 |Realgar, or   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Orpiment    | -| -| -| -| -| 1| -|
 |Vegetable     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  black       | -| 1| -| -| -| -| 1|
 |Loaf Sugar    |12| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Carbonate     |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  of Strontian| 5| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 +--------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

It is impossible to powder shellac sufficiently fine, by hand; and,
twenty years ago, it could not be procured. About that time the
drug-grinders, finding a demand for it, submitted it to the action of
the stamping mills, (mechanical pestle and mortar), and now it can be
obtained at most shops. Chertier mixed it with salt; melted the two
together; powdered the mixture; and washed out the salt. Such process
is needless now. It is useless, unless as fine as wheaten flour. Page,
of 47, Blackfriars Road; and Chubb, of 29, Old Street, St. Lukes,
London, supply it.



_GREEN OR EMERALD STARS AND LANCES._

 +--------------+--+--+---+--+---+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number        | 1| 2|  3| 4|  5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
 +--------------+--+--+---+--+---+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Potash      |16| 8|132|32|144| 8| 3| 1| -|16| 6|12|16| 3|48|
 |Nitrate of    |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Barytes     |16| 8|108|54|160|21| 2| -| -| 8| 7| 5| 8| 3|42|
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Barytes     | -| -|  -| -|  -| 3| 2| 2| 4| 8| 3| 4| 4| -| -|
 |Sulphur,      |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  washed      | 5| 4|  6| 6|  4| 7| 1| 1| 1| 5| -| -| 1| -| -|
 |Charcoal,     |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  fine        | 1| 1|  -| -|  -| 1| -| -| -| 1| -| 1| -| -| -|
 |Sulphuret of  |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Antimony    | -| 1|  -| -|  -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Calomel       | -| -| 48|27|100| -| -| -| -| -| 5| 2| 2| 2| -|
 |Shellac       | -| -|  -|24| 12|12| 2| -| -| -| -| 3| 4| -| 7|
 |Vegetable     |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  black       | -| -|  -| 1|  1| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Loaf Sugar    | -| -|  -| -|  -| -| -| -| -| -| 5| -| -| 2| 7|
 |Salammoniac   | -| -|  -| -|  -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 5|
 |Orpiment, or  |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Realgar     | -| -|  -| -|  -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Sulphuret of  |  |  |   |  |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
 |  Copper      | -| -|  -| -|  -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 +--------------+--+--+---+--+---+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

 +--------------+--+--+---+--+--+
 |Number        |16|17| 18|19|20|
 +--------------+--+--+---+--+--+
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  Potash      |22|24|108|24|16|
 |Nitrate of    |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  Barytes     |22|32|108|32|48|
 |Chlorate of   |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  Barytes     | -| -|  -| -| -|
 |Sulphur,      |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  washed      | -|10| 18| 8|12|
 |Charcoal,     |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  fine        | -| -|  -| -| 1|
 |Sulphuret of  |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  Antimony    | -| -|  -| 2| -|
 |Calomel       |10| -| 48| -| 8|
 |Shellac       | 1| -| 24| -| 5|
 |Vegetable     |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  black       | -| -|  1| -| -|
 |Loaf Sugar    |14| -|  -| -| -|
 |Salammoniac   | -| -|  -| -| -|
 |Orpiment, or  |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  Realgar     | -| 3|  -| 3| -|
 |Sulphuret of  |  |  |   |  |  |
 |  Copper      | -| -|  -| -| 2|
 +--------------+--+--+---+--+--+

If powdered nitrate of barytes, and shellac crushed by being hammered in
a bag, are mixed together, and melted in a pipkin, over the fire, the
mixture, when cold, may be reduced to a powder in an iron mortar, with
patience. Take Number 6. Weigh out 21 parts nitrate of barytes, and 2
parts of coarsely powdered lac; melt them together; when cold, powder
them; and add the other substances in proper proportion. Shellac may be
melted with nitrate of strontian, in the same way.


_DEEP AND PALE YELLOW STARS AND LANCES._

 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of Potash    | 8| 4|12|16|12|16| 4| 4|16| 3| 8|16|16| 4| 8|
 |Oxalate of Soda       | 3| 2| 8| 4| 4| 4| 3| 1| 4| 4| 4| 5| -| 1| -|
 |Bicarbonate of Soda   | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 3| -| 3|
 |Nitrate of Strontian  | -| -| -| -| -| -|20| -| -| -|16| -| 4| -| -|
 |Carbonate of Strontian| -| -| -| 3| 2| 3| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Nitrate of Barytes    | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 4|10| -| -| 3| -| -|
 |Sulphur, washed       | -| -| -| 4| 4| 4| -| 1| 2| -| 6| 5| -| -| -|
 |Shellac               | 2| 1| 3| -| 1| 1| 5| -| 2| 3| 1| -| 4| 1| -|
 |Stearine              | -| -| -| -| -| 1| -| -| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Charcoal, fine        | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| 1| -| -| -|
 |Orpiment, or Realgar  | -| -| -| 1| 1| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1|
 |Sugar                 | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| 3|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_MAUVE AND LILAC STARS AND LANCES._

 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of Potash    |28|17|60|40|25|24|24|25|12|
 |Calomel               |12| -| -| -|10|12|12| -| -|
 |Shellac               | 4| -| -| -| 5| 5| 5| -| -|
 |Nitrate of Strontian  | 4| 4|25|14| -| 4| -|16|16|
 |Sulphuret of Copper   | 2| 7|20| -| 5| 2| 2| -| -|
 |Stearine              | 1| -| -| -| 1| -| 1| -| -|
 |Sulphur, washed       | -| 7|35|16| -| -| -|12| 2|
 |Chloride of Lead      | -| 1| -| 2| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Nitrate of Lead       | -| -| -| -|10| -|12| 1| -|
 |Oxychloride of Copper | -| -| 8|12| -| -| -| 6| -|
 |Salammoniac           | -| -| 1| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Vegetable black       | -| -| -| 1| -| -| -| 1| 1|
 |Nitre                 | -| -| -| 2| -| -| -| 2| 1|
 |Carbonate of Strontian| -| -| -| -| 5| -| 4| -| -|
 |Orpiment, or Realgar  | -| -| -| -| -| -| 1| -| 1|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_PURPLE AND VIOLET STARS AND LANCES._

 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Number                | 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9|10|11|12|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
 |Chlorate of Potash    |42|28|48|16| 6|16| 3| 6|26|30|96|24|
 |Nitrate of Strontian  |42|14|48| -| 4| -| -| 1| -| -|24| -|
 |Sulphur, washed       |13| -|28| 2| 1| 6| 1| 3| -| 3| -| 2|
 |Calomel               |12|14|28| 7| 2| 6| 2| 2|20| 8|48| 8|
 |Sulphuret of Copper   | 4| 1|40| 8| 1| -| 3| -| 3|12| 1| -|
 |Shellac               | 4| 5| 1| -| 1| -| -| -| -| 4| -| 1|
 |Vegetable black       | 1| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|
 |Black Oxide of Copper | -| -| -| -| -| 4| 4| 1| -| -| -| -|
 |Carbonate of Strontian| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 4|12| -| -|
 |Sugar                 | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -|14| -|42| -|
 |Oxychloride of Copper | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 4|
 |Stearine              | -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| -| 2|
 +----------------------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+


_MAGNESIUM COLOURS FOR STARS AND ASTEROIDS._

 +---------------------+--------+--------+------+-----+-------+------+
 |       Colours.      |Crimson.|Scarlet.|Green.|Blue.|Yellow.|White.|
 +---------------------+--------+--------+------+-----+-------+------+
 |Nitrate of Strontian |   8    |    6   |   -  |  -  |   -   |   -  |
 |Chlorate of Barytes  |   -    |    -   |  12  |  -  |   -   |   -  |
 |Oxychloride of Copper|   -    |    -   |   -  |  2  |   -   |   -  |
 |Oxalate of Soda      |   -    |    -   |   -  |  -  |   2   |   -  |
 |Sulphuret of Antimony|   -    |    -   |   -  |  -  |   -   |   1  |
 |Chlorate of Potash   |   2    |    4   |   -  |  5  |   4   |   -  |
 |Nitre                |   -    |    -   |   -  |  -  |   -   |  12  |
 |Sulphur              |   2    |    2   |   1  |  2  |   -   |   4  |
 |Charcoal             |   1    |    -   |   -  |  -  |   -   |   -  |
 |Shellac              |   -    |    2   |   3  |  1  |   1   |   -  |
 |Calomel              |   -    |    4   |   -  |  2  |   -   |   -  |
 |Magnesium-filings    |   2    |    3   |   2  |  2  |   1   |   2  |
 +---------------------+--------+--------+------+-----+-------+------+


_SLOW FIRES, TO BE HEAPED UPON A TILE IN SHAPE OF A CONE, AND LIT AT
TOP._

 +----------------------+---------+--------+---------+--------+
 |       Colours.       |   Red.  | Green. | Purple. | Yellow |
 +----------------------+--+--+---+--+--+--+-----+---+---+----+
 |Nitrate of Strontian  |16|24|108| -| -| -| 108 | 72| 20|  - |
 |Nitrate of Barytes    | -| -| - |16|16|16|  -  |  -|  -| 10 |
 |Oxalate of Soda       | -| -| - | -| -| -|  -  |  -|  3|  5 |
 |Sulphuret of Copper   | -| 3| 30| -| -| -|  24 |  3|  -|  - |
 |Chlorate of Barytes   | -| -| - | -| -|12|  -  |  -|  -|  - |
 |Chlorate of Potash    | 1| 3| 12| 1| 1| -|   9 |  4|  2|  2 |
 |Charcoal, fine        | 1| -| - | 1| -| -|  -  |  -|  -|  - |
 |Calomel               | -| 6| 24| -| 5| 9|  24 | 18|  -|  - |
 |Sulphur, washed       | 4| 8| 39| 4| 2| 7|  39 | 24|  4|  1 |
 |Shellac               | -| 1|  2| -| 2| 1|   2 |  3|  2|  6 |
 |Vegetable black       | -| -|  1| -| -| -|   1 |  2|  -|  - |
 +----------------------+--+--+---+--+--+--+-----+---+---+----+




_INDEX._


 Air Balloons, 165.

 Air Balls, 124.

 Alum, 13.

 Articles, to Mix, 8.

 Asteroid, or Parachute Rockets, 131.


 Balloons, Fire or Montgolfier, 159.

   "       Gas, 165.

   "       Screw-propelled, 80.

 Blow-pipe Experiment, 176.

 Blue Lights, 111.

 Bottles, to Clean, 7.

 Bottomless Pill-boxes, 57.

 Brass, to Lacquer, 4.

 Bursting Powder, 45.


 Caprice Wheels, 139.

 Carriage Bolts, 165.

 Cascade, 142.

 Cases, to Tie on Wheels, 136.

 Cast Iron Borings, to Preserve, 116.

 Charcoal, 46, 49.

 Chenille, 132.

 Chequer Piece, 141.

 Chertier's Copper, 14.

 Chinese Fliers, 83.

   "     Trees, 69.

 Chondrometer, 158.

 Chopped Stars, 54.

 Clay, 15.

 Coffee Mill, 52.

 Coke, 48.

 Coloured Gerbes, 70.

   "      Lances, to Prime, 177.

 Comet, 148.

 Compositions required, 44, 68.

 Concluding Remarks, 173.

 Crackers, 98.

 Cracks in Wooden Bowls, 23.

 Crochet Cotton, 29.

 Cup Hook, 167.

 Cut Stars, 54.


 Darning Cotton, 29.

 Devices for Lancework, 115.

 Devil-among-the-Tailors, 146.

 Dextrine Solution, 11.

 Distillation, 173.

 Distress Rockets, 171.

 Drop Piece, 150.

 Dry Pill-box Stars, 54.


 Enveloped Stars, 58.


 Faraday's Example, 183.

 Fire from Wheel to Fixed, 149.

 Five-pointed Star, 83.

 Fixed Cases, 66.

 Flat Weights, to Make, 165.

 Flax, 5.

 Flower Pots, 72.

 Flying Dutchman, 80.

 Frames, 97.

 French Nails, 97.

 Frying Pan, 8.

 Funnel, to Make, 86.

 Furilona Wheel, 139.

 Fuses, 185.


 Galileo's Discovery, 138.

 Garden Sieves, 49.

 Gauge, 2.

 Gerbes, 69.

 Girandole of Rockets, 153.

 Gold Rains, 107.

 Goods-weighing Machine, 158.

 Gores, to Cut, 161.

 Grinding Mill, to Imitate, 152.

 Gum Bottle, 12.

  "  Brushes, 12.

  "  Solution, 11.

  "  Strips, 114.

 Gum-resins, 175.

 Gums, 174.

 Gunpowder, 18.


 Hemp, 5.

 Hitch, to Make, 36.

 Horizontal Wheel, 140.

   "        Changed to Vertical, 140.


 Jack-in-the-Box, 145.


 Knitting Cotton, 29.


 Lac Solution, 9.

 Lamp Black, 73.

  "     "    and Linseed Oil, 73.

  "   Cotton, 25.

 Lances, 112.

   "     to Time, 138.

 Leader Pipes, 102, 103.

 Leather Bag, 18.

 Line, or Telegraph Rocket, 146.

 List of Prices, 172.

 Litmus Paper, 51.

 Log-line, 158.


 Magnet, 181.

 Mallets, 6, 39.

 Maroons, or Imitative Cannon, 105.

   "      Salute, to Fire, 107.

 Meal powder, 18.

 Mines, 143.

 Mortars, 122.


 Nest of Shells, 131.

 Nitrate of Strontian, to Dry, 8.

   "        Potash, or Nitre, 46.


 Oil Flasks, 124.

 Oils, Fixed, 175.

  "    Volatile, 175.

 Oxalate of Soda, 51.

 Oxychloride of Copper, 176.


 Paper Weights, 165.

 Parachute, 131.

 Paste, 13.

   "    Pot, 13.

 Pattern Gore, 160.

 Peacock's Plumes, 108.

 Pearl Streamer, 111.

 Pendulum, Invention of, 138.

 Pigeon, or Fiery Phœnix, 146.

   "     House, 148.

 Pins for Lustres, 72.

 Pinwheels, 91.

 Pipes, to Join, 102.

 Plait Mill, 99.

 Plaster of Paris, 15, 22.

 Pocket Scissors, 105.

 Porcelain, 48.

 Portfire, 73.

   "       Holder, 154.

 Prince of Wales' Feathers, 112.

 Pyramidical Piece, 142.


 Quickmatch, to Make--

   "         Usual Method, 24.

   "         My New Method, 26.

   "         Box, 31.

   "         to Test, 30.

 Quill Scoop, 23.


 Rainbow Wheel, 138.

 Rayonant Star Piece, 141.

 Resins, 174.

 Revolving Globe, 143.

 Rocket, 32.

   "     Drifts, 38.

   "     Guide, 170.

   "     Heads, 59.

   "     Moulds, 63.

   "     Proportions, 33, 34.

   "     Spindles, 37.

   "     Stars, 53.

 Rocket Sticks, 62.

   "    to Fire, 45.

 Rolling Board, 1.

 Roman Candle, 1.

   "     "     Bouquets, 152.


 Saucissons, 109.

 Saxons, 81.

 Scales, 155.

 Scoops, 15, 23.

 Screw Eye, 167.

   "   Hook, 167.

   "   Ring, 167.

   "   in Brickwork, 23.

 Scroll Wheel, 141.

 Serpents, 90.

 Seven-lance Star, 179.

 Shell Fuses, 73.

 Shells, Cylindrical, 125.

   "     Spherical, 117.

   "     Spheroidal, 124.

 Sieves, 47, 49.

 Silver Rains, 107.

 Slate Slab, 4.

 Slot Tube, 170.

 Slow Match, 24.

 Soap Boxes, 49.

 Solder, How to, 86.

 Spindles for Wheels, 165.

 Spiral Wheel, 142.

 Spur Fire, 73.

 Squibs, 84.

 Star Candles, 111.

 Stars, to Damp, 7.

 Starting Fire, 21.

 Stearine Solution, 10.

 Steel Filings, to Preserve, 116.

   "   Fliers, for Sportsmen, 80.

   "   Pen Scoop, 23.

 Steelyard Scales, 155.

 Sublimation, 173.

 Sulphate of Copper, 14.

 Sulphur, to Wash, 50.

 Sulphuret of Copper, 52.

 Sulphuric Acid, 14.


 Tape Quickmatch, 29.

  "   Slowmatch, 24.

 Touch Paper, 23.

 Tourbillions, 73.

 Triangular Wheels, 135.

 True Lover's Knot, 142.

 Turning Sun, 141.


 Vegetable Black, 73.

 Vertical Wheels, 137.

 Vials for Measures, 13.


 Wasp Light, 178.

 Water Measure, 12.

 Wax Solution, 10.

 Weight of Cast Iron Spheres, 65.

   "       Leaden      "      65.

   "       Water, 12.

   "   for Quickmatch, 27, 177.

 Wheel Cases, 66.

 Windmill Piece, 149.

 Winged Rockets, 168.

 Wire, to render inelastic, 71.


 Zinc Pot, 13.


J. OGDEN AND CO., PRINTERS, 172, ST. JOHN STREET, E.C.




[Illustration: 1]

[Illustration: 2]

[Illustration: 3]

[Illustration: 4]

[Illustration: 5]

[Illustration: 6]

[Illustration: 7]

[Illustration: 8]

[Illustration: 9]

[Illustration: 10]

[Illustration: 11]

[Illustration: 12]

[Illustration: 13]

[Illustration: 14]

[Illustration: 15]

[Illustration: _Charging a Case._]




    Transcriber's notes:

    The following is a list of changes made to the original.
    The first line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

    solid piece of wood. After catisng, the rough
    solid piece of wood. After casting, the rough

    ironmongers', of lengths varying from 1 inch
    ironmonger's, of lengths varying from 1 inch





End of Project Gutenberg's The Pyrotechnist's Treasury, by Thomas  Kentish



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PYROTECHNIST'S TREASURY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


