The Project Gutenberg eBook of Consumption Curable: Observations on the Treatment of Pulmonary Diseases
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Consumption Curable: Observations on the Treatment of Pulmonary Diseases

Author: Henry Congreve

Release date: January 3, 2017 [eBook #53880]

Language: English

Credits: Transcribed from the 1839 W. Tylee edition by David Price


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSUMPTION CURABLE: OBSERVATIONS ON THE TREATMENT OF PULMONARY DISEASES ***


Transcribed from the 1839 W. Tylee edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                        [Picture: Pamphlet cover]

                       NEW ERA IN MEDICAL SCIENCE.

                                * * * * *





                           CONSUMPTION CURABLE:
                               OBSERVATIONS
                                  ON THE
                     TREATMENT OF PULMONARY DISEASES;


                             CHARACTERIZED BY
                                 ASTHMA,
                                   AND
                      OTHER DISORDERS OF THE CHEST,

                      PRECEDED BY, OR ATTENDED WITH

                       VIOLENT COUGH AND WHEEZING,

                                    OR

                     EXTREME DIFFICULTY OF BREATHING;

                                 AND THE

            METHOD OF EFFECTUALLY ERADICATING EVERY SYMPTOM OF
                            THOSE COMPLAINTS,

                                   AND

                          PULMONARY CONSUMPTION,

                              BY MEANS WHICH

                           NATURE HAS PROVIDED,

                  HITHERTO EMPLOYED ONLY BY THE AUTHOR.

                                * * * * *

 _Patronized by the Nobility and Medical Men of the highest distinction_.

                                * * * * *

                         TWENTY-SEVENTH EDITION.

                                 LONDON:
              PRINTED BY W. TYLEE, BOLT-COURT, FLEET-STREET.
         PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR (H. CONGREVE, SHEPHERD’S BUSH)
          BY HANNAY AND DIETRICHSEN, 63, OXFORD-STREET, LONDON;
                    AND MAY BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                  1839.

                                * * * * *




OBSERVATIONS
ON
PULMONARY DISEASES;


DEFINING THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS, AND DIRECTING TO THE MODE OF TREATMENT,
                           AND MEANS OF CURE OF

     INFLUENZA COLDS AND COUGHS, HOOPING COUGH, ASTHMA, AND PULMONARY
                             CONSUMPTION, &c.

IT is a matter of notoriety how slightly regarded or little known are the
medicinal properties concentrated in the plants which adorn the vegetable
kingdom.  Such negligence of the means of healing, by the remedies which
are sent by the immediate hand of Providence, and rendered most abundant
and common, and the substitution of others of a more doubtful, and often
highly injurious, character, evinces a love of change, not simply to
promote a greater benefit, but to render the art of healing more
complicated and obscure.

It is probable that many disorders, for the relief of which medicines are
sought for from the remotest parts of the globe, which act with harshness
and violence, would be averted, were the same attention paid to the
investigation of the properties, and the best mode of extracting the
qualities, incorporated in the leaves, seeds, roots, and juices, together
with the balsams, which in some cases exude from them, to be found in the
soil of Nature’s platform on which we traverse.

There was a time, and not very remote, in the annals of the past, when
disorders of the Chest and Lungs, so alarmingly prevalent in the present
day, were scarcely known; when Consumptions were seldom heard of; when
obstructions of the viscera were hardly ever seen, and when chronic
diseases were but rarely witnessed.  The reason is obvious: the simples
which adorn the pages of our ancient authors on medical science, are no
longer resorted to for relief by the student or practitioner, however
valuable their properties have heretofore been manifested; and other
compounds, emanating from the laboratory, have been preferred, and thus
the _simplicity_ of the science has been gradually lost in its
complications.

The design of the present treatise is to attempt the restoration of the
good old ancient mode of cure, now obsolete; particularly as regards
pulmonary complaints, which, in this our variable climate, are unhappily
so abundant and fatal.  All the information, needful to exhibit to the
sufferer the dangers frequently arising from the neglect of what is
called a common cold; and of the means whereby its course may be nipped
in the very bud, and its more direful effects removed in its latent
stages, and other matter of general importance is advanced; which, while
it becomes a friendly beacon to warn him of danger, will at once point to
a safe and salutary, and not less certain than salutary remedy.

All diseases of a pulmonary character should be treated by remedies
possessing a combination of emollient, pectoral, and mildly expectorant
qualities, capable of inciding and discharging the offending matter,
which impedes the free action of the lungs, and highly aggravates the
complaint.  A remedy has for many years been employed in these cases,
embodying the before-mentioned properties, which, when mixed in honey, is
so pleasant that children take it with avidity.  It is composed of the
essences of herbs and asiatic gums, containing the purest balsamic and
healing virtues.  The sacrifices of human life, which annually transpire
from pulmonary complaints, call loudly for a reform of medical practice.
If the means of averting this calamity, or ameliorating the afflictions
of the numerous class of sufferers, with which this country abounds, can
be devised, it is, doubtless, the paramount duty of the individual who
possesses them, to diffuse abroad the intelligence of his discovery, as
extensively as possible, and more especially so when the ordinary means
fail (as obviously they do) to yield the desired relief.  These
considerations have appeared weighty; and stimulated by the hope, that
this remedy will become the means, in the hand of Providence, of saving
many thousands from a premature grave, the author is induced strenuously
to recommend its use to the patient tortured with the worst symptoms of
asthma, cough, difficulty of breathing, and pulmonary consumption, of
which this pamphlet treats, in every characteristic form of the disease.

The antidote referred to (see page 16) is a medicinal agent, which, from
its efficacy in Asthmatic affections, as well as in the respiratory
function in Pulmonary Consumption, has extended its just pretensions to
universal notice.  The embarrassed breathing, approaching to an anxious
sense of suffocation, incidentally presenting in Pulmonary complaints, is
relieved by its salutary influence.  As its pervading and soothing power
has been found to ameliorate and obviate the obstruction or impeded
breath, in asthmatic and other disordered states of respiration, it has
become a most valuable accession to the stock of remedies entitled to
confident adoption.

This preparation, being a saturated infusion of plants and gums, &c.,
unknown to the medical profession, cannot be ascertained by any chemical
analysis or examination.  As the Proprietor has not developed the
particulars relative to this discovery to any member of the profession,
he is prepared to anticipate from the illiberal amongst their number a
degree of censure; but he appeals from the tyranny of custom to the
dictates of common equity and reason.  If, in the course of medical
research, any discovery is incidentally made, which offers to society the
most important benefits, humanity appears to demand that it should be
unreservedly communicated to the faculty, for the welfare of mankind:
but, having devoted a considerable property and time in the conducting a
series of experiments, totally unconnected with the customary routine of
medical practice, in the completion of the discovery, the Author
conceives that he is warranted to expect some remuneration by its sale,
as a compensation for his labours.  An invention is as much the property
of its proprietor, as the estate he purchases or inherits.  Society has a
right to enjoy the advantage of his toil and skill—but, surely his
labours have an equal claim on their patronage in return.  The Public are
sufficiently enlightened in the subject of medicine to be aware that the
opposition which secret preparations have experienced from this quarter
(though there are many exceptions to be made) arises entirely from
interested motives, and they will decide accordingly.



OF HOARSENESS, ARISING FROM COLD.


HOARSENESS is not only a very distressing and painful complaint, but
often extremely obstinate, and very difficult to cure by the customary
means.  A sense of roughness in the throat, with frequent attempts to
clear it, is generally the first and most early symptom of the disease.
It is attended with, or succeeded by irritation of the larynx, exciting a
hard and dry cough, hoarseness of voice, with a sense of tightness across
the chest, and sometimes with soreness and pain upon breathing deeply, or
coughing.  Lassitude, aching of the limbs, cold chills, and shiverings,
are now apparent, with but little expectoration of the opaque matter that
irritates the part; which, from neglect of the means of totally removing
it, assumes other characters, and rapidly passes into inflammation of the
lungs.

The larynx, or top of the windpipe, is the seat of this complaint; and to
great tenderness or soreness of the surrounding part, with a thickened
state of its natural moisture, may be ascribed the cause producing it.
This is always perceptible to those who are hoarse, who, in endeavouring
to speak out to render their voice audible, feel that part of the throat
extremely painful and tender; and if, at any time, they expectorate, or
discharge a portion of phlegm, it is very firm, thick, and tenacious, and
often tinged with blood—but they are enabled to speak more freely
afterwards, until a re-accumulation of the matter, which occasions the
disease, ensues.  The BALSAM is a natural and truly excellent remedy in
such cases, for it possesses great power in softening and dissolving the
tough phlegm; and it is, moreover, an excellent pectoral and balsamic, on
which account, nothing can be more suited for curing the complaint, which
fact repeated experience has confirmed.

The subjects of this disorder are always worse in the morning.  The acrid
humours which occasion it, collect, accumulate, and spread themselves
over the affected parts during the night, undisturbed; and on rising from
bed in the morning, the oppression induced is severely felt.  On this
account, also, those who are subjected to these oppressions from thick,
glutinous phlegm, feel more uneasiness at this time, than perhaps any
other part of the day.—The remedy should, therefore, never be omitted at
night in such cases, and ought to be again repeated early in the morning.

Those who suffer from hoarseness, should refrain, as much as possible,
from any attempt at loud talking, because those efforts invariably
increase the malady.  Although night and morning are the periods when the
use of the Balsam is indicated, in such cases, it will do good taken at
any time of the day, in small doses, as the occasion requires.  If,
therefore, the patient labouring under this harassing complaint have
occasion to speak much, he should always guard against the consequences,
by previously taking a dose, to sheathe the lungs, and the subjoining
parts affected.  He will then be enabled to articulate with greater ease
and comfort to himself, more intelligibly to his auditory, and prevent
that violent straining which inevitably aggravates and increases the
disorder.

When any person afflicted with hoarseness is going into company where his
conversational powers will be unavoidably called into action, it will be
advisable to take a dose of the Balsam, incorporated with honey; and
again renew it, should not the first relieve him—which relief he would in
vain endeavour to obtain by violent efforts—such efforts, without the use
of this remedy, would only add to the existing evil.

Speaking with ease and clearness, is agreeable to every one; but to some
it is of the utmost importance.  The clergyman, who officiates in his
duties as a minister in the pulpit; the advocate, who pleads the cause of
his client at the bar; the actor, who caters on the stage, for the
amusement of the spectators; and those vocalists, who contribute to the
delight of the assembly or the concert, are often distressed in the
highest degree by hoarseness, which it is of consequence should be
obviated by the use of a counteracting remedy.  In these cases, this
medicine will certainly afford permanent relief.



OF CATARRH, COLD, INFLUENZA, AND COUGH; AND HOOPING COUGH, TO WHICH
CHILDREN ARE ESPECIALLY LIABLE.


Although Catarrhs, or Colds, are the most common of all disorders, there
are few which are less understood, or have called forth a greater
diversity of opinion.  Persons of a phlegmatic temperament, delicate
constitution, and relaxed habit of body—and those with long necks and
narrow chests, or who indulge in warm apartments and beds—who rise late,
and take but little exercise in the open air—are most liable to the
complaint.

In the spring and autumnal seasons, or in wet and changeable weather, its
attacks are most general and severe.  The coldness and moisture of the
atmosphere, or in other states of the air, not perceptible to the senses,
but which impede and check the insensible perspiration of the skin, or
cutaneous surface, are the chief and prevailing exciting causes.  When it
arises from epidemic or infectious sources, as it sometimes does, the
disorder is attended with symptoms of a febrile character, and is usually
very severe in its effects; and in this case, it not only extends to the
digestive mucus, producing great debility, but along the air passages,
exciting cough, difficulty of breathing, and a host of melancholy
feelings, to which the asthmatic are the constant subjects.

The uncertainty of our climate renders its inhabitants extremely liable
to Colds; and one of the common effects arising from them is a Cough.  A
Cough is too frequently slighted, because it is common; but if the danger
attendant on this apparently unimportant affection, were known, and the
remedy applied in time, much mischief would be prevented.  In young
persons especially, Coughs are often the forerunners of Consumption; and
in those who are far advanced in life, though not in the same degree
liable to this dangerous consequence, the complaint will become habitual
and confirmed, and of course most troublesome and distressing.

Colds are often brought on by taking hot liquors previous to going out of
a warm room into the air in a cold evening; but generally they arise from
an exposure of the body to the atmosphere, when it is heated above its
usual temperature; or from a sudden transition from heat to cold.  The
natural perspiration is, in a great measure, retarded by the obstruction
of the cutaneous pores; and the abundant humours, which should have
passed off through the skin, lodge in the internal surface of the throat
and lungs, where, by their quantity and acrimony, they create a constant
tickling and wheezing, with a peculiar painful and distressing sensation;
and the lungs, by endeavouring to dislodge the accumulated matter, become
subject to a state of inflammation, with a harassing Cough, as the
natural result.

In this case, those means must be used which will attenuate and subdue
this acrimonious humour, lessen its quantity, and carry it off by the
urinary passages; and this cannot be effected with advantage, but by
ingredients of a balsamic quality, which, while they act with efficacy,
will also mollify and sheathe the parts, and preserve them from the
results which a chemical action of the corrosive matter would otherwise
produce.  Such then is the Balsam, herein recommended, which, for these
purposes, can never be sufficiently extolled; and, in most cases, it acts
as a preventative, as well as cure.

We would respectfully advise that on the first appearance of the Cough,
recourse be immediately had to the remedy, of which one or two doses will
generally cure.  There are but few who do not suffer a Cough to be
neglected, until it has gained a firm hold, and affects the whole frame,
by febrile and other symptoms.  If such be the case, no time must be lost
in commencing with the remedy, and persevering in its use—as in these
cases, it is a decided specific.

In Chronic Coughs, arising from a loaded state of the air vessels of the
lungs with mucus, it proves pre-eminently beneficial, by increasing the
power of the patient to expectorate the irritating matter; at the same
time allaying irritability in the membrane lining the wind-pipe, &c.

A recent Cold may be cured by an extra full dose of the Balsam, taken at
night.  As in all Colds and Coughs, fever is an attendant symptom, the
patient should refrain as much as possible from the use of meat, and
especially strong spirituous liquors; and take gentle exercise in the
open air, when the weather will admit; of course avoiding all draughts,
which would renew and increase the Cold.

Disorders, which have been slowly induced, and established a firm hold in
the constitution, will, of course, require a little time to pass off,
even with the utmost care.  No person, however, need suffer a Cough to
fix upon him, if he will have timely recourse to this medicine; but if
either by neglect or ignorance of the remedy, or other remedies, it has
become habitual and confirmed, the use of this specific for a short
period, twice or thrice a day, with an occasional dose of some gentle
opening medicine, will complete the cure.  This course must not be
omitted by young persons especially, because, if the Cough in its early
stages is neglected, Consumption will inevitably be produced.  Had it no
other excellent qualities to recommend its fame, it is, in this respect,
entitled to a high estimate, as we shall hereafter demonstrate.  How
often do we notice medical men at a pause, not knowing what to do with
obstinate and rebellious Coughs, which are proof against all their
medicines; whereas there is no case of this kind in which the Balsam does
not effect permanent advantage.  Certainly, the sooner it is taken, the
more speedily will the benefit be manifested; but there is no period when
(with due regard to temperance and exercise, and perseverance with the
remedy) it will not effect a permanent and radical cure.



HOOPING COUGH.


The immediate cause of Hooping Cough is a viscid and glutinous matter or
phlegm lodged upon the bronchiæ, trachea, and fauces, which adheres so
firmly as to be expectorated or discharged with the greatest possible
difficulty.

This Cough is known by the peculiar _hoop_ which is descriptive of the
disease.  Children are most commonly the subjects of this complaint, and
especially those who are teething; but it sometimes attacks those
advanced in life.  It comes on with a slight difficulty of breathing,
thirst, rapid pulse, hoarseness, Cough, and all the symptoms of common
Cold.  This disorder, if not nipped in the bud, gradually increases; and
about the second or third week, assumes its peculiar characteristic
symptoms.  The expiratory motions, peculiar to coughing, are made with
more rapidity and violence than usual; and after several of these
convulsive efforts, a sudden and full inspiration succeeds, and from the
air rushing with unusual violence through the _glottis_, the Hooping
Cough is occasioned.

In this peculiar calamitous and highly dangerous Cough, the object to be
attained is a free expectoration, to dissolve and remove the phlegm, and
to abate the fever.  Emetics, which are often unwisely ordered, agitate
the system, and aggravate the symptoms; blisters only irritate, without
accomplishing the desired intention; and, in fact, the patient is too
frequently abandoned to the chances of change of air, and strength of
constitution, to sustain the shock.  It will be a source of consolation
to every anxious mother, that this valuable compound which operates so
beneficially in Coughs, is also equally excellent in Hooping Cough;
indeed, its balsamic, pectoral, expectorant, and emollient properties,
render it peculiarly adapted to eradicate the worst stages of the
complaint, for the reasons before advanced.  It may be given in the
quantity of a tea-spoonful, three or four times a day, in honey, or on
lump sugar, as the urgency of the case demands.  The contents of a 2s.
9d. bottle, seldom or ever fail to develope its specific qualities in
such cases.

This disorder sometimes terminates in apoplexy and suffocation.  In some,
it lays the foundation for asthma and pulmonary complaints.  It will,
therefore, be manifest, that a remedy, which will remove the offending
cause, should never be omitted.



OF THE TOUGH PHLEGM, WHICH USUALLY PRECEDES AN ATTACK OF ASTHMA.


Many individuals, especially those far advanced in life, are much
subjected to a collection of tough phlegm, which adheres to the bronchial
tube, or inner surface of the windpipe, in the morning, and renders their
breathing most difficult and painful; occasioning hoarseness, and
producing violent fits of coughing, until the matter is discharged.  This
affection is not, strictly speaking, a disease; and although it is most
troublesome and disagreeable, as well as painful to its subject, and to
others, there are but few persons who consult the physician for its
removal.

This complaint should not, however, be neglected, for, by inattention to
its early symptoms, it will be much increased, and often terminate in
Asthma; and some have fallen a sacrifice to its consequences, by the
rupture of a blood vessel, occasioned by violent straining.  If it were
asked of medical men, what medicine would cure this infirmity, and be a
safe preventative to its return, the question would be with difficulty
answered.  No remedy could afford effectual relief, otherwise compounded
than the Balsam before alluded to.  The patient should have recourse to
it on retiring to rest at night, and early in the morning, or on rising
from bed; one or two tea-spoonsful in a little honey, or on lump sugar,
will constitute the regular dose.  Relief will be experienced from it the
first day, and progressively increase, until the recovery is complete.
It will, nevertheless, be advisable to take minute supplies occasionally,
for a short period afterwards, to prevent a tendency to relapse: and if
at any subsequent period, after the removal of the cold, the complaint
again appear, the same course must be again adopted, and duly persevered
in, until it is totally removed.



OF ASTHMA, OR DIFFICULTY OF BREATHING.


There are two distinct kinds of Asthma—one of which is denominated
nervous or convulsive—the latter is not the disorder so prevalent in this
country as the former.  The true Asthma is a laborious breathing,
wheezing, sense of suffocation, attended by anxiety, cough, and mucus
expectoration.  It is very frequent; and no disease is more distressing
to the patient.

Asthma is a disease which usually attacks elderly people; and those who
are subject to it, have frequent returns—for all the methods in common
use are calculated only to promote relief in the present fit, not to
produce a lasting cure.  If the medical adviser be called in in the
extremity of a fit, he bleeds his patient freely; and that practice is
become too general, because it often affords immediate relief in the
paroxysms, but the fits again return, and often with greater violence
than before; and frequent renewals of this practice soon undermine and
destroy the constitution.

The phenomena of Asthma arises from increased excitement of the branches
of the eighth pair of nerves, distributed over the larynx, and the
internal membrane of the wind-pipe, and bronchiæ, brought on by a certain
condition of the atmosphere, probably with respect to electric matter:
for, opposite states of the air, with regard to its temperature, density,
or humidity, do not disorder asthmatic subjects, so much as easterly or
north-easterly winds.  In consequence of the excitement of the nerves of
the larynx, &c., the respiratory muscles, particularly those which
perform the functions of expiration, become affected by spasms, whereby
the free admission of the irritating air into the lungs is promoted.
This is manifest by the excessive paroxysms, very similar to that which
ensues on an attack of Asthma, which immediately follows an artificial
irritation, the membrane of the larynx.  The suffocating sensation
produced by a morsel of food lodging in the membrane in the act of
swallowing (usually attributed by unprofessional persons to “the food
going the wrong way,”) is of this nature.  The muscles concerned in
expiration immediately contract, to prevent the admission of an obnoxious
article into the wind-pipe; and this state of muscles will continue many
minutes: and, in asthmatics, whose nerves of the parts are morbidly
irritable, it has continued many hours.

It would be incompatible with the design of this pamphlet, and perhaps
superfluous to enter minutely into a description of what Asthma
is—especially as no disease shows itself more distinctly.  The
individual, occasionally attacked by wheezing, difficulty of breathing,
and tightness of the chest, need not be assured that he is asthmatical;
but it will be a source of consolation to inform him, that his case is
really curable, by this valuable medicine, as experience in the worst
cases has amply confirmed.  As the use of the Balsam is persevered in,
the paroxysms abate, the attendant cough becomes freer, and is
accompanied by gentle expectoration; and, in proportion to the increase
of the cough and expectoration, the distressing symptoms decrease—a more
free passage of air being now admitted to and from the lungs.

Some individuals are continually asthmatic, and others are subject to it
only occasionally, when it comes on in fits: this remedy will be found
intrinsically valuable to such, because it will loosen the tough phlegm,
which oppresses the lungs and produces shortness of breath, and cause its
removal by expectoration.

Those who have a confirmed Asthma, should form the Balsam into a syrup,
by mixing with it about an equal quantity of fine honey, (having
previously dissolved it by heat, and removed the wax and impurities which
arise to its surface,) and, when thus incorporated, taking a dessert
spoonful, or two tea-spoonsful, night and morning; and, in some cases,
once or twice throughout the day.  The paroxysms will speedily terminate,
after short perseverance in the use of these means; and, by bringing on a
free expectoration, every asthmatic sensation will speedily disappear.
When taken in the day-time, it effectually keeps off the evening
exacerbation or paroxysm.  In cases of winter or irritable cough, arising
from an increased excitement of the bronchial nerves, and a certain state
of the atmosphere, it is also a most valuable remedy.  The Elixir more
speedily and permanently allays morbid irritation, or increased
excitement of the nerves of the larynx, wind-pipe, and lungs, than any
other known remedy.

The only difference between a winter Cough and Asthma is, that the seat
of the former is in the membrane lining the bronchial tube, while the
latter is in the membrane of the larynx, and upper part of the wind-pipe.

For those who have an Asthma, the attacks of which are periodical, and
the fits regular, this Balsam will be highly useful.  The fits of this
species of the disease come on about every ten days; they are more
violent, and last longer in summer than in winter; and the symptoms are
highly aggravated by intemperance and irregularity.  These fits are
certainly rendered much more tolerable, and are slighter when
expectoration comes on.  The Balsam should therefore be regularly taken
in such doses as to produce this: and the approach of the fits should be
carefully watched, that the remedy may be taken in sufficient doses prior
to the commencement.  If the patient feel a tightness about the pit of
the stomach shortly after dinner, it is a certain indication that an
attack will shortly ensue; in which case, one or two tea spoonsful of the
Balsam should be immediately taken, mixed in a similar quantity of honey,
or, in absence of honey, lump sugar: he should remain quite still, in an
erect posture; and in about half an hour afterwards renew the dose.  When
the stomach is swelled, and the patient is flatulent, it is an infallible
sign that the fit is gaining strength, and a tightness of the chest and
lungs will follow.  About once in two hours half a spoonful, or more, of
the Balsam must be taken for three times more; when the patient should be
put to bed, and lie with his head high.  The fit often comes on with
violence about two o’clock in the morning: the invalid retires to rest
fatigued, and inclined to sleep; and, after exhibiting sensations of
uneasy restlessness, he falls asleep, and is harassed by uneasy and
embarrassed dreams; startings in his sleep, and other nervous symptoms
often attend, and indicate the tendency to a fit: he awakes in restless
anxiety, and is obliged to toss about, and change his posture, or sit up
in bed, in expectation of relief; but, owing to the increase of the
spasms, his breathing becomes increasingly impeded, and he pants for
breath with unspeakable anxiety.  He should then get up, and drink freely
of the infusion recommended in Consumption (page 10); and take a dose of
the Balsam incorporated with honey, which will promote the expectoration,
and generally carry off the fit.  The heat of the bed, and the posture of
lying, both increase the complaint.

As aperients, judiciously combined with bitters, tonics, stimulants, or
antispasmodics, with a view of promoting the abdominal secretions,
without depressing the vital energies, and of deriving from the lungs any
accumulation of morbid matter which cannot be expectorated; such a
combination _with_ Camphor, as contained in “Dr. Flemming’s Quinine and
Camphor Pills” (prepared by the Author in boxes at 4_s._ 6_d._ each,
containing a Treatise on Indigestion, Diet, and Regimen, &c.) is
peculiarly serviceable in this disorder, TAKEN IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE
BALSAM, in sufficient doses to remove the accumulation of bile in the
biliary organs, and of the _sordes_ retained in the mucus surface of the
bowels; and it should be observed that purgatives are always better borne
when combined with Camphor, and are then most proper in all stages of the
disease.  When expectoration is rendered difficult, and the cough
suffocating, from the tenacity and consistency of the matter, as is not
unfrequently the case, the Balsam, in conjunction with the “Camphor
Pills” alluded to, will be found an invaluable remedy.  The virtues of
Camphor in this disease have been singularly overlooked by the writers on
this subject, _as an adjunct_ to other balsamics, pectorals, and
expectorants; but administered in this form, it is doubtless the most
valuable remedy we possess in this, as well as in several other diseases,
and particularly of those consequent on debility or disorder in the
digestive organs, which require a tonic, and a stimulating remedy.  When
the bowels require evacuation, strong purgatives must on no account be
resorted to: because such measures tend very considerably to check and
diminish expectoration; but gentle aperients of a cooling nature should
not be neglected, when a tendency to constipation points out the need of
a remedy to relieve the system, and nothing can be better adapted for
that purpose than the foregoing combination.

By recourse to these means, the lengthened fits of Asthma will be
prevented; and if the disease be established in the constitution, a due
perseverance with the remedy will effectually eradicate every symptom.

With regard to the course of life of the asthmatic—great care should be
observed to choose a proper air; experience will soon point out what air
is best, and no certain rule can be definitely given.  Where the patient
breathes most easy he ought to reside.  He should lie with his head high,
and not be too much encumbered with bedclothes; must avoid a stooping or
a leaning posture; when he writes, use a high desk; and read sitting
upright; and should always accustom himself to moderate and gentle
exercise.  These cautions are important, for, by their observance, with a
moderate diet, early rising, and light supper—an increase of the disorder
will be prevented; and the use of the Balsam will subdue what is already
established in the constitution.

The patients _beverage_ should also receive particular attention.
Barley-water and lemonade, but especially the infusion before referred
to, may be freely taken.  Change of air will generally prove beneficial;
and flannel worn next the skin be of service.  Constipation of the bowels
must be avoided; and whenever that disposition is manifest, immediate
recourse should be had to such an aperient remedy as above described.



OF PULMONARY CONSUMPTION.


Pulmonary Consumption is accompanied with general emaciation, debility,
pain in the side or chest, difficulty of breathing on taking the
slightest exercise, and a Cough, which usually proves most troublesome
towards morning.  In its advanced stage, a viscid expectoration, with
hectic fever and diarrhœa, ensues.  The predisposing causes of this
complaint are too numerous herein to detail, but the disease generally
commences by a cold, taken in the winter season, which brings on at first
a common cough, that from neglect settles on the lungs.  The lungs become
gradually and increasingly obstructed, inflamed, and ulcerated; a slow
fever attends the latter stages of the disorder, when the case imports
the existence of considerable danger.  Those of a delicate structure and
weakly habits, between the ages of 16 and 25, are most liable to this
disease.

It has appeared from the calculations of an eminent Physician, that the
annual mortality from diseased lungs throughout Great Britain, amounts to
one hundred and forty thousand, and that from this class of disorders
more than one third expire from Pulmonary Consumption.  When we consider
the size and peculiar construction of the lungs, their perpetual motion,
the chemical process going on in them, and their exposure to the action
of contaminated air, or sudden changes in its temperature, it can be no
matter of surprise that Pulmonary Complaints are so frequent; and the
lungs, not possessing the same natural powers of removing diseased
structure, or of mutation as other parts of the body, we may account for
their fatal termination from the want of application of proper
auxiliaries, as counteractives.  Various and contradictory are the
opinions of medical men, as to the hectic fever, which is symptomatic of
the disorder, being a primary disease, and some absurd notions have been
advanced in support of their statements.  The recapitulation of these
opinions will not, however, interest the afflicted, or casual reader.
One proof of the discrepance of their statements on the origin of this
disease, must, however, be advanced: Dr. Young considers that, “the want
of proper nourishment is the most frequent cause of Consumption.”  If so,
it may be inquired, how does it happen that the disease most frequently
occurs in the families of the opulent?  Dr. Lambe, a man of equal
experience, fearlessly asserts, “that an excessive use of animal food is
among the most prominent and prevalent procuring causes of the disease,”
and consequently recommends a vegetable diet.  Surely, it may be
observed, these contradictory opinions are not likely to increase the
confidence of the public in the healing art.

It has been said, and is generally believed, that Consumptions are
incurable.  This fact cannot be established.  Moreover, the doctrine
involves the most fearful consequences; for cases, which in themselves
are hopeful, are rendered hopeless from the neglect of proper means, from
the groundless apprehensions that no medicines can succeed, and death
inevitably ensues.  The patient afflicted with cough, expectoration,
shortness of breath, and other pectoral symptoms, is calmly consigned to
the slow ravages of hectic fever and Consumption.  After a few weeks or
months of suffering, he dies: this is regarded only as a matter of
course.  An inspection takes place—the lungs are found studded with
tubercles, and an ulcer of more or less extent in some part of them.  The
pathologist immediately asks, in significant triumph, what possible good
could medicines have done in such a case? by what mode of treatment could
an organ so diseased have been restored?  But another case occurs, the
invalid complains precisely of the same symptoms: he has cough,
expectoration, wheezing in the chest, and difficulty in breathing—he
gradually falls away in flesh, and the hectic fever increases.
Palliatives are resorted to, as in the former case, not to cure, which is
considered impossible, but simply to alleviate his suffering—he also
dies.  On inspection, the lungs are found generally sound; no tubercles
are discovered; but there is found to be an ulcerated spot of more or
less extent in the bronchial membrane.  We are forthwith informed, that
an ulcerated or thickened condition of the bronchial membrane, with
purulent secretion, is a fatal disorder, even although the lungs are
otherwise perfectly sound: that in fact, in this case, as there was no
difference in the symptoms from the former, and none in the result, so
there could have been none made in the method of treatment—that remedies
were alike unavailing in both.

Without under-estimating the importance of morbid anatomy, we must
observe, that when it is carried to the unwarrantable length of
introducing such paralysing and disheartening scepticism into medical
science, it is productive of extensive and serious practical evils that
counterbalance the benefits which would otherwise result from it.
Hundreds, nay, thousands of cases of death are day by day occurring,
exactly as above described.  Indeed, it is a well-established fact, that
in this country alone, the annual number of deaths by pulmonary
consumption greatly exceeds 50,000.

When it is considered, further, that in every individual case of the
above solemn catalogue of deaths in disease, medical skill has been
resorted to, and found unavailing; the practitioner is reluctantly
constrained to pronounce every similar case as equally hopeless, and
beyond the power of remedies to cure.  This is manifestly a fallacious
mode of reasoning, leading to an erroneous conclusion.

Before we concede to the morbid anatomist, that an ulcerated or diseased
lung is necessarily incurable, we demand, by what direct method can that
assertion be proved, that tubercles, once existing in the lungs, cannot
possibly be absorbed during life, and the healthy texture again restored?
This point cannot be incontrovertibly demonstrated: who then can limit
the powers of the living texture in self-restoration?  The conclusion,
that ulceration of the lungs is incapable of restoration, is founded only
upon indirect induction, and amounts, in fact, to nothing but conjecture.
There is but one way of disproving the inference that Pulmonary
Consumption is incurable, and that is by an appeal to facts.  If it can
be established that in cases, where, from the attendant symptoms the same
reasons have existed for inferring disorders of the lungs to exist, as in
the case of those who die; yet that these invalids have, under a
judicious mode of treatment, gradually lost these serious symptoms, and
have at length recovered—an argument is made out, not only in favour of
the possibility of cure in this disease, but positively that it is
curable in most of its stages, by adopting those remedies which assist
nature in throwing off the diseased matter, healing the injured surface
by the application of balsamics and restoratives, possessing the power of
new creating, in the lieu of diseased surface, living and healthy
structure—so long, we again repeat, as a solitary case of cure has been
effected (and there are many) under the most unpromising circumstances,
philosophy and humanity alike oppose the practice of abandoning to its
fate any case in which there is at least a hope of cure.

Those who allege that Pulmonary Consumption is incurable, from the
results obtained by inspections after dissolution, can substantiate no
claim to depreciate the efficacy of remedial agents, until they supply us
with unequivocal symptoms, whereby we may determine between cases which
are and which are not curable.  It is mere trifling to assert that all
medical means in the cure of the diseased were unavailing, and that the
disorder was incurable.  This is sufficiently apparent to need that
information.  But, what we require is, a certain criterion during the
life of the patient, to form our judgment between the curable cases, and
those which are pronounced incurable; which we must possess before we can
admit the necessity of despair in a solitary case.  No morbid anatomist
has hitherto supplied us with that indispensable information: and the
most we can extort from them on the subject is, that in the event of the
death of the subject who exhibited certain symptoms of consumption, the
disease was necessarily incurable: and the cause assigned is—ulceration
in the lungs!  But, in the case of recovery of a patient who has
experienced similar symptoms, we are informed that there could have been
no affection of the vital organs: but, no proof is offered by way of
demonstration.

The cases which do terminate fatally are, doubtless, very numerous; and,
therefore, the natural conviction deduced from that circumstance is, that
wherever diseased lungs make their appearance, all hope of recovery is
extinct, and the patient has no alternative but to prepare himself for
his exit.  Yet, none can deny that recoveries have been effected under
the most fearful circumstances, even when solid masses of tubercle have
been ejected, or spat up, by which the character of the disease has been
most decisive.  By reckoning some diseases incurable, and others as past
the period of cure, physicians only enact a law of negligence to exempt
their own ignorance from discredit and infamy in the eyes of posterity.

It is deplorable that physicians, who have shocked the constitutions of
their patients with opium and mercury, never have discovered the mode of
effecting a cure.  They admit that the fatal issue of this disease they
may retard, but cannot avert; and as to their remedies, they have no
established mode of treatment; and with respect to their opinions on the
origin of the disease, means of arresting it, or palliatives, but few of
their number agree; and in ninety-nine cases out of every hundred, they
are compelled to abandon the patient to his fate.

It is well known, that those who move in the higher circle of life are
frequently the subjects of this obstinate and fatal disorder.  Each
family has its medical attendant actively engaged when any serious
symptom of this disease appears.  Patient after patient sinks into an
untimely grave, under their united efforts; and the disease is generally
pronounced by them of a fatal character.  If then, in such extremities,
remedial means are discovered which will not only mitigate, but in almost
every instance cure the complaint under which the subject labours, such
means are entitled to the highest commendation.

As this disorder, like several others, does and will sometimes terminate
fatally, in spite of our every effort and means to control it, it is wise
to adopt precautionary measures to prevent its approach.  The delicate,
and those who are susceptible of colds, should avoid exposures to
draughts as much as possible, and the change from heated apartments to
cold atmospheric air.  On the first appearance of cough, they should have
immediate recourse to the Balsam before recommended, to deterge the lungs
from the obstructing matter—which matter impedes a free respiration,
irritates and occasions cough, and ultimately produces the disease.  When
the disease has further advanced, the Balsam may be regularly taken in
the dose of a tea-spoonful, three or four times in the day, mixed with
honey (dissolved by heat, and separated from the wax to which it is often
combined).  The patient must avoid all indigestible meat, and take
nutritious broths, jellies, &c., and refrain from spirituous liquors, as
he would from a poison.  He ought to take gentle and moderate exercise in
the early part of the day, when the weather will permit.  Whenever a
disposition to constipation arises, it should be obviated by the
occasional use of mild laxatives, and a salutary relaxation must on no
account be checked.

In addition to the Balsam, and what will be preferable to jellies, is a
beverage made of an infusion of marshmallow root, which may be freely
taken throughout the day for common drink, (made warm when drank;) but no
means, however excellent as auxiliaries, will supersede the necessity for
the regular use of the Balsam, which imparts to the lungs a healing
quality, after it has deterged them from the mucus which clogs their
cells and air-pipes.

It was the opinion of the learned HIPPOCRATES, the Father of Physic, that
in lingering diseases, a slender and insufficient diet was a dangerous
course to pursue; and that a more generous treatment was uniformly
necessary in such cases.  The strength of the patient should never be
reduced, but on the contrary, whatever will yield nourishment to the
debilitated system (always avoiding overloading the stomach) may be
taken, with a course of the medicinal remedial means herein referred to.
Those patients, particularly, who inherit an hereditary predisposition to
this complaint, in whom there is a great tendency to debility, should
observe an invigorating mode of living; always giving a decided
preference to those articles of diet, which they have uniformly found
best to agree with their stomach; {10} and that the organs of digestion
may not be impaired by the performance of double duty, due attention
should always be paid to the proper mastication of the requisite supplies
of food, that its dissolvent principle—the saliva, may be incorporated
with it, during that important act.

That diet, which most imparts vital power to the blood, and through it to
the entire system, must always be preferred in pulmonary cases.  By
invigorating, we do not mean stimulating food—the object being to
strengthen and build up; not to stimulate, and occasion an ultimate
reaction, with debility—but permanently to create power.  A vegetable
diet yields nourishing properties to some, but, in a majority of
instances, it is inadequate for the purposes of producing the required
nutrition: on the contrary, animal diet partaken with a due regard to the
circumstances of the case, always adapting the quantity and quality to
the power of digestion, and peculiarities of constitution, so as to
prevent fever and disorder, increases the power of the digestive
functions, enriches the vital fluid—the blood, and gives tone and vigour
to the system.

Frequent changes of air and scene will be found extremely beneficial,
both in a physical and mental point of view.  The sea air is, of all
others, the purest—and on that account, better calculated generally, for
the purposes of breathing, in weakly persons.  In all air there is more
or less of that principle which is essential to life; but the air which
passes over an extensive tract of water is not only refrigerated or
cooled, but purified; and consequently, the bad effects of the sultry
heats of the summer season are counteracted.  A temporary sojournment at
the sea-side, for the purpose of inhaling the saline particles, with
which the sea breezes are impregnated, with occasional excursions on the
ocean, or short voyages by sea, will be attended with much advantage, as
a means for stimulating the lungs to deeper and more frequent
inspiration, and tending to enlarge the cavity of the chest, a matter of
great importance.  These means will be found highly serviceable, and an
excellent auxiliary to the use of the Balsam herein recommended, as
possessing a true tonic power, which will brace and invigorate the
surface of the body, and exert a beneficial influence on the viscera,
especially those connected with the digestive functions.  It must,
however, be observed, that there are some consumptive patients, with whom
sea air never agrees—when country air, especially in the rural
agricultural districts, must be substituted.

Exercise is generally beneficial when the degree is proportionate to the
strength of the patient, without producing fatigue, and in a pure
atmosphere, remote from large cities or towns, in situations not exposed
to winds, especially the north-east.  The exercise should be in the open
air on horseback, the greater part of the day, in fine weather—if the
strength will permit; and a nourishing diet of new milk, farinaceous
preparations, animal soups, and solid animal food twice a day.  The
bowels to be gently relieved every second or third day, and the cough
mixture—the Balsam, to be continued as before directed.

The Author’s apology for the mention of his remedy in this publication,
is, that as it has for the last ten years proved pre-eminently
successful, though confined within a limited compass, it becomes his duty
to the public more extensively to declare it.  The novelty of the
doctrine, that Consumption is curable, may gain him many opponents, who
would, without this public announcement, have slumbered; but he is
determined at all events to persevere, well knowing that his discovery
will endure the test of experience and trial, and in the issue must, like
other now-approved, but once-rejected articles of the Pharmacopœia, be
universally adopted. {11}

In justice to the liberally minded among the profession, it must be
observed that, although most practitioners deny the possibility of
Consumption being curable, there are a few of their number possessing
eminent talent, who have deeply studied the subject, and strenuously
contend for the affirmative of the question, corroborated by the evidence
of their own experience.  While an opposite opinion on the subject is
maintained by professional men, equally distinguished for their knowledge
of the science, and their utility in their professional pursuits—there
can be no doubt but that an enlightened public will decide in favour of
the doctrine herein advanced, that Pulmonary Consumption is curable.

                                * * * * *

_The following Cases_, _illustrative of the beneficial properties of the
Balsamic Elixir_, _in Cough_, _Hooping Cough_, _Asthma_, _and Pulmonary
Complaints_, _which had previously baffled the skill of the most eminent
medical practitioners_, _are selected from various others_.



CONSUMPTIVE COUGH, SHORTNESS OF BREATH, &c.


Sir,—I feel induced to send you the two following cases (for the
encouragement of yourself, and the benefit of the public at large) of the
beneficial effects of your invaluable medicine, the Balsamic Elixir.  A
few weeks ago, (a neighbour, who lives opposite me,) a young man of the
name of JAMES HOWE, was afflicted with a most distressing Cough,
Shortness of Breath, &c.  He had had medicine from a Chemist in the
neighbourhood, and also been under an eminent Physician in the city, but
to no purpose.  Indeed, the Cough was so incessant, that it seemed to
threaten a lingering Consumption—when I persuaded his mother to try your
Balsamic Elixir, (which they purchased at Mr. Willoughby’s,
Bishopsgate-street,) and, although not more surprising than true, after
taking only one bottle, was perfectly recovered.

The other case is that of a young man, about the same age as the above
(twenty years,) who was also afflicted with a most violent Cough, which
all the medicines he could get could not remove.  The young man, above
mentioned, finding the good effects upon himself of your Elixir, strongly
recommended it to him; and, after taking a 1s. 1½d., and a 2s. 9d.
bottle, he was perfectly recovered.  The above persons have authorised me
to send you this testimonial of the value of your inestimable medicine,
the Balsamic Elixir; and for myself, Sir, I can assure you, if ever I
should need it, I shall have recourse to the same.

                      I am, Sir, yours respectfully,

                                                            EPHRAIM MOORE.

30, Spital-square, Mile-end,
New Town, Nov. 24, 1837.

                                * * * * *

PETER REDFORD, Alfred House Academy, Kingsland-road, about the close of
July, became severely afflicted with a violent cough, incessant wheezing,
attended with very great difficulty of breathing, which deprived him of
rest for several weeks together, only in an erect posture, through fear
of suffocation.  He was attended by three skilful medical gentlemen.  But
his complaint still remaining unabated in its violence, he was persuaded
to make trial of this excellent specific, with which solicitation,
through necessity, he gladly complied, on the 5th of September; and,
after taking it a few times, he felt such considerable relief in
breathing, that he was induced to continue it, and in less than a week,
the distressing and alarming sensations of wheezing were so far abated
that he again ventured to lie down in his bed; and from this time his
health and strength began gradually to increase, and were so far
restored, that on the 12th of the present month (October) he recommenced
his profession, in full enjoyment of accustomed health.

N.B.  Only three bottles, at 2s. 9d. were purchased, and half the last
was rendered unnecessary by the cure.

                                * * * * *

WM. HARMER, Bookseller, Stroud, Gloucestershire, suffered exceedingly for
several years (especially in the winter and spring) with a most
distressing Cough, for which he could never obtain permanent relief; and
for some time past he concluded that his disorder was a confirmed and
incurable asthma: in addition to which, in the beginning of February
last, he had a most severe attack of Influenza, which rendered his Cough
still more distressing, and the difficulty of breathing almost to
suffocation.

He states that, although he is a book-seller, and a Vendor of Patent
Medicines, he never heard of this Balsamic Elixir till about a month
since, when he saw the announcement in the “_Patriot_” newspaper, of my
pamphlet, called “Consumption Curable.”  He immediately ordered from his
Booksellers, _Longman and Co._, six copies; on reading the work, he says
that he felt an anxious desire to give the medicine a trial, and
immediately ordered from my wholesale Agent, six 2s. 9d. bottles, and
three boxes of Flemming’s Pills.  In a letter, renewing his order, he
observes, “By the use of three bottles, I am happy to inform you, I have
obtained almost a cure; the first bottle gave me more relief than all the
medicine I had taken for the preceding three months.  It is my intention
to keep a regular supply of the medicine, and to do all in my power to
recommend it, as I can with confidence.”

In a further communication, dated 3rd August, 1837, he says, “I have been
very successful in the sale of the Elixir; and in every case where its
virtues have been tried, I have received a most favourable report of its
curative properties.”

                                * * * * *

JAMES MOSS, Cabinet Maker, High-street, Peckham, Surrey, having witnessed
the good effects of this cough medicine on one of his children, in
Hooping Cough, was induced to apprize me of that circumstance, for the
benefit of others.  The child had, for some time, been suffering from
that painful disorder.  A friend, being very anxious about the child,
presented the parents with a 2s. 9d. bottle of the Balsamic Elixir, and
its value soon appeared in the beneficial effects it produced; for after
about three or four times taking it, the disorder abated, and a few more
doses removed it altogether.  His age is three years.

                                * * * * *

C. SIBURN, 4, Upper Bland-street, Great Dover Road, aged 40, at about the
age of fifteen, caught a violent cold, which brought on difficulty of
breathing, ultimately terminating in Asthma.  She had been a victim to
that disease ever since, and tried every remedy which medical men could
prescribe, without deriving the slightest benefit.  During the two last
winters, the complaint rapidly increased, so much so that her life was
despaired of.  For weeks together she was bolstered upright in bed, from
fear of strangulation from the congealed phlegm which clogged her lungs,
and produced the greatest possible difficulty of breathing.  It was
delightful to witness the astonishment and gratitude she evinced at the
efficacy of the Elixir: for, after taking a few doses, it produced
expectoration in a way she never before experienced; and her breathing
was instantly relieved.  On the third night she retired to rest, and
slept with great composure until five o’clock the following morning.  She
is now perfectly free from every symptom of the disorder, and has
continued so ever since.

                                * * * * *

PATRICK CONNER, 14, Regent-street, Hunter-street, Old Kent-road, suffered
greatly from a distressingly severe Asthma, demonstrated by its usual
symptoms, extreme difficulty of breathing, which existed, more or less,
for the last ten years.  Having heard of the cures produced by this
celebrated Balsam, and being then in a deplorable condition, he resolved
to give it a fair trial.  When he commenced taking it, his breath was
very short, so much so, that it was with the greatest difficulty he could
walk about; and his fits of coughing were so violent, and long continued,
that he was in perpetual danger of expiring under the effort.  His health
naturally declined, and his flesh wasted away; and to all appearance, he
was rapidly hastening into a decline.  In a letter of thanks, he says, “I
bless God, and am truly thankful that I ever heard of your medicine.  I
found almost immediate benefit from it; and, as I continued to take it,
my amendment was very rapid.  In short, I can now walk about, and breathe
quite easy; and my cough has entirely ceased, and never since returned.”

Happily this is not a solitary case, for a vast number of patients,
similarly affected, have derived equal benefit.

                                * * * * *

FRANCES HUNT, Little Ebury-street, Pimlico, had from her youth been
subject to shortness of breath, fits of coughing, pain in the side, and
general debility: from taking one cold upon another, and the neglect of a
remedy, these sensations greatly increased in their length and violence,
and at length terminated in the disorder called Asthma.  She was
exceedingly ill with the complaint last winter, and continued so at
intervals, throughout the summer—the least exertion frequently
occasioning spitting of blood.  The parish surgeon attended, and gave her
medicine, but to no purpose.  Having seen an account of the Balsam, and
read a case exactly corresponding with her own, induced her to purchase a
2s. 9d. bottle.  She had not taken more than three doses of the medicine
before she felt wonderfully better; the tightness in her chest ceased;
she coughed less frequently; and her health much improved.  She purchased
another bottle, and before it was exhausted, she was completely restored
to health.

                                * * * * *

Two of the children of MARY ANN GORHAM, 3, Queen’s-row, Paradise-row,
were alarmingly ill with Hooping Cough, for which various medicines were
given, without effect, until the Balsamic Elixir was administered.  After
they had taken two or three doses each, they found astonishing relief—it
having cleared away from their chests an accumulation of thick phlegm,
and appeased the violence of their coughs.  She continued to give the
medicine, as directed, until a second bottle was consumed, when every
symptom disappeared, to the evident surprise of every one who saw the
child.

                                * * * * *

MR. J. DAVIS, a respectable farmer of Warden, derived most essential and
permanent benefit from the Balsamic Elixir.  He was from early life
severely afflicted with tightness at the chest, cough, and the general
symptoms which characterise Asthma, for which he had tried every known
remedy, without obtaining the least relief.  He had recourse to the
Elixir; and its efficacy was soon demonstrated in a complete recovery.
He has found it to be a friend in need, to which he invariably resorts,
when, from the haziness of the weather, and the dampness of the air, he
renews his cold.  His health has much improved since he has taken it.  A
better proof of the high opinion he entertains of its true virtues,
cannot be given than his urgent recommendation of it to his extensive
connexions in this county; so much so, as to incur the severe censure of
the medical men in the neighbourhood, with whose practice he so far
interferes.  He is prompted to this diligence with the view of doing
good; and, what may seem extraordinary, this medicine has done good in
every instance where recommended.

Amidst other cases which might be cited, that of MISS REYNOLDS is
particularly interesting.  She is of consumptive make; and from a severe
cold caught in the autumn, she had an unconquerable cough, with shortness
of breath, and was, to all appearance, on the verge of a rapid decline.
The Elixir operated beneficially.  It soon allayed her cough; her breath
improved, her appetite increased, and she speedily recovered strength.
This interesting young lady had the best attention the faculty could
give: no expense was spared—she was sent to London, and had advice of
eminent physicians, but to no effect.  The ecstasy of her parents, on
once more beholding their only daughter again restored to health, to the
astonishment of all who knew her, after the consultation of the faculty
to no purpose, may be conceived, but cannot be expressed.

MR. S. KETCHLEE, 5, St. James’s-street.  Bermondsey, (opposite the New
Church,) has testified of the specific properties of this Balsam, which
perhaps cannot be better stated than in his own words:—“Having been
afflicted with a most distressing and troublesome cough for the last nine
years, which has always increased in the winter, causing me to dread its
approach; I felt some considerable apprehensions as the autumn advanced,
in consequence of the rapidity with which my cough increased.  About this
period, I received the welcome intelligence of several cures effected by
your Balsam, and feeling a strong inclination to test its qualities in my
own experience; I purchased a small bottle, from which I soon found great
relief; and by the time I had taken the second bottle, scarcely any
remains of my cough were left.  Since that period, I have always kept a
bottle of the Balsam by me; and when I have taken a fresh cold, had
recourse to it.  I may say, that I never passed a winter so comfortably,
and so free from the harassing sensations induced by coughing, as the
last, though the weather has been unusually severe.  I feel a great
desire to recommend this valuable preparation to the utmost in my power;
and trust the blessing of the Almighty will attend it, and that its worth
may be extensively known and enjoyed by many thousand of my fellow
sufferers.  I could write you a long letter to state, that all means I
have hitherto made use of, have failed, but think it unnecessary.”

                                * * * * *

G. VIGURS, Esq., 10, Richmond-terrace, East-street, Walworth, writes as
follows:—“Your Balsamic Elixir is, in my opinion, of such unspeakable
value to those afflicted with cough, hooping cough, and asthma, (many
cures of which I have lately heard,) that, much as I should object to the
public announcement of my name in an ordinary case, I feel much pleasure
in sending you my warmest recommendation for publicity, with observations
on the following cures, which have been effected in my family by its use;
and shall be happy to give personal testimonials of its excellence to
inquirers.  Part of my numerous family was attacked in the winter of 1826
with typhus, and were sometime afterwards the subjects of violent coughs,
especially a little girl, about two years of age (for the cure of which
the usual remedies were tried in vain).  In the course of conversation,
your Elixir was mentioned, and I determined to make trial of it.  The
first bottle wrought wonders; indeed, the children were so far recovered,
as to induce the family to abstain from its use; but a few days evidently
manifested that their coughs were only arrested, so that I was induced to
send for a second bottle, which completed the cures.  Allow me to offer
you my congratulations on the discovery of a compound so truly
advantageous to the afflicted; and to express my warmest wishes that, by
a wide circulation, many of our fellow-creatures suffering under such
like attacks, may fully realize its beneficial influence.”

                                * * * * *

Mrs. ELIZABETH THOMSON, a lady belonging to the society of Friends,
called Quakers, aged 63 years, occupying apartments at Mrs. Sims’s,
Rye-lane, Peckham, about two years ago was severely attacked by Hooping
Cough, which terminated in Asthma, and baffled every means to control it.
By the recommendation of a friend, whose child had found benefit from the
Balsam in a case of Hooping Cough, betraying the unfavourable symptoms of
scanty expectoration, and great debility—she purchased a 2s. 9d. bottle,
which completely cured the complaint.  Anxious that others, afflicted
with the same complaint, should derive the benefit the Balsam is
calculated to confer, she felt constrained to forward a testimony of her
approbation of the same, of which the above observations are the
_substance_.

                                * * * * *

JAMES GARIE, 66, John-street, Perth, Scotland, became an Agent for the
Proprietor, on the 6th of May, and his testimony to the value of the
medicine is as follows:—“I am happy to inform you, that the Elixir has
proved most beneficial to many in this town and neighbourhood, who have
experienced speedy cures of severe colds and coughs, hoarseness, &c.; and
in one particular case, * a very afflicting cough and asthma, of many
years’ standing.  The reports I am continually hearing of it, are most
pleasing and satisfactory.”

On the following month, he further observes,—“Since I last wrote, I have
received additional proofs of the beneficial tendency of your Elixir, and
have myself experienced its efficacy in the case of a severe cold.

“The Surgeons show great reluctance in recommending this specific remedy,
but _it has cured where they could not_!

“Advices from Dunkeld, and round the country, of the great value of the
Elixir, is arriving daily.  It is selling fast in Perth, and I have no
doubt that in Glasgow, where the medicine has produced incalculable
benefit, the demand will be very great.  The last 4s. 6d.  I had, I have
sent to Dunkeld this morning; and another order for 11s. bottles is
waiting to be sent to Kilmore.  Forward me immediately two dozen each of
the 4s. 6d. and 11s. bottles; and three Guinea bottles for LADY WILLISON,
who intends to recommend the medicine throughout her extensive circle, in
consequence of its efficacy.

“The Hooping Cough is raging here.  My son and daughter have been
severely affected by it; but both of them have been cured by the Elixir,
taken in honey night and morning, in doses of two tea-spoonsful.”

                                * * * * *

* _The following Testimonial addressed to Mr. Garie_, _is from_ CAPTAIN
ALEXANDER,_ an Officer in the Army_, _residing at Perth_.—

“The two bottles of Congreve’s Balsamic Elixir, which I purchased in
February last, I am happy to say, have totally removed my asthma, of
forty years’ standing.  I attribute its beneficial efficacy, under God,
to its peculiar balsamic and expectorant properties, in dislodging the
glutinous phlegm, which impeded the free action of my lungs—for as soon
as that was removed, I could breathe freely.  I am sixty years of age,
and was first seized with the complaint when abroad.  You are at liberty
to publish this, as I think the Elixir should be made more extensively
known.”

                                * * * * *

Mr. T., a respectable gentleman, residing in Cavendish-street, New-road,
London, had for a considerable period experienced all the symptoms
indicative of the disease called Pulmonary Consumption.  The complaint
originally proceeded from a violent cold, which was followed by a sense
of straitness and oppression at the chest, with great difficulty of
breathing, violent cough, and great and general emaciation of the body.
When he heard of the Balsam referred to in this treatise, he had
previously tried almost every other remedy, with little or no advantage.
He, therefore, commenced a course of this medicine, under the most
unfavourable circumstances.  The remedy succeeded in promoting
expectoration of slimy matter from the lungs to a considerable degree.
Symptoms of amendment rapidly followed; and, as he persevered with the
Balsam, his difficulty of breathing ceased.  By the advice of his
attendant, he then had recourse to the beverage referred to, (page 10,)
with the usual doses of Balsam, as therein directed, and the patient
became convalescent—although physicians had previously pronounced the
cure altogether hopeless.

                                * * * * *

JOSEPH LAMOREAUX, Esq., 33, Green-street, Grosvenor-square, with the
sanction of his nephew, who is one of the liberal of his profession, (a
surgeon in the Royal Navy,) having heard the fame of this Balsamic
Elixir, was induced to try it, and had purchased several of the 4s. 6d.
bottles, and derived from it very considerable benefit, in one of the
worst cases of harassing cough, with scanty expectoration and impeded
respiration.  Being desirous of obtaining one of the bottles at One
Guinea, he begged I would give him a call, with a bottle of that size, to
be paid for on delivery—as he was particularly desirous of communicating
to me personally the vast benefit he had found from taking the Balsam;
and of suggesting the best mode of taking it.  I called upon Mr. L., and
was highly delighted with his favourable report.  In addition to which he
presented me with a card of recommendation, defining the peculiar benefit
he had derived from the medicine, addressed to Dr. Hitchman, Leamington,
Warwickshire; which was forwarded to that gentleman, with a letter on the
subject; and, on the 28th of that month, Dr. Hitchman called upon me, to
ascertain on what terms he could be supplied with the medicine.

                                * * * * *

This Balsam has been patronised by some of the most eminent medical men
in this country, by whom its qualities have been tried and approved.  To
some of them the author and proprietor of the pamphlet and medicine has
sent considerable supplies; and its virtues have not only made
astonishing proselytes to the doctrine advanced, with reference to the
speedy cure of pulmonary complaints, coughs, and asthma, in this country,
in Scotland, and Ireland, but in Van Diemen’s Land, Malta, the East and
West Indies, America, and various other parts of the Continent of Europe,
not only is a new light dawning on the mind, but the fame of this remedy
is expanding its beneficial influence on the system with the velocity of
lightning.

Amongst other interesting circumstances, may be noticed that of the late
Rev. ROWLAND HILL, late of Surrey Chapel, Blackfriars-road, who
patronised the use of the medicine, and derived from it singular benefit,
in cases of obstinate cough, to which he was subject; as also did many
distinguished individuals in his congregation; and other ladies of title
and respectability at _Bath_ and elsewhere, whose names we are not
permitted more specifically to mention.

Miss CLARK, a respectable lady, who attended the ministry of Mr. Hill,
after having suffered exceedingly from a most terrible and alarming
cough, was induced to purchase a bottle of the Balsam, from the
representations of a lady, who had on several occasions procured it, to
distribute among the poor; and administered it to others with the most
marked advantage in pulmonary complaints, asthma, and confirmed coughs.
The effect of the first dose was, she said, truly astonishing—it gave her
immediate relief.  At night she ceased from coughing and enjoyed tranquil
repose: her cough gradually disappeared; and, in a short time, she became
perfectly convalescent.

The BALSAMIC ELIXIR is prepared only by the Author, H. CONGREVE,
Shepherd’s Bush, and sold retail at 4s. 6d., 2s. 9d, 1s. 1½d., and in
Family Bottles, at 11s. and 22s. each.  There is a considerable saving in
purchasing the larger bottles.  The Proprietor’s name, “_Henry
Congreve_,” is written by him across the Stamp.  All others are
counterfeit preparations.

Messrs. Hannay and Dietrichsen, 63, Oxford-street, London, are appointed
sole wholesale agents for the sale of the above, and the following most
valuable preparation, mentioned in pages 7 and 11, which is also
compounded by the Author:—

                  _Under the distinguished Patronage of_
                  HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX,

DR. FLEMMING’S QUININE AND CAMPHOR PILLS, a celebrated remedy for
Indigestion, Nervous, Bilious, and Liver Complaints.  As a mild aperient,
and fine stomachic, they are unquestionably unequalled by any other
compound, as they uniformly invigorate the digestive organs, and operate
most beneficially throughout the entire nervous system.  “Their great
merit consists in their mild and gentle operation, inducing a healthy
tone of stomach, creating an appetite and relish for food, promoting
refreshing sleep, and dissipating morning languor, and general
nervousness; and, in short, resuscitating the system.”—_Letter of C.
Bushman_, _Esq._, _No._ 3, _Addison-place_, _Notting-hill_.

Sold in Boxes, containing a Pocket Manual; or, Concise Treatise on
Indigestion, Diet, and Regimen, &c.  _A work of great importance to those
whose limited time will not admit of their perusal of other complicated
and voluminous productions on this subject_.  Price 4s. 6d. each, and
eight of the small size boxes of Pills: also, in Boxes of 2s. 9d. and 1s.
1½d. each.  _See that_ “_Henry Congreve_” _is signed across the
Government Stamp_.

Sole wholesale Agents for the Proprietor, Hannay and Dietrichsen, 63,
Oxford-street, London, by whom Dealers in the Country are supplied on the
usual terms; and sold by all Venders of Patent Medicines in the United
Kingdom.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

           W. Tyler, Printer, Bolt court, Fleet-street, London.

                                * * * * *




FOOTNOTES.


{10}  See the “Medical Casket,” (Diet and Regimen) recently published by
the Author; a copy of which accompanies each 4s. 6d. box of Dr.
Flemming’s Quinine and Camphor Pills, recommended in pages 7 and 8.

{11}  On the propriety of concealing the composition of a remedy, Sir
Joseph Banks judiciously observes—“I have no doubt a medicine will prove
more beneficial to the Public, in a high degree, when confined to the
practice of an individual, that it may be well prepared, of the best
ingredients, and that the maceration be properly conducted—matters of
vast importance to the afflicted.”






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSUMPTION CURABLE: OBSERVATIONS ON THE TREATMENT OF PULMONARY DISEASES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


