The Project Gutenberg eBook of Edgings: crocheted, tatted, hair pin lace
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Edgings: crocheted, tatted, hair pin lace

Creator: American Thread Company

Release date: June 26, 2020 [eBook #62485]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDGINGS: CROCHETED, TATTED, HAIR PIN LACE ***

                     Star Book No. 81    10 CENTS.




                               _Edgings_


                    _Crocheted·Tatted·Hair Pin Lace_


                        AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                  260 W. Broadway, New York 13, N. Y.
                 Copyright 1951    Printed in U. S. A.

                             See Pg. 2 for instructions on above Edgings




                      Tatted Motif and Edging #810


                      _Illustrated on front cover_

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
  “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    2 balls Tinted Pink and Yellow or any color desired
  1 Shuttle
  1 Handkerchief

MOTIF: R, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last
r made, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last r
made, 3 d, 3 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r (clover), turn. Ch, 6 d, small p, 3
d, small p, 6 d, turn. * R, 3 d, p, 3 d, join to center free p of last r
made, 3 d, 2 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last r
made, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last r
made, 3 d, 3 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r, turn. Ch, 6 d, join to last p of
previous ch, 3 d, small p, 6 d, turn. Repeat from * twice joining the
last r to 1st r made and joining the ch at corresponding picots, tie and
cut.

2nd Row—R, 4 d, 4 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r, * turn. Ch, 6 d, turn. R, 4
d, p, 4 d, join to last p of last r made, 4 d, 2 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl
r. R, 4 d, join to last p of last r made, 4 d, 4 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl
r. R, 4 d, join to last p of last r made, 4 d, 3 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl
r, turn. Ch, 6 d, turn. R, 4 d, join to center free p of last r made, 4
d, 3 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r, turn. Ch, 6 d, p, 6 d, join to p of 1st r
of clover of 1st row, 6 d, join to 1st p of next r of same clover of 1st
row, 6 d, p, 3 d, turn. R, 4 d, p, 4 d, join to center free p of last r
made, 4 d, 2 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r. R, 4 d, join to last p of last r
made, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 4 d, cl r. R, 4 d, join to last p of last r
made, 4 d, 3 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r, turn. Ch, 3 d, join to last p of
last ch, 6 d, skip 1 p of same r of 1st row, join in next p, 6 d, join
to next p of next r of same clover, 6 d, p, 6 d, turn. R, 4 d, p, 4 d,
join to center free p of last r made, 4 d, 2 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r.
Repeat from * twice, turn. Ch, 6 d, turn. R, 4 d, p, 4 d, join to last p
of last r made, 4 d, 2 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r. R, 4 d, join to last p
of last r made, 4 d, 4 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r. R, 4 d, join to last p
of last r made, 4 d, 3 p sep by 4 d 4 d, cl r, turn. Ch, 6 d, turn. R, 4
d, join to center free p of last r made, 4 d, 3 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r,
turn. Ch, 6 d, join to opposite p of last ch, 6 d, join to next p of
next r of 1st row, 6 d, join to next p of next r of same clover of 1st
row, 6 d, p, 3 d, turn. R, 4 d, p, 4 d, join to center free p of last r
made, 4 d, 2 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, cl r. R, 4 d, join to last p of last r
made, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 4 d, cl r. R, 4 d, join to last p of last r
made, 4 d, p, 4 d, join to center free p of 1st r made, 4 d, p, 4 d, cl
r, turn. Ch, 3 d, join to opposite p of last ch, 6 d, skip 1 p, join in
next p of same r of same clover, 6 d, join to next p of next r of same
clover, 6 d, join to p of opposite ch, 6 d, tie and cut.

Work 3 more motifs in same manner. Sew one motif in each corner of
handkerchief leaving the clover extend over edge of handkerchief. Cut
away extra material from underneath motif.

EDGE: R, 3 d, 3 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last
r, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last r, 3
d, 2 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r, turn. Ch, 3 d, p, 6 d, p, 2 d, p, 6 d, p,
3 d, turn. * R, 3 d, p, 3 d, join to center p of last r, 3 d, p, 3 d, cl
r. R, 3 d, join to last p of last r, 3 d, 4 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r. R,
3 d, join to last p of last r, 3 d, 2 p sep by 3 d, 3 d, cl r, turn. Ch,
3 d, join to last p of last ch, 6 d, p, 2 d, p, 6 d, p, 3 d, turn.
Repeat from * until strip is long enough to fit across side between
corner motifs. Work 3 more strips in same manner and sew on each side of
handkerchief between the corner motifs.




                           Flower Edging #811


                      _Illustrated on front cover_

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
  “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    1 ball each Yellow and Nile Green
  Assorted Colors
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

1st FLOWER: With Yellow ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 10 s c
in ring, join in 1st s c, cut thread.

2nd Row—Attach Color in any s c, s c in same space, * ch 5, s c in next
s c, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 5, join in 1st s c, cut
thread.

2nd FLOWER: Work 1st row same as 1st flower.

2nd Row—Attach Color, s c in same space, ch 2, join to center st of any
loop of 1st flower (to join: sl loop off hook, insert in st, pull loop
through), ch 2, s c in next s c of 2nd flower, ch 2, join to next free
loop of 1st flower, ch 2, s c in next s c of 2nd flower, work remainder
of flower same as 1st flower. Work as many flowers as needed for each
side of handkerchief joining in same manner leaving 3 petals free on
upper and lower edge between joinings. Leave 6 petals free on outer edge
of each corner flower.

FINISHING: Attach Green in corner space of handkerchief, ch 1 and work 3
s c in same space, ** ch 1, s c in next space, join to center st of
center loop at lower edge of 1st free flower after corner flower, * ch
1, s c in next space, repeat from * for about ½ inch, join to center
loop of next flower, repeat from 1st * to last flower before corner
flower (ending in space before corner space), ch 1, 3 s c in corner
space, repeat from ** all around ending row to correspond, join, cut
thread.




                    Narrow Hairpin Lace Edging #812


                      _Illustrated on front cover_

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
  “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    1 ball Tinted Lavender and Yellow or any color desired.
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13
  Hairpin Staple ¼ inch wide

HAIRPIN LACE: Make a loop at end of thread, insert hook in loop and wind
thread around right prong of hairpin staple, thread over hook and draw
through loop keeping loop at center, * drop loop from hook, turn staple
½ turn to the left, pick up the dropped loop at center, thread over hook
and pull through loop, insert hook through top part of loop on left hand
prong, thread over and pull through (2 loops on hook), thread over and
pull through both loops completing the single crochet, repeat from *
until lace is long enough to reach around entire handkerchief. When
staple is filled, slip loops off staple always keeping 4 or 5 loops on
so lace will not get twisted.

Sew around handkerchief as illustrated allowing a little fullness at
each corner.

EDGE: Attach thread in any loop of hairpin lace, * ch 3, s d c in 3rd st
from hook (s d c: thread over hook, insert in st, pull through, thread
over and pull through all loops at one time), sl st in next loop, repeat
from * all around, join, cut thread.




                         Crocheted Edging #813


                        _Illustrated on page 3_

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
  “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    3 balls White or color desired
  1—11 inch Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Attach thread in corner, ch 6, d c in same space, ch 10, 2 d c with ch 3
between in same space, * ch 10, skip about ⅝ inch space, 2 d c with ch 3
between in next space (shell), repeat from * 19 times ending in corner
st, ch 10, shell in same space (corner), continue working all around in
same manner having 20-ch 10 loops on each side and 1 loop in each corner
space, ch 10, join in 3rd st of ch.

2nd Row—Sl st to center of shell, ch 7, tr c in same space, ** ch 3, s c
in corner loop, * ch 3, s c in same loop, repeat from * once, ch 3, 1 tr
c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next shell, * ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, s c in
same loop, ch 3, s c in same loop, ch 3, shell in shell, repeat from *
to 2nd shell before corner, ch 3, s c in next loop, * ch 3, s c in same
loop, repeat from * once, ch 3, 1 tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next shell,
repeat from ** all around in same manner ending row to correspond, join
in 4th st of ch.

3rd Row—Sl st into loop, ch 7, tr c in same space, ** ch 3, skip 1 loop,
s c in next loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, skip 1 loop, 1 tr c, ch
3, 1 tr c in next loop, * ch 3, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 3, s c
in next loop, ch 3, shell in next shell, repeat from * to last shell
before corner group, ch 3, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 3, s c in
next loop, ch 3, skip 1 loop, l tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next loop, repeat
from ** all around in same manner ending row to correspond, join in 4th
st of ch.

4th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 4 (counts as 1 tr c), 2 tr c in same loop,
** ch 5, 3 tr c in same loop, * ch 3, skip 1 loop, 3 tr c, ch 5, 3 tr c
in next loop, repeat from * once, ch 3, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, *
ch 6, s c in next shell, ch 6, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 3, 3 tr
c, ch 5, 3 tr c in next shell, ch 3, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch
3, 3 tr c, ch 5, 3 tr c in next shell, ch 3, skip 1 loop, s c in next
loop, repeat from * 5 times, ch 6, s c in next shell, ch 6, skip 1 loop,
s c in next loop, ch 3, 3 tr c in next shell, repeat from ** all around
in same manner, join in 4th st of ch.

5th Row—Ch 4 (counts as 1 tr c), 1 tr c in each of the next 2 tr c, ch
5, s c in next loop, ch 5, * thread over hook twice, insert in next tr
c, thread over and work off 2 loops twice, repeat from * 5 times, thread
over and work off all loops at one time (6 tr c cluster st), ch 5, 3 tr
c, ch 5, 3 tr c in next loop, ch 5, cluster st over the next 6 tr c, ch
5, s c in next loop, ch 5, 1 tr c in each of the next 3 tr c, * ch 3,
skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, 1 tr c in
each of the next 3 tr c, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, cluster st over
the next 6 tr c, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, 1 tr c in each of the
next 3 tr c, repeat from * 5 times, ch 3, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop,
ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, repeat from beginning all around in same
manner, join in 4th st of ch.

6th Row—Ch 4, 1 tr c in each of the next 2 tr c leaving the last loop of
each st on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time, *
ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 5, 1 tr c in each of the
next 3 tr c, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, 1 tr c in each of the next 3
tr c, ch 5, s c in next loop, * ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from *
once, ** ch 8, cluster st over next 6 tr c, * ch 8, s c in next loop,
repeat from * 3 times, repeat from ** 5 times, ch 8, cluster st over the
next 6 tr c, repeat from 1st * all around ending row with ch 8, 3 tr c
cluster st in last 3 tr c group, join to 1st cluster st.

7th Row—Ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for picot, ch 3, s c in next
loop, ch 3, sl st in s c for picot, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat
from * once, ch 3 picot, ch 6, 3 tr c cluster st over next 3 tr c group,
ch 3 picot, ch 6, s c in next loop, ch 7, sl st in 3rd st from hook for
picot, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 6, 3 tr c cluster st over next 3 tr c
group, ch 3 picot, ch 6, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 3 picot, * ch
7, s c in next loop, repeat from * once, ** ch 3 picot, ch 3, sl st in
top of next cluster st, ch 3 picot, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3 picot,
ch 6, s c in next loop, ch 6, tr c in next loop, ch 5, sl st in 4th st
from hook for picot, ch 1, tr c in same space, * ch 6, s c in next loop,
repeat from * once, repeat from ** 5 times, ch 3 picot, ch 3, sl st in
top of next cluster st, repeat from beginning all around, cut thread.

    [Illustration: Center Edging & Corner #815 above.
    Instructions on Page 14.]




                   Tatted Round Motif and Edging #814


                          _Illustrated above_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    2 balls White or any color desired
  1 Handkerchief
  1 Shuttle

CENTER: R, 2 d, 8 p sep by 3 d, 1 d, cl r, tie and cut.

1st Row—Using ball and shuttle R, 3 d, p, 3 d, join to p of center, 3 d,
p, 3 d, cl r, turn. * Ch, 4 d, 3 p sep by 4 d, 4 d, turn. R, 3 d, join
to last p of last r made, 3 d, join to next p of center, 3 d, p, 3 d, cl
r, turn. Repeat from * 6 times, joining last r to 1st r. Ch, 4 d, 3 p
sep by 4 d, 4 d, tie and cut.

2nd Row—1ST MOTIF: * R, 6 d, 5 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to
last p of last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. Repeat from * once,
tie and cut.

2nd MOTIF: R, 6 d, 5 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of
last r, 2 d, 2 p sep by 2 d, 2 d, join to center p of ch of 1st row, 2
d, p, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, p, 2 d, join to center p of next ch of 1st row,
2 d, join to 2nd free p from joining of last r of 1st motif, 2 d, p, 2
d, p, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d,
6 d, cl r, tie and cut.

                                             _Continuation from page 14_

3rd MOTIF: R, 6 d, 2 p sep by 2 d, 2 d, join to 1st free p of lower r of
last motif, 2 d, 2 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of
last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, 5 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl
r. R, 6 d, join to last p of last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r, tie
and cut.

4th MOTIF: R, 6 d, 5 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of
last r, 2 d, 2 p sep by 2 d, 2 d, skip 1 ch of 1st row, join in center p
of next ch of 1st row, 2 d, p, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, p, 2 d, join to center
p of skipped ch of 1st row, 2 d, join to 3rd free p of lower r of
previous motif, 2 d, p, 2 d, p, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of
last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r, tie and cut. Repeat the 3rd and
4th motifs twice joining last motif to 1st motif to correspond.

Work 3 more corners in same manner. Sew one in each corner of
handkerchief as illustrated having the 3 full motifs extend over corner
and half of motif extend on each side. Cut out extra material from
underneath leaving about ⅛ inch to turn under.

EDGE: * R, 6 d, 5 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of
last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. Repeat from * once, tie and cut.

2nd MOTIF: R, 6 d, 3 p sep by 2 d, 2 d, join to 4th free p of lower r of
previous motif, 2 d, p, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, join to last p of last r, 2
d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d, 5 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r. R, 6 d,
join to last p of last r, 2 d, 4 p sep by 2 d, 6 d, cl r, tie and cut.

Repeat the 2nd motif until strip is long enough to fit between corners.
Work 3 more strips in same manner and sew to each side of handkerchief
between corners.




           Gray Place Mats with Rose Border and Napkins #816


    [Illustration: {Place mats}]

 This set may be made with any of the AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY products
                             listed below:

            Material                        Quantity             Size of
                                                                  Needle

 “GEM” CROCHET COTTON Article    5 balls Shaded Pinks           steel 12
   35, size 30                     4 balls Nile Green
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   6 balls Shaded Pinks           steel 12
   20, size 30                     4 balls Nile Green
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   15 balls Shaded Pinks          steel 12
   30, size 30                     10 balls Nile Green

  Finished mats measure 10 inches × 18¼ inches.
  1½ yds. 35 inch Gray linen will make 4 place mats and 4 napkins.
  Each flower measures 1¼ inches.
  Inside of crocheted section should measure 10 inches × 16½ inches.

PLACE MAT—ROSE: With Shaded Pinks ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 5, d c
in ring, * ch 2, d c in ring, repeat from * 5 times, ch 2, join in 3rd
st of ch.

2nd Row—Ch 1 and over each loop work 1 s c, 4 d c, 1 s c, join.

3rd Row—* Ch 5, sl st in back of work between next 2 petals, repeat from
* all around.

4th Row—Ch 1 and over each loop work 1 s c, 7 d c, 1 s c, join.

5th Row—* Ch 6, sl st in back of work between next 2 petals, repeat from
* all around, cut thread.

6th Row—Attach Nile Green in loop and work 1 s c, 1 d c, 5 tr c, 1 d c,
1 s c in each loop, join, cut thread.

Work a 2nd flower joining it to 1st flower in last row as follows:
attach Green in loop, 1 s c, 1 d c, 3 tr c in same space, join to center
st of any Green petal of 1st flower (to join: drop loop off hook, insert
in center st of petal, pick up loop and pull through), 2 tr c, 1 d c, 1
s c in same space, 1 s c, 1 d c, 3 tr c in next loop of 2nd flower, join
to next petal of 1st flower, 2 tr c, 1 d c, 1 s c in same space of 2nd
flower, finish row same as 1st flower. Work 13 more flowers joining in
same manner leaving 2 petals free at top and 2 petals free at lower edge
between joinings. Last flower made will be corner flower.

Work another flower same as previous flowers but leaving 4 petals free
on outside edge of previous flower for corner when joining. Work 8 more
flowers joining same as 1st side. Work another flower and join to last
flower leaving 4 petals free on outside edge of last flower made for
corner. Work 13 flowers joining same as 1st side. Work another flower
and join to last flower leaving 4 petals free on outside edge of last
flower for corner. Work 7 more flowers joining same as 1st side and
joining last flower to 1st flower made leaving 4 petals free on outside
edge of 1st flower for corner.

Cut linen ½ inch larger all around than inside edge, turn under a narrow
hem and sew. Attach Nile Green at corner of linen, 3 s c in same space,
** 1 d c between the 2 petals of corner flower, 2 s c in same space on
linen, working the s c about ¹/₁₆ inch apart work 2 s c on linen, 1 tr c
in joining of corner flower and next flower to left of corner, 6 s c on
linen, drop loop from hook, insert in center of 1st free petal of 1st
flower to left of corner, pick up loop and pull through, 5 s c on linen,
join to center of next petal of same flower, * 6 s c on linen, 1 tr c in
joining of flowers, 6 s c on linen, join to center of 1st free petal of
next flower, 5 s c on linen, join to next free petal of same flower,
repeat from * to corner, 6 s c on linen, 1 tr c in joining of last
flower and next corner flower, 2 s c on linen, 3 s c in corner of linen,
repeat from ** all around, cut thread. Work other 3 mats in same manner.

                                             _Continuation from page 11_

NAPKINS: Cut linen 12 x 12 inches. Turn under a very narrow hem and sew.
With Nile Green work a row of s c around entire napkin working 5 s c in
each corner, join, cut thread. Attach Shaded Pinks at corner, ch 3, d c
in same space, ch 3, sl st in top of last d c for picot, d c in same
space, * ch 3, skip 2 s c, s c in next s c, ch 3, skip 2 s c, 2 d c in
next s c, ch 3, sl st in top of last d c for picot, d c in same space,
repeat from * all around working the 2 d c, picot, 1 d c at each corner
and ending row to correspond, join, cut thread. Work a rose same as on
mat and applique to corner as illustrated.




                   Green Place Mats and Napkins #817


    [Illustration: {Place mats}]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “GEM” CROCHET COTTON, Article 35, size 30
    5 balls Shaded Lt. Yellows or color desired
                                   or
  “STAR” CROCHET COTTON, Article 30, size 30
    14 balls Shaded Lt. Yellows or color desired
  Each mat measures 12 inches x 18 inches finished.
  Each napkin measures 12 inches x 12 inches finished.
  Steel crochet hook No. 12
  1½ yds. 35 inch Dark Green linen will make 4 place mats and 4 napkins.

MOTIF: Ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 5, d c in ring, * ch 2, d c in
ring, repeat from * 5 times, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

2nd Row—* Ch 1, 1 s c, ch 3, 1 s c over next loop, repeat from * all
around, join.

3rd Row—Ch 3, d c in next ch 3 loop, ch 3, 5 d c over the d c just made,
* d c in next ch 1 loop over the d c of previous row, d c in next ch 3
loop, ch 3, 5 d c over last d c made, repeat from * 6 times, join.

4th Row—Ch 8, * s c in 1st d c of next scallop, ch 5, skip 4 d c of same
scallop, d c over next d c of previous row, ch 5, repeat from * all
around ending row with s c in 1st d c of next scallop, ch 5, join in 3rd
st of ch, cut thread.

Work a 2nd motif joining it to 1st motif in last row as follows: ch 8, s
c in 1st d c of next scallop, ch 5, skip 4 d c of same scallop, d c in
next d c of previous row, ch 2, join to corresponding loop of 1st motif,
ch 2, s c in 1st d c of next scallop of 2nd motif, ch 2, join to next
loop of 1st motif, ch 2, skip 4 d c of same scallop of 2nd motif, d c in
next d c, finish row same as 1st motif, join, cut thread. Join all
motifs in same manner having 6 loops free on each side of motif between
joinings to corner. Leave 2 loops free at lower edge of corner motif
when joining next side. Join all corner motifs in same manner and join
last motif to 1st motif. 36 motifs are required for each mat having 12
motifs on each long side and 6 motifs on each short side between
corners.

Inside Edge: Attach thread in 2nd free loop of motif to right of corner,
* 3 s c in same loop, ch 2, 3 s c in next loop of same motif, repeat
from * twice, ch 4, 1 tr c in next loop of same motif leaving last loop
of tr c on hook, 1 tr c in each of the 2 free loops of corner motif
leaving last loop of each tr c on hook, 1 tr c in 1st free loop of next
motif to left of corner leaving last loop of tr c on hook, thread over
and pull through all loops at one time (4 tr c cluster), ** ch 4, 3 s c
in next loop, * ch 2, 3 s c in next loop of same motif, repeat from *
twice, ch 4, tr c in next loop leaving last loop of tr c on hook, thread
over hook twice, insert in 1st free loop of next motif, thread over and
work off all loops 2 at a time (2 tr c cluster), repeat from ** all
around working all corners same as 1st corner, joining last ch 4 to 1st
s c.

Next Row—Sl st to next s c, ch 5, d c in next ch 2 loop, * ch 2, skip 1
sc, dc in next sc, ch 2, dc in next ch 2 loop, repeat from * once, ch 2,
skip 1 s c, d c in next s c, cluster st in the 4 tr c cluster at corner
(cluster st: 3 tr c in same space keeping last loop of each tr c on
hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time), ** skip 1 s c
of next motif, d c in next s c, * ch 2, d c in next ch 2 loop, ch 2,
skip 1 s c, d c in next s c, repeat from * twice, ch 2, d c in next
loop, ch 2, d c in the 2 tr c cluster, ch 2, d c in next loop, ch 2,
repeat from ** all around working all corners same as 1st corner and
ending row to correspond, join, cut thread.

                                             _Continuation from page 11_

Outside Edge: Attach thread in 1st free loop of motif to right of corner
motif, ch 3, sl st in next loop, * ch 3, 2 d c in same space keeping
last loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at
one time (a 2 d c cluster st), ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for
picot, ch 3, sl st in same space with cluster st, ch 3, sl st in next
loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, sl st in 1st free loop of corner
motif, ch 3, sl st in next loop of same motif, * ch 3, 2 d c cluster st
in same space, picot, ch 3, sl st in same space, ch 3, sl st in next
loop of same motif, repeat from * 7 times, ch 3, sl st in 1st free loop
of next motif, ** ch 3, sl st in next loop, * ch 3, 2 d c cluster st in
same space, picot, ch 3, sl st in same space, ch 3, sl st in next loop,
repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, sl st in 1st free loop of next motif,
repeat from ** all around working around all corner motifs same as 1st
corner motif.

Cut linen 10 inches x 16 inches or ½ inch larger all around to fit
inside of edging. Turn under ½ inch hem all around and hemstitch if
preferred. Sew inner edge of edging to outside edge of place mat as
illustrated.

Napkins: Ch 785, d c in 8th st from hook (corner), * ch 2, skip 2 sts of
ch, d c in next st of ch, repeat from * 64 times, ch 5, d c in same
space (2nd corner), repeat from 1st * all around working next 2 corners
same as last corner and having 65 meshes on each side, not counting
corner loops, joining last ch 2 in 3rd st of ch, do not cut thread. Cut
linen 12 inches x 12 inches or ½ inch larger all around than inside of
meshes just worked. Turn under ½ inch hem all around and sew or
hemstitch if preferred. Sew edging around napkin matching corners.

2nd Row—sl st in corner loop, ** ch 3, 2 d c in same space keeping last
loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one
time (a 2 d c cluster st), ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for picot,
ch 3, sl st in same space with cluster st, * ch 3, sl st in next mesh,
repeat from * once, repeat from ** all around, join, cut thread.




                Gray and Yellow Hairpin Lace Edging #818


                      _Illustrated on center pages_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    1 ball Gray
    2 balls Yellow or any color desired
  1 Handkerchief 11 inches x 11 inches
  Hairpin Staple ¾ inch wide
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

See directions for hairpin lace given on page 2.

With Gray and leaving a small end work a length of hairpin lace to fit
around handkerchief (560 loops on each side of staple), cut thread
leaving an end, tie ends together being careful not to twist lace.
Attach Yellow in 1st loop of hairpin lace and keeping the twist in each
loop, ch 2, s d c in same space (s d c: thread over hook, insert in st,
pull through, thread over and pull through all loops at one time), * ch
3, small puff st in next loop (small puff st: thread over hook, insert
in loop, thread over and pull loop up about ⅛ inch, thread over hook,
insert in same space, thread over and pull loop up the same length,
thread over and pull through all 5 loops at one time), repeat from * 5
times, ** ch 3, small puff st through next 7 loops inserting hook
through all 7 loops at one time, * ch 3, small puff st in next loop,
repeat from * 6 times, repeat from ** across lace ending row with ch 3,
small puff st through next 7 loops, ch 3, join in 1st puff st.

Sl st to center of 2nd loop, ch 7, d c in next loop, ch 4, ** tr c in
next loop keeping the last loop of tr c on hook, skip 6 loops, tr c in
next loop keeping the last loop of tr c on hook, thread over and pull
through all loops at one time (corner), ch 4, d c in next loop, ch 4, d
c in next loop, * ch 4, thread over hook twice, insert in next loop,
pull loop through and work off 2 loops twice, thread over hook twice,
skip 2 loops, insert hook in next loop, pull loop through, thread over
and work off all loops 2 at a time, ch 4, d c in next loop, ch 4, d c in
next loop, ch 4, d c in next loop, ch 4, d c in next loop, repeat from *
7 times, ch 4, tr c in next loop keeping last loop of tr c on hook,
thread over hook twice, skip 2 loops, insert hook in next loop, pull
loop through, thread over and work off all loops 2 at a time, ch 4, d c
in next loop, ch 4, d c in next loop, ch 4, repeat from ** all around
ending row to correspond and joining last ch 4 in 3rd st of ch 7, cut
thread.

With Yellow crochet a row of s c around handkerchief working 3 s c in
each corner. Sew hairpin lace around handkerchief sewing corners of lace
to match corners of handkerchief.

OUTSIDE EDGE: Keeping the twist in the loops, attach Yellow through the
7 loops to right of 7 corner loops and work a small puff st through same
7 loops, ch 3, small puff st in next loop, ch 5 and work 1 small puff st
in each of the next 6 loops with ch 5 between each puff st, * ch 3,
small puff st through next 7 loops, ch 3, small puff st in each of the
next 7 loops with ch 3 between each puff st, repeat from * all around
working all corners same as 1st corner, ending row with ch 1, s d c in
same st as beginning.

Next Row—Ch 3, d c in next loop, * ch 6, sl st in 3rd st from hook for
picot, ch 3, small puff st in next loop, repeat from * 5 times, ch 6, sl
st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 3, ** 1 d c in each of the next 2
loops keeping last loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull
through all loops at one time, * ch 5, sl st in 3rd st from hook for
picot, ch 2, small puff st in next loop, repeat from * 5 times, ch 5, sl
st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 2, repeat from ** 8 times, 1 d c in
each of the next 2 loops keeping last loop of each d c on hook, thread
over and pull through all loops at one time, repeat from 1st * all
around ending row to correspond, join, cut thread.




                   Red & White Periwinkle Edging #819


                      _Illustrated on center pages_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    1 ball each White and Bright Red
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

With Red ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 10 s c in ring, join,
drop Red.

Attach White in 1st s c, * ch 4, 3 d tr c (3 times over hook) in same
space, 3 d tr c in next s c, ch 4, sl st in same space, sl st in next s
c, repeat from * 4 times, cut White thread.

Next Row—Pick up Red, ch 4, 1 s c in each of the 6 d tr c of 1st petal,
ch 4, sl st in 1st row between petals, * ch 4, 1 s c in each of the 6 d
tr c of next petal, ch 4, sl st in 1st row between petals, repeat from *
3 times, cut thread. Work a 2nd flower joining center of one petal to
center of any petal of 1st flower in last row. Work a 3rd flower joining
to 2nd flower in same manner leaving 1 petal free at lower edge and 2
petals at outside edge. Work a 4th flower same as 1st flower.

Sew the 3 flowers in corner as illustrated leaving 2 entire petals of
side flowers extend over the hem of handkerchief.

Sew 4th flower between the 2 upper flowers as illustrated. Attach White
in hem next to flower to left of corner flower and working around
handkerchief, * ch 5, skip ¼ inch space, s c in next space, repeat from
* to corner having an uneven number of loops on side, ch 7, s c in same
space (corner), * ch 5, skip ¼ inch space, s c in next space, repeat
from * all around having an uneven number of loops on each side not
counting corner loop and working all corners same as 1st corner, working
to flower on last side, cut thread.

2nd Row—Attach White in 1st loop on opposite side, * ch 6, cluster st in
next loop (cluster st: 4 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d c
on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time), ch 6, s c
in next loop, repeat from * across side to corner loop, ch 6, 2 cluster
sts with ch 6 between in corner loop, ch 6, s c in next loop, * ch 6,
cluster st in next loop, ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around to flower at opposite side working all corners same as 1st
corner, cut thread.

3rd Row—Attach Red in same space where 1st row was started, ch 6, s c in
top of 1st cluster st, ch 3, s c in same space, ch 6, sl st in next s c,
* ch 6, s c in top of next cluster st, ch 3, s c in same space, ch 6, sl
st in next s c, repeat from * to the s c before corner, ch 6, s c in top
of 1st cluster st at corner, ch 3, s c in same space, ch 5, s c in next
loop, ch 5, s c in top of next cluster st at corner, ch 3, s c in same
space, * ch 6, sl st in next s c, ch 6, s c in top of next cluster st,
ch 3, s c in same space, repeat from * around next 3 sides working all
corners same as 1st corner and working to flower on last side, cut
thread.




         Lavender and Pink Edging with Knot Stitch Border #8110


                      _Illustrated on center pages_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    2 balls Lavender
    1 ball Shaded Pinks
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Attach Lavender in corner and work a double knot st (double knot st: *
draw up a ³/₁₆ inch loop on hook, thread over hook and pull through loop
forming a ch st, s c over single loop of st, repeat from * once), s c in
same space, * work a double knot st, skip 3 hemstitched spaces or about
⁵/₁₆ inch space, s c in next space, repeat from * all around having an
uneven number of double knot sts on each side without counting corner
double knot st working all corners same as 1st corner and ending row
with double knot st, s c in same space as beginning.

2nd Row—Double knot st, s c in loop to right of s c of corner double
knot st, double knot st, s c in loop to left of s c of same corner
double knot st (an increase), * double knot st, s c in center s c of
next double knot st, repeat from * all around increasing 1 double knot
st at each corner. Without joining rows work 1 more row of double knot
sts increasing 1 double knot st in each corner ending row with double
knot st, s c in center s c of double knot st to right of corner double
knot st, cut thread.

4th Row—Attach Shaded Pinks in same space, * ch 5, sl st in 3rd st from
hook for picot, repeat from * once, ch 2, sl st in loop to right of s c
of corner double knot st, ch 5, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch
5, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 2 (double picot loop), sl st
in loop to left of s c of same double knot st, * work a double picot
loop, sl st in center s c of next double knot st, repeat from * all
around to last free knot st working all corners same as 1st corner, work
a double picot loop, sl st in center of 1st double picot loop made.

5th Row—Double picot loop, sl st between picots of corner loop, double
picot loop, sl st in same space, * double picot loop, sl st between
picots of next double picot loop, repeat from * all around working all
corners same as 1st corner and joining last double picot loop in center
of loop to right of corner, cut thread.

6th Row—Attach Lavender in same space, work a double knot st, s c
between the 2 picots of corner loop, double knot st, s c in same space,
* double knot st, s c between picots of next loop, repeat from * all
around working all corners same as 1st corner. Without joining rows work
3 more rows of double knot sts increasing 1 double knot st at each
corner ending last row with s c in center of double knot st to right of
corner double knot st, cut thread.

Next Row—Attach Shaded Pinks in same space, ch 3, tr c in center s c of
corner double knot st, ch 3, sl st in top of tr c for picot, * ch 2, tr
c in same space, ch 3, sl st in top of last tr c for picot, repeat from
* 3 times, * ch 3, s c in center s c of next double knot st, ch 3, tr c
in center s c of next double knot st, ch 3, sl st in top of tr c for
picot, ch 2, tr c in same space, picot, ch 2, tr c in same space, picot,
repeat from * all around working all corners same as 1st corner, cut
thread.




         Green Handkerchief with White Rice Stitch Edging #8111


                      _Illustrated on center pages_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    4 balls White or color desired
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Attach thread in 1st hemstitched space to right of corner, ch 8, 2 d c
in 4th st from hook leaving last loop of each d c on hook, thread over
and pull through all loops at one time, ** 1 tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in
corner space, ch 4, 2 d c in 4th st from hook leaving last loop of each
d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time (a rice
st), tr c in next hemstitched space, * work a rice st, skip 3
hemstitched spaces (about ⁵/₁₆ inch), 1 tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next
space, work a rice st, skip 3 hemstitched spaces, tr c in next space,
repeat from * across side of handkerchief ending with 1 tr c in
hemstitched space to right of next corner, work a rice st, repeat from
** all around ending row with rice st, join in 4th st of ch 8.

2nd Row—Ch 7, tr c in same space, rice st, 4 tr c with ch 3 between each
tr c in corner loop, * rice st, 2 tr c with ch 3 between in next tr c,
rice st, tr c in next loop, repeat from * all around working all corners
same as 1st corner ending row with rice st, join in 4th st of ch.

3rd Row—Sl st into loop, ch 8, rice st in 4th st from hook, 1 tr c, ch
3, 1 tr c in next loop, ch 3, 1 tr c, ch 5, 1 tr c in next loop, ch 3, 1
tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next loop, * rice st, tr c in next loop, rice st,
1 tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c (shell) in next tr c, repeat from * all around
working all corners same as 1st corner and ending row with rice st, join
in 4th st of ch.

4th Row—Ch 7, tr c in same space, rice st, shell in next loop, ch 3,
shell in next loop, ch 3, 1 tr c, ch 5, 1 tr c in next loop, ch 3, shell
in next loop, ch 3, shell in next loop, * rice st, shell in next tr c,
rice st, 1 tr c in next shell, repeat from * all around working all
corners same as 1st corner and joining last rice st in 4th st of ch.

5th Row—Ch 8, rice st in 4th st from hook, shell in next shell, ch 3,
skip 1 loop, shell in next shell, ch 3, skip 1 loop, 1 tr c, ch 5, 1 tr
c in next loop, * ch 3, skip 1 loop, shell in next shell, repeat from *
once, * rice st, tr c in next shell, rice st, shell in next tr c, repeat
from * all around working all corners same as 1st corner and joining
last rice st in 4th st of ch.

6th Row—Ch 7, tr c in same space, rice st, shell in next shell, ch 3,
skip 1 loop, shell in next shell, ch 3, skip 1 loop, shell in next loop,
ch 5, shell in same space, * ch 3, skip 1 loop, shell in next shell,
repeat from * once, rice st, shell in next tr c, rice st, 1 tr c in next
shell, repeat from * all around working all corners same as 1st corner,
ending row to correspond, joining last rice st in 4th st of ch.

7th Row—Ch 8, rice st in 4th st from hook, shell in next shell, * ch 3,
skip 1 loop, shell in next shell, repeat from * once, ch 3, 1 tr c, ch
5, 1 tr c in next loop, ch 3, shell in next shell, * ch 3, skip 1 loop,
shell in next shell, repeat from * once, * rice st, tr c in next shell,
rice st, shell in next tr c, repeat from * all around working all
corners same as 1st corner and joining last rice st in 4th st of ch.

8th Row—Ch 7, tr c in same space, rice st, shell in next shell, * ch 3,
skip 1 loop, shell in next shell, repeat from * once, ch 3, skip 1 loop,
1 tr c, ch 5, 1 tr c in next loop, * ch 3, skip 1 loop, shell in next
shell, repeat from * twice, * rice st, shell in next tr c, rice st, 1 tr
c in next shell, repeat from * all around working all corners same as
1st corner joining last rice st in 4th st of ch.

9th Row—Ch 8, rice st in 4th st from hook, shell in next shell, * ch 3,
skip 1 loop, shell in next shell, repeat from * once, ch 3, skip 1 loop,
shell in next loop, ch 5, shell in same space, * ch 3, skip 1 loop,
shell in next shell, repeat from * twice, * rice st, tr c in next shell,
rice st, shell in next tr c, repeat from * all around working all
corners same as 1st corner and joining last rice st in 4th st of ch.

10th Row—Ch 4, cluster st in next shell (cluster st: 3 tr c in same
space keeping last loop of each tr c on hook, thread over and pull
through all loops at one time), ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for
picot, ch 3, cluster st in same shell, picot, ch 4, skip 1 loop, s c in
next shell, ch 4, skip 1 loop, cluster st in next shell, picot, ch 3,
cluster st in same shell, picot, ch 4, skip 1 loop, s c in next shell,
ch 4, cluster st in corner loop, picot, ch 3, cluster st in same space,
picot, ch 4, s c in next shell, ch 4, skip 1 loop, cluster st in next
shell, picot, ch 3, cluster st in same shell, picot, ch 4, skip 1 loop,
s c in next shell, ch 4, skip 1 loop, cluster st in next shell, picot,
ch 3, cluster st in same shell, picot, ch 4, s c in next tr c, * ch 4,
cluster st in next shell, picot, ch 3, cluster st in same shell, picot,
ch 4, s c in next tr c, repeat from * all around working all corners
same as 1st corner ending row to correspond, join, cut thread.




                        Narrow Pink Edging #8112


                      _Illustrated on center pages_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    1 ball Med. Pink
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Attach thread about ¼ inch from any corner, * ch 5, skip about ¼ inch
space, s c in next space, repeat from * to about ¼ inch from next corner
having an odd number of sts, ch 7, cluster st in corner space (cluster
st: * 2 d c in same space keeping last loop of each st on hook, thread
over and work off all loops at one time), ch 5, cluster st in same
space, ch 7, skip about ¼ inch space, s c in next space, repeat from 1st
* all around ending row with ch 3, d c in same space as beginning (this
brings thread in position for next row).

2nd Row—Ch 5, d c in d c, * ch 3, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in
center st of next loop, ch 3, 2 d c with ch 3 between in center st of
next loop, repeat from * across row to loop before corner, ch 3, then in
corner loop work 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between, ch 3, 2 d c with ch 3
between, ch 3, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between, ch 3, 2 d c with ch 3
between in center st of next loop, repeat from 1st * all around, ch 3,
join in 3rd st of ch.

3rd Row—Sl st in loop, * ch 6, sl st in 4th st from hook for picot, ch
2, skip one ch 3 loop, s c in next loop, repeat from * to 2nd loop
before corner group, * ch 6, sl st in 4th st from hook for picot, ch 2,
skip 1 loop, cluster st in next loop, ch 6, sl st in 4th st from hook
for picot, ch 2, cluster st in same space, repeat from * twice, ch 6, sl
st in 4th st from hook for picot, ch 2, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop,
repeat from 1st * all around, cut thread.

    [Illustration: #818 See Pg. 6
    #819 See Pg. 6
    #8110 See Pg. 6
    #8111 See Pg. 7
    #8112 See Pg. 7
    #8113 See Pg. 11]




                   Pineapple Pillow Case Edging #8118


                        _Illustrated on page 13_

    This edging may be made with any of the AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                         products listed below:

            Material                        Quantity             Size of
                                                                  Needle

 “GEM” CROCHET COTTON Article    3 balls White or any color     steel 12
   35, size 30                     desired
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   3 balls White or any color     steel 12
   20, size 30                     desired
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   8 balls White or any color     steel 12
   30, size 30                     desired
 1 pair Pillow Cases

Ch 37, 2 d c in 4th st from hook, ch 2, 3 d c in next st of ch, * ch 3,
skip 3 sts of ch, 3 d c in next st, ch 2, 3 d c in next st (shell),
repeat from * once, ch 1, skip 1 st of ch, d c in next st, * ch 3, skip
1 st of ch, s c in next st, ch 3, skip 1 st of ch, d c in next st,
repeat from * 3 times, ch 2, d c in end st, ch 5, turn.

2nd Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 3 times,
ch 1, d c in same space, ch 1, shell in shell, ch 3, 11 tr c in next
shell, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 4, turn.

3rd Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, s c between 1st 2 tr c, * ch 4, s c
between next 2 tr c, repeat from * 8 times, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 1,
d c in next single d c, ch 1, d c in next d c, * ch 3, s c in next mesh,
ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 3 times, ch 2, d c in 3rd st of ch,
ch 5, turn.

4th Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 4 times,
shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next
loop, repeat from * 7 times, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 4, turn.

5th Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c
in next loop, repeat from * 6 times, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 1, d c in
next single d c, * ch 3, s c in next mesh, ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat
from * 4 times, ch 2, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 5, turn.

6th Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 4 times,
ch 1, d c in same space, ch 1, shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of
pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * 5 times, ch 3, shell
in shell, ch 4, turn.

7th Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c
in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 1, d c in
next d c, ch 1, d c in next d c, * ch 3, 1 s c in next mesh, ch 3, d c
in next d c, repeat from * 4 times, ch 2, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 5,
turn.

8th Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 5 times,
shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next
loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 4, turn.

9th Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, 1 s
c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 1, d c in
next d c, * ch 3, s c in next mesh, ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from *
5 times, ch 2, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 5, turn.

10th Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 5
times, ch 1, d c in same space, ch 1, shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st
loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * once, ch 3,
shell in shell, ch 4, turn.

11th Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, ch 4, s c
in next loop, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 1, d c in next single d c, ch 1,
d c in next d c, * ch 3, s c in next mesh, ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat
from * 5 times, ch 2, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 5, turn.

12th Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 6
times, shell in shell, ch 3, s c in remaining loop of pineapple, ch 3,
shell in shell, ch 4, turn.

13th Row—Shell in shell, ch 1, shell in next shell, ch 1, d c in next
single d c, * ch 3, s c in next mesh, ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from
* 6 times, ch 2, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 5, turn.

14th Row—D c in next d c, * ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 6
times, ch 1, d c in same space, ch 1, shell in shell, ch 2, s c in
center of next shell, ch 2, turn.

15th Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, skip 1 single d c, shell in next d c, ch
3, skip 1 d c, shell in next d c, ch 1, d c in next d c, * ch 3, s c in
next mesh, ch 3, d c in next d c, repeat from * 3 times, ch 2, d c in
3rd st of ch, ch 5, turn.

Repeat from 2nd row for length desired. Work a row of s c across top of
edging. Sew to edge of pillow case. Work other pillow case in same
manner.




                    Green Turkish Towel Edging #8117


                        _Illustrated on page 12_

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
  “PURITAN” CROCHET COTTON, Article 40
                                   or
  “DE LUXE” CROCHET COTTON, Article 346
    1 ball Shaded Nile Greens or color desired
  1 Turkish Towel
  Steel crochet hook No. 7

Ch 12, 2 d c in 7th st from hook, ch 1, 2 d c in next st of ch, ch 1,
skip 2 sts of ch, 2 d c in next st, ch 1, 2 d c in next st, ch 3, turn.

2nd Row—2 d c, ch 1, 2 d c (shell) in next ch 1 loop, ch 1, skip next ch
1 loop, 2 d c, ch 1, 2 d c in next ch 1 loop, ch 1, d c in end loop, ch
4, turn.

3rd Row—Shell in center of 1st shell, ch 1, shell in center of next
shell, ch 6, sl st in the ch 3 of previous row, ch 2, turn.

4th Row—8 s d c over loop just made (s d c: thread over hook, insert in
space, pull loop through, thread over and pull through all loops at one
time), ch 1, shell in center of 1st shell, ch 1, shell in center of next
shell, ch 1, d c in 3rd st of end ch, ch 4, turn.

5th Row—Shell in center of 1st shell, ch 1, shell in center of next
shell, ch 6, sl st in the ch 1 of previous row next to the 1st scallop,
ch 2, turn.

6th Row—4 s d c over loop just made, ch 6, drop loop from hook, insert
hook in center st of previous scallop, pick up loop and pull through, ch
2, 4 s d c over loop just made, ch 3, sl st in top of last s d c for
picot, 4 s d c over same loop, 4 s d c over remainder of previous loop,
ch 1, shell in center of next shell, ch 1, shell in center of next
shell, ch 1, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 4, turn.

7th Row—Shell in center of 1st shell, ch 1, shell in center of next
shell, ch 6, sl st in the ch 1 of previous row, ch 3, turn.

8th Row—8 d c over loop just made, ch 1, shell in center of shell, ch 1,
shell in center of next shell, ch 1, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 4, turn.

9th Row—Shell in center of 1st shell, ch 1, shell in center of next
shell, ch 1, skip the 2 d c of same shell, 1 d c in each of the next 8 d
c with ch 1 between each d c, ch 1, sl st in 4th s d c where previous
scallop is joined, turn.

10th Row—Ch 4, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 1, s c between
1st 2 d c, * ch 4, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 1, s c
between next 2 d c, repeat from * 6 times, ch 3, shell in center of next
shell, ch 1, shell in center of next shell, ch 1, d c in 3rd st of ch,
ch 4, turn.

Repeat from 3rd row for length desired.

Sew to end of towel.




                        Guest Towel Edging #8116


                        _Illustrated on page 13_

    This edging may be made with any of the AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                         products listed below:

            Material                        Quantity             Size of
                                                                  Needle

 “GEM” CROCHET COTTON Article    1 ball Shaded Light Yellows    steel 11
   35, size 30                     or any color desired           or 12
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   1 ball Shaded Light Yellows    steel 11
   30, size 30                     or any color desired           or 12
 1 Guest Towel

Ch 11, d c in 4th st from hook, ch 2, skip 2 sts of ch, d c in next st
of ch, ch 3, skip 3 sts of ch, 5 d c in next st, ch 3, turn.

2nd Row—Sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, * ch 3, sl st in 3rd st
from hook for picot, repeat from * once, 5 d c in 1st d c, ch 3, skip 3
d c of same group, s c in next d c, ch 3, d c in next d c, ch 2, 1 d c
in next d c, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 3, turn.

3rd Row—D c in next d c, ch 2, d c in next d c, ch 3, 5 d c in next d c,
ch 3, turn.

Repeat the 2nd and 3rd rows for length desired.

Sew to end of towel.

            TATTING ABBREVIATIONS

  R                Ring
  L R              Large Ring
  S R              Small Ring
  D or D S         Double or Double Stitch
  P                Picot
  S P              Short Picot
  L P              Long Picot
  Ch               Chain
  Sp               Space
  Sep              Separate
  Cl               Close




               Fuchsia & White Hairpin Lace Edging #8113


                      _Illustrated on center pages_

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
  “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    2 balls each White and Fuchsia or any contrasting color
  1 Handkerchief 11 inches x 11 inches
  Hairpin staple ½ inch wide
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

See directions for hairpin lace on page 2.

With White work a strip of hairpin lace to fit around handkerchief
(about 480 loops on each side of staple).

Attach Fuchsia through 1st 3 loops of hairpin lace keeping the twist in
the loops, * ch 4, s c through next 3 loops, repeat from * across lace,
cut thread.

Sew this side to handkerchief easing in a little fullness at each
corner.

With White work another length of hairpin lace same as 1st length
allowing 6 loops more for each corner.

Join 2nd length to 1st length as follows: attach Fuchsia through 1st 3
loops of 1st length, ch 2, s d c in same space (s d c: thread over hook,
insert in st, pull through, thread over and pull through all loops at
one time), ch 2, thread over hook, insert in 1st 3 loops of 2nd length,
thread over and pull loop up about ⅛ inch, thread over, insert through
same 3 loops, thread over and pull loop up the same length, thread over
and pull through all 5 loops at one time, * ch 2, thread over hook,
insert through next 3 loops of 1st length, thread over and pull loop up
about ⅛ inch, thread over hook, insert through same 3 loops, pull loop
up the same length, thread over and pull through all 5 loops at one time
(small puff st) ch 2, small puff st through next 3 loops of 2nd length,
repeat from * to the 3 loops before corner 3 loops of 1st length, ch 2,
small puff st through next 3 loops of 1st length, ch 2, small puff st
through next 3 loops of 2nd length, ch 2, small puff st through same 3
loops of 1st length, * ch 2, small puff st through next 3 loops of 2nd
length, ch 2, small puff st through next 3 loops of 1st length, ch 2,
small puff st through next 3 loops of 2nd length, ch 2, small puff st
through same 3 loops of 1st length, repeat from * once, * ch 2, small
puff st through next 3 loops of 2nd length, ch 2, small puff st through
next 3 loops of 1st length, repeat from * across each side, working all
corners same as 1st corner, join, cut thread.

Next Row—Attach Fuchsia in 1st of the 3 corner loops, ** ch 5, s c in
next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, * ch 4, s c through next 3 loops,
repeat from * to 1st loop at next corner, repeat from ** all around
ending row to correspond, ch 4, join.

Next Row—sl st into loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space keeping last loop of
each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time, ch
5, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 2, cluster st in same space
(cluster st: 3 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
thread over and pull through all loops at one time), ch 5, sl st in 3rd
st from hook for picot, ch 2 (picot loop), 2 cluster sts with picot loop
between in next loop, * picot loop, cluster st in next loop, repeat from
* all around working all corners same as 1st corner ending row to
correspond, join, cut thread.

          CROCHET ABBREVIATIONS

  ch            Chain
  st            Stitch
  sts           Stitches
  sl-st         Slip st.
  s c           Single Crochet
  s d c         Short Double Crochet
  d c           Double Crochet
  tr c          Treble Crochet
  d tr c        Double Treble Crochet
  tr tr c       Triple Treble Crochet

* Asterisk—This sign indicates that the instructions immediately
      following are to be repeated the given number of times plus the
      original.

** Are used in the same way.

    [Illustration: Shaded Green Edging #8117
    Instructions on Page 10
    Gray Towel Edging #8115
    Instructions on Page 13]




                     Motif Pillow Case Edging #8119


    [Illustration: {Pillow case edging}]

    This edging may be made with any of the AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                         products listed below:

            Material                        Quantity             Size of
                                                                  Needle

 “GEM” CROCHET COTTON Article    3 balls Shaded Peaches or      steel 12
   35, size 30                     color desired
                                    or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   4 balls Shaded Peaches or      steel 12
   20, size 30                     color desired
                                    or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   8 balls Shaded Peaches or      steel 12
   30, size 30                     color desired
 1 pair Pillow Cases

Ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 8 s c in ring, join in 1st s c.

2nd Row—Ch 6, d c in next s c, ch 3, d c in next s c, repeat from * 5
times, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

3rd Row—Sl st to center of loop, ch 4, 2 tr c in same space keeping last
loop of each tr c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one
time, * ch 3, cluster st in next loop (cluster st: 3 tr c in same space
keeping last loop of each tr c on hook, thread over and pull through all
loops at one time), ch 10, cluster st in same space (corner), ch 3,
cluster st in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 3, 2 cluster sts with
ch 10 between in next loop, ch 3, join in top of 1st cluster st.

4th Row—Ch 1, ** 3 s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st in top of last s c for
picot, 2 s c in same space, 3 s c in next loop, * ch 3, sl st in top of
last s c for picot, 3 s c in same space, repeat from * twice, 3 s c,
picot, 2 s c in next loop, repeat from ** 3 times, join.

5th Row—Ch 8, tr c in space over next cluster st of 3rd row, ** ch 4, d
c in center picot of corner loop, ch 4, tr c in same picot, ch 4, d c in
same picot, * ch 4, tr c in space over next cluster st of 3rd row,
repeat from * twice, repeat from ** all around ending row to correspond,
join in 4th st of ch.

6th Row—Ch 1, s c in same space, ch 3, sl st in top of last s c for
picot, 4 s c in next loop, s c in next tr c, ch 3, sl st in top of last
s c for picot, ** 4 s c in next loop, s c in next d c, ch 3, sl st in
top of last s c for picot, 4 s c in next loop, s c in next tr c, ch 7,
sl st in top of same s c, 4 s c in next loop, s c in next d c, ch 3, sl
st in top of last s c for picot, * 4 s c in next loop, s c in next tr c,
ch 3, sl st in top of last s c for picot, repeat from twice, repeat from
** all around ending row to correspond, cut thread.

Work a 2nd motif joining it to 1st motif in last row as follows: ch 1, s
c in same space, ch 3 picot, 4 s c in next loop, s c in next tr c, ch 3
picot, 4 s c in next loop, s c in next d c, ch 3 picot, 4 s c in next
loop, s c in next tr c, ch 3, join to ch 7 picot at corner of 1st motif,
ch 3, sl st in top of same s c on 2nd motif, 4 s c in next loop, s c in
next d c, ch 1, join to next picot of 1st motif, ch 1, complete picot, *
4 s c in next loop of 2nd motif, s c in next tr c, ch 1, join to next
picot of 1st motif, ch 1, complete picot, repeat from * twice, 4 s c in
next loop, s c in next d c, ch 1, join to next picot of 1st motif, ch 1,
complete picot, 4 s c in next loop, s c in next tr c, ch 3, join to ch 7
picot at next corner of 1st motif, ch 3, sl st in top of same s c,
finish motif same as 1st motif.

Work 3rd motif same as 1st motif.

Work 4th motif in same manner but joining 1 side of 4th motif to 1 side
of 3rd motif same as before and joining the next side of 4th motif to
side of 1st motif of 1st 2 motifs made as illustrated.

Work 28 more motifs and join in same manner.

Sew to lower edge of pillow case. Cut away extra material from
underneath motifs. Work other pillow case in same manner.

    [Illustration: Shaded Yellow Guest Towel Edging #8116
    Instructions on Page 10
    Pineapple Pillow Edging #8118
    Instructions on Page 10]




                        Gray Towel Edging #8115


    [Illustration: Towel edging]

    This edging may be made with any of the AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                         products listed below:

            Material                        Quantity             Size of
                                                                  Needle

 “DE LUXE” CROCHET COTTON        1 ball each Peach and Lt.      steel 7
   Article 346                     Green
               or
 “PURITAN” CROCHET COTTON        1 ball each Pink and Nile      steel 7
   Article 40                      Green
               or
 “STAR” PEARL COTTON Article     2 balls Lt. Peach 1 ball Nile  steel 7
   90, size 5                      Green
 1 Turkish Towel

With Peach ch 12, 2 d c in 6th st from hook, ch 2, 2 d c in next st, ch
4, skip 4 sts of ch, sl st in last st, ch 3, turn.

2nd Row—9 d c in 1st loop, ch 1, 2 d c, ch 2, 2 d c (shell) in next
loop, ch 5, turn.

3rd Row—Shell in center of shell, ch 1, 1 d c in each d c and 1 d c in
3rd st of end ch, ch 4, turn.

4th Row—1 d c in each d c with ch 1 between each d c, ch 2, shell in
center of shell, ch 5, turn.

5th Row—Shell in shell, ch 2, 1 d c in each d c with ch 1 between each d
c, ch 1, d c in 3rd st of ch, ch 3, turn.

6th Row—* D c in next mesh, d c in next d c, repeat from * 8 times, ch
3, shell in shell, ch 5, turn.

7th Row—Shell in shell, ch 3, s c in 1st d c, * ch 4, skip 1 d c, s c in
next d c, repeat from * 8 times, ch 4, turn.

8th Row—S c in 1st loop, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * 7
times, ch 3, shell in shell, ch 5, turn.

9th Row—Shell in shell, ch 4, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 3, turn.
Repeat from 2nd row for length desired. Sew to lower edge of towel as
illustrated.

Attach Green in corner of towel to right of work, ch 1, 1 s c in each of
the next 2 d c of shell, 2 s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st in last s c for
picot, 1 s c in same loop, 1 s c in each of the next 2 d c, 2 s c, ch 3
picot, 1 s c in next loop, repeat from * 8 times, ** 3 s c, ch 3 picot,
2 s c in loop at point, working downward * 2 s c, ch 3 picot, 1 s c over
next d c, repeat from * 3 times, 1 s c over next d c, 1 s c over s c
between scallops, ch 3 picot, 1 s c in same loop with s c of previous
row, * 2 s c, ch 3 picot, 1 s c in next loop, repeat from * 6 times,
repeat from ** across row finishing opposite side to correspond.




                        Shaded Pink Edging #8114


    This edging may be made with any of the AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY
                         products listed below:

            Material                        Quantity             Size of
                                                                  Needle

  “GEM” CROCHET COTTON Article   1 ball Shaded Pinks or color   steel 11
            35, size 30            desired                        or 12
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   1 ball Shaded Pinks or color   steel 11
   20, size 30                     desired                        or 12
               or
 “STAR” CROCHET COTTON Article   1 ball Shaded Pinks or color   steel 11
   30, size 30                     desired                        or 12
 1 Guest Towel

Ch 4, d c in 4th st from hook, ch 2, 2 d c in same space, ch 5, turn.

2nd Row—2 d c, ch 2, 2 d c (shell) in the ch 2 loop, ch 5, turn.

3rd & 4th Rows—Shell in center of shell, ch 5, turn.

5th Row—Shell in center of shell, ch 3, working along side of edging,
work 5 d c with ch 3 between each d c in next ch 5 loop, ch 3, s c in
next ch 5 loop on side, ch 3, turn.

6th Row—Cluster st in next d c (cluster st: 3 d c in same space keeping
last loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at
one time), ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for picot, * ch 4, cluster
st in next d c, picot, repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch
3, shell in center of shell, ch 5, turn.

Next 4 Rows—Shell in center of shell, ch 5, turn. Repeat from 5th row
for length desired. Sew to end of towel.




                    Crocheted Motif and Edging #815


                        _Illustrated on page 3_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    2 balls White or color desired
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 8 s c in ring, join.

2nd Row—Ch 3, 2 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
thread over and pull through all loops at one time, * ch 5, cluster st
in next s c (cluster st: 3 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d
c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time), repeat
from * 6 times, ch 5, join.

3rd Row—Sl st to center of loop, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from *
all around.

4th Row—Sl st into loop, ch 3 (counts as part of 1st cluster st) and
work 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in same space, * ch 7, 2 cluster
sts with ch 3 between in same space, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st
in top of s c for picot, ch 5, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in next
loop, repeat from * twice, ch 7, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in same
space, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 3, sl st in top of s c for picot, ch
5, join in 1st cluster st, cut thread.

Work a 2nd motif joining it to 1st motif in last row as follows: sl st
into loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d c on
hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time, ch 3, cluster
st in same space, ch 3, join to corner loop of 1st motif, ch 3, 2
cluster sts with ch 3 between in same space of 2nd motif, ch 2, join in
next ch 5 loop of 1st motif, ch 2, s c in next loop of 2nd motif, ch 3,
sl st in top of s c for picot, ch 2, s c in next loop of 1st motif, ch
2, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in next loop of 2nd motif, ch 3, join
to corner loop of 1st motif, ch 3, 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between in
same space of 2nd motif, finish motif same as 1st motif. Join 3rd motif
to 2nd motif and 4th motif to 3rd and 1st motifs in same manner.
Applique motifs to corner of handkerchief having the 2 sides even with
hem of handkerchief. Cut away material from underneath motifs.

EDGE: Attach thread on linen to left of corner, 1 s c in same space, * 2
s c in next space, 1 s c in next space, repeat from * all around to
opposite side of motif, working 3 s c in each corner of handkerchief.

Next Row—Working on motif, * ch 6, skip 2 cluster sts, s c in next loop,
ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 6, s c in corner loop,
ch 6, s c in same space, * ch 6, skip 2 cluster sts, s c in next loop,
ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 6, s c in corner loop, *
ch 6, skip 3 s c, s c in next s c, repeat from * across side to corner
having an uneven number of loops, ch 6, s c in same space at corner,
continue in same manner all around working all corners same as 2nd
corner.

Next Row—Sl st to center st of 1st loop of motif, s c in same space, *
ch 5, cluster st in next loop, ch 3, sl st in top of cluster st for
picot, ch 3, cluster st in same loop, picot in top of cluster, ch 5, s c
in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 5, cluster st in corner loop,
picot, * ch 3, cluster st in same space, picot, repeat from * once, * ch
5, s c in next loop, ch 5, cluster st in next loop, picot, ch 3, cluster
st in same space, picot, repeat from * 3 times, ** ch 3, s c in next
loop, * ch 3, cluster st in next loop, picot, ch 3, cluster st in same
space, picot, ch 3, s c in next loop, repeat from * to loop before
corner loop, ch 3, cluster st in corner loop, picot, * ch 3, cluster st
in same space, picot, repeat from * once, repeat from ** all around
ending row to correspond and working the 2 remaining corners same as 2nd
corner.




            Handkerchief with White Rice Stitch Edging #8120


                       _Illustrated on back cover_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    3 balls White or color desired
  1 Handkerchief 11 inches square
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Attach thread in 4th space to right from corner, ch 6, d c in same
space, skip 2 spaces (about ¼ inch), 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in next space,
ch 4, 2 d c in 4th st from hook keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
thread over and pull through all loops at one time (a rice st), 1 d c,
ch 3, 1 d c (shell) in corner space, ch 4, rice st in 4th st from hook,
1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c (shell) in next space, ** skip 2 spaces, shell in
next space, * ch 4, rice st in 4th st from hook, skip 2 spaces, shell in
next space, skip 2 spaces, shell in next space, repeat from * to space
before next corner ending with the 2 shells having the last shell in
space before the corner, work a rice st, shell in corner space, work a
rice st, shell in next space, repeat from ** all around working all
corners same as 1st corner, ending row with rice st, join in 3rd st of
ch.

2nd Row—Sl st into loop, ch 6, d c in same space, shell in next shell,
work a rice st, shell in corner shell, * work a rice st, shell in next
shell, shell in next shell, repeat from * all around working all corners
same as 1st corner and joining last rice st in 3rd st of ch.

3rd Row—Sl st into shell, ch 6, d c in same space, shell in next shell,
work a rice st, 2 d c with ch 3 between in corner loop, ch 5, 2 d c with
ch 3 between in same space, * rice st, shell in each of the next 2
shells, repeat from * all around working all corners same as 1st corner,
joining last rice st in 3rd st of ch.

4th Row—Same as last row but working a shell in each of the 3 loops at
each corner.

5th Row—Same as last row but working a shell in each shell at each
corner.

6th Row—Work a shell in each shell and a rice st over each rice st
working 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in center shell at
each corner. Repeat the 5th and 6th rows once.

9th Row—Sl st into shell, ch 7, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch
1, d c in same space, d c in next shell, ch 4, sl st in 3rd st from hook
for picot, ch 1, d c in same space, rice st, * d c in next shell, ch 4,
sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 1, d c in same space, repeat
from * 6 times, * rice st, work 1 d c, ch 1, ch 3 picot, ch 1, 1 d c in
each of the next 2 shells, repeat from * all around working all corners
same as 1st corner, join, cut thread.




                          Yellow Edging #8121


                       _Illustrated on back cover_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    4 balls Yellow
  1 Handkerchief
  Steel crochet hook No. 13

Attach thread about ½ inch from any corner, ch 3, 1 d c in each of the
next 2 spaces keeping last loop of each st on hook, thread over and work
off all loops at one time, ch 7, 1 d c in each of the next 3 spaces
keeping last loop of each st on hook, thread over and work off all loops
at one time, ** ch 7, 3 d c in corner space keeping last loop of each st
on hook, thread over and work off all loops at one time, * ch 7, 1 d c
in each of the next 3 spaces keeping last loop of each st on hook,
thread over and work off all loops at one time, repeat from * to next
corner space, repeat from ** all around in same manner ending row with
ch 3, d c in top of 1st d c group (multiple of 4 plus 1 loop on each
side).

2nd Row—Ch 3, 2 d c in d c, * ch 3, 3 d c in center st of next loop,
repeat from * once, ** ch 5, 3 d c in top of 3 d c group at corner, ch
5, 3 d c in center st of next loop, * ch 3, 3 d c in center st of next
loop, repeat from * to last loop before next corner, repeat from ** all
around in same manner ending row to correspond.

3rd Row—Sl st to next loop, s c in same space, * ch 7, s c in next loop,
repeat from * once, ** ch 11, s c in next loop (corner loop), * ch 7, s
c in next loop, repeat from * to last loop on side, repeat from ** all
around in same manner ending row with ch 3, tr c in 1st s c (this brings
thread in position for next row).

4th Row—Ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 4, 3 d c in center st of next loop,
** ch 7, 3 d c, ch 7, 3 d c in center st of corner loop, ch 7, 3 d c in
center st of next loop, * ch 4, s c in next loop, ch 8, s c in next
loop, ch 8, s c in next loop, ch 4, 3 d c in center st of next loop,
repeat from * to loop before corner loop, repeat from ** all around in
same manner ending row with ch 3, tr c in tr c.

5th Row—Ch 8, s c in next loop, ch 4, 3 d c in next d c, ch 7, s c in
next loop, ch 7, 3 tr c in next d c, ch 5, 3 tr c, ch 5, 3 tr c in
center st of corner loop, ch 5, skip 2 d c, 3 tr c in next d c, ch 7, s
c in next loop, ch 7, skip 2 d c, 3 d c in next d c, * ch 4, skip 1
loop, s c in next loop, ch 8, s c in next loop, ch 4, 3 d c in next d c,
ch 5, skip 1 d c, 3 d c in next d c, repeat from * to 2nd d c group
before corner d c group, ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning
all around in same manner ending row to correspond.

6th Row—Sl st to 4th st of next loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, ch 3, 3
d c in next st of same loop, ** ch 4, 3 d c in next d c, ch 5, s c in
next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, 2 tr c in next tr c, ch 5, s c in
next loop, ch 5, 3 tr c in next tr c, ch 1, 3 tr c, ch 3, 3 tr c in
center st of corner loop, ch 1, skip 2 tr c, 3 tr c in next tr c, ch 5,
s c in next loop, ch 5, skip 2 tr c, 2 tr c in next tr c, s c in next
loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, skip 2 d c, 3 d c in next d c, * ch
4, skip 1 loop, 3 d c in 4th st of next loop, ch 3, 3 d c in next st of
same loop (shell), ch 4, 3 d c in next d c, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch
5, skip 2 d c, 3 d c in next d c, repeat from * to last 3 d c, ch 5, 3 d
c group before corner group, ch 4, skip 1 loop, 3 d c in 4th st of next
loop, ch 3, 3 d c in next st, repeat from ** all around in same manner
ending row to correspond.

7th Row—Sl st to center of shell, ** ch 4, skip 1 loop, 3 d c in next d
c, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 6, skip 1 loop, d c in next s c, 1 d c in
each of the next 2 tr c keeping last loop of each d c on hook, thread
over and work off all loops at one time, ch 9, skip 1 loop, s c in next
loop, ch 7, s c in next ch 1 loop, ch 7, s c in corner loop, ch 7, s c
in next ch 1 loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 9, 1 d c in each of the
next 2 tr c, 1 d c in next s c, keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
thread over and work off all loops at one time, ch 6, skip 1 loop, s c
in next loop, ch 5, skip 2 d c, 3 d c in next d c, * ch 4, skip 1 loop,
s c in next loop of shell, ch 4, skip l loop, 3 d c in next d c, ch 5, s
c in next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, skip 2 d c, 3 d c in next
d c, repeat from * to d c group before last shell, ch 4, s c in loop of
next shell, repeat from ** all around ending row to correspond.

8th Row—Sl st to center st of next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, * ch 7,
s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 11, s c in next loop (corner
loop), * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * 6 times, * ch 3, 3 d c in
center st of next loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop,
ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * to 5th
loop before corner, repeat from 1st * all around, ending row to
correspond.

9th Row—Sl st to center st of next loop, * ch 7, sl st in 4th st from
hook for picot, ch 3, s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 5, sl
st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 2, 2 d c in center st of corner
loop, ch 3, sl st in top of last d c for picot, d c in same space, ch 5,
sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch 2, 2 d c, ch 3 picot, 1 d c in
same space of corner loop, ch 5, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, ch
2, s c in next loop, * ch 7, sl st in 4th st from hook for picot, ch 3,
s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, * ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3 picot, 1 d
c in center st of next loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 5, skip 1 loop,
2 d c, ch 3 picot, 1 d c in center d c of next d c group, ch 4, sl st in
3rd st from hook for picot, ch 1, 2 d c, ch 3 picot, 1 d c in same
space, ch 5, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, repeat from * to 8th loop
before corner (counting corner loop), ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3 picot, 1 d c in
center st of next loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, repeat from 1st * all
around ending row to correspond, join, cut thread.




              Tinted Pink and Blue Corner and Edging #8122


                       _Illustrated on back cover_

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” TATTING CROCHET, Article 25
    2 balls Tinted Pink and Blue or any color desired
  Steel crochet hook No. 13
  1 Handkerchief

MOTIF: Ch 5, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 8 s c in ring, join in
1st s c.

2nd Row—Ch 6, d c in next s c, * ch 3, d c in next s c, repeat from * 5
times, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

3rd Row—Sl st into loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space leaving last loop of
each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at one time, ch
5, cluster st in same space (cluster st: 3 d c in same space keeping
last loop of each d c on hook, thread over and pull through all loops at
one time), * ch 3, d c in next loop, ch 3, 2 cluster sts with ch 5
between in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 3, d c in next loop, ch 3,
join.

4th Row—4 s c, ch 5, 4 s c over next loop (corner), 4 s c over next
loop, s c in next d c, 4 s c over next loop, repeat from beginning all
around, join.

5th Row—Sl st to the ch 5 loop at corner, ch 6, d c in same space, * ch
5, 2 d c with ch 3 between in same space, ch 5, skip 7 s c, 1 s c in
each of the next 2 s c, ch 3, sl st in top of last s c for picot, s c in
next s c, ch 5, skip 7 s c, 2 d c with ch 3 between in the ch 5 loop at
next corner, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 5, 2 d c with
ch 3 between in same space, ch 5, skip 7 s c, 1 s c in each of the next
2 s c, ch 3, sl st in top of last s c for picot, s c in next s c, ch 5,
join in 3rd st of ch, cut thread.

Work a 2nd motif joining it to 1st motif in last row as follows: sl st
to ch 5 loop at corner, ch 6, d c in same space, ch 2, s c in corner
loop of 1st motif, ch 2, d c in same space of 2nd motif, ch 1, s c in
next loop of 1st motif, ch 1, d c in same space of 2nd motif, ch 2, s c
in next loop of 1st motif, ch 2, skip 7 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 2
s c of 2nd motif, picot, s c in next s c, ch 2, s c in next loop of 1st
motif, ch 2, skip 7 s c, d c in corner loop of 2nd motif, ch 1, s c in
next loop of 1st motif, ch 1, d c in same space of 2nd motif, ch 2, s c
in center loop of 1st motif, ch 2, d c in same space of 2nd motif, ch 3,
d c in same space, finish motif same as 1st motif. Join all motifs in
same manner having 3 motifs in 1st row, 2 motifs in 2nd row and 1 motif
in 3rd row. Sew in position at corner. Trim linen from underneath
crocheted motifs.

EDGE: Attach thread on handkerchief to left of corner, * 1 s c in each
of the next 5 spaces, ch 4, sl st in top of last s c for picot, repeat
from * all around to same space at opposite side of same corner, join,
cut thread.

    [Illustration: See Pgs. 14 and 15 for instructions on above Edgings]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Relocated material “continued on remote page” for more
  conveniently-flowing text.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDGINGS: CROCHETED, TATTED, HAIR PIN LACE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


