The Project Gutenberg eBook of Little Dramas for Primary Grades
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Little Dramas for Primary Grades

Author: Ada M. Skinner
        Lillian Nixon Lawrence

Release date: October 10, 2016 [eBook #53245]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, David Edwards and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE DRAMAS FOR PRIMARY GRADES ***

                    LITTLE DRAMAS FOR PRIMARY GRADES


                                   BY
                           ADA MARIA SKINNER
                    ST. AGATHA SCHOOL, NEW YORK CITY
                                  AND
                         LILLIAN NIXON LAWRENCE

[Illustration]

                         AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY

 NEW YORK                      CINCINNATI                        CHICAGO

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          Copyright, 1913, BY
                ADA M. SKINNER AND LILLIAN N. LAWRENCE.

                   COPYRIGHT, 1913, IN GREAT BRITAIN.

                   LITTLE DRAMAS FOR PRIMARY GRADES.
                                W. P. I




                             PREFATORY NOTE


The use of dramatic readers has passed beyond the experimental stage.
Their value in arousing interest, in stirring the imagination, in
quickening literary appreciation and power of interpretation, has been
so clearly demonstrated as to make them permanent textbooks in the
elementary schools, and more particularly in the primary grades. The
present difficulty consists, therefore, not in uncertainty of the value
of dramatic literature, but in the inadequacy of the supply. The need of
suitable literary material in good dramatic form for the primary grades
is still very great. This little book has been compiled as one step
toward meeting this need at least in one particular school, but it is
hoped that it may prove of service in many other schools. It is intended
for use at the end of the first, and at the beginning of the second,
year.

                                                        EMMA G. SEBRING.




                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


For permission to use copyright material in this volume, acknowledgments
and thanks are proffered to authors and publishers, as follows:

To Laura E. Richards, for the adaptation from her story, “The New Year”;
to Dodd, Mead & Co. for “Mabel and the Green Lizard,” adapted from “The
Adventures of Mabel,” by H. T. Peck; to G. P. Putnam’s Sons, of New York
and London, for the selection by Judge Parry from “The Golden
Staircase”; to Longmans, Green, & Co. for “The Odd Man and the Dog
True”; and to John Lane Company for “Return of Spring,” by Dion Clayton
Calthrop.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

 BUNNY RABBIT                                                          7

 THE ODD MAN AND THE DOG TRUE                                         14

 THE OWL AND GRASSHOPPER GREEN                                        19

 SOMEWHERE TOWN                                    _Kate Greenaway_   21

 THE TIMID HARE                                                       22

 MABEL AND THE GREEN LIZARD                               _Adapted_   26

 THE MAIDEN AND THE BIRD                        _Lydia Maria Child_   32

 THE LITTLE FISH                                    _African Fable_   35

 BELLING THE CAT                                                      37

 THE FOX AND THE CROW                                                 40

 HANS AND GRETCHEN                                                    41

 LADY MOON                                          _Lord Houghton_   50

 PRECOCIOUS PIGGY                                     _Thomas Hood_   52

 STRANGE LANDS                               _Laurence Alma-Tadema_   56

 HOW TO GET A BREAKFAST                                               58

 THE LITTLE CHRISTMAS TREE              _Adapted from an Old Story_   60

 CHRISTMAS EVE IN AN ATTIC                                            65

 THE NEW YEAR                                _Adapted from Laura E.   73
                                                          Richards_

 A FRIENDSHIP DECLINED                                                77

 THE SELFISH MAN                                                      79

 THE MAGPIE’S NEST                                                    83

 ADVENTURES OF THE FIRST SPRING                                       86

 THE BIRD’S NEST                                _Lydia Maria Child_   93

 THE BOASTFUL BAMBOO TREE                          _Japanese Fable_  100

 RETURN OF SPRING                                                    105

 WHO HOLDS UP THE SKY?                                    _Adapted_  110

 THE FOX’S PLAN                                                      114

 TOM AND THE LOBSTER                                      _Adapted_  117

 WHY THE JELLYFISH HAS NO SHELL                    _Oriental Fable_  119

 I WOULD LIKE YOU FOR A COMRADE                       _Judge Parry_  132

 SOUTHWEST WIND’S VISIT TO GLUCK         _Adapted from John Ruskin_  134

 THE CHILD AND THE SPARROW                        _Thomas Westwood_  143

 THE RABBIT’S MESSAGE                                 _German Tale_  145

 LAUGHING SANJA                               _Japanese Folk Story_  150

 THE TIGER AND THE BRAHMAN                                           159

 THE LION AND THE STORY-TELLER                                       169

 OVER THE HILL                                   _George MacDonald_  174

[Illustration]




                       BUNNY RABBIT AND THE LION


    CHARACTERS—_Lion_, _Rabbit_, _Mother Deer_, _Elephant_, _Camel_,
                       _Jackal_, _other animals_


                          SCENE I—_The Forest_

_Mother Deer._       Brave Lion, give me back my little deer.

_Lion._              I will not. The deer is mine.

_Mother Deer._       O Lion, it is the only one I have. I beg of you,
give it back to me.

_Lion._              A lion does not give back what he has taken. Be
off, or I will eat _you_.


                 SCENE II—_Another Part of the Forest_

_Mother Deer._       Can you not help me, animals? The lion has taken my
little deer, the only one I had.

_Elephant._          I am sorry for you. But the lion is the king of the
forest. He takes what he will and keeps what he likes. I cannot help
you.

_Mother Deer._       [_Goes on._] Can you not help me, Camel? You are
always kind and gentle.

_Camel._             The lion did wrong to take your deer. He did a
great wrong, but I cannot help you.

_Mother Deer._       [_Goes on._] Surely, little jackal, _you_ will help
me.

_Jackal._            Sh! Sh! I’m afraid of the lion, myself. We’ve never
been very good friends. I wish I could help you. Let me see. I have it!
Go to Bunny Rabbit. He’s a little creature, but he’s wise and brave.

_Mother Deer._       You say he’s wise?

_Jackal._            He is.

_Mother Deer._       And brave?

_Jackal._            He is.

_Mother Deer._       Then I will go at once.


             SCENE III—_In Front of Bunny Rabbit’s Burrow_

_Bunny Rabbit._      Good morning, Mother Deer. What is the matter?

_Mother Deer._       Bunny Rabbit, that wicked lion stole my little deer
and will not give it to me. I asked the forest animals to help me, but
none was brave enough to do so.

_Bunny Rabbit._      Not even the elephant, or the camel, or the jackal?

_Mother Deer._       Not one. I asked them all. They all said they were
sorry. But I believe they are all afraid of the lion.

_Bunny Rabbit._      Why did you come to me? I’m such a little creature.

_Mother Deer._       The jackal told me you are wise and brave, and he
said that you would help me.

_Bunny Rabbit._      Tell them all to meet in front of my burrow. We
will talk it over and see what can be done. [_Mother Deer goes away, and
Bunny Rabbit digs a long passage under the ground and then comes out
behind a bush._]


                   SCENE IV—_In Front of the Burrow_

 [_Bunny Rabbit and all the animals. Lion watching in the distance. Only
                      Elephant and Camel see him._]

_Bunny Rabbit._      Elephant, do you think the lion should keep the
little deer?

_Elephant._          The lion is king of the forest, and he _should_
keep the little deer.

_Bunny Rabbit._      Camel, what do you say?

_Camel._             Dear me. What can I say? It is all wrong. But I’m
sure he

_should_             keep what he stole.

_Bunny Rabbit._      How you tremble, little jackal! What do you say?

[Illustration]

_Jackal._            [_Seeing the lion._] Oh! Do I tremble? No, yes, no,
yes, yes. I think he _should_ keep the deer.

_Bunny Rabbit._      [_In a loud voice._] The lion should _not_ keep the
deer! The lion is a wicked _thief_! [_Lion springs at him. Bunny Rabbit
darts down into the burrow._]

_Lion._              [_Looking into the burrow._] Gone down there, has
he? Well, I’ll fix him. I’ll stay right here until he comes out. I’ll
stay, and stay, and stay, until I starve him out.


                  SCENE V—_Another Part of the Forest_

_Bunny Rabbit._      Run, Mother Deer, and get your little one.

_Mother Deer._       Won’t that wicked lion come again?

_Bunny Rabbit._      No, no! He’s going to stay in front of my burrow
until I come out. Ha! ha! He’ll starve to death _himself_ if he waits
for that! Ha! ha! [_Mother Deer runs to the little deer, and both escape
into the forest._]

[Illustration]




                      THE ODD MAN AND THE DOG TRUE


             CHARACTERS—_Odd Man_, _True_, _Big Black Dog_

_Odd Man._           [_To the dog._] Who are you, and why do you come
into my cave?

_True._              I am a poor dog, sir, who has lost his way. Will
you be so kind as to tell me how I may get out?

_Odd Man._           No, I will not. But I will tell you what you may do
if you like. You may stay here in my cave and work for me.

_True._              I will do that if you will not let me out. But what
work do you wish me to do?

_Odd Man._           Well, well, you see I have here a great bag full of
gold. I have to sit on it all the time.

_True._              Why must you sit on it?

_Odd Man._           I will tell you. Near my cave lives an ogre. This
ogre wants to kill me so that he can get my gold.

_True._              Dear me!

_Odd Man._           If I go to sleep or move away he will try to get at
me. I am just worn out for want of rest.

_True._              Dear me! How can I help you?

_Odd Man._           Well, if you would stay by me and watch for the
ogre, I might take a short nap.

_True._              I will do that! And you, sir, go to sleep. [_Odd
Man goes to sleep. Big Black Dog enters._]

_Big Black Dog._     Good day, little dog. How do you do?

_True._              I am very well, I thank you; but who are you?

_Big Black Dog._     My name is Nip, and I have come to show you the way
out of this cave. Let us run now!

_True._              No; I said I would take care of this cave for the
Odd Man, and I will do it.

_Big Black Dog._     But the Odd Man is asleep. He will not see you.
Come, now, come along with me!

_True._              No, I will not go.

_Big Black Dog._     Then give me a bone, will you?

_True._              I cannot, for they are not mine; the Odd Man may
give you one, by and by. [_Big Black Dog goes to get a bone._]

_True._              Bow-wow-wow!

_Odd Man._           [_Opening his eyes._] What was that? You woke me
out of my nap.

_True._              Oh, sir, it was a big black dog. It came into the
cave and was stealing a bone.

_Odd Man._           Oh! That was the ogre in the dress of a black dog.
Here, you may have a bone. You were a good dog to bark and wake me up.
What more can I do to show you how glad I am?

_True._              Oh, sir, may I go out of the cave now? I want to
see a nice, nice cat that is waiting outside.

_Odd Man._           Very well, good dog. The ogre will not come back
again, and I can take a good nap. Here is a door in the side of the
cave. I will open it, and you can go.—Good-by.




                     THE OWL AND GRASSHOPPER GREEN


                         SCENE—_In the Meadow_

_Grasshopper Green._ Creak, creak, creak, c-r-e-a-k!

_Owl._               Won’t you keep quiet? I can’t sleep with your
“creak, creak.”

_Grasshopper Green._ No, I will not keep quiet. Creak, creak, creak!

_Owl._               Then go away from here. Go into the grass field
over there, if you must sing.

_Grasshopper Green._ I shall do nothing of the sort. I have as much
right to sing as you have to sleep. Creak, creak! Besides, you have
never done anything for me. Creak, creak, creak, c-r-e-a-k!

_Owl._               [_To himself._] Such a saucy grasshopper green!

_Grasshopper Green._ Creak, c-r-e-a-k!

_Owl._               [_Later._] Well, Grasshopper Green, you have a
wonderful voice!

_Grasshopper Green._ I have indeed. Creak, creak, creak, c-r-e-a-k!

_Owl._               Now that I am awake, I love to hear you sing.

_Grasshopper Green._ C-R-E-A-K!

_Owl._               Let me give you some of the sweet honey I have here
in my tree. Honey is good for the voice.

                  [_The grasshopper goes to the owl._]

_Owl._               SNAP!




                             SOMEWHERE TOWN


_First Child._       Which is the way to Somewhere Town?

_Second Child._      Oh, up in the morning early.
                     Over the tiles and the chimney pots,
                     That is the way quite clearly.

_First Child._       And which is the door to Somewhere Town?

_Second Child._      Oh, up in the morning early.
                     The round red sun is the door to go through;
                     That is the way quite clearly.

                                                        —KATE GREENAWAY.




                             THE TIMID HARE


[Illustration]


                               CHARACTERS

                             _Timid Hare_
                             _Camel_
                             _Sheep_
                             _Deer_
                             _Brother Hare_
                             _Elephant_
                             _Lion_

_Timid Hare._        Oh dear! Oh dear! If the sky were to fall, what
would happen to me? Oh, what would happen to me! What is that noise? Oh
dear! Oh dear! Oh, I am sure the sky is falling! It is! It is! It is!
[_Timid Hare runs._]

_Brother Hare._      Why are you running away, little hare?

_Timid Hare._        Oh, I have no time to talk. The sky is falling!

_Brother Hare._      [_Frightened._] Oh dear! Oh dear! The sky is
falling!

_Deer._              Why, what is the matter, little hare?

_Timid Hare._        Oh, I have no time to talk. The sky is falling.

_Deer._              [_Frightened._] What shall I do?

_Sheep._             Where are you going, little hare? Why do you run so
fast?

_Timid Hare._        Oh, the sky is falling!

_Sheep._             [_Frightened._] Dear me, dear me!

_Camel._             Stop a minute, little hare! What’s the matter?

_Timid Hare._        Oh, I have no time to talk. The sky is falling.

_Camel._             [_Frightened._] No, no, it can’t be.

_Elephant._          Why do you run so fast, little hare? What has
happened?

_Timid Hare._        I have no time to talk. The sky is falling.

_Elephant._          Can that be true?

_Lion._              What is this you say?

_Timid Hare._        I have no time to talk. The sky is falling.

_Lion._              How do you know this?

_Timid Hare._        I saw it.

_Lion._              Where did you see it?

_Timid Hare._        There, by that tree.

_Lion._              Oh, what nonsense! There are no signs that the sky
is falling. Come with me and I’ll show you.

_Timid Hare._        No, no, I must hurry along. I am afraid to go back.

_Lion._              Yes, you shall come with me to that tree. I will
take you there myself. [_Lion and hare go to the tree._]

_Lion._              There, do you see? The sky is not falling. A little
acorn fell upon a leaf. It made the noise that frightened you. Let us go
back now, and tell the other animals.




                       MABEL AND THE GREEN LIZARD


            CHARACTERS—_Grandma_, _Mabel_, _Lizard_, _Wolf_


                         SCENE I—_Mabel’s Home_

_Mabel._             Grandma, may I go to the woods to pick some berries
for supper?

_Grandma._           Yes, but be sure to come home before dark. There
are animals in the woods, Mabel. They prowl around after dark.

_Mabel._             Oh, I’m not afraid. I’ll come home before night.


                        SCENE II—_In the Woods_

_Mabel._             Dear me! How dark it is getting. I must hurry home.
[_Hears a little squeaking sound._] What’s that? [_Sees a little green
lizard with a stone on its tail._] Oh, you poor little lizard! Let me
lift that stone from your tail. [_Takes stone off._]

_Lizard._            Thank you. You are a very kind child.

_Mabel._             Oh! I didn’t know that lizards could talk!

_Lizard._            Some lizards can’t. But I am the king of all the
lizards. I am going to do something for you because you lifted the stone
from my tail.

_Mabel._             I was very glad to do it.

_Lizard._            I am going to do something for you that I wouldn’t
do for any other little girl. It’s this: I’m going to teach you the
animal call. Then you will understand everything the animals say to you,
and they will know what you say to them.

_Mabel._             What fun!

_Lizard._            Just listen. [_Gives a low whistle._] Now you do it
after me. [_Mabel tries._] Try again, Mabel. [_She tries again and
again._] Good, that’s it! Now if you wish any animal to be your friend,
just whistle that way to him. That’s the call of all the animals.
Good-by. [_Lizard goes away._]

_Mabel._             Well, that’s the funniest thing I ever heard of.
But, dear me, how dark it is getting. I must run home. [_Starts
homeward. Hears howl._]

_Wolf._              [_Howls._] O-ooo-w.

_Mabel._             What’s that? Oh! it’s a wolf. I’m so frightened!
What shall I do? I’ll give the call.

                             [_Whistles._]

_Wolf._              [_Answers._] O-ooo-w! O-ooo-w!

                        [_Wolf comes to Mabel._]

_Mabel._             Wolf, I want you to be my friend.

_Wolf._              To be sure, I will be.

_Mabel._             I’ve lost my way. Please show me the way home. I
live at grandma’s.

_Wolf._              I know where you live. I’ve seen you playing there
many times. Put your hand on my neck, and I’ll show you the way. [_Mabel
does so._]

[Illustration]


                      SCENE III—_Edge of the Wood_

_Wolf._              There is your home; and your grandma is waiting for
you.

_Mabel._             Thank you very much. I knew you were a good wolf.
You wouldn’t hurt a little girl, would you?

_Wolf._              I wouldn’t hurt you.

_Mabel._             Good night, Wolf.

_Wolf._              Good night.


                        SCENE IV—_Mabel’s Home_

_Grandma._           Mabel! Mabel! Mabel!

_Mabel._             Yes, Grandma.

_Grandma._           Where have you been so long?

_Mabel._             I’ve been in the woods. Oh, Grandma. I left my
basket of strawberries there.

_Grandma._           Never mind. We can go to-morrow and get them. I was
so frightened! Your uncle told me only yesterday he saw a wolf in the
woods. Just think if you had met him to-day! He would have eaten you up,
every bit of you.

_Mabel._             Oh, Grandma! I’m sure all wolves don’t eat little
girls.




                        THE MAIDEN AND THE BIRD


[Illustration]

_Maiden._            Little bird, little bird, come to me,
                     I have a green cage ready for thee,
                     Beauty-bright flowers I’ll bring anew
                     And fresh ripe cherries all wet with dew.

_Bird._              Thanks, little maiden, for all thy care,
                     But I love dearly the clear cool air
                     And my snug little nest in the old oak tree.

_Maiden._            Little bird, little bird, stay with me!

_Bird._              Nay, little damsel,—away I’ll fly
                     To greener fields and warmer sky;
                     When spring returns with pattering rain,
                     You’ll hear my merry song again.

_Maiden._            Little bird, little bird, who’ll guide thee,
                     Over the hills and over the sea?
                     Foolish one, come in the house to stay,
                     For I’m very sure you’ll lose your way.

_Bird._              Ah, no, little maiden, God guides me,
                     Over the hills and over the sea.
                     I will be free as the rushing air,
                     And sing of sunshine everywhere.

                                                     —LYDIA MARIA CHILD.

[Illustration]




                            THE LITTLE FISH

_Fisherman._         Aha! I have you at last, little fish.

_Little Fish._       O Mr. Fisherman, please put me back into the water.

_Fisherman._         Put you back? No, I will not!

_Little Fish._       I beg you, put me back. I am so little.

_Fisherman._         It has taken me a long time to catch you. Put you
back, indeed! I think not.

_Little Fish._       But I am so little. Put me back and wait until I
have grown to be a large fish. Then I will make you a very good meal.

_Fisherman._         [_Thoughtfully._] True, my little fish, true. But
where shall I find you when you have grown larger?

                                                         —African Fable.




                            BELLING THE CAT


               CHARACTERS—_Old Mouse_, _Three Young Mice_

_Old Mouse._         Oh dear, dear, dear! That old cat ate Squeak Nibble
to-day. What can we do?

_Second Mouse._      Well, we must do something! She’ll eat us all, one
by one!

_Third Mouse._       How can we keep her from catching all the rest of
us?

_Fourth Mouse._      Yes, how can we? If we could only know when she is
coming. Her paws are so soft that we cannot hear her.

_Second Mouse._      I have it! One of us will watch her all the time.
When the cat is coming he must squeak as loud as he can.

_Old Mouse._         Watch her, indeed! She’d soon catch that little
mouse.

_Fourth Mouse._      No, that will never do.

_Third Mouse._       Let’s stay in our holes. Then she’ll starve to
death.

_All the Mice._      Ha-ha-ha! A fine plan.

_Old Mouse._         A fine plan, indeed! Do you think the cat eats
nothing but mice? And how should we get anything to eat if we stayed in
our holes?

_Fourth Mouse._      My friends, listen to me. Let us hang a bell round
her neck. That will tell us when she is coming. Then we can run and
hide.

_Second Mouse._      Good, good!

_Third Mouse._       The very thing!

_Fourth Mouse._      Nothing could be better.

_Old Mouse._         [_Thoughtfully._] But who will hang the bell on the
cat’s neck?

                              [_Silence._]

_Second Mouse._      I will not.

_Third Mouse._       Not _this_ little mouse.

_Old Mouse._         But some one must do it. Who will?

_All._               Sure enough, who?

[Illustration]




                          THE FOX AND THE CROW


                     CHARACTERS—_Fox_ _and_ _Crow_

_Crow._              Ah! Some one has left a bit of cheese for me. I’ll
fly up into that tree and eat it.

_Fox._               [_To himself._] That cheese is for me, as sure as I
am a fox.

                         [_Goes to the tree._]

                     Good day, Mistress Crow.
                     How well you are looking.
                     What bright eyes you have.
                     I am sure your voice must be sweet.
                     Just let me hear you sing one song.

                        [_Crow lifts her head._]

_Crow._              Caw—caw—caw.

_Fox._               [_Snaps up cheese._] That bit of cheese was all I
wanted.

[Illustration]




                           HANS AND GRETCHEN


                CHARACTERS—_Hans_, _Gretchen_, _Red Fox_


                         SCENE I—_In the Woods_

_Red Fox._           Help me out! Help me out, little Hans. I am caught
in this trap. Help me out, and it shall be well with you.

_Hans._              To be sure. I’ll let you out. There!

_Red Fox._           You are very kind. If you have a wish, tell me what
it is and it shall be granted.

_Hans._              Oh, as to that, I wish my pail here were full of
berries. My sister and I are very hungry.

_Red Fox._           Your wish is granted. Look into your pail! [_Hans
runs home._]


                           SCENE II—_At Home_

_Hans._              See, Gretchen dear, what fine berries I have
brought.

_Gretchen._          Oh, what big ones! Where did you get them in so
short a time?

_Hans._              It was the fox, Gretchen. He was caught in a trap.
I let him out. He said I might have whatever I wished for, and I wished
for berries. Aren’t you glad?

_Gretchen._          Foolish boy! Why didn’t you ask for something
better? If he could fill your pail with berries just for the asking, he
could do far greater things.

_Hans._              But don’t you like the berries, Gretchen?

_Gretchen._          When we eat them there will be nothing left. Go
back and tell the fox that you wish to have the cupboard always full of
food.

_Hans._              Be satisfied, dear sister. We are quite happy as we
are.

_Gretchen._          No, I will not be satisfied. You must do as I tell
you.


                        SCENE III—_In the Woods_

_Red Fox._           How now, little Hans? Is it not well with you?

_Hans._              Alas! My sister is not satisfied. She asked me to
come to you again.

_Red Fox._           What does she wish?

_Hans._              She wishes that our cupboard may be always full.

_Red Fox._           Go home, little Hans. It shall be as she wishes.


                  SCENE IV—_At Home_ (_the Next Day_)

_Hans._              Why are you unhappy again, Gretchen? Come, let us
play.

_Gretchen._          Why should I be happy? We have no toys, only sticks
and stones for playthings. Go to the fox and tell him I wish for some
beautiful toys to play with.

_Hans._              Be satisfied, little Gretchen. We are quite happy
as we are.

_Gretchen._          No, I will not be satisfied.


                         SCENE V—_In the Woods_

_Red Fox._           How now, little Hans? Is it not well with you?

_Hans._              Alas! My sister is not satisfied. She asked me to
come to you again.

_Red Fox._           What does she wish?

_Hans._              She wishes she had some beautiful toys to play
with.

_Red Fox._           Go home, little Hans. It shall be as she wishes.

[Illustration]


                   SCENE VI—_At Home_ (_Another Day_)

_Hans._              Why are you not happy, little Gretchen? Come, let
us play.

_Gretchen._          Why should I be happy? I am tired of these old
toys. I want a beautiful palace to live in. Go to the fox and tell him
so.

_Hans._              Be satisfied, little sister. We are quite happy as
we are.

_Gretchen._          No, I will not be satisfied. You must do as I tell
you.


                        SCENE VII—_In the Woods_

_Red Fox._           How now, little Hans? Is it not well with you?

_Hans._              Alas! My sister is not satisfied. She asked me to
come to you again.

_Red Fox._           What does she wish now?

_Hans._              She wishes to live in a beautiful palace.

_Red Fox._           Go home, little Hans. It shall be as she wishes.


                          SCENE VIII—_At Home_

_Hans._              Why are you unhappy again, little sister?

_Gretchen._          Why should I be happy? I am tired of this palace.
There is only one thing that would make me happy. Go to the Red Fox.
Tell him I must have the great silver ball that hangs over us in the
sky.

_Hans._              Be satisfied, dear sister. We are quite happy as we
are.

_Gretchen._          No, no. I will not be satisfied. You must do as I
tell you.


                        SCENE IX—_In the Woods_

_Red Fox._           How now, brother Hans? Is it not well with you?

_Hans._              Alas! My sister is not satisfied with the palace.

_Red Fox._           What does she wish?

_Hans._              She wishes the great silvery moon for her
plaything.

_Fox._               [_Very slowly._]

                     The great silvery moon!
                     The great silvery moon!
                     The great silvery moon!

                     Go, little Hans. It shall _not_ be as she wishes.
You will find the cupboard empty, the toys gone, and your home again a
little cottage.

[Illustration]




                               LADY MOON


                    TIME—_Evening_
                    PLACE—_Garden_
                    CHARACTERS—_Lady Moon_, _Child_

_Child._             Lady Moon, Lady Moon,<br>Where are you roving?

_Lady Moon._         Over the sea.

_Child._             Lady Moon, Lady Moon,<br>Whom are you loving?

_Lady Moon._         All that love me.

_Child._             Are you not tired with rolling and never
                     Resting to sleep?
                     Why look so pale and so sad, as
                     Forever wishing to sleep?

_Lady Moon._         Ask me not this, little child, if you love me.
                     You are too bold.
                     I must obey my dear Father above me
                     And do as I’m told.

_Child._             Lady Moon, Lady Moon,<br>Where are you roving?

_Lady Moon._         Over the sea.

_Child._             Lady Moon, Lady Moon,<br>Whom are you loving?

_Lady Moon._         All that love me.

                                                         —LORD HOUGHTON.




                            PRECOCIOUS PIGGY


[Illustration]

_Child._             Where are you going to, you little pig?

_First Pig._         I’m leaving mother,<br>I’ve grown so big.

_Child._             So big, young pig!
                     So young, so big!
                     What! leaving your mother, you foolish young pig?

_Child._             Where are you going to, you little pig?

_Second Pig._        I’ve got a new spade, and I’m going to dig.

_Child._             To dig, little pig!
                     A little pig dig!
                     Well, I never saw a pig with a spade that could
                     dig.

_Child._             Where are you going to, you little pig?

_Third Pig._         Why, I am going to have a nice ride in a gig.

_Child._             In a gig, little pig!
                     What, a pig in a gig!
                     Well, I never saw a pig ride in a gig.

_Child._             Where are you going to, you little pig?

_Fourth Pig._        I’m going to the barber’s, to buy me a wig.

_Child._             A wig, little pig!
                     A pig in a wig!
                     Why, who ever before saw a pig in a wig?

_Child._             Where are you going to, you little pig?

_Fifth Pig._         Why, I’m going to the ball, to dance a fine jig!

_Child._             A jig, little pig!
                     A pig dance a jig!
                     Well, I never before saw a pig dance a jig!

_Child._             Where are you going to, you little pig?

_Sixth Pig._         I’m going to the fair, to run a fine rig.

_Child._             A rig, little pig!
                     A pig run a rig!
                     Well, I never before saw a pig run a rig.

                                                           —THOMAS HOOD.




                             STRANGE LANDS


[Illustration]

_Child._             Where do you come from, Mr. Jay?

_Mr. Jay._           From the land of play, from the land of play.

_Child._             And where can that be, Mr. Jay?

_Mr. Jay._           Far away—far away.

_Child._             Where do you come from, Mrs. Dove?

_Mrs. Dove._         From the land of love, from the land of love.

_Child._             And how do you get there, Mrs. Dove?

_Mrs. Dove._         Look above—look above.

_Child._             Where do you come from, Baby Miss?

_Baby Miss._         From the land of bliss, from the land of bliss.

_Child._             And what is the way there, Baby Miss?

_Baby Miss._         Mother’s kiss—mother’s kiss.

                                                  —LAURENCE ALMA-TADEMA.




                         HOW TO GET A BREAKFAST


_First Chick._       It is so hard to scratch;
                     I’m as hungry as can be,
                     I wish a little worm
                     Would come close up to me.

[Illustration]

_Second Chick._      It is so hard to scratch;
                     I’m as hungry as can be,
                     I wish a bowl of meal
                     Were standing here by me.

[Illustration]

_Third Chick._       It is so hard to scratch;
                     I’m as hungry as can be,
                     I wish a nice green leaf
                     Would drop right down to me.

[Illustration]

_Mother Hen._        See here, you lazy chicks,
                     Here’s the green garden patch,
                     If you’re hungry as can be,
                     You should come here and scratch!

[Illustration]




                       THE LITTLE CHRISTMAS TREE


                               CHARACTERS

                          _Big Fir Tree_
                          _Little Fir Tree_
                          _Littlest Fir Tree_
                          _A Little Bird_

_Little Bird._       [_Going to Big Tree._] Oh, please, Big Fir Tree,
may I rest here in your branches? I have hurt my wing, and I cannot fly.

_Big Fir Tree._      No, I cannot have any little birds in my branches.
I must grow straight and tall, for I mean to be a Christmas tree some
day.

_Little Bird._       [_Goes to Little Tree._] Oh, please, dear tree, may
I not find shelter from the cold in your branches? My wing is broken,
and I cannot fly. I have come a long way over the ice and snow.

_Little Fir Tree._   No, I cannot give shelter to any birds in my
branches.

_Little Bird._       But I’m very tired, and I shall do your branches no
harm.

_Little Fir Tree._   It cannot be. I must hold my head up high and my
branches out straight, for I mean to be a Christmas tree.

_Little Bird._       I’m afraid I shall freeze out here in the snow.
[_Little Bird goes on._]

_Little Bird._       [_Softly._] Please, Littlest Fir Tree, may I rest
in your branches? I am so cold and hungry. I do not think I can go any
farther.

_Littlest Fir Tree._ Yes, yes, Little Bird. Creep up close to my trunk.
I will cover you as best I can with my little branches. Come close. I’m
glad to have you here.

_Little Bird._       Thank you, kind tree.
                  *       *       *       *       *

_Big Fir Tree._      I hear sleigh bells. The bells come nearer and
nearer. Some one is coming this way. Some one is coming through the
woods.

_Little Fir Tree._   Who is it, Big Fir Tree? I cannot see so far as you
can. Tell me what you see.

_Big Fir Tree._      I see a sleigh and reindeer. Some one all wrapped
in fur is in the sleigh.

_Little Fir Tree._   Oh, I feel that some one is coming for me. Now I am
going to be a Christmas tree. The bells sound nearer and nearer. I see
the sleigh.

_Santa Claus._       [_Alights from his sleigh and looks at Big Tree._]
A fine tree—tall and straight! But it is too tall for my Christmas tree.
I must look farther. [_Goes on to next tree._] Ah! Here’s another; but
there’s a little one I see just at the foot of the hill. I believe it is
the most beautiful tree in all the wood. [_Goes to Littlest Tree._]
Little tree, you hold your head up straight, and your branches spread
out in all directions. I must have you for my Christmas tree. [_Seeing
Little Bird._] Who is this that has found shelter in your branches? A
little bird. I will take it, too, and it shall be some little child’s
Christmas present.

                                                               —Adapted.

[Illustration]




                       CHRISTMAS EVE IN AN ATTIC


                               CHARACTERS

                           _First Mouse_
                           _Second Mouse_
                           _French Doll_
                           _Tin Soldier_
                           _Lion_
                           _Elephant_
                           _Tiger_
                           _Jack-in-the-box_
                           _Woolly Dog_
                           _Mrs. Santa Claus_

_First Mouse._       Christmas is here again. The air is full of the
smell of good things to eat!

_Second Mouse._      It’s a gay time for us. I know there’ll be plenty
of crumbs around now.

_First Mouse._       I wish Christmas came every night. But look at
those old toys in the corner. I wonder why they look so sad.

_French Doll._       Look sad, do we? No wonder. It’s Christmas Eve and
we don’t like to be here in the dark and cold. It isn’t fair!

[Illustration: CHRISTMAS EVE IN AN ATTIC]

_Tin Soldier._       We once hung on a Christmas tree.

_First Mouse._       It must have been a long time ago.

_Tin Soldier._       It was, indeed! But the children do not care to
play with us now that we are so old.

_French Doll._       Old, sir? How can you say that? Just look at me! If
my hair were combed and I had a new dress on, I’d still be a very nice
doll! Old, indeed!

_Second Mouse._      Yes, I’m quite sure you would be very pretty.

_Tin Soldier._       And I’d be as good as any other tin soldier, if I
had a new leg, a little paint, and a fresh gun.

_First Mouse._       Oh, I believe that, sir.

_Lion._              [_Proudly._] Only my mane’s gone. [_To Elephant._]
But I see you have lost your trunk!

_Elephant._          Yes, some one broke it off. Now if I had a new
trunk, I’d be all right. But look at the tiger! He has cracked his
paint, and his stripes are all gone. It would be hard to make him look
new again.

_Tiger._             Do you mean me? Oh, a few stripes of new paint, and
I’d be as fine a tiger as you ever saw. Listen! Woolly Dog is trying to
speak.

_Woolly Dog._        [_In a whisper._] My voice is almost gone. Some one
punched me too hard once and broke the spring. If I had a new spring,
I’d bark louder than ever. We’d never even hear your squeak then, little
mice.

_Jack-in-the-box._   I never could get back after my lid came off. A
hinge and a few screws, and I’d be as good as new. It’s a shame to leave
me like this.

_Mice._              Hush! Some one is coming up the stairs.

                      [_Mrs. Santa Claus enters._]

_French Doll._       Who are you?

_Mrs. Santa Claus._  I am Mrs. Santa Claus. Every Christmas Eve I find
all the old toys I can. I change them into new ones. Then I send them to
the little children who have no other Christmas toys. I knew I’d find
some old toys in this attic! Come here, all of you. Let me see what each
one needs. Please, only one at a time! [_Toys come about Mrs. Santa
Claus._] Now, French Doll, I’ll begin with you. There! I’ve washed your
face and combed your hair. You’re as good as new.

_First Mouse._       She does look fine!

_Mrs. Santa Claus._  Now, Tin Soldier, what can I do for you?

_Tin Soldier._       Give me a new red coat, and mend my leg. Oh, yes,
and I’d like a new gun, too.

_Mrs. Santa Claus._  Here you are, sir. Now, Jack, down in your box
while I mend the lid. There, now you can bob up as well as ever.

_Lion._              If you please, I want a new mane. A little boy
pulled mine off. I haven’t had one for a long time.

_Woolly Dog._        Please don’t forget me. I can’t bark till I get a
new spring.

_Mrs. Santa Claus._  Come, Elephant and Tiger. I’ll do you next. There,
I’ve seen you all. You are now as good as toys can be.

_French Doll._       Are we to stay in this old attic?

_Tin Soldier._       Can’t we be put on a Christmas tree again?

_Mrs. Santa Claus._  No. Listen to me. You are all to go out into the
world to-night. Each one of you must make one little child happy. Go the
way you wish, but be sure to find the child that needs you most. I must
hurry to another old attic over the way. Good night, toys.

                           [_Toys go away._]

_First Mouse._       Will each toy try to make some child glad on
Christmas morning?

_Second Mouse._      I hope so. How happy they all looked as they went
out!




                              THE NEW YEAR


_New Year._          Here I am!

_Old Year._          Oh, there you are, are you? Come in and let us have
a look at you, and shut the door, please, after you.

_New Year._          Frosty night! Fine and clear. I’ve had a pleasant
journey.

_Old Year._          Humph! I don’t expect to find _mine_ pleasant. A
long cold drive, I call it. But to be sure, I thought it pleasant when I
was your age, youngster! Is the sleigh waiting?

_New Year._          Yes, but there is no hurry. Wait a bit and tell me
how matters are in these parts.

_Old Year._          [_Shaking his head._] So, so! They might be better
and yet they might be worse, too. They were worse before I came, much
worse. I have done a great deal. Now I expect you, my boy, to do just as
I did. Be a good year all the way through.

_New Year._          I shall do my best, you may be sure. And now tell
me a little what there is to do.

_Old Year._          In the first place, you have the weather to attend
to. You see the seasons have a way of running into each other and
getting mixed, if you don’t keep a sharp lookout on them. The months,
too, are a troublesome set. Then you must be careful how you turn on wet
and dry weather. And one thing I want you to do very carefully—watch the
leaves that are turned.

_New Year._          I thought Autumn attended to that sort of thing!

_Old Year._          Oh, I don’t mean leaves of trees. You know that at
the beginning of a year half the people in the world say, “I am going to
turn over a new leaf!” They mean that they are going to be better than
they have ever been before. But leaves do not stay turned over. I know a
great many little boys who said they were going to turn over new leaves.
They were not going to tear their clothes, nor lose their jackknives,
nor bring mud into the house on their boots. And the little girls were
going to keep their rooms tidy and their buttons sewed on. But I haven’t
seen much change in most of them.

_New Year._          I’ll attend to that. Anything else?

_Old Year._          Above all, take care of the children. Give them all
the good weather you can. And now the horses are ready to go. My time is
nearly up, so I start on my long drive. You will find everything in
pretty good shape. Well, well, my boy, good-by, good luck to you.

                                                               —Adapted.

[Illustration]




                         A FRIENDSHIP DECLINED


                   CHARACTERS—_Mary_ _and_ _a Kitten_

                    (_Mary wears a gray fur bonnet_)

_Mary._              Pussy, aren’t you cold?

_Pussy._             Me-ow!

_Mary._              Pussy, aren’t you cold?
                     Don’t look so sad.
                     Come here to me,
                     At home, I’ve kittens two—
                     And I should like—indeed I should
                     To make a friend of you.

_Pussy._             Me-ow!

_Mary._              To make a friend of you.

_Pussy._             I thank you, Miss, for your kind words,
                     And know they’re gently said;
                     But truth to speak,
                     I do not like
                     That thing upon your head.
                     For much it looks to me as though
                     Your very furry hat,
                     So soft and fine, might once have been
                     A very furry cat. Me-ow!
                     A very furry cat.




                            THE SELFISH MAN


             CHARACTERS—_Man_, _Camel_, _Wise Man_, _Tiger_

_Camel._             Pray, sir, where are you going?

_Man._               I am going to the Wise Man to seek my fortune.

_Camel._             Seek mine, too. I have had these sacks of gold on
my back for a long time. I cannot lie down. Seek mine, too.

_Man._               I will.

_Tiger._             Pray, sir, where are you going?

_Man._               I am going to the Wise Man to seek my fortune.

_Tiger._             Seek mine, too. For a long time I have had this
thorn in my foot. I cannot rest. Seek mine, too.

_Man._               I will. [_Man comes to Wise Man._]

_Wise Man._          I pray you, sir, why are you here?

_Man._               I seek my fortune. I am a very poor man.

_Wise Man._          Then, I fear you have been living only for
yourself. Think of making others rich and you will become rich.

_Man._               In the jungle I met a camel. He carried two sacks
of gold on his back. They were so heavy that he could not lie down. He
asked me to seek his fortune, too.

_Wise Man._          Take the sacks off his back. Then he will be free,
and you will have the gold. Why did you not do it before?

_Man._               I was thinking only of myself. After that I met a
tiger. For many days he has had a thorn in his foot. He cannot rest. He
asked me to seek his fortune, too.

_Wise Man._          Take the thorn out of his foot, and both of you
will gain by it. Why did you not think of this before?

_Man._               I was thinking only of myself. [_Man goes homeward.
He meets the tiger._]

_Tiger._             Have you found my fortune?

_Man._               The Wise Man told me to take the thorn out of your
foot.

                [_Pulls thorn out and starts to go on._]

_Tiger._             Thank you. Here, take my treasure. I did not think
of giving it to you before. [_Man goes on._]

_Camel._             Have you found my fortune?

_Man._               The Wise Man told me to take the sacks off your
back.

                        [_Man takes off sacks._]

_Camel._             Thank you. But stop! These sacks are full of gold.
Take them, and both of us will be happy. Why did we not think of this
before?

_Man._               We were thinking only of ourselves.

[Illustration]




                           THE MAGPIE’S NEST


[Illustration]


                               CHARACTERS

                              _Magpie_
                              _Thrush_
                              _Blackbird_
                              _Wise Owl_
                              _Starling_
                              _Sparrow_
                              _Turtledove_

_Thrush._            Oh, Mrs. Magpie, I wish you would teach us how you
build your nest. Every one says your nest is made better than any other.

_Magpie._            Is that true? Indeed! Come nearer then, and I will
show you how I do it. [_Birds draw near._] You see I take some mud and
make a round cake with it.

_Thrush._            Oh, that’s how it’s done! I can make one now.
[_Flies away._]

_Magpie._            Oh! the thrush went too soon. It is not yet done.
Now I lay some twigs in the mud this way and that way, this way and that
way.

_Blackbird._         I see! I see! [_Flies away._]

_Magpie._            What! Has the blackbird gone, too? Next another
layer of mud—twigs and mud, twigs and mud.

_Wise Owl._          Oh, that’s very easy! [_Flies off._]

_Magpie._            Does the wise owl think that’s all? Now more twigs
round the outside. Up and down; in and out; round and round.

_Sparrow._           The very thing. [_Flies off._]

_Magpie._            Oh! but the nest is not lined yet. I make it soft
and warm inside with feathers.

_Starling._          That suits me. [_Flies off._]

_Magpie._            Has the starling gone, too? It will take just one
minute more.

_Turtledove._        Take two, Tousey, take two-o-o.

_Magpie._            One is enough.

_Turtledove._        Take two, Tousey, take two-o-o.

_Magpie._            One is enough, I tell you. Oh! are they all gone
but you, silly turtledove? And I have just finished my nest. None of
them will make a nest like mine.




                     ADVENTURES OF THE FIRST SPRING


[Illustration]


                               CHARACTERS

                             _Mr. Sparrow_
                             _Mrs. Sparrow_
                             _Crocus_
                             _Mary_
                             _Pussy Willow_
                             _Fern_
                             _Violet_
                             _Children_

_Mr. Sparrow._       There! I’m glad enough to see the last of that
snow. Chirp, chirp! Did you notice, my dear Mrs. Sparrow, how quickly it
melted at the last?

_Mrs. Sparrow._      Yes, it seemed in a great hurry to go. It did the
same thing last year when the warm days came.

_Mr. Sparrow._       Yes, yes, it always does—and don’t you know why?
How could the little worms and green things come up out of the ground if
the snow stayed all summer long? And then what should we do for good
things to eat?

_Mrs. Sparrow._      Oh, yes, of course!

_Mr. Sparrow._       I see a worm now. You stay right here and I’ll get
him for you. [_He flies down and carries away the worm._]

_Violet._            That’s good. Worms are such dreadful creatures;
always wriggling about one’s feet. I wonder what they are good for. Dear
me, there’s Miss Crocus. Good morning! Did you have a good sleep?

_Crocus._            Yes, indeed. But I can’t unroll my petals far
enough, I just want to stretch and stretch.

_Violet._            But it’s good to be back in the sunshine again.

                   [_Two children enter the woods._]

_First child._       Oh, just see what I’ve found, a violet—a real
one—and it’s a white one, too. Won’t Mary be glad.

_Second Child._      Oh, oh, can’t you find another?

_First Child._       No, there is just this one. I am going to take it
up by the roots. Then it won’t wither.

    [_Child digs up violet and puts it in her basket with the other
                               flowers._]

_Pussy Willow._      [_In basket._] Dear me! What does this mean? Why,
Violet, you’ve got some dirt in my eye and on my nice new fur.

_Fern._              [_In basket._] It Serves you right for being so
proud. You think yourself better and prettier than others. Something
always happens to any one who does that.

_Pussy Willow._      I wasn’t speaking to you.

_Violet._            Oh, please don’t quarrel. I am sure I am sorry if I
have hurt any one. It was not my fault. I didn’t want to come here a
bit. How I wish I could get out.

_Fern._              Humph! Little good it will do to get out. I think
these are the very people that Mr. Oak Tree was telling me about. They
come every year looking for ferns and flowers. He says some of my
ancestors for many generations have gone the same way. They always
choose the finest, at any rate.

                              [_At Home._]

_First Child._       Oh, Mary, I found the sweetest little violet for
you—a white one. I dug it up with all its roots, so it will not wither.

_Mary._              How lovely! You are very kind to bring me such
beautiful flowers.

[Illustration]

_Second Child._      It’s the first one that came up.

_Mary._              How I’d love to hunt for the violets! But it’s hard
for any one who is lame to go to the woods. I don’t suppose I shall ever
go there myself.

_First Child._       Yes, you shall. Some day we’ll all go together.

_Mary._              Poor little flower! I wonder if it was sorry to
leave its place in the woods to stay with me in this room. Please give
it some water to drink. Then it will go on living.

_Violet._            How thankful I am that I came. Just a few days
later and I might have withered there in the meadow. I would have been
of no use to any one. Now I can make this little girl happy. I am so
glad I grew. The best of all is to make some one happy.

                                                               —Adapted.




                            THE BIRD’S NEST


[Illustration]


 CHARACTERS—_Yellow-breast_, _Bobolink_, _Cuckoo_, _Crow_, _Cow_, _Dog_,
                       _Sheep_, _Hen_, _Little Boy_

_Yellow-breast._     To-whit, to-whit, to-whee!
                     Will you listen to me?
                     Who stole four eggs I laid
                     And the nice nest I made?

[Illustration]

_Cow._               Not I. Moo-oo! Moo-oo!
                     Such a thing I’d never do!
                     I gave you a wisp of hay
                     But didn’t take your nest away.
                     Not I! Moo-oo! Moo-oo!
                     Such a thing I’d never do.

[Illustration]

_Yellow-breast._     To-whit, to-whit, to-whee!
                     Will you listen to me?
                     Who stole four eggs I laid
                     And the nice nest I made?

_Bobolink._          Bob-o-link! Bob-o-link!
                     Now what do you think?
                     Who stole a nest away
                     From the plum tree to-day?

[Illustration]

_Dog._               Not I! Bow-wow! Bow-wow!
                     I wouldn’t be so mean, I vow!
                     I gave hairs the nest to make,
                     But the nest I did not take!
                     Not I! Bow-wow! Bow-wow!
                     I wouldn’t be so mean, I vow.

[Illustration]

_Yellow-breast._     To-whit, to-whit, to-whee!
                     Will you listen to me?
                     Who stole four eggs I laid
                     And the nice nest I made?

_Bobolink._          Bob-o-link! Bob-o-link!
                     Now what do you think?
                     Who stole a nest away
                     From the plum tree, to-day?

_Cuckoo._            Coo-coo! Coo-coo! Coo-coo!
                     Let me speak a word, too!
                     Who stole that pretty nest
                     From little Yellow-breast?

[Illustration]

_Sheep._             Not I! Oh, no! Oh, no!
                     I wouldn’t treat a poor bird so.
                     I gave wool the nest to line;
                     But the nest was none of mine!
                     Oh, no! Oh, no! I wouldn’t treat a poor bird so.

[Illustration]

_Yellow-breast._     To-whit, to-whit, to-whee!
                     Will you listen to me?
                     Who stole four eggs I laid
                     And the nice nest I made?

_Bobolink._          Bob-o-link! Bob-o-link!
                     Now what do you think?
                     Who stole a nest away
                     From the plum tree, to-day?

_Cuckoo._            Coo-coo! Coo-coo! Coo-coo!
                     Let me speak a word, too.
                     Who stole that pretty nest
                     From little Yellow-breast?

_Crow._              Caw, caw! Hear the crow!
                     I should like to know
                     What thief took away
                     A bird’s nest, to-day?

[Illustration]

_Hen._               Cluck! Cluck! Hear me then!
                     Don’t ask me again!
                     Why, I haven’t a chick
                     Would do such a trick!
                     We all gave her a feather
                     And she wove them together.
                     I’d scorn to intrude
                     On her and her brood.
                     Cluck, cluck! hear me then,
                     Don’t ask me again.

[Illustration]

_Bobolink_,<br>_Cuckoo_,<br>_Crow._ Chirr-a-whirr! Chirr-a-whirr!
                     All the birds make a stir,
                     Let us find out his name
                     And all cry “For shame!”

_Little Boy._        I stole that pretty nest
                     From poor little Yellow-breast.
                     And I feel so full of shame
                     I do not like to tell my name!

                                        —Adapted from LYDIA MARIA CHILD.




                        THE BOASTFUL BAMBOO TREE


                               CHARACTERS

                           _Boastful Bamboo_
                           _Little Tree_
                           _Boy_
                           _Girl_
                           _Woodcutter_


                        SCENE I—_In the Forest_

_Boastful Bamboo._   Little bamboo tree, you bow and bend to every wind
that blows. A bamboo tree should never show fear. Look at me! I stand
straight and strong and bow to no one.

_Little Tree._       I know you are strong. You are much stronger than I
am. I am only fit to trim the houses for the New Year’s feast. But you
will be used in making some great house or maybe in making a palace.

_Boastful Bamboo._   Only that! I shall be chosen for the mast of a big
ship. Every one will look at me and say, “See what a beautiful mast that
ship has!” As for you, timid little tree, you will never be brave enough
even to deck the New Year’s feast.

_Little Tree._       Who knows? If I grow straight and strong. I may be
chosen to do some good in the world!


                    SCENE II—_In the Forest (later)_

_Boy._               [_Looking at the Boastful Bamboo._] What a big,
strong, bamboo tree!

_Girl._              But this dear little one beside it is prettier than
any of the others.

_Boy._               Yes; let us bind her with our garland of flowers.

[Illustration]

_Girl._              We’ll call her the Lady Silver Mist.

_Woodcutter._        [_Looking at the big bamboo tree._] Here is a tall,
straight tree. It will do for a mast. I will cut it first.

_Boastful Bamboo._   [_To Little Tree._] Good-by,—I am sorry for you. I
shall see the world now and do great things. Good-by, Little Tree!

_Little Tree._       Good-by! Good fortune go with you! [_Big tree
falls._]

_Boy._               I’m glad he didn’t take our little tree.

_Girl._              [_To Woodcutter._] Please don’t cut down our little
tree. In all the forest we love it best.

_Woodcutter._        Ah, I see the little tree has friends.

_Girl._              Yes, we call her the Lady Silver Mist, and she is
our playmate.

_Woodcutter._        But I’ve been sent to cut down all the trees in the
forest. You must dig it up and carry it away, if you wish to keep it.

_Boy._               I’ll dig it up. We’ll take it home and plant it in
our garden by the sea. [_Children carry off the tree._]


                SCENE III—_In the Garden (after storm)_

_Little Tree._       All night the waves of the sea tossed the white
foam and dashed the ships about. All around me lie pieces of wood washed
up by the sea. What is this at my feet? A piece of a great bamboo tree!
Can it be my friend of the forest?

_Boastful Bamboo._   Alas! I am your poor friend.

_Little Tree._       I wish I could help you.

_Boastful Bamboo._   No one can help me. I wish that I had lived in a
garden as you have. Then I might have been useful for many years.
Farewell, Little Tree.




                            RETURN OF SPRING


         TIME—_Morning—Breakfast_
         PLACE—_A Garden on Mt. Olympus_
         CHARACTERS—_Spring_, _Columbine_, _Pantaloon_, _Clown_

_Columbine._         Spring, Spring! Oh, you naughty boy. Why are you
here?

_Spring._            They didn’t want me, and neither do you.

_Columbine._         Oh, you poor dear boy. Come along at once to the
fire and have some breakfast.

_Spring._            I didn’t come in before, because I thought you
wouldn’t want me. [_All sit down to breakfast._]

_Clown._             Sausages? I’m tired of sausages; such ages since we
had anything else.

_Pantaloon._         Ho! ho! ho! [_Waves his wand._] We’ll have rabbit
pie, then. [_Dish of sausages turns to rabbit pie._]

_Clown._             Do you know how they get the rabbits into the pie?

_Spring._            [_Shakes his head._] No.

_Clown._             Would you like to know?

_Spring._            Please, sir.

_Clown._             Well, first of all, you make a nice rich brown
crust, and you put it over a large dish. Then you cut a round hole from
the pie crust. Fill the dish with lettuce and put it out on the lawn.

_Spring._            On the lawn?

_Clown._             Yes. Then the rabbits come. They pop down the hole
in the crust to eat the lettuce. When the pie is full of rabbits, you
run from behind a tree, cover the hole in the crust, and then with the
dish in your arms, you dash into the kitchen,—pie in the oven, oven hot,
fire bright—and, here we are!

[Illustration]

_Columbine._         Don’t you believe him.

_Pantaloon._         [_To Spring._] Why did you come back?

_Spring._            The farmers said I made the buds come out too soon.
I only stroked the trees and the little sticky buds peeped out to kiss
my hand. The gardeners were angry because, where I stepped, the flowers
came out too soon, they said, and then—

_Columbine._         Never mind, dear. We are all glad to see you.

_Pantaloon._         And then?

_Spring._            Then East Wind came and Snow and Jack Frost, and
they nipped my flowers, and hurt my trees, and made my lambs shiver
behind the hedges. The goblins who sing in the fire hobs sang and sang
till the people turned their backs on me and crouched up to the fire
again and began to tell ghost stories.

_Columbine._         But you must go back now, and fight Jack Frost and
scare Winter away. You have had your breakfast, dear, and now like all
the world, you must do your work. Yes, dear, you must keep on working
till summer wakes up.

_Spring._            Good-by.




                         WHO HOLDS UP THE SKY?


[Illustration]


   TIME—_Spring_
   PLACE—_A Wood_
   CHARACTERS—_Daisy_, _Rose_, _Fir Tree_, _Elm_, _Bird_, _Mountain_

_Daisy._             Oh dear, Miss Rose, do tell me please,
                     Is it you holds up the sky?

_Rose._              Dear Daisy, no, no, indeed,
                     I cannot reach so high.
                     And _very_ far above me
                     Is the blue and lovely sky.

                     But if you wish to know.
                     To find out I will try.
                     Perhaps that tall fir tree
                     Is holding up the sky.

                          [_To the fir tree._]

                     You lift your head so high,
                     Do you hold up the sky?

_Fir Tree._          [_Shaking his head._]
                     Oh no, indeed, sweet Rose
                     It surely is not I!
                     It may be this lofty elm,
                     Who stands to me so nigh.

_Elm._               No, no, it is not I.
                     But a mountain very tall
                     In the distance I can spy,
                     And on his shoulders rests,
                     I think, the wondrous sky.

                      [_Calling to the mountain._]

                     You lift your head so high,
                     Do you hold up the sky?

_Mountain._          And who is it who would
                     For these secrets pry?
                     I’ve stood here many an age,
                     But I never touched the sky.

_Rose._              Sweet Daisy, dearest friend,
                     I fear before we die
                     We never shall find out
                     Who is holding up the sky.

                  [_A bird alights on the fir tree._]

_Daisy and Rose._    [_Together._]
                     O Bird, you fly up so high,
                     Will you not please tell us
                     Who is holding up the sky?

_Bird._              ’Tis He who made the daisy
                     And He who made the rose;
                     ’Tis He who made the fir tree,
                     The elm, and all that grows.

                     ’Tis He who made the mountain
                     And made the bird to fly—
                     The good and Heavenly Father,
                     Who holdeth up the sky.

                                                               —Adapted.

[Illustration]




                             THE FOX’S PLAN


                  CHARACTERS—_Tiger_, _Hunter_, _Fox_

_Tiger._             [_To fox in a net._] So you are here. Caught!

_Fox._               Only to help you, Tiger.

_Tiger._             To help me? How is that?

_Fox._               Why, the other day you said you could not get
enough men to eat. So I got into this net. When the men come to take me
you may get the men.

_Tiger._             A fine plan! Can I believe you?

_Fox._               Believe me. Hide in the bushes close by. I’ll show
you the men when they come.

_Tiger._             Can I believe you?

_Fox._               Believe me, Tiger. Here comes one now. Quick!
Behind the bushes! [_Tiger hides._]

_Hunter._            [_To fox._] So here you are. Caught!

_Fox._               Only to help you, Hunter.

_Hunter._            To help me? How is that?

_Fox._               Why, the other day you said you could not get the
tiger who has been killing and eating your cattle. So I got into this
net to-day that you may have him.

_Hunter._            A fine plan. Can I believe you? But how will I get
him?

_Fox._               Believe me, Hunter. [_Quietly._] He came here to
eat me up, but he saw you coming. He is now behind the bushes. Let me
out of this net, and I will take you right to him.

_Hunter._            Can I believe you?

_Fox._               Believe me, Hunter. Only let me out, and you’ll
see. [_Hunter lets fox out._] Come! [_Calling out loud._] Now, Sir
Tiger, here is the hunter; and, Mr. Hunter, there is your tiger. I have
kept my word to both; you must settle the matter between yourselves.

                           [_Fox runs off._]

_Hunter._            Alas! Alas!




                          TOM AND THE LOBSTER


                      PLACE—_Among the rocks_
                      CHARACTERS—_Tom_, _Lobster_

_Tom._               [_To lobster caught in a lobster pot._] What, have
you been naughty, and have they put you in the lockup?

_Lobster._           I can’t get out.

_Tom._               Why did you get in?

_Lobster._           I came in for that ugly piece of fish.

_Tom._               Where did you get in?

_Lobster._           Through that round hole at the top.

_Tom._               Then why don’t you get out through it?

_Lobster._           Because I can’t. I have jumped upwards, downwards,
backwards, and sideways, at least four thousand times, and I can’t get
out. I always get up underneath then and can’t find the hole.

_Tom._               Stop a bit. Turn your tail up to me, and I’ll pull
you through hindforemost, and then you won’t stick in the spikes. [_Tom
pulls lobster._] Hello, here is a pretty business. Now take your great
claws and break the point off those spikes, and then we shall both get
out easily.

_Lobster._           Dear me, I never thought of that!

[Illustration]




                     WHY THE JELLYFISH HAS NO SHELL


 CHARACTERS—_Fishes_, _Turtle_, _three Monkeys_, _Jellyfish_, _Queen Osa_


                        SCENE I—_Under the Sea_

_First Fish._        What is the matter, little fish?

_Little Fish._       Have you not heard? Our sea queen is very ill.

_First Fish._        Osa, our queen, very ill, did you say?

_Little Fish._       Yes, yes, we have done everything; but she grows
worse.

_Second Fish._       We fear she must die.

_First Fish._        This cannot be. Come, tell me what you have done.

_Little Fish._       Oh, we fed her seaweed and laid her upon a bank of
sponges. Every little fish helped. But she is no better.

_First Fish._        Our queen Osa! This is sad indeed. Is there no wise
creature in the sea who can help us?

_Third Fish._        There must be. Let us think hard.

_Little Fish._       I know. Let’s ask the turtle. He’s wise. He goes
out of the sea upon the land. Surely he must learn many things there.
Perhaps he is just the one to tell us what to do to save our queen.

_Second Fish._       Go at once and bring him back with you. [_Little
Fish goes out._]

_First Fish._        He won’t be gone long. No one swims faster than our
little fish.

_Third Fish._        Here he comes back already, and the turtle is with
him.

_All the Fish._      Good, good. [_Turtle and Little Fish enter._]

_First Fish._        O Turtle, have you heard that our sea queen is
about to die?

_Turtle._            I know that she is very ill.

_Second Fish._       Can you not help us to save her? You are wise,
Turtle. It’s because you don’t stay down in the sea, but go upon the
land, that you learn about so many things. What will cure our queen?

_Turtle._            [_Slowly._] Yes, I do learn a great many things on
the land. Let me think—I am thinking—yes—I believe—yes—I know, I’m sure
I know just what will save her life. I have it—a monkey’s heart—the very
thing! I heard about it one day as I was resting upon the shore. A
monkey’s heart can cure anything!

_All the Fish._      Wonderful!

_Little Fish._       Will you go and get one? O Turtle, you know we
would go if we could leave our homes as you can. You will go, won’t you?

_Turtle._            I will go—at once.


                       SCENE II—_On the Seashore_

_Turtle._            Dear me—not a monkey to be seen anywhere! Well,
I’ve waited and waited. It’s very hot here on the sand. I’m sleepy. I’ll
just take a nap. [_Sleeps. Monkeys (three) come._]

[Illustration]

_First Monkey._      [_Seeing turtle._] What’s this?

_Second Monkey._     I don’t know. I never saw anything like that
before. Now, I see, it’s a big stone.

_First Monkey._      So it is.

_Third Monkey._      I don’t believe it.

_Second Monkey._     Well, you just put your paw on it and see. There,
it’s as hard as it can be.

_Third Monkey._      _I_ know. It’s a great shell. [_Touches the
turtle._] A big hard one, hard all over. [_Turtle wakes and catches
monkey._] Oh, oh, oh! Let me go.

_Turtle._            No, I will not let you go. Be quiet and do what I
tell you, and I will not hurt you. Your brothers have run away. You must
come down under the sea with me.

                       [_They go out together._]


                       SCENE III—_Under the Sea_

_Monkey._            Why do they keep me here? No one to talk to, no one
to play with, no trees to climb. Only one friend, the jellyfish with his
hard shell. I’d like him better if he hadn’t one. It makes me think of
that bad turtle that brought me down here on his hard back. Here comes
the old jellyfish now.

_Jellyfish._         Hello, Monkey, you look sad.

_Monkey._            So would you if you wanted trees instead of
seaweed, and land instead of water, and warm sunshine, and other little
monkeys to play with.

_Jellyfish._         Poor Monkey! I am sorry for you. But of course you
must stay here until they come to get you.

_Monkey._            Until who comes to get me?

_Jellyfish._         The fish, of course. Don’t you know?

_Monkey._            Indeed, I don’t, Jellyfish. What do you mean?

_Jellyfish._         They want your heart for the queen. In a few days
they’ll come and kill you and give her your heart to eat.

_Monkey._            Oh, dear me! Give my heart to the queen to eat?
Why, Jellyfish, do you know what you are talking about? What wrong have
I done that I should be killed?

_Jellyfish._         Oh, you’ve done no wrong. But our dear queen is
very ill, and your heart is the only thing that will cure her. We cannot
get your heart unless we kill you; so try and be brave about it.

                        [_Jellyfish swims off._]

_Monkey._            [_To himself._] I shall not give my heart to the
queen. I must get away from here somehow. But how? I do not know the
way. Only the turtle could take me back, and he won’t. What can I do?
Here comes the turtle now.

_Turtle._            You look sad, Monkey. What is the matter?

_Monkey._            Dear me, Turtle, I was just thinking of something I
have left at home that I need very much.

_Turtle._            Indeed! What is it, dear Monkey?

_Monkey._            It’s my heart, Turtle. Just before I left home I
hung it out on a bush to dry. If the rain comes, it will be spoiled.

_Turtle._            What is this you tell me?

_Monkey._            It’s about my heart. Some one must carry me back to
the land so that I can get it.

_Turtle._            Well, well, is there no other way? Then I must take
you back to get your heart. That is the best plan, and we must start at
once. Come. [_They go out together._]

[Illustration]


                    SCENE IV—_Home of the Sea Queen_

                 [_Turtle comes in looking very sad._]

_Queen Osa._         My dear Turtle, where have you been so long, and
oh, what has happened to you?

_Turtle._            Dear Queen, I am very sad, and very cold, and very
ill. My poor body is without its covering, for see, I have lost my
shell.

_Queen Osa._         Poor Turtle! Come tell me all about it.

_Turtle._            The monkey told me he had left his heart at home
and he asked me to take him back so he could get it. I believed him. You
know I wanted the heart for you.

_Queen Osa._         You are very kind, Turtle.

_Turtle._            I took him on my back. When we got to the land he
sprang off my back and up the nearest tree. He told his brothers what
had happened to him. Then they all rushed at me. They tore off my shell
and threw my body back into the sea without it.

_Queen Osa._         Poor Turtle! Never mind. I’ll give you another
shell, for you did your best. Some one must have been telling the monkey
tales. Jellyfish, you were his friend. Do you know anything about this?

_Jellyfish._         I told the monkey that we were going to kill him so
that we could get his heart for you. I told him to try and be brave
about it.

_Queen Osa._         You are to blame, then, Jellyfish, for all this
trouble. To punish you for meddling, I will take away your shell. And
you must go without it forever.

                                                        —ORIENTAL FABLE.




                     I WOULD LIKE YOU FOR A COMRADE


_Little Girl._       I would like you for a comrade, for I love you,
                     that I do,
                     I never met a little calf as amiable as you;
                     I would teach you how to dance and sing and how to
                     talk and laugh,
                     If I were not a little girl and you were not a
                     calf.

_Little Calf._       I would like you for a comrade; you should share my
                     barley meal
                     And butt me with your little horns just hard enough
                     to feel;
                     We would lie beneath the chestnut trees and watch
                     the leaves uncurl,
                     If I were not a clumsy calf and you a little girl.

                                                           —JUDGE PARRY.

[Illustration]




                    SOUTHWEST WIND’S VISIT TO GLUCK


                               CHARACTERS

                         _Gluck_
                         _Hans_
                         _Schwartz_
                         _Little Old Gentleman_

_Gluck._             What a pity my brothers never ask anybody to
dinner. I’m sure when they’ve got such a nice piece of mutton as this it
would do their hearts good to have somebody to eat it with them. [_Knock
sounds at the door._] It must be the wind. Nobody else would dare to
knock double knocks at our door. [_Gluck goes to the window._]

_Little Old Gentleman._ Hello! That’s not the way to answer the door. I am
wet. Let me in.

_Gluck._             I beg your pardon, sir. I am very sorry, but I
really can’t.

_Little Old Gentleman._ Can’t what?

_Gluck._             I can’t let you in. I can’t, indeed. My brother
will beat me, sir, if I thought of such a thing. What do you want, sir?

_Little Old Gentleman._ Want? I want fire and shelter. There’s your great
fire there blazing, cracking, and dancing on the walls with nobody to
feel it. I only want to warm myself.

_Gluck._             He does look very wet. I’ll just let him in for a
little while.

                          [_Opens the door._]

_Little Old Gentleman._ That’s a good boy. Never mind your brothers. I’ll
talk to them.

[Illustration]

_Gluck._             Pray, sir, don’t do any such thing. I can’t let you
stay till they come.

_Little Old Gentleman._ Dear me. I’m very sorry to hear that. How long may
I stay?

_Gluck._             Only till the mutton’s done, sir, and it’s very
brown. [_Little Old Gentleman seats himself before the fire._] You’ll
soon dry there, sir. Mayn’t I take your cloak?

_Little Old Gentleman._ No, thank you.

_Gluck._             Your cap, sir?

_Little Old Gentleman._ I am all right, thank you.

_Gluck._             But, sir! I’m very sorry, but really, sir, you’re
putting the fire out.

_Little Old Gentleman._ It’ll take longer to do the mutton then. That
mutton looks very nice. Can’t you give me a little bit?

_Gluck._             Impossible, sir.

_Little Old Gentleman._ I’m very hungry. I’ve had nothing to eat yesterday
nor to-day. They surely couldn’t miss a bit from the knuckle.

_Gluck._             They promised me one slice to-day, sir. I can give
you that.

_Little Old Gentleman._ That’s a good boy.

_Gluck._             [_To himself._] I don’t care if I do get beaten for
it. [_Loud rap at the door. Schwartz and Hans enter._]

_Schwartz._          What did you keep us waiting in the rain for?

_Hans._              Ay, what for, indeed!

_Schwartz._          Bless my soul, who’s that?

_Gluck._             I don’t know, indeed, brother.

_Schwartz._          How did he get in?

_Gluck._             My dear brother, he was so very wet.

_Schwartz._          Who are you, sir?

_Hans._              What’s your business?

_Little Old Gentleman._ I am a poor old man, sir, and I saw your fire
through the window and begged shelter for a little while.

_Schwartz._          Have the goodness to walk out again, then.

_Little Old Gentleman._ It’s a cold day to turn an old man out, sir. Look
at my gray hairs.

_Hans._              Ay, there are enough of them to keep you warm.
Walk!

_Little old Gentleman._ I’m very, very hungry, sir. Couldn’t you spare me a
bit of bread before I go?

_Schwartz._          Bread, indeed! Do you suppose we’ve nothing to do
with our bread but to give it to such fellows as you?

_Hans._              Out with you.

_Little Old Gentleman._ A little bit?

_Schwartz._          Be off!

_Little Old Gentleman._ Pray, gentlemen.

_Hans._              Off!

_Little Old Gentleman._ Gentlemen, I wish you a very good morning. At
twelve o’clock to-night I’ll call again. But you will not be surprised
if that visit is the last I ever make you.

_Schwartz._          If I ever catch you here again—[_To Gluck._] A very
pretty business, indeed, Mr. Gluck. Dish the mutton, sir. If ever I
catch you at such a trick again—bless me, why the mutton’s been cut.

_Gluck._             You promised me one slice, brother, you know.

_Schwartz._          Oh, you were cutting it hot, I suppose, and going
to catch all the gravy. It will be long before I promise you such a
thing again. Leave the room, sir, and have the kindness to wait in the
coal cellar till I call you.

                               _Midnight_

_Schwartz._          [_Starting up._] What’s that?

_Little Old Gentleman._ Only I, Southwest Wind.

_Hans._              The room is full of water, and the roof is off.

_Little Old Gentleman._ Sorry, gentlemen. I am afraid your beds are
dampish. Perhaps you had better go to your brother’s room. I’ve left the
ceiling on there. You’ll find my card on the kitchen table. Remember,
this is the last visit from Southwest Wind.

[Illustration]




                       THE CHILD AND THE SPARROW


_Child._             Sparrow in the cherry tree,
                     Won’t you drop one down for me?

_Sparrow._           Presently, presently.

_Child._             Sparrow, sparrow, Greedy-pate!
                     There’s a fine one! Drop it straight!

_Sparrow._           Little boys should learn to wait!

_Child._             Sparrow, without more ado,
                     Come, be kind and drop me two.

_Sparrow._           They’re not ripe enough for you.

_Child._             Saucy sparrow, cease your fun!
                     What, you’re off—and give me none!

_Sparrow._           All are gone, all are gone.

                                                       —THOMAS WESTWOOD.




                          THE RABBIT’S MESSAGE


[Illustration]

 CHARACTERS—_Three Children_, _Spring_, _Rabbit_ _and_ _creatures of the
                                  woods_


                         PART I—_The Children_

_First Child._       Oh, how bare the woods look. Not a flower or bud
anywhere!

_Second Child._      Spring is late.

_Third Child._       Ow-o-o. Let’s run home.

_Second Child._      Spring has forgotten us. I shan’t come here again.


                         PART II—_Lady Spring_

_Spring._            At last! Be off, Jack Frost and North Wind. You
have kept me waiting too long. Now to work. I must waken the flowers.
[_Waves her wand._]

_Flowers._           [_Awaken._] Welcome, Lady Spring. We have looked
for you long.

_Spring._            Break into buds, trees.

_Trees._             [_Awaken._] Welcome, Lady Spring. We have looked
for you long.

_Spring._            Waken, animals.

_Animals._           [_Awaken._] Welcome, Lady Spring. We have waited
for you long.

_Spring._            But where are the children? Perhaps they do not
know we are here. I must find some way to send them a message. Robin,
will you take it?

_Robin._             I am too busy building a nest for my little ones.
Send the fox.

_Spring._            Fox, will you take it?

_Fox._               I dare not go. The people will think I have come to
steal their chickens. Send Black Bear.

_Spring._            Black Bear, will you take the message to the
children?

_Black Bear._        Don’t send me. I am so big I would frighten them.
All children love the rabbit. Send him.

_Spring._            Rabbit, will you go?

_Rabbit._            Yes, yes. I’ll go. But, dear me! The dogs! They
might catch me.

_Spring._            Go when they are asleep.

_Rabbit._            Good. I will go to-night. But what message shall I
take?

_Spring._            I’ll weave a basket of twigs and leaves and green
grass, and line it with soft moss. Each one of us will put a message
into it.


                         PART III—_The Journey_

_Spring._            Here is the basket, Rabbit.

_Robin._             Here is an egg.

_Thrush._            Here is another.

_Squirrel._          Here are some acorns that have just sprouted.

_Spring._            My prettiest flowers go to the children. There!
Stop at every house where there is a child.

_Rabbit._            I shall not forget. I’m off. [_To himself._] I’ll
just make a nest of grass for each child, and leave it on the doorstep.
An egg and a spring flower in each—and the children will know!


                         PART IV—_The Message_

_First Child._       What a pretty nest! I found it on my
doorstep—flowers and twigs and an egg.

_Second Child._      I found one, too—with everything in it from the
woods.

_Third child._       Oh! Spring must be here.

_First child._       See, here are the tracks of the rabbit’s feet! He
came to tell us.

_Second Child._      Then spring _is_ here. Let’s run to the woods—now!

_Children._          [_Running._] Spring is here! Bunny has brought us
the message.

[Illustration]




                             LAUGHING SANJA


                               CHARACTERS

                             _Sanja_
                             _First Jizu_
                             _Second Jizu_
                             _Third Jizu_
                             _Ogre_

    NOTE: _Jizu is a roadside image or statue._


                        SCENE I—_Along the Road_

_Sanja._             Dear, dear, there goes one of my finest dumplings
rolling down the hill. That will never do. I cannot lose that one. I
must run and catch it. [_Runs after it. As she goes she meets Lord
Jizu._] Good morning, my Lord Jizu! Have you seen a rice dumpling fall
this way?

_Lord Jizu._         Good morning! Yes, I saw a dumpling. It went past
here. It went down the hill skipping as if it had legs.

_Sanja._             Oh, thank you. Then I must skip after it.

_Lord Jizu._         No, no. Do not go on. An ogre lives down there. He
may do you harm.

_Sanja._             But I must have my dumpling. [_Laughing._]
Tee-hee-hee! Tee-hee-hee! [_Goes on._]

                     [_To Second Lord Jizu._] My good Lord Jizu, have
you seen a dumpling pass this way?

_Second Lord Jizu._  As if it had wings! It flew past me.

_Sanja._             Then I must hurry to catch it.

_Second Lord Jizu._  You must not think of that. There is a wicked ogre
below. He does not like old women. He will be cruel to you, and he might
eat you up.

_Sanja._             But I must have my dumpling. He’ll not eat an old
woman like me. [_Laughing._] Tee-hee-hee! Tee-hee-hee! [_Goes on._]

                     [_To herself._] If I ever catch that dumpling, I’ll
eat every bit of it myself. Tee-hee-hee! [_To Third Lord Jizu._] My good
Lord Jizu, have you seen my dumpling pass this way?

_Third Lord Jizu._   Yes, it passed but a moment ago. Do not think of
searching for it. The ogre who lives beyond is cruel, and he’ll surely
eat you.

_Sanja._             He’ll not eat an old woman like me. Tee-hee-hee!
[_They hear a terrible noise. Ogre comes._]

_Third Lord Jizu._   Here comes the ogre. Get behind me. Be quick!

_Ogre._              [_Deep voice._] Good morning, Lord Jizu! I smell
meat.

_Third Lord Jizu._   Good morning, Ogre. Is it not dumpling that you
smell? I saw one pass along this road a little while ago.

_Ogre._              No, indeed. It is not dumpling. What I smell is
meat.

_Third Lord Jizu._   I do not smell it. Are you sure it is not rice
dumpling? It seems to me that I smell a little of it about you.

_Ogre._              That is not strange. I saw the dumpling rolling my
way. I caught it and ate it. It was good. I wish I had the one who made
it. What I smell now is meat, meat, meat; juicy, young, tender. [_Sanja
bursts out laughing._]

_Sanja._             Tee-hee-hee! Tee-hee-hee!

_Ogre._              [_Seeing Sanja._] Who are you?

_Sanja._             I am the one who made the dumpling. Tee-hee-hee!
Why did you eat it?

_Ogre._              Because it was good.

_Sanja._             You couldn’t eat me for that reason. Tee-hee-hee!

_Ogre._              No, I shall not eat you. You shall come home with
me and be my cook. As long as you cook your dumplings for me I will not
harm you. [_Sanja goes with the ogre._]


                       SCENE II—_Ogre’s Kitchen_

_Ogre._              You are a good cook; but you use more rice than you
need. You should put but one grain into the pot.

_Sanja._             One grain? Tee-hee-hee. How could any one live on
one grain of rice?

_Ogre._              I will show you. Put one grain of rice into the
pot. Then take this paddle in your hand. If you want rice for ten
persons, stir ten times, in this way. [_Stirs paddle about in the
water._] See the grain of rice burst into ten pieces. If you want rice
for one hundred persons, stir one hundred times. The grain of rice will
burst into one hundred pieces.

_Sanja._             Tee-hee-hee! Tee-hee-hee!

_Ogre._              This is a magic paddle.

_Sanja._             Tee-hee-hee! Tee-hee-hee!

_Ogre._              [_To himself._] How strange that she laughs at
everything.


                       SCENE III—_The River Bank_

_Sanja._             I won’t stay here another day. The ogre is off
hunting. Tee-hee-hee. He’ll never know how I got out of the castle and
over the river. Tee-hee-hee. Tee-hee-hee. [_Hears call._] Who calls? The
ogre. Oh, he sees me! I am afraid to go back.

_Ogre._              [_From other side of the river._] What are you
doing there, you Laughing Dumpling? Go back to my kitchen, I say. Go
back!

_Sanja._             Tee-hee-hee!

_Ogre._              How strange that she laughs at everything. She
shall not laugh at me. [_Starts to go across river._]

[Illustration]

_Sanja._             What shall I do to get away. The magic paddle! The
magic paddle! I have it tucked in my belt. I’ll stir the water in the
river with it. There! Tee-hee-hee! Tee-hee-hee! See the water flows and
flows, higher and higher. The ogre must swim for his life. Tee-hee-hee!
Tee-hee-hee!




                       THE TIGER AND THE BRAHMAN


                               CHARACTERS

                               _Tiger_
                               _Jackal_
                               _Brahman_
                               _Tree_
                               _Road_
                               _Buffalo_

_Tiger._             Let me out of the cage, Brahman!

_Brahman._           No, I will not. If I let you out of the cage, you
will eat me.

_Tiger._             O Brahman, indeed I will not. I could not be so
unkind as that. Only let me out to get a drink of water. Then I will
come back. [_Brahman opens the cage._]

[Illustration]

_Tiger._             [_Jumping out._] Now, I will eat you first and then
I’ll drink the water.

_Brahman._           Alas! How foolish I was to let you out. Only do not
kill me hastily. Let me ask the first three things I meet to tell me
whether it is just and fair that you should put me to death. If all of
them say it is just and fair for you to kill me I shall be willing to
die.

_Tiger._             It shall be as you say. You may ask the opinion of
three.

                         [_Brahman goes off._]

_Brahman._           O Tree, hear my story and tell me who is right. The
tiger begged me to let him out of his cage, to drink a little water. He
promised not to hurt me if I did so. But now that I have let him out he
wishes to kill and eat me. Is this right?

_Tree._              I give shade to all who pass by, but when they are
rested they cut my branches and break off my leaves. Why do you
complain?

_Brahman._           Alas! Alas! [_Goes on._] O Buffalo, hear my story
and tell me who is right. The tiger begged me to let him out of his cage
to drink a little water. But now that I have let him out he wishes to
kill and eat me. Is this right, O Buffalo?

_Buffalo._           Look at me! See how hard I work. When I was young I
had the best of food. But now that I am old I am kept here in the field.
I have only the coarsest food to eat. Why do you complain?

_Brahman._           Alas! Alas! [_Goes to Road._] O Road, hear my story
and tell me who is right. The tiger begged me to let him out of his cage
to drink a little water. But now that I have let him out he wishes to
kill and eat me. Is this right, O Road?

_Road._              Poor Brahman! How can you hope for anything else?
Think of me. Here I am useful to every one. Yet all, rich and poor,
great and small, trample on me as they go past. Why do you complain?

_Brahman._           Alas! Alas! Alas! There is no help for me. [_Turns
homeward._]

_Jackal._            What’s the matter, Mr. Brahman? You look very sad.

_Brahman._           I am sad. As I was walking along the road I came to
the tiger in his cage. He begged me to let him out to drink a little
water. He said he would not harm me if I did so.

_Jackal._            Did you let him out?

_Brahman._           I did. As soon as he was out he tried to eat me. I
asked him to wait till I could get the opinion of the first three things
I came to whether it was right for him to kill me. I asked the tree, the
buffalo, and the road. Alas!

_Jackal._            What did they say?

_Brahman._           They all said it was right.

_Jackal._            Who said it was right?

_Brahman._           Why, the tree, and the road, and the buffalo.

_Jackal._            Oh, it’s very confusing. Let me see! Perhaps
matters are not so bad as you think. But it’s very confusing. You say
the tiger said the tree and the road and the buffalo were right?

_Brahman._           No, no, no. The road and the tree and the buffalo
said the tiger should kill and eat me!

_Jackal._            It all goes in one ear and out the other. It’s very
confusing. Take me to the place where it happened. Then I shall be able
to understand.

                  [_Brahman and Jackal go to Tiger._]

_Tiger._             You have been away a long time. I want my dinner.

_Brahman._           Just wait until I make the jackal understand how it
all happened. He is so slow in his wits! I must explain things to him.

_Jackal._            Show me where you stood.

_Brahman._           Here, by the cage.

_Jackal._            Right there?

_Brahman._           Right here.

_Jackal._            Where was the tiger then?

_Tiger._             I was in the cage!

_Jackal._            Yes, yes. Let me see, how did it all begin?

_Brahman._           Tiger was in the cage and I came walking by—

_Jackal._            Yes, yes, I see. You were in the cage and the tiger
came walking by—

_Tiger._             [_Angrily._] Not at all! _I_ was in the cage.

_Jackal._            Yes, my lord. Dear, dear, it’s very confusing. It
has all got mixed up in my mind. Let me see, the tiger was in the
Brahman and the cage came walking by! No, no, that was not it, either!
Well, don’t wait for me. I shall never understand.

_Tiger._             Yes, you _shall_ understand. Look here, I am the
tiger.

_Jackal._            Yes, my lord.

_Tiger._             And that is the Brahman.

_Jackal._            Yes, my lord.

_Tiger._             And that is the cage.

_Jackal._            Yes, my lord.

_Tiger._             And _I_ was in the cage. Do you understand?

_Jackal._            Yes, my lord. But please, my lord, how did you get
in?

_Tiger._             How did I get in? Why, the usual way, of course!

_Jackal._            Oh dear me! My head is beginning to whirl again.
Please don’t get angry, my lord, but what

_is_                 the usual way?

_Tiger._             This way. Now do you understand? [_Tiger jumps into
cage._]

_Jackal._            Yes, I understand now. And I think we had better
leave you just where you are. [_Locks cage door._]




                     THE LION AND THE STORY-TELLER


  CHARACTERS—_Lion_, _Fox_, _Elephant_, _Tiger_, _and_ _Other Animals_

_Elephant._          Dear me—we must find one.

_Tiger._             One what?

_Elephant._          A story-teller for the lion. He wants one who will
tell him stories one after another without stopping. It’s a task indeed.

_Camel._             Yes, yes, and he will put us to death if we fail to
find some one who can do so.

_Tiger._             He’s king, and they say the king kills when he
will. I do not know what we shall do.

_Fox._               Let me think. I have it—Tell the king you have
found the story-teller that he wished for.

                               _At Court_

_Lion._              So, Mr Fox, you are to tell me stories without
ceasing.

_Fox._               Yes, O King Lion.

_Lion._              Very well—begin.

_Fox._               There was once a fisherman who went to sea. He had
a large net. He spread it out far and wide. One day a great many fish
got into the net. Just as the fisherman was about to draw it up, the
cords broke, and a small hole was made in the side of the net. Now, this
hole was just large enough for one fish to slip through at a time. So,
one fish got out—[_Fox stops._]

[Illustration]

_Lion._              Yes?

_Fox._               Then two fishes got out. [_Fox stops._]

_Lion._              What then?

_Fox._               Then three escaped. [_Fox stops._]

_Lion._              [_Impatiently._] Yes, yes! but the story? I tell
you, go on with the story. What then?

_Fox._               Then four fishes got out.

_Lion._              Come, come, sir, you are not telling me anything
new.

_Fox._               O King! Each lot of fishes was different from the
rest.—Then the hole grew a little larger and—

_Lion._              But, wherein is the wonder?

_Fox._               Why, your majesty, what can be more wonderful than
for fish to escape in lots, each lot greater than the other by one?

_Lion._              [_Impatiently._] How long will it take all those
fishes to get out?

_Fox._               O King Lion, it was a large net—there were
thousands and thousands of fishes in it.—Then the hole grew a little
larger and—

_Lion._              Stop, stop! I can not stand this. Leave my court at
once—anything to stop those fishes.

                           [_Fox goes out._]

_Fox._               [_To animals._] Fear not, I have saved you all. The
tyrant won’t try that plan again.

[Illustration]




                             OVER THE HILL


_Child._             Traveler, what lies over the hill?
                     Traveler, tell to me.
                     I am only a child from the window sill,
                     Over I can not see.

_Traveler._          Child, there’s a valley over there,
                     Pretty and wooded and shy,
                     And a little brook that says, “Take care,

                     Or I’ll drown you by and by.”

_Child._             And what comes next?

_Traveler._                              A little town
                     And a towering hill again;
                     More hills and valleys up and down
                     And a river now and then.

_Child._             And what comes next?

_Traveler._                              A lonely moor
                     Without a beaten way;
                     And gray clouds sailing slow before
                     A wind that will not stay.

_Child._             And then?

_Traveler._                   Dark rocks and yellow sand,
                     And a moaning sea beside.

_Child._             And then?

_Traveler._                   More sea, more sea, more land,
                     And rivers deep and wide.

_Child._             And then?

_Traveler._                   Oh, rock and mountain and vale,
                     Rivers and fields and men,
                     And over and over repeat the tale,
                     And round to your home again.

                                                      —GEORGE MACDONALD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 2. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE DRAMAS FOR PRIMARY GRADES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


