The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ruffled Doilies and the Pansy Doily
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ruffled Doilies and the Pansy Doily

Creator: American Thread Company

Release date: June 26, 2020 [eBook #62484]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUFFLED DOILIES AND THE PANSY DOILY ***

                      STAR BOOK No. 59    10 CENTS




                            Ruffled doilies
                         _and the Pansy Doily_


                           _Copyright, 1948_
                   The American Thread Company, Inc.
                          Printed in U. S. A.




                         _Ruffled Doilies ..._


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

to show off your treasured bric-a-brac—as a complimentary setting for a
rose—for that cool snowflake look. You’ll love to make these as well as
other Star designs in these books:

  _Book No. 41_         Edgings
  _Book No. 51_         Rugs
  _Book No. 52_         Afghans
  _Book No. 53_         New Baby Book
  _Book No. 55_         Potholders
  _Book No. 57_         New Tablecloth Book

These books are available at your nearest dealer ... or send 10¢ each
to:

                The American Thread Co., Inc., Dept. 59,
                  260 West Broadway, New York 13, N.Y.

    [Illustration: TRADE MARK]




                         Double Ruffle No. 5901


                      _(Illustrated on Front Cover)_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 20 Size 30
  4—250 yd. Balls White.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 12.
  Doily measures 13¼ inches without the ruffle.

Ch 10, join to form a ring, ch 4, d c in ring, * ch 1, d c in ring,
repeat from * 11 times, ch 1, join in 3rd st of ch (14 d c).

2nd Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * ch 2, 2 d c in next d c, repeat from
* all around, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

3rd Row. Ch 3, d c in next d c, 1 d c in next st of ch, * ch 2, 1 d c in
each of the next 2 d c, 1 d c in next st of ch, repeat from * all
around, ch 2, join.

4th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, d c in next st of ch, *
ch 2, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, d c in next st of ch, repeat from
* all around, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch. Repeat the 4th row having 1
more d c in each d c section until there are 8 d c in each section.

9th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 6 d c, * pull up ⅛-inch loop on
hook, thread over and pull through loop, s c in single loop of st
(single knot st) pull up ⅛-inch loop on hook, thread over and pull
through loop, s c in single loop of st (double knot st) 1 d c in each of
the next 7 d c of next d c group, repeat from * all around ending with a
knot stitch, join.

10th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, * work a double knot
st, s c in center s c of next double knot st, double knot st, 1 d c in
each of the next 6 d c, repeat from * all around ending row with double
knot st, s c in center s c of next double knot st, double knot st, join.

11th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * double knot st, s c
in center s c of next double knot st, double knot st, s c in center s c
of next double knot st, double knot st, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c,
repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, join.

12th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, ** double knot st, s c
in center s c of next double knot st, * double knot st, s c in center s
c of next double knot st, repeat from * once, double knot st, 1 d c in
each of the next 4 d c, repeat from ** all around ending row to
correspond, join.

13th Row. Same as last row but having 1 less d c in each d c section and
1 more double knot st in each double knot st section, join.

14th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in next d c, ** work a single knot st, s c in
center s c of next double knot st, * double knot st, s c in center s c
of next double knot st, repeat from * 3 times, single knot st, 1 d c in
each of the next 2 d c, repeat from ** all around ending row with single
knot st, s c in center s c of next double knot st, * double knot st, s c
in center s c of next double knot st, repeat from * 3 times, single knot
st, join.

15th Row. Double knot st, skip the single knot st, s c in center s c of
next double knot st, * double knot st, s c in center s c of next double
knot st, repeat from * twice, double knot st, skip the single knot st, s
c in next d c, repeat from beginning all around.

16th Row. Sl st to center of next double knot st, * work a double knot
st, s c in center s c of next double knot st, repeat from * all around.

17th Row. Sl st to center of next knot st, * ch 6, s c in center s c of
next double knot st, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 3, d c
in sl st, this brings thread in position for next row (70 loops).

18th Row. Ch 8, d c in next loop, * ch 5, d c in next loop, repeat from
* all around, ch 5, join in 3rd st of ch.

19th Row. Ch 8, d c in next d c, * ch 5, d c in next d c, repeat from *
all around, ch 5, join in 3rd st of ch.

20th Row. Sl st into loop, * ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 3, tr c in sl st.

21st Row. Ch 9, d c in next loop, * ch 6, d c in next loop, repeat from
* all around, ch 6, join in 3rd st of ch.

22nd Row. Sl st into loop, ch 3, 5 d c in same loop, * ch 5, s c in next
loop, ch 5, 6 d c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with
ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, join.

23rd Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 5, s c in next
loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, s
c in next loop, ch 5, join.

24th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, * ch 3, d c in next
loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, d c in next loop, ch 3, 1 d c in
each of the next 4 d c, repeat from * all around ending row to
correspond, join.

25th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, * ch 3, s c in next
loop, ch 4, skip 1 loop, tr c in next s c, ch 4, skip 1 loop, s c in
next loop, ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, repeat from * all
around ending row to correspond, join.

26th Row. Ch 3, d c in next d c, * ch 4, d c in next s c, ch 5, s c in
next loop, s c in next tr c, s c in next loop, ch 5, d c in next s c, ch
4, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, repeat from * all around ending row
to correspond, join.

27th Row. Ch 9, * skip 1 d c, s c in next d c, ch 6, d c in center s c
of next s c group, ch 6, s c in next d c, ch 6, d c in next d c, ch 6,
repeat from * all around in same manner ending row with skip 1 d c, s c
in next d c, ch 6, d c in center s c of s c group, ch 6, s c in next d
c, ch 3, tr c in 3rd st of ch.

28th Row. * Ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, tr c in tr c, break thread.

29th Row. Attach thread in 3rd loop to left of joining of last row, ch
3, 5 d c in same loop, * ch 4, s c in next loop, ch 5, d c in next loop,
ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 4, 6 d c in next loop, repeat from * all
around ending row to correspond, join.

30th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 4, d c in next s
c, ch 4, s c in next loop, s c in next d c, s c in next loop, ch 4, d c
in next s c, ch 4, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, repeat from * all
around ending row to correspond, join.

31st Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, * ch 4, s c in next
loop, 1 s c in next d c, s c in next loop, ch 4, 1 d c in center s c of
next s c group, ch 4, s c in next loop, s c in next d c, s c in next
loop, ch 4, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, repeat from * all around
ending row to correspond, join.

32nd Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, * ch 5, d c in center s
c of next s c group, ch 4, s c in next loop, s c in next d c, s c in
next loop, ch 4, d c in center s c of next s c group, ch 5, 1 d c in
each of the next 3 d c, repeat from * all around ending row to
correspond, join.

33rd Row. Ch 3, d c in next d c, * ch 5, s c in next loop, s c in next d
c, s c in next loop, ch 4, d c in center s c of s c group, ch 4, s c in
next loop, s c in next d c, s c in next loop, ch 5, 1 d c in each of the
next 2 d c, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, join.

34th Row. * Ch 6, d c in center s c of next s c group, ch 6, s c in next
d c, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 3, tr c in same space
as beginning.

35th Row. * Ch 6, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, tr c in tr c.

36th Row. Same as last row but ending row with ch 6, s c in tr c.

RUFFLE: Sl st into loop, * ch 8, s c in same loop, ch 8, s c in same
loop, ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with
ch 4, tr c in sl st (420 loops).

2nd and 3rd Rows. * Ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around
ending each row with ch 4, tr c in tr c.

4th Row. * Work a double knot st pulling loops up ¼-inch, s c in next
loop, repeat from * all around.

5th, 6th and 7th Rows. Sl st to center of next double knot st, * work a
double knot st, s c in center s c of next double knot st, repeat from *
all around.

8th Row. Sl st to center of double knot st, * ch 8, s c in center s c of
next double knot st, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 4, d tr
c in sl st.

9th Row. ** Ch 5, tr c in next loop, * ch 4, sl st in 4th st from hook
for picot, tr c in same loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 5, s c in next
loop, repeat from ** all around, break thread.

INSIDE RUFFLE: Attach thread in any mesh of 18th row and work same as
outside ruffle (having 210 loops in 1st row) but working only 2 rows of
8 ch loops and 3 rows of double knot sts. Work last 2 rows same as last
2 rows of outside ruffle.




                       Victorian Ruffle No. 5902


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DE LUXE” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                    AND KNITTING COTTON, ARTICLE 346
  9—250 yd. Balls White.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 7.
  Doily measures about 25½ x 31 inches without ruffle.

Ch 39, d c in 7th st from hook, * ch 1, skip 1 st of ch, d c in next st,
repeat from * 15 times.

2nd Row. S c into last mesh over the d c just made, * ch 25, s c in same
mesh, repeat from * 6 times, ch 20, 2 s c in each of the next 7 meshes,
ch 20, s c in next mesh, * ch 25, s c in same mesh, repeat from * 3
times, ch 20, 2 s c in each of the next 7 meshes, ch 20, s c in corner
mesh, * ch 25, s c in same mesh, repeat from * 7 times, ch 20 and
working on other side of meshes, work 2 s c in each of the next 7
meshes, ch 20, s c in next mesh, * ch 25, s c in same mesh, repeat from
* 3 times, ch 20, 2 s c in each of the next 7 meshes, ch 20, s c in next
mesh (corner) ch 25, s c in same mesh, break thread.

3rd Row. Attach thread in 1st loop of center group on side, s c in same
space, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, s c in 1st loop
of end group, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * 8 times, s c in
1st loop of next group at side, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from *
4 times, s c in 1st loop of end group, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat
from * 8 times, join to 1st s c.

4th Row. Sl st to center of loop, * ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from
* all around, then without joining rows work 3 more rows of 10 ch loops.

Next Row. * Ch 30, s c in same loop, repeat from * 5 times, 10 s c in
next loop, s c in next loop and work 6-30 ch loops in same loop, repeat
from * all around, join and break thread. Attach thread in 1st long loop
and work 10 ch loops over long loops and 3 Ch loops between groups of
long loops. Sl st to center of loop and work a 10 ch loop in each 10 ch
loop, without joining rows work 8 more rows of 10 ch loops.

Next Row. Ch 3, work 5 d c in same loop, * ch 5, 5 d c in next loop,
repeat from * all around.

SCALLOP: Sl st into loop, * ch 10, s c in same loop, ch 10, s c in same
loop, ch 10, s c in same loop, ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from *
all around and continue work without joining rows.

Next Row. * Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around and repeat
the last row 12 times, break thread.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                         Filet Ruffle No. 5903


 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 30 Size 30
  5—75 yd. Balls White.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 12.
  Doily measures about 7½ inches in diameter without ruffle.

Ch 29, d c in 8th st from hook, * ch 2, skip 2 sts of ch, d c in next st
of ch, repeat from * 6 times, ch 13, turn.

2nd Row. D c in 8th st from hook, ch 2, skip 2 sts of ch, d c in next st
of ch, ch 2, d c in next d c, (increases at beginning of row) * 2 d c in
next mesh, d c in next d c, repeat from * 6 times, 3 d c in end mesh, ch
2, d tr c (3 times over needle) in same space, * ch 2, d tr c over d tr
c, repeat from * once (increases at end of row) ch 13, turn.

3rd Row. D c in 8th st from hook, ch 2, skip 2 sts of ch, d c in next
st, ch 2, d c in next d tr c, * 2 d c in next mesh, d c in next d tr c,
repeat from * once, 2 d c in next mesh, d c in next d c (solid mesh) *
ch 2, skip 2 d c, d c in next d c (open mesh) repeat from * 7 times,
then work 3 solid meshes, ch 2, d tr c in same space, * ch 2, d tr c
over d tr c, repeat from * once, ch 11, turn.

4th Row. D c in 8th st from hook, ch 2, d c in next d tr c, 3 solid
meshes, 14 open meshes, 3 solid meshes, increase 2 meshes at end of row.
Continue working back and forth according to diagram. To decrease meshes
sl st over meshes.

RUFFLE: S c over last d c made, ch 5, s c in next open mesh, repeat from
* around entire doily ending row with ch 1, tr c in 1st s c (this brings
thread in position for next row).

2nd Row. 4 s c in same loop, * ch 5, 1 tr c in next loop, ch 2, 2 tr c
in same loop, ch 2, 1 tr c in same loop, ch 5, 4 s c in next loop,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 5, 1 tr c in last loop, ch
2, 2 tr c in same loop, ch 2, 1 tr c in same loop, ch 5, sl st in 1st s
c.

3rd Row. Ch 4 (counts as 1 tr c) 1 tr c in each of the next 3 s c, ch 5,
1 tr c in next tr c, ch 2, 2 tr c in each of the next 2 tr c, ch 2, 1 tr
c in next tr c, ch 5, repeat from beginning all around, join in 4th st
of ch.

4th Row. Ch 4, 1 tr c in each of the next 3 tr c, ch 7, 1 tr c in next
tr c, ch 2, 1 tr c in each of the next 4 tr c, ch 2, 1 tr c in next tr
c, ch 7, repeat from beginning all around in same manner, join in 4th st
of ch.

Next 4 Rows. Ch 4, 1 tr c in each of the next 3 tr c, ch 9, 1 tr c in
next tr c, ch 2, 1 tr c in each of the next 4 tr c, ch 2, 1 tr c in next
tr c, ch 9, repeat from beginning all around in same manner, join in 4th
st of ch.

9th Row. Ch 4 (counts as 1 tr c) * thread over needle twice, insert in
next tr c, thread over and work off two loops twice, repeat from *
twice, thread over and work off all loops at one time, ch 6, sl st in
6th st from hook for picot, * ch 5, sl st in same space, repeat from *,
(3 picot cluster), ch 9, tr c in next tr c, ch 5, sl st in top of tr c
for picot, ch 3, * thread over needle twice, insert in next tr c, thread
over and work off 2 loops twice, repeat from * 3 times, thread over and
work off all loops at one time, work a 3 picot cluster, ch 3, tr c in
next tr c, ch 5, sl st in top of tr c for picot, ch 9 and continue all
around in same manner, join, break thread.




                         Square Ruffle No. 5904


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “GEM” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 35 Size 30
  3—350 yd. Balls White or Ecru.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 12.
  16 Motifs 4 x 4 are required for doily measuring 7½ x 7½ inches
          without ruffle.

Ch 5, join to form a ring, s c in ring, * ch 4, s c in ring, repeat from
* 6 times, ch 1, d c in 1st s c (this brings thread in position for next
row.)

2nd Row. Ch 7, * thread over needle twice, insert in 5th st from hook,
pull through and work off 2 loops twice, repeat from * once, thread over
and pull through all loops on needle at one time, * d c in next loop,
cluster st in top of d c just made, (cluster st: ch 4, this counts as 1
tr c, thread over twice, insert in st, pull through and work off 2 loops
twice, thread over twice, insert in same space, pull through and work
off 2 loops twice, thread over and pull through all loops at one time)
repeat from * all around, join at base of 1st cluster st.

3rd Row. Cluster st in same space, ch 3, 3 tr c cluster st in same
space, * ch 9, s c in d c between next 2 cluster sts, ch 9, 2-3 tr c
cluster sts in d c between next 2 cluster sts with ch 3 between, repeat
from * twice, ch 9, s c in d c between next 2 cluster sts, ch 9, join in
top of 1st cluster st.

4th Row. Sl st to center st of ch 3 loop, s c in same space, * ch 9, s c
in next loop, cluster st in s c just made, cluster st in top of cluster
st just made, s c in next loop, ch 9, s c in next ch 3 loop, repeat from
* twice, ch 9, s c in next loop, cluster st in s c just made, cluster st
in cluster st, s c in next loop, ch 5, d tr c (3 times over needle) in
1st s c.

5th Row. Ch 7, 2 d tr c with ch 9 between in same space as d tr c just
made, * ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c between next 2 cluster sts, ch
7, s c in next loop, ch 7, 2 d tr c with ch 9 between in next s c,
repeat from * twice, ch 7, s c, in next loop, ch 7, s c between next 2
cluster sts, ch 7, sl st in 1st d tr c, break thread.

Work another motif in same manner joining to 1st motif in last row as
follows: ch 7, d tr c in same space as d tr c, just made, ch 4, sl st in
center st of corner loop of 1st motif, ch 4, d tr c in same space with
last d tr c of 2nd motif, ch 3, join to center st of next loop of 1st
motif, ch 3, s c in next loop of 2nd motif, ch 3, join to center st of
next loop of 1st motif, ch 3, s c between next 2 cluster sts of 2nd
motif, ch 3, join to center st of next loop of 1st motif, ch 3, s c in
next loop of 2nd motif, ch 3, join to center st of next loop of 1st
motif, ch 3, d tr c in next s c of 2nd motif, ch 4, join to center st of
corner loop of 1st motif, ch 4, complete motif in same manner as 1st
motif. Join 3rd motif to 2nd motif and 4th motif to 1st and 3rd motifs
in same manner.

RUFFLE: Attach thread in any corner loop, s c in same space, * ch 10, s
c in same loop, repeat from * 5 times, * ch 10, s c in next loop, ch 10,
s c in same loop, ch 10, s c in same loop, repeat from * across side to
next corner, ch 10, s c in corner loop, * ch 10, s c in same loop,
repeat from * 5 times, continue all around in same manner working other
corners same as last corner ending row with ch 5, tr tr c (4 times over
needle) in 1st s c, this brings thread in position for next row.

Next 2 Rows. Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around
ending each row with ch 5, tr tr c in tr tr c.

4th Row. S c in same space, ** cluster st in s c just made, cluster st
in top of cluster st just made, s c in next loop, * ch 10, s c in next
loop, repeat from * twice, repeat from ** all around ending row with ch
5, tr tr c in tr tr c.

5th Row. Ch 10, * thread over twice, insert in 5th st from hook, thread
over and work off 2 loops twice, repeat from *, thread over and work off
all loops at one time, sl st in space between next 2 cluster sts,
cluster st in same space, ch 5, s c in next loop, * ch 10, s c in next
loop, repeat from * once, repeat from beginning all around ending row
with ch 5, tr tr c in tr tr c.

6th Row. * Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, cluster st in
last s c, cluster st in top of cluster st just made, s c in next loop,
repeat from beginning all around in same manner ending row with sl st in
tr tr c.

7th Row. Sl st to center of next loop, s c in same space, ** ch 10, s c
in next loop, ch 10, s c in next loop, ch 10, * thread over twice,
insert in 5th st from hook, thread over and work off 2 loops twice,
repeat from * once, thread over and work off all loops at one time, sl
st in space between next 2 cluster sts, cluster st in same space, ch 5,
s c in next loop, repeat from ** all around omitting ch 5 at end of row,
tr tr c in 1st s c.

8th Row. S c in same space, * cluster st in same space, ch 5 sl st in
5th st from hook for picot, cluster st in top of cluster st, s c in next
loop, ch 10, sl st in 6th st from hook for picot, ch 4, s c in next
loop, repeat from * all around, ending row with sl st, break thread.




                        Tailored Ruffle No. 5905


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DE LUXE” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                    AND KNITTING COTTON, ARTICLE 346
  1—250 yd. Ball White and 1—175 yd. Ball Yellow or any contrasting
          Color.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 7.
  Doily measures 7½ inches in diameter without the ruffle.

With Yellow, ch 6, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 8 s c in ring,
join.

2nd Row. * Ch 8, s c in next s c, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, tr c in 1st s c (this brings thread in position for next
row).

3rd Row. Ch 5, s c in same loop, * ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, s c in
same loop (picot loop), repeat from * all around, ch 5, join in same
space as 1st ch.

4th Row. Sl st into picot loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, ch 3, 3 d c
in same space, * ch 5, skip 1 loop, 3 d c, ch 3, 3 d c (shell) in next
picot loop, repeat from * all around, ch 5, join in 3rd st of ch, break
Yellow.

5th Row. Attach White in center of shell, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 3 d c in
same space, * ch 5, shell in center of next shell, repeat from * all
around, ch 5, join in 3rd st of ch.

6th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 5, s c over
the White and Yellow loop of 2 previous rows, ch 5, shell in center of
next shell, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 5, s c over
loops of two previous rows, ch 5, join.

7th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 4, s c in
next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 4, shell in center of next shell,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 4, s c in next loop, ch 5, s
c in next loop, ch 4, join in 3rd st of ch.

8th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 5, skip 1
loop, 1 tr c, ch 3, 1 tr c in next loop, ch 5, skip 1 loop, shell in
center of next shell, repeat from * all around in same manner ending row
to correspond, join.

9th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 5, skip 1
loop, shell in ch 3 loop, ch 5, skip 1 loop, shell in center of next
shell, repeat from * all around in same manner ending row to correspond,
join.

10th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 5, s c
over next loops of previous 2 rows, ch 5, shell in center of next shell,
repeat from * all around in same manner ending row to correspond, join.

11th Row. Same as 7th row.

12th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 5, skip 1
loop, s c in next loop, ch 5, skip 1 loop, shell in center of next
shell, repeat from * all around in same manner ending row to correspond,
join.

13th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, ** ch 5, *
thread over needle twice, insert in next loop, pull through and work off
2 loops twice, repeat from *, thread over and work off remaining loops
at one time, ch 5, shell in center of next shell, repeat from ** all
around in same manner ending row to correspond, join.

14th Row. Sl st to center of shell, * ch 8, skip the 5 ch loop, 2 d c in
next st, ch 8, skip the 5 ch loop, s c in center of next shell, repeat
from * all around in same manner ending row to correspond, break White.

15th Row. Attach Yellow in next loop, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 3 d c (shell)
in same loop, * ch 3, 3 d c, ch 3, 3 d c in next loop, repeat from * all
around, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

16th Row. Sl st to center of shell, ch 4, d c in same space, * ch 1, d c
in same space, repeat from * 3 times, * ch 2, 6 d c with ch 1 between
each d c in next loop, ch 2, 6 d c with ch 1 between each d c in center
of next shell, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, ch 2,
join.

17th Row. Ch 4, * d c in next ch 1 loop, ch 1, d c in next ch 1 loop, ch
1, d c in next d c, ch 1, d c in next ch 1 loop, ch 1, d c in next d c,
ch 1, d c in next ch 1 loop, ch 1, d c in next ch 1 loop, ch 1, d c in
next d c, ch 2, skip the ch 2 loop, d c in next d c, ch 1, repeat from *
all around in same manner ending row to correspond, ch 2, join in 3rd st
of ch (9 d c in each section with ch 1 between each d c).

18th Row. Ch 4, ** d c in next loop, * ch 1, d c in next loop, repeat
from * twice, ch 1, d c in next d c, * ch 1, d c in next loop, repeat
from * 3 times, ch 1, d c in next d c, ch 2, skip the ch 2 loop, d c in
next d c, ch 1, repeat from ** all around in same manner ending row to
correspond, ch 2, join (11 d c in each d c section with ch 1 between
each d c).

19th Row. Ch 4, ** d c in next loop, * ch 1, d c in next loop, repeat
from * 8 times, ch 1, d c in next d c, ch 2, skip the ch 2 loop, d c in
next d c, ch 1, repeat from ** all around in same manner ending row to
correspond, ch 2, join (12 d c in each section with ch 1 between each d
c), break Yellow.

EDGE: Attach White in same space (1st d c of d c section) s c in same
space, * ch 3, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, s c in next loop, s
c in next d c, repeat from * 23 times, drop loop from hook, insert
needle in 11th picot made, pick up loop and pull loop through (this
scallop lays in front of work), s c in next ch 1 loop of next d c
section, s c in next d c, * ch 3, sl st in 3rd st from hook for picot, s
c in next loop, s c in next d c, repeat from * 10 times, drop loop from
hook, insert needle in 12th picot of 2nd scallop, pick up loop and pull
through having 1 picot between joinings (this scallop lays to back of
work), ** s c in 1st ch 1 loop of next d c section, s c in next d c, *
picot, s c in next loop, s c in next d c, repeat from * 10 times, drop
loop from hook, insert needle in 10th free picot of previous scallop,
pick up loop and pull through leaving 1 picot free between joinings
(this scallop lays to front of work), repeat from ** all around having 1
scallop to back of work and the next to front of work to the last
scallop. On last scallop work 9 picots after the joining, then join to
13th picot made at beginning of row, s c in next loop, s c in next d c,
picot, s c in next loop, s c in next d c, join to 10th free picot of
previous scallop, break thread.




                          Star Ruffle No. 5906


 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 30 Size 30
  5—75 yd. Balls White.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 12.
  Doily measures about 7 inches without ruffle.

Ch 8, join to form a ring and work 16 s c in ring, join.

2nd Row. Ch 8, tr c in same space, * skip 1 s c, 2 tr c with ch 4
between in next s c, repeat from * 6 times, join in 4th st of ch.

3rd Row. 3 s c, ch 5, 3 s c over each ch 4 loop, join.

4th Row. Sl st to center of 5 ch loop, s c in same space, * ch 5, skip 2
s c, tr c in space between next 2 s c, ch 5, s c in next 5 ch loop,
repeat from * 6 times, ch 5, skip 2 s c, tr c in space between next 2 s
c, ch 2, tr c in 1st s c, this brings thread in position for next row.

5th Row. S c in same space, * ch 7, 5 tr c (shell) in next tr c, ch 7,
skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, 7 tr c in next tr c, s c in next loop,
repeat from * all around in same manner ending row with sl st in 1st s
c.

6th Row. Sl st to center of loop, s c in same space, * ch 9, s c in
center tr c of next shell, ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 11, s c in center
tr c of next tr c group, ch 11, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around in same manner ending row with ch 6, d tr c (3 times over needle)
in 1st s c.

7th Row. Ch 11, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around
ending row with ch 6, tr tr c (4 times over needle) in d tr c.

8th Row. Ch 4, 4 tr c in same space, * ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 9, 2
shells with ch 5 between in center st of next loop, repeat from * 6
times, ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 9, 5 tr c in same space as 1st shell,
ch 2, d c in 4th st of ch.

9th Row. Ch 5, shell in center st of next shell, ch 3, s c in next loop,
ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 3, shell in center st of next shell, ch 5, s
c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around in same manner ending
row with ch 2, d c in d c.

10th Row. Ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, shell in center st of next
shell, ch 5, skip 1 loop, s c in next loop, ch 5, shell in center st of
next shell, ch 5, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around in
same manner ending row with ch 2, d c in d c.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

11th Row. Ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, s c in next loop, ch 5, shell in
center st of next shell, ch 3, shell in center st of next shell, ch 5, s
c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around in same manner ending
row with ch 2, d c in d c.

12th Row. * Ch 5, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 5, * shell
in center st of next shell, repeat from *, repeat from beginning all
around ending row with ch 2, d c in d c.

13th Row. * Ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 7, *
thread over twice, insert in next tr c, pull through, thread over and
work off 2 loops twice, repeat from * 9 times, thread over and work off
all loops at one time (cluster st), ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from
beginning all around in same manner ending row with ch 3, tr c in d c.

14th Row. * Ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, ch 7, s c in
top of next cluster st, ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around
in same manner ending row with ch 3, tr c in tr c.

15th and 16th Rows. * Ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around
ending row with ch 4, tr c in tr c.

17th Row. Shell in same space as tr c just made, s c in next loop, * ch
7, s c in next loop, shell in next s c, s c in next loop, repeat from *
in same manner all around ending row with ch 3, tr c in tr c.

18th Row. Ch 8, s c in center st of next shell, ch 8, s c in next loop,
repeat from beginning all around ending row with ch 1, d tr c in tr c.

19th Row. Start ruffle, * ch 10, s c in same loop, repeat from * twice,
ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all round ending row with
ch 5, tr tr c (4 times over needle) in d tr c (224 loops).

20th and 21st Rows. Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all
around ending row with ch 5, tr tr c in tr tr c.

22nd Row. * Ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, ch 9, 2
shells with ch 5 between in center st of next loop, ch 9, s c in next
loop, repeat from beginning all around in same manner ending row with ch
5, tr tr c in tr tr c.

23rd Row. * Ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from * 5 times, ch 2, shell
in center st of next shell, ch 3, s c in next 5 ch loop, ch 3, shell in
center st of next shell, ch 2, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning
all around ending row with sl st.

24th Row. Sl st to center of loop, * ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from
* 4 times, ch 3, shell in center st of next shell, ch 3, s c in next
loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, shell in center st of next shell, ch
3, s c in next ch 9 loop, repeat from * all around in same manner, join.

25th Row. Sl st to center of loop, * ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 2, 2
shells with ch 3 between in center st of next loop, ch 2, s c in next
loop, ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 3, shell in center st of next shell, ch
3, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch
3, shell in center st of next shell, ch 3, s c in next ch 9 loop, repeat
from * all around in same manner, join.

26th Row. Sl st to center of loop, * ch 3, shell in center st of next
shell, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 5, sl st in s c for picot, ch 3, shell
in center st of next shell, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 4, 3 d c, 5 ch
picot, 2 d c in center st of next shell, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, s
c in next loop, ch 9, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 4, s c in
next loop, ch 3, s c in next loop, ch 3, 3 d c, 5 ch picot, 2 d c in
center st of next shell, ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around in same manner, join, break thread.




                       Irish Rose Ruffle No. 5907


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 30 Size 50
  5—100 yd. Balls White.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 13.
  Doily measures about 10½ inches without ruffle.

Ch 6, join to form a ring, ch 6, d c in ring, * ch 3, d c in ring,
repeat from * 3 times, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

2nd Row. Ch 1, * 2 d c, 5 tr c, 2 d c in mesh, s c in next d c, repeat
from * all around.

3rd Row. * Ch 6, s c in next s c in back of petal, repeat from * all
around.

4th Row. In each loop work 2 d c, 7 tr c, 2 d c and 1 s c in s c between
petals.

5th Row. Ch 10, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 7, sl st in 5th
st from hook for picot, ch 2, s c in center st of next petal, ** ch 7,
sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 7, sl st in 5th st from hook for
picot, ch 2, d c between petals, * ch 7, sl st in 5th st from hook for
picot, repeat from *, ch 2, s c in center st of next petal, repeat from
** 4 times, * ch 7, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, repeat from *,
ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

6th Row. * Ch 7, s c between picots of next loop, ch 7, s c in next s c,
ch 7, s c between picots of next loop, ch 7, s c in next d c, repeat
from * all around.

7th Row. Sl st to center of next loop, ch 8, d c in same loop, * ch 2, 1
d c, ch 5, 1 d c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with
ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

8th Row. Sl st to center of next loop, ch 5, s c in same loop, * ch 2,
skip the ch 2 loop, 3 d c in next loop, ch 5, sl st in top of last d c
for picot, 5 d c in same loop, ch 5, sl st in top of last d c for picot,
3 d c in same loop, (shell) ch 2, skip the next 2 ch loop, 1 s c, ch 5,
1 s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 2, skip
the 2 ch loop, 3 d c, picot, 5 d c, picot, 3 d c in next loop, ch 2,
join.

9th Row. Sl st into 5 ch loop, ch 7, s c in center d c of next shell, ch
5, s c in same space, ch 7, * s c in next 5 ch loop, ch 7, s c in center
d c of next shell, ch 5, s c in same space, ch 7, repeat from * all
around.

10th Row. Sl st to center of next loop, ch 8, d c in same space, * ch 7,
sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 2, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c in center
st of next ch 7 loop, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 7, sl
st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

11th Row. Sl st into loop, * ch 5, s c in same space, ch 9, skip the
picot loop, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with
ch 4, tr c in sl st, (this brings thread in position for next row).

12th Row. Ch 8, d c in same space, ch 5, d c in same space, * ch 7, sl
st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 2, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c in center st
of next 9 ch loop, ch 7, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 2, d c
in center st of next 9 ch loop, ch 5, d c in same space, ch 5, d c in
same space, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 7, sl st in 5th
st from hook for picot, ch 2, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c in next 9 ch loop, ch
7, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

13th Row. Sl st to loop, * ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, skip the picot
loop, 1 s c, ch 5, 1 s c in next loop, ch 7, skip the picot loop, s c in
next loop, repeat from * all around.

Next 4 Rows. Repeat 10th, 11th, 12th and 13th rows.

18th Row. Sl st into loop, ch 3 (counts as 1 d c), 2 dc, picot, 5 d c,
picot, 3 d c (shell) in same loop, * ch 2, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c in center
st of next loop, ch 7, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 2, 1 d c,
ch 5, 1 d c in center st of next 7 ch loop, ch 2, 3 d c, picot, 5 d c,
picot, 3 d c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with ch
2, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c in center st of next loop, ch 7, sl st in 5th st
from hook for picot, ch 2, 1 d c, ch 5, 1 d c in center st of next loop,
ch 2, join.

19th Row. Sl st to center of shell, * ch 5, s c in same space, ch 7, s c
in next 5 ch loop, ch 5, s c in same space, ch 7, skip the picot loop, 1
s c, ch 5, 1 s c in next loop, ch 7, 1 s c in center d c of next shell,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 5, s c in same space, ch 7,
s c in next 5 ch loop, ch 5, s c in same space, ch 7, skip the picot
loop, s c in next 5 ch loop, ch 5, s c in same space, ch 7, join. Repeat
10th, 11th, 12th and 13th rows once, then repeat 10th and 11th rows.

26th Row. S c in loop, * ch 10, s c in next ch 9 loop, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 5, d tr c (3 times over needle) in s c.

27th Row. S c in loop, * ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 5, d tr c in s c.

RUFFLE: Sl st into loop, * ch 10, s c in same loop, repeat from * twice,
** ch 10, s c in next loop, * ch 10, s c in same loop, repeat from *
twice, repeat from ** all around ending row with ch 5, d tr c in sl st.

2nd Row. * Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 5, d tr c in d tr c.

Repeat last row 5 times.

8th Row. Ch 1, s c in same space, * ch 5, sl st in top of s c for picot,
ch 8, 3 d c, picot, 5 d c, picot, 3 d c in next loop, ch 8, s c in next
loop, repeat from * all around, break thread.




                       Bread Tray Ruffle No. 5908


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 30 Size 50
  5—100 yd. Balls white will make either the oval or round doily.
  Steel Crochet hook No. 13 or No. 11.

Hemstitch or turn under a very narrow hem on oval linen center measuring
about 10¾ by 5 inches.

Crochet a row of s c all around, join.

2nd Row. * Ch 6, skip 3 s c, s c in next s c, repeat from * all around.

3rd Row. Sl st into loop, * ch 8, s c in same loop, ch 8, s c in same
loop, ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with
ch 4, tr c in sl st (this brings thread in position for next row).

4th Row. * Ch 8. s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 4, tr c in tr c.

5th Row. Ch 6, cluster st in next loop (cluster st: thread over needle,
insert in loop, pull through and work off 2 loops, * thread over needle,
insert in same loop, pull through and work off 2 loops, repeat from *
once, thread over and work off all loops at one time), ch 4, cluster st
in same space, * ch 3, d c in next loop, ch 3, 2 cluster sts with ch 4
between in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 3,
join in 3rd st of ch 6.

6th Row. * Ch 8, s c between next 2 cluster sts, ch 8, s c in next d c,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 4, tr c in same st as
beginning.

7th Row. * Ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around.

8th Row. Sl st to center of loop and then work in same manner as 5th
row.

9th Row. Ch 6, * 2 cluster sts with ch 4 between in loop between next 2
cluster sts, ch 3, d c in next d c, ch 3, repeat from * all around, join
in 3rd st of ch 6.

10th Row. Ch 4, * 4 cluster sts with ch 4 between each cluster st in
loop between next 2 cluster sts, ch 1, d c in next d c, ch 1, repeat
from * all around ending row with 4 cluster sts with ch 4 between each
cluster st in loop between next 2 cluster sts, ch 1, join in 3rd st of
ch 4.

11th Row. Ch 1, s c in same space, s c in next ch 1 loop, * 2 s c in
next ch 4 loop between cluster sts, ch 3, sl st in top of last s c for
picot, 2 s c in same loop, 2 s c, picot, 2 s c in each of the next 2
loops, s c in next ch 1 loop, s c in next d c, s c in next ch 1 loop,
repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, join, break thread.




                           FOR A ROUND DOILY

Cut a linen circle 7½ inches in diameter. Hemstitch or turn under a very
narrow hem. Work same as Oval Doily with Linen Center.




                         Shaded Ruffle No. 5909


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 30 Size 30
  4—65 yd. Balls Shaded Green or any Color desired or “GEM” Mercerized
          Crochet Cotton, Article 35, Size 30.
  1—250 yd. Ball.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 12.
  Doily measures about 5 inches in diameter without ruffle.

Ch 8, join to form a ring, ch 3 and work 14 d c in ring, join in 3rd st
of ch.

2nd Row. Ch 5, d c in next d c, * ch 2, d c in next d c, repeat from *
12 times, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

3rd Row. Sl st to loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * ch 1, 3 d c in next
loop, repeat from * all around, ch 1, join in 3rd st of ch.

4th Row. S c over last ch 1 made, * ch 7, s c over next ch 1, repeat
from * 13 times, ch 3, tr c in 1st s c, this brings thread in position
for next row.

5th Row. S c in same space, * ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around ending row with ch 5, d tr c (3 times over needle) in 1st s c.

6th Row. Ch 4, 5 tr c in same loop, * s c in next loop, ch 11, s c in
next loop, 11 tr c in next loop, repeat from * 3 times, s c in next
loop, ch 11, s c in next loop, 5 tr c in next loop, join in 4th st of
ch.

7th Row. S c in same space, * ch 9, d c in next s c, ch 9, s c in next
loop, ch 9, d c in next s c, ch 9, s c in center st of next tr c group,
repeat from * all around in same manner ending row with ch 5, d tr c in
1st s c.

8th Row. S c in same loop, * ch 11, s c in next loop, repeat from * all
around, join.

9th Row. Work 11 s c over each loop, join.

10th Row. Ch 5, skip 1 s c, d c in next s c, * ch 1, skip 1 s c, d c in
next s c, repeat from * all around ending row with ch 1, join in 3rd st
of ch.

11th Row. Work 2 s c in each mesh, join.

12th Row. S c in same space, * ch 9, skip 4 s c, s c in next s c, repeat
from * all around ending row with ch 5, d tr c in 1st s c.

13th Row. * Ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 5, d tr c in d tr c.

14th Row. * Ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 1, tr tr c (4 times over needle) in d tr c.

15th Row. * Ch 10, s c in same loop, repeat from * twice, ch 10, s c in
next loop, repeat from beginning all around in same manner ending row
with ch 5, d tr c in tr tr c.

16th and 17th Rows. Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all
around ending each row with ch 5, d tr c in d tr c.

18th Row. 4 s c in same loop, 7 s c in each of the following loops
ending row with 4 s c in 1st loop, join.

19th Row. Ch 5, skip 2 s c, d c in next s c, * ch 2, skip 2 s c, d c in
next s c, repeat from * all around, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

20th Row. 2 s c in each of the 1st 9 meshes, 3 s c in each remaining
mesh, join.

21st Row. S c in same space, * ch 11, skip 5 s c, s c in next s c,
repeat from * all around ending row with ch 7, tr c in 1st s c.

22nd Row. 6 tr c in next loop, ch 5, sl st in last tr c for picot, 5 tr
c in same space, s c in next loop, ch 10, sl st in 6th st from hook for
picot, ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from beginning all around, join,
break thread.




                       Pineapple Ruffle No. 5910


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 20 Size 20
  4—200 yd. Balls White, Ecru or Cream.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 12.
  Doily measures about 13 inches in diameter without the ruffle.

Ch 6, join to form a ring, ch 1 and work 8 s c in ring, join in 1st s c.

2nd Row. * Ch 10, s c in next s c, repeat from * 6 times, ch 4, d tr c
(3 times over needle) in next s c. This brings thread in position for
next row.

3rd Row. Ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * ch 7, 3 d c in next loop, repeat
from * all around, ch 7, join.

4th Row. Sl st to next d c, * ch 5, 3 d c in next loop, ch 5, s c in
center d c of next d c group, repeat from * all around ending row with
ch 5, 3 d c in next loop, ch 2, tr c in same space with sl st.

5th Row. * Ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, tr c in tr c.

6th Row. Ch 5, d c in same space, * ch 5, 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in center
st of next loop, repeat from * all around, ch 5, join in 3rd st of ch.

7th Row. Sl st into loop, ch 3, d c in same space, ch 3, 2 d c in same
space, * ch 3, skip 1 loop, 8 tr c in next loop, ch 3, skip 1 loop, 2 d
c, ch 3, 2 d c (shell) in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, skip 1 loop, 8 tr c in next loop, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

8th Row. Sl st into center of shell, ch 3, d c in same space, ch 3, 2 d
c in same space, * ch 3, 1 tr c in each tr c with ch 1 between each tr
c, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c, (shell) in center of next shell, repeat
from * all around ending row with ch 3, 1 tr c in each tr c with ch 1
between each tr c, ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch.

9th Row. Sl st to center of shell, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in same
space ** ch 4, s c between 1st 2 tr c of pineapple, * ch 4, s c between
next 2 tr c, repeat from * 5 times, ch 4, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in center
of next shell, repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

10th Row. Sl st to center of shell, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in same
space, ** ch 4, skip 1 loop, s c in 1st loop of pineapple * ch 4, s c in
next loop, repeat from * 4 times, ch 4, shell in shell, repeat from **
all around in same manner, join.

11th Row. Sl st to center of shell, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d
c in same space, ** ch 4, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c in
next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 4, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c
in center of next shell, repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

12th Row. Sl st into loop, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c in same space, ** ch
5, shell in next loop, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c
in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 4, skip 1 loop, shell in next ch 3
loop, repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

13th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, ** ch 3, shell
in next loop, ch 3, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of
pineapple, * ch 4, s c, in next loop, repeat from * once, ch 4, shell in
next shell, repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

14th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 3, 1 d c,
ch 3, 1 d c in next loop, ch 3, shell in next shell, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3,
1 dc in next loop, ch 3, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of
pineapple, ch 4, s c in next loop, ch 4, shell in next shell, repeat
from * all around in same manner, join.

15th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 4, skip 1
loop, 8 tr c in next loop, ch 4, shell in next shell, ch 4, skip 1 loop,
8 tr c in next loop, ch 4, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c in remaining
loop of pineapple, ch 4, shell in next shell, repeat from * all around
in same manner, join.

16th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 4, 1 tr c
in each of the next 8 tr c with ch 1 between each tr c, ch 4, shell in
next shell, ch 4, 1 tr c in each of the next 8 tr c with ch 1 between
each tr c, ch 4, shell in next shell, shell in next shell, repeat from *
all around in same manner ending row to correspond, join in 3rd st of ch
of 1st shell, ch 1, turn.

17th Row. Sl st back to center of shell just made, ch 3, turn, d c in
same space, ch 2, 2 d c in center of next shell, ** ch 4, s c between
1st 2 tr c, * ch 4, s c between next 2 tr c, repeat from * 5 times, ch
4, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c between 1st 2 tr c, * ch 4, s c
between next 2 tr c, repeat from * 5 times, ch 4, 2 d c in center of
next shell, ch 2, 2 d c in center of next shell, repeat from ** all
around in same manner, join.

18th Row. Sl st into ch 2 loop, shell in same space, ** ch 4, s c in 1st
loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, ch
4, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of next pineapple, * ch 4,
s c in next loop, repeat from * 4 times, ch 4, shell in next ch 2 loop,
repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

19th Row. Sl st to center of shell, ch 3, 1 d c, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d
c in same space, ** ch 4, s c in 1st loop of pineapple * ch 4, s c in
next loop, repeat from * 3 times, ch 4, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c, ch 3, 2 d c
in center of next shell, repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

20th Row. Sl st to loop, shell in same space, ** ch 5, shell in next ch
3 loop, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next loop,
repeat from * twice, ch 4, shell in next ch 3 loop, repeat from ** all
around in same manner, join.

21st Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, ** ch 4, s c in
next loop, ch 4, shell in center of next shell, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of
pineapple, * ch 4, s c in next loop, repeat from *, ch 4, shell in next
shell, repeat from ** all around in same manner, join.

22nd Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 5, s c in
next s c, ch 5, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c in 1st loop of pineapple,
ch 4, s c in next loop, ch 4, shell in next shell, repeat from * all
around in same manner, join.

23rd Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, ** ch 7, *
thread over needle twice, insert in next loop, thread over and work off
2 loops twice, repeat from *, thread over and work off all loops at one
time, ch 7, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c in remaining loop of
pineapple, ch 4, shell in next shell, repeat from ** all around in same
manner, join.

24th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 7, s c in
next loop, ch 9, s c in next loop, ch 7, shell in next shell, ch 4, s c
in next s c at top of pineapple, ch 4, shell in next shell, repeat from
* all around in same manner, join.

25th Row. Sl st to center of shell, shell in same space, * ch 7, s c in
next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, s c in next loop, ch 7, shell
in next shell, ch 1, shell in next shell, repeat from * all around in
same manner, join.

26th Row. Sl st to center of shell, ch 3, d c in same space, ** ch 7, s
c in next loop, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat from * twice, ch 7, 2 d
c in center of next shell, 2 d c in center of next shell, repeat from **
all around ending row with 2 d c in last shell, join.

27th Row. ** Ch 7, s c in next loop, * ch 7, s c in next loop, repeat
from * 3 times, ch 7, s c in center of 4 d c group, repeat from ** all
around ending row with ch 3, tr c in center of 4 d c group.

28th Row. * Ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, tr c in tr c.

29th Row. Ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * ch 5, 3 d c in next loop, repeat
from * all around, join.

30th Row. Sl st to center of loop, * ch 8, s c in next loop, repeat from
* all around ending row with ch 3, tr c in sl st.

31st Row. Ch 3, 2 d c in same space, * ch 6, 3 d c in next loop, repeat
from * all around ending row with ch 3, tr c in 3rd st of ch.

32nd Row. * Ch 9, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
with ch 3, d tr c in tr c.

33rd Row. Same as 31st row but ending row with ch 1, tr tr c (4 times
over needle) in 3rd st of ch.

RUFFLE. * Ch 10, s c in same loop, ch 10, s c in same loop, ch 10, s c
in same loop, ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending
row with ch 5, tr tr c in same space as beginning (384 loops).

2nd Row. * Ch 10, s c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row
same as last row. Repeat the 2nd row twice but ending the last row with
ch 3, thread over needle 5 times, thread over and work off all loops 2
at a time.

5th Row. Ch 4, 7 tr c in same loop, * ch 6, 4 s c in next loop, 4 s c in
next loop, ch 6, 8 tr c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending
row with ch 6, 4 s c in each of the next 2 loops, ch 6, join in 4th st
of ch.

6th Row. Ch 5, 1 tr c in each of the next 7 tr c with ch 1 between each
tr c, * ch 8, skip 2 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 4 s c, ch 8, 1 tr c
in each of the next 8 tr c with ch 1 between each tr c, repeat from *
all around ending row with ch 8, skip 2 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 4
s c, ch 8, join in 4th st of ch.

7th Row. Sl st between 1st 2 tr c, ** ch 7, sl st in 4th st from hook
for picot, ch 3, s c between next 2 tr c, * ch 7, sl st in 4th st from
hook for picot, ch 3, s c between next 2 tr c, repeat from * 4 times, ch
6, s c in next loop, ch 9, sl st in 5th st from hook for picot, ch 4, sl
st in same space for picot, ch 4, sl st in same space for picot (a 3
picot cluster) ch 4, s c in next loop, ch 6, s c between first 2 tr c of
next tr c group, repeat from ** all around, break thread.

                      CROCHET ABBREVIATIONS

  ch          Chain
  st          Stitch
  sl st       Slip st.
  s c         Single Crochet
  s d c       Short Double Crochet
  d c         Double Crochet
  tr c        Treble Crochet
  d tr c      Double Treble Crochet
  tr tr c     Triple Treble Crochet
  o m         Open Mesh. Sometimes termed sp-Space
  s m         Solid Mesh. Sometimes termed bl-Block
  p           Picot
  d p         Double Picot
  beg. rnd    Beginning Round
  incl        Inclusive
  inc         Increase
  dec         Decrease


                   _Directions for Starching Doilies_

STARCH: Dissolve ¼ cup starch in ½ cup of cold water. Boil slowly over a
low flame, as it thickens stir in gradually about 1¼ cups of cold water.
Boil, stirring constantly until starch clears. This makes a thick pasty
mixture.

As soon as starch is cool enough to handle, dip doily and squeeze starch
through it thoroughly. Wring out extra starch. The doily should be wet
with starch but there should be none in the spaces. Pin center of doily
in position according to size and leave until thoroughly dry. If steam
iron is used iron ruffle after it is dry. If regular iron is used dampen
ruffle slightly before pressing. Pin folds of ruffle in position and
leave until thoroughly dry.




                          Pansy Doily No. 5911


                      _(Illustrated on Back Cover)_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “STAR” MERCERIZED CROCHET
                       COTTON, ARTICLE 30 Size 30
  1—75 yd. Ball White.
  1—65 yd. Ball Shaded Lavenders.
  1—65 yd. Ball Shaded Yellows.
  3 yds. Green.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 11.
  Doily measures about 7¼ inches.

With White, ch 6, join to form a ring, ch 5, d c in ring, * ch 2, d c in
ring, repeat from * 5 times, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch (8 spokes).

2nd Row. Ch 1 and work 3 s c in each loop, join in 1st s c (24 s c.)

3rd Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 2 s c, * ch 2, 1 d c in each of
the next 3 s c, repeat from * all around, ch 2, join in 3rd st of ch.

4th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, 1 d c in next d c, 2 d c in next dc, *
ch 2, 2 dc in next d c, 1 d c in next d c, 2 d c in next d c, repeat
from * all around, ch 2, join.

5th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, 2 d c
in next d c, * ch 2, 2 d c in next d c, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c,
2 d c in next d c, repeat from * all around, ch 2, join.

6th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch 1,
skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, 2 d c in next d c, * ch 2,
2 d c in next d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch 1, skip 1 d c, 1
d c in each of the next 2 d c, 2 d c in next d c, repeat from * all
around, ch 2, join.

7th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch
1, skip 1 d c, d c in next mesh, ch 1, skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the
next 2 d c, 2 d c in next d c, ch 2, 2 d c in next d c, repeat from *
all around ending row to correspond, ch 2, join.

8th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch
1, skip 1 d c, 1 d c in next mesh, d c in next d c, d c in next mesh, ch
1, skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, 2 d c in next d c, ch 2,
2 d c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, ch
2, join.

9th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch
1, skip 1 d c, d c in next mesh, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, d c in
next mesh, ch 1, skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, 2 d c in
next d c, ch 2, 2 d c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row
to correspond, ch 2, join.

10th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch
1, skip 1 d c, d c in next mesh, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch 1,
skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, d c in next mesh, ch 1,
skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, 2 d c in next d c, ch 2, 2
d c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, ch
2, join.

11th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, d
c in next mesh, ch 1, skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, d c
in next mesh, 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, ch 1, skip 1 d c, d c in
next mesh, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, 2 d c in next d c, ch 2, 2 d
c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond, ch 2,
join.

12th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, d
c in next mesh, ch 1, skip 1 d c, 1 d c in each of the next 3 d c, ch 1,
skip 1 d c, d c in next mesh, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, 2 d c in
next d c, ch 2, 2 d c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row
to correspond, ch 2, join.

13th Row. Ch 3, d c in same space, * 1 d c in each of the next 7 d c, d
c in next mesh, ch 1, skip 1 d c, d c in next d c, ch 1, skip 1 d c, 1 d
c in next mesh, 1 d c in each of the next 7 d c, 2 d c in next d c, ch
2, 2 d c in next d c, repeat from * all around ending row to correspond,
ch 2, join.

14th Row. Ch 3, 1 d c in each of the next 4 d c, * ch 3, skip 2 d c, 1 d
c in each of the next 3 d c, d c in next mesh, ch 1, d c in next mesh, 1
d c in each of the next 3 d c, ch 3, skip 2 d c, 1 d c in each of the
next 5 d c, ch 2, 1 d c in each of the next 5 d c, repeat from * all
around ending row to correspond, ch 2, join.

15th Row. Sl st to ch 3 loop, ch 3, 2 d c in same loop, ch 3, 3 d c in
same loop, * ch 4, 1 d c in next ch 1 mesh, ch 4, 3 d c, ch 3, 3 d c
(shell) in next ch 3 loop, ch 4, d c in next ch 2 loop, ch 4, 3 d c, ch
3, 3 d c in next loop, repeat from * all around ending row to
correspond, ch 4, join, break thread.

PANSY: With Yellow, ch 7, join to form a ring, ch 3 (counts as 1 d c), 2
d c in ring, * ch 7, 3 d c in ring, repeat from * 3 times, ch 7, join.

2nd Row. Sl st to loop, ch 3 (counts as 1 d c), work 15 d c in loop, s c
in center d c of 3 d c group, * 16 d c in next loop, s c in center d c
of next 3 d c group, repeat from * once (3 petals), ch 4, 12 d tr c (3
times around needle) with ch 1 between each d tr c in next loop, ch 1, 2
tr c with ch 1 between in same loop, ch 1, 2 d c with ch 1 between in
same loop, s c in center d c of next 3 d c group, 2 d c with ch 1
between in next loop, ch 1, 2 tr c with ch 1 between in same loop, ch 1,
12 d tr c with ch 1 between each d tr c in same loop, ch 4, s c in
center of next d c group, join to base of 1st petal, break thread. Work
7 more Yellow pansies and 8 Lavender pansies in same manner. Join White
in s c between large petals at top of Yellow pansy, * ch 3, s c in next
ch 1 loop, repeat from * 14 times, ch 3, s c in ch 4 loop of same pansy,
s c in 4 ch loop of large petal of Lavender pansy, work ch 3 loops
across 2 large petals of pansy, join the next Yellow pansy and continue
until all pansies are joined, alternating colors, break thread.

With wrong side of work toward you, attach Green in single d c between
White sections, ch 6, s c between the 12th and 13th d c of 1st small
petal of pansy, ch 6, s c in center st of 2nd petal and center of shell,
ch 6, s c between 4th and 5th d c of next petal, ch 6, s c in next
single d c of solid section, ch 6 and repeat all around, break thread.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Relocated material “continued on remote page” for more
  conveniently-flowing text.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUFFLED DOILIES AND THE PANSY DOILY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


