The Project Gutenberg eBook of The lost race
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The lost race

Author: Robert E. Howard

Illustrator: G. O. Olinick

Release date: June 8, 2024 [eBook #73793]

Language: English

Original publication: Indianapolis, IN: Popular Fiction Publishing Company, 1927

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Distributed Proofreaders Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST RACE ***





                             The LOST RACE

                          By Robert E. Howard

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Weird Tales January 1927.]


Cororuc glanced about him and hastened his pace. He was no coward, but
he did not like the place. Tall trees rose all about, their sullen
branches shutting out the sunlight. The dim trail led in and out among
them, sometimes skirting the edge of a ravine, where Cororuc could gaze
down at the tree-tops beneath. Occasionally, through a rift in the
forest, he could see away to the forbidding hills that hinted of the
ranges much farther to the west, that were the mountains of Cornwall.

In those mountains the bandit chief, Buruc the Cruel, was supposed to
lurk, to descend upon such victims as might pass that way. Cororuc
shifted his grip on his spear and quickened his step. His haste was
due not only to the menace of the outlaws, but also to the fact that
he wished once more to be in his native land. He had been on a secret
mission to the wild Cornish tribesmen: and though he had been more
or less successful, he was impatient to be out of their inhospitable
country. It had been a long, wearisome trip, and he still had nearly
the whole of Britain to traverse. He threw a glance of aversion about
him. He longed for the pleasant woodlands, with scampering deer, and
chirping birds, to which he was used. He longed for the tall white
cliff, where the blue sea lapped merrily. The forest through which he
was passing seemed uninhabited. There were no birds, no animals; nor
had he seen a sign of a human habitation.

His comrades still lingered at the savage court of the Cornish king,
enjoying his crude hospitality, in no hurry to be away. But Cororuc was
not content. So he had left them to follow at their leisure and had set
out alone.

Rather a fine figure of a man was Cororuc. Some six feet in height,
strongly though leanly built, he was, with gray eyes, a pure Briton but
not a pure Celt, his long yellow hair revealing, in him as in all his
race, a trace of Belg√¶.

He was clad in skilfully dressed deerskin, for the Celts had not yet
perfected the coarse cloth which they made, and most of the race
preferred the hides of deer.

He was armed with a long bow of yew wood, made with no especial skill
but an efficient weapon; a long bronze broadsword, with a buckskin
sheath, a long bronze dagger and a small, round shield, rimmed with
a band of bronze and covered with tough buffalo hide. A crude bronze
helmet was on his head. Faint devices were painted in woad on his arms
and cheeks.

His beardless face was of the highest type of Briton, clear,
straightforward, the shrewd, practical determination of the Nordic
mingling with the reckless courage and dreamy artistry of the Celt.

So Cororuc trod the forest path, warily, ready to flee or fight, but
preferring to do neither just then.

The trail led away from the ravine, disappearing around a great tree.
And from the other side of the tree, Cororuc heard sounds of conflict.
Gliding warily forward, and wondering whether he should see some of the
elves and dwarfs that were reputed to haunt those woodlands, he peered
around the great tree.

A few feet from him he saw a strange tableau. Backed against another
tree stood a large wolf, at bay, blood trickling from gashes about his
shoulder; while before him, crouching for a spring, the warrior saw a
great panther. Cororuc wondered at the cause of the battle. Not often
the lords of the forest met in warfare. And he was puzzled by the
snarls of the great cat. Savage, blood-lusting, yet they held a strange
note of fear; and the beast seemed hesitant to spring in.

Just why Cororuc chose to take the part of the wolf, he himself
could not have said. Doubtless it was just the reckless chivalry of
the Celt of him, an admiration for the dauntless attitude of the
wolf against his far more powerful foe. Be that as it may, Cororuc,
characteristically forgetting his bow and taking the more reckless
course, drew his sword and leaped in front of the panther. But he had
no chance to use it. The panther, whose nerve appeared to be already
somewhat shaken, uttered a startled screech and disappeared among the
trees so quickly that Cororuc wondered if he had really seen a panther.
He turned to the wolf, wondering if it would leap upon him. It was
watching him, half crouching; slowly it stepped away from the tree, and
still watching him, backed away a few yards, then turned and made off
with a strange shambling gait. As the warrior watched it vanish into
the forest, an uncanny feeling came over him: he had seen many wolves,
he had hunted them and had been hunted by them, but he had never seen
such a wolf before.

He hesitated and then walked warily after the wolf, following the
tracks that were plainly defined in the soft loam. He did not hasten,
being merely content to follow the tracks. After a short distance, he
stopped short, the hairs on his neck seeming to bristle. _Only the
tracks of the hind feet showed: the wolf was walking erect._

He glanced about him. There was no sound; the forest was silent. He
felt an impulse to turn and put as much territory between him and the
mystery as possible, but his Celtic curiosity would not allow it. He
followed the trail. And then it ceased altogether. Beneath a great
tree the tracks vanished. Cororuc felt the cold sweat on his forehead.
What kind of place was that forest? Was he being led astray and eluded
by some inhuman, supernatural monster of the woodlands, who sought to
ensnare him? And Cororuc backed away, his sword lifted, his courage
not allowing him to run, but greatly desiring to do so. And so he came
again to the tree where he had first seen the wolf. The trail he had
followed led away from it in another direction and Cororuc took it up,
almost running in his haste to get out of the vicinity of a wolf who
walked on two legs and then vanished in the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trail wound about more tediously than ever, appearing and
disappearing within a dozen feet, but it was well for Cororuc that it
did, for thus he heard the voices of the men coming up the path before
they saw him. He took to a tall tree that branched over the trail,
lying close to the great bole, along a wide-flung branch.

Three men were coming down the forest path.

One was a big, burly fellow, vastly over six feet in height, with a
long red beard and a great mop of red hair. In contrast, his eyes were
a beady black. He was dressed in deer-skins, and armed with a great
sword.

Of the two others, one was a lanky, villainous-looking scoundrel, with
only one eye, and the other was a small, wizened man, who squinted
hideously with both beady eyes.

Cororuc knew them, by descriptions the Cornishmen had made between
curses, and it was in his excitement to get a better view of the most
villainous murderer in Britain that he slipped from the tree branch and
plunged to the ground directly between them.

He was up on the instant, his sword out. He could expect no mercy; for
he knew that the red-haired man was Buruc the Cruel, the scourge of
Cornwall.

The bandit chief bellowed a foul curse and whipped out his great
sword. He avoided the Briton's furious thrust by a swift backward leap
and then the battle was on. Buruc rushed the warrior from the front,
striving to beat him down by sheer weight; while the lanky, one-eyed
villain slipped around, trying to get behind him. The smaller man had
retreated to the edge of the forest. The fine art of the fence was
unknown to those early swordsmen. It was hack, slash, stab, the full
weight of the arm behind each blow. The terrific blows crashing on his
shield beat Cororuc to the ground, and the lanky, one-eyed villain
rushed in to finish him. Cororuc spun about without rising, cut the
bandit's legs from under him and stabbed him as he fell, then threw
himself to one side and to his feet, in time to avoid Buruc's sword.
Again, driving his shield up to catch the bandit's sword in midair, he
deflected it and whirled his own with all his power. Buruc's head flew
from his shoulders.

Then Cororuc, turning, saw the wizened bandit scurry into the forest.
He raced after him, but the fellow had disappeared among the trees.
Knowing the uselessness of attempting to pursue him, Cororuc turned
and raced down the trail. He did not know if there were more bandits
in that direction, but he did know that if he expected to get out of
the forest at all, he would have to do it swiftly. Without doubt the
villain who had escaped would have all the other bandits out, and soon
they would be beating the woodlands for him.

After running for some distance down the path and seeing no sign of any
enemy, he stopped and climbed into the topmost branches of a tall tree,
that towered above its fellows.

On all sides he seemed surrounded by a leafy ocean. To the west he
could see the hills he had avoided. To the north, far in the distance
other hills rose; to the south the forest ran, an unbroken sea. But
to the east, far away, he could barely see the line that marked the
thinning out of the forest into the fertile plains. Miles and miles
away, he knew not how many, but it meant more pleasant travel, villages
of men, people of his own race. He was surprized that he was able to
see that far, but the tree in which he stood was a giant of its kind.

Before he started to descend, he glanced about nearer at hand. He could
trace the faintly marked line of the trail he had been following,
running away into the east; and could make out other trails leading
into it, or away from it. Then a glint caught his eye. He fixed his
gaze on a glade some distance down the trail and saw, presently, a
party of men enter and vanish. Here and there, on every trail, he
caught glances of the glint of accouterments, the waving of foliage.
So the squinting villain had already roused the bandits. They were all
around him; he was virtually surrounded.

A faintly heard burst of savage yells, from back up the trail, startled
him. So, they had already thrown a cordon about the place of the fight
and had found him gone. Had he not fled swiftly, he would have been
caught. He was outside the cordon, but the bandits were all about him.
Swiftly he slipped from the tree and glided into the forest.

Then began the most exciting hunt Cororuc had ever engaged in; for he
was the hunted and men were the hunters. Gliding, slipping from bush
to bush and from tree to tree, now running swiftly, now crouching in a
covert, Cororuc fled, ever eastward; not daring to turn back lest he be
driven farther back into the forest. At times he was forced to turn his
course; in fact, he very seldom fled in a straight course, yet always
he managed to work farther eastward.

Sometimes he crouched in bushes or lay along some leafy branch, and
saw bandits pass so close to him that he could have touched them. Once
or twice they sighted him and he fled, bounding over logs and bushes,
darting in and out among the trees; and always he eluded them.

It was in one of those headlong flights that he noticed he had entered
a defile of small hills, of which he had been unaware, and looking back
over his shoulder, saw that his pursuers had halted, within full sight.
Without pausing to ruminate on so strange a thing, he darted around a
great boulder, felt a vine or something catch his foot, and was thrown
headlong. Simultaneously something struck the youth's head, knocking
him senseless.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Cororuc recovered his senses, he found that he was bound, hand and
foot. He was being borne along, over rough ground. He looked about him.
Men carried him on their shoulders, but such men as he had never seen
before. Scarce above four feet stood the tallest, and they were small
of build and very dark of complexion. Their eyes were black; and most
of them went stooped forward, as if from a lifetime spent in crouching
and hiding; peering furtively on all sides. They were armed with
small bows, arrows, spears and daggers, all pointed, not with crudely
worked bronze but with flint and obsidian, of the finest workmanship.
They were dressed in finely dressed hides of rabbits and other small
animals, and a kind of coarse cloth; and many were tattooed from head
to foot in ocher and woad. There were perhaps twenty in all. What sort
of men were they? Cororuc had never seen the like.

They were going down a ravine, on both sides of which steep cliffs
rose. Presently they seemed to come to a blank wall, where the ravine
appeared to come to an abrupt stop. Here, at a word from one who seemed
to be in command, they set the Briton down, and seizing hold of a large
boulder, drew it to one side. A small cavern was exposed, seeming to
vanish away into the earth; then the strange men picked up the Briton
and moved forward.

Cororuc's hair bristled at thought of being borne into that
forbidding-looking cave. What manner of men were they? In all Britain
and Alba, in Cornwall or Ireland, Cororuc had never seen such men.
Small dwarfish men, who dwelt in the earth. Cold sweat broke out on the
youth's forehead. Surely they were the malevolent dwarfs of whom the
Cornish people had spoken, who dwelt in their caverns by day, and by
night sallied forth to steal and burn dwellings, even slaying if the
opportunity arose! You will hear of them, even today, if you journey in
Cornwall.

The men, or elves, if such they were, bore him into the cavern, others
entering and drawing the boulder back into place. For a moment all was
darkness, and then torches began to glow, away off. And at a shout they
moved on. Other men of the caves came forward, with the torches.

Cororuc looked about him. The torches shed a vague glow over the
scene. Sometimes one, sometimes another wall of the cave showed for
an instant, and the Briton was vaguely aware that they were covered
with paintings, crudely done, yet with a certain skill his own race
could not equal. But always the roof remained unseen. Cororuc knew that
the seemingly small cavern had merged into a cave of surprizing size.
Through the vague light of the torches the strange people moved, came
and went, silently, like shadows of the dim past.

He felt the cords or thongs that bound his feet loosened. He was lifted
upright.

"Walk straight ahead," said a voice, speaking the language of his own
race, and he felt a spearpoint touch the back of his neck.

And straight ahead he walked, feeling his sandals scrape on the
stone floor of the cave, until they came to a place where the floor
tilted upward. The pitch was steep and the stone was so slippery that
Cororuc could not have climbed it alone. But his captors pushed him,
and pulled him, and he saw that long, strong vines were strung from
somewhere at the top.

Those the strange men seized, and bracing their feet against the
slippery ascent, went up swiftly. When their feet found level surface
again, the cave made a turn, and Cororuc blundered out into a firelit
scene that made him gasp.

The cave debouched into a cavern so vast as to be almost incredible.
The mighty walls swept up into a great arched roof that vanished in the
darkness. A level floor lay between, and through it flowed a river; an
underground river. From under one wall it flowed to vanish silently
under the other. An arched stone bridge, seemingly of natural make,
spanned the current.

All around the walls of the great cavern, which was roughly circular,
were smaller caves, and before each glowed a fire. Higher up were other
caves, regularly arranged, tier on tier. Surely human men could not
have built such a city.

In and out among the caves, on the level floor of the main cavern,
people were going about what seemed daily tasks. Men were talking
together and mending weapons, some were fishing from the river;
women were replenishing fires, preparing garments; and altogether it
might have been any other village in Britain, to judge from their
occupations. But it all struck Cororuc as extremely unreal; the strange
place, the small, silent people, going about their tasks, the river
flowing silently through it all.

Then they became aware of the prisoner and flocked about him. There was
none of the shouting, abuse and indignities, such as savages usually
heap on their captives, as the small men drew about Cororuc, silently
eyeing him with malevolent, wolfish stares. The warrior shuddered, in
spite of himself.

But his captors pushed through the throng, driving the Briton before
them. Close to the bank of the river, they stopped and drew away from
around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two great fires leaped and flickered in front of him and there was
something between them. He focused his gaze and presently made out the
object. A high stone seat, like a throne; and in it seated an aged man,
with a long white beard, silent, motionless, but with black eyes that
gleamed like a wolf's.

The ancient was clothed in some kind of a single, flowing garment. One
clawlike hand rested on the seat near him, skinny, crooked fingers,
with talons like a hawk's. The other hand was hidden among his garments.

The firelight danced and flickered; now the old man stood out clearly,
his hooked, beaklike nose and long beard thrown into bold relief; now
he seemed to recede until he was invisible to the gaze of the Briton,
except for his glittering eyes.

"Speak, Briton!" The words came suddenly, strong, clear, without a hint
of age. "Speak, what would ye say?"

Cororuc, taken aback, stammered and said, "Why, why--what manner of
people are you? Why have you taken me prisoner? Are you elves?"

"We are Picts," was the stern reply.

"Picts!" Cororuc had heard tales of those ancient people from the
Gaelic Britons; some said that they still lurked in the hill of
Siluria, but----

"I have fought Picts in Caledonia," the Briton protested; "they are
short but massive and misshapen; not at all like you!"

"They are not true Picts," came the stern retort. "Look about you,
Briton," with a wave of an arm, "you see the remnants of a vanishing
race; a race that once ruled Britain from sea to sea."

The Briton stared, bewildered.

"Harken, Briton," the voice continued; "harken, barbarian, while I tell
to you the tale of the lost race."

The firelight flickered and danced, throwing vague reflections on the
towering walls and on the rushing, silent current.

The ancient's voice echoed through the mighty cavern.

"Our people came from the south. Over the islands, over the Inland
Sea. Over the snow-topped mountains, where some remained, to stay
any enemies who might follow. Down into the fertile plains we came.
Over all the land we spread. We became wealthy and prosperous. Then
two kings arose in the land, and he who conquered, drove out the
conquered. So many of us made boats and set sail for the far-off cliffs
that gleamed white in the sunlight. We found a fair land with fertile
plains. We found a race of red-haired barbarians, who dwelt in caves.
Mighty giants, of great bodies and small minds.

"We built our huts of wattle. We tilled the soil. We cleared the
forest. We drove the red-haired giants back into the forest. Farther we
drove them back until at last they fled to the mountains of the west
and the mountains of the north. We were rich. We were prosperous.

"Then," and his voice thrilled with rage and hate, until it seemed to
reverberate through the cavern, "then the Celts came. From the isles of
the west, in their rude coracles they came. In the west they landed,
but they were not satisfied with the west. They marched eastward and
seized the fertile plains. We fought. They were stronger. They were
fierce fighters and they were armed with weapons of bronze, whereas we
had only weapons of flint.

"We were driven out. They enslaved us. They drove us into the forest.
Some of us fled into the mountains of the west. Many fled into the
mountains of the north. There they mingled with the red-haired giants
we drove out so long ago, and became a race of monstrous dwarfs, losing
all the arts of peace and gaining only the ability to fight.

"But some of us swore that we would never leave the land we had fought
for. But the Celts pressed us. There were many, and more came. So we
took to caverns, to ravines, to caves. We, who had always dwelt in huts
that let in much light, who had always tilled the soil, we learned to
dwell like beasts, in caves where no sunlight ever entered. Caves we
found, of which this is the greatest; caves we made.

"You, Briton," the voice became a shriek and a long arm was
outstretched in accusation, "you and your race! You have made a free,
prosperous nation into a race of earth-rats! We who never fled, who
dwelt in the air and the sunlight close by the sea where traders came,
we must flee like hunted beasts and burrow like moles! But at night!
Ah, then for our vengeance! Then we slip from our hiding places, from
our ravines and our caves, with torch and dagger! Look, Briton!"

And following the gesture, Cororuc saw a rounded post of some kind of
very hard wood, set in a niche in the stone floor, close to the bank.
The floor about the niche was charred as if by old fires.

Cororuc stared, uncomprehending. Indeed, he understood little of what
had passed. That these people were even human, he was not at all
certain. He had heard so much of them as "little people." Tales of
their doings, their hatred of the race of man, and their maliciousness
flocked back to him. Little he knew that he was gazing on one of the
mysteries of the ages. That the tales which the ancient Gaels told of
the Picts, already warped, would become even more warped from age to
age, to result in tales of elves, dwarfs, trolls and fairies, at first
accepted and then rejected, entire, by the race of men, just as the
Neandertal monsters resulted in tales of goblins and ogres. But of that
Cororuc neither knew nor cared, and the ancient was speaking again.

"There, there, Briton," exulted he, pointing to the post, "there you
shall pay! A scant payment for the debt your race owes mine, but to the
fullest of your extent."

The old man's exultation would have been fiendish, except for a certain
high purpose in his face. He was sincere. He believed that he was only
taking just vengeance; and he seemed like some great patriot for a
mighty, lost cause.

"But I am a Briton!" stammered Cororuc. "It was not my people who drove
your race into exile! They were Gaels, from Ireland. I am a Briton and
my race came from Gallia only a hundred years ago. We conquered the
Gaels and drove them into Erin, Wales and Caledonia, even as they drove
your race."

"No matter!" The ancient chief was on his feet. "A Celt is a Celt.
Briton, or Gael, it makes no difference. Had it not been Gael, it would
have been Briton. Every Celt who falls into our hands must pay, be it
warrior or woman, babe or king. Seize him and bind him to the post."

In an instant Cororuc was bound to the post, and he saw, with horror,
the Picts piling firewood about his feet.

"And when you are sufficiently burned, Briton," said the ancient, "this
dagger that has drunk the blood of an hundred Britons, shall quench its
thirst in yours."

"But never have I harmed a Pict!" Cororuc gasped, struggling with his
bonds.

"You pay, not for what you did, but for what your race has done,"
answered the ancient sternly. "Well do I remember the deeds of
the Celts when first they landed on Britain--the shrieks of the
slaughtered, the screams of ravished girls, the smokes of burning
villages, the plundering."

Cororuc felt his short neck-hairs bristle. When first the Celts landed
on Britain! That was over five hundred years ago!

And his Celtic curiosity would not let him keep still, even at the
stake with the Picts preparing to light firewood piled about him.

"You could not remember that. That was ages ago."

The ancient looked at him somberly. "And I am age-old. In my youth I
was a witch-finder, and an old woman witch cursed me as she writhed at
the stake. She said I should live until the last child of the Pictish
race had passed. That I should see the once mighty nation go down into
oblivion and then--and only then--should I follow it. For she put upon
me the curse of life everlasting."

Then his voice rose until it filled the cavern, "But the curse was
nothing. Words can do no harm, can do nothing, to a man. I live. An
hundred generations have I seen come and go, and yet another hundred.
What is time? The sun rises and sets, and another day has passed into
oblivion. Men watch the sun and set their lives by it. They league
themselves on every hand with time. They count the minutes that race
them into eternity. Man outlived the centuries ere he began to reckon
time. Time is man-made. Eternity is the work of the gods. In this
cavern there is no such thing as time. There are no stars, no sun.
Without is time; within is eternity. We count not time. Nothing marks
the speeding of the hours. The youths go forth. They see the sun, the
stars. They reckon time. And they pass. I was a young man when I
entered this cavern. I have never left it. As you reckon time, I may
have dwelt here a thousand years; or an hour. When not banded by time,
the soul, the mind, call it what you will, can conquer the body. And
the wise men of the race, in my youth, knew more than the outer world
will ever learn. When I feel that my body begins to weaken, I take the
magic draft, that is known only to me, of all the world. It does not
give immortality; that is the work of the mind alone; but it rebuilds
the body. The race of Picts vanish; they fade like the snow on the
mountain. And when the last is gone, this dagger shall free me from the
world." Then in a swift change of tone, "Light the fagots!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Cororuc's mind was fairly reeling. He did not in the least understand
what he had just heard. He was positive that he was going mad; and what
he saw the next minute assured him of it.

Through the throng came a wolf; and he knew that it was the wolf whom
he had rescued from the panther close by the ravine in the forest!

Strange, how long ago and far away that seemed! Yes, it was the same
wolf. That same strange, shambling gait. Then the thing stood erect and
raised its front feet to its head. What nameless horror was that?

[Illustration: "Then the thing stood erect and raised its front feet to
its head. What nameless horror was that?"]

Then the wolf's head fell back, disclosing a man's face. The face of
a Pict; one of the first "werewolves." The man stepped out of the
wolfskin and strode forward, calling something. A Pict just starting
to light the wood about the Briton's feet drew back the torch and
hesitated.

The wolf-Pict stepped forward and began to speak to the chief, using
Celtic, evidently for the prisoner's benefit. (Cororuc was surprized to
hear so many speak his language, not reflecting upon its comparative
simplicity, and the ability of the Picts.)

"What is this?" asked the Pict who had played wolf. "A man is to be
burned who should not be!"

"How?" exclaimed the old man fiercely, clutching his long beard. "Who
are you to go against a custom of age-old antiquity?"

"I met a panther," answered the other, "and this Briton risked his life
to save mine. Shall a Pict show ingratitude?"

And as the ancient hesitated, evidently pulled one way by his fanatical
lust for revenge, and the other by his equally fierce racial pride,
the Pict burst into a wild flight of oration, carried on in his own
language. At last the ancient chief nodded.

"A Pict ever paid his debts," said he with impressive grandeur. "Never
a Pict forgets. Unbind him. No Celt shall ever say that a Pict showed
ingratitude."

Cororuc was released, and as, like a man in a daze, he tried to stammer
his thanks, the chief waved them aside.

"A Pict never forgets a foe, ever remembers a friendly deed," he
replied.

"Come," murmured his Pictish friend, tugging at the Celt's arm.

He led the way into a cave leading away from the main cavern. As they
went, Cororuc looked back, to see the ancient chief seated upon his
stone throne, his eyes gleaming as he seemed to gaze back through the
lost glories of the ages; on each hand the fires leaped and flickered.
A figure of grandeur, the king of a lost race.

On and on Cororuc's guide led him. And at last they emerged and the
Briton saw the starlit sky above him.

"In that way is a village of your tribesmen," said the Pict, pointing,
"where you will find a welcome until you wish to take up your journey
anew."

And he pressed gifts on the Celt; gifts of garments of cloth and finely
worked deerskin, beaded belts, a fine horn bow with arrows skilfully
tipped with obsidian. Gifts of food. His own weapons were returned to
him.

"But an instant," said the Briton, as the Pict turned to go. "I
followed your tracks in the forest. They vanished." There was a
question in his voice.

The Pict laughed softly, "I leaped into the branches of the tree. Had
you looked up, you would have seen me. If ever you wish a friend, you
will ever find one in Berula, chief among the Alban Picts."

He turned and vanished. And Cororuc strode through the moonlight toward
the Celtic village.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST RACE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one‚Äîthe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG‚Ñ¢
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away‚Äîyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‚Äúthe
Foundation‚Äù or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work (any work
on which the phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù appears, or with which the
phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work in a format
other than ‚ÄúPlain Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ‚ÄúPlain
Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
provided that:

    ‚Ä¢ You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, ‚ÄúInformation about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.‚Äù
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        works.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain ‚ÄúDefects,‚Äù such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‚ÄúRight
of Replacement or Refund‚Äù described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‚ÄòAS-IS‚Äô, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢‚Äôs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation‚Äôs EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state‚Äôs laws.

The Foundation‚Äôs business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation‚Äôs website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


