The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Scaring off of Teddy Dawson: A Comedy in One Act
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Scaring off of Teddy Dawson: A Comedy in One Act

Author: Harold Brighouse

Release date: August 7, 2017 [eBook #55292]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Widger from page images generously
        provided by the Internet Archive


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCARING OFF OF TEDDY DAWSON: A COMEDY IN ONE ACT ***

THE SCARING OFF OF TEDDY DAWSON

A Comedy In One Act

By Harold Brighouse

London: Samuel French, Ltd

1911

[Illustration: 0007]





THE SCARING OFF OF TEDDY DAWSON

_Living room of a small house in an East End sidestreet. Door direct to
street back centre. Next it, window. Door to house l. Kitchen range R.
Dresser with crockery l. Centre is a table. Four deal chairs. At the
table Polly Bettesworth is ironing as the curtain rises. She is no more
than fifty, but a hard life has aged her in appearance beyond her years.
A cheap serge skirt and a dark printed blouse, with elastic-sided boots,
form her visible attire. Her husband (Andrew) throws open the door c.
and enters rapidly from street. He is a navvy, dressed in corduroy, with
a leather belt, and is in his shirt sleeves, having been to the nearest
public for the supper beer, which is in a large jug in his hand He is a
large man, and Polly seems small by con-start. It is evening, but still
light._

*****

Andrew (_angrily_). Where's our Liza?

Polly. What do yer want 'er for?

Andrew (_closing door_). I'm goin' to tan 'er 'ide for 'er.

Polly. What's to do? (_Calmly continuing ironing_)

Andrew (_crossing to door l._). I'll put beer in back to keep cool an'
then I'll tell yer. (_Opens left door, leaves jug inside and closes door
again._) Now, do yer know wot I've bin 'earing in the _Bluebell_ abart
our Liza?

Polly. Tell me.

Andrew. Liza's started courtin'! That's wot that whistlin's bin as we've
bin 'earing so much lately.

Polly (_stopping ironing_). Courtin'! At 'er age?

Andrew. It's Gawd's truth. Wait while I catch the bloke wot's after 'er.
I'll skin 'im alive.

Polly (_sitting_). Liza courtin'! I don't know wot things is comin' to
nowadays. Young girls are gettin' a set of forward hussies that haven't
hardly laid by their skipping-ropes afore they're thinkin' they're ould
enough to get wed. I fancied we'd brought 'er up different to that.

Andrew. I'll fancy 'er--'er an' 'er fancy man, an' all. I'll teach 'im
to come round 'ere whistling for our Liza. We ain't partin' with Liza
yet. She's the only 'un left to us now.

Polly. Yus. T'other girls went off a sight too young. Fust Martha an'
then Sally must be havin' their blokes an' gettin' wed. But I didn't
think it of Liza. She's kept 'er mouth shut. Them quiet 'uns are always
deep.

Andrew. Nature 'ull 'ave its way with 'em so what you do. (_Fiercely._)
But I'll spoil this chap's little game. I don't like 'im, not arf like
'im I don't.

Polly. Who is 'e?

Andrew. Teddy Dawson's 'is name.

Polly (_rising_). Teddy Dawson! Wild as they make 'em that chap is. 'E's
after no good with Liza.

Andrew. I'll mar 'is good looks if I catch 'im. 'E'll not be so keen on
comin' an' whistlin' at street corner like a canary in a fit. And I'll
give Liza the taste of my strap an' all.

Polly (_firmly_). Yer'll not touch the girl. Andrew.

Andrew. Who won't?

Polly. I'll give 'er a piece of my mind.

Andrew. An' I'll give 'er a piece of my belt.

Polly. Yer won't. Me an' yer didn't arsk our old 'uns for leave to start
courtin'. Liza ull go the way o' all flesh when 'er time comes.

Andrew. Yus, but 'er time ain't come yet, not by a bloomin' long chalk,
an' I'll make 'er know it.

Polly. Yer leave Liza to me. Yer can do wot yer loike with Teddy Dawson
an' welcome.

Andrew. I'll make 'im wish 'e'd never bin born.

Polly. I dunno. Yer've tried that road twice--with Martha's man an'
Sally's.

Andrew (_reminiscently, gloating_). I did an' all. They didn't 'ave much
of a larky toime courtin'. I put strap abart both of 'em more than once.

Polly. An' they only came the more.

Andrew. Yus. They was spunky fellows. This bloke 'ull not take it that
way. 'E'll cut an' run.

Polly. I'm not so sure it's the right road to scare 'em off.

Andrew. It's the only road I knows of. Do yer think yer knows a better?

Polly. I dunno as I do. Hush! There's Liza comin' downstairs. Now, keep
yer mouth shut till I've had my say.

(_Enter l. Liza, a girl of sixteen, with black alpaca skirt to her
ankles, gaudy stockings, cheap "flash" shoes, a purple blouse and a hat
with coster feathers._)

Polly. My word, Liza, yer do make yerself smart for evenin's. Yer might
be courtin' the way yer've decked yerself.

Liza. There's no 'arm in puttin' on a bit of finery, is there, mother?
If yer've got things, yer might as well show 'em. Don't do 'em no good
to lie by in a drawer.

Polly. Be careful, girl. Yer'll 'ave some fellow takin' a fancy to yer
if yer go down the Mile End Road in that gear. Foine feathers don't make
foine birds. (_Liza tosses her head._)

Andrew. Birds! Yus. Puts me in moind of that crazed canary wot comes
rahnd the 'ouse whistlin' of an evenin'. (_A whistle pipes a little tune
at back._) Rot it! There's the darned thing now. (_Unbuckling belt._)
I'll make 'im whistle if I catch 'im. (_Liza runs to door c. to stop
his way._) Now-then, Liza, out of my way if yer don't want a taste of
this yerself. (_Swings strap round._) 'Ere, if yer've nothin' ter do in
the 'ouse get orf to bed. Yer'll not go out this night. (_Exit swinging
strap. Liza sits with her handkerchief to her eyes._)

Polly (_softly_). Wot's to do with yer, Liza?

Liza. Oh 'e'll 'urt 'im.

Polly. 'Urt who? Is any one there?

Lisa. I--I don't know.

Polly (_roughly_). Yus yer do, yer young deceiver. Yer think yer've got
a feller--yer that's just abart goin' into long skirts. I dunno what the
world's comin' to. Young girls is that forward.

Liza (_rising_). Will father 'urt 'im?

Polly (_grimly_). Depends which on 'em's the better man.

Liza (_tearfully_). Oh!

Polly (_kindly_). I dunno that 'e'll do 'im much 'urt. 'E only means to
frighten 'im orf comin' rahnd tryin' to court a girl that's too young
to know wot marryin' means. Yer silly girl! Toime 'ul come soon enough.
'Ere, dry yer eyes an' come to yer mother. When proper time comes,
yer'll not foind us backward at lettin' yer go. It's not come yet by
years. Yer taken by 'is looks an' 'is bold ways. It ain't looks as make
a man. This 'un's one of them sort as bring woe to a girl wot's fool
enough to wed 'em. 'E's your fust, but yer not 'is fust, not by many a
one.

Liza (_indignantly_). 'E says I am.

Polly. Hark to that now. Creditin' anything a feller tells yer when 'e's
lurin' yer to 'is arms. (_The whistle pipes l. Liza hears it and jerks
up her head. Polly fails to notice it._) Eh, not that I blame yer so
much, yer too young to know different. P'raps yer'd best go to yer
bed, as yer father said, an' ave yer cry out. Yer'll be better in the
mornin'.

Liza (_with a quick look off l. in the direction of the whistling_).
All right, mother. (_She reaches the door, losses her head defiantly
and exit l. Polly gets some matches and is about to light the gas when
Andrew opens the door c. and returns buckling on his belt. It is growing
gradually darker. Polly puts the match box down unused._)

Polly. Well, 'ave yer trounced 'im?

Andrew. No. 'E dodged me some'ow an I 'eard is darned whistle goin'
impudent afterward I reckon 'e wants to get 'er out, but I'll watch 'im
at it.

Polly. Liza's gorn to bed to 'ave 'er cry out. She'll get over it by
mornin'. Young 'uns don't take love bad. (_Whistle sounds off l._)

Andrew (_moving to door c._). Darn 'im for a piece of brassen impudence!
If I don't break an' spoil 'is whistle for 'im, my name's not Andrew
Bettesworth. I'll raise a lump on 'is thick 'ead big enough for 'im to
'ang 'is 'at on.

Polly (_detaining him with her hand on his arm_). I'm not so sure,
Andrew. I've bin thinkin' as that's not right road o' dealin' with 'im.

Andrew. Right or wrong, 'e'll feel the weight of my belt with my arm
behind it when I catch 'im.

Polly. I'll tell yer wot I'm thinkin. Yer leathered the fellers wot came
after Martha an' Sally, but it didn't choke 'em orf. Made 'em all the
keener. Made 'em think the girls was jewels, or yer'd not make so much
fuss abart lettin' go of 'em. Let this feller think the girl's a wrong
'un an' 'e'll cool orf quick enough.

Andrew. Well, so they are jewels, an' Liza's the best of the bunch.

Polly. Yus, o' course she is, but you don't need to let 'im know it.
Make 'im think yer'd be glad to get shut of 'er. Then 'e'll start
thinkin' there's somethin' wrong abart the girl an' lave er' alone.

Andrew. (_shaking her off_). Garn, that's all woman's bunkum. It takes
a man to dal with a job like this 'ere. Wot 'e wants is a thick ear an'
I'll stick it out till I catch 'im an' give it 'im an all.

(_Unbuckling his belt and going out centre. Polly removes her ironing
from table. Suddenly she assumes a listenin attitude, then tiptoes
to the door L. and opens it quietly. Teddy and Liza are standing just
outside it. He has his arm round her waist. He is a good looking young
man, short, dark, clean-shaven in a shoddy suit with muffler round his
neck._)

Teddy. I love yer so I could eat yer.

Polly. Yer'd 'ave a foine belly ache, an all, if 'er flesh were as sour
as 'er temper. (_Teddy stands amazed, then begins to move away._) Yer'd
never run from a woman, would yer? (_Teddy stops._) Come in. I'm sure
yer welcome. (_Teddy and Liza enter, suspicious and reluctant. Polly
hands a chair out._) Sit yer down. Don't be shy. Yer welcome to come
'ere if yer'll do yer courtin' proper an' drop yer dancin' abart outside
with that whistle of yours. 'Ticin' Liza out after she's bin sent to
bed. Yer slipped out o' back door I reckon, Liza?

Liza (_timidly_). Yus, mother.

Polly. I thought so. (_Cordially._) Well, yer'll 'ave no need to carry
on that road now. We're goin' to 'ave this square an' straight. Liza,
I'm sure Mr. Dawson's ready for a bit of supper. There ain't nothing
like peckin' a bit together when you want to get friendly. (_Finishing
the removal of ironing from table._) Now, Liza, get a move on. Where's
that piece of boiled bacon as we found good chewing yesterday? Bustle
round, girl. (_Liza takes a cloth from dresser, spreads on table and
lays plates, etc., for two, putting out the bacon, a tin loaf, and
butter._)

Polly (_drawing up a chair to Teddy's confidentially_). Yer see, Mr.
Dawson, I'm glad yer come in. I 'aven't arf liked yer plan of workin'.
Comin' 'ere an' whistlin' abart the 'ouse as if yer felt feared o' bein'
seen. (_Teddy shifts uncomfortably._) But that's all over now. We're
goin' to 'ave that altered. (_Looking round at table._) Where's yer
'ead, Liza? Do yer think Mr. Dawson can face 'is supper dry? (_Rising._)
There's some beer in the back. I'll go an' fetch it. (_Looking round as
she reaches the door l._) It's gettin' a bit dark in 'ere, Liza. Things
'ull look more cheerful with a light on. It'll give yer somethin' ter
do ter keep yer out of mischief while I'm gorn. (_Exit Polly l. Liza
immediately lights the gas and puts the blind down. Teddy rises._)

Teddy. Well, blime, Liza this beats everything. Wot made yer tell me
they'd be against it if they knew'?

Liza. I don't understand this no more than yer do. They didn't set abort
it this road with my sisters' fellers.

Teddy. Looks like she's took a fancy to me. Nothin' surprisin' in that
neither. Yer've got a sight better kind of a man than yer sisters ever
'ad.

Liza. That's right enough, Teddy, but I don't like looks of this. Father
used to leather Sally's bloke.

Teddy. I'm not afraid of 'im so long as I'm on right side of the missus.
I knaw who wears 'em in this 'ouse, an' it ain't the old man. Yus, Liza,
there ain't nothin' to complain of so far. (_Sitting and putting his
thumbs in his waistcoat armholes._) Yer never know yer luck. This 'ere
weren't looked for. I'll not be whistlin' out there for yer termorrer
night. Not arf. I'll walk in at door an' 'ang my 'at up loike as if I
owned the place. (_Looking round._) Tidy few bits of sticks yer've got
an all, Liza.

Liza. It ain't so bad.

Teddy. No. I say, Liza, if the missus don't like yer sisters' 'usbands
she'll be glad to see yer wed a man she's taken a fancy to. Fond of yer,
I reckon, too, eh, Liza?

Liza. Yus.

Teddy. Yus. Too fond to part. See wot I mean? They'll arsk us to live
'ere arter we're wed. Gettin' on, too, they are. Can't last for ever.

Liza. Wot are yer gettin' at?

Teddy. Nothin' particklar. It just struck me there's a nice pair of
shoes to step into 'ere. This is goin' to be a bit of all right, Liza. I
must keep on the sweet side of yer mother.

Liza (_bridling_). I dunno what yer've got in yer 'ead, Teddy Dawson. I
don't call to moind 'avin said I'd wed yer. I've not bin arsked that I
know of.

Teddy (_releasing his thumbs and coming to her_). I'm arskn' yer now,
ain't I?

Liza. I'm not goin' ter be arsked now. When I'm arsked I'll be arsked
proper, an' it'll not be in between while mother fetches the beer. Yer
makin' a bit too sure an all, so yer can put that in yer pipe an' smoke
'it. Don't be in too much of a 'urry abart me nor them shoes of my
father's wot yer mentioned either.

Teddy (_trying to put his arm round her_). 'Ere, I say, Liza, yer not
offended are yer?

Liza Yer'd best be careful of yer tongue.

Teddy. Well, I'll arsk an' arsk till yer say yer'll 'ave me. I'm deep in
love an' I'll not take no for an answer.

Liza (_softly_). P'raps yer'll not get it neither when yer arsk proper.

Teddy. That's right. Give us a kiss for a night cap, Liza.

Liza (_shyly_). I don't think I ought.

Teddy. Why not? Wot's come over yer? Yer've taken many a score out in
the street an' giver, as good as yer took, an all.

Liza. I know. I dunno. Seems like street's one thing an' inside's
another. It don't seem same thing with the gas on.

Teddy. Turn un low if yer feared o' the light.

Liza. Mother might catch us.

Teddy. That don't signify. She arsked me in an' told me to do my
courtin' proper. I don't call it proper courtin' for yer to go to yer
bed without a kiss on yer lips fur company.

Liza. I must get used to it fust. (_Teddy is turning gas down._) Yer
leave that gas be. I'll scream out. (_Teddy turns gas up._)

Teddy. Look 'ere, Liza, yer darned stand-offish all at once. Yer weren't
above kissin' me in street.

Liza (_apologetically_). It don't seem same thing in the 'ouse no 'ow,
Teddy.

Teddy. We wouldn't live in street if we were wed.

Liza (_with conviction_). No. That's what keeps striking me. It
don't seem same fun in the 'ouse. (_Teddy approaches her again with
resolution._) Here's mother! (_Teddy retreats. Enter Polly, with the
beer jug, which she puts on the table._)

Polly. 'Ere it is. Why, Liza, where's yer wits bin wool-gatherin'?
Yer've put no glasses out._) (_Liza hurriedly puts two glasses from
dresser on table. Garn, yer've no need to colour up like that if yer did
forget 'em. I'm not so old myself I've forgot my courtin' days. There
ain't nothink surprisin' if yer did forget when yer lover's with yer.
Well, sit yer down, Mr. Dawson.

Teddy (_sitting quite confidently now_). Thank yer.

Polly (_drawing up a chair for herself, facing him_) Yer'd best go to
bed, Liza; yer've bin sent there twice ternight. Don't stare like that.
Me an' Mr. Dawson's got to get acquaint an' I reckon I'm old enough, to
do without 'avin' yer for a chaperone.

Liza (_reluctantly_). All right. Good-noight, mother.

Polly (_mimicking_). Good-noight, mother! Is that all yer've got ter
say?

Liza. Yus. As far as I know.

Polly. Well, if yer keep yer mouth shut the likes o' that when yer wed,
Teddy 'ull be in clover. Wot? Oh, I see. Took yer charnce with 'im while
I got beer, did yer? Righto. Sling yer 'ook. (_Liza goes out l. under
protest._) Now then, Mr. Dawson, we can be comfortable.

Teddy. 'Ere, where's Mr. Bettesworth?

Polly (_assuming during the ensuing scene an air of rollicking
camaraderie_). 'E's all right. Out lookin' for somebody, only 'e ain't
lookin' in right place. Don't yer worry abart 'im. Now, yer'll ave a bit
of bacon?

Teddy (_reassured again_). I don't mind if I do.

Polly (_cutting and handing_). Righto. Bread's on yer side. (_Polly
helps herself to bacon and accepts a slice of bread from Teddy. They
eat without forks, using bread instead and show no objection to putting
knives in their mouths._)

Polly (_sarcastically_). I didn't know yer was teetotal.

Teddy. I ain't.

Polly. Well, beer was brewed for drinkin', (_Teddy pours himself a glass
and drinks modestly._)

Teddy (_replacing glass_). Ah!

Polly. Sup it up. I like a man that can take 'is liquor. Yer drink as if
it feared yer. (_Teddy empties his glass._) That's better. (_She passes
her glass, he fills it and his own._) Now, Mr. Dawson, don't stint
yerself. There ain't nothink like courtin' fur givin' an appetite. Yer
ain't got much to say for yerself. I dunno. Young men don't seem so
brisk at their courtin' as they was when I were a girl.

Teddy (_nettled_). I don't think I'm pertiklar slow.

Polly. Well, I'll give yer an instance. That gas. It were lighted the
moment I left room. I saw gleam of it under door. My old man 'ud never
'ave lit it like that when 'im and me courted. I give yer a fair chance,
an all. Yer don't fancy I allays take that long to pick up a jug o'
beer, do yer?

Teddy. Yus, well that 'ud go down all right with some girls, but it
ain't right way with Liza.

Polly. Oh, yer know yer own business best, of course, but yer'll not
be above takin' a 'in! from an old woman that was courted afore yer was
born. Yer must make use o' yer charnces. Girls don't like a slow lover.

Teddy. I'm not so shy, neither.

Polly. Yer not eatin' much. A feller wants a bit o' somethin' as ull
stick to 'is ribs when 'e's bin courtin'. Don't forget yer beer. Ain't
there no more in jug? (_Teddy drinks up and refills._) Yer'll not get
boozed on a drop like that, and who's to care if yer do? Yer at 'ome
'ere. Drink up and 'ave another.

Teddy (_pushing plate and glass from him_). I've 'ad enough. (_He
rises._)

Polly. I'll 'ave somethin' tastier in against yer come termorrer night.
I suppose yer'll be 'ere (_Polly rises._)

Teddy (_sulkily_). I told Liza I would, but I'm not so sure if I can.

Polly. Please yerself. Only yer'll keep 'er warm now yer've got so far
if yer'll take my tip. Don't let a girl fancy yer coolin' orf. Now,
understand, yer welcome 'ere so long as yer break yerself of that
whistlin' 'abit. We'll expect yer termorrer.

Teddy. I dunno as I'll be comin'. My mind's not made up yet.

Polly. Yer mighty slow abart it. Wot's to do wi' yer?

Teddy. Nothing. (_Polly puts her hand on his arm in a friendly way._)

Polly. Because yer've no need to feel awkward T' whole thing 'ull be
straight forward now. Yer've only to go in and win.

Teddy. Yer a bit anxious abart it.

Polly. No, Mr. Dawson, no. Not anxious.

Teddy (_dogmatically_). Yer a sight too keen set on my winnin' for my
taste.

Polly (_secretly rejoicing_). Yus. Well, I've took a fancy to yer.

Teddy (_slyly_). Sudden like. 'Ere, I've bin thinkin' now, yer said
somethin' a while back abart Liza's bein' a 'ot tempered 'un.

Polly (_as if much taken aback_). No. Did I? 'Ot tempered did I say?

Teddy. Yus.

Polly. Well, I can't deny she's a 'igh-spirited girl.

Teddy. 'Igh-spirited, eh? Liza didn't never 'ave much ter say for
'erself out in street.

Polly (_winking elaborately at him_). That's 'er artfulness. Trust a
girl to be careful when she's got 'er eye on a man.

Teddy (_moving towards door_). I think I'll go 'ome. Yer've give me a lot
to think abart.

Polly. I tell you wot, Mr. Dawson, yer slip in fur yer dinner on Sunday.
Liza shall cook yer somethin'. She ain't much good at cookin' but you'll
enjoy it whatever it's loike when she's cooked it. Me an' the old man
'ull 'ave a walk round Park afterwards an' yer can 'ave the 'ouse to
yerself with Liza. See what I mean?

Teddy. I don't know as I can come.

Polly (_as if deeply disappointed_). Yer a bit slow to my way of
thinkin'. I'm doin' my best fur yer.

Teddy. Yus. That's just it.

Polly. Just what?

Teddy. Yer a fat sight too keen to be rid of the girl if yer want it
straight.

Polly. Don't say that. I'm only tryin' to 'elp yer.

Teddy. Yer didn't 'elp blokes wot come after yer other girls only with
yer old man's strap.

Polly. Oh, but yer a very different sort to them, Mr. Dawson.

Teddy. That's right enough. (_Door l. opens softly and Liza peeps in.
She leaves door ajar without entering._)

Polly. Then we'll expect yer o' Sunday?

Teddy. No. Damned if yer will. Yer shovin' 'er 'at me a sight too last.
I'm thinkin' there's somethin' wrong with 'er or yer'd not be so humble
abart it. Yer bally well beggin' me to 'ave 'er. I'm 'avin' none of yer
bad bargains, with tongues an' tempers an' no good at cookin', thank
yer. Yer can't fool me Mrs. Bettesworth.

Polly. I'm sorry yer doubts me. Then we mustn't expect yer round never
no more?

Teddy. No. I've seen through yer this time.

Polly. It's very 'ard, very 'ard it is. Wot must I tell Liza?

Teddy. It's nothin' to me wot yer tells 'er. I'm goin' 'ome. (_As he
reaches the centre door, Andrew opens it and enters._)

Andrew (_drawing hack in amazement_). Well, blime! (_Liza steps into the
room. Teddy looks at the l. door as if to escape that way, but sees her.
Polly moves to Andrew._)

Polly. Let 'im go, Andrew. 'E ain't worth wastin' leather on 'im. 'E
won't ever come 'ere no more.

Andrew'. 'E'll get 'isself done in if 'e does. Clear out. (_Teddy loses
no time. Andrew closes door. Liza goes to Polly._)

Liza. Mother, do yer really want ter get shut of me?

Polly. Oh, bin listenin' at key-'ole 'ave yer? Well, listeners don't
'ear no good o' themselves.

Liza. I couldn't go ter bed without knowin'. I'd got ter come dahn ter
find out wot yer an' Teddy was savin'.

Polly. Yer 'eard 'e'll not come back.

Liza. Yus.

Polly. Are yer sorry?

Liza (_hesitating_). No--no--not if yer don't want ter get rid of me.
Yer don't do yer? Father, mother, yer don't want me ter go!

Andrew. We don't that.

Liza. That's wot 'e said.

Polly. 'E said a lot o' foolish things. No Liza we don't want yer to go.
Yer the light o' our eyes. That chap----

Liza (_fiercely_). I 'ate 'im.

Polly. Ah. See, Liza. (_Takes her to hearth and shows her the motto on a
grocer's calendar over it._) See that? "East, West, home's best." Ain't
that true? Yer stick to yer 'ome a bit longer. Yer can take wings an'
fly from yer nest when time comes. Yer sure yer not sorry 'e's gorn?

Liza (_crying on Polly's shoulder_). I want ter stay with yer.

Polly (_caressing her_). That's right, Liza.

Andrew (_angrily approaching table_). Who's drunk my supper beer?

Polly. 'Im.

Andrew. I'll break 'is-------

Polly. Wasn't it worth it to be rid of 'im?

Andrew. Yus. Yer bloomin' old schemer. Yus. Yer plan worked it after all.

Polly. It's bin a cure for love.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCARING OFF OF TEDDY DAWSON: A COMEDY IN ONE ACT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


