The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Little Child's Book of Divinity
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Little Child's Book of Divinity

Author: John R. Macduff

Release date: May 5, 2016 [eBook #52001]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Heiko Evermann, Lisa Anne Hatfield and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE CHILD'S BOOK OF DIVINITY ***

                          Transcriber’s Notes


Italic text enclosed with _underscores_.

Small‐caps replaced by ALL CAPS.

Tables require a monospace font in order to align properly.

More notes appear at the end of the file.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration: Emma and her Grandmamma.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE LITTLE CHILD’S

                           BOOK OF DIVINITY;

                                  OR,

                       GRANDMAMMA’S STORIES ABOUT
                            BIBLE DOCTRINES.


                            BY THE AUTHOR OF

                 “MORNING AND NIGHT WATCHES,” “FAITHFUL
                           PROMISER,” &c. &c.

“From a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ
Jesus.”―2 Tim. iii. 15.

“And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be
the peace of thy children.”―Isa. liv. 13.


                            SECOND EDITION.


                                LONDON:
                JAMES NISBET AND CO., 21 BERNERS STREET.
                                MDCCCLV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               EDINBURGH:
                   PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY,
                              PAUL’S WORK.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


                                         PAGE
                           INTRODUCTION     3
                           FIRST NIGHT      4
                           SECOND NIGHT    12
                           THIRD NIGHT     20
                           FOURTH NIGHT    30
                           FIFTH NIGHT     40
                           SIXTH NIGHT     48
                           SEVENTH NIGHT   57
                           EIGHTH NIGHT    66

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE LITTLE CHILD’S

                           BOOK OF DIVINITY.


LITTLE Emma was one Sabbath evening alone in the room with her
grandmamma. Good old Mrs Allan (for that was her grandmother’s name) was
seated in her arm‐chair, beside a blazing winter fire. A small table was
before her, with a Bible and a pair of spectacles lying upon it.

Emma came jumping up upon her grandmamma’s knee, and kissed her, and
said—

“Dear grandmamma, there is much in that large Bible I do not understand;
I should like so much to know all it tells about. When I was at church
this forenoon, I heard Mr R., our clergyman, speak to the people about
what he called ‘doctrines;’ and when he was telling about them, there
were many things the people liked to hear which were too difficult for
me. Do you think you could tell me about them in very simple words, and
make them plain to me? I will promise to be very attentive to all that
you say.”

“I shall be truly happy,” said the other, looking with a kindly smile on
her little grandchild, “to do what you ask me. And if you will come to
me for a few minutes every Sabbath night, I will try to explain these
Bible doctrines to you as simply as I can.”

So saying, she put aside her spectacles, and drawing her chair closer by
the fire, with her arm round little Emma’s neck, began as follows:—


                              FIRST NIGHT.

[Sidenote: Of the Being of God.] “There was a time, my dear child, far,
far back in eternity, when no one lived but the Great God, when no angel
waved his wing, and no star glittered in the sky.

“This ever‐living God did not need angels or worlds to make Him happy.
He was quite glorious without them.

“This great Being was _one_ God; but there were three persons in the
Godhead—God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Of these,
there was none higher or greater than the other; they were all equal in
power and in glory.

[Sidenote: Of the Creation of all things.] “This Great God resolved on
making angels and worlds; and He just said, ‘I wish them to be,’ and
they were all made by the word of His power. And it was not a few that
He made, but a very great many. He made large armies of angels; and such
a number of stars and worlds, that they cannot be counted.

[Sidenote: Of our World.] “Among these crowded worlds which you see in
the dark sky at night, there was a very little one—so little, as
scarcely to be seen or noticed amid those around it.

“This little star was called ‘_the Earth_;’ and God loved it very much,
and the Three Persons in the Godhead resolved to do something very
wonderful with regard to it. God put a happy and holy creature into it,
called _Man_; and He made him after His own image, and placed him in a
beautiful garden.

[Sidenote: Of the Covenant of Works.] “While there, God entered with man
into what is called a _Covenant of Works_.”

“What does a _covenant_ mean?” inquired Emma.

“I shall tell you, my child,” said her grandmamma. “It is an agreement,
or bargain, between two people. In the garden of Eden, the two parties
were God and Adam; their covenant or agreement was this;—God said to
Adam, ‘If you do what I ask you, you shall live and be happy. If you
disobey me, you must “surely die.”’

[Sidenote: Of the Fall.] “God told him not to eat of the fruit of one of
the trees in the garden; but though Adam had all the rest of the trees
in Eden to eat of, he forgot God’s command, and took of the forbidden
one; and he was driven out of his happy home, and became a lost and
ruined creature.”

“How sad for poor Adam,” said Emma, “to be banished from his beautiful
garden!”

“Yes,” said the other; “and sadder still to be banished from his God,
with nothing before him but certain death!”

“But how was it, grandmamma,” inquired Emma, “that Adam did not die all
at once? How did he continue to live after God had said that, if he
disobeyed Him, he should ‘surely die’?”

“I was just going to explain this to you, my dear,” said Mrs Allan. “Our
first parents could not have lived for one moment after their ‘Fall,’ if
it had not been for another and more glorious covenant the Bible tells
us of.”

“And what was the name of that covenant?” inquired Emma, eagerly.

“It was called _the Covenant of Grace_,” replied her grandmother. “I
shall try, my dear child,” continued she, patting her grandchild on the
head, “to make this very great and glorious subject as simple as I can
to you; and after you hear me, you will, perhaps, be able to explain it
to others.”

Little Emma was again very attentive, and her grandmamma proceeded:

[Sidenote: Of the Parties in the Covenant of Grace.] “I want to see,
before I begin, if my little scholar remembers what I have just been
telling her,—who the two parties were in the _Covenant of Works_?”

“God and Adam,” replied Emma.

“Yes, dear, you are right. And in this new covenant or agreement I am
going to speak about, there were two parties also. Do you think you
could tell me who they were?”

“Was it God and Adam again?” inquired the little girl.

“No, my child,” said the old lady. “Man, having broken the first
covenant, could no longer enter into terms with God. There was some one
who came in the place of guilty man. Can you tell me who this was?”

“It was the Lord Jesus Christ,” said Emma.

“Quite correct,” replied her grandmother. “God was angry with man, and
could no longer speak with him. But Jesus said, ‘_I_ will come in the
room of those lost sinners, and speak to God _for_ them.’ So God and
Jesus made a covenant together. It was as if Jesus said to God, ‘O my
Father, if Thou wilt pardon these poor sinners, I will leave my glorious
throne, and come down to the earth, and die for them, and wash their
guilty souls in my precious blood.’ And then God promised, and said, ‘I
_will_ pardon them! They deserve nothing but wrath; but, for the sake of
what Thou art to do and suffer, as their Redeemer, I will shew them
“_Grace_.”’ Hence this new covenant between God and Jesus was called
‘_the Covenant of Grace_.’”

“I should like to hear more,” said Emma, “about this glorious Being who
loved man so much as to die for him. Why is He called by the name of
_Redeemer_?”

[Sidenote: Of the Person of the Redeemer.] “Jesus is called ‘Redeemer,’
because He ‘buys back’ the lost souls of men. No one but God, in our
nature, could do this. If the highest angel in heaven had tried to save
us, he _could_ not. Jesus Christ was both God and man. He had lived from
all eternity ‘_with_ God, and _was_ God.’ He took upon Him our nature,
and was born a little babe in the stable of Bethlehem. How sweet for
little children to think that Jesus was once himself _a little child_!”

[Sidenote: Of the Humiliation of Christ.] “How wonderful!” said Emma,
“for the great God of heaven to come down to dwell with man on the
earth—to be called the ‘Man of Sorrows’—to be poor and hated, and have
‘nowhere to lay His head,’ till He laid it on the Cross, and there died
a cruel death!”

“Wonderful indeed,” replied her grandmamma. “Can you tell me, my dear
child, what became of Jesus after He died?”

[Sidenote: Of His Resurrection and Exaltation.] “Yes,” answered Emma; “I
think He was laid in a grave in the middle of a garden in Jerusalem. A
stone was put at the mouth of it, and soldiers were made to watch it.
But after lying dead three days, He rolled away the stone, and came
forth alive.”

“You are right, my child,” said Mrs Allan. “By this, God the Father
shewed that He had accepted the work of His dear Son—that the wages of
sin were all paid, and that His holy law was satisfied and honoured.
After remaining forty days on the earth, Jesus went up among rejoicing
angels to heaven.”

“And where is the Lord Jesus now?” inquired Emma.

[Sidenote: Of the Intercession of Christ.] “He who once was ‘despised
and rejected of men,’” said her grandmother, “is seated on a very
glorious throne in the skies, where blessed spirits without number adore
Him. But He has not forgotten poor sinners on earth. He is engaged in
praying to God for them; and whatever He asks on their behalf, His
Father is ready to give; for Him He ‘heareth always.’”

[Sidenote: Of the Second Coming of Christ.] “And is there not a day of
awful glory drawing near,” said Emma, “when Jesus shall appear in the
clouds of the sky, seated on a ‘great white throne’? How dreadful to be
found, on that great day, on the left hand of the Judge! Will there be
no chance of His being merciful to these miserable wicked, and of making
another ‘_covenant of grace_’ with them?”

“No, no; impossible, my child!” replied her grandmother. “God’s
holiness, and righteousness, and justice, and truth, could not admit of
mercy _then_. Jesus is now seated on a throne of _Grace_, and entreats
sinners to come to Him and be saved. But when once seated on His throne
of _Judgment_, the time of grace is at an end. Those who there seek Him
for the first time will never find Him. God has said, ‘Then shall they
call on me, but I will not answer.’”

“I should like you,” said Emma, “to tell me what you mean by ‘seeking
Jesus.’ I fear I may never yet have sought Him in earnest.”

“I shall be happy, my dear child, to explain this and many other things
to you; but as it would take me too long to‐night, I shall wait till
next Sabbath, when, if God spare me, I will speak to you about some more
of these solemn truths. I am old, and must soon stand before that great
throne; but I have long sought and found Jesus the _Saviour_, and I am
not afraid to meet Jesus the _Judge_!”

The little child knelt down on her grandmother’s lap, to offer up her
evening prayer. The aged Christian entreated earnestly that Jesus would
early give her an interest in His “covenant of grace,” that she might be
found at last on His right hand, at the great day, an heir of glory!


                             SECOND NIGHT.

Sabbath evening again returned; and when the shutters were closed, and
fresh wood had been piled on the fire, little Emma climbed on her
grandmamma’s knee, and asked her to explain some more “Scripture
doctrines.”

“I shall do so with pleasure, my child,” said Mrs Allan; “and I must ask
you to give me to‐night your close attention, as I am going to speak to
you about some very important and precious truths.”

Emma thanked her for her great kindness, in being at so much pains to
instruct her; and her grandmamma thus began:—

[Sidenote: Of Justification.] “You will remember, my dear, that the
Bible tells us we are all condemned by nature—in a lost and ruined
state. In order to make us understand what this state is, it
represents,—

[Sidenote: The Judge.] “God as a great Judge, ‘of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity,’ and who cannot look upon sin.

[Sidenote: The Prisoner.] “It represents the sinner as standing at His
bar, called to answer for his many thousand transgressions.

[Sidenote: The Witnesses.] “And, as in a court of earthly justice
witnesses are brought in to condemn the prisoner, so Satan accuses the
sinner—his own heart accuses him—God’s Law, which he has broken, accuses
him.”

“And what more?” said Emma.

[Sidenote: The Sentence.] “These all,” said her grandmother, “pronounce
the sinner ‘_guilty_’—the Holy Judge passes upon him a sentence of
_condemnation_. Oh! how dreadful to think, that, if ‘out of Christ,’ we
are _at this moment_ in a _condemned state_! We have not to wait till a
day of judgment to have the sentence pronounced upon us. The Bible tells
us we are ‘condemned _already_,’ and that ‘the wrath of God _abideth_
upon us.’ We are, as it were, shut up in a condemned cell; the kindness
and clemency of our Judge alone delaying the execution of the awful
sentence!”

“But is there no hope,” said little Emma, “for the poor sinner? Must he
die in that state of condemnation and misery?”

[Sidenote: God’s Method of Mercy.] “No, dear child,” replied her
grandmamma. “God is willing, for Christ’s sake, to ‘_justify_’ us.”

“But what do you mean by that word?” said Emma.

“Listen to me,” said the other, “and I will endeavour to explain. I have
already told you that the sinner, standing in the court‐room of justice,
with the chains of condemnation fastened round him, cannot answer a word
for himself; his ‘mouth is stopped,’ and he has become ‘guilty before
God.’

[Sidenote: The Advocate.] “But, in the midst of that court‐room, there
is one who stands up to ‘answer’ _for_ him!—it is the ‘Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.’

“God the Judge asks, ‘Sinner! can you say anything to justify yourself?’
The sinner says, ‘Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O God! for
in Thy sight no flesh living can be justified.’

[Sidenote: The Grounds of Pardon.] “God is about to execute the awful
sentence; but Jesus, his advocate, stands up, and says, ‘_I_ have
suffered, “the Just for the unjust;” I have obeyed the law the sinner
should have obeyed; I have been “made sin for him;” I have paid with my
own blood the price of his redemption!’

[Sidenote: The Acquittal.] “The Great Judge says, ‘It is enough! Take
the chains of condemnation off him. I pronounce him, for the sake of
what Jesus has done and suffered, “_not guilty_!” Let him go out of the
court‐room a “justified man;” for “there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus.”’”

“Do you mean to say, grandmamma,” said Emma, “that God thus graciously
pardons _all_ the iniquities of the sinner for the sake of Jesus?”

[Sidenote: Two parts of Justification.] [Sidenote: 1. Forgiveness of
Sin.] “Yes, my child; it is an amazing thought. But, on account of what
the Lord Jesus Christ has done, in pouring out His precious blood, this
great and holy Judge looks upon the sinner _as if he had never sinned at
all_! He is, in the eye of law, ‘_justified_’—considered ‘_just_.’ Jesus
is said to be ‘wounded for his transgressions, and bruised for his
iniquities.’ Like the scape‐goat under the Jewish law, God ‘has laid
upon Christ the iniquities of us all.’ These He has carried away into a
land of forgetfulness, where they can never more be found!”

“This is a wonderful doctrine indeed!” said little Emma, “and”――

“Stay, my child,” interrupted her grandmamma, “I have not yet told you
the most wondrous part of it:—

[Sidenote: 2. Acceptance as Righteous in God’s sight.] “In justifying
sinners, God does more than merely _pardon_ them. He not only reckons
the sinner as ‘_not guilty_,’ but, for Jesus’ sake, He counts him as
positively _righteous_. All the righteousness of Christ—His obedience,
and patience, and love, and resignation, and forgiveness of injuries,
and all the holy things of His holy life,—are put down to the sinner’s
account; and a holy God actually counts as if they had all been done by
the sinner himself. This is what is called _Christ’s imputed
righteousness_.”

“Surely,” said Emma, “this explains the meaning of that verse I was
reading to you this morning in Isaiah—‘He hath clothed me with the
garments of salvation; He hath covered me with a robe of
righteousness’?”

“Yes; you are right, my dear. The holy life, and virtues, and obedience
of Jesus, are spoken of as a bright shining robe or garment, in which
the poor sinner clothes himself. By nature, in his condemned state, he
is black with sin; and his language is, ‘O Lord, look not on me, because
I am black;’ but when he puts this imputed garment on, he can say, ‘O
Lord, look upon me, for I am all bright and shining with a Saviour’s
righteousness!’”

“How kind is God,” exclaimed Emma, “to do all this for vile sinners!”

[Sidenote: Justification all of Grace.] “Yes, my child; well may
justification be called ‘an act of God’s _free grace_;’ for man has no
part in it. He deserves nothing at God’s hand but wrath, and vengeance,
and condemnation. He might have been sent away trembling from His bar,
crying out, ‘It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God!’ His justification proceeds from free sovereign mercy; and through
all eternity his confession will be, ‘By the grace of God, I am what I
am.’”

“I fear I may be wearying you,” said Emma; “but I have just one other
question to ask you about this glorious doctrine—how can _I_ be
justified, and get the great God thus to pardon and accept ME?”

[Sidenote: Received by Faith.] “That is a very proper question,” replied
her grandmamma, “and I am happy to think I can give you a simple and
easy answer. You are justified ‘_by faith_;’ by _believing_ that God is
able and willing to receive you—that Jesus has shed His precious blood
for you—that He died for you on earth, and now lives and pleads for you
in heaven. ‘He that _believeth_ on the Son of God hath life.’ ‘_Believe_
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.’ ‘Therefore being
justified _by faith_, we have peace with God.’

“This glorious subject of Justification,” continued she, “has occupied
us so long, that it will be better not to speak of any other doctrine
to‐night. If spared till another Sabbath evening, I shall do so. I would
have you, my child, think very much about this most precious Bible
truth—_How a sinner is justified before God_.

[Sidenote: The Article of a Standing and Falling Church.] “Luther, the
great father of the Reformation, said, that a church could not stand for
a moment without this doctrine. Like a house without a foundation, it
would fall to pieces. And an older saint than Luther—the apostle
Paul—had his mind so full of it, that you cannot read his writings, and
understand them, without keeping this blessed doctrine constantly in
view.”

“Oh how peaceful, and safe, and joyous,” exclaimed Emma, “must the
justified sinner be!”

“Yes, truly,” replied her grandmother. “He has nothing to fear. On the
great day of judgment, however many his enemies and accusers may be, he
can look around him on all of them, and exclaim, with the great apostle,
‘Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? It is GOD THAT
JUSTIFIETH; who is he that condemneth?’ Here is a beautiful verse of a
hymn I should like you to learn by heart,” she added, repeating twice
over to little Emma the following lines:—

                 “‘Jesus! Thy blood and righteousness
                 My beauty are, my glorious dress,
                 ’Mid flaming worlds, in these array’d,
                 With joy I shall lift up my head!’”


                              THIRD NIGHT.

“Are you ready now?” said little Emma, coming skipping into her
grandmother’s room. “I have just finished learning my verses in Romans,
and I so weary to hear about some more Scripture doctrines.”

“I am quite ready,” said her grandmamma; “but it would make me happy,
before I begin, to hear you repeat whatever verses you have been
committing to memory to‐night.”

So saying, Emma stood by her grandmother’s chair, and, without a
mistake, repeated from the 10th to the 15th verse of the eighth chapter
of Romans. The last one was this, “Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father!”

“I am happy, my dear child,” said old Mrs Allan, “that these have been
your verses to‐night, as they refer to the very subject I should like
now to speak to you about.

“You remember what I explained to you last Sabbath?”

“Yes, grandmamma,” said Emma. “It was about _Justification_. God the
Great Judge trying the sinner at His bar, and sending him away freely
forgiven for the sake of Christ.”

[Sidenote: Of Adoption.] “You are right, my dear; and we are now going
to speak about _Adoption_. I wonder if you know what that is.”

“Oh, no. I have often wondered what that word can mean, and I long to
hear from you.”

[Sidenote: Difference between Justification and Adoption.] “Well, then,
my child, as in Justification God acts as a _Judge_, so in Adoption God
acts as a _Father_.”

“How I should like to hear about this, grandmamma! There is something
terrible about the thought of a _Judge_; but there is nothing but love
and joy in the thought of a _Father_!”

[Sidenote: Of our State by Nature.] “It is true, my dear,” said her
grandmother; “but by nature none of us are in the family of God; we are
called ‘children of wrath;’ ‘children of the devil;’ ‘enemies!’ God puts
a very solemn and striking question about us—‘How shall I set thee among
the children?’ He sees that we are such poor miserable sinners, that if
He had dealt with us as we have deserved for our sins, we should have
been for ever ‘children of wrath!’”

“What, then, could have made God adopt us into His family?” said little
Emma.

[Sidenote: Difference between Man’s Adoption and God’s.] “This, my
child,” replied the other, “is the thing in which _God’s_ Adoption
differs from _man’s_. When a man takes a little orphan child into his
house, and is kind to it, and brings it up as his own, it is because of
something attractive, and lovely, and engaging in the child. I knew an
old gentleman who saw a lovely little boy with golden locks, and he was
so struck with his beauty, he would never part with him, but brought him
up as his own son. But how different is it with us and God! The Bible
represents sinners as lying all filthy and vile in the open field; so
vile, that none would look at them, ‘all passed them by!’ But God came,
lifted them up, and said unto them, ‘Live!’ ‘_I_ will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters.’ What, my dear Emma, would
you call this act of God in Adoption?”

[Sidenote: Adoption all of Grace.] “Oh, I would say,” said her little
hearer, “that it is the same as with Justification. It is an ‘_act of
God’s free grace_’—that is to say, that there was nothing about us to
make God love us, or be kind to us, and that it was all of His own great
and wonderful kindness and mercy in Christ Jesus!”

“You are right, my darling; and do you remember the name of an aged
disciple of Jesus who delighted more than all the rest to speak of God’s
love? And perhaps you remember, too, what he says about this adopting
love of God?”

“Oh, yes,” said Emma; “I think that will be the text Mr R. was preaching
from last month:—‘Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!’ But, dear [Sidenote:
When Adoption takes place.] grandmamma,” continued she, “you told me
last Sabbath that Justification takes place _in this world_, whenever
the sinner believes in Jesus. It cannot surely be that this great honour
of being children of God, and adopted into His family, can begin on
earth?”

“Yes, dear child, it does,” said her grandmother. “Justification and
Adoption are just different names for one great act. God, as I said, is
represented in the one as a _Judge_, in the other as a _Father_. I don’t
know if Mr R. [Sidenote: The Apostle John’s Testimony.] took the next
verse in that beautiful chapter along with his text. If he did so, it
will tell you _when_ the believer is adopted, and can call God his
Father.”

Little Emma quickly turned up her Bible, and read as follows:—“Beloved,
now are we the sons of God!”

“You see, my child,” continued the old lady, “_when_ this act of
fatherly love takes place; it is ‘_now_;’ and if my dear little Emma
loves the Lord Jesus, she can _now_ look up to the Great God, and say,
‘He is my _Father_;’ and to Jesus, and say, ‘He is my _Elder Brother_!’”

“How kind in God,” said Emma, with the tear in her eye, “to love sinners
so much, and deal with them so tenderly! I think this, too, explains my
favourite story in the gospel—does it not, grandmamma?”

[Sidenote: Our Lord’s Parable about Adoption.] “I remember now what your
favourite is,” said the other, after thinking a moment; “it is the
_Prodigal Son_; and you are very right; there is no portion of the Bible
which speaks more beautifully of God’s adopting love. You remember, at
the very same moment that God forgave the Prodigal, He ordered ‘the ring
to be put on his finger’ (the ring of _adoption_); and He calls him,
‘_This, my son!_’”

“Oh! I shall love to read that parable more than ever,” said Emma. “I
don’t think any earthly father would have been so kind to an ungrateful
son. But you often tell me that ‘God’s ways are not as man’s ways;’ and
it is surely so in this.

[Sidenote: Evidences of Adoption.] “But how can I know, dear grandmamma,
whether _I_ am a child of God? I would feel as if I was richer and
happier than the richest in the world, and greater than earthly kings or
queens, if I could be sure that the Great God was my Father, and that I
was His child.”

“That is a very natural question, my dear, and I shall do what I can to
answer you. Let me ask you another question. What are your feelings
towards your earthly parents?”

[Sidenote: Love of God.] “I love them,” said Emma, “very much; I try to
do what they bid me, and I am always unhappy when I do anything that
vexes or hurts them.”

[Sidenote: Hatred of Sin.] “It is the very same, my dear,” said her
grandmother, “with the children of God. If you are really a child of
God, you will love Him, and try to do all His will, and be unhappy
whenever you sin against Him or displease Him.”

“I will tell you another thing, grandmamma,” interrupted the little
girl; “I am never happy when I am far away from my father, or when my
father is far away from me. Sometimes he has to go away for many days to
a distance, and I so weary for his coming back. I think and speak of him
all the day long; and once I remember, when I was a week away at aunt
Fanny’s, I so longed to get back again to be with him.”

[Sidenote: Filial Nearness.] “Well, dear child, you have just given
another mark by which you may know if you are a child of God. Do you
love your Heavenly Father’s presence? Do you love prayer, [Sidenote:
Prayer.] which brings you always near Him? and are you always unhappy
when you forget prayer, which drives you away from God; or commit sin,
which drives God away from you?”

“Oh, yes, dear grandmamma, I think I can say I am; but then, I often
sin, and I fear”――

“Stop, my dear child,” said the old lady. “Remember, it is a great cause
of grief to the true child of God, that the power of sin is so strong in
his heart, and that the devil is so often tempting him.”

“But,” exclaimed Emma, “does not the Bible say, ‘We _cannot_ sin,
because we are born of God’?”

[Sidenote: How the Child of God “cannot sin.”] “Yes, my child, you are
correct; but I must tell you the real meaning of that verse, so that you
may not be cast down by supposing it asks what you cannot give. That
verse means, that God’s children cannot go on in a _course_ of sin. They
cannot love sin, and continue _in_ sin; but it does not mean that their
lives are so perfectly holy that they never can know what it is to have
a bad heart and wicked thought. Alas! this never can be, till the
adopted children of God get safe into their Father’s house in heaven!”

“Oh! how I wish,” said Emma, “I could love this kind Heavenly Father
more than I have ever yet done; and hate sin more and more every day!――I
am afraid, dear grandmamma, I tire you with my questions; but I have
just one more to ask to‐night, and then I shall go to bed. You often
speak of it being our duty to ‘_fear_ God.’ Now, how should we _fear_ a
God that you have just been telling me to _love_?”

[Sidenote: What it is to “fear” God in Adoption.] “I do not wonder, my
child, at your question. But there are two kinds of fear; the wicked
‘_fear_’ God as an awful Judge; they fear Him—that is, they are _afraid_
of Him, and tremble to think of His hatred of sin, and His judgment day.
But the children of God ‘_fear_’ their Heavenly Father in another sense;
they ‘_fear_’ to _offend_ Him. It is because they _love_ Him so very
much, that they are _afraid_ of doing anything that would displease Him.
The wicked man’s fear is what the Bible calls ‘the fear that hath
torment.’ The other is the fear, and reverence, and godly awe of
‘perfect love.’

“Good‐night, then, my dear,” said the kind old lady, kissing her little
scholar. “I love you much as an earthly parent; but your Heavenly Father
loves you more. When you go down on your knees to pray to Him to‐night,
think of that sweet verse in Jer. iii. 4, ‘_My Father!_ thou art the
guide of my youth!’

“You will not know all the wonders of the subject I have been speaking
about to‐night till the gracious Heavenly Father who adopts you opens to
you the gates of His own palace in glory, and when, taking you by the
hand, and shewing you all the unsearchable riches which Jesus has
purchased for you, He will say, ‘My child! _thou art ever with me; and
all that I have_ IS THINE!’”


                             FOURTH NIGHT.

“I fear I weary you, grandmamma,” said little Emma, as she opened the
room‐door on the following Sabbath, and resumed her accustomed seat by
the good old lady’s side—“I fear I weary you, coming so often to hear
your nice explanations of Bible doctrines; but you have already enabled
me to understand a great deal I never knew before, and have made my
Sabbath evenings so happy!”

“I assure you, you have made me happy too, my dear child,” said Mrs
Allan, wiping the tear that was rolling down her withered cheek. “I can
truly say, I have no greater joy than to talk to you about these
glorious truths. I will soon be in that silent place,” continued she,
pointing, as she was closing her shutters for the night, to the
churchyard, on which the moon was then shining; “but it makes me happy
to think, that when you can hear my voice no more, you will remember,
with joy, the Sabbath evenings we have spent together. Happy, dear Emma,
will it be,” her face brightening as she spoke, “if we meet to speak of
these blessed truths in the better Sabbath in heaven!”

Emma was about to reply, when her grandmother took her by the hand, and
said, with a kindly smile, “Well, dearest, and what would you have me
talk to you about to‐night?”

“You are the proper judge,” replied her little scholar, “as to what will
best follow after the two beautiful doctrines you have last explained to
me, of _Justification_ and _Adoption_. The other day I came to a
difficult word in a book, which, [Sidenote: Of Regeneration.] if it
would not be out of place, I should like to know something about. The
word was _Regeneration_, and”――

“Stay, my dear,” interrupted her grandmother; “that is the very subject
I was thinking of. You could not have named a better; and if you will
give me all your attention, I shall try to open up this great doctrine
to you as simply as I can.

“Do you remember what I told you about _Justification_?—What God does to
the sinner when He justifies and adopts him?”

[Sidenote: Difference between Justification,] “He changes his _state_,”
replied Emma. “He brings him from a _state_ of _wrath_ to a _state_ of
_grace_,—from a _state_ of _condemnation_ to a _state_ of _pardon_.”

“You have given me just the answer I wanted,” said her grandmother—“that
it is a change of _state_ or _condition_. In Justification, from being a
_rebel_, the sinner is pardoned by [Sidenote: Adoption,] his Sovereign.
In Adoption, from being a _prodigal_, he is received back into his
Father’s lost home. Now, dear,” continued she, “did I say that in these
there is produced also any change in _character_?”

“I don’t think so,” replied Emma.

“You are right; and you will instantly see how well it is that I should
speak to [Sidenote: And Regeneration.] you about Regeneration to‐night,
which is the very word which tells about this great change of
_character_ or _mind_, which is as necessary to salvation, as the great
change of _state_ and _condition_ of which I have already spoken. What
is your own idea, my dear child, as to the meaning of Regeneration?”

“Indeed, grandmamma,” replied Emma, “it is such a long and difficult
word, that I am ashamed to tell, though I have often heard it mentioned
in Mr R――’s sermon, I never understood it aright.”

“You should never be ashamed, my dear, to ask those older than yourself
to explain Bible difficulties to you. Many grow up to be big people, in
great ignorance, owing to this false shame.”

“Is it the same, grandmamma,” said Emma, “as _Repentance_? I think I
understand _that_ word better.”

[Sidenote: Bible Terms about Regeneration.] “Yes, my child, there are
many words in the Bible used to denote this same great change, and which
you must often hear ministers speaking about. ‘The _new birth_’—being
‘_born again_’—‘_Conversion_’—‘_Repentance_’—‘_Regeneration_;’ but the
meaning of them all may be summed up in this,—the necessity of a new
heart, produced by the Holy Spirit, who turns the old heart from the
service of sin to the service of God.”

[Sidenote: Necessity of Regeneration.] “But must every one have this
entire change of heart before he can be saved?”

“Yes, dearest, it is a doctrine many don’t like to believe, or to hear
about, because they think it makes the way to heaven too strait and
narrow; but do you remember anything Jesus said about it, when He was
speaking to inquiring Nicodemus?”

[Sidenote: What Jesus says of it.] “Oh, yes,” said Emma, “you have put
me in mind of the verse now—‘Except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God.’”

“You are quite correct,” replied the old lady. “That same blessed
Saviour never spoke an unkind word, and He would never have uttered
this, unless it was a solemn truth, ‘Marvel not that I said unto you, Ye
_must_ be _born again_.’”

“But if the sinner,” asked Emma, “is justified in the sight of God, and
God calls him ‘_not guilty_,’ and _pardons_ him, and says of him there
is _no condemnation_, what more does he require, in order to be saved?”

[Sidenote: A Change of State and a Change of Heart must go together.] “A
great deal more,” replied her grandmother. “Let me ask you,” said she to
Emma, “two questions, which may help to explain the matter to you. If a
king pardoned a rebel, and if that rebel still hated his sovereign, and
sought to kill him, would it be safe for the king to receive the
ungrateful rebel into his palace?”

“No!” replied Emma.

“Or, if a father received back a prodigal son; but if that son
_continued_ prodigal as ever, breaking, with fresh sin, his poor old
father’s heart, and corrupting his other brothers, could that father
permit him to live in his house?”

“No, _surely_,” still replied Emma.

“Well, dearest, what would require to be done to make it safe for the
king to keep company with the rebel he had pardoned; and the father to
take the son to live with him in his own household?”

“If they had changed and better hearts,” said Emma.

“You have just given again the answer I wanted,” said her grandmother.
“I want you to see it is the same with the sinner. God the _King_ has
pardoned the _sinner‐rebel_. God the _Father_ has adopted the
_sinner‐prodigal_; but He never could receive him into His glorious
palace of heaven, unless what?”

[Sidenote: Change of Heart in Regeneration needed for Heaven.] “Oh,
unless his heart is _changed_,” exclaimed Emma. “I understand it now. He
must have a _holy_ heart,—a heart to love God and hate sin. I see quite
well he could not get into heaven with an unchanged heart!”

“Yes, my dear child,” said the other (happy that her little
grand‐daughter was now able to see the meaning of Regeneration); “and
even if the sinner could get into heaven with his sinful, unchanged,
unconverted heart, could he be happy?”

[Sidenote: Heaven a place for holy Hearts.] “I don’t think,” said Emma,
“he could; he would be miserable in that holy place, amid holy angels
and a holy God. I see quite well now the truth of what Jesus says,
‘Except ye be converted, ye cannot enter in the kingdom of heaven.’

“But,” continued little Emma, getting more interested in the subject, “I
should like much to know _how_, and _when_, and _where_ we are
regenerated, and get this new mind.”

[Sidenote: The Agent in Regeneration.] “Like every other thing in
salvation,” replied the old lady, “this great change of heart and life
is the work of God; and though all the glorious Trinity are engaged in
producing it, it is more especially brought about by the agency of the
third person in the blessed Godhead—the Holy Ghost.”

“But how do you know when it takes place?” continued Emma. “Are we aware
of the time when the Holy Spirit works this great change?”

[Sidenote: The Method of Regeneration.] “No,” replied her grandmother.
“You remember how simply and beautifully Jesus speaks of this to one who
was asking about it, and wondering about it, like _you_. That, just as
you cannot tell where the wind comes from—you hear it blowing, but
cannot tell _from where_—‘so is every one that is born of the Spirit.’
That new birth, or change, is wrought silently in the soul. It is like
the little dew‐drops that sparkle in the morning sun, which gather
unseen and unnoticed during the night; or like the Temple of Jerusalem
of old, which was built without any noise of ‘hammer, or axe, or any
tool of iron;’—it rose without din or observation; and this is the case
with every renewed heart when it becomes a ‘temple of the Holy Ghost.’”

“Then it takes a long time, grandmamma, before a sinner’s heart can be
changed?”

[Sidenote: Various Modes of Operation.] “The Spirit of God, my child,
acts _how_, and _where_, and _when_ He pleases. He sometimes converts
and renews, _in a moment_, as He did the thief on the cross and the
jailer of Philippi, or the thousands at Pentecost. Sometimes He does it
_gradually_ (or by _degrees_), as in the case of Nicodemus; and
sometimes, as I trust, my dear Emma, is the case with you, He sanctifies
from infancy, changes the young heart, as He did in the case of Timothy,
and Samuel, and Jeremiah.”

[Sidenote: Am I Regenerated?] “Oh! I am happy to hear you say so,”
replied Emma, “for I was beginning to fear that I had never felt the
Holy Spirit _changing my heart_, and that I must surely be yet
unregenerated and unsaved. Such a thought would be very awful to me.”

“I trust, my dear child,” said her grandmother, “I have good reason to
believe that God, by His grace and Spirit, has ‘turned you from darkness
to light,’ and given you a heart to love Him and serve Him. I wish that
many little children would have such a [Sidenote: Awful Importance of
Regeneration.] _fear_ as you speak of. I wish many, too, would remember
that one little word MUST, and _who_ says it, ‘Ye _MUST_ be born
again!’”

“Dear grandmamma,” said Emma, “I must pray more than I ever have done
for a _clean heart_. I fear, till you have been explaining this to me, I
have thought too much about my sins being washed in Jesus’ blood, and
too little about my heart being changed and made holy by Jesus’ Spirit.
I see that I need both, and will try and pray for both.”

“It is a good resolution, my dearest,” said the other; “and the Great
God, for your encouragement in asking for a change of heart, gives you
in His own blessed Bible both a _prayer_ [Sidenote: A Prayer for it, and
its Answer.] and an _answer_. Give me your Bible,” continued she, “and,
as I feel unable to speak more to‐night, I will mark the two places to
which I refer, and you can take them with you to your own room, and read
them to yourself.”

The good old lady kissed her little grandchild, putting two pieces of
paper at what she had so marked. Emma, saying “Good‐night,” ran
up‐stairs with her Bible in her hand, and, having shut her door, read to
herself, before she knelt down to her evening prayer, these two verses:—

_The Prayer._—“Create in me a clean heart, O God; renew a right spirit
within me” (Ps. li. 10).

_The Answer._—“A new heart also will I give you, and a right spirit will
I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh” (Ezek. xxxvi. 26).


                              FIFTH NIGHT.

“I am now ready for you,” said old Mrs Allan, as little Emma was waiting
anxiously for the time when she might again seat herself by her
grandmother’s chair. “What am I to tell you about to‐night?”

“I have been thinking,” replied Emma, “if you have no more to explain
about the great work in the soul of the believer, that I should like to
hear more of that glorious Being to whom the sinner owes all the
precious blessings you have been telling me of.”

[Sidenote: Of the Person, Offices, and Work of Christ.] “I shall gladly
do so, my dear child. It is a delightful subject to converse upon the
Person, Offices, and Work of the Lord Jesus Christ, who, though He was
rich, yet for our sakes He became poor.”

“I shall hear attentively,” said Emma, “what you have to say, as there
is much about the _Person_ of Jesus I do not rightly understand. He is
called [Sidenote: Christ the Son of God and Son of Man.] both ‘Son of
God’ and ‘Son of Man.’ I often wonder how this can be.”

“This, my child,” replied her grandmother, “is the great mystery of
godliness, ‘God manifest in the flesh,’—but it is a glorious mystery;
and happy shall I be to speak to you upon it.

[Sidenote: Son of God.] “The Lord Jesus Christ is the eternal Son of
God. He was ‘with God, and was God.’ Before this world, or any worlds
were made, He dwelt from everlasting with the Father. He is equal with
Him in power and in glory. If He had been an angel, or an archangel, He
could not have saved us, for the highest archangel is only a
_creature_—and one created being cannot atone for the sin of another. In
one word, if Jesus had not been _God_, He could not have been the
Saviour of man.”

[Sidenote: Son of Man.] “But is he not spoken of,” said Emma, “also as
the Son of Man?”

“Yes, my dear; and I must add, if He had not been man, He could not have
saved us. As our surety, it was necessary for Him to suffer and die in
the nature which had sinned—and besides, you know, that _as God_, He
could not have suffered, because the Divine nature is a spiritual one.
Therefore it is that He says, ‘A _body_ hast thou prepared Me.’”

“I think, too,” said Emma, “it is a blessed thought that our great
Redeemer was a man. If He had been God only, He could not have felt for
us in the way He can do as the ‘Son of Man.’”

“You are right, my dear child. This is one of the most delightful
thoughts about the person of Jesus, that He is our ‘elder brother,’ and
not ashamed to call us ‘brethren.’ He can say to all of us, ‘I know your
sorrows,’ for He was Himself ‘the Man of Sorrows,’ and felt them all.”

[Sidenote: Titles of Jesus.] “Would you explain to me,” said the young
inquirer, “the meaning of some more of the names of the Lord Jesus
Christ?”

[Sidenote: Immanuel.] “He is called,” said her grandmamma, “by that
beautiful word, which tells that He is both God and man, ‘_Immanuel_,’
which means, ‘God with us.’

[Sidenote: Jesus.] “Then He is called ‘_Jesus_,’ because He ‘saves’ His
people—the word Jesus meaning ‘Saviour.’

[Sidenote: Messiah, Christ.] “Then He is called ‘_Messiah_,’ and
‘_Christ_,’ because He is the anointed of God—both words meaning
‘anointed.’ As kings, in ancient times, had anointing oil poured upon
their heads when they were set apart to their royal office, so our
blessed Saviour had the anointing oil of the Holy Spirit poured upon
Him, to qualify Him for His offices as mediator.”

“The _Offices_ of Jesus; dear grandmamma, I have often heard these
spoken of. Will you kindly explain to me what they mean?”

[Sidenote: The Offices of Christ.] “The Lord Jesus Christ, my dear
child, stands in different relations, and performs different acts with
regard to the Church He has redeemed with His precious blood. I shall
mention to you the three under which He is most frequently referred to.

[Sidenote: Prophet.] “Jesus is the _Prophet_ of His Church. He is her
great Teacher. By means of His precious Word, and the influences of His
Spirit, He makes known to us His own will, and the will of God for our
salvation.

[Sidenote: Priest.] “Jesus is the _Priest_ of His Church. A priest, you
know, in former times, offered sacrifices on the altar. Jesus is called
the ‘Great High Priest of our profession.’ He was Himself both the
Priest and the Victim, for ‘He gave Himself for us;’ and just as the
Jewish high priest of old went into the holy of holies and sprinkled on
the mercy‐seat the blood of the slain sacrifice, and prayed to God for
the people, so Jesus has carried the merits of His own blood into
heaven, and, as _our_ High Priest, is there pleading our cause at God’s
right hand. You remember, too, the high priest of old, after being
within the vail, came out to bless the waiting people. So Jesus, our
Great High Priest, will, at His second coming in glory, bless His
assembled Church, saying, ‘Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.’

[Sidenote: King.] “Jesus also is _King_ of His Church, the ruler _in_
it, and ruler _over_ it. He protects it from its enemies; and though
often, like the bush which Moses saw in the wilderness, it burns with
fire, He will prevent it from ever being consumed. He will continue to
reign over it as King, until all enemies be put under His feet.”

“What a wonderful and complete Saviour, grandmamma!” exclaimed Emma.
“Jesus is so great, and yet so compassionate! I feel as if I can adore
Him as God, and yet love Him as a brother.”

“True, most true, my dear child; He is all you need—the very Saviour you
_do_ need. It is a wonderful thought, His Godhead and His Manhood! As
God, angels and seraphs worshipped Him. As Man, little children smiled
in His arms!”

“I love to think of Him, too,” said Emma, “as my High Priest in heaven.
It does [Sidenote: Christ’s Intercessory Work.] not make me afraid to
approach the Great God, when I have so kind a Saviour to intercede for
me.”

“You are right, my dear,” said the other; “there is no thought more
pleasing and delightful, than that we have in glory ‘a Prince’ that has
‘power with God,’ and must ‘prevail.’ The Apostle Paul rejoiced much in
this truth. It gave him ‘boldness,’ as he calls it, to approach the
throne of grace. And the Apostle John, in his vision on the Isle of
Patmos, beheld Jesus as the Angel of the Covenant, with a ‘censer’ in
His hand. His people on earth put all their prayers into this censer,
and a fragrant cloud ascends from it before the throne.”

“What is the meaning of that?” asked Emma.

“It tells us, my child,” said her grandmother, “that the believer’s
poor, imperfect prayers, when sprinkled and made fragrant with the
incense of Christ’s adorable merits, ascend with acceptance into the ear
of God Himself. God hears the poorest and unworthiest of His saints, for
the sake of the work and merits of Jesus.”

“I can now well understand,” said Emma, “how the Apostle Paul could say
with such a grateful heart, ‘Thanks be to God for His unspeakable
gift!’”

“Yes,” replied the other, “it _is_ unspeakable—and the more you know of
Jesus, the more wonders will you discover in His person, and the more
glories in His work. Oh! seek to love him more and more every day. Let
it be your constant wish, and desire, and prayer—how can I do enough for
this Saviour who has done so much, so very much for me?

“But I can say no more to‐night. May this blessed Saviour, my dear
child, be yours—yours now, and yours for ever!”


                              SIXTH NIGHT.

“It is a long time,” said Emma, running to her grandmother’s side,
“since you were last able to tell me those nice things about Bible
doctrines. I have been longing much for you to be able to speak to me
again about them.”

“I feel better and stronger now,” said old Mrs Allan, who had been for
many weeks laid aside, “and I am as happy as my little Emma can be, to
find myself once more in my old oaken chair, with her at my knee.”

“Thank you, grandmamma,” said she, clinging affectionately to her
withered hand; “and what are you going to speak to me about to‐night?”

“Our last conversation, my child, if I remember well, was on the
intercessory work of the Lord Jesus. I think you would like to hear me
speak of the final great act of His mediatorial reign, when He will come
at the [Sidenote: The Resurrection and Judgment.] resurrection to judge
the world.”

“Oh, yes!” said Emma; “I should like much to hear of that awfully
glorious day. I often tremble when I think about it.”

“It has no terrors, my child, to God’s own people. It is to them a very
joyful day—the happiest of all their lives; for then they shall be
brought to the full enjoyment of God for ever.”

[Sidenote: Souls of Believers at Death.] “But, dear grandmamma, I
thought, when believers die, they go to heaven at the very moment of
death; that the angels of God are waiting by their pillows to carry them
into Jesus’ bosom.”

“True—most true, my child,” replied the aged lady; “the moment the saint
closes his eyes on this world, he opens them in heaven. The souls of
believers are at their death made perfect in holiness, and do
immediately pass into glory. You perhaps remember some of the things the
Apostle Paul said in the prospect of death?”

“Yes,” said Emma; “‘Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better;’ ‘Willing rather to be absent from the body, and to
be present with the Lord.’ I remember, too, of Stephen, when his wicked
murderers were stoning him, how he cried out, ‘Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit.’”

“Quite right, my dear; and that other saying of the Saviour to the poor
thief on the cross is more to the point still, when He said to him,
‘Verily I say unto thee, _To‐day_ shalt thou be with me in paradise.’”

“But then, from all these verses,” said Emma, “is not heaven begun at
the hour of death?”

“It is, my child,” replied her grandmother. “I have already told you
that, at the moment of death, the soul of the saint is made perfectly
holy, and happy too, beyond what we can now conceive; but its state of
final and complete glorification will not take place until the day of
judgment.”

“What is it,” said the little inquirer, “which will then add to its
state of glory and blessedness?”

[Sidenote: The Bodies of Believers.] “You know, my dear,” was the reply,
“that the _body_ of the believer is not taken to heaven at the hour of
death. It is laid in the tomb. You remember too well that sad day when
your little brother was laid in his grave in the churchyard. His happy
spirit, I believe, is now in heaven, joyful in the presence and love of
God; but his full state of glory and blessedness will not be complete
until his body is raised again on the resurrection morning. Perhaps I
should tell [Sidenote: Purchased by Christ.] you that the body, as well
as the soul, is part of the purchase of the Lord Jesus Christ. Every
particle of the saints’ dust is redeemed by His blood. The Apostle
speaks of ‘our _bodies_ and our spirits’ as ‘not our own,’ but ‘bought
with a price.’”

“But how can this be?” inquired Emma; “do you mean that the bodies of
those who have been buried for ages will come all to life again, and the
soul be once more united to these?”

[Sidenote: Raised from the Grave.] “Yes, my dear, it is indeed a
wonderful thought. But what cannot the power of God do? He has _said_
that He will raise us up at the last day. Do you remember any of the
words of Jesus about this?”

Emma thought a little, and at last turned up her Bible to the verses,
and read them: “Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.” “But how,”
continued she, when she had finished, and once more repeating her
question of surprise—“how, grandmamma, can this be?—does not the dead
body crumble into dust? How can the particles that have for hundreds and
thousands of years been mixed with the earth come together again?”

“God can do anything, I answer once more,” was the reply of the other.
“We should always remember that what is impossible with man, is possible
with God. We are not without examples, my child, in the natural world,
of the wondrous changes which the power of God can produce in smaller
[Sidenote: The Doctrine of the Resurrection probable from Analogy.]
things; and this shews us (from what is called _analogy_) that we have
no right to question the doctrine I am now speaking about, however
strange and apparently impossible it may seem to be.”

“What instances, grandmamma,” said Emma, “may I ask, do you refer to in
the outer world? I should like to understand better what you mean.”

“I like to hear you asking for more information, dear Emma, and I shall
try to give it to you. Well, then, I know you have often seen the bright
and beautiful butterfly with its golden wings and rings of silver. Can
you believe that that lovely insect was once a little grub or
caterpillar? I see you are astonished, my dear, at what I now say; but
it is the case. During winter, these little worms lie in what is called
a _chrysalis_ state. During this time there is nothing in the least
beautiful about them—I would say rather the reverse; but all at once,
when the summer sun shines out, the little insect bursts its coating,
and is changed into a lovely butterfly or moth, with expanded wings,
flying up into the blue sky, or ranging at large amid the garden
flowers.”

“Oh how wonderful is this!” exclaimed Emma; “and I see now, grandmamma,
what you mean. This little creature teaches me to understand how the
same mighty power of God, that changes the caterpillar into a butterfly,
can bring about the still more wonderful change in raising our vile
bodies from the grave.”

“You are right, my child,” said her grandmother. “I am glad you have
understood me; and if I had time, I might give you other instances of a
similar kind. You have seen, for example, the farmer put the little
grains of seed into the ground; could you ever have expected that the
small pickles thrown into the earth would spring up into the rich fields
of yellow corn you have seen waving at harvest time?”

“Oh no,” replied Emma; “I have often thought how curious this is, and
also that the little annual seed I sow in my own garden‐plot should
spring up such lovely flowers. The seed looks so small and withered
like, and the flowers are so beautiful in colour, and have such a sweet
smell.”

“Well, my dear, does not God give us proofs in these smaller things of
what He can do in greater things. The body laid in the grave is like the
seed laid in the ground, ‘it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in
glory.’ I should like you,” continued the old lady, “to take your Bible
and read all that striking and beautiful passage of the Apostle Paul on
[Sidenote: Testimony of St Paul.] this subject.” Emma immediately opened
to the 15th chapter of 1st Corinthians, 42d verse, and read aloud as
follows:—“It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: it is
sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.... Behold,
I shew you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump (for
the trumpet shall sound); and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall
have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is
swallowed up in victory.”

“What a wonderful scene that will be!” said Emma, as she closed her
Bible. “Dear grandmamma, can you tell me _when_ it will take place?”

[Sidenote: When the Resurrection will be.] “No, my child,” replied she;
“the Bible tells us that ‘Of that day and hour knoweth no man; no, not
even the angels that are in heaven.’ God seems purposely to keep us in
the dark about the time of the coming of Jesus, that we may be always
ready for it. It matters little how long or how short it may be,
provided we are now living as we would wish we had done when we hear the
trumpet sounding.”

“And what sort of bodies,” said Emma, “will they be that will then rise
from the graves?”

“All that I can tell you,” replied her grandmother, “is, that they will
be glorious [Sidenote: Glory of the Resurrection Body.] bodies,
fashioned like unto Christ’s glorified body. They will be no more
subject to decay, and weakness, and disease, and death. It is said of
them, ‘They shall be like Him’ (like Jesus), and also, ‘Neither shall
they die any more.’ And surely no blessedness can be greater than
this—to be _like Jesus_, and _never_ to _die_.”

“Oh, grandmamma!” exclaimed Emma, “I feel as if I would not be afraid to
go to the grave, after all that you have been now telling me.”

“True, my child, the lowliest grave in yonder churchyard, if it be the
grave of a true believer, is holy ground. Perhaps angels are watching
over it, and Jesus himself counts its dust _precious_. The grave of the
wicked is a prison house, where they are detained in captivity until the
day of awful vengeance; but the grave of the saint is a casket holding a
precious jewel. It is a bed of rest, where he gently and peacefully
‘sleeps’ till awakened on the happy morning of immortality.

“But I must here, my dear, pause for to‐night. We have been speaking so
much about this wondrous doctrine of the body’s resurrection as to
render it necessary that I should wait till another Sabbath to speak as
I promised about the day of judgment.”


                             SEVENTH NIGHT.

“You promised, grandmamma,” said little Emma, as she found herself once
more seated by the old oaken chair, “to tell me to‐night [Sidenote: The
Last Judgment.] about the Day of Judgment. I long to hear you speak
about so solemn a subject. There is much about it I do not understand.”

“It _is_, my child,” replied the other, “a solemn subject. It will be a
dreadful day to the wicked; but it will be a happy day to all God’s dear
children—the happiest day in their lives.”

“Tell me, then, dear grandmamma, all that the Bible tells us about it. I
shall promise to listen with great attention.”

[Sidenote: What it is.] “The Judgment,” answered the other, “is that
great transaction which is to take place at the end of the world, when
every man, and woman, and child, that ever lived, will be brought to
trial before God’s ‘great white throne.’ A trumpet will sound over their
graves. As I told you last Sabbath, the mouldering dust will come to
life again, and the dead, small and great, will stand before God.”

“What a wonderful and awful thought!” exclaimed Emma; “but do you mean
to say that _all_ will be there, without any exception?”

“All!—all!” replied the aged lady, “from Adam to the last inhabitant of
the world. There will be those who lived _before_ the flood, and _since_
the flood. Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles—Jews and
Gentiles—Pagans and Christians—rich and poor—young and old—learned and
unlearned—kings and beggars—not one will be wanting; and more still,
_you_ and _I_ will be there. _Our_ eyes will look on that vast crowd.”

“And tell me,” continued Emma, deeply impressed with the thought, “who
is the [Sidenote: The Judge.] Judge that will be seated on the throne
you speak of? and what will He do?”

“If you refer, my child,” said her grandmother, “to the seventeenth
chapter of Acts, thirty‐first verse, you will there read who is set
apart as Judge of the world.” Emma turned up the passage in her Bible,
and read as follows:—

“For He hath appointed a day in the which He will judge the world in
righteousness by _that Man_ whom He hath ordained; whereof He hath given
assurance unto all men, in that He hath raised Him from the dead.”

“Oh, I see now!” she exclaimed, as she closed her Bible; “it is the Lord
Jesus Christ who is to be Judge. It makes me glad to think of this; for
if I love and serve Him now, I will not be afraid to meet Him then.
[Sidenote: The Throne.] But why is it said that He is to be seated on a
_white_ throne?—will it really be so?”

“I cannot tell,” replied the other, “what the _outward_ marks of majesty
will be in which He will appear, although, doubtless, these will be very
great; for it is said that He will come ‘in His glory,’ and that He is
to have ‘all His holy angels with Him.’ But He is spoken of as seated on
a great _white_ throne, to denote His awful purity and holiness; that He
will give on that day every one his due. His mercy will not interfere
with the exercise of justice and holiness, and sinners will not escape
unpunished.”

“I think I now remember, dear grandmamma,” said Emma, “of reading in
that same chapter in Revelation which speaks of the throne of the Judge,
that He is to have [Sidenote: The Books.] some books lying open before
Him.”

“Yes, my child, you are right; ‘the books,’ we are told, are to be
‘opened.’ What these books may be we cannot tell; but perhaps they may
be the books of the Law and the Gospel—the books of Conscience, and
Memory, and Privilege; and especially the _Great Book of Remembrance_,
in which all [Sidenote: The Book of Remembrance.] our words, and deeds,
and actions, are preserved. All that every individual has ever done will
be found recorded in it. Many will wonder when they come to see how
faithful the pen of God has been in writing down _all_;—heart sins, and
tongue sins, and life sins. I fear not a few suppose that there are many
trifling faults (or, as they call them, ‘little sins’) which they
imagine God does not think it worth while to take notice of. They will
find every one of them recorded. _They_ may have forgotten them long
ago; but they will all be brought to light again on that Great Day.”

“If this,” exclaimed Emma, “be indeed the case, who is there but must
tremble at the thought of that day?”

“The wicked, my child,” continued her grandmother, “will and must be
afraid to think of it. All who have not known the salvation of Jesus,
and fled to His precious blood, must be covered then with confusion and
shame. They will then be led to see, what they never saw before, what an
evil thing sin is, and what a holy being God is. But His own people will
have nothing to fear. They can say now, in the words of the beautiful
hymn—

                ‘Bold shall I stand on that great day;
                For who aught to my charge can lay,
                While by Thy blood absolved I am
                From sin’s tremendous guilt and shame?’

Yes, dear Emma, they will be able to look up with joy in the face of
their Judge, and say, ‘_It is God that justifieth, who is he that
condemneth?_’”

“But what! Do you mean, grandmamma, that God does not take account of
the sins of the righteous?”

“No, no, my child; every one of their sins is written down as well as
those of the wicked—dreadful pages of guilt, too, that might well
overwhelm them with wrath and condemnation.”

“How, then,” continued Emma, “can it be different with them from the
others? How can God pass over their many sins?”

“He _does_ not—He _could_ not, my child,” replied the aged lady, “pass
any sins over. But you may have heard of _another_ book which [Sidenote:
The Book of Life.] God will have before Him on that day. It is the _Book
of Life_. There the names of all the redeemed are written. None who are
written therein can be lost! It is as if the great Judge took His pen
and drew it through every page of recorded sins, marking them all out
with the blood of the Lamb of God.”

“But,” asked Emma, “will it not make the believer very sad and sorrowful
on that day to see such an awful record of sins? It will be enough,
surely, to bring floods of tears to his eyes.”

“I do not wonder at your saying so, my dear; but I think the thought of
his sins will be lost in a still more wondrous and amazing one—I mean in
thinking of the work of Jesus, that could take _so many sins_ away,
making them all forgiven and forgotten, and blotted out for ever.”

“Oh that _my_ name, dear grandmamma, were safely written there! I feel
as if I never could be for another hour happy or joyful until I felt
sure that my name was in the _Book of Life_!”

“You have, my dear child, all the assurance necessary, if you are now
believing in the Lord Jesus—trusting in His merits—seeking to love
Him—to do what He commands—and avoid what displeases Him. Of such He
says (Rev. iii. 5), ‘I will not blot out his name out of the _Book of
Life_; but I will confess his name before my Father and before His
angels.’”

“But tell me further,” said Emma, “how will the work of judgment
proceed?”

“Jesus, my child, after the books have been opened, and the vast
multitude have been brought before Him, will go on to pronounce sentence
upon each. It will be a solemn scene. We read that ‘He will [Sidenote:
The Awards.] separate the righteous from the wicked as a shepherd
divideth the sheep from the goats.’ In this world the good and the bad,
the ‘tares and the wheat,’ are mixed up together. _We_ cannot tell the
holy from the unholy; but Jesus knows them all; and on that day He will
parcel all mankind into these two great classes. In one or other every
human being must be placed.”

“On whom will He pronounce sentence first?” inquired Emma.

“He will address the righteous first,” said her grandmother. “It will
not, indeed, be with _them_ a day of wrath. Believers, at the time of
their justification (as I explained to you on a former evening), were
dismissed with the sentence of ‘not guilty’ pronounced upon them. They
are brought before God’s throne, that there they may be ‘openly
acknowledged’—receive a public acquittal before men and angels—and
listen to that happy, happy sentence, ‘Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.’”

“I can well imagine their joy,” said Emma; “but what next?”

“It will be a sadly different scene, my child. Let the words of Jesus
himself tell you of it—you will find them in the 25th chapter of
Matthew, 41st verse.”

Emma again turned to the passage, and read, “Then shall He say also to
them on the left hand, Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels.”

“After this,” continued the aged lady, “we read no more about the doings
of that great day. The court is dissolved—the trial over. We see the
golden gates of heaven open to receive happy saints and angels; and the
miserable wicked sink down to the regions of despair! This solemn day
terminates the kingdom of grace on earth. The kingdom of glory is then
completed. The elect are gathered into it from the four quarters of
heaven. They ‘enter into the joy of their Lord.’ But this I must reserve
speaking to you about, if God spare me, till another Sabbath.”


                             EIGHTH NIGHT.

Spring once more returned with its green fields and bright sky. The
little birds were beginning to raise their earliest notes, as if telling
one another how happy they were that winter, with its snow and its
storms, was again over, and that the fresh buds were beginning again to
appear. The small, old‐fashioned lamp, too, which was filled every
Saturday, so as to be ready for the Sabbath evening, was, from the long
twilight, no longer required. As the last rays of the setting sun were
falling through the latticed window, Emma was found once more at her
grandmother’s side.

“I think, my dear,” said the latter, laying aside her spectacles, and
drawing her grandchild nearer her—“I think I left off speaking last
Sabbath when we were just beginning to talk of the most wondrous and
glorious of all Bible subjects.”

“Oh yes,” replied Emma, “you had told me about the doings of the great
Day of Judgment, and you were commencing to [Sidenote: Of Heaven.] speak
about the glories of heaven, when you thought it would be better to wait
till now.”

“Truly, my child,” said her grandmother, “I would require rather to wait
till that heaven itself begins, in order to give you any idea of its
happiness. We are told that ‘eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared
for them that love Him.’”

“I was reading a little ago, when sitting at the window,” said Emma,
“the description of this glorious heaven given us in the last chapters
of the Bible, where it is said to be a [Sidenote: How described in
Revelation.] great city, with streets of gold like transparent glass,
walls of jasper, and foundations of precious stones. And here, too, is
another beautiful verse, grandmamma,” continued she, as her eyes glanced
over the 21st chapter of Revelation: “‘And the city had no need of the
sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.’ And here yet another
lovely description,” she added, “I love so to read it: ‘And he shewed me
a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of the street of it, and on
either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve
manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of
the tree were for the healing of the nations.’”

“I have not interrupted you, my dear child, in reading these beautiful
verses,” said the aged lady; “they give us a bright and glowing picture
of happiness and glory, which our minds can in no other way conceive.”

[Sidenote: To be understood figuratively.] “But will there _indeed_ be
golden streets, and crystal walls, and all these precious stones that
are here spoken of?” inquired Emma.

“There will be far greater magnificence, and far purer happiness,”
replied her grandmother, “than all the gold and gems this world could
give. These are just figures or emblems employed by God in His Word to
convey to us some idea of the vast glory of heaven. No earthly words, or
thoughts, or language, could describe this; and therefore, as men
consider gold and precious stones the most costly and valuable things in
the world, they are used as pictures to give us some feeble
representation of heavenly blessedness.”

“What, then, dear grandmamma, will heaven really be? What kind of a
place is it? and how are the righteous employed when they get there?”

[Sidenote: The Scenery of Heaven.] “I cannot tell,” replied the other,
“what character of scenery there will be in heaven, nor in what
particular spot in the universe this happy place is prepared. The Bible
does not gratify our curiosity about this. For anything that is known to
the contrary, there may be much there that we love and admire in this
world. There may be beautiful skies, and clear rivers, and gushing
fountains, and lovely flowers, and sweet music. But still, as I have
said already, regarding all these the Bible says nothing.”

“What, then, _will_ heaven consist in, grandmamma?” inquired Emma.

[Sidenote: Negative and Positive Blessedness.] “I was just going to say,
my child, that there are many things we know will _not_ be there, and
many things we know _will_ be there. Does little Emma think she could
tell me any of the things we have in this world that we shall _not_ have
in heaven?”

“Oh yes,” replied the little girl, “I think I know. We shall have no
_sin_ there, and no _sorrow_ there, and no _death_ there.”

[Sidenote: Negative.] “Quite right, my child,” said her grandmother.
“This is a world of sin, and therefore it has become a world of pain,
and sickness, and sorrow, and death; but in heaven all these will be
unknown. I thought I saw you, my dear, but yesterday seated in the
churchyard on little Robert’s tomb; and when you came home, I observed
by your eyes that you had been weeping for the loss of your little
brother. In that happy heaven I am speaking of there will be no graves
and no tears, for there will be no sin and no death to cause them.”

“But then, dear grandmamma, will there be no other joys in heaven?”

[Sidenote: Positive.] “Yes, yes, my child,” replied the aged lady; “I
have only spoken to you of what is _not_ in heaven. I have yet to tell
you what _is_ there. Can little Emma answer this question too, as well
as the last?”

“I shall meet all my dear friends there,” said Emma—“my father and
mother, who were both taken from me when I was so young, and little
Robert, and you too, grandmamma, who have so kindly led me on in the way
to that happy place, and told me often how I am to get there.”

“My dear child,” said her grandmother, “all that you have said about
meeting departed friends there is true. All who are the friends of Jesus
will meet in that happy home. I _believe_ it to be true,” she repeated,
the tear filling her eye as she spoke. “Parents will know their
children, and children their parents; and brothers and sisters will meet
never to part any more. But this is but a very small portion of the joy
of heaven. Can you not think of a far greater joy in that bright world
than even the meeting of the dearest earthly friends?”

“Oh yes,” replied Emma, “we shall meet God!—we shall see Jesus face to
face! [Sidenote: Vision of God.] This will be the greatest, surely, of
all the glories of heaven—to dwell for ever with God, and discover more
of His grace and love!”

“Yes, truly, my child,” said the other; “this is to heaven what the sun
is to the universe. All the other glories we can speak of are only, by
comparison, like the light of the stars to that sun, or like little
streams to the great ocean. We shall ‘see God;’ and what, perhaps, is
more wondrous still, we shall be _like_ God. Along with the holy angels,
we shall have no higher delight than doing His will. We shall feel that
in His presence ‘there is fulness of joy.’”

“But shall we indeed _see God_?” inquired Emma; “the thought seems so
wondrous. How can this be?”

[Sidenote: How God will be Manifested.] “Here again, dear child,”
replied her grandmother, “we must not try to be wise beyond what the
Bible has told us; for it is there said, that ‘He dwells in light that
is inaccessible and full of glory, whom no eye hath seen, neither can
see.’ That there will be some bright and glorious manifestation of His
presence I cannot doubt; but what the [Sidenote: The Presence of Jesus
in the midst of the Redeemed.] nature of this will be I cannot tell.
This we know, however, with certainty, that Jesus, our blessed Redeemer,
in His glorified human nature, will be seen and adored by the countless
multitudes of His ransomed people.”

“I saw,” said Emma, “a verse immediately following the words I a little
ago read, which speaks of this. Here it is: ‘And _they shall see His
face_, and His name shall be in their foreheads.’”

“Yes, my child; and you may perhaps remember some other passages which
tell the same blessed truth. Do you remember what made John so happy in
the prospect of heaven?”

“Oh yes,” replied Emma, “I recollect now. He says with such joy, ‘We
know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall _see
Him as He is_.’”

“Quite right, dearest,” said her grandmother; “I shall just remind you
of one more. It is the Saviour’s own last prayer for His people—‘Father,
I will that they also whom Thou hast given me be _with me where I am_,
_that they may behold my glory_.’ Do you remember the name by which
Jesus is spoken of again and again in the book of Revelation, describing
to us how He now appears in glory?”

“Yes,” replied Emma; “I have often been struck with the title there
given to Him. He is called ‘the _Lamb that was slain_.’ I often wonder
why He should be called so, now that He is in heaven, seated on His
throne, with all His sufferings at an end.”

“It is, my dear child,” answered the aged lady, “a very precious name.
It tells that He continues, and will continue, to wear His glorified
_human_ nature there, and that, too, through all eternity. It tells us
also that the redeemed will never cease to remember that it was to the
shedding of His precious blood that they owe every gem of their crowns.”

“And doubtless,” said Emma, “the happy company of the saints will for
ever delight to think more and more of the love of Jesus?”

[Sidenote: Their Contemplation of Christ’s Love.] “You are right,” said
the other. “It will assuredly be one of the greatest joys in heaven to
comprehend with all saints what is the height and depth, and length and
breadth, and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge. They
will ever be trying to know more and more of this love; but they will
never be able to understand all its meaning.”

“I daresay, too, much that we cannot now understand will be cleared up?”
said Emma.

“Yes, my dear,” replied her grandmother; “God’s wisdom and faithfulness
will then be as fully revealed as His love. There is much that takes
place on earth which is perplexing [Sidenote: Providences Explained in
Heaven.] to us—what we call ‘dark dealings,’—as, for example, when good
and useful lives are taken away, and evil and worthless lives are
spared; but Jesus, you remember, said, ‘What thou knowest not _now_,
thou shalt know hereafter.’ I believe we shall then not only ‘_know_,’
but _see_, that ‘all things have been working together for good to them
that love God.’ Sore trials and afflictions will then call forth loud
songs of praise; and it will be made manifest that the Judge of all the
earth had done right.”

“And will all these blessed saints,” inquired Emma, “be equally holy and
happy?”

“They will all, my dear, be _holy_,” said the old lady, “for ‘without
holiness no one could see God,’ far less enjoy Him; and they will all,
too, be _happy_—not one tear will be in their bright faces. But I
believe, too, that some [Sidenote: Degrees of Bliss in Heaven.] will be
happier than others. _All_ will be like vessels full to the brim with
glory and happiness; but some vessels will be larger than others, and
able, therefore, to contain more happiness. We read that they shall
differ ‘as one star in the firmament differs from another star in
glory.’ Some stars are of a larger size than others; some are nearer the
sun than others: so those who have lived nearer Jesus on earth, and
loved Him with larger hearts, will be nearer Him in heaven. While _all_,
therefore, who are believers will be happy, those will be happiest who
are walking closest with God now. If you will turn to the twelfth
chapter of Daniel, you will find there a striking verse, telling of
different degrees of coming happiness. Here it is,” continued the old
lady, pointing her little grandchild to the third verse: “‘They that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn
many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.’”

“Oh! what a glorious, happy prospect, dear grandmamma! Would that I
could feel sure of being one even of these feeblest stars!”

[Sidenote: How Heaven is Obtained.] “There is but one way, my child,”
replied the other, “of joining that bright company of which we have been
speaking. It is the blood of Jesus alone that can open these glorious
gates. But that blood _has_ opened them, and keeps them open still, to
the chief of sinners. That blessed Redeemer seems still to stand at the
gate of heaven, and say, ‘I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he
shall be saved.’

“But I feel, my dear Emma, that my strength is failing, and I am unable
to speak more to you this evening. Give me your Bible, and I shall
double down the leaf at my favourite description of the joys of heaven.”
She accordingly took her little grandchild’s Bible, and putting a mark
with her aged finger at the seventh chapter of Revelation, thirteenth
verse, returned it to her again, saying, “Should you, my child, be with
me at my dying hour, when my tongue is too feeble to speak, remember to
read to me that sweet passage. I have often wished that I might have
some one to read to me these words when I pass through the Dark Valley.”

[Sidenote: Conclusion.] Little did Emma suppose that the words which now
fell upon her ear would so soon come true. A few weeks only passed by,
when her grandmother was laid upon a bed of sickness and pain, which
soon proved a bed of death. The aged saint bore up under her sufferings
with calmness and fortitude. She was kept in perfect peace, for her mind
was stayed on God. Her dear little grandchild was her faithful companion
during her last hours. The night before her death, when she was fast
sinking, and her lips getting paler and paler, Emma remembered
faithfully the request made to her. The tear started to her eye as she
opened her Bible, and saw the leaf still folded down. She read it with a
trembling voice. The poor old sufferer was able to do no more than clasp
her withered hands as the happy sentences fell on her ears. When she had
fallen asleep in Jesus, and was laid in the churchyard which she had so
often looked to from her window, Emma delighted to go with her Bible in
her hand, and, sitting on the green turf which covered her grave, to
read the well‐known passage: “And one of the elders answered, saying
unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence
came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me,
These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are
they before the throne of God, and serve Him day and night in His
temple: and He that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun
light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the
throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          Transcriber’s Notes


A Table of Contents has been added for convenience.

In the caption for the frontispiece, “Grandmama” has been changed to
“Grandmamma” to make it consistent with the rest of the project.

On page 46, “in” has been corrected to “on” at “vision on the Isle of
Patmos.”

Obvious punctuation errors have been silently corrected.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE CHILD'S BOOK OF DIVINITY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


