The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ruth Fielding at Golden Pass
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ruth Fielding at Golden Pass
        or, the perils of an artificial avalanche

Author: Alice B. Emerson

Release date: May 31, 2025 [eBook #76206]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Cupples & Leon Company, 1925

Credits: Roger Frank and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUTH FIELDING AT GOLDEN PASS ***





                      RUTH FIELDING AT GOLDEN PASS

                            ALICE B. EMERSON

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             RUTH FIELDING
                             AT GOLDEN PASS

                                   OR

                             THE PERILS OF
                        AN ARTIFICIAL AVALANCHE

                                   BY

                            ALICE B. EMERSON

       Author of “Ruth Fielding of the Red Mill,” “Ruth Fielding
             in the Far North,” “Betty Gordon Series,” etc.

                              ILLUSTRATED

                                NEW YORK
                         CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            Books for Girls
                          BY ALICE B. EMERSON
                       12mo. Cloth. Illustrated.

                          RUTH FIELDING SERIES

                  RUTH FIELDING OF THE RED MILL
                  RUTH FIELDING AT BRIARWOOD HALL
                  RUTH FIELDING AT SNOW CAMP
                  RUTH FIELDING AT LIGHTHOUSE POINT
                  RUTH FIELDING AT SILVER RANCH
                  RUTH FIELDING ON CLIFF ISLAND
                  RUTH FIELDING AT SUNRISE FARM
                  RUTH FIELDING AMONG THE GYPSIES
                  RUTH FIELDING IN MOVING PICTURES
                  RUTH FIELDING DOWN IN DIXIE
                  RUTH FIELDING AT COLLEGE
                  RUTH FIELDING IN THE SADDLE
                  RUTH FIELDING IN THE RED CROSS
                  RUTH FIELDING AT THE WAR FRONT
                  RUTH FIELDING HOMEWARD BOUND
                  RUTH FIELDING DOWN EAST
                  RUTH FIELDING IN THE GREAT NORTHWEST
                  RUTH FIELDING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE
                  RUTH FIELDING TREASURE HUNTING
                  RUTH FIELDING IN THE FAR NORTH
                  RUTH FIELDING AT GOLDEN PASS

                          BETTY GORDON SERIES

                   BETTY GORDON AT BRAMBLE FARM
                   BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON
                   BETTY GORDON IN THE LAND OF OIL
                   BETTY GORDON AT BOARDING SCHOOL
                   BETTY GORDON AT MOUNTAIN CAMP
                   BETTY GORDON AT OCEAN PARK
                   BETTY GORDON AND HER SCHOOL CHUMS
                   BETTY GORDON AT RAINBOW RANCH

                Cupples & Leon Co., Publishers, New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

               Copyright, 1925, by Cupples & Leon Company
                      Ruth Fielding at Golden Pass
                          Printed in U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                CONTENTS

                        I. Fire
                       II. Tom to the Rescue
                      III. Good Old Times
                       IV. Golden Pass
                        V. A New Star
                       VI. Fine News
                      VII. The Leading Lady
                     VIII. The Party
                       IX. On the Road
                        X. A Suspicious Move
                       XI. Trouble in the Air
                      XII. In Peril
                     XIII. New Worries
                      XIV. Helen is Hurt
                       XV. Startling News
                      XVI. An Incredible Suggestion
                     XVII. Ruth Decides
                    XVIII. A New Role
                      XIX. A New Friend
                       XX. Not Acting
                      XXI. The Narrow Ledge
                     XXII. A Test of Courage
                    XXIII. Buried Alive
                     XXIV. Bears
                      XXV. Sunlight Once More

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      RUTH FIELDING AT GOLDEN PASS




                               CHAPTER I

                                  FIRE


Main Street was jammed with an unprecedented crowd of people and
traffic. Automobiles discharged a continual stream of humanity before
the doors of the new motion picture house in Cheslow.

Laughing girls and their escorts, older men and women, paused before the
rather flamboyant poster in the lobby of the picture house advertising
Miss Ruth Fielding’s personal appearance with the introduction of this,
her new and greatest picture, “Snowblind.”

Nearly all Cheslow had turned out in honor of this star in picturedom,
Ruth Fielding. As Ruth had been a resident of Cheslow since her
childhood, it is not strange that the town took a proprietary interest
in her.

At that particular moment poor Ruth was feeling extremely unlike the
Miss Fielding of the flamboyant poster. She was excited and nervous, and
the prospect of facing such an audience as would in all probability pack
the Palace that night filled her with an emotion akin to panic.

Also, though she was sure in her own mind that “Snowblind” was a good
picture, felt that she had put the best of her art into the making of
it, there was always the doubt as to just how it would be received by
that fickle thing, an American audience.

The latter, besides being fickle, was pitiless. Where it condemned, it
condemned so heartily that the object of its displeasure might just as
well be sent at once to the darkest corner of the director’s room of
discarded plays. It was done for--a complete failure. This, unless there
was the possibility of practically remaking the whole thing. And in the
case of Ruth Fielding’s “Snowblind,” where the scenes had actually been
filmed amid the snow and ice of the far North, retakes would be an
impossibility.

Some of this Ruth had been saying to her chum, Helen Cameron, as she
restlessly paced the length of the living room at the Red Mill. The two
girls were dressed and ready to start for the theater, but were awaiting
the arrival of Tom, Helen’s twin brother, and Helen’s fiancé, Chess
Copley, who were to take them to their destination in Tom’s car.

“Helen, if my picture doesn’t go and go big,” said Ruth, pausing in her
restless pacing to stare at her chum, “I think I shall die of
disappointment.”

Helen laughed. There was a light in her eye as though she enjoyed a
secret all her own. She seated herself, unnoticed by her chum, in a
chair by the window from which she could command a view of the approach
to the Red Mill.

“Cheer up, Ruthie,” she said. “Disappointment seldom kills.” Then, as
she drew forth a pocket mirror and carefully examined her nose for a
hint of shine, she added: “Anyway, your ‘Snowblind’ hasn’t a chance in
the world to fail, Ruth Fielding. It is a tremendous picture, and you
know it.”

“If only the public will think so, too!” said Ruth, half to herself. She
went over to the window and looked out impatiently. “Isn’t it time for
the boys to come?”

“Gracious me, so it is!” cried Helen, with a glance of mock surprise at
her wrist watch. “These laggards shall suffer for such neglect. Wait
till I get hold of Chess----”

“Don’t rave. Here comes some one now,” Ruth interrupted.

Still enjoying her secret, Helen attempted to get Ruth away from the
window. But the latter had seen something which roused her curiosity and
she would not be moved.

“What do you suppose that means?” she asked herself, puzzled. “There’s
more than one car. Why, it’s a regular procession--one, two, three!
Helen, you know, you bad child!” She turned to her chum, caught the
mischievous gleam in her eyes, and shook her a little impatiently. “Tell
me! What is it?”

For answer, Helen held up a warning hand.

“Listen!” she said.

Across the still night air, there came a sound of singing.

    “Sweetbriars come here, one by one,
      But one wide river to cross!
    There’s lots of work, but plenty of fun,
      With one wide river to cross!
    Sweetbriars all-l!
      One wide river of Knowledge!
    Sweetbriars all-l!
      One wide river to cross!”

There was an instant’s hush. Then before Ruth could move from where she
stood spellbound, the old yell crashed through the silence.

    “S.B.—Ah-h-h!
    S.B.—Ah-h-h!
    Sound our battle-cry
    Near and far!
    S.B.—All!
    Briarwood Hall!
    Sweetbriars, do or die—
    This be our battle-cry—
    Briarwood Hall!
    That’s all!”

It was a full second after the magic of that yell had died away into the
silence of the evening before Ruth could command herself to action.

Then with a stifled cry she darted out to the porch.

A whirlwind met her, a whirlwind of bear-like hugs and joyful greetings.

“Ruthie, don’t say we actually surprised you!”

“Here, get away, Ann Hicks! I haven’t had my chance at her yet.”

“Let go of her, Heavy! There won’t be enough left to speak its piece
to-night!”

These and other gay and jumbled greetings half-deafened Ruth. She pushed
the surprise party away from her in an effort to identify more clearly
the members of it. Happy tears sprang to her eyes as she recognized them
all.

“Nettie Parsons, you old dear. Give me another hug, that’s the girl.
Bless me! There’s The Fox, as large as life and twice as natural. And
Mercy Curtis! How well you look, honey! All the dear old crowd. Heavy,”
she turned accusingly to the rather large young woman who hovered in the
background of the group, “are you responsible for this?”

“Not guilty! Ask Ann--she knows!”

There were young men in the party, too, friends of Tom and Chess, whom
the latter had asked to play escort to Ruth’s old school chums who had
come on to Cheslow at the instigation of Mrs. Jennie Marchand, nee
Stone, and Ann Hicks.

Ruth knew these boys and nodded to them pleasantly enough. But she was
still too taken up with the delightful and unexpected arrival of these
old friends of hers to accord the male members of the party much
attention.

The latter followed the girls back into the house, grinning indulgently
at the clatter of tongues and the happy exclamations of the reunited
chums.

“I must sit down! The surprise has been too much for me!” Ruth laughed
as she sank down on the couch and the girls clustered on every side of
her. “Now tell me, Jennie Marchand or Ann Hicks, or whoever is
responsible, just how it happened.”

“Ann started the ball rolling,” responded Jennie Marchand, she of the
round face and jolly smile. “Conceived the bright idea of getting some
of the Briarwood Hall girls together--some of the old crowd, who had
helped make ‘Heart of a School Girl’ famous--justly famous, I may
say----”

“So,” Ann Hicks continued eagerly, “we gathered together as many of the
old guard as we could at such short notice and--here we are.”

“Yes, here you are!” cried Ruth, looking about at them affectionately.
“And now, if no one objects, I think I shall start at the beginning and
hug you all over again!”

This pleasing ceremony being satisfactorily accomplished, Tom stepped
forward with the suggestion that they start for the theater at once.

“Oh, is every one going?” asked Ruth, innocently enough. For the moment
she had actually forgotten her picture.

“Is every one going? Just hear the child!” Jennie
Marchand--affectionately known in the old days as “Heavy”--stood with
arms akimbo regarding Ruth amusedly. “May I ask, Ruth Fielding, what you
think we came all the way to Cheslow for?”

“Besides seeing you!” said Mercy Curtis in Ruth’s ear. Mercy did not
live far away.

“More than that,” declaimed Mary Cox, more popularly known in schooldays
as “The Fox,” “we have prepared a delectable spread for you after the
show, Ruth Fielding, to celebrate the success of ‘Snowblind’.”

Uncle Jabez Potter and Aunt Alvirah appeared at the moment and attention
was instantly turned to them. Most of the girls had met Aunt Alvirah,
who greeted them with a fluttering cordiality.

Uncle Jabez acknowledged the introductions in his usual crabbed fashion
and declared that if they did not start at once they would be late for
the show.

“The picture’ll be over before we get there,” he grumbled. “And us with
a chance to stay home and make ourselves comfortable.”

“Cheerful old boy,” whispered Jennie Marchand in Helen’s ear. “Face like
a nut cracker.”

Helen looked toward Uncle Jabez and grimaced ruefully.

“He never approved of Ruth’s interest in the pictures,” she said. “If he
had had his way Ruth would never have gone much farther than the Red
Mill.”

“And look at her now!” said Nettie Parsons.

“Yes, look at her now,” laughed Helen. “Our old schoolmate, Ruth
Fielding, is on the way to becoming quite a personage, I’ll have you
know!”

There were a great many others who, either publicly or privately, echoed
that view on this particular evening. For the showing of “Snowblind” was
a sweeping triumph from the preliminary scenes taken in New York to
those final tremendous and climatic scenes taken in the snow-blanketed
and wind-swept spaces of the frozen North.

The story held together from start to finish, a proof of Ruth’s ability
both as scenario writer and director. Anita Townsend and Grand, the
co-stars of the picture, were almost equally fine in their portrayal of
the parts assigned them, while the introduction of the old trappers gave
just the necessary added touch of local color.

The audience wept--and this included most emphatically Ruth’s school
chums--when author and actors demanded it, laughed at their will, and
applauded thunderously the dramatic scenes. In the inspiration of their
enthusiasm Ruth forgot her reluctance to speak in public. Instead, she
was eager to meet this friendly and appreciative audience.

At the close of the picture she stepped upon the stage and into the
spotlight. Her young voice came to them clearly, holding them tense and
interested as she related the adventures of her party in the frozen
country, described how the various “locations” were found and the
pictures filmed.

“Doesn’t our Ruthie look too sweet for words, Heavy? Aren’t you proud of
her?” whispered Helen.

“Yes, surely. But listen to her!”

“And now,” Ruth finished, “I want to thank you all in behalf of my
company and myself for your appreciation and your generous applause. We
all----”

A sharp explosion caught up her words, drowning them in a fierce
detonation. From here and there in the audience rose frightened cries.

“The theater is on fire!”

“Fire! fire! The theater is on fire!”

“Let me get out of this!”

“I’ll be burnt to death! Oh!”




                               CHAPTER II

                           TOM TO THE RESCUE


As the panic-stricken cries were rising terrifyingly in the over-crowded
theater pandemonium was intensified by the sudden blinking out of all
the lights.

To be frightened when one can see what danger threatens is one thing. To
be frightened in the dark is quite another!

Confusion became panic. Voices already raised in protest or entreaty
became shrill or hoarse with fear. Mothers called to their children,
children cried for their mothers. The shouts of men rose, entreating
those in their charge to “sit tight and not get scared”--as though they
were not pretty well scared themselves, if they would but admit it!

At the sound of the explosion Ruth had gone as calmly as she could from
the stage to the little bare room that was all there was “behind the
scenes” of the theater.

In the darkness she was forced to feel her way. Suddenly a cloud of
smoke descended upon her, engulfed her, wrapped her about, almost
smothering her. She raised her head instinctively to draw in a breath of
fresh air and found there was no fresh air in that stifling place.

Really frightened now, gasping and sputtering, she floundered about in
the dark, stumbling over things, aware that others were desperately
seeking escape.

“If Tom would only come!” she cried to herself. “I can’t find the
door--there isn’t any door--this awful smoke--oh, if Tom would come!”

She thought of her friends back there in the well of the
theater--thought of Aunt Alvirah and groaned.

She had not the slightest doubt but what Tom was trying to find her. He
would get to her if such a thing were possible. But that
smoke--impossible to breathe----

Tom was doing his best. Out in the dark well of orchestra seats was a
living, surging nightmare. Some had succeeded in making their way to the
exits, had escaped from the smoke-filled exterior to the blessed fresh
air.

But there were those who sought, desperately, friends or members of
their families who had become separated from them in the darkness and
panic.

Ruth’s own party was among these. The boys gripped the girls to prevent
their being carried into the aisles by the maddened crowds that swept
past them. Chess had found Helen and was urging her to sit quietly.

“The only danger is being caught in the mob,” he shouted. “Let these
people get out first.”

“But Ruth!” Helen gasped. “She may be trapped there behind the stage!”

“Tom will take care of her,” Chess prophesied confidently. “Tom--where
is Tom?”

He felt in the seat beside him where just a few moments before Helen’s
brother had been sitting and found, not Tom, but some alien person who
growled at him and pushed past in the general rush to the exits.

At that moment a feeble form brushed against him, a bony old hand
clutched at his arm.

“Ruth!” gasped the harsh voice of Uncle Jabez Potter. “Somebody’s got to
get ahold o’ that girl!”

Chess put an arm about the old man’s shoulders to steady him.

“It’s all right,” he managed to gasp through the thick cloud of smoke
that rolled down upon them. “Tom will see to her.”

“Where’s Aunt Alvirah?” It was Jennie Marchand’s voice shouting through
the dark. “You’ve got to find her, you boys!”

“I’m here!” quavered an old voice, reassuringly close by. “But it don’t
matter about me. Somebody go find my pretty.”

At that very moment Tom was battling his way to the stage. He called
Ruth’s name wildly over and over while he fought the smoke and acrid
fumes to the space behind the scenes.

As for Ruth, though she had faced many and varied dangers before, just
now all of them seemed trifling to the one she was passing through.

Her adventurous career had dated from that time when, as an orphan of
twelve, she had come to live with Great-uncle Jabez Potter and his
sweet, eccentric housekeeper, Aunt Alvirah Boggs.

The Red Mill was just outside the town of Cheslow. In the first volume
of the series, entitled “Ruth Fielding of the Red Mill,” Ruth had become
acquainted with Tom Cameron. The boy had been fortunate enough to do the
orphan a service and it was through Tom that she had met his twin sister
Helen. Mr. Cameron was a rich widower and business man and lived with
his two children in a rather imposing mansion about a mile from the Red
Mill.

A short time after her arrival at her new home Ruth was able to save
Uncle Jabez a considerable amount of money. In return for this she was
allowed by the old man to enter the boarding school, Briarwood Hall, in
company with Helen Cameron. It was at this time that Ruth’s adventures
really began.

At school and college she made many friends, among them Jennie Stone,
who had later married Henri Marchand, a distinguished Frenchman.

While still at school, Ruth became interested in the work of scenario
writing, and in that work achieved a fair success from the start.

The group of her friends who had planned the surprise party on this
particular occasion in order to see the first showing of “Snowblind” had
all taken part in Ruth’s early scenario, entitled “The Heart of a
Schoolgirl,” in which Ruth herself had played the part of chum to the
heroine, a part taken by a woman already known on the screen. From that
time on all Ruth’s friends had been interested in her work for the
“pictures” and had kept as closely in touch with her as possible.

It was only when her pictures became generally known and talked about,
not only for their absorbing plots but for the powerful bits of drama
that made interpretation of the plots unusual, that Ruth felt an
irresistible urge to break away from her former affiliations and to
undertake the directing of her own pictures, as well as writing the
scenarios for them.

The picture “Snowblind” had been the second filmed under her own
direction and the amazing and exciting adventures Ruth and her company
encountered in the filming of it have been related in the story directly
preceding this, entitled “Ruth Fielding in the Far North.”

During all Ruth’s startling and very successful career, Tom Cameron had
been the talented girl’s close companion. He had always admired the girl
from the Red Mill, even when they were youngsters together; but when
Ruth’s extraordinary ability developed this admiration changed to
worship that had a little of awe in it. Ruth was well aware of Tom’s
feeling for her and, though she was fond of the young fellow, strove to
keep Tom and his emotions as much in the background as possible. Ruth
had no intention of marrying and “settling down” until she had proved to
her own complete satisfaction just how far she could go in her chosen
line of work. While Tom accepted this attitude he was, naturally, a
trifle at odds with it.

However, during the preceding year Tom had become Ruth’s business
partner, taking over the tiresome and innumerable details that must
always cling to an enterprise as flourishing and ambitious as the
Fielding Film Corporation, thus leaving the creative genius of his
partner full liberty to soar, as it were, untrammeled.

While this arrangement did not entirely satisfy Tom, it was at least a
business partnership and kept him in close touch with Ruth. Then, too,
he had become sincerely and absorbedly interested in the motion picture
industry on his own account.

Helen’s romance was a more satisfactory one from the general viewpoint.
She had allowed Chess Copley’s ardor to persuade her into an engagement
and the two--who often appeared more like amiable enemies than
lovers--were merely waiting for Chess to “make his fortune” in order to
celebrate the fulfillment of their romance.

So it was that matters stood between these four young folks on this
opening night of “Snowblind” and Ruth’s brief address to an admiring
public.

Now, as Tom fought his way through the smoke-filled theater, he could
think of nothing but how fine Ruth had looked on the stage that night
and of how proud he had been just to know her.

Now she was in danger. Suppose he could not reach her? Suppose she
should be overcome by smoke?

He paused, staggered, brushed a hand across his eyes in an instinctive
effort to clear them of the burning, stinging smoke. No flame--only
smoke? Where did it all come from? What unheard-of, mysterious thing had
happened, anyway?

He flung himself forward, caught at some one who staggered against him.

“Ruth!”

“Oh, Tom!”

Tom half-carried, half-led her toward a door he had stumbled against in
his frantic plungings. He yanked at it, pulled it open, felt a swirling
rush of fresh air.

“Safe, Ruth, safe!”




                              CHAPTER III

                             GOOD OLD TIMES


Ruth drew in great lungfuls of the fresh air. Her next thought was for
Aunt Alvirah and her school friends. She gave Tom’s arm a tug and
started around toward the front of the theater.

“If any of them are hurt!” Tom heard her murmur, as he followed.

“Take it easy,” warned the young fellow, seeing that the girl was dizzy
and weak from her terrible experience. “We will go round to the front of
the theater. Probably all our crowd have found their way to the street
by this time.”

As a matter of fact, when Tom and Ruth reached the street they found
that the theater had been practically emptied. Crowds had already
gathered curiously about the smoke-ridden place. Cheslow’s limited
police force was trying noisily and rather ineffectually to keep people
back. The local fire engines had also arrived and firemen were taking
their lines of hose and chemical fire extinguishers into the theater.
Smoke, there seemed to be in plenty but scarcely any flames.

Those who had constituted the audience were breaking up into small,
shaken groups, some wending their way homeward, intent upon reaching
shelter and safety as soon as possible.

Small children were wailing heart-brokenly, women were half hysterical,
the men were white and nervous.

But when Ruth’s eager eyes, searching, descried her own party, all
together and unharmed, as far as she could see, her relief knew no
bounds.

She saw them before they discovered her.

Aunt Alvirah and Uncle Jabez were the center of the crowd of excited and
gesticulating young folks. The latter seemed trying to soothe and
comfort the little old woman, but Aunt Alvirah’s quick, dark eyes darted
unceasingly in all directions.

When she discovered Ruth and Tom pushing eagerly through the crowd a
loud and tremulous cry broke from her old lips.

“My pretty!” she cried. “My pretty!”

The next moment Ruth’s arms were about the little old woman in a hug
hard enough and wild enough to break every bone in the frail old body.
However, it is doubtful if Aunt Alvirah would have cared at the moment
how many bones she lost as long as Ruth had been returned to her.

“I must say this is a fine show you staged, Ruth Fielding!” remarked
Jennie Marchand, regarding Ruth reproachfully. “Trying to exterminate us
all as soon as we arrive in Cheslow!”

Ruth laughed unsteadily.

“It wasn’t the most cordial reception in the world,” she admitted dryly.
“But I didn’t have a hand in it, girls, honest!”

“Didn’t you, now?” It was Mary Cox who spoke with scathing sarcasm.

“Compared to some of those scenes in your picture, Ruth Fielding,”
laughed Nettie Parsons, “this fire scene held no thrills at all.”

“It held enough for me,” sighed Mercy Curtis. “It tore a rent in my
dress that will never come right again.”

“As long as it didn’t tear a rent in you,” said Helen gayly, “you
needn’t complain, my dear.”

The young folks watched the firemen come and go. Only one stream was
turned on and several chemical extinguishers were brought into play, and
that was all.

“More smoke than anything,” remarked one of the boys.

“Gee, but what an explosion!” remarked another. “I thought the roof was
going off!”

Gradually the excitement died down and the crowd was considerably
thinned out.

“And now,” suggested Chess, who had been silent much longer than
usual--probably due to shock--“what do you all say to some eats? I
myself am possessed of a hollow void that will require considerable
attention on my part to fill.”

“How vulgar!” sniffed Helen. “Girls, don’t you envy me?”

“It begins to look,” said Jennie Marchand, “as though my wedding present
to you would be a large, fat and freshly-edited cook book.”

“Jennie,” sighed Chess ecstatically, “you certainly are a friend of
mine!”

Ruth cut short the interchange of nonsense by suggesting that Aunt
Alvirah should be taken somewhere out of the chill of the damp night
air. Uncle Jabez, having had enough excitement for one night, announced
that he was going home. But Helen would not hear of his returning so
soon, knowing that Aunt Alvirah would think it her duty to go back to
the Red Mill with him.

Then Ruth was given her second big surprise of the evening.

“We’ve arranged a real party for you, Ruth Fielding, at the hotel,”
Mercy Curtis announced gleefully, laughing eyes on Ruth’s astonished
face. “_You_ are to be the guest of honor. Aunt Alvirah is to sit on
your right hand and no one is allowed to go home.”

“Until the feast is nothing but a sweet memory,” finished Jennie with a
sigh.

Every one laughed and in the general merriment no one noticed Uncle
Jabez’ muttered complaints. They hustled him with Aunt Alvirah into
Tom’s car.

Ruth lingered before the theater with Nettie Parsons and Barclay
Clayton, who was acting as her escort for the evening.

“Some films in the storeroom exploded,” said Barclay--popularly known as
“Bark”--as he followed the direction of Ruth’s gaze to the now almost
deserted theater. “Some men were talking about it before you and Tom
showed up. Not much fire--mostly smoke.”

Ruth nodded. Firemen had easily conquered the small blaze resulting from
the explosion and were now leaving the deserted building.

“I hope no one was seriously hurt,” Nettie said, as the three,
responding to urgent calls from the rest of the party, crossed the
pavement. “It was certainly a panic for a while.”

“It is lucky,” said Ruth soberly, “that some one wasn’t killed.”

When the party reached the Cheslow hotel and were ushered into the
private dining room that Ruth’s chums had engaged for the evening in
honor of the grand occasion, the excitement and the distressing events
of the evening were almost forgotten.

Aunt Alvirah forgot all about the ache in her back and bones of which
she had complained monotonously for many years. Even Uncle Jabez
brightened perceptibly at sight of the good and plentiful food and set
to upon the tempting viands with a will.

“Your picture was a wonder, Ruth,” Mercy Curtis called across from her
side of the table. “From now on it will be my one ambition to take a
trip to your north country.”

“It must be wonderful to have all those thrilling adventures,” sighed
The Fox. “For goodness’ sake, don’t give me any more nuts, Charles,” she
said to the attentive young man on her right hand. “Before you know it,
I shall turn into one!”

“Turn?” queried Jennie, with an insulting emphasis not missed by Miss
Cox, who merely made a face at her in reply.

Ruth said suddenly from her place of honor at the head of the long
table:

“Girls, this is so exactly like old times that I feel I must be
dreaming. You can’t any of you be real!”

“Gaze upon the fast-disappearing food, Ruth, and behold the refutation
of your dream,” chuckled Jennie Marchand. “Phantoms never ate like
these. Pass me a pickle some one, ere I starve!”

“Anyway,” Ruth persisted, “now that I have you all here in Cheslow, you
shan’t get away easily! Isn’t that so, Aunt Alvirah?”

The latter nodded cordially, though Uncle Jabez was seen to glance up
sharply at his niece.

“There isn’t anything you want, my pretty, that I don’t want, too,” said
the little old woman simply.

Ruth squeezed her hand beneath the table and said so softly that no one
else could hear:

“We will have some one in from the village to help. You shan’t have any
more work, Auntie.”

Helen was speaking, and with an emphasis that caught Ruth’s attention.

“If you think you are going to have the girls all to yourself, Ruth
Fielding, you never were more mistaken in all the course of your
eventful career. I intend to do some entertaining, too!”

Ruth was about to make some laughing reply when the door opened
suddenly. Every one turned toward the sound. Ruth gave a little gasp of
surprise and delight. She rose quickly and went forward with
outstretched hands.

“Mr. Hammond! Well, this is my night of surprises!”

Mr. Hammond was immediately dragged to the table and a waiter was
directed to bring another plate for him at once.

“I hoped to reach Cheslow in time for the run-off of your picture,” the
president of the Alectrion Film Corporation said, his face ruddier and
pleasanter than ever. “I wanted particularly to hear your address. But I
was detained by business that would not be put off.”

“It was good of you to come at all,” said Ruth, hospitably making sure
that his plate was well filled with good things.




                               CHAPTER IV

                              GOLDEN PASS


Mr. Hammond needed no introduction to Aunt Alvirah or Uncle Jabez, since
he had known the old couple as long as he had known Ruth herself.

Neither did Ruth’s chums need any special introduction since they
considered themselves--and with reason--long-standing acquaintances of
the head of the Alectrion Film Corporation.

For it was Mr. Hammond who had accepted Ruth’s early scenario which she
had called “The Heart of a School Girl” and filmed it with the aid of
the two hundred odd girls at Briarwood Hall.

Some of the young men he had not met before and these introductions were
made hastily and informally. Then Mr. Hammond turned to Ruth.

“I have already heard flattering criticisms of your picture. It will
play to full houses for a long time, my dear. I can safely prophesy
that.”

“Well, I trust they have no more explosions when they show it,” answered
Ruth with a serious shake of her head.

“That explosion was not so bad as it seemed. Mr. Farstein told me so
himself. Merely a lot of discarded films left in the storeroom by one of
the distributing firms. More smoke than fire. He is already arranging to
clean up the muss so he can open as usual to-morrow. And he said that
nobody seemed to be seriously hurt, which is best of all.”

“I am awfully glad of that, Mr. Hammond.”

“It’s the Ruth Fielding luck,” and Mr. Hammond smiled. “And now that
this picture is a success I suppose you are already figuring on doing
something else as big or bigger,” he went on.

“I am,” Ruth answered quietly.

“Ah, I thought so! The old spirit. More worlds to conquer, aren’t there?
Where is the new drama of the silver screen to be laid?” the motion
picture magnate went on curiously.

“In the most beautiful spot in the world--or so we’re told on very good
authority, you yourself! Golden Pass, Montana.”

As Ruth spoke there was a sudden cessation of careless chatter. The
young folks looked at her eagerly, Aunt Alvirah looked anxiously
expectant while Uncle Jabez scowled faintly.

“Montana! Whoop--ee!” cried Helen irrepressibly. “A wild-west picture
full of thrilling scenes and good looking cowboys. Ain’t I glad I came!”

“You seem to be very sure of your welcome in the party,” said Chess
severely. “How do you know Ruth will want you to go with her?”

“Oh, Ruth always wants me,” replied Helen with a flippancy that belied
the gravity of her expression. “As a matter of fact, she couldn’t get
along without me. She told me so herself!”

Chess grinned.

“Far be it from me----”

But at this point Helen put an end to the sentence by severely pinching
the arm of its author.

“Oh, do hush! Don’t you see I’m trying to hear what Ruth’s saying?”

What Ruth was saying appeared to be of intense interest to the others of
the party. They listened eagerly as she described the spot where most of
the new picture she had in mind would be filmed.

“Golden Pass will be the ideal spot for the filming of my sort of
picture. A land of fertile valleys and picturesque mountains----”

“It is pretty,” Mr. Hammond agreed. “As you say, I know the place you
speak of, Miss Ruth, for I had to pass through Montana not long ago and
I stopped off at Golden Pass. I had heard there was to be a big cattle
round-up and I wanted to get pictures of it.”

Ruth leaned toward him eagerly.

“Is it so rugged and beautiful?”

“It is. It is a land of plains and hills and steep ravines, of sparkling
dawns and gorgeous sunsets. The very finest location possible for an
outdoor, western picture.”

“Dear me, Ruth Fielding,” spoke up Ann Hicks wistfully, “you make me
homesick for those wide, open ranges. Can’t you take me with you? I can
bust bronchos with the best of ’em. Don’t you need a really talented
extra?”

Ruth laughed.

“I wish I could take you all. Oh, girls, wouldn’t that be fun?”

Mr. Hammond shortly took his departure, saying that he would like to see
Ruth soon and hear something about her new picture.

His desertion seemed to be the signal for the general breaking up of the
party. Aunt Alvirah was looking white and tired and Uncle Jabez was
beginning to complain of the lateness of the hour.

It was hard to put an end to the fun. Ruth felt she had never before
enjoyed herself so much. It was arranged, despite Ruth’s protests, that
the visitors to Cheslow were to put up at the Cameron’s for the
remainder of their stay.

“Don’t be a goose, Ruthie,” Helen whispered when Ruth was about to
insist that she must have at least one of the girls with her at the Red
Mill. “You will be rushed to death finishing your scenario and arranging
all the details of the trip. We have plenty of room and nothing to do
but entertain the girls while they stay. Besides, we shall probably be
over at the Red Mill almost every day.”

“Well, then, I’ll have them all at the Red Mill for a night before we
start,” Ruth declared. “Even you can’t stop me doing that much, Helen
Cameron!”

All except Mercy Curtis, who lived in Cheslow, escorted Uncle Jabez,
Aunt Alvirah and Ruth home first. Standing at the door with the two old
people, Ruth answered the farewells of her friends.

“Good-by, all of you! It was a lovely party! Good-by!”

From down the road, as the little fleet of cars moved off, came softly
to Ruth!

    “S.B.—Ah-h-h!
    S.B.—Ah-h-h!
    Sound our battle-cry
    Near and far!
    S.B.—All!
    Briarwood Hall!
    Sweetbriars, do or die—
    This be our battle-cry—
    Briarwood Hall!
    That’s all!”

As they turned to enter the house together Ruth gave Aunt Alvirah a
particularly hard hug.

“It _is_ a good old world, isn’t it, Auntie?” she cried.

The old woman peered up in the girl’s face, smiled, and nodded
sympathetically.

“So it is, my pretty! So it is!”

The next day proved an eventful one for Ruth. Several days before she
had wired Layton Boardman, an interesting young westerner who had served
an early apprenticeship on a ranch and had later made a reputation for
himself in moving pictures, requesting an interview with him at the Red
Mill. Ruth felt sure he was just the one to fill the part of hero in her
new picture.

Boardman had recently quarreled with Sol Bloomberg, the chief owner of
the Palatial Films Corporation with which Boardman had been for some
time associated. It was open gossip in moving picture circles that,
since this quarrel, Layton Boardman was finding it hard to place himself
with any of the other large motion picture concerns.

This might mean, of course, that Boardman had lost his grip, had gone
stale, was no longer desirable. But Ruth, who had seen the actor’s last
picture and been thrilled by the power of his acting and by the real
magnetism of his screen personality, preferred not to believe this.

She thought it far more probable that Sol Bloomberg was pulling strings
with the deliberate intention of keeping Boardman from obtaining another
position until such time as the actor should be starved into accepting a
position from the owner of Palatial Films on the latter’s own terms.

Ruth had debated with herself at length upon the wisdom of approaching
Boardman in her own interests, for, courageous as she was, she feared
Sol Bloomberg--and with reason. But at last her business instinct won.
Boardman was exactly the type she needed for the rôle of hero; in fact,
she had so come to visualize him in that part that her picture seemed
utterly without force or power when she disassociated him from it.

So, taking her courage in both hands, she had sent a telegram,
requesting an audience. Boardman had replied promptly, accepting.

Ruth had no idea that the actor himself would appear almost on the heels
of his telegram, as it were. But then, Ruth had no idea how near to
desperation Layton Boardman was!

So it came to pass that on this morning of the day after the excitement
at the theater and the party given in her honor, Ruth was surprised when
Aunt Alvirah brought in the actor’s card.

Ruth was in the room that she used for her study, deep in the revision
and embellishing of her new scenario.

She looked vaguely from Aunt Alvirah to the card of Layton Boardman and
back again.

“Are you sure Mr. Boardman gave you this?” she asked, her mind still on
her work. “Why, Aunt Alvirah, I had no idea he would get here before
to-morrow.”

“Well, he’s here, my pretty, and as likely a young man as I’m like to
see anywhere,” said Aunt Alvirah with an emphatic bob of her white head.
“Right fine lookin’ I’d call him. Reminds me of a picture I see once of
a football star--from Yale or Princeton I think ’twas--broad-shouldered
an’ handsome an’ sech a smile!”

Ruth laughed.

“Aunt Alvirah, I’m ashamed of you, falling in love with a strange young
man. Don’t you know it’s up to you to set young folks a good example?”

Aunt Alvirah chuckled.

“I ain’t worryin’ none over you, my pretty,” she said. “An’ the question
now seems to be not what he looks like but shall I let him in?”

“Oh, please do, Aunt Alvirah.” Ruth began hurriedly straightening the
papers on her desk.

A shadow fell across her work and she looked up to see a towering figure
in the doorway. She had known before that Layton Boardman was a big man,
but she had never realized just how big he was. His shoulders seemed to
block entirely the opening made by the door.

Ruth smiled and extended her hand.

“I am very glad to see you, Mr. Boardman. I imagine you and I will have
a great deal to say to each other.”




                               CHAPTER V

                               A NEW STAR


Layton Boardman was fine looking, far better looking than he appeared on
the screen. He had one of those faces that appeal to the imagination,
usually immobile and inscrutable, yet capable of a surprising play of
expression when aroused emotionally. He had black hair and dark gray,
rather long eyes, deep set in his head and adding to the inscrutable
expression of his face when at rest. If it had not been for his flashing
and utterly friendly smile one might almost have been afraid of Layton
Boardman.

A wonderful face, a splendid personality for the hero of her western
drama--a screen strong man who was as strong off the screen as on!

Something surged up in Ruth--exultation at having secured such a prize.
Then fear gripped her again. Suppose he should refuse her offer--want
more than she was prepared to pay? Well, she would soon put that
question to the test.

“It was nice of you to come so quickly. The fact is,” she faced him with
her frank smile, “I was wondering whether you were free to accept an
offer from the Fielding Film Company.”

Boardman made a wry grimace.

“I am certainly at liberty,” he said grimly. “So much so,” with his
quick smile, “that I long for bonds again!”

“Then I hope I shall be the one to slip them on.” Ruth was again at her
ease. Something told her that she and Layton Boardman would get on.

She fingered some of the papers on her desk, looked from them to
Boardman.

“I have a new script here and I need just such a man as you to take the
lead. I don’t mind admitting,” she looked across at him with a quizzical
smile, “that I had you in mind when I wrote the story.”

“That is about the nicest thing I ever had said to me,” he told her. “I
hope more than I can tell you that I will be able to live up to that
compliment.”

“You’re sure you’re perfectly free? No loose strings that might get
tangled up in the midst of the story and spoil the whole thing?”

“Not a string!” said Boardman.

“Then listen to me and see if we can come to terms. We haven’t any time
to lose, for I’m anxious to keep my company together and start for
Montana in two weeks at the outside.”

There followed a surprisingly short business conference, during which
the two young people seemed to find it very easy to agree on everything.

Ruth felt excited and very much pleased with herself. She had done a
good morning’s work. She had not dreamed she would be able to procure
the services of Layton Boardman at so low a price and--this after she
had twice glanced up to find his eyes fixed broodingly upon her--he
would certainly make a very pleasant addition to the company.

Ruth heard Tom enter unceremoniously, heard his familiar whistle and his
affectionate greeting of Aunt Alvirah. She called to him and checked
young Boardman when he rose to go.

“I want you to meet my partner, Tom Cameron,” she explained. “His
signature will be very necessary on the contract.”

Tom hesitated in the doorway, taking in the tableau presented. His next
emotion was annoyance. It would be enough to annoy any young fellow to
find Layton Boardman, good looks and magnetism apparent even to a man,
in private conference with the girl he was--well, was fond of.

Ruth caught the expression on Tom’s face and tried to keep her vivid
face straight as she explained hurriedly.

“Glad to see you, Boardman,” Tom said then, extending his hand. Boardman
clasped it heartily. “I have an idea I can feel contracts in the air.
Ah--” as Ruth thrust into his hands the agreement she and Boardman had
drawn up. “Let me see--”

His very palpable hesitation seemed funny to Ruth. Tom always left the
signing up of new actors to her judgment. He had often declared that she
knew far more than he concerning such things. He had never made a fuss
about anything like this. Was he going to start now?

As his hesitation continued Ruth became really uneasy. When he finally,
though somewhat reluctantly it seemed, gave his approval, she drew a
deep breath of relief.

As soon as the business was over with three signatures signed to the
contract and Aunt Alvirah’s added as a witness, Layton Boardman took his
departure. He had, it seemed, important matters to attend to in town and
he left the Red Mill despite Aunt Alvirah’s hospitable urging that he
stay and have a bite of lunch with them.

Long after the door had closed upon the new member of Ruth’s company Tom
remained silent and thoughtful. Ruth tried to start a conversation with
him, for she was full of excitement and pleasure over what she
considered a triumph. But when he failed to respond to her advances she
finally retired to her study, leaving Tom to his own devices.

She had scarcely had time to become engrossed in her work again,
however, before a shadow fell across her page and she looked up to find
Tom glooming in the doorway. Ruth tapped her pencil on the edge of the
desk in helpless exasperation.

“What is wrong with you, Tom Cameron?” she cried. “You look as if you
had lost your last friend and never expected to make another. What in
the world _is_ the matter?”

“I don’t like that fellow, Boardman,” said Tom, frowning. “He’s too good
looking to be honest.”

Ruth gave a gay little laugh.

“Layton Boardman has a reputation for honesty----”

“Oh, I suppose he has all the virtues in the pack!” Tom was almost
barking at her in his irritation. “The good looking ones can get away
with anything. How about that row he had with Sol Bloomberg?”

A shadow crossed Ruth’s face. Sol Bloomberg was the lone fly in the
ointment of her content. She had been trying to forget Sol Bloomberg.
But now she shrugged her shoulders, trying to make the gesture
nonchalant.

“Knowing Sol Bloomberg, I prefer to think the fault was his,” she said.

“I think so, too,” said Tom with native honesty. “But there are two
sides to every question, you know, and there is always the chance that
Boardman’s side wasn’t a pleasant one. Then, too,” his gravity deepened,
“if there wasn’t anything more to it than a question of Bloomberg’s
enmity, it would be worth considering--and hesitating over. Bloomberg
isn’t going to be very happy when he learns that we’ve signed up his
star at a good salary.”

“His ex-star,” Ruth reminded him.

“Ex-star or not, Bloomberg wants Layton Boardman, and if I know anything
of the man in question, he’ll get Boardman, no matter how many promising
young moving picture concerns he has to trample over in the process.”

“But do you suppose,” Ruth flamed at him, “I intend to let a chance like
this slip simply because I’m afraid of Sol Bloomberg?”

“A great many people, both powerful and wise, have been afraid of Sol
Bloomberg,” retorted Tom and, thrusting his hands deep into his pockets,
strode from the room.

Ruth tried in vain to coax back her mood of the early morning. But try
as she would, it would not come. Tom had effectually destroyed all her
enthusiasm with his talk of Sol Bloomberg. The worst of it was, Ruth
admitted, that his viewpoint was a reasonable one. The owner of Palatial
Films would be furious over her capture of Boardman, and Bloomberg was
not a man to swallow his anger.

With an impatient movement she began to gather up her scattered papers
when Helen Cameron and Jennie Marchand, arms about each other in
old-time style, charged in at the front door.

“Ruthie! Ruthie Fielding, where are you?” called Helen. “I have the very
most elegant news you ever listened to! Let me tell it, else I die!”




                               CHAPTER VI

                               FINE NEWS


The arrival of Helen and Jennie Marchand was like a breath of fresh air,
blowing away the cobwebs in Ruth’s worried mind.

Helen explained that the other girls had gone motoring with their
friends of the evening before and had sent word to Ruth that they would
probably stop in at the Red Mill later in the day.

Jennie was puffing with hard exercise and blamed Helen for making her
walk so fast.

“Now that I am a young matron and not a harum-scarum schoolgirl,” she
said, as primly as Jennie could, “I prefer to walk rather than run to my
appointments.”

“Cheer up, you’re not the only pebble on the beach,” Helen retorted
flippantly, as she flung herself into a corner of the old couch. “Before
long I myself may become that awfully uninteresting, fearfully settled,
dried up old prune that people kindly term a young matron!”

Jennie giggled, but Ruth glanced at her friend quickly. She could see
that beneath Helen’s flippant manner was an undercurrent of excitement,
of pleasure. Something important had happened to Helen.

She went over and perched on the arm of her chum’s chair.

“Helen,” she said, “you may pull the wool over the eyes of most people,
but you’d better not try it with your Ruth. It won’t work.”

“You precious old thing!” Helen reached up and stroked Ruth’s hand
fondly. “I wouldn’t try to pull anything over those perfectly gorgeous
orbs of yours, Ruthie. It would be a sin and a shame.”

“Then what,” persisted Ruth, “was that news you were threatening to die
of when you burst in the door?”

“I didn’t burst in,” Helen protested, but was rudely shaken by her
friend.

“Out with it, or you shan’t come to Montana with me!”

“Oh, what a threat! You could never do such a thing to me, Ruth. You
have too big a heart. Oh, that reminds me, you were waiting to hear
about my news.”

“We’re waiting,” agreed Jennie dryly.

“Well, it isn’t so much, really, except as it affects me--and Chess,”
Helen began, and Ruth could tell by the restraint in her voice that
Helen’s news was of an emotional nature. It was always hard for Helen to
maintain her gravity in moments of sentiment. She hesitated for a
moment, then said, quite suddenly, glancing up at Ruth: “You remember
that uncle of Chess’s who owned what you called the ‘snowball property’
up North?”

Ruth’s eyes danced. She was intensely interested.

“Quite vividly,” she nodded. “Also I remember the day we went with
Delabarre and Briais, all comfy and snug in the sled behind the dog team
to look the property over.”

“And the time shortly after that,” Helen added, squeezing her chum’s
hand in the painful memories revived by the recollection, “when you
jumped into the pit with half a dozen bears and did your best to get
yourself eaten up by them.”

“There were only three bears,” Ruth corrected demurely.

“Oh, dear,” sighed Heavy, from her place as onlooker to all these
wonderful adventures, “you girls have all the fun while I have to stay
at home and take care of Henri.”

“Probably that is quite as exciting at times as falling into a pit with
three wild animals,” said Helen gravely.

“Married life at times,” chuckled Jennie, “would certainly make such an
adventure look tame!”

“Is that why you’ve left home now, Heavy, and left your Henri in
France?” asked Helen.

And then they laughed happily at such absurdity and Ruth urged Helen
again to go on with her story.

“What about the uncle and the ‘snowball property’?” she prompted.

“This darling precious old uncle,” Helen replied, “is willing to back
Chess in a big business deal that has been hanging fire for some time on
account of a small and inconsiderable thing such as the lack of ready
cash. Chess’s uncle is willing to supply the cash, which seems to make
everything lovely.”

Ruth’s arm tightened about her chum’s shoulder. She had read more into
the laughing sentence than Helen had said in words.

“And that means--” she prompted.

“Oh, Ruthie, it means,” Helen’s voice sank so low that Ruth had to bend
over her to hear at all, “that Chess and I won’t have to go on waiting
any more. Money seems to clear the way for most everything, doesn’t it?
Of course, we wouldn’t have starved, but Chess wanted to stand on his
own feet. And I just love him for that!”

“Well, just listen to my kid sister! She’s actually getting
sentimental!”

The girls looked up, startled, to see Tom grinning at them from the
doorway.

Before they could think of anything to say he advanced into the room and
stood, hands in pockets, staring down thoughtfully at the discomfited
Helen.

“I suppose,” he said with tremendous gravity, “it’s up to me to kiss the
bride!”

“If you dare!” cried his ungrateful sister. She seized a pillow and
poised it threateningly. “Get out of here, Tommy. Didn’t you know I was
speaking to my friends?”

“Oof!” grunted Tom, as he chose discretion and promptly retreated. “I’m
not a friend. I’m only a brother!”

They laughed a little, and Ruth and Jennie questioned Helen eagerly
after the manner of most girls on such occasions.

At the end Ruth put her arm about her chum and said softly:

“I’m glad for you and Chess, my dear. You and Chess will be mighty
happy.”

“Poor old ’Lasses,” sighed Jennie. “As my great aunt said to her son’s
fiancée on the eve of the young couple’s marriage, ‘Poor dear Harry, he
was such a happy boy!’”

It was then that Jennie received the full impact of the sofa cushion
which, but a moment before, had threatened Tom.

Ruth laughed.

“Don’t let Heavy fuss you, Helen,” she said. “Harry may have been a
happy boy and a still happier man.”

“But we know Helen!” interposed Jennie.

“Just so!” retorted Ruth. “Chess’s chances for bliss are excellent.”

“Thank you, Ruthie, for them kind words,” murmured Helen, her eyes
dancing.

Jennie and Helen stayed to lunch and went for a walk soon afterward,
leaving Ruth once more to the task of revising and perfecting her
scenario.

She found it unusually hard to concentrate on her work. There was still
the fear that she had made a mistake in engaging Boardman.

Tom found her bent over the manuscript, brow furrowed, looking tired and
harassed.

“You have done enough work for to-day, Ruth Fielding,” he told her.
Before she could prevent him he had gathered up the pages of her
manuscript and put them away definitely in a drawer. She made a motion
as though to open the drawer, whereupon Tom calmly locked it and
pocketed the key.

“Now what are you going to do about it?” he challenged, grinning at her.

“But, Tom, I haven’t done a speck of real work to-day,” she protested.
“And there is so much to do!”

“Not all at once,” said Tom. “The whole trouble with Ruth Fielding is
that she never knows when to stop working.”

“I certainly am glad you know what’s wrong with her,” said Ruth, with a
doleful sigh. “I’ve been trying all day to find out.”

Tom laughed cheerfully, got to his feet, seized Ruth’s hands and pulled
her up beside him.

“Come on! What you need is a breath of fresh air. You’ve no idea how
good fresh air is for ideas,” he added gravely as Ruth, protesting,
allowed herself to be led outside to Tom’s car which stood waiting for
them. “It seems just to breed ’em!”

Ruth laughed helplessly.

“I have an idea right now that I am being kidnapped against my better
judgment,” she said.

“You know better!” Tom grinned at her as he slid in behind the low-slung
wheel. “You were just pining for some nice strong man to come along and
separate you from your arduous labors. Besides,” he added with a long
and doleful sigh, “I feel that it is up to me to make hay while the sun
shines.”

Ruth looked at him curiously. The wind on her face did feel good. All
her worries seemed to have vanished in the swift rush of it.

“Just what did you mean by that?” she queried.

Tom looked at her quizzically.

“With that handsome Boardman chap on the premises, I can see where old
Tom will have to watch his step!”

Ruth laughed contentedly.

“You old silly! How lucky you would be, Tommy boy, if you never had
anything worse than that to worry about.”




                              CHAPTER VII

                            THE LEADING LADY


The days that followed were busy and pleasant ones for Ruth. Even when
her doubt concerning the wisdom of engaging Layton Boardman and thus
inviting Sol Bloomberg’s enmity would crop up, she put it resolutely
from her. She certainly did not intend to borrow trouble.

Then, too, she thought often of Tom’s laughing remark concerning the
attractive western actor. Could it be that Tom was really inclined to be
jealous of this man, whom, so far, she hardly knew? The idea was too
absurd to be seriously considered.

Helen and Chess were openly happy over the good fortune of the latter.
The big business deal which had been hanging fire for some time held
almost the certainty of success, now that Chess had secured the
necessary amount of credit to push it through.

No wonder they were happy! Their happiness was contagious, which was one
reason, perhaps, that Ruth found herself in such high spirits during
that time.

The local paper came out with an account of the fire and of the part
Ruth and the others had played in it. The fire had really been a small
affair and the theater was once more running as usual, the new film
drawing crowded houses.

But “Snowblind” was being shown elsewhere, too--six sets of films of the
picture had been made--and Ruth was eager to see what critics in other
cities would have to say about it. As the city newspapers came in she
read the notices eagerly, as did Tom.

“A knockout, Ruth!” cried the young man. “A regular knockout
everywhere!” And he was right, in every city where it was shown
“Snowblind” was a big success.

Ruth’s chums still stayed on in Cheslow. They visited the Red Mill
almost every day, occasionally staying to dinner or some other meal, and
they never failed to declare that they were having the “time of their
lives.”

They were receiving a good deal of attention from the young men of
Cheslow, and, since most of these were well-off and owned their own
cars, the girls naturally did not lack for pleasant occupation. Jennie,
as chaperone, was enjoying herself hugely. It was not in Jennie to be
formal, still in France, as Madame Marchand, she put some restraint on
herself, which now in the midst of her old school friends she threw off
entirely and became once more the old “Heavy” Stone of their Briarwood
days.

Ruth was, of course, invited to attend all these parties, and at first
her old friends seemed a bit offended when she refused, pleading her
work.

However, it was not long before, with Helen’s loyal assistance, they
were able to understand that Ruth’s work did make heavy demands on her
time and was not a light pastime to be attended to in odd moments.

If it had not been such a particularly busy time with Ruth she would
have liked nothing better than to have joined in all the fun with her
friends. As it was, she was able to accompany them once in a while, and
she never failed to return from one of the merrymakings strengthened in
mind and with a fund of fresh enthusiasm for her work.

Meanwhile plans for the house party which she meant to give her old
school chums before the end of their visit were taking definite shape.

Although the accommodations of the house at the Red Mill were limited
she could manage to put the girls up for a night; at least, all except
Mercy, who lived in Cheslow, and Helen, who would go back with Tom and
the other young fellows whom Ruth had already invited to the party.

Ruth had made inquiries in Cheslow and found that she could secure the
services of a young girl to help Aunt Alvirah with the work.

It would be a lark, and Ruth was looking forward to it eagerly.

Meanwhile, there was a great deal of work to be done. Ruth was anxious
to finish all details connected with her new picture so that they might
start for Montana as soon as possible.

The script was finished. She had gone over it with Tom and, still later,
with Layton Boardman.

Both young men were pleasantly enthusiastic. The actor had offered
suggestions here and there that, Ruth felt, strengthened the script.

She liked Layton Boardman’s free and easy western manner that was yet
always pleasant and respectful to her. And she liked the way he took
hold of the part she offered him. She became more and more convinced
that she had found the right actor for her drama.

Another thing that engaged her attention was the problem of the feminine
lead. She could not use Anita Townsend, the star of “Snowblind.” It was
not the rôle suited to Anita. She must have an actress for the lead in
“Hearts of the Mountains,” and that quickly.

She and Tom had discussed most of the stars on the horizon and found the
majority of them--at least those fitted for the part--tied up already by
handsome contracts.

“Viola Callahan is the ideal one for our purpose,” said Ruth, in one of
her many conferences with Tom. “And I think her five-year contract with
Brennan has about run out. Still----”

“Try her and see,” suggested Tom. “The most she can do is refuse.”

But Viola did not refuse. Like the majority of shining stars in Filmdom,
she had chosen to exercise her temperament, and in a fit of rage had
thrown her contract--literally--in the face of an outraged manager.
Since this contract was nearly expired, having only three weeks to run,
and since the fair Viola had allowed her temper to run away with her
several times during the past five years with disastrous results to the
company in general, Mr. Brennan had decided--with a sigh of relief--to
let his western beauty go.

Now, it is one thing to throw your contract away and quite another to
have it politely handed back to you with the request that you keep it
and do with it what you please. The pride of a genius would not allow
Viola to humble herself to the point of asking the polite Mr. Brennan
for a chance to go on again, so she found herself, for the first time in
many years, without a sign of a job.

Viola did not fancy this very much, and was in a state of mind to
receive Ruth’s overtures graciously.

So it came to pass that not long after her conversation with Tom, Ruth
found herself in audience with the fair Viola herself.

Viola seemed out of place, someway, in the quaint, old-fashioned living
room of the Red Mill. She was flamboyant in dress and action and so
overflowing with vitality that one felt her presence in a room even
before she began to speak. And then, to use Ruth’s own phrase, “one was
simply overwhelmed with Viola.”

The girl had beauty after a fashion, although the screen did something
to her features, softened them, refined them, made them infinitely more
appealing than they appeared in the full and brutal light of day.

But Ruth had seen the girl on the screen many times, knew that she could
act, and in her picture would be an effective opposite to Layton
Boardman.

Viola rather took her breath away on the subject of salary. However,
after considerable hesitation, Ruth signed her up at a figure which she
knew was going to cause considerable worry in the weeks to come. With
Viola’s salary to be paid every week, there would be little allowance
for delay or drawback of any kind. And in the making of a picture,
delays and drawbacks are the rule.

After the business part of the interview was at an end, Viola chose to
become expansive, taking Ruth into her confidence almost, as Ruth said
afterward to Tom, as though Ruth were an old friend.

“You’ve got a nice place here,” she said, wandering about the room,
touching small ornaments here and there. “Old-fashioned and homey with
plenty of windows and sun coming in at them. The kind of place me and
Tony was to have sometime.” She heaved a huge sigh and Ruth looked at
her curiously.

“Tony?” she repeated. “Do you mean Tony Martano?”

Tony Martano was a name well known in the picture world, though the man
himself had never risen beyond the rank of second-rate player.

Viola stopped roaming about the room and sat down in a big chair close
to Ruth’s, assuming a languid posture. She seemed willing, almost eager,
to talk of her blighted romance.

“You know how handsome Tony is,” she said. “Well, I guess it was his
looks that got me, for there’s nothing inside here,” she tapped her
forehead significantly, “but a solid mass of bone.”

Ruth laughed.

“I always thought he was a pretty good actor,” she said.

“What he got, his looks got for him,” Viola said with brutal frankness.
“If he’d had an ounce of brains he’d have edged some other leading man
off the map long before this. It only goes to show,” with another
tremendous sigh, “that love is a funny thing.”

“Then you love him still?” asked Ruth. She was rather taken aback by
this frankness on the part of Viola, especially to one who but a few
moments before had been a total stranger. However, she supposed a great
many things could be laid to that mysterious thing called temperament.
Something told her that Viola was full of temperament!

“Love him!” cried Viola, rolling her large and rather prominent black
eyes. “What I wouldn’t do for that man! And do you know,” she leaned
forward and fixed Ruth with a tragic gaze, “the only thing that stands
between us and a little nest of our own?”

“What?” asked Ruth, with difficulty keeping herself from smiling.

“Jealousy!” hissed Viola, and settled back with a satisfied compression
of her overfull lips.

“What kind of jealousy?” asked Ruth, bewildered. “Yours or his,
professional or personal?”

“His!” snapped Viola, evidently put out that this could be misunderstood
even for a moment. “And it’s entirely professional. That’s what proves
him a bonehead. No one should ever let anything stand in the way of
love--do you think so?” Viola had become languorous again and Ruth
stirred restlessly beneath her look. She wished suddenly that the girl
would go. There were so many things to do!

“No,” she said in answer to a repeated question from her guest, “I don’t
suppose anything ought to stand in the way of love--if it’s the right
kind.”

She thought of these words after Viola had gone and smiled a bit
ruefully herself.

“I wonder if I meant that? At any rate I don’t practice what I preach,”
she told herself. And still later, in reviewing that interview with
Viola, she added: “I don’t like that girl. For some reason I distrust
her, though I can’t for the life of me tell why!”




                              CHAPTER VIII

                               THE PARTY


The next day Ruth had her first business quarrel with Tom. It was over
the salary she had agreed to pay Viola Callahan.

“She isn’t worth it,” he protested doggedly.

“It isn’t any more than she’s been getting right along with Brennan,”
came from Ruth.

“Well, you notice Brennan wasn’t so anxious to get her back when she
jumped her contract.”

“No wonder. Neither would I.”

“Yes, you would,” Tom persisted. “That is, you would if she were a good
enough actress.”

“She is a good actress.”

“Not good enough for that salary.”

“Tom, please don’t let’s discuss it any more. Maybe I did do
wrong--although I don’t think so. Only time will prove that. And in the
meantime, we’re wasting time sitting here and arguing about it. You
wanted Viola, yourself, you know you did. And I’m sure she’ll carry the
lead nicely and if she does and makes this picture the success I’m
hoping for it, we could afford to pay her a much larger salary.”

“Yes, I know we could,” Tom capitulated at last. “And we won’t say
anything more about it, Ruth, since it’s done, though I undoubtedly have
a right to be consulted beforehand on money matters. But our job now is
to pitch into the making of pictures and make this one the finest yet.
Certainly no amount of Viola Callahans could spoil that.”

He said nothing further, but Ruth had an uneasy feeling that Tom’s mind
was not changed in the least. And this attitude of his seemed only to
add to her responsibility. If everything went well--very well! If
not----

The night of the party arrived at last.

Ruth was in wonderful spirits. This was due partly to anticipation of
the party, partly to the fact that she and Tom and Helen could expect to
start for Chicago in a few days’ time and from there to Montana.

Mercy Curtis was obliged to decline Ruth’s invitation. The girls were to
come over from Helen’s in the afternoon, bag and baggage. Though Jennie
Marchand declared she had only brought a “toothbrush and nightie” with
her, it was noticed that her bag was the biggest and heaviest of all.

This was Wednesday. The big party was for that night, and the next day
the girls were all to start back home.

“We’ve stayed so long now,” said Ann Hicks. “It’s a wonder our families
don’t disown us!”

Jennie, she thought, would probably stay on for a few days longer,
accompanying Ruth and Helen and Tom when they started for Chicago.

It happened that Layton Boardman came down to the Red Mill that
afternoon to see Ruth on a matter of business, knowing nothing of the
party. Aunt Alvirah, who had been immensely taken with the cowboy actor
from the start, insisted that he stay to dinner and the party afterward.

Ruth could do nothing but second the old lady’s invitation, though she
knew Uncle Jabez would growl at the necessity of entertaining an actor
in his house. Then, too, she was not at all sure that the other members
of the party would enjoy having Boardman thrust upon them.

However, she need not have worried. Layton Boardman proved even more
friendly and pleasant than Ruth had thought him. In the quiet dignity of
the old house there was little of the wild open plains suggested in his
manner or bearing. He was unaffected and at home, and it was not long
before the delighted girls and boys discovered that he possessed a quiet
wit that was convulsing.

“I love your hero, Ruth,” Nettie Parsons confessed before the evening
was half over.

And a little later came in a whisper from Helen:

“If I weren’t so terribly in love with Chess, Ruthie--you needn’t smile,
you bad thing--I think my heart would be in several little pieces by
this time. Ruthie, you’re in danger. Our handsome hero admires you
immensely!”

Nonsense, of course; but pleasant nonsense. Ruth’s contentment grew as
she realized what a splendid time every one was having.

They pushed back the furniture and danced. There also Layton Boardman
shone and Ruth thought that if his skill on horseback was nearly as
finished as his skill in dancing it must be very great indeed.

The actor danced with all the girls in turn, a fact which Ruth knew they
would never stop talking about when they returned home. But the girl of
the Red Mill was amused to find that after Boardman had danced with her
twice in succession Tom took possession of her and denied all further
requests on the part of the actor.

“Didn’t I tell you I was going to watch my step when that fellow was
around?” said Tom in answer to the amused twinkle in her eye.

“Well, see that you do!” Ruth admonished severely. “You stepped on my
toe that time, Tommy. My best satin slippers, at that!”

Long before refreshments were served Uncle Jabez went to bed. His action
was patently intended to express his disapproval of the “goings on.”

Aunt Alvirah, however, stayed up to the last moment, sitting in a corner
of the room, her old face wreathed in smiles and her old back upright,
despite the stiffness of it.

It was long past midnight before the party broke up and then, as the
girls said, they had fairly “to push the boys out the front door.”

“It’s lucky,” sighed Jennie as the automobiles tooted off down the road
bearing Layton Boardman along with them, “that the girls are going home
to-morrow, Ruth Fielding. That hero of yours is far too good looking to
be allowed around loose.”

“He isn’t,” said Ruth, stretching luxuriously. “I have him all sewed up
with a nice contract. But, oh, the money the Fielding Film Company has
to pay that man!”

The next day Ann Hicks went to visit her aunts and Nettie Parsons and
Mary Cox went home. Jennie Marchand was to spend a few days more with
Helen before going back to New York, to resume her interrupted visit
there.

Tom took them to the station, Helen and Ruth and Jennie going along to
say good-by. Several others--of the male population of Cheslow--were
gathered on the platform for the same purpose. Consequently the girls
were given a rousing good send off.

“The next time we come, Ruth Fielding,” said Mary Cox, poking her head
out the window as the train began to move, “we will come prepared to
stay at least a year!”

“It was like old times, having them,” murmured Ruth. “I wish they might
have stayed a year! And now,” turning with an eager smile to Tom, “for
Montana--and adventure.”

“There ought to be plenty of that,” Tom agreed.




                               CHAPTER IX

                              ON THE ROAD


The day dawned gloriously bright, a sparkling day of sunshine and fresh
sweet winds and the scent of adventure in the air. It was _the_ day on
which the start for Montana was to be made.

Ruth never failed to start on a trip of this kind without a thrill of
the sort that had come to her on that eventful day of her childhood when
she and Helen Cameron had set out for Briarwood Hall.

Adventure was before her. She was happy, exhilarated, free as the air
that blew in at her window. Helen and Jennie Marchand had spent the
night with Ruth at the Red Mill. This was a precaution taken by Ruth so
that they might start early enough to catch the train. Ruth had made
arrangements for her company to meet in Chicago, though Viola Callahan
and Boardman were to travel with her own party, boarding the train,
however, before it reached Cheslow, and Ruth had no intention of missing
the train.

Now, in the mirror, she caught Helen’s eye, saw that it was fixed
mischievously upon her.

“I am wondering,” Helen explained in reply to Ruth’s raised eyebrows,
“how long you are going to go without bobbing your hair.”

“I notice you don’t bob yours,” Ruth retorted, doing up her mane of
hair.

Helen grimaced and searched for a shoe under the bed.

“Chess doesn’t like it, that’s the only reason.”

Ruth chuckled.

“I thought you were an emancipated, modern girl,” she gibed. “But
already you’re letting Chess tell you what to do.”

“Well, no one can accuse you of that fault as far as Tom is concerned,”
Helen retorted. Then after a minute, as Ruth did not reply, she said:
“Tom is miffed over your handsome actor, Ruth.”

“So much the worse for Tom, my dear,” Ruth retorted brightly. “And if
you think you’re going to spoil this beautiful day for me, you’re
mistaken. Hurry and get dressed, old slow-poke, or we may go without
you, after all.”

They made a merry breakfast of it, despite the fact that Aunt Alvirah
was tearful at the thought of parting again with “her pretty” and that
Uncle Jabez was frankly disapproving of this “gallivantin’ off to the
ends of the earth for the takin’ of ornery pitchers.”

By this time, however, Uncle Jabez’ scolding was mere habit. He by no
means objected to the returns on some money he had put into one of
Ruth’s pictures.

Tom and Chess came over in time for the early breakfast, parked their
cars outside, and declared that everything was ready for the start.

Chess noticed Aunt Alvirah’s depression and immediately commenced to
sympathize with her.

“Cheer up, Aunt Alvirah,” Chess said, patting the old woman on the back.
“If you don’t stop crying I’ll have to start, too, out of sympathy, and
I don’t want Helen to carry away such a picture of me. She might marry
one of those handsome cowboys in the West and never come back. You and I
are in the same boat, Auntie, except that Ruth is leaving you on
business and Helen hasn’t even that excuse.”

“He’ll make me cry in a minute,” said Ruth, with a chuckle. “Poor,
neglected chap!”

“You know very well you told me you’d have to be away on business,”
Helen reminded her fiancé. “I didn’t know you would be so broken-hearted
at my desertion or I might have changed my mind,” she added.

“Please don’t,” said Ruth. “You must go along, Helen! I couldn’t do
without you!”

“Hear that?” said Helen, with a triumphant glance at her grinning
fiancé. “I told you so!”

It was Uncle Jabez who reminded them that they had better not spend all
morning at breakfast if they expected to catch their train.

“I don’t believe Uncle Jabez altogether approves of your trip,” said
Helen as she and Ruth went upstairs to get their wraps on.

Ruth smiled.

“Poor old dear, my aspirations have been a tremendous trial to him. He
complains that he’s too old to change his ideas at his time of life. But
it’s not as bad as he lets on.”

The good-by was harder than Ruth had anticipated. Aunt Alvirah clung to
her, and, as Ruth had a vision of the lonely days the old woman would
spend waiting for her return, some of her own high enthusiasm fled.

“I’d like to tie you up in a big bundle and take you along with me,
Auntie,” she said, holding the frail old woman close.

“I wish you could, my pretty. I wish you could,” sighed Aunt Alvirah,
bravely blinking back the tears and giving Ruth a little push toward the
others, waiting in Tom’s car. “And now you’d better run along, honey, or
you’ll miss your train for sure. Say good-by to your Uncle Jabez. He’ll
be lonesome too.”

Though Ruth knew the old man was really sorry to see her go, he hid all
emotion carefully, merely expressing a hope that she’d behave herself
and come back before they all “was dead and buried.”

The tooting of Tom’s horn called Ruth away, though she stole one last
hug from Aunt Alvirah. Tom opened the door of the car for her and as
Ruth stumbled into the seat beside him reached out a hand to steady her.

Ruth waved her hand as the car started down the drive, found the vision
of the old lady blurred by tears, then turned to Tom as he sat behind
the wheel, watchful eyes on the road ahead.

They reached the station and found they had reached it none too soon,
for as the car slid up on one side of the station the train slid to a
stop on the other.

Chess had volunteered to take Tom’s car back for him and see it safely
in the garage.

Tom herded them all into the train, including Jennie Marchand who had
determined to accompany the party part way and make another visit before
returning to her father’s home in New York.

They found their car easily enough and Chess went aboard with them to
see that everything was all right and that Helen was comfortably settled
for the trip. Here they found Viola and Boardman in their seats.

Chess Copley got off at the last possible minute and stood on the
platform waving to Helen. Then it was over and they were on their way to
Chicago. A rather queerly assorted party, at that, and one that was sure
to attract attention on the train.

Layton Boardman’s photographs were so well known that a low, excited
whisper and a curious craning of necks followed him wherever he went.

Viola was recognized also, though not so generally. It was not long
before all the members of the party were known, and their mission too,
in a vague way, by practically every person on the train.

Each time she went into the dining car Ruth felt as though the eyes of
every one were upon her. So she would not be at all sorry when they
should enter upon the last stage of the trip.

They dropped Jennie Marchand at her destination, but not before they had
promised the young matron on their honor to write her “books” concerning
their adventures in Montana.

They were all sorry to see Jennie go. If it had not been for Henri
Marchand--a rather important obstacle--and her other friends whom Jennie
wished to see while on this American visit, they would have taken
“Heavy” along with them for the whole time.

“But Henri says I may have just two months in America and must then come
back to France and to him,” insisted Jennie, and her friends had to be
content.

They were to arrive at Chicago in an hour, Ruth realized. There they
would meet the rest of Ruth’s company and start on the real part of the
journey--their ultimate destination, Golden Pass, Montana.

There was the inevitable bustle and flurry of donning wraps. The porter
gathered their suitcases and other luggage together, to be distributed
to their lawful owners on the platform.

Once arrived at Chicago and part of the hurrying throng in the great
station, Tom took charge of the party. Ruth always liked to see him do
this. He was so quiet yet masterful in his management of people and
things.

He hired taxicabs for them all, saw Viola and Boardman into one, handed
Ruth and Helen and then followed, himself, into another.

“Phew!” he whistled when the door was slammed shut and they were at last
alone. “I feel as if I’d been part of a circus for the past little
while. It’s good to have the door shut on the stares of the curious.”

Helen giggled.

“Viola was the circus. I think she’s loads of fun. Why,” she shot a
curious look from her brother to Ruth, “do you two distrust her so?”

“I don’t exactly distrust her,” Ruth returned slowly. “I merely have a
feeling that you never can tell just what the girl is going to do next.”

“Don’t think you’ll have to worry about Viola,” said Tom. “She’s only a
silly kid. It’s Boardman we ought to keep our eyes on.”

Ruth flushed. More than once Tom had made her feel that her judgment was
not altogether to be relied upon. Very well! Her eyes flashed and she
drew a long breath. She’d show him yet!

They drew up before the hotel where Tom had already engaged rooms by
wire for themselves as well as the company. A porter came forward to
open the door, another crowded close to pick up the luggage.

As Ruth stepped to the sidewalk she glanced about her with dancing eyes.
She slipped her arm through Helen’s and squeezed it.

“Adventure’s in the air. Can you smell it?” she cried gaily. “And this
is our starting point!”




                               CHAPTER X

                           A SUSPICIOUS MOVE


The rest of the company were waiting for Ruth and the Camerons and the
two stars, in accordance with the agreement. Ruth received them in her
sitting room that evening, gave to each one a copy of the new script and
requested that all read it thoroughly before they arrived at Montana.

“It will save time for rehearsals,” she told them, smiling. “And I have
an idea that when we reach Golden Pass we shall want to start shooting
scenes fast and furious. Now, let’s see! Are we all here?”

She counted them and found them all on hand from Dave Sentner, the
comedian of the pictures, who was really the soberest and quietest of
men, to the old character man who was to play the part of the aged, deaf
trapper in her picture and who was as talkative and as quick-eared as
anybody.

There were two cameramen and two assistant directors, experienced and
capable men, all. They were glad to see Ruth and eager to start for the
scene of the new picture.

Ruth sketched out briefly her scenario for them, pointing out what part
theirs would be in the filming and directing of it. While she was
speaking the other members of her company gathered around her, listening
with interest and now and then nodding approbation.

“Sounds great to me,” said Shepley, the tall, thin director who was
really Ruth’s right hand man, her help and guide in many details of
picture making. “Gives a chance for fine scenes and powerful acting.”

“The landslide now,” said one of the cameramen, eyes gleaming with
anticipation. “Zowie, that ought to be a knockout!”

The general enthusiasm of her company would have delighted Ruth more if
she had not been so persistently troubled by the subject of the large
payroll. Her company numbered a round twenty in all just as they stood
in the sitting room of the Chicago hotel. And there would be more when
they reached Montana, extras to be picked up on the spot for the purpose
of providing local color. But even the humblest extra must be paid.

Ruth sighed, but, seeing that Tom was regarding her questioningly,
changed the sigh to a smile. There was no use in borrowing trouble and,
for to-night at least, they might be gay!

Having rounded up all her company there was little left to do save to
book reservations to Montana. This was Tom’s task, and he went out to
attend to it, leaving Helen and Ruth alone for the first time since they
had left Cheslow.

“I declare, I’d like to have something to eat here, if it was only a
chicken sandwich and a glass of milk,” said Helen, looking around the
cozy sitting room of Ruth’s suite. “It’s going to take just about all
the courage I possess to get all dressed up and face that mob in the
dining room.”

Ruth laughed.

“I don’t see why we can’t eat here if we want to,” she agreed. “It would
be rather nice--and I have one or two changes I ought to make in the
script.”

She picked up the telephone and called the dining room, giving an order
for dinner to be served promptly at seven o’clock.

“I suppose Tommy’s invited?” suggested Helen, and Ruth looked at her,
flushing a little.

“Tom--of course!” she said briefly, and went back to her work.

There was a long silence while Helen idly turned the pages of a
magazine, watching Ruth while she pretended not to do so.

Then, casually, as though the subject had just occurred to her, she
said:

“About this awfully good-looking fellow, Boardman, Ruth. You don’t share
Tom’s suspicions of him, do you?”

Ruth deliberately finished the changes she was making in the script,
then gathered her papers together and put them away.

“I haven’t the slightest reason to suspect Layton Boardman,” she said,
meeting Helen’s glance calmly. “And I’m quite sure Tom hasn’t either.
Has he been saying things to you about him?”

“Not especially,” Helen admitted. “Only hinted that there might be
trouble from Sol Bloomberg--a sort of battle for possession, as it
were.”

“There is a chance we may have trouble with Bloomberg,” Ruth returned,
the shadow of worry again crossing her face. “But whatever trouble we
have I’m quite sure won’t come from Layton Boardman.”

Helen opened her mouth as though to speak, thought better of it, and
closed it again.

Ruth skillfully turned the subject to lighter things and no more was
said concerning Bloomberg that evening. Dinner was served promptly at
seven and Tom returned in plenty of time for his share of it.

“Now, children,” said Helen, as Tom entered the door of the apartment
followed immediately by the waiter bearing the dinner, “I refuse to
allow you to talk shop this evening. You may talk sense or nonsense and
we will eat. But no moving pictures shall be mixed with the dinner.”

“Aren’t you going to let Tom report as to the time of leaving?” asked
Ruth.

“No, not before eating. Um-um!” she went on. “Chicken-a-la-king! The
crispest of lettuce! And these rolls----”

“Merely chicken hash, if you ask me,” put in Tom.

“Come, Tommy-boy, cheer up,” observed his twin.

Tom did cheer up, and the meal went on merrily, all worry, all thoughts
of business, pushed into the background.

“It _is_ a comfort to get away from that mob downstairs,” remarked Tom,
as he threw himself into an easy chair to sip his after-dinner coffee.

“Yes,” agreed Ruth. “Still, I do love the work and the excitement of it
all. But now, Tom, what were the fortunes of the afternoon?” But with
her question all her cheerfulness left her, and once more a look of
worry came into her eyes.

Tom declared that fortune had been with him and that he had been able to
secure reservations for the entire company on the train leaving Chicago
for Montana at ten o’clock the following morning.

Her enthusiasm once more alight at the prospect of starting so soon,
Ruth forgot about Sol Bloomberg and the possibility of trouble from that
quarter.

She was forcibly reminded of it, however, the following morning and in a
way which she could least have expected.

She and Helen had run out early to do a bit of shopping before the train
started--Helen simply had to have a new hat!--when they met Viola
Callahan. The latter was evidently bound on the same mission as
themselves and offered to take them around to her favorite hat shop.

Always willing to be shown where millinery was concerned, the two girls
accompanied her readily enough. What struck them as suspicious was the
abrupt manner in which the girl took her departure after introducing
them to the shop. Uttering something entirely unintelligible, she
suddenly darted off into the crowd, leaving Ruth and Helen to stare
after her, amazed and questioning.

“I bet she saw some one she wanted to talk to in a hurry,” said Helen
excitedly. “Come on, Ruthie, let’s see for ourselves.”

Ruth allowed herself to be hurried along through the crowd. Several
times they thought they had missed Viola entirely and were tempted to
give up the absurd chase.

Then Ruth suddenly caught Helen’s arm and drew her to a standstill.

“Over there!” she whispered. “Near the corner! And she’s talking to--oh,
Helen--it can’t be!”

But it was! Ruth’s second glance told her that beyond all shadow of a
doubt the man with whom Viola Callahan was engaged in earnest
conversation was none other than an agent of Sol Bloomberg’s.

Ruth knew the man only slightly, but she was well aware that his
reputation for shady dealing and shrewd ruthlessness was only second to
that of his employer. A worthy servant of a worthy master.

“Who is it? Who is that man talking to Viola?” Helen was whispering
excitedly at her elbow.

“Sh-h! Don’t let them see we’ve caught them.” Ruth grasped Helen’s hand
excitedly. “Let’s get out of this!”

It was not until their faces were once more turned toward the hotel,
their search for a hat temporarily forgotten, that Ruth would explain
the curious incident.

“It probably doesn’t mean a thing,” she said then, trying to speak
naturally. “But that man is an agent for Sol Bloomberg. I know him
slightly and his reputation much better,” she added grimly.

Helen thought this over for a moment.

“What do you gather from it?” she asked.

“Nothing in particular,” Ruth answered slowly. “As I said, I may be
borrowing trouble. Viola may have met Charlie Reid by accident. It may
have been simply a chance encounter. Then again----”

“She may have met him by appointment! It seemed curious the way she left
us and dashed off into the crowd----”

“As though she wanted to get rid of us and was rather afraid she might
be followed,” Ruth finished, meeting her chum’s excited gaze. “Yes, it
does seem strange. And then, her talking to that man at this time----”

“What do you think he--or rather, Sol Bloomberg--wants of her?” asked
Helen, her mind turning over this new development. She loved intrigue of
any kind. “Do you think he wants to sign her up for himself?”

“Stranger things have happened,” Ruth answered dryly.

“But she has a contract with you,” said Helen. “Duly signed and
witnessed.”

“Actresses,” Ruth returned in the same tone, “have been known to jump
their contracts.”

“Isn’t there some way of making them stick to their word?” asked Helen.
“Surely, a contract must mean something.”

“Oh, of course, there are the law courts,” said Ruth as they reached the
hotel. “But it is an expensive and tiresome business and a star forced
to work against her will can make endless trouble for her concern. It’s
cheaper to let her go and get some one else.”

“But if Viola walks off at the last moment whom will you get?” Helen was
persistent and Ruth raised a protesting hand.

“I don’t know and I’m not going to think about it, either--not until
I’ve had more proof of Viola’s perfidy than we had this morning. I can’t
afford to borrow trouble.”

“If she stops to talk with that fellow much longer she will certainly
miss her train,” said Helen with a glance at her wrist watch.




                               CHAPTER XI

                           TROUBLE IN THE AIR


Ruth was really more worried than she would admit and when Viola
appeared at the last minute, looking a bit flurried and out of breath
but as cheerful as usual, Ruth drew a long breath of relief. So far, so
good, at any rate!

Tom attended to all details in his usual business-like manner and Ruth
was grateful to him. The girl could not help wondering at the great
change that had come over him since those days when she used to urge him
to find a useful occupation and stick to it.

For some reason she was feeling oppressed by worries to-day. She had not
felt that way when she got up in the morning. On the contrary, she had
welcomed the thought of Golden Pass and the immediate prospect of
getting to work with all her usual enthusiasm. It must be the problem of
Viola that was worrying her. That mysterious encounter with Charlie
Reid. What could it mean?

However, she felt that once on location with the filming of her picture
started, she would be more contented and lose this disturbing feeling of
unease that had taken possession of her.

At last the long and tiresome trip was over and they had landed with
their belongings on the dismal, almost deserted station of Golden Pass.
She looked to see that all her company were present, from the leading
actor to the humble, but very important, cameramen, and then turned to
Tom with a gesture of weariness.

“I’m so tired, Tom. I’d like to rest for hours and not do a single
thing--not even think!”

Tom smiled at her and promptly gave orders for the removal of themselves
and their luggage to Headwaters Ranch where they were to stay during the
time necessary for the filming of the picture.

Tom and Ruth had gleaned their information concerning this particular
ranch from Mr. Hammond. The latter, it seemed, had put up at this ranch
during his former stay at Golden Pass and had heartily recommended it to
Ruth and Tom as ideal headquarters for the company during the taking of
the picture.

“The ranch is run by a fine old couple,” Mr. Hammond had told Tom. “And
when I say run, I mean run. One of the finest ranches in the country. I
can’t promise you luxuries but I can guarantee that Ma Gowdy will
furnish you with all the comforts of home. Try it, my boy. You can’t go
wrong.”

Tom had been only too glad to follow this advice. Writing to Headwaters
Ranch, he had received a reply by return mail to the effect that the
ranch could easily accommodate the number Tom had mentioned in his
letter. Since the rates for rooms and meal quoted by the owner of the
ranch were satisfactory, Tom, with Ruth’s entire sanction and approval,
wrote back at once, clinching the deal.

This done, the young fellow drew a long sigh of relief. One of the most
vexing problems of the trip had been easily solved, thanks to Mr.
Hammond.

Now Tom made inquiries of the young fellows lounging about the station
and found that conveyances of a sort had been sent from the ranch.

A good looking, impudent-eyed, rangy lad, had brought a rather
dilapidated Ford which, he explained, was for the use of the ladies.

The luggage was to be conveyed in an open wagon driven by one of the
other ranch hands. The men, it seemed, were to ride the nervous,
velvet-skinned, half-wild colts, kept in hand by a third picturesquely
dressed young man.

The eyes of Layton Boardman gleamed as he approached the spirited group
of colts. With a soft word or two he reached out and touched the
nearest, a caressing movement of hand on velvet nose. The colt trembled
but stood still and in a moment the actor’s arm stole round the neck of
the little beast. Gently he stroked him with his other hand and talked
to him softly. With a sudden capitulating whinny the colt rubbed his
head against the man’s shoulder. It was colt love talk. The two were
friends.

Ruth and Helen, watching the little scene with interest, stepped forward
eagerly. Even the blasé Viola had stopped talking with the nearest
cowboy to watch.

Layton Boardman looked up at the young fellow in charge of the horses.

“Seems like he’s mine,” he drawled, instinctively dropping back into
cowboy dialect. “Just naturally belong together. A beauty, too,” rubbing
his hand over the sleek coat, “if I know hosses.”

“He’s full o’ ginger, mister,” said the youngster, his eyes admiringly
on Boardman’s breadth of shoulder. One could guess at the man’s splendid
muscular development, even beneath the conventional, loose-hung suit he
wore. “But I guess you can manage him, all right.”

“Reckon so,” drawled Boardman, and with a lithe movement swung himself
into the saddle before even the little colt knew what he was about.

The latter, surprised, reared instinctively in protest, a swift action
of rippling muscles and tossing mane that would have given even an
experienced rider a moment of tension.

But Boardman clung to the colt’s back as easily and with as much
nonchalance as though he were reclining in an easy chair at home.

“Now, don’t go gettin’ all het up,” he told the pony in a gentle drawl
of reproof. “Ain’t a bit of use, little feller. Better sit quiet and
save yo’ strength,” he went on, in true cowboy style.

As though recognizing the wisdom of this advice, the colt set its feet
daintily to earth and stood there, pawing the ground.

In the eyes of the cowboys who had gathered around was admiration and,
better still, recognition. Layton Boardman was one of them, despite his
“swell” clothes and citified air.

“You sho can handle thet colt, mister,” one of them said.

“We’ll set you to some ‘bronco bustin’ in a day or two,” another
shouted.

“Fine,” Boardman’s eyes gleamed with anticipation. “I’ll be there, boys.
Just watch me!”

Tom looked at Ruth. She, in turn, was gazing at Layton Boardman, her
lips slightly parted with pleasure, eyes bright.

Tom turned away quickly and hurried to oversee the piling of trunks on
the wagon. He despised himself for feeling jealous. But this fellow,
Boardman, was out of the ordinary. He had magnetism of the sort that
draws both men and women to him. Also, Boardman had on his side the
glamour that always surrounds an actor. By the time they were ready to
start Tom was in a pretty savage mood.

However, the ride to Headwaters Ranch was not one to cultivate moods,
except it be one of appreciation of grandeur and beauty in its finest
form.

Montana is a land of glorious mountains and fertile valleys, of sunshine
and, in the heart of its woodlands, deepest shadow. During that ride
along rock mountain roads in the shaky flivver Ruth and Helen saw views
unfolding before them that took their breath away, left them in a maze
of beauty, groping for adjectives that could describe the things they
saw.

How tell others of those lofty mountain peaks, remote and still,
towering sentinel-like above the sunlit, pleasant valleys lying fertile
and warm at their feet? How describe the picturesque grandeur of the
cañons that dropped dizzily away from one’s very feet to a dazzling
silver ribbon of stream below?

“Ruth, I’m simply steeped in beauty,” said Helen after an awed half hour
of this. “It was worth coming all the way from Cheslow, if only for a
glimpse of this glorious scenery.”

“I can see that I’m going to have an embarrassment of riches,” said Ruth
contentedly. “I’ll have to draw lots to decide on locations for my
picture.”

They came suddenly upon Headwaters Ranch, hiding away between two
towering mountains. A stream wound its way through the center of the
ranch, making it one of the most fertile in the country.

Ruth gave one glance at the rambling buildings, of the old ranch house
itself, and of the sunlit plains back of the house dotted with herds of
grazing cattle and immediately forgot all about being tired and her need
of rest.

“I’ve simply got to take a look around before dark!” she told Helen and
Tom, as the latter swung from his horse and opened the car door. “I
shouldn’t wonder if I’d find plenty of material right here on the ranch
for my picture.”

But since Helen protested that she, at least, was going to make up for
some of the sleep she had lost on her travels and Tom urgently advised
that Ruth wait until morning for her tour of exploration, the girl
finally gave in and followed the others into the house.

There were two old people in charge of the ranch--at least, they would
have seemed old to Ruth and Helen had the girls met them in the city.
But out here where rugged physique and great endurance are the rule, Ma
and Pa Gowdy seemed not so old, as well-seasoned and hardy.

Certain it was that they still ran the ranch with all their old
efficiency, hard when it came to demanding every bit of effort from
those they employed but just and square in all their dealings with “the
boys.” Every one loved and was loyal to Pa and Ma Gowdy. The young folks
had not been long on the ranch before they realized that Ma, good old
sport that she was, had equal say in the management of the ranch with
Pa--and desertions and insurrection were practically unheard of on
Headwaters Ranch.

Pa, they learned upon entering the house, was out on the ranch
somewhere, but Ma had waited to greet her guests.

She was a tall, powerfully built woman, dressed in uncompromising calico
that failed to detract from her air of quiet forcefulness.

She looked at the company, seeming in one, quick canny glance to take in
every detail of it, then led the way quietly into the big front room.
Somehow Ruth gathered that Ma Gowdy was almost always silent.

“I’m Ruth Fielding,” said Ruth as the old lady turned to face them. She
introduced the others and to each introduction Ma Gowdy nodded gravely,
neither speaking nor smiling.

“I suppose what you all want, really, is to get to your rooms and clean
up some,” she said when the introductions were over. “Andy here,”
motioning to an embarrassed youth in the doorway, “will show you where
you’re to stay. I reckon you’ll find everything ready for you. If you
want anything, all you have to do is stick your head out the door and
call out. We’re plain folks, but I hope you’ll be comfortable while you
stay. Supper’ll be ready in ’bout an hour.”

She turned and left them then to the care of Andy, who seemed not at all
certain what to do with his arms and legs. He used the latter finally as
a means of locomotion, and succeeded in assigning the leading members of
the company to large, rather scantily furnished rooms on the second
floor.

Viola was heard to comment audibly on the bareness of her quarters and
to yearn in homesick tones for the comfort of her “bung-ul-ow.”

Ruth was about to shut the door to her own particular apartment when
Helen pushed her way in.

“Ruth, I’ve got one room too many,” she complained. “The place that
ridiculous Andy gave me is big enough for sixteen people. Do have a
heart--though I have reason to believe you haven’t--and let me come in
with you.”

Ruth chuckled and glanced at the enormous bedstead in one corner of the
room.

“There certainly is room enough for two,” she admitted. “Did you ever
see such a big barn of a place?”

But, though the room was big and bare enough, the view from the windows
of it was more than enough to compensate. Arms about each other, the two
girls stood at the largest of the three windows, drinking in the beauty
of the sun-flecked range, dotted by innumerable grazing cattle, with,
beyond and above it, the towering, misty peaks of the mountains.

“That’s the Rocky Mountain range, isn’t it?” said Helen dreamily. “There
ought to be good hunting up in those woods, Ruthie.”

“Plenty of deer, I suppose,” agreed Ruth. “But I hate to think of any
one’s hunting them for sport--beautiful, soft-eyed things.”

“Well, I don’t suppose you can keep Tom away from it. I know he packed
his rifle along and he’ll probably spend every spare minute he can get
using it.”

“I wish he’d left his old rifle at home,” said Ruth crossly. “We didn’t
come up here to hunt.”

Helen’s prophecy proved correct. The next morning Tom put on outing
clothes and took his rifle, declaring his intention of browsing about a
bit.

“I may bring back only a rabbit,” he told them. “Deer is out of season.
But they say rabbit is very good to eat, cooked the way these westerners
know how to cook them.”

“Don’t stay too long, will you, Tom?” asked Ruth, with just a touch of
coldness in her voice. “I want to look for locations before long, you
know.”

“You won’t need me until noon, will you?” he asked.

“No--and probably not then,” said Ruth, turning away with a little shrug
of her shoulder.

“If Tom would rather go hunting than stay around and do his part in the
preliminary work of the picture, he can go hunting and stay as long as
he wants to!” Ruth told herself defiantly. “I don’t care what he does!”

And Tom, not knowing that she was piqued and hurt, gave her a curious
look, hesitated, then turned and swung off in the direction of the
woods, his rifle slung over his shoulder.

He had gone only a few feet when it occurred to him that he had better
enter those unfamiliar woods on horseback.

“The ponies know these mountain trails better than I--at least, they’re
more sure-footed,” he told himself, and turned toward the corrals.

Ruth saw to it that the members of her company were well employed. Some
of them had not finished reading the script. Others set out afoot or on
horseback to explore the country. Viola and Layton Boardman had already
gone for a morning canter.

All her small duties attended to, Ruth felt free at last to go about her
own business. And that business was, first of all, to explore Headwaters
Ranch thoroughly.

She and Helen selected ponies from the corrals and set forth on a brisk
canter. The ranch lands were even more picturesque close to than they
had been when seen in perspective from the window.

Ma and Pa Gowdy did no farming--at least, not more than enough to supply
their own needs. The fertile lands were given over almost completely to
stock raising.

“I never saw so many animals in my life,” said Helen. The herds of
cattle fascinated her and frightened her at the same time. “I think I’ll
go back, if you don’t mind, Ruthie dear. Yonder big steer has a mean and
hungry eye.”

Ruth laughed absently.

“All right. I’ll be coming along in a little while. I want to go as far
as the stream and see what it looks like--if I can make it before noon.”

Ruth scarcely knew when Helen left her. Her mind was glowing with the
realization that many of her scenes in her scenario could be shot right
here on the ranch. She dismounted from her horse and led it lightly by
the bridle. Such local color, such background!

She was roused from her dreaming by a strange sound as of the distant
pounding of surf upon the shore. Even as she lifted her head with a
swift, startled motion the sound became louder and swelled to a roar of
pounding hoofs.

Ruth looked and her heart leaped wildly. Down upon her, started probably
by some imaginary thing, swept a solid sea of steers, heads tossing,
hoofs tearing at the turf. And in the path of this dreadful wave Ruth
stood, unable to move, unable even to cry aloud.




                              CHAPTER XII

                                IN PERIL


Ruth’s pony snorted in terror. With a toss of its head, the animal
reared backward, almost losing its balance, then galloped wildly back
toward the corrals.

Ruth was living through a nightmare. She tried to move, but found that
her legs would not respond to her command. What use to run, anyway, when
there was no possible hope of escape? She felt numb, frozen with terror.

Muffled by the thunder of pounding hoofs she did not hear the rider
approaching from behind, was not aware of him until a horse swung up
beside her, all plunging hoofs and waving mane.

Layton Boardman leaned wide of his horse, swept an arm toward Ruth.

“Into the saddle--quick!” he shouted. “One chance left!”

It was a magnificent gesture and would have been successful had not the
pony, maddened by terror, reared on its hind feet, flinging over
backward.

Boardman was not prepared for the sudden motion, was flung from his
saddle and sprawled motionless on the ground. Ruth moaned.

That horrible sea of steers was almost upon them. In a moment she would
be lying there, too!

Came the noise of shouting behind her. A shot cracked out and the
nearest steer fell, kicking and plowing up the turf.

Another report and another. Other steers fell, and those rushing up
behind stumbled over them and fell, a kicking, snorting mass. Something
was wrong. The packed mass of steers wavered, hesitated, then divided
and swept on in two great trampling streams.

Ruth watched them in a daze, so numbed with fear that for a moment she
scarcely realized she was safe.

Then Tom was beside her, Tom’s arms about her, steadying her, Tom’s
voice, gruff and anxious:

“You aren’t hurt, Ruth? You’re all right?”

She nodded. Then lifted her white face to him.

“Did you--were you the one who fired the shots?”

“One of the ones,” he replied, modest as always. “For the rest you’ll
have to thank these boys. They sure are classy marksmen.”

Then, for the first time, Ruth saw the group of cowboys that had
surrounded them in sympathetic interest. She drew away from Tom
selfconsciously and looked toward Layton Boardman.

The latter had got to his feet. Blood flowed from a wound on his
forehead where he had struck a stone in falling and he swayed so dizzily
that one of the cowboys put an arm about his shoulders to support him.

“I’m all right,” said the actor, evidently impatient with himself for
allowing the horse to throw him. “Never mind about me, lad.”

He tried to take a step forward, brought up, amazed, while his face went
white with pain.

Ruth stepped forward involuntarily.

“What is it? Are you hurt?” she cried.

Boardman shook his head and tried to smile, but the corners of his mouth
twitched painfully.

“Not much, I guess. Just some trouble with my ankle. All right--in a
minute--” He tried to step again, but once more drew up and dubiously
shook his head.

“Can’t do it, boys. Any one got a hoss that ain’t working?”

There were a dozen offers, for the cowboys were thoroughly beneath the
spell of Layton Boardman. The latter was able with only slight aid to
swing himself to the back of one of the ponies. He sat there, one foot
in the stirrup, the other dangling, as fine a picture of wounded hero as
one would wish to see.

Ruth walked over to his pony’s side and put her hand up frankly.

“I want to thank you for what you tried to do for me,” she said softly.
“I want you to know that I fully appreciate it.”

Boardman grasped the proffered hand and met Ruth’s friendly glance with
a direct one of his own.

“To see you safe,” he said simply, “is all the thanks I need.”

Then he was gone, surrounded by a group of cowboys.

Ruth’s horse had been rounded up and brought back to her. She mounted
silently, feeling weak and exhausted after her terrifying experience.

Tom mounted also and they started back toward the ranch.

Suppose Layton Boardman, their leading man, were badly hurt? Men had
been permanently lamed by no worse an accident than he had had, and it
would be impossible to get another in his place this late--not for a
considerable time, at any rate.

And, in the meantime, even delay might be serious, with Viola drawing
her salary whether she worked or not, as did, for that matter, all the
rest of them.

Oh, well, Ruth shrugged off the weight of anxiety. Boardman would
probably be all right in a day or two. Only a slight sprain probably.

She looked at Tom, jogging along silently beside her. He looked tired
and very grave and suddenly her heart smote her. Why, she had never even
thanked him for his very important part in her rescue!

“Tom,” she said, “it was magnificent of you to do what you did!”

He looked up, surprised.

“I couldn’t have done anything else,” he said quietly.




                              CHAPTER XIII

                              NEW WORRIES


It was the day after her adventure with the stampeding cattle and Ruth
was taking a morning of rest before starting once more on a hunt for
suitable locations.

The two girls, Helen and Ruth, were up in Ruth’s room which various soft
and colorful articles from their trunks had made livable, talking over
plans for the picture and Ruth’s almost miraculous escape the day
before. At least, Ruth was trying to talk of her picture and Helen could
not be deflected from the theme of Ruth’s adventure, which interested
her vividly.

“Just think, only a little thing like chance or fate or whatever you
call it kept me from being there myself,” Helen observed. “I had a
horror of those savage looking steers.”

“It’s nothing to what I have now,” said Ruth, with a reminiscent
shudder.

“But think of the romance!” Helen was not to be stopped. “Think of
having Layton Boardman save you!”

“He didn’t,” said Ruth dryly.

“Well, he tried to, which is the same thing,” Helen said in a tone of
reproach. Ruth chuckled.

“It isn’t at all the same kind of thing, I assure you,” she retorted,
“as you would very well realize if you had been in my shoes.”

“Well, you had Tom, anyway, and a whole raft of cowboys, when Boardman
got kicked by his horse.”

“He didn’t get kicked by a horse! How many times do I have to tell you?”
Ruth laid down her papers in despair and Helen smiled mischievously at
her.

“I knew I’d make you stop working by fair means or foul,” she said
shamelessly.

“And I don’t feel like working--not a little bit,” Ruth confessed. “I’d
just like to let go--for a little while, anyway.”

“Well, why don’t you? Every one has to rest sometimes, you know, even
Ruth Fielding, whether she knows it or not. Here, take a chocolate and
give me a full and complete account of yesterday.”

“But I don’t want to talk about yesterday,” Ruth objected, accepting the
candy. “I tell you, if you had been there you wouldn’t be so keen on the
subject.”

“Poor Ruthie!” Helen reached over and patted her chum’s hand. “You did
have a dreadful shaking up. Wasn’t it lucky that Tom happened to be
coming home just then?”

“It was very lucky,” sighed Ruth, resigning herself to a discussion of
the subject since Helen, quite evidently, could be induced to talk of
nothing else. “I certainly wasn’t much use myself. I couldn’t move a
finger.”

There was a short silence while Ruth dreamed over plans for her picture
and Helen reviewed mentally the events of the day before.

“I suppose Tom was put out to find handsome Layton on the ground before
him,” said Helen, and Ruth shook herself impatiently.

“Layton, as you call him, was certainly on the ground most literally,”
she said, with a frown. “And I don’t know whether you know that my
interest in his injury is far more professional than personal.”

Helen nodded.

“I suppose you mean that having him laid up may delay your picture.”

“That’s certainly what I do mean!” Ruth sat up energetically and began
to look more like her old fighting self. “It seems to me that there’s an
evil sprite following me this trip----”

“Have you been to see him yet?”

Ruth shook her head.

“I was going to pretty soon. Tell you the truth,” she looked at Helen
seriously, “I’m almost afraid to. I’m so afraid that he may have
something more than a sprained ankle, and then--” She shrugged her
shoulders eloquently.

“A good many of the pictures can be taken without him, can’t they?”
asked Helen sympathetically. “Pictures where he doesn’t appear?”

“A few. But he appears in most of them. He plays a very strong lead all
through. Of course,” she stopped to consider, “we could take pictures of
the rodeo and the avalanche----”

“Oh, are we really going to have an avalanche?” Helen’s eyes sparkled.
“What fun!”

“An avalanche!” repeated Ruth. “Why, of course. That’s the main part of
the picture.”

Helen was leaning forward now, alert and eager.

“It will be artificial, of course?”

Ruth smiled.

“We could hardly ask Mother Nature to give us a special demonstration as
a favor,” she said. “Of course the avalanche will be the result of
carefully planted dynamite. But it will be as real looking as ingenuity
can make it.”

“I’ll count on you for that,” said Helen, regarding her chum admiringly.
“But I really didn’t know we were going to have anything so exciting.
Isn’t it--” she paused and regarded her friend uncertainly, “isn’t it a
bit dangerous?”

“A certain amount of danger always attaches to anything like that,” said
Ruth carelessly. “There are always a lot of unforeseen things that may
happen. Still, we’ve taken every possible precaution, and that’s the
best we can do.”

“Cost a heap of money I suppose?” said Helen, after another short pause.

Ruth nodded.

“More than I care to think about. Which reminds me that I must have a
business talk with Tom to-night and find out just how we stand. I,
personally, have some dead steers to pay for, too, I suppose,” and the
girl sighed.

“I don’t see why ‘personally.’ You didn’t kill the steers.”

“No; but they were killed in my cause.”

“I think Tom will look after that in spite of your hands-off
independence. You don’t treat Tommy-boy right, Ruthie.”

Ruth made no response to this observation, and the girls were silent for
a while.

“Seen anything suspicious about Viola lately?” asked Helen as Ruth
sorted out her papers and put them away.

“No, and I’m letting a sleeping dog lie,” replied Ruth emphatically.

“With all apologies to Viola,” chuckled Helen.

“I’ve about come to the conclusion,” Ruth added as she got up and began
to straighten her hair before the mirror over the washstand, “that her
conference with Bloomberg’s agent didn’t mean anything. I have enough
trouble without worrying about that.”

“It isn’t your worrying that matters,” observed Helen. “It’s what Viola
does.”

“Oh, well, we’ll let the matter rest. As a matter of fact, so far, Viola
has done nothing wrong. I suppose I’m too suspicious.”

“Where are you going?” asked Helen as Ruth turned toward the door.

“Over to see Layton Boardman,” said Ruth, with a faint smile. “I’ve got
to know the worst.”

“I’d offer to come, too,” Helen’s lazy teasing voice floated out after
her, “if I were not perfectly well aware that three’s a crowd.”

Ruth shrugged impatiently. She wished others would stop being so foolish
about her and Layton Boardman. The whole thing was ridiculous.

She went to Boardman’s door and knocked. He called to her to come in.
She opened the door and entered the room, leaving the door open behind
her.

The actor was in bed, but as Ruth entered a quick smile played over his
white face. Ruth went to him quickly and took the hand he had stretched
impulsively toward her.

“I’m sorry you were hurt,” she said, bending over him solicitously. “Is
there anything that I can do?”

It chanced that at that moment Tom was passing through the hall in
search of Ruth. He saw her hand in Layton Boardman’s, saw the girl
bending over him.

With a grim tightening of his lips Tom went on past the door and down
the hall.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                             HELEN IS HURT


Besides the injury to his ankle, which was comparatively light, being
only a painful sprain, Layton Boardman had hurt his back in his fall.
This, together with painful bruises about the head and body, had
prompted the ranch doctor to order him to stay in bed for a few days.

“After that I’ll be fit as a fiddle again,” Boardman told Ruth, trying
to reassure her. “If you can shoot some of the pictures that don’t show
me, Miss Fielding----”

“Don’t worry, Mr. Boardman,” Ruth cut in to his anxious sentence. “We’ll
go right ahead. There will be several days of hard work anyway before
we’ll need you. And whatever happens, I want you to take plenty of time
and get perfectly well. The scenes where you do come in,” she added with
a smile, “are pretty strenuous, you know, and you’ll need all your
strength.”

Boardman groaned and moved his aching body impatiently.

“I wanted to take part in the rodeo. I wanted it more than I’ve wanted
anything in years. And now--look at me!”

“I’m sorry,” said Ruth reluctantly, “but I’m afraid we will have to
shoot that without you.”

Boardman turned suddenly and caught Ruth’s hand in his hard, sinewy one.

“Promise me one thing,” he begged. “Promise me you’ll put off the rodeo
as long as you can. I may possibly be in shape!”

Ruth promised and withdrew her hand gently.

“Now rest a little while and I’ll go down and see if Ma Gowdy will let
me make you a little chicken broth for your dinner. That ought to help
put you in shape for the rodeo.”

“You’re very good to me,” Boardman muttered and closed his eyes.

Ma Gowdy was in the kitchen and readily responded to Ruth’s request for
chicken broth for the invalid.

“There’s one fresh-killed,” she told Ruth. “A fat, tough old fowl that
will make fine soup. You leave it to me. I can see you have plenty on
your mind.”

Ruth thanked her gratefully and went on out.

She had already consulted with Pa Gowdy and found him perfectly willing
that she use his ranch and as many of his ranch hands as she could
muster in her great scene of the rodeo. She wanted now to find out just
how many of these boys she could depend upon.

She found Andy, the gangling lad who helped in the small truck garden at
the rear of the house and who also did chores for Ma Gowdy in the house.
There were two regular cooks in Ma’s kitchen, swarthy Mexicans, both of
them, but Andy was general utility man.

This handy youth took her to the foreman of the ranch who was at that
moment watching a spirited exhibition of bronco busting in the corral.

This fellow, a long, lean, blue-eyed man whose face seemed to break up
into a million tiny wrinkles when he smiled, received Ruth cordially.

“I think you’ll find, Miss, that the only trouble you’ll have will be in
gettin’ too many volunteers,” he assured her when she stated her errand.
“The boys is more interested in this here movin’ picture outfit of yours
these days than in anything else that goes on about the ranch. They
think this here rodeo you’re stagin’ is a regular game. You’ll have no
trouble gettin’ them to take part.”

The man proved a true prophet. Ruth’s only difficulty was in rejecting
in such a way as to spare their feelings the cowboys she could not use.

“But I can’t take you all!” she protested. “Pa and Ma Gowdy would run me
off the ranch if I took you all from your regular work. I must pick and
choose.”

It was not long before her list was full. She gave her new extras
explicit directions as to where and at what time on the following
morning she wanted them, and then she went to find and instruct her
cameramen.

Ruth had pretty clearly in mind what she wanted. There had been a rodeo
once not far from Cheslow and she had watched the antics of the cowboys
with thrilled interest. It was her ambition to have this pictured rodeo
as near like the genuine article as she could make it.

There would be bronco busting, of course. This was to be the main event
of the affair. Then there would be a race, three or four half-broken
colts let loose in a restricted area. Into the ring would dash a mounted
cowboy in spectacular fashion. It was the business of this particular
participant to chase the half wild horses and, coming close to one of
them, to leap to its back, landing there, if the Fates were kind, and
hold on grimly until such time as the next horse came within leaping
distance, when the process was to be repeated.

In the course of this exciting performance falls and accidents,
sometimes serious accidents, were to be expected. Perhaps this, thought
Ruth, with a wry grimace, was what supplied the thrill. At any rate,
there was bound to be plenty of excitement and action, and this was what
she must have in her picture.

There would be other events, too, including the roping of steers.

“I wanted,” she told Helen, a frown of anxiety furrowing her brow, “to
have Layton Boardman himself take the lead in the events requiring skill
in the use of the lariat. That is one of his strong points.”

Both girls knew how nonchalantly and well Boardman could manage the
snakelike, almost magic rope, twisting, turning, etching strange,
serpentine figures on the air and always in the end finding the mark it
was meant for.

Ruth had pictured Boardman in these scenes of her scenario, knew how his
fine personality would dominate them. There were other cowboys no doubt
who had his skill with the lariat, but none that could borrow that
intangible thing--his personality.

“Well, the best you can do is to shoot most of the scenes
to-morrow--those in which Boardman’s not absolutely necessary--and take
the others when your leading man is on his feet again,” said Helen, then
went to her room to write to Chess.

Ruth had an interview with her cameramen in which location and light
effects were discussed at length, then went to consult her scenario as
to the exact sequence of scenes.

In the hall she met Viola Callahan and the latter stared at Ruth, a
queer expression in her bold black eyes.

“Seems like your hero’s kind of laid down on his job,” she remarked
flippantly to Ruth. “I can’t imagine myself in love with a wild-west
chap who gets his back wrenched and an ankle hurt right at the beginning
of things. Right poor judgment, I call it.”

“You may remember that Mr. Boardman injured himself trying to save my
life,” Ruth answered coldly, and went on up to her room wondering why
she disliked this girl so much. Disliked her--and distrusted her, too.

Viola had given Ruth no cause for distrust other than that meeting in
Chicago with Sol Bloomberg’s agent. Ruth had to admit that. Since her
arrival at the ranch Viola’s actions had been normal enough. Yet Ruth
still distrusted her with a suspicion that was as inevitable as the
drawing of her breath.

Again she thrust uneasy thoughts from her. She would not borrow trouble.

The different events of the rodeo had been practiced for days--bronco
busting, racing, bull-throwing. The cowboys had entered into the acting
with spirit, even though most of it was not acting to them at all, but
merely a part of their everyday experience.

The time had now come when Ruth felt that she could safely set up her
cameras and shoot the scenes.

The day of the rodeo dawned gloriously clear and one fear of Ruth’s was
dissipated. At least they would not be forced to postpone the rodeo
pictures because of bad weather.

“Oh, Ruth!” exclaimed Helen, standing at the open window. “It’s a
perfectly grand day. I’m so glad it isn’t raining, or even cloudy.”

Dressed and ready for the exciting events of the day, Ruth stopped for a
moment at Boardman’s door. The latter was better. He had insisted on
getting out of bed and was now sitting comfortably enough propped up in
a big chair by the window. He looked up as Ruth entered and smiled.

She outlined to him her general plans concerning the rodeo, explaining
that she had saved several of the most important and daring scenes for
him.

“That was mighty good of you!” There was no doubting his gratitude.
“I’ll be up and around as good as new in a day or two. Just watch me!”

Ruth said she certainly hoped he would and left him and ran buoyantly
down the steps and into the vigorous, sun-dazzled out-of-doors.

She found Tom and Helen waiting for her.

“Oh, here you are!” cried Helen. “Tom and I have been waiting hours!”

“Nothing of the kind,” laughed Ruth happily. “I left you not more than
five minutes ago.”

The cameramen and a group of eager extras stood near by.

The cowboys regarded Ruth with dancing eyes and demanded to know when
the show was to begin.

“Right away,” said Ruth. “The sooner the better. Is everybody ready?”

It seemed that everybody was, and they repaired straightway to location.

From then on events moved so swiftly that Ruth lost all account of time.
Close to the cameramen, ordering, criticizing, directing and sometimes
giving voice to spontaneous expressions of approval, Ruth seemed to
dominate the whole exciting scene with her own vivid personality.

The cowboys afterward declared that they worked their best because of
the director’s enthusiasm and intense vitality.

“With her dancin’ away there on her little toes and shoutin’ herself
hoarse when we done somethin’ she liked, we just couldn’t help playin’
up good,” said one of these, thereby expressing the general opinion, for
there was a murmured chorus of:

“Now you’ve said something, buddy.”

At any rate, up to the final “shot” Ruth was confident that she had a
smashing good picture, the real thing in a real setting, a far more
realistic rodeo than even she had ever dreamed of filming.

There was one event left--the steer roping. Since this was to be the
climactic event of the rodeo it was to start with a roar and a bang, the
boys shooting revolvers into the air not only for the purpose of
exciting their already over-nervous mounts but to provoke the steers to
a fighting mood which would make even the most skillful lariat throwing
and roping a difficult undertaking.

Helen stood a little way from Tom and Ruth, tense with excitement and
interest. This was the sort of thing that thrilled Helen to her toes, as
she expressed it, and she was eager to miss no slightest detail of the
event.

Tom, too, was full of enthusiasm and also of his old wondering
admiration of Ruth. He was more like the old Tom than he had been for
many a day. Even through the general excitement Ruth was aware of this
change in his attitude and was happy because of it.

Then the scene was set, the outdoor stage was ready for its actors. A
steer, a great, angry-looking old fellow, was let loose.

With wild whoops and shouts the boys dashed forward, firing their
revolvers into the air as they went. The noise was terrific, the
excitement tense.

Ruth, exhilarated and excited, turned to look at Helen, saw the girl
throw up her hands in a startled gesture, saw her reel and fall limp to
the ground!

“Helen! Oh, Helen!” moaned Ruth.




                               CHAPTER XV

                             STARTLING NEWS


Together, Ruth and Tom rushed over to the prone figure on the ground.
They seemed to be the only ones of all that company to see the accident
to Helen.

The cowboys, engrossed in the swift action and the excitement of the
scene, all lesser sounds drowned by their wild cries and shouts, saw
nothing. The cameramen continued to grind out length after length of
film, oblivious to everything save the drama of the scene before them.

“Is she dead?” gasped Ruth to Tom, as they bent over the girl.

It was here that Ruth’s training in the Red Cross stood her in good
stead. She knelt beside Helen, took her wrist in expert fingers. Though
her face was white and drawn, her voice was calm and controlled as she
spoke to Tom.

“She’s breathing, but her pulse is weak. We must get her into the house
at once, Tom!”

“Some fool forgot to put blank cartridges in his gun,” muttered Tom,
hands clenched.

Together they got the unconscious girl to the house. Ma Gowdy met them
at the door and led them, with no waste of words, into the living room
where they laid Helen on the couch.

Blood was flowing from a wound on her forehead. Ruth spoke to the
capable old woman and Ma Gowdy disappeared kitchenward.

Meanwhile Ruth had been loosening Helen’s clothes, tearing the tie and
collar of her blouse away from her throat, chafing her hands. Ruth’s
face was almost as white as that of her chum.

“Tom, if anything has happened to her--through me----”

Just then Ma Gowdy came back with clean strips of linen and a basin of
water.

With a brief word of thanks, Ruth seized the basin of water and the
strips of linen. Ma Gowdy watched with approval while Ruth set to work
carefully bathing and cleansing the wound on Helen’s forehead.

“Only a scalp wound,” she murmured, after a moment. “Oh, I feared it
might be much, much worse!”

“How’d it happen?” asked Ma Gowdy.

“Spent bullet,” Tom responded briefly. He had taken one of his sister’s
hands in his and was rubbing it gently. “Some fool had real bullets
instead of the blank cartridges I ordered. I intend,” he added grimly,
“to find out who that fool was, and without delay.”

The scalp wound thoroughly cleansed, Ruth took one of the clean strips
of linen, dipped it in the icy cold water, and bathed Helen’s face with
it. The girl opened her eyes, looked up languidly.

Then she shivered and put a hand to her bandaged forehead.

“I feel like a wreck,” she said with a faint smile, and closed her eyes
again.

Suddenly and for no apparent reason, Ruth burst into tears. She turned
away, fumbled for a handkerchief, and the next moment felt Tom’s big one
thrust into her hand. She accepted it gratefully, wiped her eyes, and
smiled at him.

“I’m such an awful goose!” she said. “But I thought she was going to
die!”

The next moment she was beside Helen again, stroking her hair back from
her poor throbbing forehead and telling her not to talk but just to rest
until she felt stronger.

For a few moments the new patient lay quiet, seemingly content beneath
Ruth’s gentle ministrations. But suddenly she stirred restlessly and
half sat up.

Ruth pushed her back gently and Helen’s eyes flew open. She regarded her
chum resentfully.

“If you think I’m going to lie here, Ruth Fielding,” she announced with
something of her old vigor, “you are very much mistaken!”

“Behave yourself, sis.” Tom’s voice was gentle, but there was an
underlying firmness that Helen generally obeyed. “Right where you are is
where you’re going to stay--for the rest of this day, at least.”

Helen stared at them both for a moment, looked at Ma Gowdy hovering in
the background, hesitated as though contemplating rebellion, then, with
a sigh, gave in.

“What hit me?” she asked, moving her aching head restlessly. “I felt as
though somebody had touched me with a red hot poker. Then I didn’t feel
anything.”

Ruth explained and Tom declared his intention of sallying forth
immediately for the purpose of finding out what idiot carried real
cartridges in his revolver.

“You take charge of everything, Tom,” Ruth called after him. “Tell the
boys we won’t want them any more to-day. We were nearly through anyway,
and if we have to retake the last event to-morrow it won’t matter,
although I don’t think it will be necessary. I’ll stay here with Helen.”

“I don’t see why you have to stop everything on my account,” said Helen.
“You make me feel guilty, Ruthie.”

“Of course you were responsible for getting hit,” Ruth gibed. “If you
only knew,” she knelt down beside Helen and took her hand gently, “what
a relief it was to find you were not seriously hurt! For a minute I
thought--But there, we’re not going to talk about it--either of us. You
just turn over like a good girl, with your face to the wall, and get
some sleep.”

“Suppose I can’t sleep?”

“Then I’ll read to you till you do.”

Although nothing very serious came of Helen’s accident, Ruth was careful
to keep her chum in the background after that whenever there was a
shooting scene to be taken. Luckily, the cameramen, having been too
engrossed in their work to notice the accident to Helen, had kept on
grinding and the great final scene of the rodeo had not been lost.

Tom made careful inquiries and found that, as he expected, one of the
boys had forgotten to exchange real cartridges for blank ones in his
weapon. When told what his carelessness had done the young fellow was so
overwhelmed with genuine remorse that Tom considered he had received
punishment enough. That one cowboy, at least, would be very careful in
the future!

Ruth received a letter from Mr. Hammond a day or two after the accident,
announcing his intention of stopping at Golden Pass for a brief visit on
his way farther west.

Ruth was delighted at the prospect, for aside from the fact that she was
always glad to see her old friend and business associate she set a high
value on his criticism. It always gave her a feeling of content and
certainty when Mr. Hammond’s judgment backed up hers.

In the meantime, Layton Boardman had made good his promise of rapid
convalescence. He was up and around the day after the pictures of the
rodeo, hobbling a bit painfully, but otherwise appearing up to his usual
form. He had recovered, at any rate, to such an extent that he was able
to “fake” some close-up scenes before the camera. Ruth had hopes that
before long her leading man would be able to take part in two of the
important events of the rodeo that had been delayed for his benefit.

Meanwhile Ruth kept her company busy rehearsing for the small scenes.
She was anxious to finish the filming of her picture, for expenses were
mounting and salaries ate into the business bank roll alarmingly.

Came the time when everything was in readiness for the taking of the
first small scene. Ruth, flushed and weary, had rehearsed, directed,
cajoled and bullied until she felt that at last she had pulled the
company into perfect shape.

“I haven’t a bit of pep left in me,” she confessed to Tom and Helen that
night after dinner. “I feel like a wet dishrag. All I want is to get to
bed and sleep forever.”

“You’ll feel differently in the morning,” Helen assured her, while she
studied her friend with laughing, quizzical eyes. “I never saw any one
like you, Ruth Fielding. No matter how exhausted you may seem at night,
morning finds you as fresh and as hungry for new worlds to conquer as
ever. I don’t see how you manage it.”

“It’s fun--all of it,” Ruth responded, her eyes sparkling in spite of
fatigue. “Those scenes ought to go splendidly. If only,” a shadow
crossed her face, “Viola will behave herself and not try to hog all the
scenes.”

Tom, who had been lounging at the open window, turned and faced the two
girls.

“How about Boardman?” he asked. “Do you think he will be able to
disguise his limp well enough to fool the camera?”

Ruth nodded confidently.

“I’m not worrying a bit about Layton.”

“I wish,” said Tom, grim and enigmatic but sufficiently clear to both
Helen and Ruth, “I could say the same!”

Morning came, and with it, as Helen had prophesied, a return of Ruth’s
enthusiasm and vitality. She went about the preparations for the day’s
work eagerly, gathering her company about her, reminding, instructing,
abjuring.

When everything was in readiness Ruth looked about her, searching for a
familiar black-eyed face that certainly should be there.

“Where’s Viola?” she asked impatiently. “She must know we are ready to
start!”

“I’ll go and hunt her up,” Tom volunteered, but Ruth shook her head.

“I’ll go,” she said and there was a glint of something more than
determination in her eyes. “If she thinks,” she added to herself as she
went hurriedly toward the house, “that she can keep every one waiting
like this she’ll soon find her mistake. If only,” she mused half
humorously, “we directors were spared the problem of dealing with the
whims and fancies of our temperamental stars, how simple everything
would be. Anyway,” she smiled whimsically, “I’ll show this one that if I
haven’t much temperament I’ve plenty of temper!”

She reached Viola’s door, knocked on it gently. When there was no
response she knocked again. After the third attempt she tried the knob
of the door and, finding that it turned easily, opened the door and
entered the room.

What she saw there made her gasp with a swift premonition of disaster.

Dresser drawers stood open as though the result of a hasty packing.
Viola’s trunk that had stood in one corner of the room had been dragged
to the center. On the top of the trunk was a sheet of paper, scrawled
across with Viola’s windy writing.

Ruth picked up the paper and as through a blur read the words:

    “Sorry, but Tony and I are going over to Bloomberg.
    Bloomberg’s making it worth my while and I’d be a fool if I
    didn’t take my chance while it’s offered. You will have to
    get some one in my place.”




                              CHAPTER XVI

                        AN INCREDIBLE SUGGESTION


That was all. Ruth stood staring at the words dumbly while the true
meaning of them filtered into her numbed brain.

Viola had gone, jumped her contract, left at a time when she knew her
leaving would be utterly disastrous to the picture.

The thought roused the girl to a sort of wild disbelief. It wasn’t so.
It couldn’t be so! Why, it would mean the ruin not only of this picture,
but perhaps of The Fielding Film Company as well.

It was a new company, ambitious and, up to this time, almost incredibly
successful. But to make the kind of pictures Ruth wanted to make took
money--big lumps of it--and until profits began to be felt from the last
big picture, “Snowblind,” it was necessary for Ruth to trim her sails
very neatly and sail close to the wind if she hoped to avoid shipwreck.

All these thoughts and more, many more, whirled through her brain in
that brief moment of realization. She felt faint and sick with the
shock.

Viola’s note still clasped in her fingers, she went to her own room and
sat down in a chair by the window to think things out. She hoped no one
would follow just then--not even Tom. To be alone was what she
needed--to think things out!

Poor Ruth! The more she tried to think things out the more she came to
the realization that there was no way out save a disastrous one.

Even if she and Tom succeeded in getting an actress to take Viola’s
place, the undertaking would entail ruinous delay. And at this late
moment it would be hard to find any one capable of taking the lead in
Ruth’s picture who was not already bound by contract.

“Oh, it’s hopeless--utterly hopeless!” she said, at last, aloud. “I
guess fate is against you this time, Ruth Fielding. You might as well
acknowledge the defeat as gracefully as you can. Oh, I feel so tired!”
She got up and went wearily over to the window. “And how my head does
ache!”

From the window she could see a considerable distance down the road. She
noticed, in a detached and impersonal way that a conveyance of some kind
was jouncing along the dusty trail coming toward the ranch.

She watched it disinterestedly, her mind busy with its own disquieting
thoughts. Then as an automobile turned into the road that led to the
house her interest quickened.

Who could be riding to the ranch in all the dignity of a car? Almost
certainly a stranger, for the natives used horseflesh almost exclusively
as a mode of travel.

The figure in gray descending from the car was familiar. Ruth leaned
forward, the stranger turned his face toward her, and the next moment
she recognized Mr. Hammond.

Why, of course! How could she have forgotten? She had known his arrival
to be imminent, had even considered the probability that he would reach
the ranch to-day.

A wry little smile touched the corners of Ruth’s mouth. What a different
greeting she could have given him had he come an hour, yes, even half an
hour before!

She was happy then, exhilarated, excited, could have shown him about
with pride. Now!

Still watching him, she saw Mr. Hammond turn in greeting and saw that
Tom was coming toward the house on a run. They clasped hands eagerly,
for the two were friends. Ruth turned from the window, a lump in her
throat. It was dreadful to have to shatter their pleasure and happiness
with her bad news.

However, it was Ruth’s rule that if anything unpleasant was to be done,
the only sensible procedure was to do it at once and get the agony over
with.

She straightened her shoulders, instinctively bracing herself, and went
on downstairs to greet the new arrival.

They were on the porch and Mr. Hammond turned to her with genuine
eagerness.

“My dear Miss Ruth, what a pleasure to see you again. And how splendid
you look! Doesn’t she?” turning with a smile to Tom.

But Tom had been watching Ruth’s face and, sensitive as he was to all
her moods, saw instantly that something was wrong.

“What happened?” he asked quietly.

Ruth gave a queer little laugh and dropped into one of the chairs on the
porch, motioning them to do likewise.

“I hate to spoil your first minute with us, Mr. Hammond, but this is so
dreadful--” She broke off and then fairly flung her next words at Tom.
“Viola is gone. All she left is--this!” And with a little despairing
gesture she handed the note to Tom.

The latter read it and, still without speaking, passed it to Mr.
Hammond.

The latter looked concerned, took a long breath, and cleared his throat.

“Pretty bad, pretty bad,” he murmured. “Hadn’t you a contract?” he asked
of Ruth.

The girl raised her hands and let them drop again, helplessly.

“Of course. But what good does that do in a case like this? If we did
succeed in holding her she would probably repay us by giving the worst
acting she has. And the heroine’s part is a dramatic one, as you know.
Indifferent acting would completely spoil the whole picture.”

“And whatever one may think of Viola personally, one has to admit she
can act,” muttered Tom. His gaze roamed out past the ranch lands to
Golden Pass. His hands gripped the arm of his chair. “I can’t for the
life of me see any way out of this!” he added hopelessly.

“There’s always a way out of every situation,” said Mr. Hammond slowly,
a thoughtful look coming into his eyes.

“Always,” agreed Ruth. “But sometimes it is anything but a good way.”

“Oh, come, Miss Ruth,” said the president of the Alectrion Film
Corporation, “I’ve been in this game longer than you have and have
weathered many a squall, some as bad as this.”

After this speech there was silence on the porch for several minutes.

“Meanwhile,” said Ruth, rousing herself to thought of the present, “I
suppose the entire company is waiting the coming of its director--and
Viola. We’ll have to tell them, there’s no use waiting, Tom.”

“So we shall.” Tom rose heavily and, hands thrust deep in pockets,
sauntered to the piazza steps. There he turned and with an effort
grinned at Mr. Hammond.

“I’d ask you to excuse my absence if I thought you’d miss me,” he said.

“Now what did he mean by that?” asked Ruth, looking after him.

“Probably that you and I may have something to say to each other,”
laughed Mr. Hammond. “And, as far as I’m concerned,” he added, with a
change of tone that made Ruth look at him swiftly, “he’s dead right.”

Ruth said nothing, only continued to look at Mr. Hammond, her heart
beating faster. She felt that he was leading up to something. What was
it?

“You may not like what I have to say, Miss Ruth.” The man was looking
away from her now, speaking slowly, distinctly. “But I’ve got to say it
for all that.” He turned to her with his quick disarming smile. “As a
matter of fact, I think that I see a very satisfactory way out of your
difficulties.”

“You do?” Ruth gasped. She was staring at him incredulously.

“I believe it is only your modesty that keeps you from thinking of it
yourself,” went on Hammond.

“I don’t know what you mean!” Ruth was eager now, expectant. “Please,
please don’t keep me in suspense!”

“Then I won’t.”

Mr. Hammond leaned toward her. The easy smile had left his face. He
spoke in all seriousness.

“You are a scenario writer of unusual ability, Miss Ruth, and a good
director. But I think there is still another line you could excel in to
even a greater extent, should you try.”

Ruth, studying him intently, still failed to comprehend.

“Haven’t you ever thought,” the words came with a rush, “what a fine
actress you would make?”

Ruth gasped, looked at the director of the Alectrion Film Corporation as
though she thought he had gone mad.

“Me, an actress! Why, I never heard of such a thing!”

“You have faced the camera before,” Mr. Hammond reminded her.

“Oh, I know! But not in a picture like this--not as a star working
opposite an actor like Layton Boardman! I--I never--why, I couldn’t!”

“I’m quite sure you could,” asserted Mr. Hammond. Now that the thing had
been proposed, he was smilingly confident. “And I am certain the idea
will appeal to you, once you get used to it.”




                              CHAPTER XVII

                              RUTH DECIDES


As for Ruth, her head was whirling about in a fashion extremely
unsettling to one of her usual composure and steady common sense.

She, act! A leading part! Such a notion had never entered her mind until
Mr. Hammond abruptly put it there. It was flattering, this proposal of
his, but the thing was utterly impossible.

She was saved the necessity of an immediate response by the arrival of
Helen and Tom. The former was all exclamations and sympathy and flung
herself upon Ruth at once with a flood of questions.

“That terrible Viola!” she cried, with a ferocious scowl. “You were
right enough in suspecting her, Ruth. I only wish I had her here for a
few minutes! And now what will you do for a leading woman?” and she
regarded Ruth’s flushed face with commiserating eyes.

“I’ve already suggested a remedy to Miss Ruth,” said Mr. Hammond, trying
to appear casual. “But, somehow or other, she doesn’t appear to think
much of it.”

“A remedy?” repeated Tom, puzzled. “What possible remedy can there be?
Unless,” turning jocularly to Mr. Hammond, “you have brought an actress
with you in your pocket.”

“Perhaps I have merely found one up here,” returned the older man,
evidently enjoying the mystification of the two young people.

Ruth roused herself. Her face felt feverish and her hands were as cold
as ice.

“Mr. Hammond suggests,” she said, in a small voice, “that I play the
lead myself. Oh, Tom, I don’t know! What do you think?” and she fixed
her gaze on the young man’s face.

There was a moment of startled silence. It was Helen who broke into loud
exclamations of approval.

“What a wonderful idea! Why, of course, you were just made to act, Ruth!
I’ve watched you myself sometimes with that very thought in my mind.
What an excellently simple solution!”

Ruth shook her head dubiously.

“I wish I thought so,” she said. “But I’ve never seriously thought of
acting. I’ve never wanted to, in fact. At least, not after the thrill of
my part in ‘The Heart of a Schoolgirl’ passed,” and the girl smiled
slightly. “I’ve been too happy constructing vehicles for others and
directing----”

“That’s just it,” Mr. Hammond broke in. “Any one who can direct others
in as masterly a style as you can, Miss Ruth, ought certainly to be able
to direct herself.”

Ruth shook her head, eyes narrowed thoughtfully.

“I’m not a bit sure. I haven’t much faith in my acting ability. Besides,
we can’t even tell whether or not I’ll film well.”

“That can soon be settled,” said Mr. Hammond, waiving the objection
aside. “Any one with your straight, regular features is almost bound to
film well. And you’ve got the eyes--no doubt of that.”

Ruth fell silent, thinking over Mr. Hammond’s proposal, turning it over,
looking at it from every angle. He had had a great deal of experience in
the pictures, much more than she. He had picked a number of the
present-day stars. Why was it not possible that his judgment was good in
her case?

Helen chatted on excitedly over the prospect, occasionally exchanging
views with Mr. Hammond. But Tom, despite Ruth’s appeal to him, was
silent, almost morose, and after a time Ruth noticed this silence.

She looked up at him, studying his thoughtful face for a moment. Then
she touched his arm.

“You aren’t crazy over the idea, are you, Tom?” she asked, her voice a
bit wistful.

Tom looked startled. It was as though she had discovered some secret
thought that he was trying to hide.

“I haven’t had time to think of it yet,” he answered evasively; but
after a moment he turned to her on impulse: “Will you take a walk with
me, Ruth? I’d like to talk to you.”

Ruth turned to Mr. Hammond and Helen.

“Will you excuse us?” she said.

“Certainly,” replied Mr. Hammond.

Helen, however, looked a little vexed.

“Now, Ruth Fielding, don’t go off and let Tom Cameron persuade you not
to do it!” she exclaimed. “I’m crazy to see you as a screen star!”

“A flickering little star, I’m afraid,” responded Ruth dully, as she and
Tom left the porch and turned toward Golden Pass.

They walked for some distance in silence, Tom morose, hands thrust deep
in his pockets, Ruth busy with her own thoughts and willing that he
should take the lead in the conversation.

Finally the young fellow kicked viciously at a stone in his path and
vigorously voiced his protest.

“I don’t know that I like this new wrinkle at all, Ruth!” he burst out.

“What new wrinkle?” queried Ruth, frowning.

“You know very well what I’m talking about. This suggestion of Mr.
Hammond’s that you take up acting.”

Ruth was silent for a moment. Tom’s tone hurt her. Perhaps he was as
doubtful as she of her ability to act!

“I think myself that it’s rather absurd,” she said at last.

Tom stole a look at her face, then reached out suddenly and captured one
of the brown hands that hung at her side.

“Oh, hang it all, Ruth, you know I don’t mean that you can’t act! I know
you can--as I know you can do anything else that you want to, you
wonderful girl!”

Ruth was sincerely puzzled, groping in the dark.

“Then, if it isn’t that, what is it?” she demanded. “Why don’t you want
me to try this thing?” she persisted when he remained silent. “I’m
desperate, Tom, as indeed you should be too. It seems to me we ought to
welcome any chance that would help us to tide over this trouble. If by
any chance we find that Mr. Hammond is right and that I can act
acceptably, why shouldn’t I? We’ll save the salary of a leading woman,
as well as this heart-breaking delay.”

She looked so lovely to him in her earnestness that Tom’s heart melted
within him. He looked at her pleadingly.

“Can’t you see what I mean--and make allowances for my feeling? If you
take the feminine lead in your own picture you will have to play
opposite Layton Boardman.”

Of course she would have to play opposite Layton Boardman. But, for that
matter, a great many well-known actresses would have been glad of the
privilege.

“What earthly difference will it make?” she asked.

Tom groaned.

“No difference to you, I suppose,” he said, thrusting his hands savagely
into his pockets. “But maybe you think I am going to enjoy seeing that
chap hold you in his arms as he has to do in the last scene?”

Ruth was given the vision to see how hard this would be for Tom, even
though she could not sympathize with his jealousy.

“I’m sorry, Tom, but I can’t see any other way out. After all, the whole
thing is artificial, you know, just play-acting--Layton’s lovemaking
along with the rest. It’s simply in the pictures.”

It was lucky for both Ruth and Tom that the former did not understand
nor ask him to repeat the sentence he muttered under his breath. “If I
could be sure it was all just play acting!” was what he said, and there
was no mistaking the doubt in his voice.

But Ruth did not hear. She was already busy with her plans.

“Anyway,” she said, as they turned to retrace their steps to the house.
“I haven’t decided to do it yet, you know.”

If Ruth had consulted her own feelings she would have taken several days
to think over Mr. Hammond’s suggestion. As it was, she felt that every
day was precious, not only because of the salaries and other expenses
piling up but because she feared the effect delay might have on the
morale of her company. She had trained them and urged them to the
“acting pitch” and she wanted to take full advantage of their
enthusiasm.

Also, she knew Mr. Hammond could not stay at Golden Pass an unlimited
amount of time and there was the fear at the back of her mind that, Mr.
Hammond gone, she would never have the courage to follow his suggestion.

So it happened that on the second evening after his remarkable proposal
a rather timid and embarrassed and altogether unusual Ruth approached
Mr. Hammond as he stood in laughing conversation with Tom on the porch
of the ranch house.

Both turned and saw at once the excitement that made Ruth’s eyes dark
and her cheeks unusually pink. Mr. Hammond put out a kindly hand to her.

“Going to do it?” he challenged.

“Yes!” whispered Ruth, and on the word that committed her something
wonderful and breathtaking surged up within her, making her strong,
confident and glad.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                               A NEW ROLE


Ruth Fielding scarcely slept at all that night. Her thoughts went
whirling round and round in an endless circle. She was not the least
tired, only restless and eager.

On the morrow she was to face the camera in an all-important part--she,
who had directed so many others just how to do it! They were to be test
films only, to determine whether or not she would film well, whether or
not her particular type of good looks would show well on the screen.

Ruth had studied her face long and attentively the evening before,
studied it at every possible angle, impersonally, critically, as though
it had been a perfectly strange face to her. As a matter of fact, it
might almost have been a stranger’s face from the number of surprising
things Ruth found out about it. She had been too engrossed all through
the years in her play and work to think much of her looks one way or
another. Last night she had found out that Ruth Fielding’s face was
something more than a good practical face. It was, she had to admit it,
even though she blushed in the dark over her lack of modesty, an
unusually attractive and pleasing face. Some, she thought, still
impersonally, might call it handsome.

It was a surprising, but extremely satisfying, discovery.

Having finished with her face, Ruth’s thoughts veered to Tom and Helen
and the different manner in which the two had accepted her decision the
night before.

Helen had been delighted, enthusiastic, but, Ruth could not help
feeling, a wee bit envious. For where is the girl, even one engaged and
in love, who does not in her heart cherish an ambition to be a movie
star? But on the whole Helen had been very satisfactory, had kissed her
chum and hugged her and predicted great things for her future.

Tom had been different. This time he had not even attempted to hide his
disapproval, his wretched jealousy, she thought resentfully. Had Mr.
Hammond understood the reason for Tom’s detached, glum mood? She
wondered, and finally decided that he could not very well have helped
doing so.

Well, defiantly, she would have to learn to go ahead and do as she
thought best whether Tom approved or not. Why should she care, anyway?

But even at the moment she knew that she cared very, very much indeed
what Tom thought.

“If he would only be sensible! If he would only behave himself!” she
whispered to herself.

At this period Ruth fell asleep and awoke a scant two hours later to
find the sun shining in the window.

Even then she did not feel tired. Her chief worry was lest she had
overslept. She got up, looked at her wrist watch, and reached for her
clothes all in the same instant.

A chuckle from the bed made her turn toward it. Helen was awake,
regarding her with lazy, laughing eyes.

“Good morning, Star,” said the young lady, adding whimsically: “How does
it feel?”

Ruth went over and sat down on the side of the bed, putting a cold hand
over Helen’s warm one.

“I--I’m just scared to death!” she confessed.

“Looking as you do this morning,” returned Helen, looking her chum over
impartially and critically, “you have no earthly right to be scared of
anything.”

Ruth laughed and again reached for her clothes.

“You’re a darling, Helen. But see that you stand by me to-day. I sort of
feel I’ll need all the backing I can get!”

But there were so many things for Ruth to decide, so many plans to make,
that she forgot all about being selfconscious or frightened.

The tests were taken right after breakfast and it seemed as if everybody
on the ranch turned out to see them. Even the cowboys were interested,
sensing the dramatic possibilities of the event.

There was not one of them who did not like and admire Ruth personally
and there were several who cherished even warmer emotions in regard to
the charming author-director. That these emotions did not reach the
stage of audible expression was due entirely to Ruth’s manner. Pleasant,
friendly, she always was, but beyond that she would not go--and no one
else dared go.

Ruth went through the various tests with a skill and ease that amazed
herself. She had not realized before how much she had learned of the
difficult art of acting in her capacity as scenario writer and director.
But what her modesty failed to point out to her was that she was a born
actress as well. Before she had been posing five minutes every one on
the lot but Ruth could see that.

Layton Boardman was there, watching Ruth with a queer expression in his
narrowed eyes. No one could tell whether he was criticizing or admiring.

But when, the tests over, Ruth made her way through a throng of
onlookers, Layton Boardman stepped over to her and held out his hand.

“My congratulations,” he said in a low tone, his gray eyes holding hers.
“But--I am congratulating myself even more!”

For a moment Ruth could not draw her eyes from Boardman’s. There was
something heady, intoxicating in the actor’s spontaneous praise. Then
she realized that he was still holding her hand and drew it quickly
away.

“You said that very nicely,” she said lightly, to cover her confusion,
and moved on.

Tom had not missed the little interchange. He was in a savage mood as he
turned away from the ranch house and started toward the hills.

What was the use of adding his congratulations to the chorus of Ruth’s
admirers? he asked himself. She would miss neither him nor his praise.
He thought of Boardman and clenched his hands. Time enough to get even
with the fellow!

Meanwhile, Ruth was glad enough to escape to the comparative privacy of
the ranch house. She had never felt so appallingly conspicuous in her
life and, not being used to it, the experience rather staggered her.

Nevertheless she was excited, exalted, in a mood for almost anything to
happen.

In the living room Helen flung her arms about her chum and kissed her.

“Ruthie, you were marvelous! Just think of all the time you have been
wasting your talents!”

Ruth shook her head and pushed Helen gently from her.

“You are all combining to spoil me,” she said. “What I need now is a
clear head, if I ever had one in my life.”

“I’ll wager there’s nothing the matter with your head, Miss Ruth,” said
Mr. Hammond, smiling genially down upon her. “I’ve never yet found
anything wrong with it.”

“There has to be a beginning to everything,” Ruth reminded him gravely,
and then they all laughed together, like excited and gleeful children.
Though under Ruth’s laughter was a little ache as she wondered where Tom
was.

“But seriously,” said Ruth, when their laughter had subsided, “I feel
the need of good and well-seasoned advice--I feel it badly. What I want
to know,” she turned to Mr. Hammond, “is whether you know of any one I
could get for a moderate salary to come down here and give me the points
on acting my inexperience so badly needs. I know it is asking a good
deal,” she added anxiously, “but I do feel that I must have the
advantage of some one else’s experience.”

“That was the very thing I intended to discuss with you,” said Mr.
Hammond. He drew up a chair close to the couch on which the two girls
were sitting and fixed Ruth with an earnest eye. “I know the very woman
for your purpose,” he announced.

Ruth leaned forward, her eyes shining.

“I believe you must have Aladdin’s lamp with you, Mr. Hammond,” she said
whimsically. “Every time you rub it a wish comes true.”

“I wish that were always so,” he responded, smiling. “But if I can make
any wishes of yours come true, I’m very happy.”

“About this woman you speak of,” Ruth prompted eagerly. “Do I know her?”

“You undoubtedly have heard of her,” Mr. Hammond responded. “Every one
in the picture world has. She served during the World War with the Red
Cross and was twice decorated for bravery----”

“Oh, I know,” Ruth interrupted breathlessly. “You are speaking of Edith
Lang, aren’t you? And she was wounded in the leg while ministering to
wounded soldiers behind the lines, wasn’t she?”

Mr. Hammond nodded gravely.

“And you may recollect that later blood poisoning set in and she had to
lose her leg.”

Helen uttered an exclamation of pity.

“How terrible--and for an actress, too! What does she do now?”

“What she can,” the man responded. “She can play a character part now
and then--helpless invalids mostly where no action is required of her.”

“Not very inspiring,” said Ruth soberly.

“Exactly. And not very well paid either. But, for all that, Edith Lang
is an excellent actress. Knows all the tricks of the trade and has a
splendid thinking apparatus, as well.”

“Do you suppose she would be willing to come out here to coach me in the
tricks of the trade, as you say?” Ruth queried breathlessly.

“I happen to know,” returned the other with decision, “that Edith Lang
would be willing to do almost anything just now for the sake of steady
occupation. She’d jump at the chance.”

Ruth regarded her kind friend eagerly.

“Mr. Hammond, you are wonderful,” she said. “You make me ashamed of my
own stupidity. I will send for Edith Lang at once!”




                              CHAPTER XIX

                              A NEW FRIEND


Ruth carried out her determination to send for Edith Lang, the crippled
actress, immediately. She knew the reputation the screen star had
enjoyed before her accident, and she felt, with Mr. Hammond, that Miss
Lang was the very one to give her those points on acting which she felt
were so necessary.

It was only a day or two after that that Ruth received an answering
telegram in which Edith Lang announced that she was “on the way.”

This welcome news, coupled with the information that the camera tests of
herself had been a great success and that she filmed unusually well,
served to encourage Ruth immensely. Had Tom only been more sympathetic
she felt she would have been perfectly happy in spite of the heavy cost
of the delay that Viola’s defection caused.

Edith Lang appeared promptly on the dot and was met at the station by
the rickety car--of which, by the way, Headwaters Ranch was inordinately
proud.

Ruth’s whole company turned out to meet the crippled actress on her
arrival at the ranch, eager to give a cordial welcome to a gifted but
unfortunate fellow artist.

When the car rattled up the drive and Edith Lang descended, those who
waited to welcome her were surprised to see how easily she carried
herself. They had expected to see some one on crutches.

But Edith Lang walked on two feet, and though one of them was artificial
the only thing that attested to the fact was an almost imperceptible
limp and a certain stiffness in her movements.

What they did not know was that only pride kept Edith Lang from hobbling
painfully and that there were times when what was left of her leg pained
so torturingly that not even pride could keep her on her feet.

She had been a beautiful woman, and was pretty still, although suffering
had etched lines about her eyes and mouth and given her a slightly
pinched, old look.

She smiled upon Ruth, though her face was white with the fatigue of the
journey.

“I am Ruth Fielding,” said the girl, as she slipped an arm within the
older woman’s and led her authoritatively toward the house. “My people
have turned out in force to meet you, but we are going to save all
introductions until later when you have rested.”

“How kind you are, my dear--and attractive,” said Edith Lang, with a
searching glance into Ruth’s flushed face. “I have heard much of you.
You are justly famous. I have seen your picture, ‘Snowblind.’ It is
perfect.”

All this, while Ruth led her guest into the big front room of the ranch
house and settled her in the most comfortable chair it contained.

This praise of “Snowblind” from so real an authority was sweet indeed to
Ruth. She felt tremendously drawn to Edith Lang.

Helen had been hovering around in the background and now Ruth drew her
forward and presented her to the newcomer.

“My very best friend,” was Ruth’s laughing introduction. “And soon to be
married. Meaning, of course, the end of our good times together!”

Miss Lang smiled as she took off her hat and smoothed up her bright
hair.

“Marriage means the end--and the beginning of many things,” she said.
Before she could continue Mr. Hammond came into the room, hand
outstretched in cordial greeting.

The two were good friends, as was attested by their manner toward each
other. Mr. Hammond settled down immediately for what he termed “a good
old chat.” But Ruth, seeing how very tired the newcomer looked,
interposed firmly with the dictum that Miss Lang must have food and rest
before being interviewed on any matter whatsoever.

Although the actress laughingly protested, Ruth could see that she was
secretly relieved.

In the room assigned to her--the room deserted by Viola and now divested
of every reminder of her, the trunks, various hat boxes and other
luggage having been sent for and carried away--Miss Lang slipped into a
pretty blue dressing gown and lay down upon the bed while Ruth drew the
shades partly down to shut out the glare of the afternoon sun.

When the girl went over to the bed to see if there was anything more she
could do for her crippled guest, Edith Lang caught the girl’s hand in
her own and smiled up at her.

“You are a dear girl,” she said, “and very considerate of one--less
fortunate.” She closed her eyes for a moment, then opened them again to
look at Ruth with an expression of lively interest.

“I have been studying you,” she announced, “and I want to say, my dear,
that I hardly need see you act to tell that you can. Besides good looks
and a pretty figure, you have brains, which, as you very well know, are
at a premium among our beautiful stars of the day. In fact,” with a warm
pressure of Ruth’s hand, “I believe I am going to enjoy my new work
thoroughly!”

Ruth left Edith Lang’s presence, encouraged and inspired. Besides the
pleasant things that had been said to her, Ruth felt that she had found
a genuine friend in the actress.

Nor was this belief weakened in the busy days that followed. The
friendship between Ruth and Miss Lang grew and strengthened while the
work of picture-making went ahead with marvelous rapidity.

Having written the story and created her heroine, Ruth could throw
herself into the part with more fervor and realism than would be
possible for any one else. While she was acting, Ruth was not Ruth
Fielding, but Ann Marks, suffering with the girl, fighting for her love,
as the heroine fought. But in spite of this ability to lose herself in
the part of the heroine, Ruth was honest enough to confess to herself
that the criticism and guidance of Edith Lang were invaluable.

There were times when she felt awkward and embarrassed, was not quite
sure how to carry her hands or where to place her feet.

At such times Edith Lang would call to her:

“You have an apron on, Miss Fielding. Remember, you are a little
mountain girl, nervous and excited. Twist the corners of the apron--not
too much--just enough to register mental distress. That’s right--great,
my dear. Face the camera more directly. Remember you must get your
emotions across to the public. Fine!”

Or, at another time:

“You have just heard that your lover has been wounded by the outlaws,
perhaps fatally. You forget yourself utterly in your despair. Can you
cry? Good! Oh, my dear, that is wonderful! You have art. Now your lover
suddenly appears. He is wounded, but not fatally. You run to him,
smiling through your tears. Do not keep your back turned too
long--remember your back tells little--turn toward the camera--closer,
closer----”

And so on from day to day, until Ruth, becoming experienced in her turn,
came to know instinctively what was the right thing to do.

“But I never could have done anything without you,” she told Miss Lang
gratefully one day. “There are so many things to learn!”

Miss Lang patted her hand, laughing.

“You are an apt pupil, my dear, and one it is a pleasure to teach,” she
said.

Finally all the smaller scenes were shot. It remained then to make
arrangements for the big moment in her picture--the avalanche.

Mr. Hammond had lingered on long past his intention, fascinated by
Ruth’s work in her new rôle. He accompanied her each day to location,
watched her, and, with Miss Lang, advised and criticized where criticism
was needed.

Ruth, in love with her new work, drank in these criticisms eagerly and
profited by them so quickly that both her critics were delighted.

Meanwhile, Tom had an amusing little adventure all his own--at least, it
would have been amusing if he could have kept it to himself.

It all happened in the first place because he was worried about Ruth.
She was doing some pretty dangerous acts in company with “that Boardman
chap.” In spite of Tom’s respect for the westerner’s prowess on
horseback, he had not reached the point where he could watch with any
degree of calm a scene in which the actor was supposed to swoop Ruth up
before him on his horse and race with her at thrilling speed along a
narrow ledge where a single swerve or misstep would mean almost certain
disaster.

Tom had pleaded with Ruth to let some one double for her in this scene.
But the girl was now thoroughly interested in her rôle and would not
hear to following his suggestion.

“They would all think I was afraid,” Ruth pointed out to him. “Besides,
there isn’t the slightest danger, Tommy.”

Since Tom could not agree with her on this point he decided to take a
tramp into the hills while this scene was being shot.

“I can’t keep her from risking her life if she wants to,” he told
himself as he shouldered his rifle and started afoot along the narrow,
rocky trail. “But I don’t have to stay and watch the awful deed.”

Tom knew in a general way whither he was bound. The spot had been a
favorite of his from the moment he had discovered it--a great bare rock
that jutted out above Golden Pass and commanded an awe-inspiring view of
mountains and ravines beyond.

However, Tom found that the gorgeous view only reminded him the more of
Ruth and the perilous scene she was to take part in.

So he deserted the rock and made his way into the shadowy woods, there
to wander and explore until it should be time again to return to the
ranch.

The mysterious sights and sounds of the forest fascinated him, drew him
farther and farther into the heart of it until he came to a narrow
little path, trampled hard by the feet of countless denizens of the
forest.

“Bet this leads to a water hole,” Tom said to himself. “Wish Ruth was
with me--she never gets time off from her acting to enjoy herself any
more.”

He kept on along the path and presently saw the glimmer of water through
the trees.

“The old water hole,” he told himself triumphantly, and the next moment
stepped out upon the edge of it. As he did so something rose from the
farther bank and slipped quietly and stealthily into the woods.

“It was a deer, I bet,” Tom muttered. A gleam came into his eyes and he
raised his gun, only to lower it again despondently. “Closed season,” he
warned himself. “Anyway, it might be any sort of animal. I didn’t get a
real look at it.”

The spot was picturesque in the extreme and Tom thought that if he
stayed around for a while and made himself seem only a part of the
scenery he might see something interesting. Judging from the hard ground
of the path, many wild creatures must frequent this mountain pool. Tom
thought, with a grin, that it would be fun to watch these denizens of
the woodland when they did not know themselves observed.

He found a splendid post of observation--a large flat rock backed by a
tree against which he might rest weary shoulders if he wished.

Tom settled himself comfortably and waited.

For a long time nothing stirred about the pool. Evidently the woodland
folk were still a bit uneasy about the presence of a man creature.
However, as Tom remained very still they gained confidence and one by
one stole through the heavy underbrush to drink hastily, cast a wary
glance in Tom’s direction and scuttle back to the safety of the woods.
Once a fox made its appearance and Tom’s fingers tightened instinctively
on his rifle where it lay at his side upon the rock.

However, no other movement betrayed his presence and the fox appeared to
take no notice of him. It drank lazily, insolently, then turned away and
disappeared in the direction from which it had come.

“What a fine neck-piece you’d make for some one, old boy,” Tom mused.
“Just the same, your coat will be thicker and finer when the winter
comes.”

Wearied by his cramped position, Tom was about to get up when a noise in
the woods behind him caused him to change his mind.

Something was crashing heavily through the underbrush--beast or man, Tom
could not tell which. But he sat very still, fingers coiled about his
rifle.




                               CHAPTER XX

                               NOT ACTING


The next moment Tom felt an uncomfortable chill creep along his spine.
His jumping nerves commanded action, but his common sense said, “Don’t
move!”

Breaking through the underbrush not six feet from where he sat rigid
upon the rock, blundered the largest, brownest and most dangerous
looking bear Tom Cameron had ever seen!

Lightning thoughts raced through Tom’s head. This was not his first
experience with bears, and he felt that this one might not attack him
unless he himself showed fight. Even in that case, the bear would
probably rather retreat than advance. Almost instantly Tom made his
decision. He would stay where he was, as motionless as possible, and
trust to the chance that the bear would not observe him.

It took bravery, not so much to make the decision, as to act upon it.
Tom’s instinct was to jump to his feet, seize his rifle and give battle,
counting on the element of surprise to vanquish his enemy. It required
every ounce of self-control he possessed to force himself to sit still
and watch that bear.

Evidently the animal had not yet discovered the presence of his enemy.
The wind, luckily, was blowing away from Tom. Then, too, it soon became
apparent that the bear was in playful mood. Startled as he was, Tom had
an impulse to laugh at the absurd antics of the huge creature.

It waddled off first to the borders of the pool where it studied its
reflection as intently as any pretty girl might have done.

Afterward it posed, cocking its head to one side and raising a clumsy,
vicious-nailed paw.

“One blow from that--” thought Tom and cut the thought off short. He
watched the movements of the beast with fascinated attention.

But the bear still took no notice of him. Slipping off the bank into the
shallow water, it bathed and wallowed luxuriously, ducking its head
under water and puffing for all the world like some fat man short of
breath.

His toilette completed, he lumbered up upon the bank again and rolled
over on the soft moss.

“That’s his bath towel,” thought Tom, still in a detached way as though
he were a spectator at a play, safely established in an orchestra seat.
“Whew, he’s bound to see me now!”

However, bruin either did not see the man sitting so motionless on the
rock or he chose to ignore him. But after rolling about on the ground
for some time, he got up and started directly toward Tom!

Again the young fellow felt the tingling along his spine, again his
fingers closed about the barrel of his gun.

But the bear wore an amiable, benignant expression. He waddled clumsily
forward and lay down on the farther end of Tom’s rock!

It was a huge rock, to be sure, and several feet still separated the
young man from the bear, but to Tom’s excited fancy that rock was
becoming altogether too crowded for comfort!

Gently his fingers lifted the gun, stealthily and slowly he started to
slip off his end of the rock. Suddenly every nerve cried out and he
sprang to his feet with a jerk.

A voice had reached him, a familiar voice.

“Tom! Oh, Tom! where are you?”

At the same time bruin sat up, blinking sleepily. Tom saw Ruth coming
toward him through the trees, but was too late to signal her to retreat.

“I’ve had a fine time finding you!” she cried, reaching his side. Then,
turning slowly to follow the direction of his rigid glance, “Tom! what
_have_ you got here----”

The words died in her throat as the bear, disturbed at this intrusion,
muttered fretfully and took a step toward them.

“Stand still,” Tom commanded in a whisper. “He doesn’t want to fight.”

If Tom had raised his gun then the temper of the animal would have
changed. As it was, the steady stare of two pairs of human eyes
bewildered him. He muttered fretfully deep down in his throat and,
turning, ambled sullenly off into the woods.

“Since when,” demanded Ruth unsteadily, as the crashing noise of the
bear’s retreat died off in the distance, “did you turn bear-trainer,
Tom?”

But Tom was not inclined to laugh just then. With Ruth sharing his
danger, the woods all at once seemed dark and sinister.

“Let’s get out of this,” he muttered. When they reached the sunlit trail
again, they laughed together, however, as Tom recounted his queer
experience and imitated the antics of the coquettish bear.

“Poor old thing,” she said drolly. “He was just out for a nice bath and
a nap and you spoiled it all. Wish we could have taken a picture of it,”
she said, with professional regret.

“Which reminds me,” said Tom, “to ask how you happened to find your way
into that deep, dark heart of the woods.”

“I was looking for you,” the girl admitted. “I wanted to consult you
about some details for the avalanche. Some one said you had come up this
way, so I followed you.”

“That’s a dangerous thing to do, Ruth,” said Tom anxiously. “This isn’t
a zoölogical park, you know, with the wild animals caged up.”

“I’m perfectly safe,” said Ruth, patting the neat little revolver that
hung at her belt. “You forget that, for the present at least, I am a
cowgirl, Tom!”




                              CHAPTER XXI

                            THE NARROW LEDGE


Little was discussed in the days that followed but the avalanche.

It was to be a tremendous spectacle and a great deal of preparation was
necessary to insure an artistic filming of it.

Ruth and Tom had found what they considered an ideal location--a
mountain, rising almost perpendicularly skyward, and at its base a few
squat, rambling little cabins.

Ruth had been forced to pay a ridiculously high sum for these cabins.
But Tom and she figured that to erect others, no matter how flimsily
built, would cost even more. Fortunately, not all the cabins were
occupied. Had they been, the Fielding Film Company never could have
afforded the price. Some had been deserted long since and were falling
to pieces. As Helen laughingly declared, it would be “a mercy to put
them out of the way.”

In the picture, bandits were supposed to descend upon the little mining
town, robbing, pillaging, and, after a strenuous fight, capturing the
heroine, Ann Marks, and her handsome cowboy lover.

After binding the pair securely, the bandits, alarmed at the sound of
pursuit, were to fling their victims into one of the deserted cabins and
make off.

As they dash about the side of the mountain the avalanche, tons of dirt
and rock from the mountainside, overtakes them, burying them beneath its
weight and wrecking most of the cabins.

Of course the bandits are to be engulfed by the landslide while the
cabin in which the lovers were imprisoned would miraculously escape the
full force of the avalanche. Though partly buried beneath débris, the
roof of the cabin holds and the hero and heroine, severing their bonds,
are at last able to struggle through to sunlight and safety.

Of course Ruth and Boardman were not to remain in the cabin during the
avalanche. These, as well as Tom and the rest of the company who were to
be imperiled by the landslide, had planned to take refuge in a cave at
the foot of the mountain. This cave was so situated that it would escape
the débris of the avalanche.

Then one day, when everything was almost ready, Ruth had an accident
that came near to putting her out of the reckoning entirely.

She and Helen, with Boardman and Tom, had climbed halfway up the
mountainside to inspect the little shack where the dynamite was stored
and to give last minute directions for the preparation of the landslide.

“All the dynamite that isn’t used for the avalanche must be removed as
far as possible from the scene before the landslide takes place,” Ruth
observed.

“I’ve already given orders to that effect,” Tom assured her, and the
girl squeezed his arm affectionately. Dear old Tom, always so
dependable.

Then it was that Ruth, in an impulsive moment, precipitated disaster
upon herself.

She stepped out upon the little ledge of rock and soft dirt from which
one might stare down at the precipitous slope of the mountain.

They had come by a circuitous route, a little path that wound snakelike,
clinging close to the mountainside. But at this point, rocky and
menacing, the mountain seemed to forbid descent.

“I wonder if any one could get down from here,” she said curiously. “I
declare, I’d like to try!”

At the moment the soft earth crumbled treacherously from beneath her
feet! Ruth flung herself backward--but too late. Before any one could
reach her, Ruth was gone--had disappeared completely over the lip of the
ledge.

Tom sprang forward, flung out his arm to catch the girl. But the whole
thing, the terrible, incredible thing, happened so swiftly that he
missed his grip and felt only her dress slide tantalizingly through his
fingers.

Now, grim-lipped, he knelt and peered over the ledge.

Behind him Helen, terror-stricken, was wailing:

“Ruth! Ruth! She’ll be killed on those rocks!”

“Keep still!” Tom commanded roughly. He looked up to see Boardman at his
side. It needed only a glance to tell him that Boardman had seen also.

Ruth hung there, not ten feet below, grasping the slight trunk of a
sapling, feeling for a foothold with her feet on the smooth, treacherous
rock.

Tom’s mind worked quickly. Only a few feet below Ruth was a ledge of
rock. It was only about two feet wide; still it was enough, provided one
jumping from a height of fifteen feet could judge the distance
accurately and keep his balance once he landed.

“Hold fast!” he called to Ruth, praying that she would have strength to
hold her weight until he could get to her. “It’s all right, girl. Catch
hold with your other hand. I’m coming down.”

Layton Boardman, behind him, had seen what Tom was about about to do and
was protesting.

“It’s a crazy stunt! You’ll kill yourself, man!”

Tom gave him a look.

“Maybe,” he said briefly. “Meanwhile, go for a rope. Get help here as
quickly as you can. Hurry.”

Boardman stopped no more to argue. There was something in Tom’s tone
that compelled obedience.

He turned and ran down the trail they had traversed only a short time
before. Helen, clinging to a tree, shaking, white, called to Tom.

“If I can do anything----”

“You can pray,” said Tom softly, and let himself over the lip of the
ledge.

Ruth was still clinging to the tree, gazing up at him, wide-eyed,
terrified.

“Tom, don’t do it! You will kill yourself! I’m all right! I can hold on
till some one gets a rope. Tom! Go back! Go back!”

“Save your strength, Ruth. I’m coming.”

With a prayer in his heart, Tom lowered himself till he hung only by his
fingers to the treacherous ledge. There was a tree, a sapling like that
to which Ruth clung, close to that ledge fifteen feet below. Would he be
able to grasp that? Upon that possibility, he knew, his fate hung, and
Ruth’s as well.

The girl could never sustain her weight until Boardman returned with a
rope and help. Her fingers would become numb, gradually slip their
hold----

Tom allowed himself no further time for reflection. Swinging his body
away from the cliff, he let go his hold, felt himself dropping! Would he
reach the ledge? Could he keep his balance?

The sharp edges of rocks, of rough earth, tore at him, raking his hands
and face, but he scarcely felt them.

Down, down, and then a jarring thump that made him reel dizzily
backward. With all the force of his body he flung himself forward and
reached out desperately.

The tree--the tree--his feet were slipping--he had it--the blessed feel
of the rough bark under his fingers!

Tom drew himself against the face of the cliff and clung there for a
moment to regain his breath.

The worst, the hardest part, was still to come. And it must come soon,
he knew that.

Even in the moment that he rested, Ruth’s voice called down to him.

“Tom! Tom, are you all right?”

“All right, dear. Can you hold on a minute more?”

“I--I guess so,” Ruth’s voice was not so confident as it had been. “My
fingers--I’m afraid I’m losing my grip.”

“All right! Now listen carefully and I’ll tell you what to do. I’m right
beneath you, Ruth. See--I can touch your foot. Rest it a moment in my
hand--that’s the girl! Now, when you drop, keep close to the side of the
cliff. Let yourself go. I’ll catch you.”

“Let go! Oh, Tom, I can’t!” Ruth’s voice sounded breathless, faint.
“That terrible drop!”

“You’ve got to do it, Ruth. There’s no other way. I’ll catch you.”

“All right!” came valiantly and in a louder tone. “Are you ready?”

“Ready!” replied Tom, and braced himself.




                              CHAPTER XXII

                           A TEST OF COURAGE


It was an extreme test of courage to do what Ruth Fielding did then. To
let oneself go blindly, trusting to another’s strength and skill to save
one from a terrible death, takes bravery of the highest.

Perhaps if any one but Tom had been waiting for her there below Ruth
could not have done what she did. But it was Tom--Tom, who, she knew,
would give his life for her, who was always there when she needed him.

Without daring to let herself think longer Ruth unwound her numbed
fingers from about the trunk of the tree and let herself drop.

Tom saw her coming, leaned outward, caught her as she fell. For a moment
they swung out above that dizzy depth, only the strength of Tom’s arm
between them and disaster.

Ruth did her best, throwing her weight forward, scrambling for a
foothold on the ledge. By a superhuman effort Tom regained his balance
and his sure foothold on the ledge. He drew Ruth to him, holding her
reassuringly.

“We’re all right, now,” he said huskily in her ear. “That was luck.”

“Not luck!” panted Ruth. She was feeling faint and sick with the
reaction and it was only by a tremendous effort that she kept herself
upright, even with the strength of Tom’s arm about her. “It wasn’t
luck,” she managed to say. “It was just plain pluck, Tommy-boy. No one
else would have thought of doing what you did.”

Something in the tone of the girl’s voice caused Tom to look at her
sharply.

“Do you feel sick?” he asked, for her face was ashen white.

Ruth managed a smile through tight lips.

“A little dizzy,” she admitted. “I don’t dare look down or up.”

“Don’t, then. Shut your eyes.”

Ruth shook her head.

“That only makes it ten times worse.” Then in a minute as she saw him
looking anxiously at her, she added: “I’m all right, Tom. Don’t worry
about me.”

Tom replied cheerfully that he was not worried--that he could bet on her
always.

But in his heart he was anxious enough. The pallor of Ruth’s face was
enough to show her condition. If she should faint there on that narrow
ledge of rock how long could he hold her with only the sapling to cling
to, and his left hand at that?

Well, he decided grimly, if worst came to worst, they would go
together--that was some comfort.

He cast an anxious glance aloft. Boardman should be back by this time.
It seemed ages that they had been clinging there.

Tom felt Ruth sag against him and looked down at her again. She was
fighting with all her strength the waves of nausea and faintness that
threatened to engulf her.

“Hold on, Ruth, just a minute or two more. Boardman’s sure to get here
soon.”

He looked up again and saw Helen peering over at them. She was lying
prone on the ground, afraid otherwise to approach that perilous ledge.

“They’re coming!” she cried to Tom’s questioning, upturned face. “I can
hear them coming up the trail. Can you hold on, Tommy-boy?”

“Sure!” Tom’s voice was hopeful, even buoyant. “Did you hear what she
said?” he added to the half-fainting girl at his side. “They’ll be here
in a jiffy now.”

Ruth lifted her head and tried to smile.

“Good!” was all she said, but Tom knew that there was plenty of the
fighting spirit left in her yet.

It was a matter of only a few minutes before they heard excited voices
overhead, Helen’s quick answers, Boardman’s curt commands.

Looking up, Tom saw that the actor held a lariat in his hands and was
twirling it with practiced skill. The next moment a loop of rope
descended and settled gently about Ruth’s shoulders.

“Under your arms, Ruth. Here, I’ll help,” cried Tom.

Between them they managed to get the loop of the rope beneath Ruth’s
arms.

“All right?” called Boardman.

“All right!” responded Tom, and the actor drew taut the noose, fitting
the rope snugly.

A dozen hands added their strength to Boardman’s, and in a moment Ruth
felt herself drawn over the edge of the precipice--found her feet once
more on solid ground.

“Tom!” she stammered, as Helen’s arms went eagerly about her.

“He’s all right. We’ll get him next,” promised Boardman.

A moment more and Tom was standing, shaken but smiling, among them while
a dozen admiring cowboys shook him by the hand or pounded him on the
back in admiration of his nerve.

“You sure was flirtin’ with the undertaker that time, mister,” one of
them remarked, as Tom, feeling very sheepish and not in the least like
the hero they were trying to make of him, pushed himself through the
group to where Helen was standing with her arm about Ruth.

“Feeling better?” he asked the latter.

“Ever so much!” she responded, but Tom saw that she was still fighting
nausea and faintness. Without a word he caught Ruth up in his arms and
strode with her down the mountain trail.

A short distance within the woods they found horses tethered to the
trees, evidently the mounts of the cowboys who had ridden with Layton
Boardman to the rescue.

Tom, unasking, appropriated one of these, placed Ruth in the saddle, and
swung himself up behind her.

“It isn’t Layton Boardman this time,” he could not resist saying as Ruth
rested contentedly against his big shoulder.

“You were wonderful, Tom!” she said. “I’ll never forget what you
did--never!”

All Headwaters Ranch was roused by Ruth’s accident and Tom’s spectacular
method of rescue. Every one visited the spot, examined the tiny ledge,
and wondered how any one could drop to it and retain his balance. Each
one was quite sure he could not have performed the feat. Needless to
say, Tom’s heroism raised him immensely in the estimation of every one.
As for Ruth, she never approached that spot again without a reminiscent
shudder.

The girl had scant opportunity to dwell on her narrow escape, however,
for as the day approached for the staging of the avalanche innumerable
details had to be attended to, the scene rehearsed again and again.

At last everything was in readiness--dynamite had been planted, extras
well instructed. To-morrow the scene would be taken--the great, the
climactic scene of the whole drama. Every one was on edge, excited,
keyed to a high nervous tension.

Tom, knowing the inevitable danger to the actors in a thing of the sort,
went around with an anxious frown on his brow, at times stopping to
exhort Ruth to be careful.

“Of course I’ll be careful, Tom,” she said impatiently at last. “But,
really, it’s foolish of you to worry so. There isn’t a mite of actual
danger.”

“Just the same,” he told her, “I’ll be pretty thankful when to-morrow is
safely over.”

To-morrow came and with it the promise of another fine, sunshiny day.
Ruth’s entire company was on tiptoe with expectation.

As soon as possible after breakfast Ruth ordered the company out on
location. They went gladly, excitedly, catching something of Ruth’s
intense enthusiasm, resolved to back up their “leading lady” to the
limit.

It was a great party that started into the mountains that sparkling
morning. Miss Lang rode in state in the ranch flivver. Mr. Hammond, who
had prolonged his stay out of all reason, cantered gallantly at her
side.

On horseback, Ruth, with Helen and Tom on either side of her, led the
rest of her company, including the cameramen, while in the rear a
veritable army of cowboys--those to be used as extras in the scene and
others who came along merely out of curiosity--zipped and hurrahed along
the dusty road.

Upon reaching location it took but a short time for the cameramen to set
their cameras in position and the company to get ready for spirited
action.

“I have a feeling,” said Ruth to Boardman, as she spurred her horse
toward the group of cabins at the foot of the mountain, “that something
tremendous is going to happen this morning--a picture that will give
points to the best one I ever made!”

Layton Boardman smiled.

“It’s in the air!” he agreed, and galloped after her.

At the word of command from the film director, the little band of
desperate bandits descended upon the unsuspecting mining town and
cameras started to grind busily. The “big doings” were on!

Everything went exactly as it had been planned and the fight before the
cabins was spirited and realistic. Then the great moment was at hand! A
close-up had been taken of Ruth and Boardman bound hand and foot in the
deserted cabin. The next moment--the camera having finished with
them--they had slipped their bonds and were dashing with the rest of
Ruth’s company toward the safety of the mountain cave.

The time for the avalanche was at hand!




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                              BURIED ALIVE


Tom had accompanied Shepley, to help him direct the scene of the fight
with the bandits. Tom’s advice on fighting tactics was always worth
listening to and Shepley was glad of any assistance he might give in
handling the extras. There was another point to be gained--and this was
quite a personal one with Tom--he would be with Ruth during the course
of the avalanche.

Now he seized her arm and half-carried, half-pushed her into the cave.
The place was pretty well filled when they got there and Ruth was more
than ever glad that the cave was a large one.

There was a moment of tense excitement. One of the boys put his hands
over his ears as though to shut out the expected sound of exploding
dynamite.

Ruth tucked her hand within Tom’s arm. The boy put his big one over it,
holding her fingers firmly.

“Aren’t you glad I’m here?” he whispered. “Honest?”

“Honest, I am,” she whispered in return.

The next moment it came--what they had been waiting for with held
breath. A sharp explosion, and the rumble and roar of dislodged rock and
dirt starting on its downward slide.

“Here it comes!”

“Oh boy, I wish we were out there with the cameramen to watch it!” some
one yelled.

Then, suddenly, cutting off the exclamations of those within the cave,
came a second explosion, so loud, so deafening, that the first might
have been the popping of a child’s toy pistol.

It seemed as though the whole mountain shook, rocked on its base. There
was a rending, tearing, grinding sound as tons of the dislodged
mountainside swept downward to the valley.

All those in the cave backed instinctively away from the opening. It was
well that they did, for at the moment, the light of day was shut out for
them, tons of rock and dirt piling up before the mouth of the cave,
barring their way to freedom!

It was a second or more before the extent of the calamity appeared to
them.

It was Ruth who spoke first, her voice sounding faint and eerie in that
intense gloom.

“Tom, do you realize? We’re buried alive in here! What do you suppose
happened? That second explosion----”

“Wasn’t in the picture at all,” Tom finished grimly. “Don’t you suppose
I know it?”

“Then what----”

“The dynamite house,” Tom explained briefly. “I told them to take it all
away--what we didn’t need of the dynamite. The fools evidently
forgot----”

“And we pay for it, mister,” drawled one of the boys from the dark.
“Looks like we’d been buried good and proper without any expenses of the
funeral.”

“Easy there!” Layton Boardman’s voice came cool and grim. “Remember, if
we’re in jeopardy here, our part from now on is to work hard and say
little.”

“Do you think there’s a chance to tunnel our way out?” Ruth asked
eagerly.

“We can try. And it’s safe to say that those outside won’t sit around
and twiddle their thumbs. Don’t worry, Miss Fielding. We’ll get out some
way.”

Tom could not but admire Boardman’s poise and cool courage. What he said
sounded almost convincing, but Tom knew that in his heart Boardman, like
himself, had little hope of escape for any of them.

Blocked as their retreat was by tons of débris, how could they hope to
dig a way out from within with only their bare hands for tools?

On the other hand, even though those on the outside who had witnessed
the catastrophe set to work at once with all energy--as of course they
would do--the chances were that they would not be able to burrow a way
into the cave in time to save the company from smothering to death in
those close quarters. Even now the air was getting hot, devitalized.

While Layton Boardman, some of the boys, and even Ruth, set to work at
the gigantic task of tunneling a way to the outer air, Tom worked his
way silently and unnoticed to the rear of the cave. He had no idea what
he would find there--if indeed he found anything save the blank damp
wall of dirt in which it had seemed to terminate. But, after all,
exploration seemed worth while, the chance no more forlorn than that the
others were taking.

He groped his way through the blackness. At last his fingers touched the
earthy wall at the rear of the cave.

He felt his way cautiously along this and came at last to a spot where
the earth wall seemed to end.

His breath caught in his throat. Was the rear of the cave not a solid
wall then? Was this break a possible entrance to a second cave or a
tunnel that they had not observed before?

He felt in his pocket for matches, found a box and cautiously struck
one, shielding its flame with his hand. It was a moment before his eyes
could make out anything beyond the tiny flickering light of the match.
Then he uttered a low exclamation.

There was a break, an opening through which, by ducking his head, he
could go.

The match was burning his fingers. Tom dropped it and cautiously entered
the tunnel, progressing by the sense of touch. He did not strike another
match for fear those in the main body of the cave might discover what he
was about and convey the knowledge to Ruth. He had a horror of giving
her false hope. This tunnel might lead anywhere or nowhere. It seemed,
just now, to be leading directly into the heart of the mountain.

He groped his way along, carefully testing the walls of the tunnel on
both sides of him for any sign of another opening.

But there was none. The walls of the passage presented a blank damp
surface, and as Tom progressed he felt certain that these walls were
closing in on him.

He was coming to the end probably, a converging of the tunnel into the
solid wall of the mountainside, which meant defeat and hopelessness.

Tom’s heart sank. A great horror rose in him. Not until that moment did
he realize how much he had hoped for from this unexpected tunnel. With
the snuffing out of that hope went his last shred of cheerfulness.

Buried alive! Shut in the horror and blackness of that cave! Such an
end--and for Ruth!

What was that! Tom’s hand, groping against the narrowing walls of the
tunnel, suddenly slipped off into emptiness!

No wall there! Another break! Perhaps another tunnel!

Tom lighted a second match, and with trembling fingers held it aloft,
shielded its feeble flame, peered, half in hope and half in dread, into
the shadows beyond the light.

There was a break--another tunnel branching off into darkness. Tom
lighted another match and advanced toward the opening. The flame
flickered and went out, a curious thing in that airless place.

Swift hope rushed up in him. He stood a moment collecting himself,
striving to think calmly.

There must be a current of air in that stifling place, otherwise the
match would not have gone out! And a current of air meant only one
thing--that there must be another exit from the cave, another opening
into the outer air.

Not daring to let himself hope too much, Tom went forward and around the
break in the tunnel wall, inch by inch, feeling his way.

Suddenly he stopped, head up. Before him, dim and far away, but
undeniably there, gleamed a tiny ray of light.

With a hoarse cry Tom turned and stumbled back the way he had come.

“Light! I see daylight!” he cried.




                              CHAPTER XXIV

                                 BEARS


Meanwhile, those outside the cave had been witnesses to an unbelievable
horror. There was the muttering, rending sound of the avalanche, earth
torn from the breast of the mountain, a magnificent spectacle as tons of
débris roared earthward, demolishing the cabins at the mountain’s foot.
Then, hard upon that first great rush of earth, a second explosion--an
explosion that seemed to shake the mountain from towering tip to base,
that tore up tortured earth and rock, a roar that drowned all other
sounds in its immensity.

Then, silence--breathless, tense.

“The cave!” shrieked Helen. “It is gone! The mouth of it is gone!”

She flung herself into the arms of Edith Lang. The two clung together
wordlessly. They watched while cowboys set feverishly to the task of
excavation, using whatever tools came to hand. Others dashed back to the
ranch for picks and shovels and reinforcements.

Mr. Hammond flung off his coat and joined those working at the pile of
earth and rock. Commanding, suggesting, urging, he seemed to be
everywhere at once.

Finally Helen roused herself from her numbed silence.

“They will never be able to get to them in time,” she said hopelessly.
“Why, it looks as if they would have to dig their way through the whole
mountainside. Tom! Ruth! Oh, what shall I do!”

She rose with some wild idea in her head of adding her puny efforts to
those of the rescuers.

Edith Lang guessed at her intention and gently pulled the girl down
beside her again.

“You would only get in the way, dear. They are doing all they can.”

“But it isn’t enough!” Helen’s hands were clenched. All color had left
her face. “They will never get to them in time. Never--never!”

Her desperate cry was duplicated heartbreakingly by those within the
cave. Although they knew that those on the outside must have come at
once to the rescue, must be feverishly at work, even now, no sound of
pick or shovel penetrated to their gloomy prison.

This fact in itself was enough to rob them of all hope. Had their rescue
been possible, the voices and shouts of encouragement would be audible
now.

They had dug at the imprisoning mass of rock and dirt until fingers were
sore and bleeding. Some had found sharp stones and rocks and had
continued the frantic digging with these poor implements.

Ruth realized suddenly how futile, how foolish, all their efforts were.

With a little cry of weariness and despair she straightened up and felt
about for Tom. Not finding him, she became frightened. It was natural to
suppose he had been at her side all this time.

She raised her voice and called his name aloud, at first faintly, then
wildly, frantically.

“Tom, where are you? Tom!”

“Coming!”

There was an exultation, a wild gladness in that answering shout that
thrilled and startled the prisoners in the cave. They got up from hands
and knees, nursed bleeding fingers and peered with an intense, terrible
hopefulness in the direction of Tom’s voice.

“Ruth, where are you? Ruth!”

“Here, Tom!” she stretched out her hands to him, clinging to him. “Tom,
what is it?”

“I’ve found another entrance to this place! There are tunnels, and at
the far end is light--daylight. Do you hear that? Daylight!” His voice
was husky and cracked and the shout that went up from a dozen answering
throats was wild and hoarse with hope.

“Follow me!” Tom was already turning back toward the tunnel, his arm
about Ruth. “You will have to go single file for the passage is narrow.
Keep close behind me, Ruth. Hold to my coat.”

Ruth held on to his coat. It is doubtful if anything on earth would have
made her let go of it just then!

The whole company straggled after their leader, a weary, battered but
hopeful group, yet not daring to hope too much.

Tom led them along the first passage then turned into the second.

There he paused, drew Ruth close to him, and pointed.

“Do you see it--the opening?” he asked.

Ruth, eyes upon that narrow ray of light, drew a sharp breath.

“Yes, I see it, Tom.”

They said no more, for that much was eloquent, and Tom led the way
again, going more cautiously now since the farther end of the passage
had not yet been explored.

Their progress was slowed considerably by the fact that at this point
the tunnel narrowed so sharply that they were forced to rub shoulders
with the wall on either side.

At last they were reduced to proceeding crab fashion--going sideways and
feeling their way, inch by inch.

Then, when they least expected it, the passage widened suddenly, forming
a cave not dissimilar in size, it seemed, from the one they had just
left.

Puzzled and wishing to see more of his surroundings, Tom lighted a
match. He dropped it with a startled exclamation.

“Stand back, Ruth! Get behind me!”

“What’s the rumpus?” a voice drawled behind them. The boys were crowding
into the cave. “Think you see somethin’, mister?”

“Bears!” replied Tom grimly. “Two of them!”




                              CHAPTER XXV

                           SUNLIGHT ONCE MORE


Somewhere some one laughed nervously. Another struck a match. Ruth was
crowded back into a corner behind Tom’s broad shoulders.

In the flickering light of more matches she stared out from her enforced
retirement upon the queerest tableau she had ever seen. Curiously
enough, she was not frightened. It all seemed so unreal, fantastic.

Cowboys all around, their weary, white faces lit up oddly by the
flickering light, every one with a hand on his holster, quiet, tense,
and in the far corner of the place, backed up against the wall, two
great, clumsy animals staring at the intruders with eyes half
frightened, half fierce!

Even as Ruth stared, fascinated, one of them growled and moved forward a
clumsy step. The other, as though encouraged by the defiance of its
mate, growled also and ambled forward.

A bear is always more apt to run than fight. But, trapped here in the
narrow confines of the cave with a certainty of attack from the rear
should they try to escape, the bears took the only course left open to
them--battle with their enemies. And a bear, roused to the attack, is a
formidable foe!

As the great menacing beasts lunged forward the last feeble match went
out, leaving the place in darkness. Only the faint ray of light from the
far end of the cave mitigated the intense gloom.

Ruth shrank closer to Tom. The hair began to rise on her tingling scalp.
She _was_ frightened now!

She heard the muttered remarks of the cowboys.

“If we all fire we’ll get one of ’em.”

“Leave it to Cameron and me, we’re nearest!” Layton Boardman’s voice was
clear and sharp. “Over against the light, Cameron--can you see?”

The bears had halted, probably nonplussed for a moment by the failure of
the light that had so clearly shown them their enemies.

One of them, a huge lump of shadow, bulked against the faint light from
the opening.

Tom grunted. With a roar, the shadow moved forward.

There was a shot! Another!

“Got him!” was Boardman’s exultant cry.

But the gray shadow against the light, halted with a grunt of surprise
as Tom’s first bullet grazed his huge shoulder, now lumbered forward
again, moving with incredible swiftness.

Ruth, cowering behind Tom, felt rather than saw the nearness of the
brute, knew that it had reared and was towering above them!

Tom’s pistol cracked again and then again.

The sinister shadow reeled, wavered, and fell, raking Tom’s arm in the
descent, tearing the skin from shoulder to wrist.

Ruth was vaguely aware that other matches were being struck and in the
weird light saw the faces of men bending eagerly above two great beasts,
one of which still kicked feebly.

Ruth’s hand, falling on Tom’s arm, came away hot and sticky. She saw
then the rent in his coat and the blood dripping from his fingers.

“Tom, you’re hurt! Oh, Tom, your arm!”

“It’s nothing.” Tom’s voice was impatient, curt. “Lucky he didn’t get
more of us!”

But Layton Boardman had seen Tom’s injury, as had some of the other
boys.

“What you need, Cameron, is something to stop that blood,” the former
decided. “Come on, boys, let’s get out of here. The sooner the better!”

All pressed forward.

Tom forced himself to walk steadily, though his arm throbbed badly and
he was feeling dizzy.

Ruth put his arm across her shoulders and whispered to him to lean on
her.

“You were wonderful, Tom!” she said. “I’m so proud of you!” The words
went a long way toward keeping Tom’s head up.

They found the opening of the cave larger than they had expected. It was
an easy matter, once they had found their way over the bodies of the
dead bears, to crawl out through the aperture into the blessed fresh
air.

They stood silent for a moment, all of them, filling their lungs
gratefully, faces upturned to the dazzling blue of the sky--a sky, but a
short time before, they had thought never to see again!

Boardman looked at Tom, who was keeping his feet only by a tremendous
effort of will.

“You must have come to pretty close quarters with that bear,” he
remarked gravely.

Tom nodded.

“If I had finished him with the first shot, like you,” he said, “I
wouldn’t have been left--this--little--souvenir--” Then he crumpled up,
his face a ghastly gray, the blood from his wounded arm reddening the
ground where he lay.

Boardman started to lift him, but Ruth motioned him away.

“We have to stop that bleeding first,” she said quietly, but with drawn
lips. “He has lost far too much blood already.”

While the men stood about, Ruth tore strips from her skirt, which as
“Ann Marks,” the heroine of the play, she fortunately wore, and tied
them together. It was the matter of a moment to tear away the tattered
sleeve of Tom’s shirt; to twist the strip from the skirt around the arm
above the wound and just beneath the shoulder.

Even then, twist with all her might, Ruth could not stop the spurting
blood.

“Get me a stick somebody--quick!” she cried. “A little one that I can
get through this knot!”

One of the boys was quick to see what she wanted and brought a slender,
tough twig and handed it to her.

“Maybe this’ll help, ma’am.”

“Just the thing, thanks,” returned Ruth.

She worked the twig beneath the bandage then began to twist it tighter
and tighter until it seemed that the tourniquet must cut into the flesh.

But it worked! The blood flowed more and more sluggishly until finally
it stopped altogether. Only then Ruth looked up, flushed and weary, but
triumphant.

“Take him to the others as soon as you can, please,” she directed. “He
must have a doctor at once.”

When, a few moments later, the disheveled band appeared before their
would-be rescuers, bearing Tom among them, those digging at the débris
stared for a moment as though they saw a band of ghosts.

But only for a moment. Then such a reunion, such a laughing and shouting
and crying hysteria of welcome ensued as that grim old mountain had
never witnessed before.

“Now that I’ve got you again, I’m never going to let you go,” Helen
cried, clinging to Ruth.

“We must get Tom to the ranch at once--at once, Helen! He may die----”

“Tommy boy!” All the color swept out of Helen’s face.

Tom did not die, though the doctor declared Ruth’s improvised tourniquet
had much to do with that result.

“It was quick work and thorough, my dear,” said the old doctor, eying
Ruth benevolently over his thick-rimmed glasses. “I congratulate you.”

But Ruth, turning away with the happy tears flooding to her eyes, did
not need congratulations. All she cared for was the tremendous fact that
Tom would live. Not only that, but he recovered with surprising speed
and was out of bed in a day’s time, though, of course, the wound was a
much longer time in healing.

As soon as Ruth could bring herself around to thought of her picture
again, the cameramen assured her that, so far from the scene being
ruined by the second and unplanned landslide, it had been immeasurably
strengthened.

“Nothing like the real thing to add realism to a film,” one of them
jovially informed her. “I believe the avalanches, artificial and real,
will make the greatest picture ever filmed!”

Ruth’s heart leaped at this.

“Some good seems to come even from the worst happenings,” she said. “I’m
glad that you had the presence of mind to keep on grinding!”

“We thought the whole thing was staged at first,” they confessed to her.
“And when we found out the true state of the case it was too late to
stop grinding. The scene was shot.”

“Glory be!” laughed Ruth, and went off to find Tom, Tom swathed in
bandages but with the glamour of a wounded hero about him, nevertheless.

A day or two later Chess Copley came to Golden Pass. He had meant to
surprise Helen, and his intention was certainly successful.

He came from the railroad station on horseback and when Helen recognized
him she flung herself with such fervor at the rider that his mount
became frightened and nearly ran away with him.

“That’s the kind of a welcome I like!” cried Chess, as he dismounted and
threw the reins to the grinning Andy. “Come here, fiancée, and receive
the salute!”

Whereupon he kissed her quite heartily and openly before them all.

“How about business?” Helen asked him eagerly as she led him toward the
porch. “You look as though you might be the bearer of good news----”

“The very best,” replied Chess. “Business is great! Nothing now stands
between us and eternal bliss. Hello!” as he caught sight of Tom,
bandaged but grinning delightedly, “who threw a brick at you, son?”

Of course a recital of the tremendous events of the past few days was
quickly poured into his interested ears.

“What did you do with the bears?” Chess queried when they came to the
fight in the cave.

“The boys went back the next day and got them,” Tom answered. “I
reckon,” with a grin, “they’ll be eating bear meat for a week.”

“Ugh!” said Ruth with a shudder, as she looked at Tom’s arm, “I don’t
see how they could touch it!”

A delightful few days followed, during which Ruth added the finishing
touches to her picture. There remained the final scene, the close-up of
Layton Boardman and Ruth in the humble cabin of Ann Marks, the two
lovers reunited and looking toward a rosy future.

It was a short time after the completion of this final scene that Tom
found himself alone with Layton Boardman.

Poor Tom did not feel in the best of good humor, for that last scene in
which Boardman had held Ruth close and kissed her still rankled in his
mind.

“By gosh, I’m glad that last scene is shot,” remarked the actor, with a
sigh of relief. “I make a rotten lover, don’t I, Cameron?”

“What? Rotten lover?” queried Tom. “What do you mean, Boardman?”

“Just what I said. I can’t make love for a cent, no matter how I try.
You see, it simply isn’t in me. I don’t care for girls that way--never
did, no matter how hard they rave over me in the pictures.”

“You--er--did it very well,” stammered Tom. He was so astonished he
scarcely knew what to say.

“Thanks for saying that. Then I won’t have to do it all over again!” and
Tom felt the note of relief in Boardman’s voice. “I was afraid it might
be necessary and that Miss Fielding would call me down for being such a
wooden man at it. Ever since I agreed to take the part I tried to drill
myself in it. And, believe me, drilling opposite to such a girl as Viola
was some job! It went easier with Miss Fielding, but still, as I said
before, I’m no lady’s man and never was. I’d never give ’em a second
hoot if it wasn’t all a part of the job.” And then Boardman strolled off
to join some of the cowboys.

Tom stood stock still for a moment, gazing after the retreating moving
picture actor. Then slowly a grin swept over his face.

“Tom Cameron, did you hear that?” he muttered to himself. “Never cared
for any girl, never was a lady’s man! ‘Drilled myself in it!’ Gosh, and
I thought it was all real! Well, I’ve been seven kinds of a fool--I’ll
say so myself!”

Some time later that same evening Tom asked Ruth what she meant to do
about him now that she had finished her picture. She succeeded in
putting him off once more, though this time without hurting his
feelings.

“Wait just a little while, Tommy-boy,” she pleaded. “Just till I see
myself on the screen. I must first know what kind of an actress I make.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

It was not very long after this that Ruth found her new picture
advertised in electric lights before one of the big moving picture
houses in New York.

The first few scenes in which Ruth appeared were sufficient to convince
those critics of the moving picture world who had gathered to view
“Hearts of the Mountains” that a new and scintillating star had appeared
on the horizon.

It is not often that one finds author, director, and star all in the
person of one charming girl. Ruth’s career was unique enough to satisfy
even the most enthusiastic searchers after romance.

The avalanche was a tremendous spectacle. Those in the theater, gripped
and stirred by the power of it, rose as a man and demanded the
appearance of the author of the play.

Ruth, who was in the audience, was lifted to the stage by the eager
hands of her admirers.

Flushed, tremulous, but wholly in command of herself, she said a few
words of appreciation. The last part of her impromptu little speech was
fairly drowned beneath the thunderous wave of applause that swept the
theater.

Ruth knew that, in that moment, she had won fame.

Sol Bloomberg’s sly attempt to punish Ruth for her acquisition of
Boardman and, by stealing Viola, to make a failure of Ruth’s picture had
come to worse than nothing.

His picture, starring Viola and her lover, Tony Martano, was a
disastrous failure. No one seemed to know just why--except perhaps
Bloomberg himself. At any rate, one “listening in” for a moment on a
conversation held between him and one of his directors, might possibly
have found a clew to the mystery.

“It ain’t that Viola ain’t a good actress, Jim,” the picture magnate
asseverated, chewing viciously upon a huge and unlighted cigar. “It’s
just that she’s plum silly over that Dago she’s fell for.”

The director nodded in deep dejection.

“Don’t you suppose I know it? She lets Tony Martano hog all her best
scenes. And he’s some ham actor! I tell you, Sol,” he went on with a
frankness born of long and intimate association, “you sure pulled a bone
when you put them two in the same picture.”

Bloomberg flared up at this.

“I wouldn’t ’a’ got Viola at all if I hadn’t held Tony out as bait. You
know that as well as I do. Now keep still and get out! I gotta think!”

That his thoughts were not pleasant ones was proved a few moments later
when he slammed his hat down on his head and angrily left the office,
the mangled cigar, unlit, still between his teeth.

There were more reasons than one for Bloomberg’s deep depression. Not
only had he lost money through the failure of his picture, but what
shreds of reputation remained to him, as well.

The story of how he had tempted Ruth’s star into breaking her contract
had gone the rounds as such bits of scandal will in the moving picture
world. Ruth was applauded for her courage and resource, while Bloomberg
became a laughing stock even among those he called his friends. Nor were
Viola’s chances for making a good contract helped by her desertion of
the Fielding Film Corporation at a critical time.

Ruth would not have been human had she failed to gloat a little over the
downfall of her enemies.

“So are the wicked punished!” she said, with a twinkle in her eyes, to
Helen.

They were back in the living room of the old house at the Red Mill.

At this observation of her chum Helen looked up and laughed
affectionately, albeit still with that faint touch of envy.

“You lucky, lucky girl!” she murmured. “With the world at your feet, to
say nothing of Tom!”

                                THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        THE RUTH FIELDING SERIES
                          By ALICE B. EMERSON
                12mo. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors
                  Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid

    Ruth Fielding was an orphan and came to live with her
    miserly uncle. Her adventures and travels make stories that
    will hold the interest of every reader.

    Ruth Fielding is a character that will live in juvenile
    fiction.

                 1. RUTH FIELDING OF THE RED MILL
                 2. RUTH FIELDING AT BRIARWOOD HALL
                 3. RUTH FIELDING AT SNOW CAMP
                 4. RUTH FIELDING AT LIGHTHOUSE POINT
                 5. RUTH FIELDING AT SILVER RANCH
                 6. RUTH FIELDING ON CLIFF ISLAND
                 7. RUTH FIELDING AT SUNRISE FARM
                 8. RUTH FIELDING AND THE GYPSIES
                 9. RUTH FIELDING IN MOVING PICTURES
                10. RUTH FIELDING DOWN IN DIXIE
                11. RUTH FIELDING AT COLLEGE
                12. RUTH FIELDING IN THE SADDLE
                13. RUTH FIELDING IN THE RED CROSS
                14. RUTH FIELDING AT THE WAR FRONT
                15. RUTH FIELDING HOMEWARD BOUND
                16. RUTH FIELDING DOWN EAST
                17. RUTH FIELDING IN THE GREAT NORTHWEST
                18. RUTH FIELDING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE
                19. RUTH FIELDING TREASURE HUNTING
                20. RUTH FIELDING IN THE FAR NORTH
                21. RUTH FIELDING AT GOLDEN PASS
                22. RUTH FIELDING IN ALASKA
                23. RUTH FIELDING AND HER GREAT SCENARIO
                24. RUTH FIELDING AT CAMERON HALL

            CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers      New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        THE BETTY GORDON SERIES
                          By ALICE B. EMERSON
                12mo. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors
                  Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid


1. BETTY GORDON AT BRAMBLE FARM or The Mystery of a Nobody

    At twelve Betty is left an orphan.

2. BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON or Strange Adventures in a Great City

    Betty goes to the National Capitol to find her uncle and has
    several unusual adventures.

3. BETTY GORDON IN THE LAND OF OIL or The Farm That Was Worth a Fortune

    From Washington the scene is shifted to the great oil fields of our
    country. A splendid picture of the oil field operations of today.

4. BETTY GORDON AT BOARDING SCHOOL or The Treasure of Indian Chasm

    Seeking treasures of Indian Chasm makes interesting reading.

5. BETTY GORDON AT MOUNTAIN CAMP or The Mystery of Ida Bellethorne

    At Mountain Camp Betty found herself in the midst of a mystery.

6. BETTY GORDON AT OCEAN PARK or School Chums on the Boardwalk

    A glorious outing that Betty and her chums never forgot.

7. BETTY GORDON AND HER SCHOOL CHUMS or Bringing the Rebels to Terms

    Rebellious students, disliked teachers and mysterious robberies.

8. BETTY GORDON AT RAINBOW RANCH or Cowboy Joe’s Secret

    Betty and her chums have a grand time in the saddle.

9. BETTY GORDON IN MEXICAN WILDS or The Secret of the Mountains

    Betty receives a fake telegram and finds both Bob and herself
    held for ransom in a mountain cave.

10. BETTY GORDON AND THE LOST PEARLS or A Mystery of The Seaside

    Betty and her chums go to the ocean shore for a vacation and
    Betty becomes involved in the disappearance of a string of pearls.

11. BETTY GORDON ON THE CAMPUS or The Secret of the Trunk Room

    An up-to-date college story with a strange mystery that is bound
    to fascinate any girl reader.


                Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue
             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       THE BARTON BOOKS FOR GIRLS
                          By MAY HOLLIS BARTON
             12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. With colored jacket
                  Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid

    May Hollis Barton is a new writer for girls thoroughly up-to-date
    in plot and action. Clean tales that all girls will enjoy reading.


1. THE GIRL FROM THE COUNTRY or Laura Mayford’s City Experiences

    Laura was the oldest of five and she had a chance to try her luck
    in New York.

2. THREE GIRL CHUMS AT LAUREL HALL or The Mystery of the School
    by the Lake

    When the three chums arrived at the boarding school they found the
    other students in the grip of a most perplexing mystery.

3. NELL GRAYSON’S RANCHING DAYS or A City Girl in the Great West

    Nell had a ranch girl visit her in Boston, and when Nell visited
    the great West she found many stirring adventures.

4. FOUR LITTLE WOMEN OF ROXBY or The Queer Old Lady Who Lost Her Way

    Four sisters are keeping house and having trouble. One day there
    wanders in from a stalled express train an old lady who cannot
    remember her identity.

5. PLAIN JANE AND PRETTY BETTY or The Girl Who Won Out

    The tale of two girls, one plain but sensible, the other pretty
    but vain. Unexpectedly both find they have to make their own way.

6. LITTLE MISS SUNSHINE or The Old Bachelor’s Ward

    Her guardian Major, an old bachelor, knows nothing about children.

7. HAZEL HOOD’S STRANGE DISCOVERY or The Old Scientist’s Treasure Box

    Times were hard at the Widow Hood’s place and Hazel thought it
    her duty to go to work.

8. TWO GIRLS AND A MYSTERY or The Old House in the Glen

    Bab was quite excited to learn that a distant relative had
    died and left her his property.


                Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue
             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         THE LINGER-NOT SERIES
                            By AGNES MILLER
            12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors
                  Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid


1. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THE MYSTERY HOUSE or The Story of Nine
    Adventurous Girls

    How the Linger-Not girls met and formed their club seems commonplace,
    but this writer makes it fascinating, and how they made their club
    serve a great purpose continues the interest to the end, and
    introduces a new type of girlhood.

2. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THE VALLEY FEUD or The Great West Point Chain

    The Linger-Not girls had no thought of becoming mixed up with feuds
    or mysteries, but their habit of being useful soon entangled them
    in some surprising adventures that turned out happily for all, and
    made the valley better because of their visit.

3. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THEIR GOLDEN QUEST or The Log of the Ocean
    Monarch

    For a club of girls to become involved in a mystery leading back
    into the times of the California gold-rush, seems unnatural
    until the reader sees how it happened, and how the girls helped
    one of their friends to come into her rightful name and
    inheritance, forms a fine story.

4. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THE WHISPERING CHARMS or The Secret from Old
    Alaska

    Whether engrossed in thrilling adventures in the Far North or
    occupied with quiet home duties, the Linger-Not girls could work
    unitedly to solve a colorful mystery in a way that interpreted
    American freedom to a sad young stranger, and brought happiness
    to her and to themselves.


                Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue
             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         BILLIE BRADLEY SERIES
                          By JANET D. WHEELER
            12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors
                  Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid


1. BILLIE BRADLEY AND HER INHERITANCE or The Queer Homestead at Cherry
    Corners

    Billie Bradley fell heir to an old homestead that was unoccupied
    and located far away in a lonely section of the country. How
    Billie went there, accompanied by some of her chums, and what
    queer things happened, go to make up a story no girl will want
    to miss.

2. BILLIE BRADLEY AT THREE-TOWERS HALL or Leading a Needed Rebellion

    Three-Towers Hall was a boarding school for girls. For a short
    time after Billie arrived there all went well. But then the head
    of the school had to go on a long journey and she left the girls
    in charge of two teachers, sisters, who believed in severe
    discipline and in very, very plain food and little of it—and
    then there was a row!

3. BILLIE BRADLEY ON LIGHTHOUSE ISLAND or The Mystery of the Wreck

    One of Billie’s friends owned a summer bungalow on Lighthouse
    Island, near the coast. The school girls made up a party and
    visited the Island. There was a storm and a wreck, and three
    little children were washed ashore.

4. BILLIE BRADLEY AND HER CLASSMATES or The Secret of the Locked Tower

    Billie and her chums come to the rescue of several little
    children who had broken through the ice. There is the mystery of
    a lost invention, and also the dreaded mystery of the locked
    school tower.

5. BILLIE BRADLEY AT TWIN LAKES or Jolly Schoolgirls Afloat and Ashore

    A tale of outdoor adventure in which Billie and her chums have a
    great variety of adventures. They visit an artists’ colony and
    there fall in with a strange girl living with an old boatman who
    abuses her constantly.

6. BILLIE BRADLEY AT TREASURE COVE or The Old Sailor’s Secret

    A lively story of school girl doings. How Billie heard of the
    treasure and how she and her chums went in quest of the same is
    told in a peculiarly absorbing manner.


                Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue
             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          THE CURLYTOPS SERIES
                           By HOWARD R. GARIS
            12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors
                  Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid


1. THE CURLYTOPS AT CHERRY FARM or Vacation Days in the Country

    A tale of happy vacation days on a farm.

2. THE CURLYTOPS ON STAR ISLAND or Camping Out with Grandpa

    The Curlytops camp on Star Island.

3. THE CURLYTOPS SNOWED IN or Grand Fun with Skates and Sleds

    The Curlytops on lakes and hills.

4. THE CURLYTOPS AT UNCLE FRANK’S RANCH or Little Folks on Ponyback

    Out West on their uncle’s ranch they have a wonderful time.

5. THE CURLYTOPS AT SILVER LAKE or On the Water with Uncle Ben

    The Curlytops camp out on the shores of a beautiful lake.

6. THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PETS or Uncle Toby’s Strange Collection

    An old uncle leaves them to care for his collection of pets.

7. THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PLAYMATES or Jolly Times Through the Holidays

    They have great times with their uncle’s collection of animals.

8. THE CURLYTOPS IN THE WOODS or Fun at the Lumber Camp

    Exciting times in the forest for Curlytops.

9. THE CURLYTOPS AT SUNSET BEACH or What Was Found in the Sand

    The Curlytops have a fine time at the seashore.

10. THE CURLYTOPS TOURING AROUND or The Missing Photograph Albums

    The Curlytops get in some moving pictures.

11. THE CURLYTOPS IN A SUMMER CAMP or Animal Joe’s Menagerie

    There is great excitement as some mischievous monkeys break out of
    Animal Joe’s Menagerie.

12. THE CURLYTOPS GROWING UP or Winter Sports and Summer Pleasures

    Little Trouble is a host in himself and his larger brother and
    sister are never still a minute, but go from one little
    adventure to another in a way to charm all youthful readers.


                Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue
             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUTH FIELDING AT GOLDEN PASS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


