The Project Gutenberg eBook of The coasts of illusion
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The coasts of illusion
        A study of travel tales

Author: Clark B. Firestone

Illustrator: Ruth Hambidge
        John Everett Millais

Release date: March 31, 2025 [eBook #75759]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Harper & Brothers, 1924

Credits: Alan, Hannah Wilson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COASTS OF ILLUSION ***





                        THE COASTS OF ILLUSION

                            [Illustration]


                 [Illustration: THE BOYHOOD OF RALEIGH

                        _By_ Sir John Millais]




                                  THE
                          COASTS OF ILLUSION

                        A Study of Travel Tales

                                  BY

                          CLARK B. FIRESTONE


                          _With Drawings by_

                             RUTH HAMBIDGE


                            [Illustration]


              “_Westward of Valhalla grows a plant called
            The mistletoe; it seemed too young to swear._”

                                --FRIGG


                     HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
                          NEW YORK AND LONDON
                                MCMXXIV




                        THE COASTS OF ILLUSION

                 Copyright, 1924, by Harper & Brothers
                Printed in the United States of America

                            _First Edition_




CONTENTS


                                          PAGE

        MARCO TALKS WITH HIS NEIGHBORS      ix

        PREFACE                             xi

                                       CHAPTER

      I THE WORLD THAT WAS                   1

     II THE EARTH ITSELF                     5

    III INANIMATE NATURE                    14

     IV THE ANIMAL KINGDOM                  27

      V THE FABULOUS BEASTS                 49

     VI FABLE UPON WINGS                    68

    VII THE DRAGON                          79

   VIII DENIZENS OF THE DEEP                89

     IX THE PEOPLES OF PRODIGY             103

      X THE SATYRS                         121

     XI THE PYGMIES                        132

    XII THE AMAZONS OF LEGEND              151

   XIII THE AMAZONS OF HISTORY             169

    XIV THE FOLK OF TRADITION              190

     XV THE HORIZON LANDS                  201

    XVI LANDS OF LEGEND                    223

   XVII ISLANDS OF ENCHANTMENT             251

  XVIII THE TERRIBLE OCEAN                 262

    XIX THE SARGASSO SEA                   274

     XX ATLANTIS                           281

    XXI THE GILDED MAN                     298

   XXII THE DREAM QUESTS OF SPAIN          312

  XXIII THE FABRIC OF ILLUSION             334

   XXIV THE TRAVEL TALES OF MANKIND        348

    XXV THE GAINS OF FABLE                 371

        BIBLIOGRAPHY                       379




ILLUSTRATIONS


  THE BOYHOOD OF RALEIGH. _By Sir John Millais_          _Frontispiece_

                                                           FACING PAGE

  A VOYAGE TO THESE STRANGELY PEOPLED COUNTRIES OF
  THE WORLD’S YESTERDAYS WOULD BE A VOYAGE
  ALONG THE BAYS, GULFS, AND PROMONTORIES OF THE
  HUMAN MIND IN ITS STATES OF DREAM                                  2

  CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS AT THE COURT OF FERDINAND
  THE CATHOLIC AND ISABELLA OF CASTILE. _By V. von
  Brozik_                                                           10

  ACCORDING TO TRADITION, A PUTRID STREAM FLOWS
  FROM THE ROOTS OF THE TREE AND THE VAPORS
  THEREOF KILL                                                      24

  IN CALDILHE THERE GROWETH A MANNER OF FRUIT, AND
  MEN FIND WITHIN A LITTLE BEAST AS THOUGH IT
  WERE A LAMB WITHOUT WOOL                                          58

  THE FIRST PEOPLE ENGAGED IN SUCH COSMIC ADVENTURES
  AS WARFARE AGAINST STONE GIANTS                                  116

  A SATYR. _By Jacob Jordaens_                                     122

  MEN FEARED THEM, AS EMBODYING THE LONELINESS OF
  WASTE PLACES                                                     128

  THE SWARTHY MEN CALLED PYGMIES                                   142

  THUSNELDA AT THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY OF GERMANICUS
  INTO ROME. _By C. T. von Piloty_                                 172

  THE STEEPS OVERHEAD SEEMED FIT ABODE FOR GIANTS
  AND DWARFS AND GRIFFINS--FOR CITIES OF ENCHANTMENT               206

  THE ENCHANTED WOODS OF ROMANCE WITH THEIR
  GOBLIN GLOOMS AND TALKING TREES FADED FROM THE
  MINDS OF MEN                                                     216

  “BUILD US, O DOUL-KARNAIN,” THEY BEGGED, “A RAMPART
  BETWEEN US AND THEM”                                             236

  IN ISLANDS MEN PLACED THEIR IDEAL STATES.... TO
  REACH FELICITY ONE MUST CROSS WATER                              254

  ROARING FORTIES. _By F. J. Waugh_                                268

  THE THINGS OF THE SPIRIT ANIMATED SPAIN IN SOME OF
  THE QUESTS IT FOLLOWED BESIDE THE STILL WATERS
  OF THE LAKES OF DREAM                                            314

  THE GARGOYLES OF STONE WHICH KEPT WATCH DAY
  AND NIGHT                                                        338




MARCO TALKS WITH HIS NEIGHBORS


  THE TIME: 1295 A.D.
  THE PLACE: Venice, the Rialto.
  THE SPEAKER: Marco Polo.
  THE CHORUS: Citizens of Venice.


  _“I fared,” said Marco, “as far as one may----
  From Astrakhan to the ports of Cathay,
    And sailed two years on the Pitch Dark Sea;
  And something I learned of the ways of man.
  There is a place that they call Japan,
    And Russia lies where the north winds be;
  The plain of Lop is haunted by dragons;
  Dark are the damsels and fierce the flagons
    In the Thousand Islands of Spicery.”_

  “_Far are these lands and fair is their sheen,
  But tell us, Polo, what have you seen?”_

  _“I saw,” said Marco, “the pagans at masses
  And Tibetan dogs the size of asses,
    And oil from the ground, and black stones, blazing.
  I saw pink pearls from an unknown strand,
  And ten-pound peaches of China-land,
    And bales of silk that were past appraising.
  I saw the Malabar pepper farmers
  And cannibal sharks subdued by charmers,
    But the grunting ox was most amazing.”_

  “_Much have you seen where the wild capes curve,
  But tell us, Polo, whom did you serve?”_

  _“I served,” said Marco, “the Khan of Khans.
  His edict runs with the caravans
    As far as the east is from the west.
  The Turk and the Hindu hold his charters,
  He sways Cathaians, Persians, and Tartars,
    Yet Kublai welcomes the stranger guest.
  His deeds are writ upon purple pages,
  A shepherd king but a sage of sages,
    And his thousand damsels are Asia’s best.”_

  “_Him must a thousand matters perplex,
  But, Polo, speak yet more of the sex.”_

  _“The men of Gobi,” said Marco, “require
  Their dames to sit by the stranger’s fire,
    And make his favor the tribal boast.
  Frail are the women in Pin-yang-fu,
  And delicate quin-sai wenches woo
    Ambassadors from the Pepper Coast.
  Though maids with feet as swift as the wind
  May dance, all bare, for the gods of Ind,
    The women of Persia please the most.”_

  “_Whimsical, Marco, your travel word.
  Is there aught else that you saw or heard?”_

  _“I heard,” said Marco, “but do not know,
  That Tartar shamans summon the snow,
    And suns shine not for the Samoyed.
  In southern countries its fabled horn
  Means less than its tongue to the unicorn,
    Which licks its victims until they are dead.
  Here is a text for songs or sermons:
  When babes are born to the female Burmans,
    Their foolish husbands hie them to bed.”_

  _Rose, then, a shout from a hundred lips:
  “Marco, the tar of a thousand trips,
  Marco the man of a million quips,
    Marco, Marco, Milioni!”
  And they who would hold the East in fee,
  Men of the pitiful midland sea,
  Nobles and commons, laughed shamelessly.
    “Which the catcher, and who the coney?
  What I have seen is truly averred,
  But what I have heard is--what I have heard!”
    Thus to himself, with a secret mirth,
    The only man who had seen the earth._




PREFACE


The book gives a view of the earth and its inhabitants as seen through
the haze of distance, whether of space or of time. Its purpose is to
present those myths and half-myths of geography which are loosely and
yet significantly called travel tales. It treats of various countries
and races and animals which are, or were, or might have been. Although
their true domain is the imagination, their supposed domain is, or was,
somewhere on the earth. The Coasts of Illusion, as glimpsed here, are
nowhere the shores of the supernatural.

Always the two tend to merge and the problem has been to keep them
apart. The travel tales of the race have grown out of, or become
entangled with, myths in which men sought to figure the creation of the
world, the journeys of the sun from dawn to darkness, the conflicts of
light with storm and night and winter, the high places of the gods and
their incarnations and agents. Yet the tales are touched with reality,
while the myths are unearthly.

Ulysses tarried among the Phacakians, and these were a cloud people;
but he skirted the land of the lotus-eaters, and these were a mundane
folk. Who were the lotus-eaters? Achilles fought with Memnon, son of
the Dawn, but also with Penthesilea, the Amazon queen. Who were the
Amazons? Hercules was of the progeny of Olympian Zeus, but wandering on
earth he passed through the land of the pygmies. Who were the pygmies?
What reality lies back of the fabulous animals and Deformed Folk that
peopled the mountains and deserts?

For thousands of years men accepted the realms and races of prodigy. It
was only about a century ago that these disappeared from the maps and
natural histories. The frontiers of ignorance had been pushed back so
far that the never-never countries dropped off into the sea. There was
no longer room for the phœnix to flap its wings, the dragon to hiss and
roar, the giants to stalk, the kangaroo-men to hop.

The countries and creatures of legend passed from the scene without
the parting word that every passing merits, without even a gesture of
farewell. Is it more than a tardy courtesy to summon them back for a
word that shall be both appraisal and remembrance?

These are the stories wanderers told in hall when the world was young;
and in out-of-the-way places still they tell them, and men believe.
These are stories the lad Raleigh heard along wharves where sailors
in outlandish garb recited the wonders of countries below the rim of
the sea. If one could recapture Raleigh’s boyish faith, and the faith
of ages of listeners before him, it might still be possible to behold
the King of Is in state beside the menacing ocean, to traverse the
streets of the lost Atlantis, to win to the cities of gold which Spain
could not find, and to repeople the waste places with their strange
inhabitants. So might one achieve the purpose of these pages and regain
a picture of things as they were supposed to be.

This is a survey of the world through the stained glass of men’s
imaginings.

C. B. F.

[Illustration]




THE COASTS OF ILLUSION

[Illustration]




Chapter I. The World That Was


The geography, anthropology, and natural history of this volume present
a world a little different from that which is outlined in modern
text-books and yet one that is familiar. It is the traditional world
of wonder, which until yesterday was believed to be the real world. A
map of it would show the same continents, and some of the same races of
men and species of animals that are delineated in any atlas of to-day;
but there would be changes. Asia would bear far away into the unknown
spaces of the East. A shadowy continent would stretch across the open
waters of the Indian Ocean. The clouds and darkness of supernatural
terrors, or dimly remembered fates, would shroud the Atlantic, the
Green Sea of Gloom of the Arab geographers. Looming vaguely in the
mists southwest of Gibraltar one would discern a lost continent. One
would see there, also, smaller bodies of land which on a second glance
are seen no more.

Within the contours of continents and islands there would be countries
which seem to belong both to fable and to fact. The Incense Kingdom
would be there on both sides of the Red Sea, but its sumptuous ritual
and swooning odors would suggest little now to be found in southern
Arabia and Somaliland. The Spice Islands would be there, but wearing
the splendor of a world-desire of which no trace is left to the
Moluccas. There would be seen the haughty realm of Prester John and the
vast pastures of Gog and Magog; but on a modern map of Asia one does
not find the country of the priest king and must look under other names
for the terrifying races of Hebrew and Moslem legend.

On the map would appear the gold port of Ophir and the golden land of
Havilah, but the Arab haven was silted up ages ago, and the abandoned
mine-workings of Rhodesia minister no more to the pride of kings.
The Arcadia that it would picture, of pastoral innocence and bucolic
song, has faded from the central uplands of the Morea, and the rugged
mountain land hears no longer the pipes of Pan. There are other regions
of enchantment--deserts where demon-voices tempted the traveler from
his track, mountains where cymbals clashed and lights gleamed at night,
countries of serene charm which were placed so far away that few people
ever reached them. Of these regions the modern maps know nothing.

If the map of the traditional world were pictorial, as such maps ought
to be, it would show strange races of men in Asia, in Africa, in South
America, in the sea-washed islands, and in the seas themselves. There
would be Amazons sweeping down upon the Mediterranean settlements,
pygmies battling with cranes in Upper Egypt, satyrs pursuing women in
African woodlots, troglodytes of Arabia looking on with indifference
while strangers maltreated their offspring. The vistas of Asia and
Africa would disclose men taking their siestas beneath the shade of
their own gigantic feet, sleeping at night under the cover of their
elephant-like ears, supporting life by smelling flowers rather than
eating food. Sixteenth-century charts of the Spanish Americas would
reveal the unsuspected fact that these creatures dwelt also in the new
world, and that mermaids sang upon its coasts, as upon those of the old.

A pictorial map of the traditional world would show that it was a
menagerie of strange animals as well as a museum of prodigious peoples.
The lairs and roosts of heraldry would return their tenants to its
blank spaces. The phœnix would be seen winging its way from Araby the
Blest, or mounting its own funeral pyre in the City of the Sun in Lower
Egypt. The Desert of Gobi would show the griffin, a formidable guard
for its stores of fabled gold. The unicorn would be sketched doing the
elephant to death in the jungles of Asia and Africa. The baleful glare
of the basilisk would be staged in the recesses of Libya. The dragon’s
breath would poison earth and air and water alike. The harpies and the
Stymphalian birds would raise their shrill clamor beside the brink of
sea or marsh. Among other creatures in the ocean would be depicted the
monstrous orc, the kraken of the northern deeps, and the ubiquitous,
immemorial, and enigmatic sea serpent. The familiar animals of natural
history would share with the fabled creatures the forests, pastures,
and waters of the mimic world of the map, but the text would point out
novel things about them.

[Illustration: _A Voyage to These Strangely Peopled Countries of
the World’s Yesterdays Would Be a Voyage Along the Bays, Gulfs, and
Promontories of the Human Mind in Its States of Dream_]

A voyage to these strangely peopled countries of the world’s yesterdays
would be a voyage along the bays, gulfs, and promontories of the human
mind in its states of dream.

There are three chambers in the house of the mind. One of them is a
place where pleasant bedtime stories are told. Another is the art
gallery of hope and memory. The third is a museum where runs the law of
topsy-turvy. The name of the house is Illusion.

A glance through a few of the older books of travel will show illusion
weaving its careless spells over plain records of wandering. “We fared
on,” says Sindbad, “from sea to sea and from island to island and city
to city in all delight and contentment, buying and selling wherever we
touched, and taking our solace and our pleasure.” The words prepare
the reader for enchantments. One of the Hakluyt narratives speaks of
“Zanzibar, on the backeside of Africa.” This is geography somehow
touched with magic. When Drake was cruising around South America,
his chronicler recites that on a certain day “wee had a very sweet
smell from off the land.” Simple as are the words, their quality is
dreamlike. The account of Raleigh’s third voyage to Guiana has this
passage: “There being divers whales playing about our pinnesse, one of
them crossed our stemme and going under, rubbed her backe against our
keele.” The lines unlock the frolic wonder of the sea.

The same quality illuminates reports of other lands and peoples taken
almost at random. The ancient Cimbri, says Strabo, explained their
wandering life and piracy by the fact that once they had dwelt on a
peninsula and had been driven out by a very high tide. The ancient
Getae wept at births and laughed at funerals; and in the _Arabian
Nights_ Abdallah of the Sea broke off his friendship with Abdallah of
the Land, when he learned that his people mourned rather than rejoiced
over their dead. Purchas tells of a Livonian people, ignorant but
unashamed, that “aske who learne the Hares in the woods their prayers.”
The same writer declares that Ethiopians hold their color in such
estimation that they paint the saints and angels black, but “the Divell
and wicked persons they paint white.” Pinkerton describes a tribe of
white Indians east of the Andes, whose naked and beautiful women use
a guttural speech and emphasize every remark by striking their thighs
with great force. The Eskimos attributed the Northern Lights to the
merriment of the ghosts. A Florida tribe made a cult of the devil
because the Spaniards feared him.

The thing these statements have in common is that perhaps none of them
is quite true, and yet one wishes to believe all of them.

The shaping influence in the traditional world is the power of wish.
The poets may seem to use it more than other men, and children more
than grown-ups, but it is the province of mankind.




Chapter II. The Earth Itself


Enveloping old stories of legendary lands and peoples as with an outer
husk are beliefs which relate to the world as a whole. These concern
the shape of the earth, the texture of the heavens, the distribution of
land and water, the contours of continents, and the precise number of
islands, countries, and cities. What they disclose is the instinct of
men working through the apparent confusion of nature toward order. In
all of them is the sense of symmetry, of balance, and because they are
excursions into the unknown, the method of allegory. The true symmetry
of the universe--the great annual journey of the earth around a sun
itself in motion in a firmament so vast that through the ages the stars
seem not to have changed their places--was not grasped. The result was
errors, picturesque sometimes, sometimes more useful than truth.

Wherever one stands, the meeting line of the sky and earth forms a
circle of which one is the center. This picture shaped the primitive
geography. The earth was a disk and each people seemed to itself to
be at the central point. In Homer it was a disk surrounded by a river
called the Ocean Stream. The farther shore of this river supported
the brazen dome of heaven, and earth and heaven were kept apart by
the pillars which Atlas bore on his shoulders. Thales taught that the
earth was a sort of drum floating upright in the wilderness of waters.
The ancient Hebrews thought that the earth was a rising plain which
floated like a lotus flower in the waters. The Tibetans believed the
earth to be cone-shaped. The Chinese thought that all other lands were
grouped as islands about their own. The Celts thought the earth rested
on columns and in the Irish sea-tales various islands are pictured
as standing on pillars. In North America the plains tribes thought
that the Rocky Mountains supported the sky, the Pacific coast tribes
conceived of the earth as an island swimming in the cosmic waters, and
the Southwestern tribes gave it as many stories as the tallest of their
public dwellings. The Shoshones said the vault of the sky was a dome of
ice against which the rainbow-snake rubbed its back, and the Haida said
that the firmament regularly rose and fell, the clouds striking the
mountains with an audible noise. According to many Western tribes the
canopy of heaven was pierced with holes at the four cardinal points,
and these were constantly opening and closing; a sky-world like the
earth was beyond, into which swans and shamans could pass. All peoples
believed that the earth was immovable, with the sun revolving around
it. Many thought it rested on the back of some animal--a buffalo, a
tortoise, a catfish.

Sometimes more sophisticated and still more fanciful ideas were
entertained. To one school of Greek thought the world was a living
being and man himself a microcosm, a little world, as Paracelsus called
him. The sun and moon were the two eyes of the world, the earth its
body, the ether its intellect, and the sky its wings. It was held that
the movements of man and of the world were in exact correspondence;
hence astrology, which interprets the one by the other. To the
Venerable Bede the universe was an egg, the earth its yolk, the water
the white of the egg, the air its membrane, and the encircling fire the
shell or cover of all.

Cosmas took literally the utterance of St. Paul that the tabernacle was
a figure of the world. In an amazing exercise of ingenuity he found
the oblong design, the walls, roof, and floor, the candlesticks, the
Ark of the Covenant, and the table of shewbread of this Jewish desert
booth all repeated in the shape and furnishings of the universe. His
scheme of things has been compared to a traveler’s trunk, with its body
standing for the earth, the flat tray for the firmament, and the curved
lid for the arch of upper heaven. The effects of day and night were
produced, Cosmas thought, about as they are on the stage. There was a
tall mountain in the north. When the sun went behind it darkness fell;
when the sun came out from behind it, there was light. This conception
lacks both the intelligence and the poetry of the American Indian myth
where the Sun-Carrier is pictured as hanging the sun on a peg on the
west wall of his lodge and then unrolling in succession the robe of
dawn, the robe of blue sky, the robe of golden evening light and the
robe of darkness.

The sense of symmetry demanded that the earth should have a central
point, and each country sought it somewhere in its own borders. Homer
thought that this was on Mount Olympus, where the Greek gods dwelt. The
Hindus thought that it was on Mount Meru, where their own gods dwelt.
The Chinese fixed it on Mount Sumeru on a circle of gold and with the
sun and moon revolving around it; this was surrounded by the seven
sacred mountains, the seven seas, and the four inhabited continents.

Christian pilgrims said that Jerusalem was in the center of the earth,
quoting the Psalm, “For God is my King of old, working salvation in the
midst of the earth.” There was a spot not far from the place of Calvary
which the Lord had signified and measured, and this was called Compas.
It was something pilgrims could see and touch. For eight centuries
the legend was current, and for three centuries, until nearly the
time of Columbus, it dominated European maps of the world, which were
wheel-shaped, with Jerusalem at the hub.

Among the Eastern nations the sources and courses of rivers had
sometimes a cosmic significance. They flowed from the center of the
earth or from the Terrestrial Paradise. From the Cool Lake which was
in the midst of Asia, to the south of the Fragrant Mountains and to
the north of the Snowy Mountains, flowed four great rivers, according
to the Chinese. The Ganges issued from the eastern side of the lake
through the mouth of a silver ox, and found the southeastern sea. The
Indus issued from the southern side through the mouth of a golden
elephant, and found the southwestern sea. The Oxus issued from the
western side through the mouth of a horse of lapis lazuli, and found
the northwestern sea. The River of China issued from the northern side
through the mouth of a crystal lion, and found the northeastern sea.

In the Genesis story a river goes out of Eden to water the garden and
divides into four--Pison, which compasses the golden land of Havilah;
Gihon, which compasses Ethiopia; Hiddekel, which goes toward the east
of Assyria; and Euphrates. Josephus, the Romanized Jew, assimilated
the Hebrew geography with the Greek account of an Ocean Stream that
flowed around the earth. This encircling river, he said, was the source
of the four biblical streams. The Arabs also accepted the rivers of
Eden and showed ingenuity in tracing their courses to the distant lands
where flowed the streams they had identified with them. So did John
Marignolli, the fourteenth-century Franciscan traveler.

Paradise, he said, was in Ceylon, about forty miles distant from Adam’s
Peak, which he visited. On this latter peak was Adam’s footprint and
the garden he tilled when expelled from the abode of innocence. The
Mount of Eden overtopped it, and almost always the mists brooded there,
but one could hear the waters falling from the sacred fount out of
which the four rivers came. These flowed away from the island of Ceylon
by channels under the ocean, the Gihon becoming the Nile, the Pison
passing through India and China, and doubling back through the deserts
to die in the sands and be born again as the Caspian Sea.

With the greater portion of the earth unknown, a curious custom
obtained of using definite figures in default of definite facts.
Dicuil, the Irish scholar, said that there were 2 seas, 72 islands, 40
mountains, 65 provinces, 281 towns, 55 rivers, and 116 peoples; he had
read this in what he called the cosmography of Julius Cæsar and Mark
Antony. Idrisi declared that there were 27,000 islands in the Atlantic.
Mariners on the Sea of China told Marco Polo that it contained
precisely 7,440 islands, mostly inhabited. In the Indian Ocean, he
said, there were 12,700 islands. The Koreans had an old tradition that
there were fourscore and four thousand several countries upon the
earth, but themselves doubted it. The sun could not warm so many lands,
they thought. Their real belief was that there were but twelve kingdoms
or countries. When the Dutch explorers named other countries to them
they laughed; the visitors must be talking of towns and villages.

Sometimes the sense of symmetry, sometimes poetic instinct and the
desire for graphic imagery, led men to give the habitable world the
outlines of animate or inanimate objects. Strabo likened it to a
chlamys, or soldier’s cloak. Dionysius Afer said it was like a sling.
The California Indians said it was like a mat with the long way north
and south. Massoudy likened it to a bird. The head of the bird was at
Mecca and Medina, Africa was its tail, Irak and India its right wing,
and the land of Gog and Magog its left wing. Other writers pictured
the earth in the semblance of a man, with the head in the southern
hemisphere, and the feet or under part in the northern; the right hand
was the east, whence began the movement of the _primum mobile_, and
the left the west, whither it trended. As the head was the noblest
part, governing the rest of the body, so Ptolemy thought, the southern
hemisphere was nobler than the other parts of the earth, and the stars
above it were more resplendent and of greater virtue than those of the
northern.

The tides were the breath of the living earth, Solinus thought. A
large man on the beach of the ocean gets up and sits down twice a
day, said the Tahltan Indians of Canada; twice a day a colossal crab
comes out of and goes back to its cave at the foot of the world-tree,
said the Malays; for six hours a serpent at the rim of the world
draws in its breath and for six hours lets it out, said the Scotch
islanders--wherefore the tides ebb and flow. The Gauls endowed them
with life and attacked them with weapons.

Ptolemy pictured Great Britain as a Z written backward. Strabo compared
Spain to an ox hide. Numantianus likened Italy to an oak leaf. India
was thought to be an exact equilateral triangle.

There were conflicting views as to the south. Although by the beginning
of the historical period the Sabæans and Phœnicians had gone down the
eastern coast of Africa through the Indian Ocean some twenty degrees
beyond the equator to seek the gold of Havilah, these ventures into
the zone of torrid heat were not for the Atlantic and the peoples of
the west. The insidious fictions of the Semitic mariners had awakened
their fears. No man, they thought, could live in the lands of vertical
sunlight. In what lay beyond these, they had as little interest as men
have now in the possible populations of other planets. Europeans of
the early Christian era put aside the notion which enlightened Greeks
had entertained that there might be “opposite peoples of the south.”
Assuming the inhuman heat of the torrid zone, it was evident that a
tropical people could not be of the race of Adam, and heresy was in the
thought of any other lineage.

Lactantius, the Christian Cicero of the third century, is remembered
because he gave popular error rhetorical expression and because his
words were flung at Columbus twelve centuries afterward, when he
appeared before the Council of Salamanca to justify his theory that
one might reach the east by sailing west. “Can any one be so foolish,”
asked Lactantius, “as to believe that there are men whose feet are
higher than their heads, or places where trees may be growing backward
or rain falling upward? Where is the marvel of the hanging gardens of
Babylon, if we are to allow of a hanging world at the Antipodes?” Pliny
had answered him with another question two centuries before. “If any
one,” he said, “should ask why those situated opposite to us do not
fall, we directly ask in return, whether those on the opposite side do
not wonder that we do not fall.”

Even when the ancient world had accepted the theory that the earth was
a sphere, this seemed to it somehow half as long again from east to
west as from north to south, and the belief is preserved in the two
terms, Longitude and Latitude. The limits of the habitable earth were
Thule, or Iceland, to the north; Taprobane, or Ceylon, to the east;
the Aromatic Cape, to the south, and the Sacred Promontory in Portugal
to the west. North of Thule it was too cold, and south of the Cape of
Spices it was too hot, to support life.

All that the ancient world knew of geography was gathered up by Ptolemy
and systematized in a scheme which among learned men was the standard
of belief for fourteen centuries afterward. This great Egyptian of the
second century eliminated errors, corrected reckonings, and brought
his science abreast of facts which traders had gathered. He made,
however, three great errors, each, as it proved, more useful than the
truth would have been. Ptolemy estimated the circumference of the earth
as one-sixth less than the fact, although Eratosthenes had already
reached the correct figure. Thus the true sailing distance from Spain
west to Asia was reduced by about 4,000 miles and the later venture of
Columbus made to seem a task less formidable. Ptolemy also gave Asia a
vast extension eastward, further reducing the apparent distance of a
westward route from Europe to the Orient.

[Illustration: CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS AT THE COURT OF FERDINAND THE
CATHOLIC AND ISABELLA OF CASTILE

_By_ V. von Brozik]

His third error was to assume that another continental mass joined the
southern extension of Africa with a southeastern extension of Asia,
completely landlocking the Indian Ocean. This was the Terra Australis
Incognita of the older charts. It seemed to be needed to balance the
land masses of the northern hemisphere and satisfy the persistent
demand of the mind for symmetry in the arrangement of the earth. This
vast domain has disappeared from the maps, but its name and part of its
area are preserved in the island continent of Australia. Thus Ptolemy
anticipated the discoveries of the Portuguese, Dutch, and English.

Much of what Ptolemy knew succeeding ages forgot. The mediæval
conception of the world was that of a T within an O with the east at
the top of the circle because Paradise was there and deserved the
highest place, and Jerusalem as its center. The lower half of the
circle was divided by the Mediterranean equally between Europe and
Africa, while the upper half was all assigned to Asia. The Ægean and
Red seas, branching to the left and the right from the head of the
Mediterranean, divided the upper and lower halves of the circle, and
these three seas formed the T within the O. Around all flowed the Ocean
Stream.

Intellectually, this presentation of the habitable earth belongs in
about the ninth century B. C. rather than the fifteenth century A. D.,
but the map, like the Ptolemaic geography, was a brief for discovery.
It cut off the south of Africa, and made it seem a short voyage around
it to India, and thereby it encouraged efforts to open a sea route to
the Orient. It immensely extended Asia to the east, and thereby led
Columbus to believe it might more easily be reached by sailing west.
Also, it revived the reign of fable and made a new world of wonder.
There were blank spaces on the map of Asia. The monkish map-makers
filled them in with pictures of monstrous races and animals drawn from
the classics, from Old Testament imagery, and from the Arab repertory.

It seemed at last that all the mistakes of geography were in conspiracy
to unlock the unknown half of the world. The apocryphal book of Esdras
had said that the earth was one part water and six parts dry land. That
three-fourths of its surface was sea, nobody surmised. Marco Polo had
moved Zipangu (Japan) a thousand miles east from its real position by
giving its distance from the mainland of Asia as 1,500 miles instead
of 1,500 li--a Chinese measure of about one-third of a mile. In the
map of Toscanelli, on which Columbus counted much, the Asiatic coast
was placed where California is. The Azores were supposed to lie far
west of their true position. Columbus did not dream that 210 degrees
of longitude lay between Lisbon and Japan by the westward route. He
believed that by sailing from the Azores for about 3,100 miles he would
find Zipangu, and not unknown Florida. “_El mundo es poco_” (“the world
is small”), he exclaimed, and steered confidently toward the setting
sun.

These great errors made the adventures of the Genoese in the New World
a gorgeous illusion--the vestibule into a past where, as he thought,
other feet had trodden, instead of the threshold of continents his
feet were first to press. To him it seemed only that he was reading
the book of Marco Polo backward. The gold and aromatics of which he
found traces were those of the Golden Chersonese and the Spice Islands
of the East. An Indian tale of a white-robed cacique aroused his hope
of an interview with Prester John. He dispatched a mission, including
a converted Jew who knew Hebrew, Chaldaic, and a little Arabic, to a
chieftain of Cuba, in the hope that thus he might establish relations
with the princely house of Kublai Khan. Presently he would sail farther
and, leaving the tropical islands behind him, would round the Malay
Peninsula, cross the Bay of Bengal and the Sea of the Arabs, and make
his way by land from Ethiopia to Jerusalem, and by ship from Joppa back
to Spain. It was a soaring dream, yet its wings beat feebly beneath the
pinions of the tremendous reality the man died without comprehending.

Columbus added another chapter to one of the oldest beliefs--the theory
of a world summit. Aristotle had thought that the highest part of
the earth was under the antarctic pole, others that it was under the
arctic pole. Columbus held that it was under the equator. The earth,
he thought, had the shape of a pear instead of an orange. It seemed
to him he knew just when the globe began to swell toward heaven. This
was about a hundred leagues west of the Azores. There the magnetic
needle swung from northeast to northwest. The airs became more pure
and genial, the sea grew tranquil. From the climate of oppressive heat
and unwholesome air, the explorer ascended the back of the sea, as one
ascends a mountain toward heaven. The culminating point was on the
Tierra Firma of South America, which might be approached by way of the
Gulf of Paria. Thence flowed the mighty stream of the Orinoco.

A Spanish historian, excusing this fancy of Columbus, remarks that
mathematicians have since demonstrated that he was not entirely wrong.
The diameter of the earth is twenty-seven miles greater at the equator
than at the poles, and the mountain country of Ecuador, beyond the
headwaters of Orinoco, is the true world summit, for, of all lands, it
lies nearest heaven.




Chapter III. Inanimate Nature


The progress of knowledge has been an advance from poetry to prose.
In part it has consisted in forgetting the things that were not so.
Through most of the story of mankind everything was fabulous. There
were no inanimate objects at the beginning. Sticks and stones had a
soul. This belief passed, but some quality of marvel remained--the
rhythm of the moon repeated in things terrestrial; the loves and
antipathies of the plants; the properties of gems to bring good fortune
or ill, to promote fecundity, to test the continence of men and women.
There was an unwieldy mass of topographical legends. Every township had
its shrine, or wonder-working well, or hill or tree that broke a law
of nature. There were strange cures for aches and pains. Illusion was
everywhere. The lumber rooms of history are stored with traditions in
which is the faint fragrance of faded wonder.

Sea and sky had each their part in the drama of life. To the Celt the
voices of the waves carried warning, or sympathy, or prophecy. The
ninth wave was larger than those before it, and mystery was in it.
It was thought that no man or animal beside the Gallic sea died with
a rising tide. The sun sank into the ocean with a hissing sound, and
there were races on both sides of the world that heard it. The moon,
Pliny said, “is not unjustly regarded as the star of our life.” All
seas were purified when it was full, the Nile waxed and waned with it,
and sap in trees, and even men’s blood, increased or diminished with
its phases. The time of the rising of the Dog Star was a sort of zero
hour for many things in nature and husbandry.


_The Table of the Sun_

There was a Table of the Sun, where the earth itself presided as host.
Herodotus was the first to describe it. He says that when Cambyses,
the Persian king, was in Egypt, he sent spies into Ethiopia under
the pretense of bearing gifts to court, but in reality to see if the
table were a fact. The spies came back with various stories--that the
Ethiopians drank only milk and water, that they lived to be one hundred
and twenty years old, that the Fountain of Youth bubbled up in that
country, and that they had seen the Table of the Sun. This was set
by direction of the magistrates in a meadow in the outskirts of the
capital city, and the people of the land said that the earth itself
brought forth the food spread upon the table for all comers. For a full
description one may use with advantage the idiomatic paraphrase of
Purchas:

“Of the Table of the Sunne thus writeth Friar Luys de Urreta: that the
king in a curious braverie, and sumptuous vanitie, caused there to bee
set by night in a certain field store of white bread, and the choysest
wines; hanged also on the Trees great varietie of Fowles, rost and
boyled, and set on the ground, Mutton, Lambe, Veale, Beefe, with many
other dainties ready dressed. Travellers and hungry persons which came
hither and found this abundance, seeing no bodie which prepared, or
which kept the same, ascribed it to _Jupiter Hospitalis_ his bounty
and hospitality, shewing himselfe a Protector of poore Travellers, and
called this field the _Table of the Sunne_. The report hereof passed
through the world, and brought many Pilgrims from farre Countries,
to visit the same. _Plato_ the Prince of Philosophers entred into
Aethiopia, led with desire to see this renowned _Table_ and to eate of
those delicacies. The Aethiopians, since their Christianity, in zealous
detestation of Idolatry, will not so much as name this field, and these
ancient Rites.”

It has been suggested that the legend derives from the system of dumb
trading between civilized and savage peoples which in Africa antedates
history. If this be so, the wheat was supplied by merchants rather than
by the king, the magistrates laid down the rules for the voiceless
market, and the natives, coming after the merchants had withdrawn, left
gold in exchange for what they took away.


_The Mountain of Lodestone_

Agib, son of a sultan and by his vicissitudes become the Third Calendar
of the _Arabian Nights_, had embarked with all the royal fleet on a
tour of his provinces. A storm blew them out of their course, and then
by virtue of the iron in the ships they were drawn irresistibly toward
a black mountain or mine of adamant that loomed before them. They saw
upon it a dome of fine brass and on the dome a brazen horse, carrying
a rider who had a plate of lead on his breast, on which talismanic
characters were graven. Suddenly “all the nails and iron in the ships
flew toward the mountain, where they were fixed, by the violence of
the attraction, with a horrible noise; the ships split asunder, and
their cargoes sunk into the sea,” with all the men save Agib himself.
He gained the shore, climbed to the dome, and slept there, in his sleep
receiving good counsel. The next day he shot three arrows of lead from
a bow of brass at the brazen horse and its rider. They were toppled
over, the sea rose and engulfed the mountain, and Agib was ferried off
to fresh adventures.

Some Bedouin or Persian story-teller of the bazaars may have added the
detail of the heaven-kissing statue and its overthrow, but the body of
the narrative is one of the oldest of legends. Men have always been
curious about the lodestone. The tale of the magnetic mountain to which
ships built with iron bolts are drawn is found in Aristotle, Pliny,
and Ptolemy, in the Arab geographies, in Chinese writings, and in the
reports of explorers clear to the close of the mediæval period. Ogier
the Dane in the Charlemagne cycle was wrecked on such a mountain and
like Agib was spared for sensuous delights. In a twelfth-century poem,
when the ship of Duke Ernst entered the Klebermeer, it was drawn to the
rock called Magnes and found itself among “many a work of keels,” over
which the masts rose like a tangled forest.

Ptolemy is the most definite of the early writers. “There are said to
be ten islands,” he says, “forming a continuous group called Maniolai,
from which ships with iron nails are said to be unable to move away,
and hence they are built with wooden bolts. The inhabitants are reputed
to be cannibals.” Dampier, Gemelli-Careri, and many others identify
Maniolai with Manila, and assume that the magnetic islands were the
Philippines; but Gerini, a sagacious editor of Ptolemy’s eastern
geography, believes they were the Nicobars.


_The River Sambation_

Rising in a pious Jewish fable, first recited in Josephus, the River
Sambation has flowed for eighteen centuries through the geography of
legend. It separated the lost Ten Tribes from other Jews, or from the
subjects of Prester John. Some said it was in Caucasia, others in
Arabia; and from as far east as China and as far west as Ethiopia it
was reported. Josephus placed it between Raphanea and a district of
Agrippa’s kingdom; it was called the Sabbatic river because it ran only
on Saturdays, its bed being dry the other six days of the week. Pliny
had it, however, that on Saturdays the stream rested. Much was heard
of it in the Middle Ages. Eldad Hadani, a ninth-century traveler, said
it was in the land of Cush. It had little water, but sand and stones
rolled restlessly down its bed with a noise “like the waves of the sea
and a stormy wind”; on the Sabbath their tumult was stilled and flames
surrounded the river so that none could pass.

The stream was in India, spice groves bordered it, and quantities of
precious stones went down in its billowing sand to the sea; so said
the letter of Prester John. It was fifty days’ journey inland from
Aden, said the Jewish traveler Obadiah di Bertinoro, for thus Arab
traders had told him. A Jewish geographer, Abraham Farissol, also of
the fifteenth century, identified it with the Ganges. Abraham Yazel, a
Jewish scholar of the next century, told of a bottle filled with its
sand, and save on the Sabbath the sand was in motion. A Christian whom
he quoted had seen the river in the dominions of the Grand Turk. It
was from one to four miles broad, with plenty of water, but dangerous
to navigate because of the rocks and sand that rolled along with the
current: “ships which venture on it lose their way, and indeed no ship
is yet known to have returned safely from this river.” An Arabian in
Lisbon carried an hour-glass filled with this uneasy sand on Friday
afternoons through a street of shops run by Jews who had professed
Christianity. “Ye Jews,” he exclaimed, “shut up your shops, for now the
Sabbath comes.” The last word from the Sambation was in 1847, when the
governor of Aden told a messenger seeking aid for Jews of the Holy Land
that there was a great Jewish kingdom forty stages inland, but that the
river was not there; it was in China.


_Magical Springs_

Classic mythology peopled lakes, rivers, brooks, and springs with
female divinities of a minor rank known as naiads, who were endowed
with prophetic power and were able to inspire those who drank of
these waters. The belief in the nymphs waned, but a belief in the
singular properties of the waters long persisted. Many stories relate
to the mental effects thereof. If you drink of a pool in the cave of
the Clarian Apollo at Colophon, says Pliny, you will acquire powers
of oracle; but you will not live long. Ctesias tells of an Indian
fountain the waters of which, when drawn, coagulated like a cheese;
if a little of this were triturated and the powder administered in a
potion, anybody who drank of it would become delirious, rave all that
day, and blab out whatever he had done. Therefore did the king use this
water as the modern drug, scopolamin, has been used, to detect the
guilt of persons accused. In Ethiopia, according to Diodorus, Semiramis
discovered a small lake the sweet red waters of which impelled people
who drank of them to confess their faults. Pliny recites that at the
temple of the god Trophonius in Bœotia near the river Hercynnus are two
fountains, one promoting remembrance and the other forgetfulness; one
is called Mnemosyne, the other Lethe.


_The Fountain of the Sun_

The Fountain of the Sun was rediscovered by a modern traveler, Belzoni,
in the oasis of Jupiter Ammon. He found that the ruins of the temple of
Jupiter Ammon served as a basement for nearly a whole village, in the
vicinity of which was this famous fountain in a deep well. According
to old report it was warm at midnight and cold at noon. The fact is
its temperature does not vary between night and day, and its apparent
changes are due to the greater or less heat of the surrounding air, as
the day advances or declines.


_The Tree of the Sun_

Best known of all trees was the Tree of the Sun. This grew in Persia,
and Maundeville says of it: “Within those Deserts were the Trees of the
Sun and of the Moon, that spoke to King Alexander and warned him of his
Death. And Men say that the Folk that keep those Trees, and eat of the
Fruit and of the Balm that groweth there live well four hundred Year or
five hundred Year, by virtue of the Fruit and of the Balm.” Sir John
said he would have gone toward the trees “full gladly,” but because
of the wild beasts, serpents, and dragons “I trow that one hundred
thousand Men of Arms might not pass the Deserts safely.” However, Marco
Polo passed them safely, and gives one of his terse descriptions of
the tree “called the tree of the sun and by Christians _arbo secco_,
the dry or fruitless tree.” It looked like the chestnut, but its husks
contained no fruit, and probably it was the Oriental plane tree. Here
Alexander fought Darius.


_Wonder-working Trees_

Ctesias has a characteristic traveler’s account of the parebon, an
Indian tree about the size of the olive, but with neither flowers nor
fruit. It has, however, fifteen thick roots, which, like the diviner’s
rod, will attract the precious metals. If a cubit’s length of root be
taken, says the Cnidian, “it attracts lambs and birds, and with this
root most kinds of birds are caught.” If you cast it into wine, it
solidifies the liquor so that it can be held in your hand like a piece
of wax.

The ancients had much to say of the properties of other trees and
plants. It was thought that the laurel or bay tree was never struck
by lightning, and so the peasants of the Pyrenees hold to this day;
the Emperor Tiberius wore a laurel wreath during thunderstorms. The
oak, planted near the walnut, would perish. The shadow of the walnut
was injurious to men and productive of headache. The shadow of the elm
was refreshing. The olive, if so much as licked by a she-goat, became
barren. There was a moral feud between the vine and the cabbage, and
between the vine and the radish, so that the latter was prescribed for
drunkenness. The virtue of the mistletoe, says Pliny, was to resist
all poisons and make fruitful any that used it. The cocoanut and the
betel nut were powerful aphrodisiacs. The gum of the camphor tree bred
impotency. The smell of the basil begat scorpions in the brains of men.
Moly would neutralize sorcery. There was a plant called the eriphia
with a hollow stem, inside of which was a beetle which kept ascending
and descending its narrow home the while it bleated like a kid; this
plant was beneficial to the voice.

The fable of the deadly upas, or poison tree of Macassar, Erasmus
Darwin’s “hydra tree of death,” is modern. According to tradition, a
putrid stream flows from the roots of the tree, which grows in Java,
and the vapors thereof kill. Foersch, a Dutch physician who published
a book in 1783, is mainly responsible for the ill repute of this tree.
He declares that “not a tree nor blade of grass is to be found in the
valley or surrounding mountains. Not a bird or beast, reptile or living
thing lives in the vicinity.” He even asserts that “on one occasion
sixteen hundred refugees encamped within fourteen miles of it, and all
but three hundred died within two months.” Investigation has disproved
all of this. The tree grows in a region where vegetation is luxuriant,
men make a garment of its fiber and walk under its branches, and there
birds roost. The venom known as Macassar poison with which Malays tip
their arrows is, however, made from its gum.

There grows on the island of Hierro in the Canaries a remarkable tree,
if one may credit Richard Hakluyt and others of his time. Hierro is six
leagues in circuit and produces ample foodstuffs for its inhabitants
and their flocks of goats, although no rain falls and no springs gush.
There is, however, a great stone cistern standing at the foot of a tree
with leaves like the olive’s. Clouds hover over the tree “and by means
thereof,” says Hakluyt, “the leaves of the sayd tree continually drop
water, very sweet, into the sayd cisterne, which cometh to the sayd
tree from the clouds by attraction.”

The rain tree of Peru is described as tall, rich in leaves, and
possessed of “the power of collecting the dampness of the atmosphere
and condensing it into a continuous and copious supply of rain.” “In
the dry season,” says a Spanish newspaper quoted in Walsh’s _Handy Book
of Curious Information_, “when the rivers are low and heat great,
the trees’ power of condensing seems at the highest and water falls
in abundance from the leaves and oozes from the trunks. The water
spreads around in veritable rivers. These rivers are canalized so as to
regulate the course of the water.” This singular statement closes with
an estimate that a Peruvian rain tree will yield nine gallons of water
a day, and that 10,000 trees producing daily 385,000 liters of water
can be grown on a square kilometer.

The Weather Bureau at Washington examined (1905) the facts as to the
rain tree, and declared that such a tree never existed. The American
consul-general at Callao reported (1911) that he could find no rain
trees in Peru. Then the Department of Agriculture made a statement that
the rain-tree legend was centuries old, but had no basis. In partial
explanation thereof an English botanist said that cicada-swarms,
settling upon trees, tap their juices, which fall on the ground.

Australia has planted many so-called rain trees.

Ulloa, the Spanish astronomer, brought back to Europe a related story
in 1736. He found at Quito, he said, a species of cane from thirty-five
to fifty feet high and half a foot thick. Until the canes reach full
size most of the tubes contain a quantity of water, and this rises and
falls and is clear or turbid, according to the phases of the moon.


_The Mandrake Myth_

Legends of the mandrake are perhaps a legacy of the ancient dark white
race whose gloomy imaginings and orgiastic practices survived to
color the brighter religions of Greece and Rome, and emerged again in
the witch-burnings of the Middle Ages. These legends are widespread,
uniformly sinister, often obscene. Their basis may be in homeopathic
magic--the belief that like cures like, and also may kill like; or
it may be in the sea, where affinities with the pearl myth have been
noted. It is possible that the mandrake of forbidding fable is just a
stranded cowry, the shell which has been called the first deity.

The mandrake is a member of the potato family growing in Mediterranean
countries. It is an emetic, a purgative, a narcotic poison. Usually its
flesh-colored roots are forked, so that, like a transplanted carrot or
parsnip, it resembles a miniature human figure. On this resemblance,
and on its sleep-producing properties, men have thought that the
legends were based, and in China, ginseng, which also has man-like
roots, has inherited them. The possessor of the mandrake could win good
luck for himself, bring bad luck to others, sway the passions, and even
in some measure command the elements.

Hence the popular notions that the mandrake was an aphrodisiac, that
it relieved barrenness and promoted pregnancy, as in the triangular
episode in Genesis in which Jacob, Rachel, and Leah figured; it was
known as the love-apple, and Venus was called Mandragorotis, while
the Emperor Julian wrote Calixenes that he drank its juices as a love
potion. Hence, also, the belief that it dripped blood when pulled
from the earth and, as Homer says, emitted a deathly shriek fatal
to the man who heard it; according to Josephus it was the custom
in a certain Jewish village to use a dog to pull up the roots, the
dog being killed by the shrieks that followed. Grimm describes this
process, which consisted in Germany of loosening the soil about the
root, tying the root to the dog’s tail, retreating to a safe distance
down the wind, and then decoying the dog with a piece of bread. The
dead canine was buried on the spot with religious honors, and the root
“washed with wine, wrapped in silk, laid in a casket, bathed every
Friday, and clothed in a little new white smock every new moon. If thus
considerately treated, it acts as a familiar spirit, and every piece of
coin laid by it at night doubles in the morning.”

Thus the mandrake legend entered its mediæval phase of devil worship.
The root was used as a charm against nightmare, and against robbers,
and to locate buried treasure. It was supposed to be a living creature
“engendered,” as Thomas Newton says, “under the earth of the seed of
some dead person put to death for murder,” or, as Grimm says, “growing
up beneath the gallows from which a thief is suspended.” Heads were
carved on the mandrakes and these elaborated images went by the names
of manikin and erdman, or earth-man. As much as twenty-five ducats
in gold was paid for them. They were often carried on the person
in bottles, and bottle imps were credited with the magic powers of
homunculi. But if a man died with one of these upon his person, the
devil owned him forthwith. Joan of Arc was charged with carrying such
an image about with her, but replied that she did not know what a
mandrake was. Margaret Bouchey was hanged near Orléans in 1603 on the
ground that she kept a living mandrake fiend, in form of a female ape.

Mandrake manikins were counterfeited from the root of a yam-like plant,
which had been manipulated into a complete likeness of the human body.
Sir Thomas Browne describes the process: “The roots which are carried
about by imposters to deceive unfruitful women are made of the roots of
canes, briony, and other plants; for in these, yet fresh and virent,
they carve out the figures of men and women, first sticking therein
the grains of barley or millet where they intend the hair should grow;
then bury them in sand until the grains shoot forth their roots, which,
at the longest, will happen in twenty days; they afterward clip and
trim those tender strings in the fashion of beards and other hairy
teguments. All which, like other impostures, once discovered, is easily
effected, and in the root of white briony may be practiced every
spring.”

A century ago mandrake images were still seen in French seaport towns,
but now mandragora has lost its vogue even as a medicine. In Africa and
the East, however, it is still used as a narcotic and anti-spasmodic,
while ginseng, which is a surrogate, maintains its spell in China,
where as much as four hundred dollars has been paid for an ounce of it.


_Precious Stones_

Among minerals jade held a place as distinct as that of the mandrake
among plants, but its associations were all auspicious. Its place is
the highest among the precious stones, although it is not a precious
stone at all. It is a substance to which heliolithic culture attached
magical power and which it carried quite around the world before
history began, Aryans, Kanakas, and red Indians holding it in equal
regard. Axes and hatchets of jade or jadeite have been uncovered in
the burial grounds of neolithic Europe, and there are jade celts,
cylinders, and amulets bearing Greek, Babylonian, and Egyptian
inscriptions. In a sense the civilization of China has been built up
around this stone. Eighteen centuries before the Christian era the
emperors of the Shang dynasty used it in the state ritual, paying
homage to the east with a green jade tablet, to the south with a red
tablet, to the west with a white tablet, and to the north with a black
tablet. According to Confucius, “its sound, pure and sonorous, with its
peculiarity of ceasing abruptly, is the emblem of music; its splendor
resembles the sky, and its substance, drawn from mountain and stream,
represents the earth.” An ancient caravan trade in this stone is
commemorated by a portal in the Great Wall called the Jade Gate.

The Amazon stone which the Spaniards obtained from the South American
Indians was jadeite. By them as well as by their conquerors it was
thought to be a cure for diseases of the kidneys, hence its name of
nephrite. A revived interest in jade followed American exploration.
Historically it has been treasured as a cure for colic and for diseases
of the spleen and loins; hung against the stomach, Galen believed it
a remedy for cramps. It was a good-luck charm, and, fashioned into
drinking cups, a detector of poisons, which foamed against the brim.
It survives in art and symbolism after having passed out of magic and
medicine.

Many of the old traditions about stones persist in popular belief,
which holds certain kinds of gems and individual jewels as lucky or
unlucky; and in fashion, which assigns to each month its appropriate
birthstone. It was supposed that the garnet preserved health, that
the ruby was a remedy for plague, that the turquoise protected from
accident, that the eagle-stone would promote childbirth, that the
emerald would prevent epilepsy, that the topaz would cure insanity,
that lapis lazuli was a purgative, and bezoar antidotal. Jasper was
a febrifuge and rock crystal quenched thirst. An amethyst would
prevent intoxication, a bloodstone would confer the gift of prophecy,
a chrysoprase would cure cupidity, a sapphire would defend against
enchantments, an agate would avert a tempest, a carbuncle would give
light in the dark, an opal would dispel despondency, an emerald would
break if worn in the commerce of the sexes, and a diamond under a
woman’s pillow would discover her incontinency.

[Illustration: _According to Tradition, a Putrid Stream Flows from the
Roots of the Tree and the Vapors Thereof Kill_]

In Christian symbolism, jasper signified the foundation of the
church, emerald the freshness of piety, beryl the illumination of the
divine spirit. Sapphires typified the heavenly-minded, chrysolite those
who let their light shine in word and deed, chalcedony those who fast
and pray in secret.

However vain the pagan jewel-lore from which Christian borrowings were
made, the ideas it arrays are older than the conception of precious
stones as mere adornment. These things were sought and worn at first
as life-givers and luck-bringers, and not because they were beautiful.
Justinus Kerner is of those writers who contend that primitive man was
so attuned to nature that “even the spirit of the stone, now grown
dull and sluggish, was capable of affecting him.” Only when persons
are under the influence of magnetism, says this writer, are they
susceptible to the inherent powers of precious stones; because that
state was in a measure the normal state of early men they found greater
medicinal virtue in gems than in roots and herbs.


_The Wonders of Countries_

The travelers of yesterday found marvel awaiting them in every land.
The sun of India, Ctesias says, appears to be ten times larger than in
other countries, and for four finger-breadths downward the surrounding
seas are so hot that fish cannot come near the surface. It is so hot
in Ormuz, says Maundeville, that “the Folk lie all naked in Rivers and
Waters, Men and Women together, from nine o’clock of the Day till it
be past the Noon.” In the Persian city of Susis, says Strabo, “lizards
and serpents at midday in summer cannot cross the streets quick enough
to prevent their being burnt to death midway by the heat.” Setting one
thing against another, Diodorus says that in Scythia by the force of
cold even brazen statues are burst asunder, while “in the utmost coasts
of Egypt and the Troglodytes the sun is so scorching hot at midday that
two standing together cannot see each other by reason of the thickness
of the air.”

Ctesias speaks of a fountain in India which swims every year with
liquid gold, and out of which are drawn a hundred earthen pitchers
filled with the metal--melted ore, suggests Lassen. There is growing
upon Mount Ida in Scandia, says Father Jerom Dandini, “a herb whose
virtue is to gild the teeth of those animals that eat of it; one may
believe, and with good reason, that this proceeds from the golden
mines which are in that ground.” Herodotus reports the Thracians as
saying that the country beyond the Ister (Danube) is possessed by
bees, wherefore travelers cannot penetrate it; these may have been
mosquitoes. At the altars of Mucius in the country of the Veii, and
about Tusculum and in the Cimmerian Forest, says Pliny, there are
places in which things that are pushed into the ground cannot be pulled
out again.

Geographical marvel may be brought down almost to date with Humboldt’s
report on the moving “stone of the eyes” in South America, which the
natives believed to be both stone and animal; and with Irving’s account
of the extinct thunderbolts which the plains Indians told him they
sometimes used for arrow heads. So armed, a warrior was invincible, but
he vanished if a thunderstorm arose during battle.




Chapter IV. The Animal Kingdom


Much of the literature of marvel relates to real animals. The savage
could see no great difference between them and himself; that their
bodies were unlike his did not seem important. They could reason like
him, they could understand what he said to them, they had souls which,
like his own, lived after death. A beast could assume human shape, a
man could become a beast, and it was totemic theory that some beasts
were ancestors of some men.

There were tribes that acted as if they were beasts, or birds. The
Bororo Indians identified themselves with gorgeous red birds that lived
in the heart of the Brazilian forest, and treated them as if they were
fellow mortals. Travelers have told of savages who ate maggots bred
in the carcasses of animals, and on ceremonial occasions thereafter
writhed, roared, barked, or grunted, in keeping with the nature of the
snake, lion, jackal, or hippopotamus whose body had been the table of
their feast. The people of an Alaskan island mistook the first Russian
party that landed there for cuttlefish, because the men had buttons on
their clothes.

Abundant traces of a belief that animals were beings of a higher order
than men are found in early religion, magic, and medicine. Many of them
were worshiped. Out of a fear that their spirits might work harm, all
of them were propitiated even when pursued or killed. Portions of their
dead bodies were used as amulets and to work spells. Their brains,
blood, entrails, and excrements were a principal part of the Roman
pharmacopœia in the most brilliant age of the Empire; the witches’
broth in Macbeth is an Augustan brew. Along with hundreds of like
prescriptions, Pliny recites that a mole’s right foot and the earth
thrown up by ants are remedies for scrofula, that a bat’s heart is an
antidote for ant venom, that a hen’s brains will cure snake poison and
the owlet’s a bee sting, that profuse perspiration may be checked by
rubbing the body with ashes of burnt goats’ horns mixed with oil of
myrtle, and that catarrh may be relieved by kissing a mule’s nostrils.

Curious as these things may seem, they come naturally from the fact
that primitive man had mainly to do with animals. Outside of his tribal
group he knew other men only as enemies. But all about were furred and
feathered and not unfriendly creatures whose acts had a certainty and
finality lifting them above the doubts and fears that harassed him. He
seemed a late comer and guest in an animal world. So he did what timid
peoples are wont to do. He put himself under the protection of beings
more gifted than himself. He became a vassal of the beasts. This was
the first feudalism.

The savage was glad to assert his kinship with the brute. In the Indian
west it was through the First People, who had the human shape but an
animal nature, and were transformed into beasts and birds; a beast or
a bird then created the second race of men. The natives of Vancouver
Island thought that when nobody was about animals laid aside their
skins and were people. In places the tradition lingers that migratory
birds become men when in other lands. A traveler far from home was
amazed when a stranger called him by name and asked about each member
of the family. The mystery was solved when he learned how this intimate
knowledge was gained; the stranger was the stork that each year built
its nest upon his roof.

Both in skin-shifting and shape-shifting the blood relationship between
man and brute was avowed. In the one, the hero of savage epic, by
donning or doffing an animal skin, put on or put off the beast nature.
In the other, the human or animal actor strutted for a space on his
cousin’s stage. Wizards could transform themselves, as men thought,
into wolves and hyenas; the world-wide legend of the werewolf traces
from the time when metamorphosis was the alpha and omega of myth.
Its survivals strew the classics. Io became a heifer, Actæon a stag,
Antigone a stork, Arachne a spider, Itys a pheasant, Philomela a
nightingale, and Progne a swallow.

Animals took on human form to get better acquainted with men. Indian
story tells of a man who unwittingly married a female buffalo. An
Indian woman wedded a stranger who bade her always throw the bones
in a certain place, and whenever he went out to eat she heard the
barking of a dog near the bone-heap; that was what he was. There are
stories from every continent of the union of women with reptiles that
masqueraded as men. Perhaps because they can assume the erect posture,
bears were often parties to alliances of this kind. It was thought in
Iceland that they were men bewitched and that their progeny were born
human but turned into cubs at a touch of the dam’s paw. The Votiaks
of the American northwest say the bear traces back to man and knows
his speech. When the hide is off, the California Indians aver that
bears are just like people. In a Coos Indian story a girl married
a fine-looking man whom she met while picking berries; but when he
took her to the ancestral lodge, she found herself in a bear camp.
There is a Tlingit tale of a hunter who was captured by a female
grizzly--object, matrimony.

The mitigation of these world stories is that they are literalistic
misreadings of old totemistic custom. Yet it is pleasant enough to
learn from a Tahltan tale that caribou “like to be called people.”

Under totemism, men chose their elder brothers, the brutes, for
guardians, took their names, deposited their own souls with them for
safekeeping, and, after death, entered their bodies. Where totemism
was unknown it was thought that the larger prowling animals might be
tenanted by demons and that their weird howls at night were incidents
of beast debates which had the destinies of men as their topic. It
was well not to affront them even by naming them; better to use
ingratiating epithets, such as “blue-foot,” “gold-foot,” “gray-beard,”
“broad-brow,” “flash-eye,” “forest-brother.” The lesser sort were rogue
heroes in the beast epics--among the Hottentots the jackal; among the
Bantus, the rabbit; among the Orientals, the fox; among the American
Indians, the turtle, coyote, and raven.

As a memorial of the antique relation between man and beast, three out
of every hundred persons in England and America bear animal names.
There is a wealth of detail as to how that relation was carried
down through legend into history. The woodpecker directed the Aryan
migrations, the wolf suckled the founders of Rome, the nest of the
eagle determined the winter camps of the legions, the flights of birds
fixed the sites of cities, and their entrails decided for nations
the issues of war and peace. Animal forms range the entire field of
early man’s interests. Deified bulls, rams, crocodiles, hawks, and
ibises thronged the hospitable pantheon of Egypt. In the speculation
of various peoples the snake, the elephant, the whale, the boar, the
turtle, or the catfish supported the world, and when the creature moved
itself earthquake followed. The dove of Hebrew deluge story found the
earth. The larger animals were in the sky as constellations before
history began. When the moon is in eclipse there are men to believe
that it has been swallowed by a snake, a wolf, a frog, a crab.

In their primitive judicial processes men took oath in the name of
the sacred animal. In their agriculture they conceived of the life
of the grain as residing in an animal corn spirit--a horse, a pig, a
goat, or a dog, which hid itself in the last clump of grain to be cut.
In their marriage ceremonies, the cock, duck, goat, or goose was a
fertility emblem. Totem beasts are tattooed on the bodies of savages.
Animal outlines, at first as a strong magic, were used upon pottery,
clothes, and weapons, and as decoration are still used. In animal masks
and with magical intent, dances are performed which mimic the ways of
beasts. Their feet, horns, claws, and teeth enter the medicine bag of
the shaman. When at last death comes to the savage, perhaps a turkey
buzzard or a humming bird convoys his soul to the other world, or a dog
guards the bridge over which it is to pass to a happier realm, where
the hunting of animals begins anew.

The reverence paid to the least considered of animals may serve to
show in what regard all of them were held and to explain the marvels
told about them. Scattered through the literature and folklore of
various peoples is a copious mass of traditions as to vermin worship
and to practices just suggested by the fact that Beelzebub, the
devil of Jewish Scripture, is the Semitic god of flies. There was a
classic deity known as the mouse-Apollo and tame mice were kept in
his sanctuary. The Philistines sent to Israel, with the captured Ark,
golden images of mice. Isaiah bears witness that certain of the Jews
met secretly in gardens and ate swine’s flesh and mice for sacramental
purposes. In old stories the soul is pictured as issuing from the
mouths of dying or sleeping persons in the form of a mouse. The
Chams of Indo-China erected a pillar to the god rat. Herodotus tells
of the destruction of an Assyrian army in Egypt by the aid of mice
auxiliaries. It is still the custom in some districts of Europe for
peasants to exorcise mice from the crops by running wildly with lighted
torches around the fields on the eve of Twelfth Day; to put the milk
teeth of children in a rat runway, so that the second teeth shall be
as white and strong as the rodent’s; to treat white mice with kindness
so as to bring luck to the house, and even to post a writing with a
message of good will where rats and mice can see it.

While domestic animals which had killed or maimed persons were
regularly tried in the criminal courts of ancient Greece and mediæval
Europe, ecclesiastical courts long exercised jurisdiction over smaller
animal offenders. The curse of the Church was relied upon to reach
vermin against which the secular law knew itself to be powerless; yet
anathema was not pronounced without judicial process. On complaint of
ravaged parishes, field mice, locusts, and beetles were summoned to
appear in court on a certain day and counsel was appointed to defend
them. In defense of accused rats in the diocese of Autun, Chassenée,
the brilliant French advocate of the sixteenth century, laid the
foundations of his fame. He cited biblical and classical writers,
interposed various technical objections, attributed the failure of his
clients to appear to the absence of safe conducts, and demanded that
the plaintiffs give bond that their cats would not molest the defendant
rodents in their journey to court. On their refusal to give bond the
case was adjourned without day.

Many such cases were compromised by setting aside a plot of land
to which the accused creatures might repair for sanctuary. In the
suit of Franciscan friars in Brazil in 1713 against white ants which
had invaded their monastery, the compromise was influenced by the
plea of counsel that the defendants not only had prior possession
of the ground, but were more industrious than the complaining
monks. Ecclesiastical suits were brought at various times against
caterpillars, cockchafers, flies, leeches, moles, snails, slugs,
weevils, and worms. From the ninth to the nineteenth century there is
a record of 144 successful prosecutions of animals, vermin included,
and these are thought to be only a fraction of the total number of such
litigations. The age which brought them was no less sure that insects
had rights, including the right of subsistence, than that the Church
had effectual power over them.


_The Elephant_

About the larger creatures fable has been busy and the foremost figure
is naturally the hugest of the land animals; only with mediæval and
heraldic times did the lion win pre-eminence. Classic tradition
revolves around the elephant’s intelligence, morality, and social
traits. There are stories of its understanding Greek, and even writing
it. As Pliny repeats, “it is sensible alike of the pleasures of love
and glory, and, to a degree that is rare among men even, possesses
notions of honesty, prudence, and equity; it has a religious respect
also for the stars, and a veneration for the sun and the moon.”

When surrounded by hunters, report had it that elephants placed
themselves in battle line, with the smaller-tusked animals in front, so
that the enemy might see that the spoil was unworthy the seeking. When
they perceived themselves about to be overcome, they broke off their
teeth against a tree in order to pay their ransom. While other animals
avoided fire, they resisted and fought it because they saw it destroyed
the forests. When worn out by disease, they have been seen lying on
their backs and casting grass up into the air, “as if deputing the
earth to intercede for them with its prayers.”

John Lok, in his _Voyage to Guinea_, paraphrases an ancient belief as
to the feud between the elephant and what he calls the dragon: “They
have continual warre against Dragons, which desire their blood, because
it is very colde; and therefore the Dragon lying awaite as the Elephant
passeth by, windeth his taile, being of exceeding length, about the
hinder legs of the Elephant, & so staying him, thrusteth his head into
his tronke and exhausteth his breath, or else biteth him in the Eare,
whereunto he cannot reach with his tronke, and when the Elephant waxeth
faint, he falleth downe on the serpent, being now full of blood, and
with the poise of his body breaketh him: so that his owne blood with
the blood of the Elephant runneth out of him mingled together, which
being colde, is congealed into that substance which the Apothecaries
call Sanguis Draconis, (that is) Dragons blood, otherwise called
Cinnabaris, commonly called Cinoper or Vermilion, which the Painters
use in certaine colours.”

The elephant is polygamous, although, as Lok says, “Plinie and Soline
write that elephants use none adulterie.” It was thought that the
intercourse of the sexes took place every second year, in a honeymoon
of five days’ length, and that the couples purified themselves in a
river before rejoining the herd. Of these nuptial journeys Buffon says,
“In their march love seems to precede and modesty to follow them, for
they observe the greatest mystery in their amours.” To this day the
East Africans think that if their wives are unfaithful while they are
on an elephant hunt, themselves will be killed or maimed by their
quarry.

It was a Roman belief that when elephants met a man who had lost his
way in the woods they would go gently before him and bring him to a
plain path. Sindbad had a kindred experience on his seventh voyage when
a herd conducted him to their cemetery so that henceforth “I should
forbear to kill them, as now I knew where to get their teeth without
inflicting injury on them.” It is still widely believed that somewhere
in Central Africa, perhaps in a remote valley of the western Sudan, is
an elephant graveyard whither all the aged and ailing pachyderms of
the continent repair, sometimes traveling thousands of miles in order
to die in peace amid the relics of their kind. No elephants dead of
natural causes are ever found, tradition avers, and from time to time
expeditions have sought the vast riches of this storehouse of mortuary
ivory.

To the elephant various peoples have accorded royal honors. Akbar,
the great Mogul, erected a monument to a favorite elephant, which
still stands near the deserted city of Fatephur Sikri; it is a tower
seventy-two feet high, studded with hundreds of artificial tusks. At
the court of Siam the traditional rank of the chief white elephant
has been next to the queen and before the heir-apparent. The chief of
the Burmese court herd has the residence and honors of a minister of
state. “The king of Pegu,” says one of the Hakluyt travelers, “is
called the King of the White Elephants. If any other king have one, and
will not send it him, he will make warre with him for it; for he had
rather lose a great part of his kingdome than not to conquere him.”
This was history when penned. In the sixteenth century a long war was
waged between Pegu, Siam, and Aracan, wherein five kings were killed,
in order to obtain possession of one white elephant. These albinos are
regarded as an appurtenance of royalty and lack of them is an ill omen.
Siam is the Land of the White Elephant.


_The Rhinoceros_

The ancients had less to say of the rhinoceros than of the monoceros or
unicorn, for which fabulous beast it may have provided the pattern; but
they wove legends about the virtues of its horn and its feud with the
elephant. Cosmas Indicopleustes wrote that when the rhinoceros walked
its horn shook, but that rage tightened it so that the beast was able
to uproot trees. Its skin was four fingers thick, and so hard that from
it, instead of iron, men made plowshares. In later ages the horn was
kept for the cure of diseases and detection of poison. Drinking cups
were made of it on a turner’s lathe, and the mediæval west accepted the
tradition of the east that these would sweat at the approach of poison.
Horns taken from young bull rhinoceroses which had never coupled with
females were preferred. Set in gold and silver, the goblets were an
acceptable present for kings. Thunberg was one of the first inquirers
to put the superstition to the test by bringing the horn and various
poisons together; there was no chemical reaction.

The tongue, not the horn, of the rhinoceros was its weapon of offense,
according to old belief. Marco Polo says that this member, in the
Sumatran species, is armed with long sharp spines, wherewith, after
trampling its enemies, it licks them to death. Pliny has a like story.


_The Hippopotamus_

Of the hippopotamus two travelers’ tales may be noted. Pliny gives it
on hearsay that the river horse enters a cornfield backward, so that
there will be no one waiting to waylay it when it comes out. The
statement of Father Joano dos Santos in his history of eastern Ethiopia
(1506) may best be set down verbatim: “The hippopotamus is naturally
of a sickly constitution, and subject to gouty paines, which it cures
by scratching the stomach with the left foot; and it has further been
noticed, when it wishes to effect a perfect cure that it falls on the
horn of the hoof of the left foot; this, entering the stomach, appeases
and terminates the pain. Hence the Caffres and Moors make use of this
horn as a remedy for the gout.”


_The Hyena_

The foul countenance and abject gaze of the hyena, its misshapen body,
its slinking tread, its affinities with both the wolf and the cat
tribes, have been provocative of legend. It lurks in caves and ruins
by day, it prowls for carrion food at night, it despoils graveyards
of their dead, it roams through unlighted villages, and its howl when
excited has a weird note, as of a demon’s laughter; so antique fable
had much to work upon. “Of prodigious strength,” Ctesias called the
beast under its Indian name of Krokottas; and, indeed, no animal of
its size has jaws so powerful. He credited it with the courage of the
lion, the speed of the horse, and the strength of the bull. It imitated
the human voice, he said, and, pronouncing their names, called men out
at night, when it fell upon and devoured them. “We cannot in the least
credit this,” is however, the comment of Diodorus Siculus.

Pliny, and Solinus after him, thought that the hyena was male one
year and female the next--an opinion challenged by Aristotle. It was
supposed to carry a stone in its eye which, placed under a man’s
tongue, would enable him to prophesy. Purchas says the beast “hath
no necke joynt, and therefore stirres not his necke but with bending
about his whole body.” Improving upon Ctesias, he says the animal draws
near to sheepcotes at night in order to learn the names of herdsmen,
whom afterward it decoys to destruction. Its eyes are “diversified
with a thousand colours” and the touch of its shadow “makes a dogge
not able to barke.” Buffon mentions, only to scout, the notion that
the hyena fascinates shepherds so that they cannot move, and renders
shepherdesses distracted in love. As a supposed hybrid, Raleigh
excludes it from the Ark. A kind of worship is still paid it in East
Africa, where the oath of the hyena is administered; it is a crime to
kill one and a misdemeanor to mimic its voice. Stories are told of
gold rings found in the ears of dead hyenas similar to those worn by
sorcerers and workers in iron.


_The Gnu_

Near the headwaters of the Nile, according to Pliny, roams the
catoblepas, an animal of moderate size and of movements made cumbersome
by a head immoderately heavy, which is always bent down toward the
earth. This is a fortunate thing, for otherwise “it would prove the
destruction of the human race,” since “all who behold its eyes fall
dead upon the spot.” In this demon-beast of dejected aspect Cuvier
recognizes the antelope-gnu, a horned creature apparently compounded of
a bison’s head, a horse’s body, and an antelope’s legs; a fantastic and
mournful silhouette of the African prairies.


_The Crocodile_

The standing of the crocodile in ancient Egypt, and among the savages
of the East Indies to this day, has been that of a sacred, or at least
a tabooed, animal. It had its own temple at Memphis, where it was
worshiped as a divinity, and tame crocodiles took part in the religious
processions. The Dyaks of Borneo and the Minangkabauers of Sumatra
never kill a crocodile unless it has killed a man. Its privileged
position among animals is due to a variety of reasons, of which only
three need be noted: it is a dangerous reptile, it flourishes mainly
where other food is plenty, and its meat is not agreeable to most
palates, having, as Sir Samuel Baker puts it, “the combined flavor of
bad fish, rotten flesh, and musk.” Such a creature it is both savage
superstition and policy to let alone, and even to flatter.

The older explanations of crocodile worship are more fantastic.
According to Plutarch, this reptile is a symbol of deity because it
is the only aquatic animal which has its eyes covered with a thin
membrane, so that, like divinity, it sees without being seen. He adds
that the Egyptians worship God symbolically in the crocodile, that
being the only animal without a tongue, like the Divine Logos, which
is in no need of speech. One species has something more than a hundred
teeth, wherefore Achilles Tatius declares, “the number of its teeth
equals the number of days in a year.”

In his pilgrimage to the Holy Land, Ludolf saw a crocodile which the
Knights Templars, by extracting certain of its teeth, had converted
into a serviceable beast of burden. “In winter,” says Maundeville, “the
Cockodrills lie as in a dream.” Purchas provides a detail on a matter
of peculiar interest to the mediævals: one lobe of the crocodile’s
liver is poison, the other counter-poison.

“Crocodile tears” are defined as simulated weeping, and back of this
useful metaphor is the venerable tradition set down in Hakluyt’s
collection: “His nature is ever when hee would have his prey, to cry
and sobbe like a Christian body, to provoke them to come to him, and
then hee snatcheth at them, and thereupon came this proverbe that is
applied unto women when they weepe, _Lachrmyæ Crocodili_, the meaning
whereof is, that as the Crocodile when hee crieth, goeth then about
most to deceive, so doeth a woman most commonly when shee weepeth.”


_Snakes_

Most of the numerous snake traditions have a religious significance.
The older writers, however, have left observations which belong to
natural history. Pliny recites it as “a well-known fact” that a serpent
120 feet in length was taken at the river Bagrada in the Punic Wars
by the Roman army under Regulus. The monster was besieged as if it
were a fortress, balistæ and other engines being used. Of India, known
from earliest time for its immense serpents, the most striking reptile
story Ctesias has to tell is of a snake only a fathom long, and without
fangs. It is purple with a white head and does execution by vomiting.
Flesh putrefies wherever the vomit falls. Suspended by the tail, it
yields two kinds of poison, amber-hued when the snake is living, black
when obtained from a carcass. A sesame seed’s bulk of the former brings
instant death to him who swallows it, his brains oozing from his
nostrils, while the latter brings death from consumption after about a
year.

Out of many traditions that snakes have power to fascinate or injure
without striking, two opinions from respectable sources may be given.
Ulloa, the Spanish explorer, thinks the breath of the cobra produces “a
kind of inebriation,” in persons, as does “the urine of the fox” and
“the breath of the whale.” Lobo, the Portuguese friar, reports that
while lying on the ground in Abyssinia, he was seized with a pain which
forced him to rise, when he discovered a serpent something more than
four yards from him. He revived himself with “that sovereign remedy” a
bezoar stone. These serpents, he explains, have wide mouths and swallow
air in great quantities, which they presently eject with such force
that it kills at four yards.


_Grasshoppers_

Classic writers knew the grasshopper less as a pest than as a food,
and it has a pleasant place in myth. Tithonus, beloved of Aurora and
dowered by the gods with immortality but not with eternal youth, was
changed by her into a grasshopper after he shrank up with old age.
There is a grasshopper fable to which Strabo gives a naturalistic and
Solinus a supernatural tinge. In southern Italy, Rhegium and Locris are
divided by a river flowing through a deep ravine. The insects on the
Locrian side sing, while those on the other side are silent.

Strabo suggests that this is because it is sunny on the Locrian side,
and densely wooded across the river. In the one case the membranes used
in stridulation are dry and horny and therefore resonant when rasped
together; in the other, they are so softened by shade and dew that they
produce no sound. Solinus has a simpler explanation. Hercules passed
by Rhegium and its grasshopper orchestra irritated him. So he bade the
insects be silent, and, resentful or forgetful, failed to lift the
embargo.


_The Salamander_

The best account of the salamander appears in the _Memoirs_ of
Benvenuto Cellini. “One day,” he said, “when I was about fifteen
years of age, my father was in a cellar where they had been scalding
some clothes for washing. He was alone, and was playing upon the viol
and singing in front of a good fire of oakwood, for the weather was
very cold. On looking at the fire accidentally, he saw a small animal
resembling a lizard, gambolling joyously in the midst of the fiercest
flames. My father instantly perceiving what it was, he called my
sister and me, pointed out the animal to us, and gave me a severe box
on the ear, which caused me to shed a perfect deluge of tears. He
gently wiped my eyes and said to me, ‘My dear boy, I did not strike you
as a punishment, but only that you should remember that that lizard
which you behold in the fire is a salamander, an animal which has never
been seen by any known person.’ He afterwards kissed me and gave me a
few quattrini.”

That the salamander is able to live in flames, Aristotle thought, and
Ælian, and Nicander, and Pliny. The last named tells why: This lizard
is so cold that it extinguishes fire like ice. There is great danger in
its venom. Unless precautions are taken it might destroy whole nations,
for if it crawls up a tree it infects all the fruit and those who eat
thereof are killed. It will also poison water or wine in which it is
drowned. Sir Thomas Browne concedes that it may resist a flame or put
out a coal, but “thus much will many humid bodies perform.”


_The Spider Dance_

The tarantula is a large, brown mining spider which is found on both
shores of the Mediterranean, and is said to be numerous near Taranto
in southern Italy, whence its name. Its bite is painful, although not
dangerous, but in the fifteenth century the superstition arose that it
caused what is called tarantism, a nervous affection with some of the
symptoms of hydrophobia, and now classed with St. Vitus dance. Those
who were bitten, or believed themselves to be, assumed a livid color,
lost the senses of sight and hearing, and sank into a deep depression;
nausea and sexual excitement were also remarked. Only music could
arouse the sufferer; under the influence of lively strains he would
dance himself into a perspiration and the poison of the spider bite
would escape through the skin. If the dance was continued to exhaustion
the patient was cured, at any rate for a time.

The disease soon assumed the form of a contagion communicated from one
person to another. Dancers were violently affected by bright colors.
Red was the favorite, and then green and yellow, and one man’s hue
might be another’s madness. Sufferers sought water, some plunging into
the sea, others immersing their heads in a tub or carrying globes
of water while dancing. Old and young, skeptical visitors as well as
natives, and women more than men, were the victims. Attacks lasted from
two to six days, and recovery was effectual until warm weather came the
following year, when the symptoms had again to be exorcised to music.
One woman was a tarantant for thirty summers.

The earliest mention of the mania is in the writings of Nicolas
Perotti, a contemporary of Columbus. It broke out at the same time that
the St. Vitus dance appeared in Germany. A like superstition and a like
cure are known in a Persian province. The northern nations were first
to recover and since the seventeenth century the epidemic has slowly
waned. The lively Neapolitan folk dance, called the tarantella, is a
memorial of the madness that set the Middle Ages dancing with a spider
calling the tune.


_The Swallow_

Swallows show themselves suddenly in the northern climes in April, and
as suddenly vanish at the threshold of autumn. They are often seen
skimming the surface of water. Doctor Kalm, the Swedish traveler,
reports that in April, 1750, he saw great numbers perched upon posts,
“and they were as wet as if they had just come out of the sea.” That
the swallow comes out of the sea in the spring and returns to it in
the fall is a belief of unknown antiquity. Thus, thought Luther, it
repeated each year the process of creation recorded in Genesis, when
the water obeyed the command to bring forth “fowl that may fly above
the earth in the open firmament of heaven.”

There is a considerable literature on the reputed hibernation of the
swallow. It has been credited with electing at will the winter economy
of the wild goose, the bear, or the batrachian. In Mediterranean
countries it is conceded that swallows migrate. In England and Germany,
according to one eighteenth-century observer, they “retire into clefts
and holes in rocks, and remain there in torpid state.” In the colder
northern countries popular opinion has been that they submerge in the
sea. Regnard, the French comic poet, who made a journey to Lapland in
1681, accepted this on the word of trustworthy Danes and Swedes.

In the eighteenth century the secretary to the city of Dantzig obtained
sworn testimony in support of this opinion from collectors of the
revenues of the king of Prussia. The mother of the Countess Lehndorf
reported that she saw “a bundle of swallows” brought from under water
to a warm room, where they revived and fluttered about. Count Schlieben
said that while fishing on his estate he saw several swallows netted,
one of which he carried into a warm room; it lay there for an hour and
then began to stir and fly around. Collector-General Witkowski said
that in 1741 he got two swallows from the great pond at Didlacken, and
that these birds revived in a warm room, “fluttered about, and died
three hours later.” Six other witnesses made their several oaths to
similar incidents.

A final touch of poetry is given by the statement of Doctor Wallerius,
the celebrated Swedish chemist, who deposed “that he had seen more than
once swallows assembling on a reed till they were all immersed and
went to the bottom; this being preceded by a dirge of a quarter of an
hour’s length.” Holy, luck-bringing, and inviolate, men everywhere have
thought the swallow, and the solemn descents into the sea with which
legend credited it deepened this character.


_Wild Geese_

About wild geese a still more fantastic belief obtained up to four
centuries ago, when the Dutch discovered Spitzbergen. It was thought
that goslings grew upon trees in the form of nuts. The nuts fell into
the sea and the chicks came forth. Therefore a decree at the Sorbonne
in Paris adjudged that wild geese were not birds and could be eaten
in Lent. In Spitzbergen, Barentz came upon the breeding grounds of
these migratory fowl, and, breaking open the eggs, discovered the
unhatched young in them. So the myth passed. “It is not our fault,” he
remarked, “that we have not known this before, when these birds insist
upon breeding so far northward.” Two variants of the story are found
among Norwegian writers. Jonas Ramus says that “a particular sort of
Geese found in Nordland leave their seed on old trees and stumps and
blocks lying in the sea”; a shell forms around the seed, and from the
shell, as from an egg, young geese are hatched by the sun. Pontoppidan
describes what seems to be the goose barnacle which contains “the
little creature reported to be a young wild goose.” It looks like
“little crooked feathers squeezed together” and is merely a “living
sea insect.” While the legend was credited it was used to confirm the
doctrine of the Immaculate Conception.


_Animal Politics_

Fable dowered various creatures with the political institutions and
social sense of the ant and bee. Pearl oysters were said to live in
settlements under the rule of the oldest. Cranes placed sentinels on
guard at night, each with a stone in its claw; if the bird nodded
the stone fell to the ground, betraying its neglect of duty. Cranes,
rooks and storks, even modern observers assert, hold criminal courts.
Twice a year a pair of ravens was assigned to each farm in Iceland
by a parliament of their fellows. The storks of Egypt were supposed
every winter to make the Mecca pilgrimage and were regarded as hajjis.
Because the panther’s diet was aromatic roots and herbs, its breath
was balmy and medicinal, and when it walked abroad all the other
beasts attended it. Wild beasts and apes tended a mountain shrine near
Srinagar in India, bringing daily offerings of flowers. In Ceylon “very
pious and credible persons” told Ibn Batuta that the bearded black
monkeys had their own sultan, who wore a green turban woven of leaves,
as if he wished to seem an Islamite, and maintained a council of state
and a harem.


_Other Animal Marvels_

Marvel tales about animals might be recited almost indefinitely,
and a respectable authority ancient or modern, named for each. A
few representative ones may be noted. It is a well-known fact, says
Solinus, that magpies have died because they could not master the
pronunciation of a difficult word. In South America, according to
Purchas, men make clean their teeth with the beards of seals, “because
they bee wholesome for the toothache.” The she-camel, so says Launcelot
Addison, father of the essayist, “brings forth her young in a negligent
slumber.” The toucan, says Humboldt, makes an extraordinary gesture
when preparing to drink, which the monks assert is the sign of the
cross upon the water, and so the creoles call it _diostede_ (God gives
it to thee). Bordering the country of the grasshopper-eaters in Africa,
says Diodorus, is a fair land which has been untenanted since rain bred
a multitude of venomous spiders that stung many persons to death and
drove away the remainder. Plutarch thought that the ibis became more
sacred by standing with straddled legs so as to form a triangle. Buffon
confutes the notion, based on the noisome odor of the shrewmouse, that
its bite is dangerous to cattle. Isaac Walton cites a polygamous fish
which “goes courting she-goats on the grassy shore.” Even Linnæus
thought that birds of paradise had neither wings nor feet.


_Pliny’s Mirabilia_

Pliny is authority for the fables which follow: The ant rests from
her labors at the changes of the moon. The sea remains calm while the
halcyon is hatching her young upon it. When the sun is in Cancer the
bodies of dead crabs on the seashore are transformed into serpents.
When the porcupine stretches its skin it discharges its quills like
missiles. Lions resent it if a man looks at them asquint. The breath
of the elephant will draw serpents from their retreats. Only by using
the left hand can one pull snakes from their holes. They will flee from
a naked man, but pursue one clothed. The best way to catch eels is to
put the bait in the end of a hollow fishing rod and suffocate them by
blowing through it.

Bears crawl into their dens on their backs in order to leave no
betraying trail. Ostriches throw stones at their pursuers. Vultures
will entice a bull over a precipice by holding their wings before its
eyes. The boding raven is most so when it swallows its voice as if
choked. If a horse follows in the track of a wolf it will burst asunder
beneath its rider. If a shrewmouse crosses the rut of a wheel it will
die at once. The pastern bones of swine promote discord. Madness in
he-goats may be calmed by stroking their beards. She-goats in pasture
never look at one another at sunset. Goats breathe through their ears,
are never quite free from fever, and are therefore more lascivious than
sheep. Roebucks grow fat on poisons.

As to birds and insects, it is doubtful if they dream; yet pigeons
“have a certain appreciation of glory.” At a certain season cuckoos
become hawks. The crow is at enmity with the weasel, the duck with
the sea-mew, but there is friendship between the peacock and the
pigeon, the turtle-dove and the parrot, the heron and the crow. Quails
sometimes settle so thickly on ships at night as to sink them. Locusts
make their whirring noise by grinding their teeth. Hornets, wasps, and
bees will not attack a person stung by a scorpion. In high winds bees
carry small stones for ballast. It is not certain whether their honey
is “the sweat of the heavens, or whether a saliva emanating from the
stars, or a juice exuding from the air while purifying itself.”

Stranger than these classic beliefs is the early Christian tradition of
the small hole found in the forefeet of pigs when the hair is removed.
Therein of old time passed the legion of devils in the country of the
Gadarenes. The rings about the hole which seem branded in the skin are
the marks of demons’ claws as they entered their unclean habitation.
Javanese Moslems have it that the peacock was gatekeeper of Paradise
and admitted the devil by swallowing him. A third domestic creature,
the cock, could scatter ghosts and demons by his dawn cry.


_Browne Catalogues Vulgar Errors_

The treatise upon _Vulgar Errors_ which Sir Thomas Browne made in the
seventeenth century attacks many notions that had come down to his time
from a past without date. Among them are the following: Swans sing
their own death songs. The badger has the legs of one side shorter
than the other. Spermaceti is the spawn of the whale. Lampries have
nine eyes. There is antipathy between the toad and the spider. There
is a lucky-stone in the toad’s head. The pelican pierces her breast
and feeds her young with her own blood. The clicking sound made in a
wainscoting by the beetle called the death-watch presages bereavement.
Peacocks are ashamed of their legs. Storks will live only in republics
or free states. Lions are afraid of cocks.

Each of these beliefs the great physician confutes in turn, remarking,
for example, that storks nest in kingly France and in the dominions of
the Great Turk, and that a lion, escaped from a menagerie, had robbed a
hen roost in Bavaria.


_Beasts of the Hermits_

A chapter of charming legends has for its theme not the remarkable
traits of different species of animals, but the conduct of single
creatures that came under the influence of holy men who went out into
the deserts in the early days of the Christian era. In the absence of
human society the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field formed
for the hermit the society of the waste. The crocodile, protected and
worshiped by pagan Egypt, the gross-looking hippopotamus, the venomous
serpents, and above all the hyena, with its fearful laughter, rimmed
the anchorite’s life with a horizon of supernatural terror; these were
embodied dæmons with designs upon his very soul. But sometimes he could
cast out the evil spirit that tenanted them, and there were other and
gentler beasts that became his servants and companions. In them the
unfriendly deserts were made to repeat the polity of Eden, where all
created things obeyed man.

Wild asses, lions, stags, wolves, and fowls were the hermit’s domestic
animals. Stags, harnessed to plow, cultivated the field of St. Leonor,
and took the place of St. Colodoc’s cattle when these were driven away
because he had sheltered a hunted deer. St. Helenus rode on the back
of a crocodile. Dragons guarded the cell of Abbot Ammon. The lion from
whose foot St. Gerasimus extracted a thorn protected his ass. St.
Costinian saddled and rode a bear. St. Sulpicius tells of a she-wolf as
tame as a dog and of a lioness under a palm tree that moved modestly
aside at a hermit’s command until he had eaten his fill of dates.
Swallows sang upon the knees of St. Guthlac.

Not all of this, it may be, is the mere poetry of pious imaginations.
After the breakdown of Roman civilization in the west, many of the
oxen, horses, and dogs returned to the wild state, and what the
hermits did in some cases was merely to recall them to their ancient
allegiance. Here and there among so many thousands of solitaries, so
Kingsley urges, were men such as become horse-tamers and bee-takers
in settled communities, whose natures won them friends in the world
of brutes. The very quietude of the hermits, their habit of silent
meditation in field and forest, would disarm the fears of wild things
and draw them toward companionship.


_The Invasion of the Cathedrals_

The church had yet another chapter to write in the story of the
beasts, and this time they became hieroglyphs on the vast scroll of
the cathedrals. The early significance of animals in the life of man
was completely revived in the mediæval fanes, but as allegory rather
than reality. Brute and fowl were created, it was thought, only to
illustrate the truth of God’s word and to convey some spiritual
message. Did not Job say, “Ask the beast and it will teach thee, and
the birds of heaven and they will tell thee”? What they taught and
told was set forth at large in the cathedral, which became in very
fact a rebus carved in stone. With effects that were indescribably
quaint, and beautiful at times, Christian symbolism wrought itself in
ecclesiastical architecture in an age when few could read other writing.

From Egypt, where cenobites were already in communion with desert
creatures, the impulse came; and from India, where Buddhist ascetics
were taught to pattern their humility from the ass that sleeps by the
roadside, their aloofness from the rhinoceros that wanders alone. Its
immediate source was the _Physiologus_, or Naturalist, the compilation
by an Alexandrian Greek of what the ancient world reported of animals
and plants, with moral reflections added. The compendium was translated
into all of the languages of Europe and several African and Asiatic
tongues, and, being in the vernacular, may have been for a time more
widely read than the Bible itself. For the unlearned a source of
pleasant stories and forerunner of the bestiaries, for the learned
it was a theological treatise. Its subject-matter entered patristic
writings and popular sermons and was at length transferred to stone.

The vogue of animal symbolism in Christian churches covered half a
millennium, was at its height in the eleventh and twelfth centuries,
was still alive at the Reformation, and left its marks in sacred
vessels and ecclesiastical vestments as well as in sculpture. Façades,
portals, buttresses, and gargoyles of church exteriors, and cloisters,
chancels and chapels of interiors, were decorated with animal forms.
As an emblem of priestly chastity, the elephant was embroidered on
sacerdotal vestments. Lamps, censers, and sacramental vessels repeated
the outline or carried the effigy of the griffin, the pelican, the
dolphin. Sculptured lions ramped at cathedral doors, lizards peeped
from crevices, and all about the sanctuary were the figures of foxes
and ferrets, harts and hedgehogs, panthers and partridges, the whale,
the crocodile, the tortoise, and a hundred other flying, walking,
creeping, or swimming things.

Though St. Bernard denounced this as “the foul and tattered vesture of
pagan allegory,” every animal was a text, or was designed to be. The
lion typified majesty, the ox patience, the ram spiritual leadership,
the turtle-dove constancy, the skin-sloughing snake the repentant
believer, the salamander the righteous who extinguish the flames of
desire. The sun-staring, youth-renewing eagle was an admonition to
those grown old in sin to face the day star of revelation. Ravens
symbolized Jews who battened on the carrion of the Law. Sometimes
virtues and vices were pictured as women riding animals or bearing
animal devices--Humility on a panther, Chastity on a unicorn, Devotion
on an ibex, Patience with a swan helmet, Love with a pelican shield,
Lust with a siren-buckler.

Animal symbolism had also its secular phases. Amorous troubadours
likened themselves to flame-walled salamanders; or, disappointed in
love, likened woman to the double-natured dragon and the hooting owl.
By degrees the secular impulse invaded the churches. Animal sculptures
were admitted as such and not as cipher characters of divine script;
and satire, inspired or tolerated by the regular body of clergy, raided
the sheepfold of allegory. This was directed against the preaching
friars and the failings of the monastic orders, all the actors in
the beast-epos of Reynard the fox entering the sanctuary as its
auxiliaries. The animals overran windows, balustrades, cornices, and
capitals; foxes were significantly depicted in palmer weeds; a stall
in the cathedral at Amiens showed Reynard preaching to a flock of
fowls and with pious gesture reaching for the nearest hen. Death, “the
sarcastic and irreverent skeleton,” capered among the creatures in the
dance macabre. At the outset an attack on religious abuses, the secular
phase became in effect a lampoon of the very rites of the church.

Among other figures that caricatured its principal ceremonies under
its own roof, says Evans in his authoritative study of the period,
were “apes in choristers’ robes, swine in monks’ hoods, asses in
cowls chanting and playing the organ, sirens in the costume of nuns
with their faces carefully veiled and the rest of their persons
exposed, stags in chasubles ministering at the altar and wolves in the
confessional giving absolution to lambs.” The ass, which the east had
long celebrated for its devoted service and which has a high niche in
biblical story, attained a place in the churches of the west which
neither fact fully accounts for. There was thought to be some mystic
relation between its anatomy and the architecture of a cathedral. In
a catechism of the last century used in a French town it was recited
among other details that the head of the ass signified the bell of the
town cathedral, its paunch the poor-box and its tail the aspergill
for sprinkling holy water. In the one-time popular Feast of the Ass,
a living ass was led up the nave into the chancel, the chants were
sung in a braying tone, and the officiating priest dismissed the
congregation with a loud hee-haw.

The ceremony has passed. Most of the beast figures have been removed
from the cathedrals. Animal symbolism still lives, but more in letters
than in stone.




Chapter V. The Fabulous Beasts


In the world that was, the fabulous animals that roved the land were
creatures of unusual interest, though of limited number. More species
were to be found in the deep. Thither, Pliny explains, fall the seeds
from the innumerable figures of beasts impressed as constellations
upon the heavens, and these seeds, being mixed together in the watery
element, produce a variety of monstrous forms.

With animal life abounding in the thickets and fields of the earth,
and for every bird and beast a fable, there was less incentive to
invent new species of them than there was to make stories of ghosts,
dæmons and faeries, or of men with beast attributes or lineage or some
quality of caricature in their anatomy. With the coming of heraldry
the category of strange creatures is greatly enlarged, but the shapes
added by blazonry do not purport to be living things and have no place
in geography or in literature, save in massive volumes where the quaint
designs and quainter jargon of a curious erudition are preserved.

The ancient had naïve ideas about cross-breeding. Every unusual
animal seemed a hybrid of two known species. These were produced in
hot climates. Hence, says Pliny, arose the saying, common even in
Greece, that “Africa is always producing something new.” The males and
females of various species in that singular land, he thought, coupled
promiscuously with each other, but not always with impunity. “The lion
recognizes, by the peculiar odor of the pard, when the lioness has been
unfaithful to him, and avenges himself with the greatest fury.”

There was a belief, which lasted nearer to the present time, that the
savage dogs of India, two of which would make no scruple of attacking
the lion, had tigresses for their dams. Diodorus noted that eastern
Arabia produced beasts of double nature and mixed shape, and he deemed
it reasonable that “by the vivifying heat of the sun in southern parts
of the world many sorts of wonderful creatures are there bred.” Among
these he cites the crocodiles and river horses of Egypt. He strains
a point in support of his theory in the account of what he calls the
Struthocameli of Arabia, “who have the shape both of a camel and an
ostrich.” He describes their bodies “big as a camel, newly foaled,”
their small heads with large black eyes, their long necks, the “hairy
feathers” on their wings, their strong thighs, and “cloven hoofs.”
This creature, says the Sicilian geographer, “seems both terrestrial
and volatile, a land beast and a bird”--after all, only an inexact yet
graphic portrait of the ostrich. That this fowl is a cross between a
camel and a bird is an Arab notion; according to Aristotle it is of an
equivocal nature, part bird and part quadruped. So its Persian name
signifies, and sacred writers liken its voice to the bellowing of a
bull.

Even the breezes take part in the creation of hybrids, so men have
thought. That there is actual generative power in the wind is a belief
older than the discovery of its function in carrying the fertilizing
pollen of plants. Pliny records the popular belief that barren eggs are
breeze-begotten; hence their name of Zephyria. The modern “wind-egg”
for an egg without a shell laid by a fat hen, but supposed by Doctor
Johnson not to contain the principle of life, comes from a similar
notion. Male sheep are conceived when the northeast wind blows, and
females when the south wind blows, according to the Romans. One of the
heroic ballads of the Tartars personifies the wind as a foal which
courses about the earth. The fable about Portuguese mares, widely
credited by the ancients and roundly asserted by Pliny, is an echo
of sailor reports on the fertility of Lusitania: “In the vicinity of
Olisipo and the river Tagus, the mares, by turning their faces toward
the west wind as it blows, become impregnated by its breezes, and the
foals thus conceived are remarkable for their fleetness; but they never
live beyond three years.”


_The Unicorn_

Best known animal of legend is the unicorn. There are two veritable
unicorns, or animals with one horn--the rhinoceros and the narwhal.
The accepted description of this animal gives it the narwhal’s straight
and spirally twisted horn but none of the parts of the rhinoceros. It
is pictured with the legs of a buck, the tail of a lion, and the head
and body of a horse. Its markings suggest the zebra’s; its head is red,
its body white, its eyes blue, while its horn is red at the tip, white
at the base and black in between. The high authority of Aristotle has
determined these points.

The ancients mention five different animals as having one horn set in
the middle of the forehead. The most famous of these were the Egyptian
oryx and the Indian ass. Pliny says the oryx gazes at the Dog Star
when it rises, and sneezes in a sort of worship. It has the stature
of a bull, the form of a deer, and hair that sets forward instead
of backward. The Indian ass is described by Ctesias as having the
traditional shape and hues of the unicorn, solid hoofs, and a horn a
cubit in length. Filings of this horn, if taken in a potion, are an
antidote to poison. Drinking cups made from it give immunity also from
epilepsy. The Indian ass is so fleet it can be seized only when it
leads its foal to pasture. In defense of its young it uses its horn,
teeth, and feet, killing horses and men. It is sought for the horn and
huckle bones, the latter, Ctesias declares, “the most beautiful I have
ever seen”; they are as heavy as lead, he says, and of the color of
cinnabar.

The third animal was the monoceros, on which the Orsæan Indians preyed.
It had the head of the stag, the feet of the elephant, and the tail of
the boar, while the rest of its body was horse-like. The single black
horn projecting from the middle of its forehead was two cubits long. It
lowed like a bull, was of ferocious nature, wandered alone, and could
not be taken alive. The two other unicorns of ancient story were the
single-horned horse and the single-horned ox.

There was a second growth of the fable in the Middle Ages and the
unicorn took on new dignities. It was the only animal that would
attack the elephant, disembowelling the pachyderm with one blow of its
sharp-nailed foot; and it charged the lion at sight. The king of beasts
was constrained to kingly craft, dodging behind a tree. His assailant,
says Topsell, “in the swiftness of his course runneth against the tree,
wherein his sharp horn sticketh fast”; and the lion dispatches him at
leisure. In his _Display of Heraldry_ (1724) Guillim says the unicorn
is never taken alive because “the greatness of his mind is such rather
to die.” Mediæval intelligence at last hit upon a characteristic device
to secure this creature without slaying him, and the bestiaries of
the time record it. This was to place a young virgin near his haunts.
As soon as he saw her he would run to her and lie down at her feet,
placing his head in her bosom, when the hunters could halter him.

It was the alexipharmic virtues of the unicorn’s horn that most engaged
the ages of faith, when the poisoning of princes was almost an article
of statecraft. As late as 1789 it was used to test food at the court of
France, and horns, usually of the narwhal, were in the royal museums.
The ancients had made little of this. The reference of Ctesias to the
horn of the Indian ass as an antidote for poison and a cure of the
falling sickness stands alone. What was later made of this reputed
power is shown in a passage from John of Herse, who pilgrimed to
Jerusalem in 1389: “Near the field Helyon in the Holy Land is the river
Mara, whose bitter waters Moses struck with his staff and made sweet,
so that the children of Israel could drink thereof. Even now evil and
unclean spirits poison it after the going down of the sun, but in the
morning after the powers of darkness have disappeared, the unicorn
comes from the sea and dips its horn into the stream, and thereby
expels and neutralizes the poison, so that the other animals can drink
of it during the day.”

According to Guillim, it became “a general conceit that the wild beasts
of the wilderness used not to drink of the pools, for fear of venomous
serpents there breeding, until the unicorn hath stirred them with his
horn.” Thus its office was that of water-conner for the other beasts of
the forest.

Cosmas Indicopleustes said he had seen the brazen statues of four
unicorns set upon towers in the royal palace of Ethiopia. Frobisher
found a dead “sea unicorne” on the Canadian coast with a broken horn
two yards long. Into the hollow of the horn the sailors put spiders,
where they presently died. In his second voyage (1564) Sir John Hawkins
found the Florida Indians wearing pieces of the unicorn’s horn about
their necks.

The unicorn was celebrated in Christian symbolism before it found a
permanent niche in heraldry. When Balaam blesses Israel he says, “God
led him out of Egypt even as the glory of the unicorn.” According to
the _Bestiare Divine de Guillaume Clerc de Normandie_, the animal
represents Christ, and its horn signifies the Gospel of Truth. It
became a favorite charge in Scottish heraldry and James I of England
made it the sinister support in the arms of Great Britain, replacing
the red dragon of Wales.

Purchas the Pilgrim was always expecting news of the unicorn, hearing
of it and doubting report. Browne avows his belief in the animal in a
sardonic dissertation. Far from doubting its existence, he says, “we
affirm there are many kinds thereof,” and he mentions the five classic
animals, several fishes, and “four kinds of nasicornous beetles.” What
he wants to know is which one possesses the alexipharmic horn. He
complains that the animal is not uniformly described: “Pliny affirmeth
it is a fierce, terrible creature; Vartomannus, a tame and mansuete
animal; those which Garcias ab Horto described about the Cape of Good
Hope were beheld with heads like horses; those which Vartomannus beheld
he described with the head of a deer: Pliny, Ælian, Solinus, and Paulus
Venetus affirmeth the feet of the unicorn are undivided and like the
elephant’s; but those two which Vartomannus beheld at Mecca were footed
like a goat. As Ælian describeth, it is in the bigness of an horse; as
Vartomannus, of a colt; that which Thevet speaketh of was not so big as
an heifer; but Paulus Venetus affirmeth that they are but little less
than elephants.”

Browne proceeds remorselessly: The horns of the unicorn, as described
by writers or preserved in collections, are too various. Some are red,
some are black, and some have spiral markings, while “those two in the
treasure of St. Mark are plain and best accord with those of the Indian
ass.” Albertus Magnus describes one ten feet long, a narwhal’s, Browne
suggests. Others are but fossil teeth and bones and petrified tree
branches.

Yet the tradition long survived Browne. His contemporary, the
Portuguese Jesuit Lobo, said that in Abyssinia he had seen the unicorn,
in shape like a beautiful bay horse with a black tail. He could give no
minute account, for it ran with prodigious swiftness from wood to wood,
and never fed save when surrounded by animals that protected it. “The
unicorn really exists in Tibet,” Huc affirmed after traveling there in
1846. At Kordofan, in 1848, a man, whose custom was to provide Baron
Von Mueller with animal specimens, offered to sell him an _a’nasa_,
which he described as of donkey size with a tail like a boar’s, and a
single pendulous horn which it erected when it saw an enemy. In 1876
Prejevalski gave an account of the _orongo_, a stag-like creature with
two vertical horns, which he said was common in Tibet; according to
natives there were a few single horned individuals among the herds.

Every feature in the unicorn legend of the west has its counterpart
in the Chinese books. Six species of unicorns are mentioned; one
figures in the crest of the Mikado of Japan; another is sculptured in
the avenue of animals that leads to the Ming tombs north of Peking.
Another, and the best known, the _ki-lin_, appeared only in the reign
of upright monarchs. It was called a spiritual beast, chief of the
360 kinds of hairy creatures. Its pace was regular, it ambled only on
selected grounds, and its voice was like a monastery bell. So softly it
trod that it left no footprints and crushed no living thing.

All a moon myth, says one ingenious writer. But Gould declares, “I
find it impossible to believe that a creature whose existence has been
affirmed by so many authors, at so many different dates, and from so
many countries, can be the symbol of a myth.” He thinks it either a
hybrid occasionally produced by the crossing of the equine and bovine
families, or else the generic name for extinct missing links between
horses, cattle, and deer.

Whence the world’s long belief in the unicorn? Was there such an
animal, now extinct? Cuvier returns an emphatic negative: “The nations
of modern days have only been able to drive back the noxious animals
in the deserts, but have never yet suceeded in exterminating a single
species.” He goes further: there could never have been a cloven-footed
ruminant with a single horn, because its frontal bone must have been
divided, and no horn could have been placed on the suture.

Ctesias may have woven some rhinoceros details into his picture of the
so-called Indian ass. The Egyptian unicorn was called an oryx--a word
perhaps related to the Sanscrit and Teutonic aurochs. There is a large
African antelope the modern name of which is oryx. It is probable that
the correct name has been retained, and that the oryx, or gemsbok, of
to-day, is the unicorn of Herodotus, Strabo, Pliny, Lampridius, et al.
But the real oryx has two horns, while the fabled animal had but one
because the Egyptians did not understand perspective in drawing.


_The Griffin_

Greek and Persepolitan griffins are curiously alike, and both may
have derived from the winged lion of the Assyrians, emblem of the
god Nergal. Griffin lore, however, is rich in details which have no
religious significance. Herodotus speaks of the animal as guarding the
gold of the one-eyed Arimaspians in Asia north of the Altai Mountains.
Ctesias places it in the mountain barrier of India.

According to Ælian the griffin was a winged and feathered lion with
an eagle’s head and a color scheme that suggests the German imperial
flag--the breast plumage red, the wings white, and the dorsal plumage
black; “a mixed and dubious animal,” Browne calls it. Ctesias says it
had also blue neck feathers and red eyes. He describes the species as
a race of four-footed birds the size of wolves, but Maundeville says
they were as large and strong as eight lions and could carry to their
nests “a great Horse, or two Oxen yoked together as they go to the
Plough.” Of their talons the Indians made drinking cups. The griffins
built their nests like the eagle, but laid therein agates instead of
eggs. The Bactrians said that these birds dug gold out of the mountains
and made their nests therewith, and the Indians carried off so much of
it as falls to the ground. The Indians denied that the griffins were
watchmen for the gold of their district or had any use for it; they
said that when the birds see them coming to gather gold, they fear the
intruders are after their young and assail them. Also they attack all
other beasts and prevail over them, save only the lion and the elephant.

Fearful of their vengeance, the natives go not out to gather gold
in the daytime, say the chroniclers, but under cover of night make
their raids into a frightful desert where griffin and gold are found
together. Companies of one thousand or even two thousand men set out,
equipped with mattocks and sacks. The expeditions take from three to
four years, for this region lies afar. If successful, the members
return wealthy; but should they be detected in the act of theft, says
Ælian, certain death would be their fate.

There are four explanations of this four-footed bird of classic
legend and Welsh heraldry--that the winged Assyrian lion was taken
for a portrait instead of a symbol; that the Samoyeds mistook mammoth
bones in the gold-bearing district of the Ural Mountains for remains
of monster fowls; that the griffins were merely Tibetan mastiffs of
singular ferocity and reputed tigrine decent, and that they are an
early form of the dragon. The so-called griffin’s claws in the museums
of Dresden and Vienna and in the churches elsewhere are horns of the
Caffrarian buffalo. Drinking cups made of them were used in treating
epilepsy.


_The Hippogrif_

It would be vain to seek among animals the original of the hippogrif,
a creature related to the griffin, though of more involved lineage,
and like it treated sometimes as a bird, sometimes as a beast. The
hippogrif is a product of mediæval romance, and wings its way as the
courser of more than mortal knights over countries of fable, albeit
they bear such names as Brittany, Abyssinia, Circassia, and Cathay.
As the griffin was called a hybrid between the lion and the eagle, so
the hippogrif was supposed to be a hybrid between the griffin and the
horse. It had the head, wings, and fore claws of the griffin and the
body, hind hoofs and tail of the horse. Its habitat was the Riphæan
Mountains, source of the north wind. The hippogrif enters the Orlando
cycle as the mount of an enchanter with a castle on the Pyrenees, but
later serves the far adventures of the paladins of Charlemagne.


_The Monster Rat_

The Samoyeds and Chinese who found in the river banks of the north the
frozen bodies of mammoths, with skin and flesh intact as if they had
died but yesterday, reached the strange yet natural conclusion that
this was a kind of monstrous burrowing rat. It figures in Chinese books
as _fen-shu_, the “digging rat,” or _yen-men_, the “burrowing ox.” Why
was it always dead when men came upon it? Because air and sunshine were
both fatal to it; evidently in its wanderings underground it had broken
the crust above it and died in the daylight. Sometimes the Yakuts saw
the earth tremble and knew this great rat walked beneath. “There is got
from it,” says the _Chinese Encyclopedia_, “an ivory as white as that
of the elephant, but easier to work, and not liable to split. Its flesh
is very cold and excellent for refreshing the blood.”


_The Martikhora_

In the jungles of Ind roved the martikhora--a creature with unpleasant
affinities to men, the great cats, and the serpents. Its face was
like a man’s with pale blue eyes and human ears but with three rows
of teeth. Its body was as big as the lion’s and in color red like
cinnabar. It had a tail like the scorpion’s and more than a cubit long.
The martikhora, indeed, was a sort of anticipation of the machine gun,
for it had one sting at the end of its tail, two at the roots of this
member, and a fourth on the crown of its head; and these it projected
to the distance of a hundred feet. The missiles, which were about a
foot long and no thicker than fine thread, were fatal to every animal
save the elephants. The natives, says Ctesias, hunted it from the backs
of elephants. The name of the animal means man-eater, so-called because
the beast carried off men and women. Its size, also, and general
description, and the manner of hunting it all suggest the tiger as
fearful Indians might report it. To this day the Cambodians think the
whiskers of the tiger are a strong poison. The Malays call it a demon
in beast form and speak of its Village where the houses are raftered
with men’s bones and thatched with human hair.

In heraldry the martikhora is called the montegre, manticora, or
man-tyger, and is pictured with the body of a lion, the head of an old
man, the horns of an ox, and sometimes with dragon feet.


_The Scythian Lamb_

To match the barnacle goose which came from a nut, the ages of faith
had the Scythian lamb which grew in a gourd. Maundeville has the best
account, for did he not make a meal of one? The creature is found in “a
kingdom that men call Caldilhe,” one of “the Countries and Isles that
be beyond the Land of Cathay.” In this country “there groweth a manner
of Fruit, as though it were Gourds. And when they be ripe, men cut them
in two, and Men find within a little Beast in Flesh and Bone and Blood,
as though it were a little Lamb without Wool. And men eat both the
Fruit and the Beast. And that is a great Marvel.”

Friar Odoric makes a similar report. In other stories the Scythian
lamb is a true animal attached to the earth by its umbilical cord. The
Scythian lamb of botany is a woolly fern (_Cibotium barometz_) with a
prostrate stem turned upside down. It is also called vegetable lamb
and Tartarian lamb. In his _Travels into Muscovy and Persia_ (1636)
the ambassador from the Duke of Holstein describes it as a gourd like
unto a lamb in all its members and with the lamb’s sacrificial relation
to the wolf. It grows wild in the district of Samara, in Russia, and
its growing is a kind of destructive browsing. “It changes places in
growing, as far as the stalk will reach, and wherever it turns the
grass withers, which the Muscovites call feeding.” When all available
grass fails, it dies. The rind of the gourd is covered with a sort of
hair, which makes a good substitute for fur. The natives showed the
traveler certain skins, covered with a soft frizzled wool “not unlike
that of a lamb newly weaned”--vegetable lamb, they affirmed. Scaliger
declares that alone among animals the wolf feeds on this gourd and that
wolf traps are baited with it.

[Illustration: _In Caldilhe There Groweth a Manner of Fruit, and Men
Find Within a Little Beast as Though It Were a Lamb Without Wool_]

Erasmus Darwin has these lines upon the Scythian lamb in his _Botanic
Garden_:

  /*
  Rooted in earth each cloven hoof descends,
  And round and round her flexible neck she bends;
  Crops the gray coral moss and hoary thyme;
  Or laps with rosy tongue the melting rime,
  Eyes with mute tenderness her distant dam,
  And seems to bleat, a Vegetable Lamb.

So until 1915 stood the fable--seemingly just a tale of the credulous
Middle Age, rationalized by later science and gently derided in still
later rhyme. Then the scholarship of Berthold Laufer, basing itself
mainly upon Chinese texts, gave it long backgrounds. The Scythian lamb
has been in turn a mollusk, a marine sheep, a bird, the cotton-plant, a
strange half-human creature and--this part is surmise--an allegory of
the early Christian Church, the Lamb of Revelation that “stood on the
mount Sion.”

Unto this day fabrics are made of the undyed fleece of the true
Scythian lamb. Byssus silk is the name it bears in commerce, and
Taranto is the seat of its manufacture. The silk is derived from the
fibrous foot by which mollusks of the species called the pinna, found
in the waters about southern Italy, attach themselves to rocks. The
original Scythian lamb was this mollusk and its umbilical cord was
the byssus, or foot, which anchored it. The genesis of the legend
seems to be a statement of Aristotle that these creatures have within
them a parasite, a small crab, nicknamed the “pinna-guard” which in
gathering its own food collects fishes also for its blind, stationary,
and helpless host. Without the pinna-guard, says Aristotle, the mollusk
soon dies; and he cites the latter to illustrate his observation that
in the sea “there are certain objects concerning which one would be
at loss to determine whether they be animal or vegetable.” After
Aristotle’s time, and in the first centuries of the Christian era,
byssus fabrics, which may have been a by-product of pearl fisheries in
the Persian Gulf, appeared in the Mediterranean countries.

Here, then, is an animal living within what passed for a vegetable
that was “rooted in earth,” and that produced a substance later known
as marine wool. But how did the Adriatic mollusk and its tenant crab
become a lamb-tenanted gourd, or a veritable sheep attached to the soil
by a fleshy stem, in the plains of Asiatic Scythia? And how did this
tiny partnership of the sea floor become in turn a phœnix-like creature
of the air and the grisly Yedua, man-monster of Talmudic legend?
The process illustrates the part that travel tale, the carrying of
confused reports from place to place, has in creating myth. Though the
fable grew up in the Roman Orient and reached China only through such
reports, the superior historical sense of the Chinese has made their
annals the key to its meaning.

The first Chinese record in point, not later than A. D. 220, speaks
of a fine cloth in the Roman Orient “said by some to originate from
the down of a water sheep.” This may be inference from the almost
contemporary phrase of Alciphron, the Greek sophist, who calls byssus
textiles “woolen stuffs out of the sea.” In the sixth century Procopius
recites that each of the five hereditary satraps of Armenia had from
the Roman emperor a golden-hued cloak made from “wool gathered out of
the sea.” In an account by the Arab Istakhri, written about A.D. 950,
it is said that an animal runs out of the sea and rubs itself against
the rocks, “whereupon it deposes a kind of wool of silken texture and
golden color.” Robes of this, worn by the Ommiad princes at Cordova,
were valued at a thousand gold pieces each.

By etymological error and a device of ancient trade, the mollusk, which
had already become a water sheep, got itself wings. Pinna, its name, is
also the classic Latin word for “feather,” an ambiguity which may have
confused the Arabs; and the filaments of the shellfish are rather like
the plumage of fowls. Byssus weaves were held at so high a price that
they were counterfeited in feather fabrics, and to promote their sale
the discovery of a wonderful bird was at length announced. The Arab,
Kazwini, calls it _abu baraquish_ and pictures it as like the stork;
but “every hour its plumage glitters in another color, red, yellow,
green and blue.” The fabric from its plumage is named “phœnix-feather
gold” in a Chinese work of the Mongol period. Skilled artisans, it is
related, weave a soft golden brocade from the neck feathers of the
phœnix, which in the spring drop to the foot of the mountains. These
were probably the feathered headskins of peacocks, which in China are
still made into jackets.

When the _Annals_ of the T’ang Dynasty (618-906) were compiled, the
water sheep had become a land animal of Syria, or Fu-lin as that
country was called. Here is the Chinese account: “There are lambs
engendered in the soil. The inhabitants wait till they are going to
sprout, then build enclosures around as a preventive measure for wild
beasts that might rush in from outside and devour them. The umbilical
cord of the lambs is attached to the soil, and when forcibly cut off
they will die. The people, donning cuirasses and mounted on horseback,
beat drums to frighten them. The lambs shriek from fear and thus their
umbilical cord is ruptured. Thereupon they set out in search of water
and pasture.”

It was part of the tradition of the marine sheep that it yielded its
fleece of its own accord, and this was carried over into the later
Chinese story that the Scythian or Syrian lamb must itself rupture the
umbilical cord, which others could not sever without killing it. The
appearance of men in armor to frighten it to this end is elucidated
by a passage from the thirteenth-century Arab traveler, Abul Abbas.
After the pinna comes ashore and lets its wool escape, he records, it
is pounced upon by large crabs. In the Chinese story, these crabs have
become men on horseback and their shells are the cuirasses worn by the
horsemen.

A debased version of the same story appears in the Mongol period when
a thirteenth-century Chinese traveler describes the “sheep planted on
hillocks” in the countries of the western sea. The umbilical cord of a
sheep is planted and watered. At the time of the first thunder peals it
begins to grow. When matured, the creature is frightened by the sound
of wooden instruments and, breaking off the cord that attaches it to
the ground, roams about in search of herbage. This was the tale Odoric
and Maundeville heard; that the lamb was inclosed in a gourd may have
been their own invention, or the report of some early attempt to relate
it to the cotton pod, which about a generation ago was conjectured to
be the basis of the fable.

“Creatures called Lords of the Field are regarded as beasts,” says
the Talmud. The same creature is also called the Man of the Mountain.
“It draws its food out of the soil by means of the umbilical cord; if
its navel be cut, it cannot live,” says Simeon a thirteenth-century
rabbi. In the detailed portrait by Rabbi Meir the timid vegetable lamb
undergoes a wolfish transformation: “There is an animal styled Yedua,
with the bones of which witchcraft is practiced. It issues from the
earth like the stem of a plant, just as a gourd. In all respects the
Yedua has human form in face, body, hands, and feet. No creature can
approach within the tether of the stem, for it seizes and kills all. As
far as the stem stretches, it devours the herbage all around. Whoever
is intent on capturing this animal must not approach it, but tear at
the cord until it is ruptured, whereupon the animal soon dies.”

Laufer thinks that the Jewish legend is early Christian allegory
misunderstood; that the Man of the Mountain is “the lamb that stood on
the mount Sion,” a symbol of the Church itself the followers of which
are attached to the earth by sensual pleasures; and that the mounted
horsemen of the Chinese version, who cause the lambs to break their
connection with the earth, may be the two hundred thousand horsemen of
Revelation that symbolize the Last Judgment.


_Gold-guarding Ants_

Bits of turquoise, chips of obsidian arrow heads, and fragments of
prehistoric jewelry are found in the little heaps of earth which ants
bring up from underground on the sites of vanished cities in New
Mexico. On the Pajarito plateau ant-gold is not unknown. Ant-gold is
the theme of one of the most circumstantial and puzzling stories told
by ancient travelers. Herodotus lays its scene somewhere near Cabul.
The Indians of that district send forth men in search of gold into a
sandy desert “where live great ants in size somewhat less than dogs,
but bigger than foxes.” A number of these were caught by hunters and
sent to the Persian king. The ants live underground and, “like the
Greek ants, which they very much resemble in shape, throw up sand-heaps
as they burrow.”

There is gold in the sand, but the ants are formidable enemies and
fleet in pursuit. So the Indians harness a female camel between two
males, and the female is one that has lately dropped a foal. The inroad
is timed so that the caravans arrive when the sun is hottest and the
ants are hiding from the heat. Herodotus continues:

“The Indians fill their bags with the sand and ride away at full speed;
the ants, however, scenting them, as the Persians say, rush forth in
pursuit. Now these animals are so swift, they declare, that there
is nothing in the world like them; if it were not, therefore, that
the Indians get a start while the ants are mustering, not a single
gold-gatherer could escape. During the flight the male camels grow
tired and begin to drag; but the females recollect the young which they
have left behind, and never flag. Thus, say the Persians, the Indians
get most of their gold.”

In substance the story is repeated in the letter which Prester John
sent to the Pope in the twelfth century. The “emmet valley” also
appears in the _Arabian Nights_. Megasthenes said that the plain
tenanted by the monster ants is three thousand stadiæ in circumference
and lies eastward in the mountains in the kingdom of the Dardæ. In
winter the ants dig holes and pile the auriferous earth in heaps at the
pit mouths. Pliny declares the ants are of the color of cats and the
size of Egyptian wolves; that they work in winter and are despoiled
in summer. “The horns of the Indian ant,” he remarks, “fixed up in
the temple of Hercules at Erythræ were objects of great wonderment.”
Nearchus, admiral of Alexander, reports having seen skins of these
ants as large as leopard skins. Ctesias speaks in his _Persica_ of a
horse-pismire which was fed by the magi and became of such monstrous
size that it took two pounds of meat a day to victual it. As late as
the sixteenth century there is a story by Busbequius that the Shah of
Persia sent one of the Indian ants as a present to Sultan Soliman at
Constantinople. Maundeville transfers the whole scene to Taprobane
(Ceylon) and varies the incidents: Men do not enter ant-land but send
thither mares to which empty vessels are suspended. “It is Pismire
nature that they let nothing be empty among them, but anon they fill
it, and so they fill those Vessels with Gold.” When the foals neigh in
the distance their dams return to them with a golden burden.

What were these ants, and whence the fable?

It will be noted that the griffins were cast in a similar rôle in
another Indian gold quest. It may be accepted that good-sized animals,
or the skins of animals, were seen in menageries, museums, and temples,
and identified with the ant custodians of the Scythian metal. It
has been suggested that these were some other burrowing animal--the
anteater, or the marmot; but neither is fleet of foot. M. de Weltheim
thought the Herodotoan ant might be the corsac, a small Asiatic fox.

Philology has a word to offer. The gold collected on the plains of
Little Tibet is popularly known as _pippilika_, or “ant gold,” from
the belief that ants bring it up, or bare the veins which carry it.
McCrindle asserts that the gold-diggers were neither ants nor other
animals, but “Tibetan miners, who, like their descendants of the
present day, preferred working their mines in winter when the frozen
ground stands well and is not likely to trouble them by falling
in.” Thus the raid and retreat would be accomplished with the same
expedition with which any tribe would make a sudden foray on another
tribe equipped with equal ordnance and cavalry. Metaphor still speaks
of the miner as a mole or a human ant.


_The Questing Beast_

In _Le Morte d’Arthur_, Malory describes a singular animal with an
economy of phrase that whets curiosity. Arthur had had a heavy dream
of griffins and serpents that devoured his land, and to put it out of
his mind he went a-hunting. And he followed a white hart until his
horse fell dead under him and his quarry was embushed. “He set him down
by a fountain, and there he fell in great thoughts. And as he sat him
so, him thought he heard a noise of hounds, to the sum of thirty. And
with that the king saw coming toward him the strangest beast that ever
he saw or heard of; so the beast went to the well and drank, and the
noise was in the beast’s belly like unto the questyng of thirty couple
hounds; but all the while the beast drank there was no noise in the
beast’s belly; and therewith the beast departed with a great noise,
whereof the king had great marvel.”

Followed a knight hight Pellinore, and sought to borrow the king’s
horse to pursue this animal, and the king would have taken over his
quest for a twelvemonth, but he would not. After Pellinore’s death it
is Palomides that rides across the pages of romance, well in the rear
of the questing beast.


_The Beasts of Revelation_

The beasts of Revelation were but symbols; yet they moved like
realities through the imagery of the Church, and, undergoing a sea
change, appeared alive in the distant Atlantic Islands of Irish epic.
St. John beheld the shapes of locusts like unto horses prepared for
battle; “and their faces were as the faces of men, and they had hair as
the hair of women, and they had tails like unto scorpions.” He saw also
a beast coming up out of the earth; “and he had two horns like a lamb,
and he spake as a dragon.” Above all, John saw the beast that came up
out of the sea, a leopard with the feet of a bear and the mouth of a
lion, and with the dragon’s authority; and the beast had seven heads
and ten horns, “and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.” The Whore of
Babylon rode this beast--composite of seven mountains and ten kings,
the text explains--to world power and to downfall; and rode on into
literature, and an unending controversy.


_American Contributions_

Animal elders are America’s main contribution to the collection
of fabulous beasts. The Indian believed that every species had a
giant ancestor like itself in form, but with supernatural powers to
protect it. Hunters who killed more animals than they needed for food
felt the vengeance of the elder beasts. The latter gave a tribe its
medicine, and themselves became totems. They are sometimes represented
as in human form and living in stately lodges. The Pacific coast of
South America has also stories of a house-haunting ram, a repulsive
tree-dweller, a water-monster resembling a distended cowskin, and a
creature with the head of a heifer and the body of a sheep.

According to members of the Forest Service, American lumberjacks have
their own mythology. Product of camp-fire chaff and a whimsical humor,
the creatures that people it are noted here only because, both in name
and in nature, they illustrate the traditional instinct for composites
that elsewhere has wrought to more serious ends. They include the
tote-road shagamaw, with the head of a lion, the forepaws of a bear
and the hind legs of a moose; the splinter cat, which crushes hollow
trees in search of raccoons; the hugag, with buffalo body and jointless
legs, which sleeps leaning against a tree; the sausage-like wapaloosie,
which lives on fungi; the billdad, which kills fish with its tail; the
gumberoo, which explodes when it gets too near a fire; the snoligoster,
a spiked and legless crocodile, and the lachrymose squonk. A common
human figure in these tales is the grotesque giant, Paul Bunyan.


_The Prodigies of Heraldry_

In the later totemism, which is called heraldry, the following fabulous
creatures with human, animal, or bird attributes, or an admixture of
all of these, were represented on crests and coats of arms: allerion,
chimera, cockatrice, dragon, griffin, harpy, hydra, lyon-dragon,
lyon-poisson, mermaid, montygre, martlet, opinicus, pegasus, sphinx,
sagittary, satyr, tarask, tityrus, unicorn, wyvern, winged lyon, winged
bull.

Several of these are noted elsewhere in this study, and a word will
serve for the rest. The allerion is an eagle without beak or claws. The
chimera, says Bossewell, is “a beast or monstre having thre heades,
one like a Lyon, an other like a Goate, the third like a Dragon.” The
hydra is a seven- or nine-headed water serpent. The lyon-dragon is
a composite of a lion and a dragon, and the lyon-poisson of a lion
and a fish. The martlet is a swallow without feet. The opinicus is a
composite of camel, dragon, and lion. The pegasus is a winged horse.
The sphinx is a figure with a woman’s head and breasts, a lion’s body,
and usually eagle’s wings. The sagittary is the centaur of antiquity
with the head, arms, and body of a man from the waist up, united to
the body and legs of a horse. The heraldic satyr has a human face, a
leonine body, and the horns and tail of an antelope. The tarask is a
dragon-basilisk on the shield of Tarascon. “The tityrus is ingendred
between a sheep and a buck-goat,” says Guillim. The wyvern is a
serpentine dragon with a long tail and only two legs. The winged lyon
is an achievement of Venice, the winged bull a memory of Assyria.

Other heraldic creatures, not so well authenticated, are mentioned
by Randle Holme in his _Academy of Armory_. These include the
ass-bittern, the cat-fish, the devil-fish, the dragon-tyger, the
dragon-wolf, the falcon-fish with a hound’s ear, the friar-fish, the
lamya, compounded of a woman, a dragon, a lion, a goat, a dog, and a
horse; the lyon-wyvern, the minocane or homocane, half child and half
spaniel dog; the ram-eagle, the winged satyr-fish, and the wonderful
pig of the ocean.

The menagerie of blazonry has been enlarged by representing nearly
all of the animals at times with fish-tails, when they are said to be
marined. The zodiacal sign of the capricorn, shown as half goat and
half fish, is a familiar example. Sometimes the sea-horse is drawn as
an enlarged hippocampus, sometimes with the forequarters of a horse and
a fish tail. Griffins and unicorns are marined in German heraldry.




Chapter VI. Fable upon Wings


For the most part the winged creatures of fable are exiles from
mythologies broken down or forgotten. They are imperfect and confused
embodiments of the phenomena of the heavens. In them one sees, what the
men who repeated stories about them did not see, the diurnal journeys
of the sun into the west, the shadowing storm-cloud, the lightning
flash, the fury of evil winds, the hail, and the snow. But the poetry
of the air, of which these creatures are the flying shreds, is weighted
with terrestrial prose. Extinct birds of colossal size, prehistoric
winged reptiles, and the bones of fossil mammals are reflected in
the shapes of cloudland. Few of the creatures that hover there can
be called fowls at all; their wings carry bodies that belong upon
the earth. Thus Pliny, in one of the most flagrant of his carelessly
credulous passages, makes the casual statement that Ethiopia produces
“horses with wings, and armed with horns, which are called pegasi.”
Because of its human affinities the dragon must be considered by itself.


_The Phœnix_

Of the phœnix, a true fowl of legend and its most renowned, Maundeville
has a vivacious picture. This bird, he says, “is not much more big than
an Eagle, but he hath a Crest of Feathers upon his Head more great than
the Peacock hath; and his Neck is yellow after the Colour of an Oriel
that is a fine shining Stone; and his Beak is coloured blue as Azure;
and his wings be of purple Colour, and the Tail is yellow and red, cast
in streaks across his Tail. And he is a full fair Bird to look upon,
against the Sun, for he shineth full gloriously and nobly.”

Other men were not so sure about the phœnix. Herodotus said he had
never seen it and Pliny declared he was “not quite certain that its
existence is not all a fable.” Herodotus, however, had seen its
picture, and the Maundeville account is copied from him.

The bird was Arabian, its legend Egyptian. It was said that there
was only one phœnix in the world, and that it appeared at very long
intervals. The Roman Senator, Manlius, wrote that no person had seen
it eat since its food was air, that in Arabia it was sacred to the
sun, and that its lifetime was five hundred and forty years. When
stricken with age it built a nest of cassia and sprigs of frankincense
and lay down to die; from its bones and marrow issued a worm which in
time changed into a small bird. The first duty of the new bird was to
perform the obsequies of its predecessor, and carry the nest containing
its myrrh-swathed remains to the City of the Sun in Egypt, placing it
upon the altar of that divinity.

According to the more familiar account, when the phœnix is full of
years it flies to Heliopolis, sings its own dirge there, flaps its
wings to fan the funeral pyre, and presently is utterly consumed; the
next day emerges the new bird, fully feathered; and on the third day,
its wings well grown, it salutes the priest and returns to the East.
Still another account has it that in its old age the bird casts itself
on the ground, receiving a mortal wound, and the new bird issues from
the ichor.

In the censorship of the Emperor Claudius what purported to be a phœnix
was brought to Rome and exhibited in the Comitium, but it was adjudged
an imposture. Plutarch ventures the daring statement that “the brain of
the phœnix is a pleasant bit, but that it causeth the headache.” He may
have meant the golden pheasant, or even wine from cocoanuts, but it is
said that Heliogabalus made a fruitless attempt to secure this unique
tidbit for his table.

Popular art reflects the phœnix legend, metaphor still more. It is
the favorite symbol of self-regeneration. The burned city, the ruined
country or cause, “rises like the phœnix from its own ashes.” Jesus,
whose death coincided with one of the reported flights of the fowl to
Egypt, was called the Phœnix by monastic writers, and St. Clement of
Alexandria cites the fowl as proof that the dead will rise again. Its
effigy was taken over from the pagan urn by the Christian sarcophagus.
Browne, however, thought that the notion of a solitary phœnix was
repugnant to Scripture, “because it infringeth the benediction of
God concerning multiplication.” At one time its image hung before
chemists’ shops because of its association with alchemy. Sometimes the
Arabs confused it with the salamander and pictured the latter as a bird.

The relation of the phœnix to astronomical reckoning gives a clue to
the legend. It reappeared, according to some authors, at intervals of
250, 500, 654, 1,000, 1,461 or even of 7,006 years, but the accepted
Phœnix Period or Cycle was 540 years, and Egypt reports having seen the
fowl five times, the first in the reign of Sesostris, and the last time
in A.D. 334. This relates the appearances of the phœnix to the Great
Year, which Hardouin says is 532 years.

It was an ancient belief that the same aspect of heaven and order
of the stars that had prevailed when the world began recurred
every 532 years, and that at one of these periods, with all the
planets in conjunction or all the stars returned to the same point
in the ecliptic, the world would be destroyed; or else that it
would perish and revive again to go through the same sequence of
celestial phenomena. The phœnix, self-regenerating, sun-dedicated,
westward-winging, arrayed in the gold and purple of dawn and twilight,
seems to be an obscure form of the sun myth; and this inference is
strengthened by the fact that at Heliopolis a bird called the bennu
was a symbol of the Egyptians for the rising sun. It was a heron which
“created itself” and rose in a “fragrant flame” over a sacred tree.
Bennu in Egyptian and phœnix in Greek are the same word, and signify
the palm tree.


_The Fung-wang_

There was a Chinese phœnix called the fung-wang which at long intervals
and only in the reigns of upright monarchs emerged from the deserts.
Six feet high, with plumage reflecting the five colors that the Chinese
recognized--red, white, yellow, azure, and black--it was something
like an immense bird of paradise. It was called the chief of the three
hundred and sixty kinds of birds, and classed with the dragon and the
unicorn as a spiritual creature. On its poll appeared the Chinese
character for uprightness, on its back that for humanity, while its
wings enfolded the character for integrity. Its low notes were bell
tones, and its high like those of a drum. When you play the flute,
in nine cases out of ten the fung-wang comes to hear, says the _Shu
King_. It frequented only groves and gardens and would not peck living
grass. The _Bamboo Books_ record its visits as far back as 2647 B.C.
The emperor in whose reign it first showed itself recast his cabinet so
that officers bore the names of birds, and the Minister of the Calendar
was called the Phœnix. “Another example of an interesting and beautiful
species of bird which has become extinct within historic times,” rashly
concludes Gould.


_Flying Serpents of Araby_

Another winged creature besides the phœnix sought to go out of Arabia
into Egypt, but its passage was opposed. This was the flying serpent.
Herodotus says he went to “a certain place in Arabia” to ask about
it. He saw the backbones and ribs of these reptiles in inconceivable
number, piled in a gorge, and learned why they got no further. They
are met in this place by “the birds called ibises, who forbid their
entrance and destroy them all.” Hence the Egyptians hold the ibis in
reverence.

Josephus uses the incident as basis of a story about Moses that is not
in the Pentateuch. The Ethiopians had successfully invaded the land of
Egypt, and an oracle advised the defenders to choose for their general
Moses the Hebrew. His choice pleased the scribes of both nations--the
Egyptian because they apprehended that Moses would be slain, and the
Jewish because they expected that he would be the instrument of their
deliverance. The line of march lay through the country of winged
serpents, powerful and mischievous creatures that came out of the
ground unseen or fell upon men from the air. But Moses “made baskets
like unto arks of sedges, and filled them with ibes, and carried them
along with him, which animals are the greatest enemies to serpents
imaginable, for these fly from them when they come near them, and as
they fly they are caught and devoured.” So Moses passed on unscathed,
and into the heart of an Ethiopian princess through whose aid her
father’s forces were routed.

After centuries of discussion the sacred ibis of the Egyptians was
finally identified by the traveler Bruce with the bird the Abyssinians
call Father John; but the winged serpents have not been satisfactorily
explained. It has been suggested that what Herodotus saw in the Arabian
gorge was the remains of a locust invasion--a difficult surmise,
although Pliny reports that the legs and wings of grasshoppers three
feet long were dried in the sun and used by the Indians for saws.


_The Roc_

The case for the roc--a creature unknown to either Greek or Roman
legend--rests mainly upon three beguiling names of travel tale. These
are Aladdin and Sindbad of the _Arabian Nights_, and Marco Polo of the
_Diversities_. By the magic of his lamp Aladdin, the wayward gamin of a
Chinese city, had won a princess and a palace; and he had poisoned the
African magician who sought to use him as a tool and then to take the
lamp from him. Bent on vengeance, the magician’s brother stabbed a holy
woman with the very un-Chinese name of Fatima, disguised himself in her
habiliments and won entrance into the palace of Aladdin and into the
confidence of his princess. The latter asked the false Fatima what she
thought of her residence, and this was the reply.

“My opinion is that if a roc’s egg were hung up in the middle of the
dome, this hall would have no parallel in the four quarters of the
world, and your palace would be the wonder of the universe.”

“My good mother,” said the princess, “what is a roc, and where may one
get an egg?”

“Princess,” replied the pretended Fatima, “it is a bird of prodigious
size, which inhabits the summit of Mount Caucasus; the architect who
built your palace can get you one.”

The princess consulted Aladdin, and, retiring to his apartment, he
rubbed the lamp; when a genie appeared, he bade him procure the roc’s
egg. Whereupon the hall shook as if about to fall, and the genie
exclaimed in a loud and terrible voice, “Is it not enough that I and
the other slaves of the lamp have done everything for you, but you, by
an unheard-of ingratitude, must command me to bring my master and hang
him up in the midst of this dome? The attempt deserves that you, the
princess, and the palace should be immediately reduced to ashes; but
you are spared because this request does not come from yourself.” Then
he told of the presence of a conspirator in the household. Aladdin’s
killing of the latter is the final episode of the tale, the fortunate
adventurer and his spouse soon mounting the throne of China.

Sindbad encountered the parent bird on his second voyage, after he
had been abandoned on an island; and first he saw its egg. He mistook
the egg for a white dome of prodigious height and extent and found it
fifty paces around and too smooth to climb to the top. All of a sudden
the sky became dark as by a thick cloud and a huge bird came flying
toward him. It alighted on the egg, and Sindbad, creeping close to the
shell, tied himself by his turban to one of its legs, which was as big
as the trunk of a tree. The next morning he hoped the roc would carry
him away. Nor was his hope disappointed, and after an immense journey
in the air--quite from Madagascar to India--the bird alighted in the
Valley of Diamonds. There Sindbad disengaged himself, only to fall into
other adventures.

Marco Polo was the first veracious traveler to bring to the west a
report of the roc, and he was careful to state that he did not see
the bird; he only heard of it. The roc, he said, comes to Madagascar
from the south. It resembles the eagle, but is so much larger that
it can carry away an elephant. “Persons who have seen the bird,” he
continues, “assert that when the wings are spread they measure sixteen
paces [forty feet] from point to point, and that the feathers are eight
paces [twenty feet] long and thick in proportion.” Messer Marco guessed
that these creatures might be griffins, half birds and half lions, and
particularly questioned those who claimed to have seen them. No, was
the reply, they were fowls altogether. Kublai Khan sent messengers to
Madagascar to confirm the story. They brought back, as Marco heard,
“a feather of the roc positively affirmed to have measured ninety
spans, and the quill part to have been two palms in circumference.” The
delighted khan sent valuable gifts.

Two centuries afterward the roc reappears in the narrative of Father
Joano dos Santos, a Portuguese Dominican friar traveling in eastern
Ethiopia. He tells of a fellow Portuguese faring inland in Madagascar
to purchase ivory, and leading a large monkey on a chain. This he
fastened to the trunk of a tree and lay down to rest; a monstrous bird
snatched up both the monkey and the tree and flew away. The Shoshones
have a story of an owl which carries men away to its island larder.
Mewan legend speaks of the cannibal bird Yel-lo-kin with wings like
pine trees which snatched children by the top of the head and bore them
through the hole in the middle of the sky to its nest on the other side.

While the roc belongs to nature myth, matter-of-fact has a word to
say. The extinct dodo is recalled, which, however, could not fly. The
feather brought to Kublai, and the monstrous stump of a roc’s quill
which it is said was brought to Spain by a merchant from the China
seas, may have been taken from a species of palm growing in Madagascar
which has quill-like fronds. Southern Madagascar is frequented by very
large birds--the albatross with a wing-spread of fifteen feet, and the
condor, which may measure more than ten from tip to tip.

Everybody in the east believed that the roc, or more correctly the
rukh, really existed. When the utmost depths of Arabic credulity
are sounded, one reaches the probable basis of a legend into the
superstructure of which exaggerated details of natural history have
been built. One Arab writer says the length of the roc’s wings is ten
thousand fathoms, or nearly twelve miles, and these dimensions would
make a fair-sized storm cloud. A Chinese tale describes the bird as
a fowl which in its flight obscures the sun, and of whose quills
“water-tuns” are made. One of the riders of the roc in another tale
from the _Thousand and One Nights_ is admonished to stop his ears from
the wind, “lest thou be dazed by the noise of the revolving sphere and
the roaring of the seas.” It is shrewdly surmised that the roc is the
storm cloud and the egg it covers is the sun--true master of the slaves
of Aladdin’s lamp.


_The Rhinoceros of the Air_

Another monstrous fowl, the rhinoceros of the air, was reported in
mediæval travel and still commands the faith of the Samoyeds. Purchas
abstracts the description given by Andrea Corsali in his Abyssinian
travels. The bird is much bigger than an eagle and has a bow-fashioned
bill or beak four feet long, with a horn between the eyes streaked
with black. “It is a cruel fowle and attends on battels and campes.”
The Siberian myth gives this winged rhinoceros gigantic dimensions.
The tusks and bones of the great pachyderms, found in the tundras, are
thought by native hunters to be the beaks and talons of monster birds.
The nearest approach of fact to the Abyssinian prodigy is perhaps the
horned screamer, or unicorn bird, whose cries “resembling the bray of a
jackass, but shriller,” unpleasantly disturbed for the naturalist Bates
the solitude of the Brazilian forest.


_The Harpies_

Those forbidding sister groups, the gorgons, the sirens, and the
harpies, are perhaps different aspects of the storm clouds and the
storm wind--the baleful lightning, the shrieking sea gales, the violent
gusts that snatch (_harpazo_) away soul and body. Of the three, the
gorgons and sirens will be left within the domain of nature myths.
The harpies may be migrants from the religions of Egypt, in which
Nekhbet, the vulture-goddess, is sometimes represented as a woman with
a vulture’s head, and the soul is depicted as a human-headed bird
fluttering from the mouths of the dying. Yet they have that savor
of the soil, that touch of the grotesque, that suggestion of coarse
reality that belong rather to travel tale. Though with woman faces,
their attributes are animal.

Hesiod describes them as maidens, winged and golden-haired, who
harassed the blind King Phineus at his banquets. The myth is retold
in grosser form in the story of the Argonauts, whence these sisters,
driven away by the comrades of Jason, make their flight to the Æneid
and find roost in an isle where the Trojans cast anchor. The picture
Virgil drew of them superseded the more flattering accounts of poets
before him, and the immense vogue of this poet in later ages led
the romancers of the Charlemagne cycle to adopt his report without
abatement.

The harpies of Virgil are, as the poet Morris pictures them, “dreadful
snatchers,” like women down to the breast, with scanty, coarse black
hair, dim eyes ringed with red, bestial mouths, gnarled necks, and
birds’ claws. Their faces are pale with hunger. When the Trojans slay
the island cattle and prepare meat for a feast, the birds swoop down
with a horrible clamor, seize part of the meat, and defile the rest.
Nimbly they dodge the Trojan swords, and their feathers are like
steel mail. From a cliff they reproach the visitors for slaying their
cattle and warring upon them, and as Æneas departs they shriek direful
predictions after him.

In the legends of Charlemagne the bird-sisters reappear when Astolpho,
cousin of Orlando, reaches Abyssinia riding the hippogrif. Here is
another blind king, like Phineus, “prey to a flock of obscene birds
called harpies, which attacked him whenever he sat at meat, and with
their claws snatched, tore, and scattered everything, overturning the
vessels, devouring the food, and infecting what they left with their
filthy touch.” They are put to flight with one blast of Astolpho’s horn
and driven by him and his hippogrif into a cavern, the entrance of
which he blocked up so that they are seen no more.

That is, so far as the romancer of that time knew. They reappeared in
the New World on the Isthmus of Darien, where Balboa was pursuing,
amid the fens of a haunted land, the adventure of the mines of Dobayba
and the elusive golden temple. The Indians told him there had been
a horrible tempest, and when they ventured forth again they found
that two monstrous creatures had come in with the storm. They were
apparently a mother and her daughter. They had woman faces and eagle
claws and wings; the branches of the trees where they perched broke
with their weight. Swooping down, they would seize a man and carry him
away to the hilltops to devour him. At last the natives killed the
older bird by a stratagem, and, suspending her body from their spears,
bore it from town to town to appease the alarm of their people. The
younger harpy disappeared.

Natural history has given the name of harpy to a buzzard, an eagle,
a fly, and two species of bats. Neither of the last named, however,
is the vampire bat of which Bates has left a portentous portrait.
Its spread of wing is nearly two and a half feet. “Nothing in animal
physiognomy can be more hideous than the countenance of this creature
when viewed from the front; the large, leathery ears standing out from
the sides and top of the head, the erect, spear-shaped appendage on the
top of the nose, the grin and the glistening black eye, all combining
to make up a figure that reminds one of some mocking imp of fable.” It
seems to be fact that villages in Central America have been abandoned
because of the nocturnal attacks of this animal. Dampier professes to
have seen on an island near Sebo bats “with bodies as big as ducks and
with a wing spread of eight feet.” The custom of nailing up dead bats
as witch-or-devil forms is common. “An animal,” says Buffon, “which,
like the bat, is half quadruped and half bird, and which, in fact, is
neither the one nor the other, is a kind of monster.” He suggests that
“the wings, the teeth, the claws, the voracity; the nastiness, and all
the destructive qualities and noxious faculties of the harpies bear no
small resemblance to those of the Ternat bat.”


_The Stymphalian Birds_

The Stymphalian birds, according to Greek legend, frequented a lake
in the northeast of Arcadia, which lay on the main route from Argolis
and Corinth westward. To disperse or destroy them was the sixth labor
of Hercules. These birds were anthropophagous, used their feathers as
arrows, and were equipped with brazen claws, wings, and feet. Diodorus
has a milder account in which they figure merely as voracious poachers
of the fruits of the neighborhood. With a brazen pan the hero made such
an uproar that they flew away, appearing again, in the story of the
Argonauts, as tenants of the island of Aretias.

Pausanias visited the township of Stymphalus in his tour of Greece.
He describes a temple to Artemis Stymphalia standing there, and the
figures of the birds Stymphalides under its roof; behind the temple
were marble statues of young women with the legs of fowls. The birds,
he says, are as large as cranes, but resemble the ibis save that they
have stronger beaks and less curved; so, indeed, they are represented
on coins of Stymphalus. Herodotus rationalizes the legend by intimating
that their feathery arrows were, in truth, hail or snow.


_The Cockatrice_

“The weaned child,” said Isaiah, prophesying the good time coming,
“shall put his hand on the cockatrice’ den.” The cockatrice was a
monster with the head and plumage of a cock and a barbed serpent’s
tail, and so it is represented in heraldry. The word is an old French
corruption of the Latin for crocodile, but popular etymology attributed
the name to the fact that the prodigy was hatched from an aged cock’s
egg by a serpent. Because of the crest crowning its head it is also
called a basilisk, from the Greek _basilikos_, or “little king.”

Its habitat was Africa. It was horrid to look upon and its glance
and breath were alike fatal, while its voice struck terror to other
serpents. Its own image, reflected in a mirror, would kill it. The
basilisk of Cyrene, Pliny said, was not more than twelve fingers in
length, but it destroyed all shrubs save the rue, and consumed grasses
and shattered stones merely by breathing upon them. “He infecteth the
water that he cometh neare,” according to Leigh. It was believed that
if a horseman killed a basilisk with a spear-thrust, its poison would
ascend the weapon and destroy not only the rider, but his mount. Even
its dead body hung in a temple kept swallows from building and spiders
from spinning there. However, if a man saw the basilisk first, he went
scatheless and the creature itself might die, while women could seize
it without suffering harm. The effluvium of the weasel and the crow
of the cock were alike fatal to it. Travelers passing near its haunts
sometimes took a cock along.

While its deadly nature has persisted, the shape of the cockatrice has
changed. To the ancients it was merely a baleful lizard. Its confusion
in the Middle Ages with the cock gave it feathers and a beak. As soon
as hatched by a toad or snake from a cock’s egg laid in a stable it
hid itself in crevice, cistern, or rafter, for to be seen was to die.
Later the heralds and painters represented it with the head of a hawk,
sometimes even with the head of a man. Its ashes would turn base metals
into gold. People thought that cock’s eggs were used in the devil’s
chrism whereby his anointed hags could assume beast form or ride the
clouds. In Browne’s time there was traffic in counterfeited cockatrices
made by joining the dead bodies of pheasants and serpents, or out of
the skins of thornbacks. The basilisk of natural history, which may
have been the original of the fable, is a harmless creature, although
of frightful aspect.




Chapter VII. The Dragon


The dragon of pagan and early Christian legend was a winged crocodile
with a serpent’s tail. As the word is used by travelers, often a
crocodile or a snake rather than a fabulous composite animal is
intended. There are three animals listed in natural history which
somewhat resemble this creature. The dragon-fly is a frightful-looking
but entirely harmless insect; how the supersession of myth by science
has shifted values is illustrated by the fact that the ninth edition
of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ gives nearly four pages to the insect
and only a dozen lines to the fabulous monster, the destruction of
which in another age was the crowning exploit of gods and men. There is
also a small flying lizard, native to the East Indies, which is called
a dragon and which in miniature is a fair copy of fable. The primeval
world knew a veritable dragon in the pterodactyl, a flying lizard with
a wing span of seventeen feet.

In the Far East the dragon was a four-legged serpent with rugged head
and spiked ears, and, though without wings, it flew. There was more of
the crocodile in the dragon of the Near East. It had four short paws, a
forked tongue, and bat wings, and fire came from its mouth. The dragon
of heraldry had a squat, scaly body, a head with horny projections,
long clawed legs, a barbed tongue, and bat wings.

There were four noteworthy things about the dragon. It was watchful, it
spat fire and smoke, it ejected poison, and it had control of water.
The dragon watched the golden apples in the garden of Hesperides where
Hercules found and slew it. It guarded the Valkyrie Brynhild in a
castle on the Glistening Heath. Although ecclesiastics of the Middle
Ages used the word to symbolize sin and particularly pagan worship,
yet until very recent times the world accepted the dragon. The elder
naturalists, such as Gesner and Aldrovandi, picture it in their
works. A mediæval writer says that at the midsummer celebration lads
burned bones and filth to generate a noxious smoke, and so to drive
away dragons, which, excited by the summer heat, copulated in midair,
poisoning the wells and springs by dropping their seed in them.

For what it is worth there is documentary evidence of dragons in the
Alps, all of it attested by oath. The depositions were gathered early
in the eighteenth century by Prof. Johann Jacob Scheuchzer and are
thus summarized in Francis Gribble’s _Early Mountaineers_: “There are
dragons with and without wings, with and without legs, with and without
crests; dragons with cat faces, with human faces, and with nondescript
faces; dragons that breathe fire and dragons that do not breathe fire.”

Scheuchzer was impelled to this inquiry when he found there were graven
images of dragons on Swiss public buildings and a “dragon-stone” in
a Lucerne museum. The latter item he says is a jewel cut out of a
dragon’s head in its sleep. If the monster awakes before the operation
is complete, it will die and the stone will vanish. To forestall
awakening, drowsy herbs are scattered about, and sometimes incantations
are muttered. The dragon-stone is a remedy against plague, poison,
dysentery, and nosebleed. Scheuchzer concludes that the Lucerne
dragon-stone is no imposture because it does effect cures, because the
Alps afford many caves for dragon haunts and because of the testimony
of eye-witnesses as above.

In June, 1673, Joliet and Marquette saw two dragon forms carved
and painted along a bluff that overlooks the Mississippi at Alton,
Illinois. Says Père Marquette: “As we coasted along rocks, frightful
for their height and length, we saw two monsters painted on one of
these rocks, which startled us at first, and on which the boldest
Indian dare not gaze long. They are as large as a calf, with horns on
the head like a deer, a fearful look, red eyes, bearded like a tiger,
the face somewhat like a man’s, the body covered with scales, and the
tail so long that it twice makes a turn of the body, passing over the
head and down between the legs, and ending at last in a fish’s tail.
Green, red, and a kind of black are the colors employed.”

These outlines, which have been called the highest attainment of early
Indian pictorial art, and which Marquette said the best painters of
France could scarcely equal, became known as the Piasa petroglyph.
Quarrymen destroyed them shortly before the Civil War, but drawings
were made of them by artists who followed descriptions. One surmise is
that they represented the Algonquin thunder bird.

A copious and curious literature treats of the dragon as a veritable
creature of natural history. According to Ælian, although the
Ethiopians call it the slayer of elephants, it conceals itself when it
hears the noise of the eagle’s wings. When it lies in wait for man or
beast, it consumes deadly roots and herbs. At Lanuvium naked virgins
paid it the annual tribute of a barley cake to insure a fruitful year.
Passing the cave of a sacred Indian dragon, the army of Alexander was
affrighted by hissing and blowing and the apparition of a head with
eyes “of the size of a Macedonian shield.” Artemidorus adds the detail
that the Indian and African dragons have grass growing on their backs.
“You burst asunder vast bulls” is Lucan’s apostrophe. Ignatius reports
that the library of Constantinople had the intestine of a dragon 120
feet long on which the Iliad and Odyssey were inscribed.

Chinese reports are very detailed. In the great Materia Medica of
the early seventeenth century it is said that the dragon has nine
resemblances--its head like a camel’s, its horns like a deer’s, its
eyes like a hare’s, its ears like a bull’s, its neck like a snake’s,
its belly like an iguanodon’s, its scales like a carp’s, its claws
like an eagle’s and its paws like a tiger’s. It is whiskered and its
voice resembles the beating of a gong. The dragon, however, cannot hear
itself, for it is deaf. It is fond of gems and jade and excessively
fond of swallow’s flesh; but it dreads iron, beeswax, the mong plant,
the centipede, the leaves of the Pride of India, and silk dyed in the
five colors. It passes the winter in muddy water contemned by the fish
and turtle, and in summer the moles, crickets, and ants annoy it. At
five hundred years it grows horns. “If you do not ride on a dragon,”
says one writer, “you cannot reach the weak waters of Kwan-lun hill.”
Another suggests that if you eat dragon’s flesh soaked in acid “you can
write essays.”

It was a belief among Chinese that dragons did not die, but merely
sloughed off their bones as a snake its skin. These were used to cure
a variety of diseases and are still sold in apothecaries’ shops. The
records speak of a bone-covered dragon plain east of the hills of
Fang-chang, and of isles where the dragons shed their bodies; “teeth,
horns, spines, feet, it seems as though they are everywhere.” The
identification is perhaps with those deposits of dinosaur and other
paleontological remains which modern exploration has uncovered.

The naturalistic side of Chinese dragon lore is not far removed
from the position taken by Charles Gould, the stoutest defender of
the literal basis of wonder stories (_Mythical Monsters_, 1886). He
finds nothing impossible in the dragon of tradition and thinks it
more likely that it once lived than that fancy engendered it: “It
was a long, terrestrial lizard, hibernating and carnivorous, which
dragged its ponderous coils and perhaps flew; which devastated herds
and on occasions swallowed their shepherd; which, establishing its
lair in some cavern overlooking the fertile plain, spread terror
and destruction around, and, protected from assault by dread
or superstitious feeling, may even have been subsidized by the
terror-stricken peasantry, who, failing the power to destroy it, may
have preferred tethered offerings of cattle adjacent to its cavern, to
having it come down to seek supplies.”

But the dragon reached a place in the political and spiritual life of
China such as a mere saurian hardly could attain. The empire was called
“the dragon empire”; the imperial throne, “the dragon throne”; the
emperor’s countenance, “the dragon’s face”; his beard, “the dragon’s
beard.” In pictured effigy, the dragon rears itself upon house fronts
and draws its scaly folds over garments and utensils as well as across
the imperial flag; and there are annual processions of dragon images,
regattas of dragon boats, and sacrificial ceremonies in dragon temples.
To a third of mankind, for five thousand years or more, the dragon has
been the bestower of rain and the great giver of good, and the emperor
its earthly representative.

As in other matters, China has merely preserved and exaggerated beliefs
which were world-wide. Nearly all of the thrones of earth were once
dragon thrones. On the shield of Agamemnon, king of kings, was “the
unspeakable horror of a dragon glancing backward.” Persians, Parthians
and Scythians had dragon flags and Rome borrowed them for its cohorts.
The dragon flew on the battle standards of German, Celt, and Saxon,
and breasted the foam of the seas as the figurehead of Norse longboats.
In the older Europe, as in the China of to-day, it was carved on house
gables, bells, musical instruments, goblets, weapons, chairs, and
tables.

Under these world-wide customs, was there only a giant reptile not long
extinct, an inference from fossil remains, some frightful-seeming but
diminutive lizard contemporary with man and magnified a thousand times
by the aberrations of fancy? All of these things there may have been,
for the myth is so complex that its development has been called the
history of civilization. But inevitably speculation had to rise higher
than a saurian to account for phenomena of such consequence; it was
conceived that the dragon was the storm-cloud and he who slew it the
sun. So, it may be, ingenious minds surmised thousands of years before
modern conjecture first spoke of solar myths and found in forgotten
texts not the heart of the thing, but allegories in which ancient solar
mythologists had wrapped it. Or, it was guessed, the dragon typified
the spirit of evil, a power to be placated by sacrifice and politic
devil-worship, but destroyed as opportunity offered. So the world long
thought, and so far as it thinks at all of the dragon, that is what it
thinks now.

To assume that the myth is an allegory of satanic forces is to explain
much, but does it explain all? Powerful as is the motive of fear,
it is negative. Was it potent enough to coil a dragon at the roots
of all the world’s religions; and when these arose, were men able
to speculate on so abstract a thing as evil and symbolize it as a
composite beast? The Bible narrative begins with the dragon of Genesis
in the Garden of Eden and ends with the dragon of Revelation, “that
old serpent which is the Devil and Satan,” in the bottomless pit. The
slaying of the dragon is the central point of Norse and Saxon epic,
the great deed of the heroes. The water monster of Navaho legend is a
dragon; the elephant-headed thunder god of the Mayan inscriptions is
a dragon deity; the legendary founders of both Athens and Mexico were
dragon-tailed. Snake worship is dragon worship and, like the Midgard
serpent, it encircles the earth. Everywhere the myth is a thing of
thrones and temples.

Perhaps its secret is to be found, as later in this study it will be
seen that the secret of the Amazon myth is to be found, in the time
when thrones and temples were one. Clues that lead to it are: (1) the
world has still a dragon throne, or rather a recent memory of one; (2)
always in the lore of dragon or serpent, whether as victim, votary, or
mate, appears the figure of a daughter of Eve; (3) the snake is the
badge of Æsculapius and the symbol of healing; (4) the dragon, whether
haunting cloud or pool, is associated with water.

Woman is the physical source of human life. Water is healing,
fertilizing, and regenerating. Use the Scriptural figure, “the water
of life,” and it relates itself to woman and to the serpent symbol of
the art that lengthens life. When the throne and temple were one, the
creation and continuation of life was the function of the priest-king,
though only in China has his tradition come down to the modern time.
The Chinese emperor was himself the dragon. In the spring festivals of
his people he supplicated heaven for rains that would revive the land,
and in the autumn festivals he rendered thanks for nature’s bounty or
took upon himself the blame for dearth.

The dragon myth is not a myth of fear, nor was the dragon in the
beginning a personification of evil. It was an expression of the
deepest desire of man, the desire to defeat chance and change, to
repeal “the sad laws of time” and to live forever. Of all myths, that
of the dragon is the fundamental, for the forces with which it deals
are the forces which have impelled man, in a long grapple with destiny,
to construct societies, build religions, and create an art and a
literature. In China both the significance and the origin of the legend
lie almost on the surface. In most other places and at most other times
its meaning has been distorted, inverted, weighted down with fancies
and guesses. As it stands, it is like the fabric of a vision in which
tatters of experience are woven on the looms of sleep by the master
weavers of hope and fear; and in this faded grotesque one may decipher
the eternal dream of mankind.

The theory which will be interpreted here is that of Grafton Elliot
Smith (_The Evolution of the Dragon_: 1919). It is too sweeping in its
implications and too revolutionary yet to have received the general
sanction of writers upon mythology; but among all dragon theories
it must take precedence because alone it has the elemental breadth
demanded by the phenomena to be accounted for. A difficult thing about
it is that the author rejects the doctrine accepted of the time, that
the same beliefs and practices can arise independently in two or more
places. Unless there is in any case definite evidence to the contrary,
he assumes that “no ethnologically significant innovation in customs or
beliefs has ever been made twice.” It is his contention that the dragon
myth was born in Egypt, developed in Babylonia, and in a time remote
carried to China, India, and the Americas, and to all other parts of
the earth. Granting this, it becomes not merely the one world-epic, but
the proof that, before history began even as now, all races of men were
in effectual contact.

The primitive custom at the basis of the myth is well established. The
post of priest-king was enviable but dangerous. With each recurring
spring he was expected to bring fertility to his land; but sometimes
he was killed and a successor appointed each year, in imitation of
the death of vegetation that preceded the resurrection of spring; and
always when age overtook him he was slain, for what vital magic over
nature was there left in his aging frame? To avoid this fate a mock
king was erected to suffer in his stead; or a virgin was sacrificed; or
in elaborate mummery a ritual murder was merely simulated.

Here in their simplest form appear all the elements of the dragon
myth--a king who was thought to control the sources of water and the
fertility of which it was the symbol; a slaying to be accomplished, and
a woman who was at once a fertility symbol and a vicarious sacrifice.
The king himself was the dragon, in its original form just a serpent
symbol of his reputed control over water.

Thus stated the story is understandable, but it becomes confused and
infinitely complex when it is dramatized in the mythology of ancient
Egypt. A king who through his beneficent irrigation works is identified
with the river Nile is translated by legend into the skies and becomes
the water god Osiris, a member of the earliest Trinity. The second
member of the Trinity, but the first in point of time, is Hathor,
the Great Mother,--at one time identified with the cowry shell, the
earliest form of fertility emblem, and then identified with the moon
and translated into the sky when primitive minds saw the lunar rhythm
repeated in the sex life of woman. The third member of the Trinity is
Horus, the Warrior Sun God, a son of Osiris. How an aging king, not yet
a god, resolved that he would not be slain to make way for a younger
man and called upon the Great Mother, already a goddess, to provide
him with an elixir of life, which was blood, and how, in compliance
with his entreaty, she nearly wiped out mankind before a substitute
was provided--in reality the red waters of the Nile inundation--is
allegorically recited in the ancient Egyptian narrative called the
Destruction of Mankind.

In this and its companion legends, the Story of the Winged Disk and
the Conflict between Horus and Set, are all the elements of the dragon
saga. It would be futile to recite them in detail, for the thing has
become so confused that in the words of Doctor Smith it amounts to
this: “The early Trinity as the hero, armed with the Trinity as a
weapon, slays the dragon, which is the same Trinity.” But the confusion
has produced a concrete and comprehensible result, a composite
wonder-beast in which are blended parts of real animals that symbolize
both regeneration and destruction and that are the attributes of the
several members of the early Trinity, and of Set, enemy of Horus and
lord of chaos.

An archaic conception this may seem now, but what is there of the human
or the cosmic that does not lie in it? The desire for unfading youth
and continuing life on one side of the grave or the other is in it, and
that is the heart history of humanity. The conflict between order and
chaos is in it, and that is the story of nature. The theme of vicarious
sacrifice is in it, and that is the deep mystery of religion. There is
that in the tale which impelled the story-tellers of five millenniums
to repeat it, to enrich its incidents and to weave the tissues of new
meanings through it until it was at once a treatise on astronomy, a
theory of meteorology and a philosophy of destiny; a record of the
strife between winter and summer, night and day, justice and injustice,
and good and evil fates, which is the world as men have found it.

Unquestionably the dragon of classic story and mediæval blazonry is
the devil of Scripture; the biblical identification is complete,
and the bird-like features, leathern wings, and forked tail of this
elemental creature of fable all are reproduced in familiar portraits
of the enemy of mankind. This and the inner meaning of the dragon myth
may be accepted, while its origin in Egypt and dissemination from one
place throughout the world is probable. Doctor Smith, whose contentions
are all-embracing, makes other inferences which here will be outlined
without comment:

The serpent in the Garden of Eden, the tree of life and Eve herself
are all one. The deluge of Sumerian, Babylonian, and Hebrew legend
is a disastrous Nile inundation dramatized. The ark is the moon-boat
of Hathor. The pig owes its evil name to its identification with
Set, who represents the evil side of the dragon’s nature. The cowry
shell, suspended from the girdle as a fertility emblem and not from
any motives of modesty, became the origin of all clothing. Inland
tribes which had no access to the shore copied the cowry in a plastic
yellow metal, and this was the origin of the world-old quest for gold
and the occasion of its use as money. The object of mummification
was the continuance of life beyond the grave, the purpose in burning
gums and spices was to restore to the mummy the odor and warmth of
life; and these customs, related to each other and to the theme of the
dragon saga, are also related to the development of architecture, sea
trade, and medicine. Jade reached its mystic estate in China and other
lands, because the men who sought gold for cowry amulets in Turkestan
sought jade at the same time for seals, and in popular thought the
two substances became confused. Through a similar confusion, diamonds
attained in India the value they have since had everywhere. Pearls
ranked beside both because they were thought to be particles of moon
substances, emanations of the moon goddess herself. The precious metals
and precious stones became so not because of their rarity or beauty,
but because of their magical power as symbols of the divine actors in
the dragon story. The griffin of legend is merely a tentative dragon.
The mandrake of legend is merely a stranded pearl shell, and the dog
used to extract it from the earth is a terrestrial version of the
Mediterranean dogfish to which had been transferred the demoniac powers
of the sharks that guarded the pearl treasures of the east. With the
dragon began the unending search for the elixir of life.

These conclusions, some of which offer novel explanations for
enigmatical things noted in this study, are at least a testimony that
the dragon myth has traveled far, and in its travels has become related
to many things. It is the most vital of all growths that have found
root in the fecund soil of the imagination. It is a richly pictorial
history of the groping sublimities of human thought. The dragon is one
of two portraits which man has painted of himself.




Chapter VIII. Denizens of the Deep


Belief that the sea was in every respect like the land, and that its
very waves were only a thicker atmosphere, was the main source of
marine fable. In Celtic story, for example, Manannan sings to Bran that
what he is sailing across is not the sea but a flowery plain, and the
speckled salmon are lambs and calves. Mældune, voyaging over the ocean,
descries beneath him a country with castles, people, and cattle. In
the _Pih T’an_ it is said that in the midst of the waters off Shantung
there is sometimes the misty semblance of a palace, with towered walls
about it, and the appearance of men and carriages and horses busily
engaged; and this is called the Market of the Sea.

It was long held that every land animal had its counterpart in the
ocean. So there had to be mermen to match the men of the land. Such
names as sea-mice, sea-spiders, sea-kites, sea-hares, sea-dragons,
sea-lions, sea-oxen, and sea-horses, “the grisly wasserman” and “the
horrible sea-satyr,” are the records of old belief. Pliny tells of
a number of strange marine creatures, including elephants and rams,
stranded on a Mediterranean beach, and of others with the heads of
horses, asses, and bulls, which despoiled grain fields beside the
Indian Ocean. The Chinese believed that all domestic animals in the
Roman Orient came out of the sea. Proclaiming that the atmosphere was
only diluted water, De Maillet, a French naturalist of the eighteenth
century, contended that in the ocean was the original type of
everything; that dogs descended from seals and men from tritons, while
parroquets had their brilliant colors from gold, green, and violet
fishes in the sea. There were fierce tribes of men in the north who
seemed to him only lately emerged.

In classic legend, danger and marvel met mariners upon the strands
along which they sailed in coasting voyages, and there was no need to
go inland for adventure. The sirens sang their shrieking songs by
the water’s edge, the Polyphemus-folk flung masses of rock into the
breakers, and from their island palaces enchantresses kept watch for
passing ships. The voyages of fable were thus a sort of parade between
shores thronged with perilous romance. A writing on the Catalan map of
1375 is in this spirit. In the Spice Islands, it recites, are “three
kinds of sirens--one is half woman, half fish; another is half woman,
half bird; and the third is half woman, half horse.”

Elder fancy peopled the deep itself with tritons riding sea-horses and
stilling the waves with blasts from their shell trumpets, and with
divine nymphs of great beauty and often of engaging nature, as well as
with singular animals. The legate of Gaul wrote Augustus that a number
of nereids had been found dead on its shore, and men from Olisipo
(Lisbon) brought word to Tiberius that a triton had been heard blowing
a conch shell in a cavern retreat. Sea marvels multiply, but somehow
take on a coarser texture, in the mediæval time.


_The Sailors’ Favorite_

Among the marine populations the dolphin has always been a favorite
with sailors, as Greek and Roman bas-reliefs and the coins, medals, and
coats of arms of Mediterranean countries bear witness. It was supposed
to be the swiftest of animals; it was fond of men and of music,
particularly that of the water organ; it had a turned-up nose, and
according to Pliny recognized in a surprising manner the name of Simo
(flat-nose) and “preferred to be called by that name rather than any
other.” Ajasson thought it was attracted merely by the hissing sound of
the word. Pliny has a tale of its friendship with mankind which should
have a better ending:

“A dolphin at Hippo Diarrhytus on the coast of Africa used to receive
his food from the hands of various persons, present himself for their
caresses, sport about among the swimmers, and carry them on his back.
Proconsul Flavianus rubbed him with unguents whose odor rendered him as
if dead, and he kept aloof for months afterward, as though affronted.
But he returned to familiar intercourse later. At last the vexations
that were caused them by having to entertain so many influential men
who came to see this sight, compelled the people of Hippo to put the
animal to death.”


_Monster Whales_

The ancients held the great cetaceans in terror. The Talmud declares
that it would take a ship three days to sail from the head to the
tail of Leviathan. Pliny speaks of whales in the Indian Ocean nine
hundred feet long, and of others which would cover two acres of
ground. The traditional fear of them is in the account by Nearchus of
his battle--his own word--with a school of whales when he was taking
Alexander’s fleet back from the mouth of the Indus to the Persian Gulf.
The sailors saw columns of foam shooting up from the sea and at first
mistook them for waterspouts. When they learned that these came from
whales, “they were so terrified that the oars fell from their hands.”
But Nearchus rallied them, drew up his ships in order of battle, and at
a given signal dashed toward the monsters. Oars splashed loudly, rowers
shouted, trumpets sang defiance. The astonished whales plunged out of
sight, and his men hailed Nearchus as savior of the fleet.

Sailors in the Indian Ocean of a later time told of the head of a fish
“that might be compared to a hill; its eyes were like two doors, so
that people could go in at one eye and out at the other.” In these
waters Sindbad’s companions mistook a whale for a green meadow. The
whales of Norse lore carry witches, while the monster that bore
Glooskap, the Algonquin culture hero, could hear the song of clams as
they lay under the sand.

St. Brendan and his seventeen monkish brethren repeated the Sindbad
adventure when they sailed into the western seas in search of the Isle
of the Blessed. Bearing a lamb without blemish, they landed on a low
island to celebrate the Easter festival. But when a fire was lighted
and the pot set over it, the island began to move, and they fled to
their osier ship. What they had taken for an islet was “the beast
Jasconius, greatest of things that swim, which laboureth night and day
to put his tail in his mouth, but for greatness he may not.” In stories
of this kind in the _Physiologus_ the whale was supposed to represent
the devil, the sea the world, and the ship the human race.


_The Kraken_

“Oh, silly mariners,” exclaimed Arngrim, “that in digging cannot
discern whale’s flesh from earth!” Bishop Pontoppidan pondered these
accounts and in his _Natural History of Norway_, published in 1752, he
concluded that the whale, large as it was--and science knows no extinct
monster of equal bulk--was not large enough to explain them. These are
not floating islands, but a vast sea-monster called kraken, kraxen, or
krabben. “What the credulous Olaus Magnus writes,” says he, “of the
whale being so large that his back is looked upon as an island, and
that people might land, light fires, and do various kinds of work upon
it, is a notoriously fabulous and ridiculous romance.” No, this is the
kraken, the back of which “seems to be about an English mile and a half
in circumference.”

People, thinks the bishop, had some imperfect idea of the kraken for
ages back. Pliny heard an obscure account of it in the Gaditanian sea;
he likens it both to a wheel with spokes and to a tree with such large
branches that it could not get through a ship channel. The Kors Trold
or Soe-Drawl which sailors deemed an evil spirit, and which they said
could stop a ship under full sail, must be the kraken, concludes the
Norwegian.

Pontoppidan draws a spirited picture of this prodigious creature
showing itself among a fleet of fishermen. They are several miles out
at sea on a hot summer day. Their lines should show from eighty to one
hundred fathoms of water under them, but show only twenty or thirty.
Fish are plentiful, above all cod and ling. As fast as the sailors cast
in they draw out their finny prey. They are angling right over the
monster, and his back is the bottom the lines have sounded. Then they
see the water shallowing still further; the kraken is raising himself.
So they hasten out of danger and lie on their oars.

“In a few minutes,” says the historian, “they see this enormous
monster come up to the surface of the water; he there shows himself
sufficiently, though his whole body does not appear, which in all
likelihood no human eye ever beheld. His back looks at first like a
number of small islands, surrounded with something that floats and
fluctuates like seaweeds; and several bright points or horns appear,
which grow thicker and thicker the higher they rise above the
water. Sometimes they stand up as high and as large as the masts of
middle-sized vessels. These are the creature’s arms, and it is said if
they were to lay hold of the largest man-of-war, they would pull it
down to the bottom. After this monster has been on the surface a short
time, it begins slowly to sink again, causing a whirlpool that draws
down everything with it.”

Pontoppidan believes the kraken is a polypus, one of the starfish kind.
It has a strong and peculiar scent by means of which it attracts other
fish. Those islands, among the Faroes, that suddenly appear and as
suddenly disappear and that people deem inhabited by evil spirits are
krakens.

All of which is set down in the famous eighth chapter of the _Natural
History_ which, as its author says, “treats of the Norwegian
Sea-Monsters, or those animals of enormous size and uncommon form
which are sometimes seen in the ocean.” In this chapter the Norse
cleric seeks seemingly to outmatch in the colder seas of Scandinavia
the marvels of the Mediterranean. He makes himself chief sponsor for
the sea-serpent. He describes the trold-fish, or unlucky-fish, that
sailors hasten to throw overboard. He has much to say of mermaids. He
tells of the Maelstrom in the Lofoden district of Nordland--an abyss
which penetrates the globe and issues in the Gulf of Bothnia; “within
a Norway mile of it, boats, ships, and yachts have been carried away.”
Whales are sometimes swept into it, “and then it is impossible to
describe their howlings and bellowings.”


_The Sea Serpent_

The sea serpent of Pontoppidan has a venerable past and a present of
conjecture and recurrent report. Insensibly a legend has been built up
in the modern time as strange as any in the whole range of fable. Men
say, not “a sea serpent,” but “the sea serpent.” It is assumed that
there is but one, and that for ages it has haunted the deep, appearing
sometimes in the Atlantic, sometimes in the Indian Ocean, sometimes in
the South Pacific--a plesiosaurus, perhaps, wandering the seas, the
lonely survivor of a vanished age.

Olaus Magnus described the great marine snake--the Soe-Ormen of old
lays--as two hundred feet long and twenty feet around, and as rising up
like a mast before ships and snapping men off their decks. Hans Egede,
the Greenland missionary, saw it in July, 1734. When it reared itself,
its head was higher than the ship’s maintop. When it flattened itself
upon the water, its tail was a ship’s length behind its head. “The
following evening,” says Mr. Egede, “we had very bad weather.”

From all accounts, Pontoppidan concludes that this monster is of about
the length of a cable, or six hundred English feet. The body is as big
around as two hogsheads. “The head has a high and broad forehead, but
in some a pointed snout, though in others that is flat, like that of
a cow or horse; with large blue eyes like a couple of bright pewter
plates, large nostrils, and several stiff hairs standing out on each
side like whiskers.” Its skin is smooth, except for a mane, like
seaweed.

These great snakes, the Norse writer declares, haunt the floor of the
North Sea, rising in July and August, their spawning time. The wind is
destructive to them, and they appear only in calms. They cannot face
the sun, and the fisherman may escape them by rowing toward it. Nor can
they endure the smell of castor or asafœtida, and anglers who go out
on Stor Eggen in the summer provide themselves with one or the other.
Sometimes, however, the monster rises under small boats and upsets
them, or throws its heavy folds across vessels even of some hundred
tons burthen, and sinks them.

The appearances of the sea serpent are well enough documented. It was
reported off the Norway coast in 1819, 1822 and 1837, off the New
England coast in 1815, 1817, 1819, 1833, and 1869, and off the American
coast farther south in 1895. It was seen in the South Atlantic in 1841
by the frigate _Dœdalus_, and in 1875 by the bark _Pauline_, when
seemingly it was dragging under a large whale. A few years ago it was
seen by the bark _Harvard_ near Borneo. In the nineteenth century it
was sighted so often near Boston that it became known as the American
sea serpent. The accounts were circumstantial and so well vouched
for that there could be no reasonable doubt that a strange marine
monster was abroad. A committee of the Boston Linnaean Society, for
example, drew up a report signed by eye-witnesses in 1819. The serpent,
they said, was from eighty to ninety feet long, with buoy-like
protuberances on its back and was swimming at twenty miles or more an
hour, and driving frightened mackerel before it.

These reports have been variously explained--that a low-ranging flight
of sea fowl could produce the semblance of a snake upon the water; that
a mass of seaweed had created this effect; that a pair of gigantic
basking sharks, swimming in a line, had seemed to be one creature;
that twenty-foot ribbon fish were the basis of the legend, and that
a monster squid had been mistaken for a snake. The preponderance of
scientific opinion inclines to the last named view. Cephalopods more
than sixty feet long have been seen off Newfoundland and the coasts of
northern Europe, and it may be that what the _Pauline_ saw was not a
serpent crushing a whale, but a whale killing a giant cuttle fish. But
it is not at all certain that a monster of some species unknown, or
too hastily assumed to be extinct, a stray from the Mesozoic or Eocene
seas, does not haunt the ocean.

Cousins of this prodigy, of vaguer outline, rove the deeps of myth and
romance. The sea serpent of Arab story is the waterspout. The spotted
snake of Navajo story caused the flood. The bunyip of Van Diemen’s
Land carried off women to his water abode. The yacu-mama, or mother
of waters, of Brazilian story--fifty paces long and twelve yards in
girth--drew anything within a hundred yards into its jaws, but could
be placated by bugle music. The orc of the Charlemagne cycle, a
horrible mass of tossing and twisting body with nothing of the animal
but head, eyes, and tusked mouth, haunted an island off the Irish
coast and menaced the manacled and beauteous Angelica. Rogero with
his hippogrif and magic buckler released her, and Orlando slew the
monster afterward. The killing by a Moslem of a like creature that had
been devouring beautiful virgins led to the conversion of the Maldive
islanders, according to Ibn Batuta; at times it reappears in the offing
in the seeming of a ship with lighted candles. The orc of science is
no serpent, but a large dolphin, and when it pursues the whale, says
an old writer, the latter makes “a hideous bellowing, like a bull when
bitten by a dog.”


_Tortoises_

A quaint humor animates much of tortoise tradition. By stringing cords
across a tortoise shell the infant Hermes invented the lyre. According
to the Sicilians a tortoise executed the decree of fate that Æschylus
should die of a blow from heaven; an eagle mistook the tragic poet’s
bald head for a stone and dropped a tortoise upon it to break the
shell. Pliny says that tortoises betray themselves to fishermen by
overeating at night on land and snoring loudly after they return to
the water. “Some persons are of opinion,” he reports, “that the female
refuses to have any intercourse with the male until he has placed a
wisp of straw on her back, and that she hatches her eggs merely by
looking at them.” From the tortoise the Romans obtained no less than
sixty-six remedies for bodily ills.

Sea turtles may attain a weight of a thousand pounds, and legend has
enlarged this figure. In their shells, says Diodorus, the Chelonophagi
(turtle-eaters) of the East African islands, sailed to the mainland for
fresh water. They used them also as roofs, nature’s bounty providing
them “by one gift food, vessels, shipping, and habitations.” Ælian
speaks of tortoise shell houses fifteen cubits long: “nor does the rain
beating against them sound otherwise than if it were falling on tiles.”
Odoric overtops this. In Cochin-China he saw a tortoise “bigger in
compass than the dome of St. Anthony’s Church in Padua.”


_Eels_

The Romans thought that the murænas, or sea eels, had a language
of their own, and that their voices were “low and sweet, with an
intimation so fascinating that few could resist its influence.” The
Emperor Augustus, it was believed, could understand the language. How
eels were generated was long a puzzle, their origin being imputed
to May dew, horse hairs, rocks, mud, the carcasses of animals, and
even to Jove and the goddess Anguilla; hence their scientific name of
_Anguillina_. A cod of the German coast and a Sardinian water beetle
have each been called the “eel-mother.” It has lately been ascertained
that the eggs are spawned in Bermuda waters, and the young reach Europe
after a two years’ journey.


_Three Traditions_

A German folk-tale has it that when Christ was crucified all the fishes
were terror-stricken and dived under water, save the pike, which thrust
forth its head and witnessed the scene. Hence the pike’s head shows
some of the parts of the crucifixion--the cross, three nails, and a
sword. Another fish, the remora, decided the fate of the world by
attaching itself to Antony’s galley and keeping it out of the battle
line at Actium; or so says Pliny. There are monstrous crabs on the
beaches of Japan, some of them seven feet across, which bear what seems
to be a human mask on their backs. The natives say they appeared after
a pirate fleet had been destroyed and its leaders beheaded on the shore.


_Water Horses_

The water gods of northern Europe usually had the horse form, and their
memory survives in Shetlandic tales of the njogel and tangi. The former
appeared as a sleek pony or decrepit gray horse; its hair grew forward
instead of backward; its fetlocks pointed upward instead of downward;
its hoofs were reversed. At dusk it would stand beside a trail, and
seemed to invite the benighted traveler to mount it. Then it galloped
over a waterfall, or dashed into a lake, leaving him to drown while it
vanished on the other bank in a blue light. The tangi was like it, but
had its ranging ground on the seashore. People became insensible for
days when it ran around them.


_Sharks_

Human attributes among the sea’s inhabitants are divided between
sharks and the merfolk. The latter are the graceful creatures of an
imagination at play with itself. The former are always things of
terror, not only because they attack man, but because they seem to have
some special and sinister relation to him. They have been thought to
be enchanted men. Savages tell of their taking human form and human
mates. The West African sacrificed children to a shark god. In the
shark temples of the Sandwich Islands priests rubbed their own bodies
with salt water so as to seem to have scaly skins. Offerings of coins
were made to the basking shark in northern Europe. In New Calabar it
was a capital offense to kill a shark. Sailors still think that this
fish will follow vessels on which some one is to die, and in the days
of the slave ships it was said to have a special fondness for the flesh
of blacks. In former times its teeth, set in gold, were used as amulets
and its powdered brains had a place in medicine; shark’s oil is still
in the pharmacopœias, shark fins are a Chinese dainty, and shark skins
an article of commerce. The source of these beliefs and practices may
be in the world-wide dragon myth, wherein pearls were thought to be
emanations of the moon goddess and were sought as givers of life. The
sharks that harassed the pearl fisheries came to be looked upon as
demons guarding the treasure houses of the sea floor, and embodiments
of evil like the dragon itself.


_Merfolk_

Under mermaid legend is the old notion that because there are men and
women on the land there must be men and women in the sea. The texture
of the legend has become about as complex as human nature itself, and,
like it, shows the divine, the semi-divine and the coarsely animal
subsisting together. In turn the mermaid has been goddess, enchantress,
and fresh meat at sea.

The oldest known form of the myth may be glimpsed on tavern signs,
where the mermaid is depicted with a circular mirror in her hand and a
fish tail. She is Chaldean and Phœnician. Derceto, the moon goddess,
was represented as half woman and half fish because it was conceived
that she divided her time between the earth and the waters under the
earth, plunging into the sea with every moonset. Baring Gould thinks
that the mirror she holds may be the moon disk.

Other shapes of poetry were merged in the legend before it entered the
prose period of maritime discovery. Among them were the tritons and the
nereids, “half-naked, natural, loving, and antique”--lesser divinities
of classic fable. At some time the sirens, who had been pictured as
half human and half bird, were immersed, and thereafter were pictured
as half human and half fish. Browne protests this representation, but
the mermaid myth does carry siren features, song included. The song of
the Rhine maidens is mermaid song, their prophecy mermaid prophecy. Of
the same family are the nixies who love music and foretell the future.

The legend has become further entangled--with tales of banshees whose
wailing portends death, of gull-befriended seal people who could take
human form, of swan maidens who wed mortals, of forward sea fairies
who leave their red caps on the shore of Ireland for young men to pick
up, even of the female demon or nightmare. There are both foam and
cloud-flock in mermaid story, and they meet in the gentle Phæacian,
Nausicaa, whom Ulysses discovers bathing on the shore.

In Fouqué’s _Undine_ the legend achieves its purest poetry. It is the
story of a nymph who lives with her foster parents on the edge of an
enchanted forest where a knight of the old German Empire finds and woos
her. Riding thither through the wood, a bear mocks him with human voice
from the branches of an oak, a troll shows him the goblins at play with
their gold beneath the earth, and what seems at one moment a tall white
man and at the next a foaming brook guides him to the cottage. These
were Undine’s familiars, and when the knight meets the water maiden the
brook rises and for days roars about the cottage, secluding him there
until he has won the nymph’s heart, and she his hand and with it an
immortal soul. Through the remainder of the story until its inevitable
disaster in the unwitting breaking of a vow--the end of all unions
between nymphs and mortals--water foams and flashes and strange shapes
dissolve in spray.

This is the type of a hundred mediæval tales, of which the best known
is that of Melusina, a fountain nymph wedded to the head of the house
of Lusignan, but lost to him because he did not keep his pledge to
respect her Saturday privacy. He discovered her in the bath, a serpent
from the waist downward. According to report her blood flowed in the
veins of the Luxembourg and Rohan families and in Henry VII, sovereign
of the Holy Roman Empire. Her spirit was seen whenever the death of a
Lusignan impended. The tale has an extensive bibliography.

Other accounts of water maidens are of a wilder cast. The judy of
Slavic folk tales lived in the lakes and rivers of the Rhodope
Mountains and danced in meadows, and him whom they coaxed to dance with
them they destroyed. When they saw a man in the water they entangled
him in their long hair and drowned him. The pariks of Armenian story
are erotic female demons of the river banks. In a Celtic tale Rath saw
mermaids as “grown-up girls, the fairest of shape and make above the
waters; but huger than one of the hills was the hairy-clawed, bestial
lower part which they had beneath.” They sang the hero to sleep and
tore him to pieces. The ships of another Celtic adventurer, Ruad, were
stopped, and when he went over the side he saw “three of the loveliest
of the world’s women” holding to the keels; the rest of the story is
dalliance. Pacific coast Indians have legends of beautiful, long-haired
women who lived in a round house under the ocean and made trouble for
people above. An Arab traveler tells of joyous water maidens caught and
caressed by sailors in the bright straits of Greece, and then returned
to the sea.

The prose of the legend was reached when men began to capture what
they conceived to be mermaids and mermen, and failed in most cases to
find kindred beings. There is a considerable list of these creatures
captured or sighted on the beaches of the Old and the New World.
Only one of these talked, and Pontoppidan mentions the story but to
discredit it. Two senators of Norway caught a merman, but let him go
on his threatening them in Danish to sink the ship with all its crew.
Of the so-called bishop-fish or sea bishop, said to have been netted
for the King of Poland in the Baltic in 1453, a similar tale is told.
It wore a dalmatic and mitre and carried a crosier. With gestures of
entreaty it besought the intercession of its brother prelates of the
court. When it was released into the sea the grateful creature made
the sign of the cross and gave the episcopal benediction with its fin
before it submerged. In one other instance there were points of human
contact. Milkmaids of Edam in West Friesland in 1430 found a mermaid
which had been swept over the dykes by a storm. They brought it home,
as the story goes, and dressed it in female attire; it learned how to
spin, to eat with them, to adore the crucifix, but it never spoke.

Through many other accounts runs the belief that merfolk were
weather-breeders. The _Speculum Regale_, an Icelandic work of the
twelfth century, describes a mermaid with a “very horrible face” that
haunts the deep near Greenland and before heavy storms is seen with
fish in its hands. If it casts the fish toward the ship, it is an omen
of death in the coming storm; if it casts the fish away from the ship
it is a good omen. Hakluyt’s _Voyages_ tell of a monster, from the
middle upward proportioned like a man and with a tawny skin, which was
discovered near Bermuda in the sixteenth century. The clerks of the
expedition put the account in writing, to be certified to the English
king. “Presently after this,” it is recited, “for the space of sixteen
days we had wonderful foule weather.” Knud Leems in his account of
Danish Lapland asserted that horrible tempests followed the appearance
of a merman and merwoman in those seas. The male, or hav-manden, was
like a robust man with brown skin and long hair and beard; the female,
or hav-fruen, had the human shape and hair and a ghastly visage.

It appears that a merman, captured in the Baltic in 1531, lived for
three days at the court of Sigismund, King of Poland, and there is a
story that to determine ownership of another the King of Portugal and
the Grand Master of the Order of St. James had a suit at law.

Merolla tells of a ship’s crew in a South African port who saw at a
distance “a sort of sea monsters like unto men” gathering herbs, with
which they plunged into the sea. The sailors gathered herbs for them,
and the grateful creatures “forthwith drew from the bottom of the sea a
quantity of coral” and laid it in the place where the sailors had piled
the herbs. Human perfidy ends a pretty story. The sailors spread a net
to catch the mermen, who lifted it and fled.

The purely animal quality predominates in other of the circumstantial
accounts repeated of the mer people. A merman was captured off the
coast of Suffolk in 1187, but escaped. Hendryk Hudson reports that his
crew saw a mermaid near Nova Zembla, and “from the navel upward her
back and breasts were like a woman’s,” while the tail was like the tail
of a porpoise. In 1560 fishermen netted seven mermen and mermaids in
the seas west of Ceylon; several Jesuit priests were witness thereto.
Captain Weddell, the Antarctic explorer, records the sworn testimony
of one of his crew that he had seen a creature with human form and the
tail of a seal, and with red face and green hair. In the sea of Angola,
says Pontoppidan, mermaids are heard to shriek and cry like women;
negroes net and eat them, and their flesh is considered much like pork.
Sigismundus ab Herbenstein had it from Muscovite sources that in the
river Tachnin there was “a certain fish with head, eyes, nose, mouth,
hands, feete and other members utterly of humane shape, and yet without
any voyce, and pleasant to be eaten.” In Pinkerton’s _Voyages_ there
is an account of the woman fish found “among the islands Boccias,” the
flesh of which is “of excellent savour when eaten boiled like other
meat, and which also serves to make highly savoury sausages.”

The dugong, manatee, or sea cow has been called the Old Man of the
Sea as well as the mermaid. It has figured in legends with a biblical
background; the people about the Red Sea took these creatures for
survivors or descendants of the army of Pharaoh that was drowned in
pursuing the Israelitish host. The three mermaids that Columbus saw on
his first voyage to the New World are supposed to have been of this
species. When white men first came to America the manatees thronged the
waters of Florida, but have since become nearly extinct there, although
there is a protected herd in the Miami River.

Reports of actual captures present the rationalization and degradation
of the mermaid legend. The divine daughters of the deep with their
lovely bodies and flowing hair become strange animals of the seal or
cetacean species with ugly faces and bodies that may be converted into
pork--sea apes, as the credulous and yet cautious Pontoppidan calls
them. They grow so common that the _Aberdeen Almanac_ of 1688 predicts
the periods when mermaids may be expected near the mouth of the Dee.

Sir Humphrey Davy argued that if God had created the mermaid, her
deficient means of locomotion and of self-defense would have left her
a prey to the fish. Yet the seas would have been poorer of romance if
the logic and poetry of men had not led them to correct, in ages more
naïve, what seemed to them an oversight of their Maker.




Chapter IX. The Peoples of Prodigy


In his _True History_ Lucian relates what he is at pains to point out
is a fictitious voyage to the moon and to various isles of the outer
seas. Grotesque half-human beings people his narrative. There are grape
vines, the upper parts of which have the shape of women, and these
entwine themselves about his men. There are Hippogypi, or men carried
upon vultures; Onoscileas, or ass-legged women, with long robes and a
free manner of harlotry; Bucephali, or men with bulls’ heads and horns
and lowing voices; Schorodomachi, or garlic-fighters; Psyllotoxotæ, or
flea-archers; Acroconopes, or gnat-riders; cloud-centaurs, nut-eaters,
pirates riding dolphins that neigh like horses, and a variety of other
fantastic creatures. The Samosatan wrote, he says, “about such things
as neither are nor ever can be.”

Yet races of men very much like these were long supposed to live
upon earth. Their descriptions are in the ancient histories, their
habitats are defined in the classic geographies, their effigies are
upon mediæval maps. As late as the century after Columbus, travelers
were still coming upon them, and repeating the interrogatory of _The
Tempest_, “What have we here, a man or a fish?” Perhaps twoscore of
these imaginary tribes are better documented, and not so long ago were
better known, than most of the tribes of real men and women upon the
earth; the documents are on dusty shelves of the larger libraries.

Some of the singular folk entered literature by the double gates of
mistaken etymology and literal acceptance of figurative language.
In the lineaments of others one discerns races that are still upon
earth, but divested of the masks of fable. In the rest one sees the
creative fancy of man following its natural bent--cartooning humanity
by exaggerating a limb or feature or by eliminating it; borrowing
something from the brute; making men taller or shorter, or longer-lived
or shorter-lived, than reality; fashioning the moon calves, the
Calibans; setting up a realm in which paradox is law. Thus mankind gave
itself new and interesting neighbors.


_Singular Speech_

Men judge one another by the testimony of the ear as well as of the
eye; and the speech of all these peoples, no less than their anatomy,
proclaimed the law of paradox. Sometimes the surprise was in hearing
Indian or Greek or Arab words from lips that seemed bestial rather
than human. Often no words came at all, but only unintelligible animal
sounds. This, indeed, was to be expected from races whose bodies varied
from the normal; but the list of prodigious folk is lengthened by the
addition of other men who, while looking like ordinary mortals, were
not quite human in their speech.

There were nations which used dumb-barter because they had no
language. There were tribes in Ethiopia which, as Pliny says, “have
to employ gesture by nodding the head and moving the limbs instead
of speech.” On the Atlantic seaboard were troglodytes that “have no
articulate voice, but only utter a kind of squeaking noise.” “Like the
screeching of bats,” says Herodotus of the same people. Another tribe
of troglodytes, according to John Lok, “have no speech, but rather a
grinning and chattering.” The Arabians dwell in caves and have shrill,
boyish voices, declares Jordanus. In the eastern mountains of Ind, says
Tauron, are the Choromandæ, a forest folk with hairy bodies, canine
teeth, and sea-green eyes who “screech in a frightful manner.” Kazwini
speaks of hairy little men in Ramni with a speech like the chirping
of birds. Carpini names among the peoples of Ind the dog-faced men
who speak two words in human wise and bark for the third. There were
people with a small hole in place of the mouth, whose conversation was
a whistling. Among the isles of Maundeville is one “clept Traconda,
where the Folk be as Beasts and unreasonable, and dwell in Caves; and
they eat Flesh of Serpents, and they eat but little; and they speak
Nought, but they hiss as Serpents do.” In a desert beyond paradise this
authority says there are wild men “that be hideous to look on, for they
be horned and they speak Nought, but they grunt as Pigs.” However,
there was speech in that country, for “Popinjays speak of their own
Nature and say ‘Salve’ to Men that go through the Deserts.”

Neither classical nor mediæval relators mention the device which has
given a South African tribe its name, and rumors of which may have
provided a basis for fable. Merolla, who went to the Congo in 1682,
heard that the Hottentots “have not the gift of human voice, but
understand each other by a sort of hissing tone and motion of the
lips.” This is the Hottentot “click” which the Portuguese called a kind
of stammering and the Dutch likened to the turkey’s gobble. It is made
by applying the tongue to the roof of the mouth, the teeth, or the
gums, and suddenly drawing it back. There are four of these clicks--the
dental, like the smack of a kiss; the palatal, like the tap of a
woodpecker; the cerebral, like the pop of a cork; and the lateral, like
the quack of a duck.


_The Dog-headed People_

The Amazon and pygmy, and certain tribes of the satyrs, had speech
entirely human. Because in them credulity has won unlooked-for triumphs
over skepticism, these three peoples, best known of the races of
legend, are reserved for separate treatment later. The men of another
race vie with the Amazons as figures in plastic art, although only
in its more grotesque manifestations. The Cynocephali, or dog-headed
people, writes Ctesias, are a swarthy and extremely just people living
in the mountains of northern India at the sources of the Hyparkhos. The
tribe numbers about one hundred and twenty thousand persons and pays
tribute to the King of the Indians.

These people have the heads of dogs, but with larger teeth, and the
bodies of men; and they have dog claws. They cannot use human speech,
although they understand it. They converse with one another by barking,
and with other people by barking and the sign language. They practice
no arts but live by the chase, using the bow and spear; and they can
outrun wild animals. Their staple food is raw flesh, which, however,
they roast in the sun. They rear numbers of sheep, goats, and asses
and drink the milk and whey of the ewes. They are fond of the fruit of
the siptakhora, the tree that produces amber. The surplus fruit they
dry and pack in hampers as the Greeks pack raisins. Every year they
freight rafts with the hampers and with two hundred and sixty talents
weight of amber, and a like weight of a pigment which they make from
a purple flower. This they convey as tribute to the Indian king. They
ship other raft-loads of the same commodities to their neighbors,
receiving bread and flour in return and a cloth made from a stuff grown
on trees (cotton). They also sell arms to other peoples.

The dog-headed people are troglodytes, sleeping on a litter of straw
or leaves spread in caves. The women bathe once a month, the men not
at all, merely washing their hands; but thrice a month they anoint
themselves with butter. They are clad in skins and the richest have
cotton raiment. Some of them live to be two hundred years old.

The inhabitants of the Andaman Islands, says Marco Polo, are a
savage race “having heads, eyes and teeth resembling those of the
canine species”; and they kill and eat strangers. Odoric is equally
uncomplimentary, but Ibn Batuta, always sensitive to female charm, says
their naked wives are of exquisite beauty. Carpini speaks of India’s
dog-faced men. Even Greenland has a similar legend as to an older race
of barbarians who had magic, but not the bow and arrow. These were men
with dog paws. They disappeared in battle with the Eskimos, or from
natural causes, since “the world was too small to hold both races.”
Myths of dog descent are found among the Aleuts, Dog-ribs, and Ojibwas
in North America, as well as in Madagascar, Java, the Nicobars, New
Guinea, Indo-China, and even Europe. In North America the wild dog
(coyote) frequently figures as the creator of mankind.

Sunamukha is the Indian name of the Cynocephali, and a manuscript of
the Prabhâsakhanda recites that this people lives on the Indus. What
Ctesias has set down seems to be an account of an actual race, a tribe
of black aborigines.

When Hayton, the intrepid traveler-king of Armenia, paid a visit in
the thirteenth century to Batu, the Mongol prince, he brought back a
related and still stranger story. Beyond Cathay, a journey of two years
and two months from Nakin, was a country where the women had the human
shape and speech, but the men were like hairy dogs and had no speech.
These dog-men repelled all strangers from their land, and supported
themselves and their wives by the chase, the men eating flesh raw, the
women cooking it. When children were born, the males had the shape of
dogs, the females that of women. The _Chinese Encyclopedia_ also has a
tale of the Kingdom of Dogs, and it was a Chinese traveler who broke up
this curious commonwealth. The women wished to escape from it and gave
him little sticks, asking him, when he went back to his native land, to
drop one of these every ten li. They got away by the trail he marked.


_The One-Eyed Arimaspians_

Lying between the gold-guarding griffins and the cannibal Issedones was
the country of the one-eyed Arimaspians. They first appear in a poem
of Aristeas of Proconesus, a semi-mythical person who made a northward
journey, as his verses declare, in a mood of “bacchic fury.” Herodotus
bases his account on these, but cannot persuade himself that there is
a race of men born with one eye who in all else resemble the rest of
mankind. Arimaspi, he says, is a word of Scythic origin, a compound of
_arima_ (one) and _spou_ (eye).

There Herodotus drops the legend, and after it has thriven in the tales
of the fabulists for some thousands of years, modern criticism takes
it up again from the same angle. It is suggested that, after all,
Arimaspi never meant one-eyed, and that the race, the tradition of
whose deformed aspect arose from a mistaken translation of its name, is
still in existence in the Russian tribe known as the Tsheremis, which
occupies the left bank of the Middle Volga. This is near enough to the
Ural gold districts to meet the general topography of the legend.

Strabo also describes a one-eyed nation, the Monomatti, with the ears
of dogs, bristling hair, and shaggy breasts.


_Folk That Live on Odors_

The folk that live on odors dwell, says Megasthenes, near the sources
of the Ganges. They have no mouths, hence their name of Astomi. Their
bodies are rough and hairy and they clothe themselves with a down
plucked from trees--silk or cotton. They use neither meat nor drink and
subsist only by breathing and by inhaling scents. When they start on a
long journey they lay in a supply of odoriferous roots, flowers, and
apples. But, says Pliny, “an odor which is a little more powerful than
usual easily destroys them.” Pope’s “die of a rose in aromatic pain”
may define such a fate.

According to other ancient writers the Astomi also supported life by
sniffing at raw meat, and their susceptibility to rank smells made it
hard to keep them alive in camp. In Ethiopia Pliny places a people
that “have the mouth grown together, and being destitute of nostrils,
breathe through one passage only, imbibing their drink through it by
means of a hollow stalk of the oat, which there grows spontaneously and
supplies them with its grain for food.” Maundeville removes the Astomi
to an island and gives them the stature of pygmies and a hissing speech.


_The Noseless Nations_

There were several noseless nations. The flexible-footed Scyritae, says
Megasthenes, had only two breathing orifices above the mouth; and he
sketches pygmies similarly made. Maundeville improves on the sketch:
“And in another Ile be Folk that have the Face all flat, all plain,
without Nose and without Mouth.” In contrast still another island had
“Folk of foul Fashion and Shape that have the lip above the Mouth so
great that when they sleep in the Sun they cover all the Face with that
lip.” Megasthenes had named and described these seventeen centuries
before. They were the Amycteres, with upper lips projecting far beyond
the lower--an omnivorous people, fond of raw meat, and short lived.
Tudela tells of desert-ranging, infidel Turks who worship the wind,
eschew bread and cooked meats, and, lacking noses, breathe through two
small holes. The Noseless People of the Eskimo shore are evil spirits
that drag fishermen to gloomy abodes under the sea.

To men with the bold Roman profile, the Levantine contour, or the
scimitar-shaped visage of the Sephardic Jew, Tartary’s small-nosed,
flat-faced peoples would indeed present a countenance very like a plane
surface. The scanty hair of the same peoples may be responsible for the
ancient notion of bald northern nations. The Eskimo legend suggests a
skeleton tenanted by a demon.


_Large-eared Races_

An Indian race called the Enotocoitæ had ears hanging down to their
feet--“great Ears and long that hang down to their Knees” is for once
the more restrained phrase of Maundeville. The philosophers who had
told Megasthenes of so many interesting folk told him also of these.
They could sleep upon their ears as upon a rug, or under them as under
a canopy, or inside them as in a sleeping bag. These appendages were
like winnowing fans, Tzetzes puts it. Their owners were so strong they
could pluck up trees. So could the elephant, which also has flapping
ears and a prolonged upper lip--the pattern, it would seem, for at
least two fables.

Ctesias describes a people who could blanket the upper parts of their
bodies with their ears. These were the Pandore, a mountain race who
lived to be two hundred years old, yet were destined evidently to
become extinct, for they numbered only thirty thousand persons and the
women bore children but once. The infants were hoary-headed at birth,
but at thirty the hair began to turn black, and at sixty no white hairs
were left. Five thousand bowmen and spearmen of the tribe followed the
Indian king. There was even a Scandinavian tribe with all-enveloping
ears, if Pliny had it right.


_Headless Peoples_

  The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
  Do grow beneath their shoulders.
  --SHAKESPEARE: _Othello_.

To the west of the Troglodytes in distant mountains of Ind, says
Ctesias, live tribesmen who are without necks and have eyes in their
shoulders. In the north of Africa, says Pliny, are the Blemmyes who
“are said to have no heads, their mouths and eyes being seated in their
breasts.” These were also called the Acephalites. Maundeville shifts
their habitat. They occupy one of fifty-four great isles under the
jurisdiction of the king of Dondun. This island is somewhere toward the
south of Asia. In it dwell “Folk of foul Stature and of cursed Nature
that have no Heads. And their Eyes be in their Shoulders, and their
Mouths be round shapen, like an Horse-shoe amidst their Breasts.” The
_Arabian Nights_ locates these same people in the City of Brass. Abu
Mohammed, hight Lazybones, in quest of his wife, who has been carried
thither by a Marid, “heard a noise of cries and found himself in the
midst of a multitude of folk whose eyes were in their breasts.” They
gave him the news he sought and volunteered, “Now we be brethren of the
white serpent.” The Eskimos speak of a headless people living in the
moon and in remote regions of the earth.

Here is a story of a curious race domiciled by various writers in
various parts of the Old World, and yet lacking details to give it
verisimilitude. These are supplied by Sir Walter Raleigh in his report
on the wonders of Guiana. The headless people are Indians of the tribe
of Ewaipanoma living in a district near the Orinoco. He has seen none
of them, but “every childe in the provinces” affirms the story. Their
eyes are in their shoulders, their mouths in the middle of their
breasts, “and a long traine of haire groweth backward between their
shoulders.” A chief’s son whom they had made a prisoner told Raleigh
they were “the most mighty men of all the land, and use bowes, arrowes,
and clubbes thrice as big as any of Guiana.” This confirms, concludes
Raleigh, what was written of them by “Mandevile, whose reports were
holden for fables many yeeres.”

In the interior of Guiana Sir Walter had a trading transaction with
a nation of kindred appearance. He bartered jew’s-harps for fowls at
a town of five hundred houses, where he found Indians plentifully
provisioned with venison, fowls, and wine. He asked their chief “whence
hee had those Hennes.” The answer was that they were brought from a
mountain less than a mile away, “where were many Indians, yea so many
as grasse on the ground, and that these men had the points of their
shoulders higher than the Crownes of their heads, and had so many
Hennes as was wonderful; and if wee would have any wee should send them
Jewes harpes, for they would give for every one two Hennes. Wee tooke
an Indian, and gave him five hundred Harpes; the Hennes were so many
that hee brought us, as were not to be numbered.” Raleigh wanted to
visit these mountain Acephali, but was warned that they were in their
drunken feasts and would kill him.

One may explain the headless peoples about as one will. The Tartar
tribes north of India certainly have short necks. Thus Pliny on the
African Acephalites: “On the invasion of the Persians the Blemmyes were
in the habit of falling on one knee and bowing the head to the breast,
by which means, without injury to themselves, they afforded a passage
to the horses of the enemy.” Buffon accepts and interprets the Raleigh
tale. “This monstrous deformity cannot be natural,” he says. “It is
probable that savages, who are so pleased in disfiguring nature by
flattening, rounding, and lengthening the head, might likewise contrive
to sink it into the shoulders. These fantasies might arise from an idea
that, by rendering themselves deformed, they became more dreadful to
their enemies.” This passage would have interested Sir Walter.


_Half-men_

There were people in the Philippines whose bodies suffered temporary
subtraction at the other extremity. These were the asuangs--men who had
acquired powers of sorcery by eating human livers. When they willed
it their persons divided at the waist line, the lower part remaining
behind and the upper growing wings and long nails and a horrible black
tongue, and flying away on vampire errands. An orifice in the armpit
contained an oil which rendered this human bat invisible. If salt was
cast on his abandoned half he could not assemble himself on his return.
Wak-wak was one of his names. The reality behind this grim fiction was
the learned counselor, called the asuang, whom each datto had at his
court before the Spaniards came. His evil repute is a Spanish slander.

If there were men whose stature had been reduced as by a transverse
sweep of the knife, there were others whose appearance was as if they
had been sliced. These were the half-men of Moslem legend called the
Shikh and the Nesnas, each with a single arm, leg, and eye, as though
one man had been split in twain. The Zulus had the same story, perhaps
from Moslem sources. They tell of half-men discovering a Zulu girl in
a cave and thinking her two persons. When they discovered their error
they exclaimed: “The thing is pretty! But, oh, the two legs!” The fable
may have sprung from figurative speech, in which men of backward
culture are described as only half-men.


_Diminutive Husbands_

American Eskimo legends tell of a tribe called Ardnainiq living far
to the northwest, whereof the men, small as children and covered with
hair, were carried around in the hoods of their wives, who were of
normal size. The detail oddly parallels Darwin’s statement that he had
found a female crustacean of the common cirripedial character, “and in
two valves of her shell she had two little pockets, in each of which
she kept a little husband.”


_Eel-like Men_

A race of eel-like men, says Julius Scaliger, dwell in Malabar. They
have the serpent’s form, are eight feet long, and, while of horrible
aspect, are harmless unless provoked. They will “stand bolt upright for
hours together, gazing on the boyes at their sportes, never offring to
hurte any of them.” In the upright posture they lose the likeness of
serpents and “spread themselves into such a corpulent breadthe, that
had they feet they would seeme to be men.” This is a tale brought to
Europe by the Portuguese; and at a time when it was debated whether the
serpent assumed a human form in tempting Eve, it was thought this might
be the creature whose body Satan borrowed.

The tale is based in part on the cobra’s power to dilate its neck
into a broad hood. Back of it are Buddhist traditions of the Nagas, a
race of serpents that lived in dragon palaces under the earth. There
were naga-kings, and naga-maidens who assumed human form, had their
mortal lovers, and became the founders of dynasties. The original
inhabitants of the Andamans were reputed to have been of this race, and
according to a popular belief their descendants were oviparous. The
interpretation of this legend is complicated by the surmise that the
Nagas were actually an ancient, non-Aryan people whose emblem was the
cobra.


_Strangely Footed Folk_

Certain races the ancients classified and named according to their
means of getting over the ground. With his instinct for balanced
statement Pliny unearths a passage from Eudoxus which says that “in
the southern parts of India” the men have feet a cubit in length,
“while those of the women are so remarkably small that they are
called Struthopodes.” The word may mean either “sparrow-footed” or
“ostrich-footed.” In the context it probably means the former; the
dames with diminutive feet hopped around as sparrows do. It may be they
were Chinese women.

Near the Indian troglodytes, according to Ctesias, dwelt the Monocoli,
who had only one leg, but were able to leap with surprising agility.
These people were also called the Sciapodes, which means “making a
shadow with the foot.” It was their custom in the time of extreme heat
to lie on their backs and shield themselves from the sun, each under
the shade of his own foot. A later century knew the shadow-footed folk
as the men with parasol feet. Maundeville places them in Ethiopia. In
Armenia, or bordering upon it, the Mongols found another one-legged
nation, but with different structure. Its citizens had only one arm
also, which was attached to the middle of the breast, but they had
two gaits. Hopping, they covered ground with remarkable speed, and
when tired of hopping the men and women whirled themselves around like
cartwheels.

When the Norsemen were exploring America, they encountered a Uniped,
or one-legged man, who launched a lethal arrow at Thorwald Ericson, as
he sat at the boat helm. The dying leader drew it out and exclaimed,
“There is fat around my paunch; we have hit upon a faithful country,
and yet we are not like to get much profit by it.”

The stiff-legged men, Carpini heard, lived south of the country of the
Kara-Khitai, upon a great desert. They had no speech and no joints in
their limbs, and when they fell down somebody had to help them up. They
wore felt of camel’s hair and made wind shelters thereof. When wounded
in battle they stanched the blood with grass and fled swiftly away.

A related tale is told by Rubruquis, who had it from “a certain priest
of Cathaya who sat with me clothed in a red-coloured cloth.” When the
friar asked him whence he had such a color, “he told me that in the
east part of Cathaya there were high craggy rocks, wherein certain
creatures dwell, having in all parts the shape of men, but that they
bow not the knees, but leap instead of walking; which are not above one
cubit long, and their whole body is covered with hair, who have their
abode in caves, which no man can come unto; and they who hunt them, go
to them, and carry strong drink with them, and make pits in the rocks
like wells, which they fill with that strong drink. The hunters hide
themselves, and then these creatures come out of their holes and taste
the drink, and cry ‘chin-chin’ and drink till they are made drunk, so
that they sleep there. Then the hunters come and bind them hand and
foot, while they are sleeping, and afterwards open the veins in their
neck and draw forth three or four drops of blood from every one, and
let them go free; and that blood, as he told me, is the most precious
purple.”

Megasthenes describes a race of Indians living upon a mountain called
Nulo, who had their feet turned backward with the heel in front and
with eight toes on each foot. Pliny places this race “beyond the
other Scythian Anthropophagi in a country called Abarimon situate in
a certain great valley of Mount Imaus” (Himalayas). They had great
rapidity of movement and wandered about indiscriminately with the wild
beasts. The fable may have originated in the Caucasus, where there is
still a tradition that dæmons take the shapes of armed men, and have
their feet reverted. Farther north dwelt an ox-footed race.

Classic note is made of two writhing nations. The Scyritæ of India who
“have merely holes in their faces instead of nostrils” have “flexible
feet like the body of the serpent,” says Megasthenes. There was also
the thong-footed people or Himantopodes, residents of northern Africa,
who moved with a serpentine, crawling gait. This may be a traveler’s
impression of some sinuous dance of the desert.

Under the hand of Maundeville the centaurs pass out of mythology into
history. The “Folk that have Horses’ Feet” are in his collection of
marvelous islanders: “And they be strong and mighty and swift Runners,
for they take wild Beasts with Running and eat them.” These are the
Hippopodes of Pliny, tenants of a Baltic island. A related folk are
the islanders permanently mounted on ostriches, with which they seem
to form one body. Kazwini, who records this Arab legend, says they
devour the bodies of drowned persons cast up by the sea. On another
isle Sir John seems for the once to have invented a people rather than
revived a legend. Here be “Folk that go always upon their Knees full
marvellously. And at every Pace that they go, it seemeth that they
would fall.”

In Ethiopia, “on that side of the Nile which extends along the borders
of the Southern Ocean,” Pliny domiciles the Artabatitæ, who have four
feet and wander about after the manner of wild beasts. Maundeville is
more detailed: “And they be all skinned and feathered, and they would
leap lightly from Tree to Tree.” Farther south were the Aigamuxa, theme
of a Hottentot story cycle, whose eyes were in the back of their feet.
Regarding human beings as zebras, they hunted them down and tore them
to pieces.

Chinese marvel tales describe a race of people living somewhere in the
west. They have a hole right through their bodies at the breast. When
their mandarins would take the air, they thrust a stick through the
aperture, and two domestics carry them so. “If the bearers are strong
enough,” says Huc, “they often string on several gentlemen at once.”


_In the Russian East_

There was an east other than the sun-bathed lands whose fabulous
peoples are in literature. It lay just beyond northern Europe, on the
farther flanks of the Urals and beside the Obi. To the Russians of the
Middle Ages it was a land of strange races and weird happenings. About
these a body of legends grew up which in a measure parallel the classic
stories, but give them backgrounds of ice and snow and add new actors
and enriching details. A Russian manuscript of the fifteenth century,
found at Novgorod a few years ago and entitled “The Unknown Peoples of
the East,” pictures these forgotten folk. Nine different races, all
called Samoyeds, are described, and six are races of marvel.

There were Samoyeds who shed their skins like snakes. For a month each
year they stayed in the water, avoiding dry land, lest their bodies
crack open. The Russian anthropologist, Professor Anutschin, whose
interpretation of the narrative is followed here, says that these
are natives who fish and hunt in the watery domain of the tundras,
where the summer attacks of mosquitoes and horse flies give their
skins a rough and bloody aspect, as if cracking before sloughing off.
There were also Samoyeds like other people from the navel up, but all
shaggy-haired from the navel down--in reality wearing trousers of
reindeer skins with the hair outside. There were other and speechless
Samoyeds with their mouths on the top of their heads. When they would
eat, says the Novgorod manuscript, “they crumble the meat or fish,
stick it under their fur caps and then move their shoulders up and
down.” This is the account of a people whose speech the Russians did
not understand, who wore the head skin of the reindeer, ears and all,
for a cap, and whose sack-like garments had collars so high as to
conceal their mouths.

There were also headless Samoyeds with eyes in their breasts and the
mouth between the shoulders, and their diet was raw reindeer heads and
bones; in warfare and the chase their weapon was an iron tube through
which they drove an iron arrow by hitting it with a hammer. This, it
is thought, was an early race of ironworkers who wore peaked head-caps
which concealed the shoulder line and made the face of the wearer seem
to be in the breast. Another explanation is that several Siberian
tribes had faces painted on the leathern fronts of their garments.
The descriptive phrase, “with the face upon the breast,” might easily
become “headless” when translated into Russian.

Then there was a strange Samoyed race--an independent creation of
Russian fantasy--the members of which died every winter and revived
two months afterward, if let alone. When the fatal hour had come, they
sat down and a stream of water gushed from their nostrils and froze to
the ground. If a stranger came from another land and broke this icicle
or removed it, the Samoyed never woke up. If he merely jarred it, the
refrigerated native would open his eyes and ask, “Why, little friend,
have you disfigured me?” Others were brought to life by the warmth
of the spring sun. According to a German writer the day of death was
November twenty-seven and revival came on the twenty-third day of the
following April. It is supposed that the wooden idols scattered over
the Obi country, three hundred of them on a single river island, were
the basis of this curious story. Covered with ice and drifted snow,
they looked human enough, and there were native reports that these were
ancestral Samoyeds.

[Illustration: _The First People Engaged in Such Cosmic Adventures as
Warfare Against Stone Giants_]

One race of Samoyeds, says the Novgorod manuscript, travels day and
night with torches by underground ways and comes out upon a sea over
which a strange light falls and beside which is a great fortress and
a deserted city. When the stranger approaches he hears a tumult in
the streets, but, entering, he sees no one and the clamor dies away.
In each house, however, there are things for him to eat and drink,
and other commodities. He takes what he needs, lays down money in its
stead, and goes his way. Should he fail to make payment, the wares
he takes with him vanish and return to the silent town. And when the
stranger leaves, “then he hears again a tumult as in other inhabited
cities.”

This story has the Celtic magic and might be a chapter from Malory.
It is thought that the mysterious sea is Lake Koliwan in the western
Altais. Granite rocks in the semblance of towers, terraces, and
dismantled fortifications rise from its shores, and in the hills are
the pits and galleries of a copper camp long abandoned by the Tchudi.
These are the underground Samoyed ways of legend. Perhaps dumb barter
was once carried on here. The radiance across the lake, if not the
northern lights, may have glanced from some Russian tale, like that in
which Bishop Theodor saw the earthly paradise on a mountain side with
an azure light upon it.


_New World Prodigies_

The New World, it has been seen, had its own prodigious peoples. In
Spanish America their legends are overlaid with imported material, but
elsewhere there is little alien alloy. North America has traditions
of stone giants, pygmies, one-eyed cannibals, hermaphrodites,
flint-armored warriors, double-headed men, dog-headed tribes. There are
also storm-raising mermen, phantom boatmen, underwater folk, otter-men,
seal-men, pug-nosed people, skeletons that resume human shape at night,
talking skulls. Many stories tell of the marriage of mortals with
unearthly beings, of the living with the dead, and of the union of
women with animals. The best known Indian myth has two versions, in
one of which the people of the First Age had human forms but an animal
nature, and took the animal guise before the real men appeared; in the
other, which is of the southwest, the first people had bestial forms
but a human nature, and presently laid aside their animal masks. In
the latter version there was an Amazonian phase in the ascent of the
primitive people. Their women seceded from society and lived with a
water monster. Hunger drove them back, but they brought into the world
a number of prodigious beings whom their lords had to destroy.

In the First People who had the human form but became animals the
Eastern Algonquins and the Pacific tribes have a myth which ranks
beside the Greek myth of the Titans that were before Zeus, and
the myths of the Golden Age. Its quality is at once haunting and
challenging, the more so because these dawn-folk are nowhere described.
“In old times,” a Micmac Indian told Leland, “men were as animals and
animals as men; how this was no one knows. But it is told that all were
at first men, and as they gave themselves up to this and that desire,
and to naught else, they became beasts. But before this came to pass,
they could change to one or the other form; yet even as men there was
always something which showed what they were.”

The story cycle of the Mewan Indians of California pictured the First
People as living in great ceremonial houses and engaging in such cosmic
adventures as sun-capture, fire-theft, and warfare against stone
giants. How nearly human and how much animal they were the Western
Indians left in doubt. When they became animals and went forth from
the ceremonial house, they carried to their future haunts not only
their old names, but their distinctive traits, such as Grizzly Bear’s
appetite for acorns, Frog’s aptitude at water jumps and the clamorous
voice of Sandhill Crane. After the transformation was effected--and
only casual reasons for it are suggested--man was created. Coyote made
him out of feathers, or sticks, or clay, and Lizard gave him five
fingers because he had five himself and knew their value. In Popol
Vuh, the Guatemalan saga, the First People were manikins that the
gods carved out of wood and endowed with life; but so frivolous and
irreverent were these that a flood was invoked to destroy them; “the
little monkeys that live in the woods” are descended from survivors.

All over North America were stories of stone giants, and crudely
archaic as are these stalking figures of legend, the myth has the
elemental vigor of Norse epic. According to the Iroquois, a cannibal
race--“stonish giants,” Schoolcraft calls them--who made their bodies
hard by rolling in sand, overran America seventeen centuries ago, and
nearly exterminated the natives. The Holder of the Heavens took giant
form in order to destroy them. These are the icy-hearted Chenoos of
Algonquin story who lived in northern Canada; in summer they rubbed
themselves with fir balsam and rolled on the ground so that moss,
leaves, and twigs adhered to them. The California Indians have tales of
a cannibal rock-giant who went abroad with a rock basket on his back
into which he tossed people. There was another stony Titan, tall as a
pine tree but vulnerable under the heel. Only after the First People
had killed him by planting sharp sticks in his path did they elect to
become animals. The theory that these clanking folk typify mountains is
not convincing.

Maundeville has a tale of a bodiless head, but North America is the
true home of this weird legend. Glooskap, culture hero of the Eastern
Algonquins, played at ball with a snapping skull. There were Indians
who went all to pieces leaving only the head, which ate the other
members. Everywhere stories were told of heads that pursued people and
devoured them. The skull of a mother chased her children over hill and
plain. In nightmare flight the heroes of Indian epic cast obstacles or
attractive things behind them to delay or divert the rolling skull.
Reading a new meaning into the legend, the Arapahoes used it to explain
the railroad.

A Sioux story describes a duel between the Monster and the Bladder,
twin sons of the Turtle. They kept striking off each other’s heads,
and these flew into the sky and, falling back, adhered again to their
necks. But at length Bladder pushed Monster’s body aside, and the head
rebounded, and to this day it rebounds, for it is the sun, and Bladder
is the sky; but only to old men or wise is this part of the story told.
It may be that these tales derive from the conception of the sun and
moon as traveling heads, or from the use of a skull as tribal medicine,
or from the war custom of decapitation later supplanted by scalping,
or even from the appearance of the tumbleweed of the western prairies,
which wanders like a ball before the autumn wind.




Chapter X. The Satyrs


The tail is a symbol of the animal nature. Stories of tailed humans are
found all over the world. They signify a belief that certain races of
men are descended from the apes, or that the apes are descended from
certain races of men. Both beliefs have been stressed in the modern
debate on evolution; yet neither is new. They are almost the oldest of
the philosophical myths. They trace back to primitive animism--to the
notion that animals are endowed with human intelligence, can understand
the speech of men, and may well be propitiated with worship. Early
man accepted them as cousins. He could change natures with them, and
sometimes it seemed to him he did. Père Lafitau said of his American
flock, “These men are living in Ovid’s Metamorphoses.”

Sometimes men were content enough with this kinship, erecting it into
totemism, wearing the tail of the buffalo or horse as an emblem of
power. Sometimes they were ashamed of it. They plucked off all hair
from their bodies, because animals were hairy, and resented it when
their women bore them twins, because the young of animals came in
litters instead of singly. Constantly they confused brute and human
nature, using identical terms of neighbor folk, whether these were
apes or men. The confusion was carried over into literature. One
African tribe was said to have an ape king. There are passages in which
travelers seem to themselves to be speaking of men while to their
readers it is evident they are speaking of monkeys. There are other
passages in which they set out to describe monkeys, yet draw pictures
of men like themselves, but of more primitive cast. The creatures
called satyrs embody this confusion and the sense of kinship behind it.

According to Isidore, the satyrs have done something to make their own
nature clear. One of them, he says, appearing to St. Anthony in the
desert, explained, “I am mortal, one of the inhabitants of the waste,
whom the heathen, misled by error, worship as the Fauns and Satyrs.”
He pictures them as manikins with upturned noses, horns on their
foreheads, and goat feet.

The heathen world, however, never was quite sure what it meant by
the satyrs. If it be true that the fable began with ritual mummers
who donned the nature of fertility dæmons when they put on the heads
of asses, horses, or goats, and danced in them--as men still do--the
memory of this was forgotten. The satyrs were supposed to be spirits,
half human, half bestial, that haunted woodland and mountain side
and fellowshipped with Pan and Dionysus. They had bristly hair, flat
noses, and pointed ears, with two small horns, and a tail like that of
a horse or goat. Earlier Greek art represented them as ugly, withered,
and ape-like. But Attic sculpture in the time of Praxiteles shows them
with the beast nature well-nigh submerged--graceful figures instinct
with poetry. They took over the attributes of the kindred sileni, and
as Roman influence grew they were confounded with the fauns and were
depicted as half men and half goats. In Scripture they are the “hairy
ones” of Hebrew folklore, a sort of demon of waste places. So is the
word intended in the prophecy of Isaiah as to Babylon: “Wild beasts of
the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful
creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.”

Satyrs, as the ancients conceived them, were a wanton, music-loving,
merry-hearted and yet timid folk, their symbol the hare. They roved
about, drinking, dancing to the pipe and cymbal, pursuing the nymphs,
killing the cattle of men and making love to their women. Men feared
them, as embodying the loneliness of waste places, feared them with the
sudden panic fear, which the apparition of their leader, the leering
goat-god, always excited. Equally, the shy creatures feared men, but
not women. Gradually these timid spirits moved out of mythology into
geography. There were satyr isles, and there were satyr tribes in
distant mountains and deserts, alike in Africa, India, and the spaces
of the sea. Always they were described as avoiding contact with men,
screening themselves in the thickets and seen only from afar. The
satyrs of western Africa, says Pliny, “beyond their figure have
nothing in common with the manners of the human race.” Ælian speaks of
Indian satyrs that have human features, that go sometimes on four feet
and sometimes on two and are too swift to be caught.

[Illustration: A SATYR _By_ Jacob Jordaens]

Thus the classic conception of this creature passes from spirits of
the waste to tailed men, to apes, retracing the path which Greek art
followed from simian beings to spirits of the waste. These were the
wild men and wild women whom Herodotus locates in western Africa.
Hanno, the Carthaginian explorer, had been before him. His narrative
tells of finding an island full of wild people on the west coast of
Africa: “For the greater proportion were women, whose bodies were
covered with hair, and whom our interpreters called Gorillæ. Though we
pursued the men, we could not catch any of them, since all fled from
us, escaping over the precipices and defending themselves with stones.
However, we took three women, but they attacked their conductors with
their hands and teeth, and could not be prevailed on to accompany us.
We therefore killed and flayed them and brought their skins with us to
Carthage,” where they were hung up in the temple of Juno.

This narrative betrays the ancient confusion as to the satyrs’ real
nature. They are described as wild men and women, and it would even
seem that the Carthaginians undertook to reason with their captives;
but their captors killed and skinned them, as they certainly would not
have done to creatures they deemed to be of their species. The terms
gorilla and orang-utan both mean men-of-the-woods. They are borne by
large apes, but when the Malays speak of the orang-utan they mean a
savage and not a simian.

The Hindu term for man-of-the-woods is bunmanus, and here is a Hindu
sketch of him. “The bunmanus is an animal of the monkey kind. His face
has a near resemblance to the human; he has no tail and walks erect.
The skin of his body is black, and slightly covered with hair.” Then
the account proceeds to enumerate the dialects of the peninsula and
includes among them “the jargon of the bunmanus.” These animals of the
monkey kind are really the dark-skinned, non-Aryan aborigines.

A Portuguese manuscript cited by Tylor tells of an Indian tribe in
Brazil called the Cuatas. “This populous nation,” it says, “dwells
east of the Juruena, in the neighborhood of the rivers San Joao and
San Thome. It is a very remarkable fact that the Indians composing it
walk naturally like the quadrupeds, with their hands on the ground;
they have the belly, breast, arms, and legs covered with hair, and are
of small stature; they are fierce, and use their teeth as weapons;
they sleep on the ground, or among the branches of trees; they have no
industry, nor agriculture, and live only on fruits, wild roots, and
fish.” The author of this account seemed not to know that the coata he
was describing was an ape and not a man.

Customs of speech and sometimes motives of self-interest have shaded
the differences between the two species. The belief is widely held,
both in Africa and in South America, that apes know how to talk, but
hold their peace lest they be put to work, as it seems they were put
to work in gathering the fig harvest in ancient Egypt and perhaps in
ceremonial processions as torch-bearers. On the other hand, sailors,
pioneer colonists, and slave dealers betray a tendency to rate the
savages among whom they are thrown, and whom they may wish to exploit,
as little, if any, above the brutes.

It has become almost a principle of ethnology, wherever a story of
a neighboring race of tailed men is current, to look for a tribe of
aborigines who have been dispossessed by men of a higher culture. Thus
the conqueror asserts his contempt, and justifies his treatment, of the
conquered. The latter may accept it in good part and admit a monkey
descent. The Marawars of South India trace their lineage back to Rama’s
monkeys, and the Kathkuri avow an ape ancestry. Even the Jaitwas of
Rajputana, although classed as Rajputs, derive, they say, from the
monkey-god, Hanuman, and allege that their princes have still a vestige
of tails. There are tribes in Tibet and in the mountains of the Malay
peninsula whose traditions tell of ape progenitors.

By a sort of poetic justice, savages sometimes tell a like story about
civilized men. Why should these wear so much clothing if there were
not something they wanted to conceal? In the Land of Lamary, says
Maundeville, men and women go all naked, “and they scorn when they see
any strange Folk going clothed,” hinting that these are not formed
as are other men. Captain Cook was not the only explorer to tell of
natives demanding that the white men strip so that it might be seen if
they were everywhere of the human kind. Buchanan gives this account in
his Indian travels:

“When I passed through among the gardens near houses, I have observed
the women squatting down behind the mud walls, in order to satisfy
their curiosity by viewing a stranger. When they thought that I
observed them, they ran away in a fright. This does not arise from the
rules of caste in Malabar requiring the Hindu women to be confined,
for that is by no means the case; but in the interior parts of North
Malabar the Nairs, being at enmity with Europeans, have persuaded the
women that we are a kind of hobgoblins who have long tails, in order to
conceal which we wear breeches. The women and children are therefore
afraid of Europeans.”

Stories of man’s descent to the ape match stories of the ape’s ascent
into man. One of these is recited in the Metamorphoses of Ovid, where
for their treachery Jove degrades the Cercopes. A Moslem legend tells
of Solomon passing through the Valley of Apes, between Jerusalem and
Mareb, and finding monkeys dwelling in the houses, wearing the clothes,
and using the speech of men. The river which flowed by their city
had been full of fish, they said, and these showed themselves freely
on the Sabbath day, trusting to the Jewish fishermen to keep the
Commandments. The temptation proved too strong, and for their offense
of Sabbath-breaking Jehovah turned all the citizens into apes.

There is a Zulu story of a lazy tribe of negroes who would not dig the
soil. Their chief led them into the wilderness, where the pick handles
which had hung useless at their backs became tails, and they themselves
baboons.

In both hemispheres there are legends of cross-breeding between the
human and the simian species. The Quoyas Morrov, or wood-man of Angola,
which was sent to Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange, was supposed by
his age to have an ape father or an ape mother. The First People of
Central American myth were manikins who became monkeys, and Count
Castelnau repeats a story by Father Ribeiro, a Carmelite missionary,
of a tribe of tailed Indians in the Amazonian region, whose descent
was from both apes and men. In British Central Africa, says Sir Harry
H. Johnston, the negro women profess to go in terror of the large male
baboons, and it is a fact that these animals will descend upon parties
of unarmed women, but only if they are carrying well-filled market
baskets.

The forests of South America are haunted by two legendary creatures of
related natures, in whom the myths of tailed men return to their Greek
originals. One of these is the salvaje, or hairy man-of-the-woods,
of whom Humboldt first heard among the cataracts of the Amazon. This
creature, the natives, planters, and missionaries were agreed, carried
off women, constructed huts, and sometimes ate human flesh. For five
years, everywhere the explorer traveled in the Americas, the story
followed him, and he was censured for doubting it. He surmises that the
legend is decked out with features taken from African ape-lore, but
adds that it may be that the man-of-the-woods, if not some rare ape, is
one of the large bears, the footsteps of which resemble a man’s, and
which are believed in every country to attack women.

“Father Gili,” says Humboldt, “gravely relates the history of a lady
in the Llanos of Venezuela, who so much praised the gentle character
and attentions of the man-of-the-woods. She is stated to have lived
several years with one in great domestic harmony, and only requested
some hunters to take her back because she and her children (a little
hairy, also) were weary of living far from the church and sacraments.”
A Spanish author wonders, however, if the fable of the man-of-the-woods
has not sprung from the artifice of Indian women who pretended to have
been carried off in default of a better excuse for long absences from
their husbands.

The other legendary creature is the Curupira, or Diable Boiteux. Among
the noises of the Brazilian forest that used to startle Bates was “a
sound like the clang of an iron bar against a hard, hollow tree, or a
piercing cry.” This was never repeated, and the silence that followed
tended to deepen the unpleasant impression. With the natives it was
always the Curupira, the wild man or spirit of the forest, that made
these inexplicable sounds. “Sometimes,” says Bates, “he is described as
a kind of orang-otang, covered with long, shaggy hair, and living in
trees. At others he is said to have cloven feet and a bright red face.
He has a wife and children, and sometimes comes down to the rocas to
steal the mandioca.”

All accounts agree that the Curupira is not footed like normal men. He
is lame, with one foot larger than the other, or his feet turn backward
so that his trail deceives. He is bald and dwarfish, with hairy person,
huge ears, and blue-green teeth, and he rides a deer, a rabbit, or a
pig. The spirit of the wood, the guardian of all wild things, he is
beneficent or mischievous, as occasion or mood offers. He insists that
game shall be killed, not maimed, merely, and for a gift of tobacco he
will return lost cattle. Where the forest is darkest, sometimes he will
appear in friendly but treacherous human guise, luring hunters from the
path and at last vanishing in mocking laughter. When the hunter sees
footprints of unequal size on the woodland trail ahead, if he is well
advised he will hasten back, and avoid the forest for weeks afterward.

Farther north one finds again the tracks of this strange old man,
or of beings like him. The Maidu Indians of California tell of the
Chamlakhu, a bearded ancient with clawlike hands and feet who lived
in trees; running on the ground, his gait was shambling and his arms
fanned the air like wings. The Indians of Costa Rica tell of a king of
the tapirs, a man of stately bearing, who rebukes hunters that kill
out of wantonness. Among the Indians of Guatemala there are stories
of a forest sovereign and protector of game whom the ladinos call the
Sombreron, from the enormous hat which he wears. Short and sturdy of
figure, he rides his domain astride a deer. He has a rustic stronghold,
and a hunter following a wounded deer once came upon it. The Sombreron
was swinging in a hammock in the courtyard. He led the hunter to an
inclosure in which were many deer. Pointing out the wounded animal, he
said, “Kill it, but another time shoot better and do not torture my
subjects.”

This creature is Arcadian Pan, master of the satyrs, generative dæmon
of the flocks and herds, somehow an emigrant to the New World. The
Filipinos call him the Tig-balang, picture him with long ears, legs of
grasshopper slenderness, and goat hoofs, and know him for a treacherous
jungle guide. The Russians call him the Lesiy. He guards their forests,
misleads wanderers, removes boundary stones and sign-posts. It is he
that makes the echo. Shouting and whistling in his domain he cannot
abide. A bearded, shaggy, green-eyed old man, he yet entices girls into
his thickets, whence after a long time they may escape, but with honor
forfeited; and he substitutes his stupid changelings for the children
of men. The same or a like figure is Tapio, “the golden king of the
forest” in Finnish magic songs. Wild animals are his flocks and herds,
his queen is the charcoal wife, the bear is his bastard son, and he
lives in Brushwood Town.

Satyr geography covers a good many countries and centuries and
specifically includes at least one civilized race. It was long the
vulgar belief upon the Continent that Englishmen had tails. This was
first the story that the people of one shire told about another, and
its birthplace was Kent. Kentishmen, according to their neighbors,
were tailed, as a punishment for one or the other of two acts of
sacrilege. Their first offense was committed, says Bailey, when they
were still pagans. They abused “Austin the monk and his associates, by
beating them and opprobriously tying fish tails to their backsides; in
revenge of which such appendants grew to the hind parts of all that
generation.” The second offense was against Thomas À Becket when it was
noised abroad that he was out of favor with Henry II. The inhabitants
of Strood cut off the tail of his horse, and by the will of God, says
Polydore Vergil, “all their offspring were born with tails like brute
animals”; not until their race was extinct did tailed men pass from
Kent.

Pliny numbers among the nations of India “men born with long hairy
tails, and of remarkable swiftness of foot. In Indo-China, southwest
of Yunnan, were the Tailed Pu mentioned in the _Sung Geography_. Ma
Tuan-Lin allows them tails from three to four inches long and classes
them among anthropophagi who eat their aged relatives. The Yao, a
subtribe of the Miaotze, have tails like monkeys, their neighbors say.
They live in leaf lodges or caves in the Lipo district south of the
Nanling range, and access to their habitations is by bamboo ladders.
Yet they are skillful weavers and musicians.

[Illustration: _Men Feared Them, as Embodying the Loneliness of Waste
Places_]

There are numerous reports of tailed tribes in the large islands of
the East. Marco Polo speaks of “a kind of wild men” in Sumatra, in
the kingdom of Lambri, with hairless tails a palm in length. The
_Merveilles de L’Inde_ tells of tailed cannibals on the west coast
of Sumatra, and Galvano has an account of Sumatrans with tails like a
sheep’s. The fifteenth century _History of the Ming Dynasty_ pictures
the Borneo village of Wu-lung-li-tan and its tailed citizens. When
they see other men approaching they flee with their hands over their
faces. The resemblance of the name to orang-utan, or “wild men,” will
not escape notice. Colonel Yule tells of a trader who had examined the
tails of a tribe on the northeast coast of Borneo. These appendages
were long and so stiff that the natives had to use perforated seats;
Arab, Malay, and native travelers report having seen them squatting
on these little stools. John Struys, a Dutch traveler in Formosa, saw
there in 1677 a man with a tail “more than a foot long, covered with
red hair, and very like a cow’s.” The man said the tail was the effect
of climate and all the natives on the southern side of the island had
them.

There were two archipelagoes known as the Satyr Islands. Ptolemy
mentions one of them, and Gerini identifies it with the Northern
Anambas lying off the Indo-Chinese mainland. Hsi-tung, supposed to
be a transcript of Syatan, was their name of old; the resemblance of
Syatan to the Greek Satyron may have led Levantine sailors to make this
jest at the expense of ill-favored little people living then in the
Anamba group. To reach the other archipelago one must steer through
the Pillars of Hercules in company with a Carian sailor of the second
century. Him Pausanias asked what he knew about the satyrs. The Carian
replied that in a voyage to Italy he was driven from his course to
a distant sea whither people no longer sail. Here were many islands
which the crew did not care to touch, and these they called the Satyr
Islands. Their inhabitants were red-haired and had tails not much
smaller than a horse’s.

Many African tribes wore animal tails for ornament, and explorers were
sometimes misled by the custom. The Duir of the northeast attached two
antelope tails to their girdles. The Wa-Kavorondo, east of the Nyanza,
go naked or wear only a waist-cloth, and the women attach to it a tail
of bark. In the same quarter of Africa the Bongo women, with their
large hips and lubricious gait, have had a share in propagating fable,
for they, too, ornament themselves with tails; and as they stride along
they swing these about in conscious emulation of the flocks and herds.
Schweinfurth likens them to “dancing baboons.”

Other African satyr stories do not yield their secret so easily.
The Ba-Kwambas of the northwest, report said, had tails which they
inserted in holes in the ground when they sat down. In his _Travels and
Adventures_ (1861) Doctor Wolf asserted that in Abyssinia were men and
women “with tails like dogs and horses,” some of these so large that
they were able to knock down a horse with them. About the Niam-Niams, a
cannibal people with filed teeth that live in French Equatorial Africa,
legends have multiplied, and these Baring Gould has assembled.

Horneman was the first to describe them as tailed anthropophagi. In
1849 M. Descouret reported that this was the common belief among the
Arabs. In 1851 M. de Castelnau told of a Houssa expedition in which
a band of Niam-Niams was slaughtered to a man. All, including the
women, had hairless tails about fifteen inches long. These people were
otherwise a handsome race, of a deep black, using clubs and javelins
in war, and in peace cultivating rice, maize, and other grains. An
Abyssinian priest, seemingly speaking of the same tribe, told M.
d’Abbadie in 1852 that only the men had tails, and these were covered
with hair and the length of a palm. Doctor Hubsch, physician to the
hospitals of Constantinople, examined in 1852 a tailed negress of the
Niam-Niams who was offered for sale in the slave market. She was black
as ebony, with frizzled hair, bloodshot eyes, large white teeth, and a
smooth, hairless, pointed tail two inches long. Her clothes fidgeted
her, she ate meat raw, and was an avowed cannibal. The slave dealer
said all her tribe was as herself.

In Cuba Columbus heard of a province called Mangou, lying farther west,
and it sounded like Mangi, the rich maritime province of the Grand
Khan. Its inhabitants had tails, and wore garments to conceal them.
Columbus recalled the Maundeville story, related above, of the scorn of
certain naked Asiatics for clothing, and their belief that garments hid
bodily defects. So he pressed onward in the thought that Mangi and the
robed peoples of Tartary lay just below the horizon.

Despite witness from Asia, Africa, and the eastern and western
Indies, there are no tailed races of men. But there have been tailed
individuals. Hottentot women come nearest meeting the requirements of
legend. Without a tail, they yet have a development of the posteriors
that amounts to a natural shelf, on which, as on a pillion, their
infants may ride. The mandril and certain other monkeys living in the
same latitudes show a like enlargement.




Chapter XI. The Pygmies


It was left to the pygmy to revenge all of the creatures of fable upon
incredulous mankind. He was doubted, yet he is. Not until some fifty
years ago would the learned doubters admit that Homer and Herodotus
were right, and themselves wrong. Now it is in the books that half a
hundred groups of pygmies are living on the earth, to say nothing of
others that have become extinct. Every race has had such groups, and
every continent has known their tread.

There is palliation for ancient and modern doubts as to these dwarfish
nations. The pygmies of reality are not so small as the pygmies of
tradition. Their name is from the Greek word for fist, or the distance
between the elbow joint and the knuckles of the average man--a little
more than thirteen inches. The ancient geographers, however, allowed
the smallest pygmies at least double that stature. There were two
species of little men--the one averaging three spans, or two feet three
inches high, the other averaging five spans, or three feet nine inches.
These measurements recur again and again for fifteen centuries in the
writings of the east and west.

No race has a mean stature as short even as the pygmies of five spans,
but among the dwarf tribes there are many women who do not greatly
exceed it; and there are women, not so small according to the standards
of their brothers as to be accounted deformed, who do not equal it.
Stanley saw among the Akkas of the West African Rain Forest a grown
girl of seventeen who was half an inch short of three feet.

Poetic license of the old time took liberties with the estimates of
geographers, but these liberties were understood as such. The dwarf
nation on the Upper Nile that was reputed to war with the cranes used
the ax, it was said, to cut down ears of wheat. When Hercules passed
through their country they set up ladders to climb to the rim of his
goblet for a drink. In his slumber two armies swooped down upon his
right hand and two on his left; but, awaking, the hero laughingly
gathered them all in his lion skin.

The myth of their warfare with the cranes became a theme of literature
and art, but cast doubt over the whole pygmy tradition. It first
appears in Homer. The _Iliad_ likens the shouts of the onrushing
Trojans to the cries of cranes as they fly southward “with noise and
order through the sky,” bringing “wounds and death to pygmy nations.”
Megasthenes elaborates the theme. It is the three-span pygmies, he
says, that war upon the cranes, as well as on the partridges, which are
as large as geese. The small folk collect and destroy the eggs of the
cranes, which breed in India and nowhere else. Pliny adds that every
spring the little men go in a body to the seashore, astride of rams and
goats, and there destroy the eggs and young of the birds; “otherwise,
it would be impossible for them to withstand the increasing multitude
of the cranes.” The shore booths which they occupy they build of mud
mixed with feathers and egg shells.

So the story moves from Africa to India, and towards modern times.
Maundeville declares that in the Land of Pygmies, which he seems to
place to the west of, and tributary to, China, the inhabitants “have
oftentimes war with the Birds of that Country that they take and eat.”
There is even a reference to this warfare in the writing (1563) of a
traveler in Greenland. There Dithmar Blefkens of Hamburg met a blind
monk who said that the pygmies represented the most perfect shape of
man, but were “hairy to the uttermost Joynts of the Fingers,” had no
proper speech, and were “unreasonable Creatures that live in Perpetual
Darkness.”

India appears to be the home of the tradition that the dwarfish peoples
warred with the cranes. Just a hint of its origin is afforded by
Ctesias. The “swarthy men called Pygmies,” he said, “hunt hares and
foxes not with dogs, but with ravens and kites and crows and vultures.”
Falconry is known to have been practiced in India as early as B.C. 600
and may be a thousand years older there. From a people’s using birds of
prey in hunting to themselves fighting against birds of prey is a step
of inference easy to take.

There is, however, a more direct explanation. According to a tradition
of the Indians, the Garuda, the bird of Vishnu, was hostile to the
people of the Kirata, and the name of this people means “dwarfish.”
While the sacred bird as pictured by the poets does not look like the
crane, or any other known species, it may be near enough to account for
the legend.

Herodotus was the first to give the pygmy tradition a historical
quality. He heard of the little people while he was collecting
materials for his books in Africa. His informants were natives of
Cyrene who had been to the shrine of Ammon and talked with Etearchus
the Ammonian king. The latter tells the story of the adventure of
the five Nasamonian youths, which he had received from their Libyan
countrymen and which Herodotus, therefore transcribes at third hand:

“The Nasamonians said there had grown up among them some wild young
men, the sons of certain chiefs, who, when they came to man’s estate,
indulged in all manner of extravagances, and among other things drew
lots for five of their number to go and explore the desert parts of
Libya, and try if they could not penetrate further than any had done
previously. The young men, therefore, dispatched on this errand by
their comrades with a plentiful supply of water and provision, traveled
at first through the inhabited region, passing which they came to the
wild beast tract, whence they finally entered upon the desert, which
they proceeded to cross from east to west. After journeying for many
days over a wide extent of sand, they came at last to a plain where
they observed trees growing; approaching them, and seeing fruit on
them, they proceeded to gather it.

“While they were thus engaged there came upon them some dwarfish men,
under the middle height, who seized them and carried them off. The
Nasamonians could not understand a word of their language, nor had they
any acquaintance with the language of the Nasamonians. They were led
across extensive marshes, and finally came to a town where all the men
were of the height of their conductors, and black complexioned. A great
river flowed by the town, running from west to east, and containing
crocodiles.

“Here let me dismiss Etearchus, the Ammonian, and his story, only
adding that he declared that the Nasamonians got safely back to their
country and that the men whose city they had reached were a nation of
sorcerers. With respect to the river which ran by their town, Etearchus
conjectured it to be the Nile, and reason favors that view.”

Thus ends one of the most valuable records which have come down from
ancient times. The river referred to is now believed to be the Niger,
or perhaps an affluent of Lake Tchad. Herodotus has another story of
a dwarfish people found in the west when Sataspes, the Carthaginian,
undertook to sail around Libya.

Although Strabo doubted the existence of pygmy races, yet his keen mind
brought him within reach of the truth. He finds in the wretched mode
of life of the people he called the Ethiopians, an explanation of the
reports of their dwarfish stature. They were naked and wandered from
place to place, and their sheep, goats, oxen, and dogs were undersized
like themselves. “It was perhaps from the diminutive size of these
people,” he concludes, “that the story of the pygmies originated,
whom no person worthy of credit has asserted that he himself has
seen.” The Greek geographer seems to have had reliable information as
to a fact that on its face is as hard to believe as the legends he
discredits--that there was dwarfish live stock as well as a dwarfish
people. Sir Samuel Baker found that the cows and ewes of the Bari,
a tribe living in the same district with the forest pygmies, “have
dimensions truly liliputian.”

Aristotle speaks with authority of the pygmies of Africa. “The storks,”
he said, “pass from the plains of Scythia to the marsh of upper Egypt,
toward the sources of the Nile. This is the district which the pygmies
inhabit, whose existence is not a fable. There is really, as men say,
a species of men of little stature, and their horses are little also.
They pass their life in caverns.” Pliny speaks of the pygmies as
dwelling in Thrace near the Black Sea, in the Carian district of Asia
Minor, in India under the shadow of the Himalayas, and at the sources
of the Nile. There is a valuable fact behind this apparently confused
geography: the Roman was right in assuming there were several such
races.

The pygmy races of Asia and Indonesia are cited in classic, Arabic, and
Chinese geography, and in mediæval travel. “In the middle of India,”
Ctesias says, “are found the swarthy men called pygmies, who speak the
same language as the other Indians. They are very diminutive, the
tallest but two cubits high, the majority only one and one-half. They
let their hair grow very long--down to their knees and even lower.
They have the largest beards anywhere to be seen, and when these have
grown sufficiently long and copious, they no longer wear clothing, but
let the hair of the head fall down their backs far below the knee,
while in front are their beards trailing down to their very feet. When
their hair has thus thickly enveloped their whole body they bind it
round them with a zone and so make it serve for a garment. They are
snub-nosed and otherwise ill-favored. Their sheep are of the size of
our lambs, and their oxen and asses rather smaller than our rams. Three
thousand men attend the king of the Indians on account of their great
skill in archery. They are eminently just and have the same laws as the
other Indians.”

This may be a description of the Kiratas, whose district is east of
Bengal in the Himalaya foothills.

There were vague reports in the classic world of other pygmy peoples
far to the southeast in Asia. The Chinese records make these more
definite. The _Hill and Sea Classic_ describes the Chiau Yau, a tribe
of cap-wearing pygmies three cubits (3 feet 3 inches) high whose
country was east of the country of the Three-headed Men. This is
perhaps the country now inhabited by the Yau tribes, who are short
of stature and may be this long-sought-for pygmy race. Individuals
of the Chiau Yau tribe, “diminutive black slaves,” were sent to the
Chinese court from the coasts of Indo-China in the reign of Ming Tu
(A.D. 58-76). There was also a pygmy people whom the Annamese called
the Phong. They were only two cubits, or twenty-six inches, high,
and although they were cave dwellers a fragrant perfume emanated
from their skins. As hunters they paid their dues to the state in
camphor, rhinoceros horns, and elephant tusks. Both of these races
Gerini locates in “the mysterious country of the pygmies” in French
Indo-China, between the Mekong and the Black rivers, under the
twenty-first parallel of north latitude. North of this district on the
Red River dwell the dark, dwarfish Pu-lu tribes which seem to be the
remnants of a once widely spread pygmy race. The Santom aborigines of
Yun-nan and Laos are also of inferior stature, with flat faces and
black skins. In China itself ancient writings speak of the black dwarfs
of Shantung province as early as the twenty-third century B.C.

Perhaps the first record of the Aetas, or Philippine negritos, appears
in Chao Fu-Kua, a Chinese author of the early thirteenth century, who
told of a tribe of small black men with frizzly hair, round yellow
eyes, and teeth that showed through their lips, who lived in remote
valleys of the archipelago. A Chinese work on novelties, published
in 1636, has several passages on the black dwarfs of Cochin-China.
Anywhere from Annam to Siam, it says, “there are pygmies whose stature
is not over three feet seven inches, who are regarded as of animal
origin, who sell themselves for longer or shorter periods to dealers in
aloes. When engaged they are provisioned, supplied with hatchets and
saws, and sent into the mountains. These dwarfs are very submissive and
servile.”

Ibn Khordadbeh and Idrisi tell of the Rami, a pygmy race of Sumatra,
who go naked, find shelter in thickets, avoid intercourse with other
people, and use a hissing speech. They are swift runners and adept tree
climbers. They have red frizzly hair and a stature of but three feet.
Curled hair of this color had been ascribed from the seventh century
A.D. to the clawed negrito savages on the east coast of the Malay
Peninsula, and a traveler of the last generation reports hairy dwarfs
on the southwest coast of Sumatra. Dunashki (about A.D. 1300) has this
note: “When ships approach Volcano Island at the beginning of a squall,
tiny black dwarfs, five spans (nearly four feet) or less in stature,
resembling negroes, appear and climb aboard, without harming anyone.”
All three of these travel notes may be reflected in the incident in the
third voyage of Sindbad, when his ship, driven by a storm amid strange
islands, is boarded by “an innumerable multitude of frightful savages
about two feet high, covered all over with red hair,” who compel the
crew to follow them to the palace of a giant cannibal.

Accounts of several other travelers bring the pygmy tradition down
to the era of modern disbelief. Odoric, the fourteenth-century
missionary monk, reports that the Yangste Kiang waters the Country of
the Pygmies, whom he describes as an innumerable folk, three spans
high, and foremost of all cotton workers. Their city of Chatan is one
of the fairest of places. Æthicus of Istria declares that he sailed
northwest from Ceylon and passed, among other islands in the Northern
Sea, Bridinno, the land of dwarfs. Marco Polo tells how pygmies were
fabricated from monkeys in Sumatra and sold to curio collectors.

Maundeville makes the pygmies subject to “the great Chan.” “The River
Dalay,” he says, “goeth through the land of Pygmies, where that the
Folk be of little Stature, and be but three Span long, and they be
right fair and gentle. And they marry them when they be half a Year of
Age and get Children. And they live not but six Year or seven at the
most; and he that liveth eight Year, Men hold him there right passing
old. These Men be workers of Gold, Silver, Cotton, Silk and of all such
Things, the best of any other that be in the World.” Men of larger size
work their lands and mines for them.

In another passage Sir John populates an isle with “Little Folk,” who
have no mouths and only an adder speech. Pigafetta, who went with the
Magellan expedition around the world and wrote its story, reports two
races of dwarfs in the Philippines, one with gigantic ears. The latter
were shaven, naked, shrill-voiced troglodytes, whose food was the sago
tree.

Ludovico Varthema, an Italian Mohammedan, a contemporary of Columbus
and a wide-ranging traveler, tells an incident of his pilgrimage to
Mecca, which may or may not shed light on the moot question of the
Middle Ages and since, as to what became of the lost Ten Tribes. There
was a mountain in the Hedjaz, he said, inhabited by pygmy Jews, color
black, who skipped from crag to crag like goats--he watched them from a
distance--and when they caught a Moslem skinned him alive.

In Madagascar in 1770 the French naturalist Commerson, who accompanied
Bougainville in his voyage around the world, found evidences of a
pygmy tribe with an average stature of three and a half feet, all
traces of which vanished in the following century. His report was
corroborated by Count de Modave, governor of Fort Dauphin. The men of
this tribe wore long beards and were workers in iron and steel, of
which they made lances and assagais. They were brave pacifists. When
from their mountain homes they saw a formidable force approaching on
the plains below, they drove down such cattle as they could spare to
the entrances of their defiles to purchase immunity from invasion. If,
however, the enemy entered these defiles, the little folk savagely
attacked them.

Near to the country of the warrior women in South America, said the
Spaniards, was pygmy land. Peru has traditions of a race not over two
cubits high. California Indians tell of a witch-like little people in
the redwood forest. The Arapahoes tell of dark-skinned, pot-bellied,
cannibal dwarfs who were only three feet high but strongly made, and
skillful trackers. They could carry buffaloes on their backs, so the
Crows said of the small folk that once roved Montana. In the Gila
Canyon in New Mexico there have been exhumed the mummies of a true
pygmy people, some of them scarcely three feet long, with cerements
of woven cloth, sandals of yucca fiber and ornaments of hummingbird
feathers; legend speaks of thievish dwarfs who lived in underground
houses and sometimes came to the cities for supplies. D’Orbigny
described, in 1831, the so-called Chiquitos, or Little Folk, who
inhabit the heights on the divide between the Mamore and Paraguay
rivers. The men he measured averaged only four feet ten inches, which
brings them within strict pygmy requirements--not over four feet eleven
inches. They are a broad-shouldered, robust Indian people, hospitable,
sociable, musical. D’Orbigny estimated their number at about twenty
thousand. No recent traces have been found of the Ayamanes whom
Friedemann met in the northern Andes regions and who, he said, were no
more than “five empans,” or three feet four inches, high.

There is a Chinese legend that in the remote northern mountains of the
old empire there has lived for seventeen centuries a race of hairy
dwarfs. Inscriptions on the Great Wall are said to recite that whenever
one of the millions of laborers who were building it was found to have
made a mistake in his work, he was imbedded alive in the wall at the
place of his error. About A.D. 210, the story continues, a body of
workmen rebelled at the custom, and with their families fled to distant
forests where their descendants still live. The hardships of their
journey and their rude surroundings brought these people down to the
pygmy level.

It is asserted that there is a race of dwarfs in Morocco in the Atlas
Mountains whose existence the Moors have kept secret for three thousand
years because they are regarded as holy men, and great saints who bring
good luck to towns. “Our Blessed Lord,” the people call a dwarf. “It
is a sin to speak about them to you,” one Moor said to a traveler. The
Moorish silence is declared to be the remnant of a superstition older
than the Mohammedan religion.

These pygmy stories, of perhaps twenty-seven centuries so far as the
record goes, of at least double that period if unwritten tradition
be included, have been brought together here in order to assess the
scientific reaction to them. Some of them on their face are completely
fabulous, some have an admixture of truth, some are good enough
history. To all except the very latest of them the scientific reaction
was unfavorable until a deluge of facts made this attitude impossible.

Strabo among the ancients was in his rights when he complained that
nobody had seen any pygmies, but his facts were incomplete, for long
before his day civilized peoples had seen them. Browne summarizes
in his stiff but elegant English the unbelief of the scholars of
the Renaissance: “Julius Scaliger, a diligent enquirer, accounts
thereof, but as a poetical fiction. Ulysses Aldrovandus, a most exact
geographer, in an express discourse hereon, concludes the story
fabulous and a poetical account of Homer. Albertus Magnus, a man
ofttimes too credulous, herein was more than dubious; for he affirmeth
if any such dwarfs were ever extant, they were surely some kind of
apes; which is a conceit allowed by Cardan and not esteemed improbable
by many others.” “There is as much reality,” concludes Browne, “in the
pygmies of Paracelsus, that is, his non-adamical men, or middle natures
betwixt men and spirits.”

Two towering names in natural history, Buffon and Cuvier, are ranged
against the pygmy tradition. Here is Buffon’s conclusion: “Deceived by
some optical illusion, the ancient historians gravely mention whole
nations of pygmies as existing in remote quarters of the world. The
more accurate observation of the moderns, however, convinces us that
these accounts are entirely fabulous. The existence, therefore, of
a pygmy race of mankind, being founded in error or in fable, we can
expect to find men of diminutive stature only by accident, among men
of the ordinary size.”

Buffon’s explanation of the fable that the pygmies war with the cranes
is so plausible that men would accept it, as his own generation did,
if they did not know that these little folk are human and not simian.
Even so, there may be truth in the theory advanced. “One knows,” says
Buffon, “that the monkeys, which go in large bands in Africa and India,
carry on continual warfare against birds; they seek to surprise their
nests, and without ceasing prepare ambushes for them. The storks defend
themselves vigorously. But the monkeys, anxious to carry off the eggs
and the young birds, return constantly, and in bands, to the combat;
and as by their tricks, their feints and movements they seem to imitate
human actions, they would appear to ignorant people to be a band of
little men. Behold the origin and the history of these fables!”

Roulin was equally ingenious in his explanation of the pygmy
populations and their campaigns against the birds. He noted the squat
frames of the Lapps and Eskimos who dwell within, or not far from, the
Arctic Circle. The pygmies, he decided, were a circumpolar population.
Homer placed their home and their battles at the southern end of the
crane path; Roulin placed them at the northern terminus, in that
Scythia of misty boundaries one of which was supposed to be the boreal
ocean. Pliny had told that every year the pygmies rode down to the
seashore to destroy the eggs and young of the cranes. Very well, here
was the story explained, for every year the Lapps and Eskimos come down
to the sea and return to the interior, and these people partly subsist
on the eggs of aquatic birds.

Cuvier is reproachful of Pliny. “I am not surprised,” he says, “at
finding the pygmies in the works of Homer; but to find them in Pliny
I am surprised indeed.” The great French naturalist has contributed
more, perhaps, than any other man to find the basis of truth or the
source of error in classic fables. His explanation of the pygmy legend,
like that of Buffon, is more convincing almost than truth itself, but
its teaching is error. He finds the source of a fable in a flattering
convention of ancient sculpture: “The custom of exhibiting in the same
sculpture, in bas-relief, men of very different heights--of making
kings and conquerors gigantic while their subjects and vassals are
represented as only one-fourth or one-fifth of their size--must have
given rise to the fable of the pygmies.”

Cuvier died in 1832. Chambers’ _Journal_ in 1844 voiced with less
reserve the unbelief of that period. In a scoffing article it declares
that “the world has long been haunted with the idea that somewhere in
Africa there is a nation of Tom Thumbs”; but “the grand difficulty
about the African nation of dwarfs is the fact that not a single
specimen has been seen either in Abyssinia or Egypt.” “The pygmy dream,
one of the last lingering superstitions of travel, has been puffed
away,” confidently asserts this periodical. These so-called pygmies
were monkeys, not men.

In 1863 Paul du Chaillu explored the coast lands of West Africa and
in 1871 published the results in _The Country of the Dwarfs_. The
scientific skepticism of the ages delivered its last stroke in the
attacks that met this book, for already, although the world did not
know it, Schweinfurth, farther east in the equatorial region, had
reviewed an entire pygmy army. The _London Graphic_ wonders whether
or not “Mr. du Chaillu means us to accept the book as a bona-fide
narrative of what he has himself seen.” Thus cautiously this periodical
registers its doubts: “The first part of the book reads very much
like other descriptions of African exploration; but further on Mr. du
Chaillu represents himself as having arrived at the country of the
dwarfs, whom he considers to be identical with the supposed fabulous
pygmies. This strange race, who average only from four feet to four
feet seven inches high, live a perfectly wild life in the forests of
equatorial Africa, feeding on snakes, rats, mice, and berries. They go
entirely naked, and inhabit huts made by bending branches of trees in
the shape of a bow. The height of the huts is just enough to keep the
head of a man from touching the roof when he is seated. These dwarfs
are very shy of being seen and hold no communion with the negro tribes
about them, by whom they are called Obongos. Truly we have here a
strange tale.”

Truly, there are not only lost arts, but lost records, forgotten
histories. Forty-four centuries before du Chaillu was scoffed at for
a true tale, an authentic pygmy testimony was set down in a letter
which a king of Egypt wrote to a vassal chief, and which is still in
existence. The world believed in pygmies then because sometimes it saw
them; and their descendants still hunt the elephant in the forests of
equatorial Africa.

[Illustration: “THE SWARTHY MEN CALLED PYGMIES”]

To the Egyptians of that time the country beyond the Second Cataract
of the Nile was the Land of Ghosts, whence the negroes brought to the
markets of Assuan strange stories of shadowy folk who dwelt there. Into
this land a prince of Elephantine named Herkhuf marched with a little
force. An account of his journey has been written by Arthur E. P.
Weigall, of the Department of Antiquities of Egypt.

In the country which Herkhuf penetrated he found pygmies dwelling, and
one he secured. He sent word back to the boy Pharaoh, Pepy II, and had
from him a letter believed to be the earliest example of a private
communication. Yet life still throbs through its lines and the colors
glow in the picture of an excited royal lad awaiting the coming of this
wonder of the south, directing that his meals shall be ample, that his
slumbers shall be guarded, and that on taking ship at Memphis there
shall be men to see he does not fall into the water. The Pharaoh’s
letter follows:

“You say in your letter that you have brought a dancing pygmy of the
god from the Land of Ghosts, like the pygmy which the Treasurer Baurded
brought from the Land of Pount in the time of Asesa. You say to my
majesty, ‘Never before has one like him been brought by anyone who has
visited Aam.’ Come northward, therefore, to the court immediately, and
bring this pygmy with you, which you must bring living, prosperous, and
healthy, from the Land of Ghosts, to dance for the King and to rejoice
and gladden the heart of the King. When he goes down with you into the
vessel, appoint trustworthy people to be beside him at either side of
the vessel: take care that he does not fall into the water. When he
sleeps at night, appoint trustworthy people who shall sleep beside him
in his cabin; and make an inspection ten times each night. My majesty
desires to see this pygmy more than the gifts of Sinai and of Pount. If
you arrive at court, the pygmy being with you, alive, prosperous, and
healthy, my majesty will do for you a greater thing than that which was
done for the Treasurer Baurded in the time of Asesa, according to the
heart’s desire of my majesty to see this pygmy. Orders have been sent
to the chief of the New Towns to arrange that food shall be taken from
every store-city and every temple (on the road) without stinting.”

A Nubian Highway, so Weigall calls the ancient road down which the
dancing pygmy came to civilization about B.C. 2500. In A. D. 1878 a
little farther south, Stanley followed what he calls a Pygmy Highway,
“along which quite a tribe must have passed. It was lined with amoma
fruit skins, and shells of nuts, and the crimson rinds of phrynia
berries. Our elephant and game track had brought us across another
track leading easterly from Andari, and both joined presently,
developing to a highway much patronized by the pygmy tribes. We could
tell where they had stopped to light their pipes, and to crack nuts,
and trap game, and halted to gossip. The twigs were broken three feet
from the ground, showing that they were snapped by dwarfs. Where it was
a little muddy the path showed high, delicate insteps, proving their
ancient ancestry and aristocratic descent, and small feet not larger
than those of young English misses of eight years old.” Later Stanley
met individuals of this tribe.

These were the Akkas, or Mambuti, the same pygmy tribe, it would
appear, whose sculptured reliefs on monuments of Egypt going back as
far as B.C. 3366 were dwarfed, so Cuvier had thought, merely to make a
conqueror seem larger than life and indicate their own inferior estate.
When a regiment of several hundred of these little warriors marched
behind Moummeri in 1870 to do homage to Munza, the East African negro
monarch, the pygmy tradition marched with them out of the mists of
fable across the border of geographical knowledge. For Schweinfurth, a
European explorer, was there to behold these “grasshopper warriors,” as
he called them.

The revolution in scientific opinion since that day appears in the
statement that the ninth edition of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_
prints one paragraph about the pygmies, nearly all of which is an
exposition of myths and a statement of doubts, while the eleventh
edition prints two full pages of ascertained facts.

Although science always balked at the name of pygmy and refused as long
as it could to admit that the African forests concealed a race of tiny
men, yet the world had long known something of the little peoples.
The Spaniards rightly reported that pygmy Indians had lived in Peru,
and they found negritos in the Philippines. Although Arab traders gave
the Andamans a wide berth because, as they believed, these islands
contained cannibals and no cocoanuts, yet they knew even before the
Middle Ages that a dwarfish people dwelt there. The Dutch found the
Bushmen when they settled South Africa, and hunted them for sport as
if they were jackals; they found also the still smaller Vaalpens, or
“dusty-bellies.” The Lapps of Russia and Scandinavia were known to
mediæval travelers, who were terrified by their diminutive stature
and witch repute. These mongoloid people, whose mean stature is only
five feet, and their kinsmen, the Eskimos, who are a little taller,
are, however, not classified among the true pygmies, a term which an
arbitrary convention restricts to Little Black Men.

The pygmies of Asia and Oceania are called negritos, the pygmies of
equatorial Africa negrillos. They vary by tribes in average height from
four feet eight inches to five feet two inches, with the women smaller
and many individuals only a little above four feet. A full-grown
Akka adult, says Stanley, may weigh ninety pounds. Another explorer
estimated the average weight of six of these adults at seventy-seven
pounds and found that two of them weighed but fifty-three pounds apiece.

Wherever seen, the tribes of little people have certain things in
common beside their stature. One of these is their discontinuous
distribution. They do not adjoin each other in a continuous zone of
population as the taller races do, but are dotted here and there
across the earth like islands in a sea of alien populations. Always
they occupy the less desirable districts. The Spaniards called the
Philippine pygmies Negritos del Monte, for they had retired before the
Malays to the mountain gorges. The Lapps rove the tundras of northern
Europe. The Bushmen dwell in the deserts of South Africa. The Akkas
inhabit the steaming forests of equatorial Africa, in parallels of
latitude deadly to the white man. The Batwas live on volcanic uplands
in the Tanganyika country. In the Malay Peninsula and New Guinea, one
seeks in vain for littoral-dwelling negritos; they have been driven
inland and to the mountain recesses.

Almost everywhere the little people somewhat resemble in feature
the races that surround them. This is due to unions, temporary or
otherwise, between the pygmy women and the men of the neighbor
tribes, by which various streams of strange blood have poured into
the veins of the lesser stock. Among the Lapps of earlier generations
it almost seemed as if it were conscious tribal policy to promote
a taller stature by encouraging women and girls to form irregular
connections with men of other European races. There is Bushman blood
in the Hottentots, or Hottentot blood in the Bushmen. In the so-called
Bastards of the Kalahari Desert--a term whereof the wearers are
proud because it concedes to them a Caucasian strain--the blood of
the Bushmen meets the blood of the Boers in the halfway house of the
Hottentot.

Herbert Long, who spent six years in Central Africa with an expedition
from the American Museum of Natural History, notes in its _Journal_ for
1919 the fact that the pygmy men he saw were often much taller than
their mates, and gives a reason, that may explain the same phenomenon
in related tribes. Comely pygmy girls enter the harems of the chiefs of
the tall negro tribes. Their half-breed sons are sent back to their own
people. Since women are valuable chattels, the daughters are retained
by the father’s tribe. The custom increases pygmy prestige; but the
little men must not wed the women of their tall friends.

The small black folk of the forest have thus won a right to the marked
regional resemblance they bear to the larger black folk of the yam and
breadfruit clearings, whom they serve as scouts against the approach of
an enemy and as allies in forest warfare. “In western Africa, as in the
Philippines and in the two Gangetic peninsulas,” asserts Quatrefages,
“the pygmies have played an ethnological rôle, at times important,
in crossing with superior races and in giving birth to half-breed
populations.” The Pandavas, or heroes of the oldest Indian times, set
the example of these unions with lower races.

The Dravidians of southern India, Quatrefages declares, occupy the
territory formerly populated by the negritos--and carry their blood.
He also thinks that the blood of these little blacks shows itself in
the skin and stature of natives in parts of Japan. Relics of a pygmy
race are supposed to exist in Sicily and Sardinia, “along the highroad
between Pleistocene Africa and Europe”; fifteen per cent of the men
of South Italy and Sardinia are rejected for military service because
less than sixty-one and one half inches high. South of Salamanca in
western Spain, the valley called Las Jurdes is peopled by men and women
said to be little more than three feet high, whose shrunken stature is
attributed to unwholesome surroundings.

No true pygmy race has developed a pronounced nose bridge, and only
the lozenge-faced Bushmen have salient chins. Among nearly all of the
tribes there is a deficiency in the fatty tissues which affect the
skin, so that, even before old age comes, they present a wrinkled
appearance as if the skin fitted too loosely. This is true even of the
Lapps. The countenances of these northern dwarfs are mongoloid, but
without the slanting eyes of the Chinese and Tartars, and their heads
are the roundest of any race of men. The negrito and negrillo tribes
have rounder heads than the tall negroes. The bodies of many of the
little people in Central Africa and New Guinea are covered with a downy
growth. Pygmy complexions show olive in the Lapps, light yellow in the
Bushmen, yellow brown in the Indonesians, dark brown in the negritos of
the Andamans and Philippines, and among the Akkas, as Schweinfurth puts
it, the color of coffee slightly roasted.

Small hands and in some cases small feet characterize these tribes, and
grown girls of the Bushmen show, under measurement, feet but little
more than four inches long. Their bodies are long in proportion to
their legs, and the legs are slim. The mid-point of the body is above
the navel instead of below, as it is in the tall races. The pygmies
of Africa are pot-bellied; this is due to diet, and is corrected by
regular and wholesome food.

In other respects the pygmies differ from the rest of mankind chiefly
in what they lack. Save in the case of the Semangs of the Malay
Peninsula they may have no separate language; and they use always the
speech of their taller neighbors. There is no pygmy state, or king,
and often no tribal organization; even among the Lapps there was a
nomad tribe called the “twice and thrice tributary Lapps,” because
its members paid tribute to two, sometimes to three states--Russia,
Denmark, and Sweden. The Andaman negritos and the Akkas of the West
African Rain Forest are the only races that never devised a means of
making fire, though both know its use. The Andamanese are also the only
people that never made a musical instrument and the only people that
never domesticated a food animal or cultivated a plant.

One or two things, however, may be said for the culture of the little
folk. There are no pygmy cannibals. Although the Bushman houses, mere
mats suspended on stakes, are the most primitive known, yet these are
the most skilled artists in South Africa, and some of their figures
suggest that they may have known hieroglyphic writing. All the little
peoples treat their women kindly, and reverence gray hairs. The
Andamanese are monogamous and believe in an omniscient deity. On the
other hand, the highest religious concept among the polygamous Akkas
is of a pygmy devil. The Bushmen live in a state approaching sexual
promiscuity; it used to be the custom, when a man wished a temporary
mate, to kidnap a small child, and the mother would follow the child
into his home. The Andamanese have the peculiar custom of manifesting
joy by weeping, and it is said the Veddahs never laugh.

No certain statements may be made as to the aggregate numbers of the
dwarf nations. There are about 50,000 Bushmen, 27,000 Lapps, 20,000
Aetas, 2,000 Mincoupies, 2,000 Veddahs. It may be that the equatorial
pygmies are half as numerous as the Aetas. Everywhere the number of
these people is diminishing.

As to their origin and the cause of their shrunken stature, there is
no agreement among ethnologists. The small blacks may have come into
existence in South India and spread thence east and west, peopling
Melanesia and Africa. Once they formed a belt of population clear
across equatorial Africa. On the evidences of crania which he examined,
Professor Kollman believes that, about b.c. 5000, they dwelt as far
down the Nile Valley as the Thebaid. The Oriental branch of the race,
pure or mixed, extends, says Quatrefages, from the extreme southeast
of New Guinea to the archipelago of the Andamans and from the Sunda
Islands to Japan, and on the Asiatic continent from Annam and the
peninsula of Malacca to the western Ghauts, and from Cape Comorin
to the Himalayas. This grandiose geography is challenged by later
scholarship.

Yet over all these wide spaces, and over the Dark Continent, pygmies
may have been the first settlers. Once it was surmised that the tall
negritoes sprang from them; but this is a moot point. To accept
it would be to assert that short stature is a primitive trait,
and that all the tall races are in this respect abnormal. British
anthropologists hold that the Bushmen are a distinct people, but
that the Congo pygmies, though of livelier intelligence than the
tall blacks, are yet special groups of the Nilotic or Bantu negroes,
arrested or degenerated by the inhospitable forest. Their diminished
stature, Stanley urges, is the result of “three thousand years of
isolation, intermarriage, and a precarious diet of fungi, wild fruit,
lean fibrous meat of animals, and dried insects; in a word, of the
utter absence of sunshine and the lack of gluten and saccharine bodies
in their food.”

Handicapping conditions may have produced the Lapps of the Arctic
Circle, the vanished Indian dwarfs of the Andes, the enigmatic Bushmen,
and the little black men of Africa, the Malay Peninsula, and various
isles of the eastern sea. But in old fables pygmyland is hard by the
country of the giants. It happens that the diminutive Lapp is neighbor
to the tall Karelian, the Bushman and Akka to the stalwart Bantu.
There are little people of the frigid zone, the tropics, and the south
temperate. There were dwarfs of rich ocean littorals as well as of the
tundra, the mountain glen, the desert, and the equatorial forest.

“I believe mankind was originally a dwarf,” says Leland. Churchward, in
his _Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man_, holds that paleolithic man
was a pygmy, “the first little earth man or red man,” and that he was
evolved near the Nile springs, and thence overspread the earth. Sign
language and articulate sounds, the Masonic writer thinks, were worked
out by these little folk. After talking with representatives of their
race, he concludes that they have a monosyllabic speech, and words
with the same sounds as the Egyptian hieroglyphs. The resemblance of
living pygmies to the long-armed, short-legged, paunchy dwarf-gods of
Egypt and Phœnicia, and notably to Bes, has been remarked. These squat
divinities may have owed their being to ancient fear of small men, the
elder brothers of historic man. Sir Harry Johnston thinks it possible
that the little blacks once overspread Europe and, by their prankish
good nature and curious power of becoming invisible in herbage and
behind rocks, gave rise to folk-tales of gnomes, kobolds, and fairies.
Kollman, the Basle anatomist, contends that the pygmies were the child
race of mankind, and that each tall race was preceded by a small one.
The common opinion, that healthy dwarf tribes have been produced by
degeneration from men of larger mold, is not fully satisfying. Yet the
oldest human skeletons found thus far are of men of normal size.

There are pygmies, but why? The one riddle succeeds the other.




Chapter XII. The Amazons of Legend


Men gave up with regret, and not so long ago, and not until they had
ransacked all the horizons of geography, the belief that somewhere in
the world there is a state of warrior women. They are reluctant to
admit, nor have they quite admitted, that there never was such a state;
and still they ransack the horizons of history and folk-lore for proof
that at one time Amazons were.

Myth has mapped the woman’s commonwealth in western Africa, in Armenia
on the Black Sea, in the Caucasus, in Russia along the lower Don, in
islands of the Baltic, the Indian Ocean, and the Caribbean, and upon
the River of the Amazons. There is report of it in Greek, Turanian,
Arab, Negro, and American legend. It figures in the poetry of Arctinus,
the history of Herodotus, the mendacities of Maundeville, the narrative
of Marco Milioni, the visions of Columbus, the journal of Orellana and
the Guiana prospectus of Raleigh.

Unlike other ancient tales, the Amazon story, instead of slowly fading,
has grown in definiteness of outline as it approached to-day. The men
who discarded utterly the belief that there is a woman state lived not
long after the men who thought the state had at last been found.

The Amazons--so runs tradition everywhere substantially the same--were
a tribe of women ruled by a queen and subsisting by the chase and by
wars of pillage. They fought both on foot and on horseback, using the
bow, the spear, the javelin, and the double-headed ax. Their garb
consisted of a short tunic clearing the knee and fastened over the left
shoulder, leaving the right breast bare. Their outlines were powerful
and beautiful. There was a dispute, never composed, between art and
etymology, as to their bosoms. The word Amazon, though of barbarian
origin, was thought to derive from _alpha_, privative, and _mazos_,
the Greek for breast. On this derivation the grammarians built up
the legend that the right breast of the women militant was either
amputated, or seared, or compressed in youth, so as not to interfere
with the recoil of the bow string. But the sculptors would not accept
this deformation, and statues and bas-reliefs represent the women
with bosoms entirely womanly. There are recent etymologies wherein
“Amazon” is supposed to mean “full busted,” “moon daughter,” “vestal,”
“girdle-bearer,” or “game-eater.”

One feature of the myth shows the working of inference. The woman
state must sustain its numbers. There must be children even if there
were no men, or the tribe would become extinct. In place of husbands,
therefore, there were what Sir Walter Raleigh called “Valentines.” Once
a year the women paid a visit to the men of neighbor tribes, or once
a year these men called on them. The women retained the girl children
born of these excursions. As to the boy children, customs differed.
In some cases the mothers nurtured them until they were weaned, and
returned them to their fathers when these came back the following year,
as always they did. In other cases the mothers put the male infants to
death, or maimed them and raised them as slaves of the state.

The Greek treatment of the myth had a certain other-worldliness. The
Amazons figured in epic events; their struggles were with demigods.
They came to the relief of Troy, and their subjugation was one of the
dozen labors of Hercules. With him they fought, and with Achilles,
and with Theseus, slayer of the Minotaur, and with Bellerophon, rider
of the winged Pegasus, and with the griffins which guarded Scythia’s
fabled gold; and they invaded Attica to attempt another _Iliad_ in
revenge for the capture of a queen. Greek sculptures and decorative
pottery show the national feeling that these were a people far removed
in time and space. The figures are beautiful, but something of
barbarian wildness animates the features. Earlier art had represented
them as bloodthirsty mænads, raiders of the borders, but the Greek
humanizing spirit wrought itself upon the legend until the story the
sculptors tell is of men’s regret that they need smite these beautiful
savages.

This spirit is in the _Æthiopis_ of Arctinus of Miletus, wherein
Amazons appear on the side of beleaguered Troy. Their queen,
Penthesilea, spreads death among the large-limbed Argives and
overwhelms Achilles with abusive words. The angered hero slays her, but
when he removes her helmet the charm of her strikes him to the heart
and he grieves over his victim.

The story, with its fine human touch, recedes into the mists in a tale
which in effect is its epilogue. After his own death and the ruin of
Troy, Achilles reigns over the isle of Leuke, an Avalon of the East
in the Black Sea at the Danube’s mouth. Thither, even to the land of
shades, the rage of the Amazons for the death of their queen follows
him. At their capital on the river Thermodon in Pontus they seize on
ships and compel the sailors to steer them to the enchanted isle. But
as they approach a temple in the grove their horses take fright and
bolt over a cliff into the sea. A terrible storm shatters the fleet and
few of the vengeful women escape.

In classic legend, there were three woman states--the countries of
the Gorgons and Amazons in the west of Libya, and an Amazon state in
the northeast of Asia Minor near the modern Trebizond; the capital
of the latter was the mythical Themiscyra on the banks of the river
Thermodon, now called the Termeh. The African Amazons subjugated the
Gorgons, and under their queen, Myrina, marched in triumph through
Egypt, Arabia, and Asia Minor into Thrace, where they were defeated and
turned back by Mopsus. Ephesus, Smyrna, Cyme, and Myrina claimed them
as their founders. This horde was wiped out by Hercules at the time
when he erected the pillar in Africa, for, says Diodorus Siculus, “it
was a thing intolerable to him, who made it his business to be renowned
all the world over, to suffer any nation to be governed any longer by
women.”

It was the Black Sea Amazons whom the Greeks mainly limned in art
and legend. These women, whose earlier home had been the Caucasus,
raided the coasts of Asia Minor and came to the relief of Troy. The
ninth labor of Hercules was to bring back the girdle of their queen,
Hippolyte, a task equivalent to the subjugation of the state. Theseus
carried off another queen, Antiope, and this led to the Amazonian
invasion of Attica; the fierce women were not halted until they had
penetrated Athens.

This expedition and that of their African sisters were interpreted by
the Greeks as allegories of barbarian menace. In the tread of Amazonian
horse they may have had a presage of the hoofs of Hunnish, Turkish,
and Tartar cavalry that in after ages was to ride across their world.
Literally taken, the tales seemed to Strabo incredible. “For who can
believe,” he asks, “that an army of women, or a city, or a nation,
could ever subsist without men, and even dispatch an expedition across
the sea to Attica? This is as much as to say that the men of those days
were women, and the women men.”

Twice, however, in the field of legend over which Strabo cast an
unbelieving backward glance, the note of reality, or perhaps of
realism, had been sounded. When Alexander the Great was in Parthia,
Thalestris, the Amazon queen, paid him a Sheba-like visit at the head
of a hundred women carrying double-headed axes and the traditional
half-moon shield. He was the bravest of men, said the lady, and she the
bravest of women. They owed a duty to posterity to raise offspring in
whom the two strains should conjoin. The appeal flattered the vanity
of the Macedonian, nor was he averse to meeting its conditions. So
runs a Greek story like unto others with which the Alexander legend
was embroidered. But Arrian explains that the so-called queen and
her followers had been sent as a present by the governor of the next
province--a time-honored Asiatic gift.

There was a battalion of death perhaps three thousand years before
the young women of Russia took the field in the World War, and those
of Poland in the war that followed it. The story is told by Herodotus
in a chapter which begins in myth and seems to pass into history. In
the opening scene three shiploads of Amazons, captured in the Attic
campaign already noted, overpower the Greek sailors and slay them all.
They let the ships drift across the Black Sea and beach on the shores
of the Palus Mæotis (Sea of Azov), where the women seize a herd of
horses. Mounting them, they fall to plundering the land of the free
Scythians. Herodotus continues:

“The Scyths could not tell what to make of the attack upon them--the
dress, the language, the nation itself were alike unknown; whence
the enemy had come, even, was a marvel. Imagining, however, that
they were all men of about the same age, they went out against them
and fought a battle. Some of the bodies of the slain fell into their
hands, whereby they discovered the truth. Hereupon they deliberated,
and made a resolve to kill no more of them, but to send against them a
detachment of their youngest men, as near as they could guess equal to
the women in number, with orders to encamp in their neighbourhood and
do as they saw them do. When the Amazons advanced against them, they
were to retire and avoid a fight. When they halted, the young men were
to approach and pitch their camp near the camp of the enemy. All this
they did on account of their strong desire to obtain children from so
notable a race.”

The Scythian youths were sent out. The Amazons saw that no harm was
meditated against them and desisted from further attack; and slowly
the romance unfolded. Day after day the camps were pitched nearer each
other, and both parties, having naught but arms and horses, supported
themselves by the chase. “At last,” says Herodotus, “an incident
brought two of them together. The man easily gained the good graces
of the woman, who bade him by signs to bring a friend the next day,
promising on her part to bring with her another woman. He did so, and
the woman kept her word. When the rest of the youths heard what had
taken place they also sought and gained the favor of the other Amazons.

“The two camps were then joined in one, the Amazons living with the
Scythians as their wives; and the men were unable to learn the tongue
of the women, but the women soon caught the tongue of the men. Then the
Scyths said: ‘We have parents and properties; let us therefore give up
this mode of life, and return to our nation, and live with them; you
shall be our wives there no less than here, and we promise you to have
no others.’”

But the young women would not go home with their husbands to live with
their mothers-in-law. “Of womanly employments we know nothing,” they
said. “To draw the bow, to hurl the javelin, to bestride the horse,
these are our arts. Your women stay at home in their wagons engaged in
womanish tasks and never go out to hunt or to do anything. We should
never agree.” So they bade the bridegrooms go back to their parents,
ask for their inheritances, and return. This the youths did, and
then the Amazons told them they could no more get along with their
fathers than with their mothers. They had stolen horses and wasted the
ancestral lands. “As you like us for wives,” they pleaded, “grant the
request that we leave the country together, and go and dwell beyond the
Tanais” (the river Don).

Again the Scythian youths consented, and all fared to a region three
days’ journey east and three north of the Sea of Azov. Thus was founded
the race of Sarmatians. From that day to this, concludes Herodotus, the
Sarmatian women ride with their husbands in the chase, and in war take
the field with them. Nor does a girl marry until she has killed a man
in battle, so that among them are women of advanced years, celibates
because they have never struck down a foe. Also, the Sarmatians do not
speak the tongue of Scythia correctly, because the Amazons learned it
incorrectly at the first.

At least the topography of the tale has been confirmed. Sarmatia is the
ancient name of Poland and Niebuhr has traced the westward drift of
the tribes from the Don steppes to the great Hungarian plain, whence
they overspread Poland and Russia. One could wish to believe that Maria
Botchkareva, commander of the Battalion of Death that took the field
against Germany when the manhood of Soviet Russia faltered and grounded
arms, is of the high Amazonian strain.

The Indian epic of the _Mahabharata_ has a similar tale, although in
less realistic vein. There was a religious rite known as the Aswamedha,
in which a leader would loose a horse, and follow it for a twelvemonth
into whatever adventures and countries it might go--a quest entailing
wanderings and warrings. Rajah Arjuna of the Gangetic city of Hatusapur
took the pledge, and in the fifth stage of his adventure followed the
ranging horse into the Country of Women. He entered it with heavy
heart, knowing its danger.

These were not like other women, but rakshasis, or goblin women. Their
queen, the Rani Paranunta, was a beautiful young creature, and so were
all her women. But their customs were worse than Circean. When men
entered the land they were kindly entreated and beguiled into remaining
for a month or more; and, indeed, there were guards to prevent their
escape. After thirty days they were killed, and such of the women as
had entertained them, but were not expectant mothers, took their own
lives--the suttee. Thus was it assured that the Country of Women should
always be also the Country of Young Women.

The roving rajah and his train were gloomily pondering these customs
when they saw a troop of Amazons appear, and lead away the Aswamedha
horse to the stables of their queen. These were young girls, all
between the ages of fifteen and sixteen, arrayed in pearls and rich
stuffs, with bows in their hands and quivers at their waists and proud
horses under them. Among them rode their queen on an elephant. And she
bade Arjuna to cease his quest. “Become my slave, drink with me, and
pass your time in pleasure,” said the young Rani.

Arjuna reminded her that this was an invitation to die thirty days
later. To which the Rani replied that really it should make little
difference to him: “If you resist me you fall by my arrows; if you
remain you have to face the light of my eyes.” Already her beauty had
overcome his heart, but his mind made a last appeal. Let her permit him
to fulfill his vow and he would come back to wed her and would find
noble husbands for all her women. The young queen liked the speech and
sped him on his way to other adventures, and the tale itself to its
ultimate happy ending.

In a fortified palace in an iron city of Ceylon--Hiouen Thsang tells
the story--dwelt other goblin women to the number of five hundred.
On their towers flags flew to attract passing ships. When merchants
were sighted, the rakshasis took the form of beautiful maidens holding
flowers and strewing scents, and with music welcomed them to the iron
city. There was a prelude of wanton pleasure and then the strangers
were shut up in an iron prison and devoured at leisure.

Hither came Simhala, prince of the merchants, and five hundred of the
trader-folk, while the lucky signals waved on the towers of the siren
host. Simhala mated with their queen, and each of the men found a
companion, and of each union a son was born. But an evil dream came to
the prince, and he went in the night to the iron stronghold, whence a
captive’s voice told him who the women were and what he might expect.
If he would escape, there was a divine horse on the seaboard that would
carry him away.

The next scene shows the goblin women, each with her child, questing
the air in search of their fugitive husbands and by blandishments
persuading them to return. Simhala alone stands out. But his deserted
queen, hastening before him to his father’s house, wins the elder man
for her husband, and then brings on the demon women for a carnival of
death. In the morning the royal ministers find in the palace hall no
living thing, but only gnawed bones. The remainder of the story tells
of the vengeance of the son in a second expedition to the Isle of Gems.

“Then,” says the narrative, “the rakshasis were driven back, and fled
precipitately to rocky isles of the sea.” There for a while we must
seek the warrior women.

Marco Polo found them “about five hundred miles toward the south in the
ocean” from Sind. Here were two islands thirty miles apart, supposed
by modern geographers to be the Two Sisters lying near Socotra. One,
inhabited solely by men, was called the Island of Males; the other,
inhabited solely by women, was called the Island of Females. In March,
April, and May the men lived with the women, and at the same time sowed
grain in the fields. The rest of the year, because of the climate, the
men lived in their own island, knowing that if they stayed with the
women it would be “at the risk of falling a sacrifice.”

In Siamese folk-lore the Amazon island is farther to the east, in
the Mergui archipelago, where lies the Country of Widows, or See-Saw
Country of Widows--a vanishing city where are women only, and nothing
can float on water. Still farther east, legend--Arabic, mediæval,
and modern--tells of women commonwealths in Engano; in the “Sea of
Malatu,” identified as a bay of North Borneo; and in an island not far
from Samar in the eastern Philippines. Even in the Ladrones and the
Carolines the Jesuits heard of female islands. Pigafetta was told by a
pilot of an island called Acoloro, which lies below Java Major, where
are found no persons but women, and these become pregnant from the
wind. They kill their male offspring and any men who visit their island.

The name of California, borne by an American state, was given by
mediæval legend to an Amazon island “on the right hand of the Indies
very near to the terrestrial paradise.” Although troglodytes, the
pirate women who inhabited it lived luxuriously. Their arms and armor
were of gold and their caves were richly tapestried and adorned with
gems and feather-work, won by plunder of passing ships.

In the _Arabian Nights_ the Amazon legend becomes entangled in other
myths. Hassan el Bassorah loves and weds a strange and beautiful woman,
but she flies away to the farthest of an archipelago of seven islands
ruled by her father. He has an army of twenty-five thousand women,
“smiters with swords and lungers with lances.” The daughter queens it
over the island of Wak-wak. Here there is a forest the trees of which
bear fruit with the faces of the sons of Adam. When the sun arises,
these exclaim, “Wak-wak, Glory to the Creating King,” and when it sets,
“Wak-wak, Glory to God.”

Lane, translator of the _Thousand and One Nights_, adds a note that
the island of Wak-wak, familiar to Arab legend, lay near Borneo. A
queen swayed it and her warriors were beautiful women. Even the trees
bore women who hung by their hair from the branches and syllabled,
“Wak-wak”; if their hair was severed, they died. Another editor,
Burton, holds that there were two Wak-waks. One was the peninsula of
Guardafui where the pagan Gallas cried “Wak” as the Moslems cried
“Allah”; the vocal fruit tree was the calabash tree, “a vegetable
elephant,” the gourds of which hang by slender filaments. The other
Wak-wak was an island identified as Madagascar, as Malacca, and as
Sumatra. Sometimes the Cantonese speak of Japan as Wo-kwok, and in
New Guinea birds of paradise, settling on trees, are supposed to cry
out “Wak-wak.” This is also the name of the Falcon-man among the
First People of American myth, and of Philippine sorcerers who could
disconnect their legs and fly about like bats.

The narrative of Maundeville brings legend west again. Beside the Land
of Chaldea is the Land of Amazonia. The woman state emerged when the
king and all his nobles were slain in war. The high-born relicts slew
all the men left, “for they would that all the Women were Widows as
they were.” Thereafter, “they never would suffer Man to dwell amongst
them longer than seven Days and seven Nights,” and when they met their
lovers in neighboring realms they lived with them only “an eight Days
or ten.” These “wise noble and worthy Women” fought valiantly as
mercenary soldiers for neighbor states.

There was an island of women in the Baltic, according to Adam of
Bremen, but he perhaps confused Gwenland, or Fenland, with the land of
gwens--that is to say, the land of women.

That there was an Amazon nation in America the Chinese were first to
report. Buddhist travelers of the sixth century told of a Land of
Women beyond the Pacific in what may have been Mexico. Of this report
the Spaniards knew nothing when they gave the legend a home in the
Caribbean Sea, in islands that were halfway houses in time and space to
its wild but splendid domicile on the mainland of South America.

The maps which Columbus knew had drawn into their contours of the
Orient the outlines of various islands of women. In the Catalan map of
1375 the _regio feminarum_ was placed in Ceylon. The fifteenth-century
Catalan map placed the _insula de bene faminill_ in the west of the
Indian Ocean and off the African coast. A map of 1489 now in the
British Museum had the _insula mulierum_ and the _insula virorum_
not far from Zanzibar. These were islands of the east, and Columbus
thought he was sailing into the east, and he had with him the _Travels_
of Marco Polo with their account of the isles of men and women. It
was confirmation of his hopes that shortly after his landfall in the
Bahamas the natives spoke, or seemed to speak, of the island of women.

Through January and February of 1493 the journal of Columbus has much
to say of the _Isla de Mugeres_, of which many Indians had told him.
Its name was Madanino, the modern island of Montserrat. There was a
companion island of men called Carib, a dozen leagues away. Columbus
wanted to visit both, although the men were cannibals, and to carry
away a few of the Amazons as a present to his sovereigns. But somehow
he never made this expedition.

On the second voyage Columbus unwittingly touched at another island of
women. It was Guadeloupe, where “abundance of women [his son Ferdinand
is the narrator] came out of a wood, with bows and arrows and feathers,
as if they would defend their island.” They were naked, with long hair
falling over their shoulders. The admiral sent two Haytian women
swimming ashore to barter for food. The armed women bade them go to the
north side of the island “where their husbands were.” But a landing
party of Spaniards brought back ten women and three boys--and report of
an adventure. One of the captives, wife of a cacique, had been pursued
by a swift-footed Canaryman, and him she threw down and had nearly
throttled before his companions pulled her off. Although nimble, the
women were excessively fat, “and there were some thicker than a man
could grasp.”

The cacique’s wife told the Spaniards that the island was inhabited
only by women, and that four men they had seen were there by chance
from another island; “for at a certain time in the year they come to
sport with them.” There was another Amazon island called “Matrimonio.”
Having seen the prowess of these women, the admiral readily believed
their stories. He dismissed them with presents, but the Amazonian
wrestler had conceived a passion for a Haytian prince whom he held
captive, and remained with the Spaniards.

Other explorers after Columbus mistook for Amazons various island women
who fought them when their husbands were away. The conquistadors even
imagined that the convents of Mexican virgins, who followed the austere
rule of Quetzalcoatl, were Amazon barracks in which, at seasons, men
were made welcome. Thus by a succession of reports the stage was
prepared for the revelation made by Orellana, when in 1542 he slipped
away with a party of men from the spice-hunter, Gonzalo Pizarro, who
was encamped near the headwaters of the great river--from that time
forth called the River of the Amazons--and descended its broadening
bosom to the sea.

At the mouth of its affluent, the Rio Negro, Orellana had a spirited
fight with a band led by a number of women. An Indian captured farther
downstream told him that this was a district of women. Their five
Houses of the Sun were plated with gold, their dwellings were of
gold, and strong walls encompassed their cities; and their country
was neighbor to El Dorado. This story, brought back to Europe with
much corroborative detail, inflamed it, and Spain gave its author a
commission to conquer and colonize the lands he had skirted afloat. But
he died on his outward passage, and these lands, falling within the
territories of Portugal, Spain had no profit of them.

Thenceforth the legend of the American Amazons followed its curious
course for three centuries, while the credulity and cupidity of men
wove for it a background bizarre in its colors and stiff with fabled
gold.

Raleigh’s is the best account--such a recital as must interest his
sovereign, the Virgin Queen. The nations of these warlike women, he
said, were on the south side of a northern affluent of the Amazon in
the province of Topago, “and their chiefest strengths and retracts are
in the Islands situated on the South side of the entrance some sixty
leagues within the mouth of the sayd river. They accompany with men
but once in a yere, and for the time of one moneth, which I gather by
their relation to be in April; and that time all kings of the borders
assemble, and queenes of the Amazones; and after the queenes have
chosen, the rest cast lots for their Valentines. This one moneth, they
feed, dance, and drinke of their wines in abundance; and the Moone
being done, they all depart to their owne provinces.

“It was farther tolde me, that if in the warres they took any
prisoners, that they used to accompany with those also at what time
soever, but in the end for certeine they put them to death; for they
are sayd to be very cruell and bloodthirsty, especially to such as
offer to invade their territories. These Amazones have likewise great
store of these plates of golde, which they recover by exchange chiefly
for a kinde of greene stones which the Spaniards call Piedras hijades,
and we use for spleene stones.”

Even without the imported wealth of Old World legend--the tales of
pygmies and vampires and headless folk with which adventurers decorated
their narrative--it was a singular backdrop of tradition before which
the female warriors of America were paraded. Through its colors ran the
primitive lusts of men--for gold and women. The English sought gold,
the Indians sought women, and the Spaniards, so Raleigh said, sought
both gold and women. The natives were fighting over women a succession
of Trojan wars, in which copper-hued Helens passed back and forth as
the booty of the victors. Indian nobles with a dozen wives envied the
polity of other tribes where the caciques had half a hundred apiece.
When Raleigh asked Topiawara’s people what he should wrest from the
Epuremi, they replied “their women for us, and their gold for you.”

Of such a world anything might be true, and Amazon proof kept coming.
The soldiers of de Agira, as Lopez Vaz records, “did finde that to be
true which Orellana had reported, that there were Amazons, but these
women fight to aide their husbands.” Father de Acunha, who went with
Teixera on his great journey of exploration, asserted (1698) that
the large ladies of fable had “treasures enough to enrich the entire
world.” Their realm was the summits of the Cordilleras of Guiana. The
males of the neighboring Guacaris were “the happy tribe which enjoys
the favor of the valiant Amazons,” and these dwelt well up the sides
of the mountains where the women throned it. When the men made their
yearly call, their hostesses met them on the frontier with arms in
their hands, which, however, they soon put aside. Each Amazon chose a
hammock at random from the canoes of the men, and its owner followed
her to her lodge.

Brazilian folk-lore fitted into the legend. The devil-mask of the
Jurupary is supposed to represent the mythical hero who came from the
Antilles and overthrew the Amazons. All along their great river bands
of women attacked him, but, like another Hercules, he destroyed them
utterly. The cuirass of the conqueror became a sacred mask, and it was
said that Indian women would hide in the forests rather than look upon
it, so poignant was its reminder of their overthrow.

In another story, found upon the middle Amazon, the Indian women
abandoned their lords and retired to the hills, taking one old man with
them. The oldster became the father of all children born to them, and
only girl babies were reared. One mother, however, had a crippled son,
and in pity she secreted and reared him, and cured his deformity. When
his retreat was discovered there began, says Rothery, a long and tender
persecution from the women, though the boy remained unmoved. To escape
this he agreed that his mother should throw him into a lake, where he
became a fish. Whenever the mother called him he swam ashore, changed
to his beautiful human form and took food from her hands. This secret,
also, was discovered, and the other women would imitate the call and
inveigle the deceived youth into their arms. The old man, sole tribal
husband of record, noted the neglect of the women, divined the reason,
and went fishing. Other nets failed to hold his prey, but a net of
woman’s hair caught the boy-fish, and youth was no longer served; the
old man killed him.

Navaho myth tells a related story of the secession of the women, their
cohabitation with a water-monster, and their return to their natural
mates. Fragmentary tales of the woman state come also from Colombia,
Nicaragua, Sinaloa, and the two Californias.

The Amazon exodus is related in a third story of Brazil, told by
Barboza Rodriguez. When the women abandoned their husbands, flood and
fell barred the way of the pursuers and the very monkeys pelted them
from the trees. After a while the female republic relented so far as
to admit the men once a year. At length it disappeared into the land
of shadows, the women going down into a hole in the earth, led by an
armadillo.

La Condamine, the French geographer and mathematician, went to Peru
in 1735 to determine the length of a degree of the meridian at the
equator, and on his homeward journey made the first scientific
exploration of the river Amazon. He returned with one certainty and
two doubts. He was sure there had been a woman state, but he did not
know whether there still was, nor where it could then be found, for the
Amazons were nomads who shifted their camps.

The distinguished scientist arrays his evidence: testimony of an Indian
whose grandfather had seen an Amazon band pass by at the entrance of
the Cuchura River and spoken with four of them; like testimony from
other natives; statement of the Topayos that the green stones called
Amazon stones which they wore were inherited from forefathers who had
them from a tribe of women; statement of an old soldier that he had
seen necklaces of Amazon stones among a tribe of long-eared Indians
and learned they had procured them from the women without husbands,
whose territories were seven marches west; native name of these women,
Cougnantainsecouima, meaning “the independent women who receive men
into their society only in the month of April”; offer of a native of
Mortigua to guide La Condamine up the river Irijo which flows hard by
the woman state; passages in the Jesuit _Relations_ of 1726 and reports
of two Spanish governors of Venezuela, Don Diego Portales and Don
Francisco Torralva.

Where are the Amazons now? asks La Condamine. He notes that while
different accounts designate the point of their retreat, some toward
the east, others the north, and others again the west, these several
routes converge in one common center, the mountains in the midst of
Guiana. But without further proof he will not credit the existence of
the woman state there in his time. The tribe may have moved again. “Or,
what to me appears a more probable event than any other, it will have
forsaken its ancient habits, either in consequence of being overpowered
by some other nation, or of the maidens’ having at length lost the
aversion of their mothers to the company of men. Thus, though no
remaining vestige should be found of this feminine republic, this would
not yet prove that none such had ever existed.”

The majority of the natives of South America, La Condamine declares,
are liars, credulous, and prone to the marvelous. But none of them, he
urges, could have heard of the Amazons of Diodorus Siculus, and Justin
previous to the arrival of the Spaniards; yet even then Amazons were
spoken of as existing in the center of the country, and later reports
come from tribes that never had held commerce with Europeans.

If ever there was such a nation, concludes La Condamine, it must have
been in America. The Indians were constantly wandering. Their wives
often went with them to war. They had plenty of chances to get away
from the men, and provocation enough in the hard estate of slavery in
which they were held. Why could not these aboriginal women do what
even imported slaves had done? Negroes in Latin America had fled from
their taskmasters into the tropical forests, and there had reared a
dozen Cimarron republics. Thus, weighing evidence, common report and
probabilities, La Condamine casts the weight of his name in favor of
the Amazons.

Two generations later the woman state received the allegiance of
Alexander von Humboldt, founder of the science of physical geography
and largest name among the savants of the nineteenth century. He had
spent five years in tropical America at the opening of the century,
and in his _Personal Narrative_ of travel there he records affirmative
answer to the question: Did he accept the conclusions of La Condamine?
There was exaggeration, he thinks, in the stories of Raleigh and
Oviedo; but nevertheless he cannot entirely reject “a tradition which
is spread among various nations having no communication with each
other.”

Ribeiro, the Portuguese astronomer who had traversed the Amazon basin,
entering it a disbeliever of the story, had found the same traditions
of the woman state among the Indians, and confirmed all that La
Condamine reported a generation before, Humboldt notes. He is impressed
with the contemporary testimony of Father Gili. The friar had asked a
Quaqua Indian what tribes inhabited the Rio Cuchiviro and the Indian
named three, one of them the Aikeambenanos. The missionary knew the
Tamanac tongue, and in that tongue the word signified “women living
alone.” The Indian confirmed his translation, and explained that these
were a community of women who made blow-tubes and other weapons of war.
After the familiar Amazon custom they had seasonal amatory relations
with the neighboring nation of Vokearos and sent their men visitors
back with presents, but killed their male offspring. This tale, says
Humboldt, seems framed on the traditions which are rife among the
Indians of the Maranon and among the Caribs; yet the Quaqua who told it
knew no Castilian, had never before talked to a white man and certainly
did not know that below the Orinoco was the river of the Amazons.

“What must we conclude?” asks Humboldt. “Not that there are Amazons
on the banks of the Cuchivero, but that women in different parts of
America, wearied of the state of slavery in which they were held by the
men, united themselves together; that the desire of preserving their
independence rendered them warriors; and that they received visits
from a neighboring and friendly horde. This society of women may have
acquired some power in one part of Guiana. The Caribs of the continent
held intercourse with those of the islands; and no doubt in this way
the traditions of the Maranon and the Orinoco were propagated toward
the north,” so that Columbus and other navigators who followed him
heard of them repeatedly before reaching the mainland of America.

A generation later the woman state is spoken of by Schomburgk, who
traversed Guiana in 1835-43. Everywhere the Caribs told him of the
Woruisamocos, a tribe of warlike women who lived near the sources of
the Corentyne in a district where no white man had been. They shot
with the bow and arrow and used the blow-pipe. Their own fields they
cultivated, and men came thither only as their lovers, and but once a
year. Schomburgk pushed on to the district where the women should have
been; they were not there.

In the remote regions of the River Amazon’s northern affluents, says a
recent geographer, the women warriors are still vainly sought.

Thus this world-wide, world-old story has been followed through perhaps
thirty centuries of tradition on four continents and in five seas; and
the end is a doubt. Men have fought with parties of armed women, but
none has found the City of Women. Stories of male and female islands
may have arisen from the custom of naming companion islets “brother”
isles and “sister” isles, like North Brother and South Brother islands
in New York’s East River. It is contended that Orellana concocted his
tale to divert attention from his desertion of Pizarro; that Spaniards
mistook young Indian braves, with topknots and berry-bracelets on their
arms, for women; and that the prose behind the poetry of the American
Amazons is the tribe of Naupes, which still wears green stones for
amulets. It is even suggested that the New World legend grew out of the
coast Indian word, _Amazuni_, to denote a tidal bore upon the great
waterway of Brazil.

It has happened that the vivid imagination of the conquistadors
projected stories among the Indians which came back later with such
a wealth of detail as to seem native stuff. Is the New World Amazon
tradition merely Book III, Chapter XXXIV of the _Travels of Marco
Polo_, writ large upon the wax-like minds of savages by the curiosity
of Columbus and his great companions?

Before answering, it will be well to turn from stories of a woman state
to authentic records of women who were less than the Amazons of fable,
but more, or rather other, than women of the hearth. Perhaps the answer
is there.




Chapter XIII. The Amazons of History


Whether there have been Amazon states or no, there have been Amazon
queens--warrior women who knew how to lead and whom men were willing to
follow. The portrait gallery of history has set aside its more spacious
halls for women of another kind, for Helen, Cleopatra, Messalina,
Theodora, and their sisters of blandishment. But women militant have
also a place. Tomyris, queen of the Massagetæ, defeated and slew
Cyrus the Great. Semiramis, legendary queen of Assyria, matched her
adulteries with her victories in arms, won all her campaigns except the
Indian, and, in the words of Strabo, left her monuments in “earthworks,
walls, and strongholds, aqueducts, bridges, and stair-like roads over
mountains.” Boadicea led the Britons in momentarily successful revolt
against Nero. Zenobia, Arab queen, established the Palmyrene power over
the trade routes of the east and swayed Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, and
part of Asia Minor, until the arms and gold of Aurelian encompassed
her downfall. Under the poetess Telesilla the women of Argos repelled
a Spartan attack. Joan of Arc led the armies of France as a girl of
nineteen.

Women have gone to war as single soldiers or in troops, in disguise,
or with husbands, brothers, and lovers. When the Goths crossed the
Roman frontiers their families came with them in ponderous wagons,
and their yellow-haired wives figured in the Roman triumphs. American
Indian women, as the Spaniards found, were able to use the bow, and
defended their homes when their husbands were away, and sometimes went
with them in battle. The aftermath of a victory among various tribes
of North American Indians--the scalping of the dead, the torture of
the living--was intrusted to the women. They bear their part in the
Mexican revolutions. Thus Ibanez puts it: “The army is composed of men
and women. No one has ever decided which of the sexes makes the better
soldier.”

To count the women, the Spanish author says, is to count the Mexican
soldiers, for every one has a wife along, and more often than not
a string of children. The woman is called a “soldierette” or a
“hard-tack,” and if her man is tiring of her, “the Indian”; and
generals have their “generalettes.” Women constitute the commissary
of the army. Each carries bedding for herself and man, a basket, and
perhaps a parrot. With her sisters she forms an advance guard several
miles ahead of the main force when the troops are on the march. When
the latter reach camp they find the fires burning and a stew in the
pot. The stew comes out of the basket and the basket is filled by
foraging along the way. The Mexican hard-tack does this thoroughly,
Ibanez thinks: “She passes over the country like a scourge of God.
Along her path not a tree remains with a piece of fruit, not a garden
with a turnip, not a coop with a chicken, not a barnyard with a pig.”
When a soldier dies his companion passes to another through the swift
courtship of circumstance; and sometimes she seizes the rifle of her
fallen mate and uses it in his stead.

Among nomad peoples women have always shared the activities of the
men; the seclusion of the harem is for settled folk. The chronicles
and legends of High Asia have their instances of feminine prowess in
arms. Marco Polo devotes a chapter to Aigiarm, daughter of Kaidu,
king of Great Turkey and nephew to the Grand Khan. She would marry no
man, she said, who could not overcome her by force. Suitors came from
other lands and wrestled with her before the court. Her hand was the
prize of success and a hundred horses were the forfeit of failure. “In
this manner,” says Marco, “the damsel gained more than ten thousand
horses, which was no wonder, for she was so well made in all her limbs,
and so tall and strongly built, that she might almost be taken for a
giantess.” In war she fought beside her father.

From Usbeck ambassadors at Delhi François Bernier heard vaunts of the
Amazonian ferocity of the Tartar women. One of their stories was of
the campaign of Aurungzebe against the Khan of Samarcand. A score of
Mogul horsemen had plundered a village and were binding its people to
sell them as slaves, when an old woman said: “My children, be not so
cruel. My daughter, who is not greatly addicted to mercy, will be here
presently. Should she meet with you, you are undone.” With a laugh the
horsemen tied her up also, and started with their captives across the
plain. The old woman kept looking behind her, and at last uttered a
scream of joy.

The raiders turned and beheld a cloud of dust, and in the midst of
it a young woman furiously riding. Raising her great voice, like the
heroines of Russian epic, she bade them loose their captives and she
would spare them. The horsemen heeding not, her bowstring twanged and
twanged again. Four men tumbled from the saddle, shot at a range beyond
their own arrows. The young Amazon galloped in among the others, slew
the greater part with her unerring bow, and with her saber cut down the
rest.

There may be an element of romantic exaggeration in each of these
stories. But they make the point that the women of the Asiatic
highlands knew the bow as well as the distaff, and they bring the
tradition of female warriors into the region where Greek fable placed
the Amazons. There are continued references to women bearing arms
in Armenia, in Kurdistan, and in the early wars of Islam in Arabia.
Women in armor fought with Miltiades of Pontus against the Romans. The
seventeenth-century traveler, Sir John Chardin, had adventure with a
ragamuffin and lewd-tongued queen of the Mingrelians. The Prince of
Georgia said the women of the Caucasus rode as well as the men, and
he accepted the Amazon legend. When Father Angelo Lamberti was in
Mingrelia in 1654, word came that among the dead in a raiding force
from the Caucasus were a large number of women. They wore complete
coats of armor over bright-red woolen skirts. Their half-boots were
adorned with brass disks and their gilded arrow-shafts bore heads
shaped like the new moon.

As late as the Crimean war “the Black Virgin,” a Kurdish woman, paraded
at the head of a thousand horsemen before the palace of the Sultan in
Constantinople, and led them away to the campaign on the Danube.

The outlines of a veritable woman’s state almost take shape in Bohemian
chronicle and legend of the eighth century. There was a Slavic queen
named Libussa who is supposed to have founded Prague and built its
imperial palace. She exercised her sovereign will by marrying a
peasant, instituting a Council of Virgins, and giving women preference
in the posts of state. When she died in 838 and affairs returned to the
old footing, Valasca, her chief woman counselor, undertook to found a
female commonwealth. Thus far more or less authentic history; legend
adds that for a while the commonwealth really was, and that under it
girls were trained to arms, while boys lost their right eyes and thumbs.

St. Bernard organized the Female Crusade in 1147, in which bodies of
armed women marched. The tradition of fighting women was kept alive
in western Europe in the Middle Ages by girls who accompanied their
knightly lovers as pages, and with them entered the chants of balladry.
It was nurtured by the romances of chivalry, in which disguised female
warriors like Bradamante, “in prowess equal to the best of knights,”
figured. But when, for the first time in the modern era, the Amazonian
impulse seized upon masses of women, there was needed, not the
modulated voice of the _trouvères_, but the Gothic accent of a Carlyle
to tell of it. The phenomenon is known as the Insurrection of Women,
the march on Versailles of October, 1789.

This was the sudden inspiration of perhaps ten thousand women drawn
from the Central Markets and other rallying places--“robust dames of
the Halle, slim mantua-makers, ancient virginity tripping to matins,
the housemaid with early broom.” The mob, continues Carlyle, storms
tumultuous, wild-shrilling, toward the Hôtel de Ville. There Theroigne
de Mericourt leaps astride a cannon, her chariot on to Versailles.
Mænads clamor behind. It is the cause of all Eve’s daughters, mothers
that are or that ought to be. “Paris is marching on us,” exclaims
Mirabeau in the National Assembly as the sinister murmurs come from
afar. Soon the esplanade is covered with “groups of squalid, dripping
women, of lank-haired male rascality.” They break into the assembly,
they compel the king and queen to show themselves, and they bring them
back to Paris, leaving the monarchy in ruins behind them. The return,
says Carlyle, is “one boundless, inarticulate ha-ha--transcendent
world-laughter, comparable to the saturnalia of the ancients.”

[Illustration: THUSNELDA AT THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY OF GERMANICUS INTO ROME

_By_ C. T. von Piloty]

Not as idealized figures of the Greek friezes, but as turbulent,
blood-hungry corybantes of earlier Greek story the Amazons of France
emerged, almost on the threshold of the nineteenth century--vanguard of
the Revolution. Later the market women were enrolled in a brigade which
wore the Phrygian cap, the tricolor, a baldric, a short skirt of red,
white, and blue, and sabots. With pike and cutlass, it was their task
to escort the carts which bore condemned royalists to the guillotine.
There were also armed battalions of women and girls in the provinces.
In the external wars of the Revolution about half a hundred women are
known to have fought, young girls in the infantry, middle-aged women in
the cavalry.

French Amazonism was partly portrayed, partly parodied in the person of
Theroigne de Mericourt. She was a popular actress, in Carlyle’s phrase
“brown-locked, light-behaved, fire-hearted,” who had “only the limited
earnings of her profession of unfortunate female.” At Versailles she
cajoled the guard, “crushing down musketoons with soft arms.” This
woman rose high, and fell far. Suspected of being a Girondist, “the
extreme she-patriots” seized, stripped, and chastised her on the
terrace of the Tuileries, with Paris looking on agrin. Theroigne lost
her wits from brooding over it, and passed out of the Revolution into a
mad-house.

Olympe de Gonges, widow at sixteen, blue stocking, pretended natural
daughter of Louis XV, entered the Revolution at middle age and
countervailed the declaration of the Rights of Man with a declaration
of the Rights of Woman. She tried the patience of Robespierre and he
sent her to the guillotine, after a jury of matrons had found against
her plea that she was “about to give the Republic a citizen.”

Younger women aped men’s attire and men’s ways. _Les Merveilleuses_
indecently imitated Roman costumes, going about in sandals with rings
on their bare toes. When a man clad only in a loin-cloth paraded
between two stark-naked women, the lurking sense of propriety, or
of humor, was affronted, and the group was mobbed. La Maillard, the
opera-singer, who was Goddess of Liberty at the Feast of Reason, wore
trousers, fought duels, and with her female followers went about the
streets to compel other women to dress as she did. This provoked
reaction and the Committee of Safety decreed that women’s political
clubs should disband and no woman henceforth have part in government.
Thus disappear the Amazons of France.

In domestic insurrections and in the defense of besieged cities, women,
as might be expected, figure more largely than in field operations.
Plutarch had told of the women of Argos who defended their city with
such courage that a public decree gave to them the right to dedicate
a statue to Mars, and to their daughters henceforth the singular
privilege of wearing false beards on their wedding day. The Feast
of the Valiant Women is celebrated in Majorca to commemorate the
part taken by two women in repelling a pirate attack upon an island
town. Spanish women manned the walls of Barcelona during the War of
Succession and provided most of the soldiers that held Saragossa
against the lieutenants of Napoleon. On the maid Agostina was conferred
the honor of bearing the name and arms of Saragossa.

The most remarkable woman in the Amazon story and, save Joan of Arc,
perhaps the most dramatic figure in the whole story of her sex, was
born in July, 1889, in the Russian province of Novgorod. The attempt
of Maria Botchkareva to prevent the suicide of her country in 1917,
by taking the field with a force of women soldiers--the Battalion of
Death--who were pledged to obey and not to debate, to shoot the foe and
not to embrace him, has the romance of a lost cause and more. It is
related in _Yashka_, her utterly frank autobiography, transcribed for
her by Isaac Don Levine.

Out of her old life as misused peasant girl and misused wife this
daughter of Russia marched away into another world where she could
strike as well as be stricken. In the Tsar’s uniform she seemed just
a tall, powerfully built, round-cheeked young soldier. But under the
hoyden of the surface there were commanding qualities; and it would
almost seem that Yashka, as the soldiers nicknamed her, could see
straighter than any man in the empire.

Her early experiences as a woman soldier in a men’s regiment were such
as perhaps might have been anticipated. She describes her first night’s
slumber in barracks and the blows and kicks she had to administer to
the men on either side. “All night long,” she says, “my nerves were
taut and my fists busy.” Soon, however, she won the respect and then
the affection of her comrades, and a corner of the regimental bathhouse
was reserved for her ablutions. She joined in trench raids, herself
bayoneted a German, killed several more with handgrenades, was captured
and escaped, was wounded and shell-shocked, repeatedly was commended
for acts of bravery or mercy; and kisses greeted her when she returned
from hospital.

Then came the revolution, committee rule in the army, incessant
soldiers’ meetings, refusal to attack. With Russia dying before her
eyes, Yashka proposed to Rodzianko, president of the Duma, a desperate
expedient--the formation of the Battalion of Death. Let the women
organize a small command free from committees and subject to full
military discipline. The men would neither fight nor take orders, but
perhaps if their women attacked the enemy, the men might be shamed into
moving forward behind them.

Rodzianko saw a gleam of hope in the project; Brusilov,
commander-in-chief, approved; Kerensky set his seal on it; and Maria
Botchkareva found herself at the head of two thousand women of all
classes from princesses to peasant girls and domestic servants. “Who
will guarantee,” asked a delegate at the meeting that authorized this
step, “that the presence of women soldiers at the front will not yield
little soldiers there?” “I will hold myself responsible for every
member of the command,” was Yashka’s spirited reply. “Only discipline
can save the Russian army. In my battalion I shall have it.” And she
did, although the securing it reduced the command she led to the front
to three hundred girls.

“I had a vision,” she said. “I saw millions of Russian soldiers rise in
an invincible advance, after I and my women had disappeared in No Man’s
Land on the way to the German trenches.”

There was a day in July, 1917, when it looked as if the vision was
to become fact. Artillery had prepared the way for a general attack.
Then the committees began to debate, precious hours passed, the day
declined. Into the Battalion of Death came nearly a hundred men
officers, followed by soldiers who would rather fight behind a woman
than not at all.

Rifles were placed in the officers’ hands, and, a thousand strong,
the detachment formed its battle line, every girl flanked by two men.
Coarse jests rose around them, but the laughter died in men’s throats
when the little command leaped the trenches and went swiftly forward,
alone, as it seemed. “Suddenly,” says Yashka, “we caught the sound of
a great commotion in the rear. In a few moments the front to the right
and left of us became a swaying mass of soldiers. First our regiment
poured out, and then, on both sides, the contagion spread, so that
almost the entire corps was on the move.”

The German first line was overwhelmed and the second, and the third,
Yashka’s regiment alone taking two thousand prisoners. Then word came
that the Ninth Corps, which was to relieve the attacking troops and
continue pursuit, was debating instead of advancing!

They must needs run for it, for the German counter-attack was forming.
Back over all the trenches they had won at such cost fled the Russians,
the enemy reoccupying them without a fight. Yashka, shell-shocked, was
carried in on the shoulders of her adjutant.

Thus the great moment of the Battalion of Death came--and went. Russian
manhood was still capable of a heroic thing. But the chaos which it had
made its world could not resolve into order even at the poignant drama
of Russian women marching alone.

What went before and was to come after was all in keeping. The tread of
the little battalion resounds through scene after scene of delirium.
Behind the lines one hears agitators haranguing the women. One beholds
Kerensky banging his table and, forgetful he has just abolished
capital punishment, threatening to have Yashka shot because she will
not tolerate committee rule in her command. One glimpses snipers in
Petrograd firing on her women as they leave for the front. Her own
angry scorn flashes out in a violent scene when she reviews the Moscow
Woman’s Battalion--committee ruled--and notes the rouge, the slippers,
the fancy stockings, the evidences of a dubious familiarity with the
men.

There was worse at the front--the men killing their officers and
embracing the enemy; No Man’s Land “a boulevard for promenading
agitators and drunkards.” Resolved that there should be some real
fighting, Yashka shot a German in the leg as nonchalantly he approached
the lines. Real fighting did follow; the Russian soldiers turned their
machine guns on their own women. The latter were sent to another
sector, and when the men heard that Lenin and Trotzky had seized
control they celebrated; they tried to lynch the little command. Twenty
girls were killed, the rest fled into the woods.

It was the end. The Battalion of Death disbanded and Yashka was seized
and brought before the duumvirs. They bade her join them in “bringing
happiness to Russia,” and laughed at her fierce scorn. But they let her
go, and she follows her command out of these pages. One salutes with
pride and pain.

About four hundred other Russian women, most of them Siberians,
served in men’s regiments, and the colonel of the Sixth Ural Cossack
Regiment was a woman. There was a smaller number of female fighters in
the Austrian armies, a few in the German. Women figured also in the
conflicts that followed the World War. The Vilna unit of girl soldiers,
about a thousand strong, suffered heavy losses in the defense of Poland
against Soviet Russia. “Their heads thrown back, they seemed the very
spirit of Poland,” said one who saw them in action.

These were Amazon volunteers. Until yesterday there were professional
Amazons at many of the courts of Asia. The Celestial King of the
Tae-Pings had a regiment of fighting women. For centuries Indian
princes, notably of Hyderabad and the Deccan, had female guards called
Urdu-begani, or “camp-followers,” on whose loyalty they could rely
utterly. A body-guard of one hundred and fifty girl archers, the
loveliest that could be found in Cashmere, Persia, and the Punjab, rode
milk-white steeds in the service of Ranjeet Singh of Lahore. There were
female sepoys in the palace at Lucknow, female guards at Bangkok and
in Bantam. With their slender bodies incased in tunics and trousers of
rich Eastern colors, with plumed caps on their small dark heads, and
with their erect and slightly swaggering carriage, these palace troops
gave an added effect of theatricalism to the lesser courts of the
Orient. The Amazon march of the modern stage mimics a reality of Ind.

The _Chronicle of the Cid_ may provide a prologue for the motley
spectacle of Africa’s warrior women which follows here. Six-and-thirty
kings of the Moors and one Moorish queen attacked Valencia. The queen
was a negress, and two hundred mounted negresses rode behind her, all
with hair shorn save a tuft on the top. They wore coats of mail and
wielded Turkish bows, and their queen drew hers so skillfully that
they called her the Star of the Archers. The Christians centered their
attack on this female cavalry, slew the leader, and dispersed her force.

Through legend and doubtful chronicle of enterprises Amazonian, one
moves in Africa to a basis of fact as completely documented as the
recent deeds of warrior women in Russia and Poland. Father Alvares, who
went with the Portuguese ambassador to the Abyssinian court (1520-27),
gives it on hearsay that to the south of the kingdom is a country where
the women have husbands but dispense them from fighting. Their queen
has “no special husband, but withal does not omit having sons and
daughters.” “They say,” says this traveler, “that they are women of
a very warlike disposition and they fight riding on certain animals,
light, strong, and agile, like cows, and are great archers.”

In his history of Ethiopia, Father Giovanni Cavazzi has two stories
of negro Amazons in the Congo country of the seventeenth century. One
is of the Princess Lliuga, who refused to submit to the Portuguese
and fought until she won a favorable peace. Her garb was skins; her
weapons were the bow, the ax, and the sword; her battle custom was to
sacrifice a man--cutting off his head and drinking his blood--before
attacking the enemy. The other story is of Tembandumba, a royal negress
who must have known the Amazonian tradition and who sought to establish
the Amazon state. Like Semiramis, she had a procession of lovers, and
slew them as she tired of them. She ruled her state through women. All
male infants, all twins, and all village-born babies were killed by
her orders, and a magic ointment was made from their macerated bodies
mingled with herbs. The queen set the example by destroying her own
boy baby. She told the young girls that their temporary matrimonial
alliances should be marriages by capture, they to do the capturing in
war. The turbulent career of this one-eyed queen of a cannibal tribe
was ended by a husband who poisoned her before she had quite reached
the point of doing for him.

Until, in some instances, less than a generation ago, the courts of
Negroland maintained palace troops and other fighting forces of women.
Burton and Rothery have collected their stories. In the Congo empire
of Monomotapa, Lopez found in 1680 battalions of women, armed members
of the royal harem. A generation before, Jinga, queen of Angola,
maintained a harem of half a hundred young men. The monarch of Yoruba
boasted that if the members of his female bodyguard clasped hands,
they could span his kingdom. In the time of the traveler Bosman the
king of Whydah on the Slave Coast had four thousand armed wives. On
the Gle’ lagoon of the Ivory Coast rumor placed a community of fetish
women ruled by a queen who was able with herbs to develop artificial
elephantiasis. These women put their male infants to death. Dahomey,
which lies back of Whydah, and which became a French protectorate in
1894, was the best known of African kingdoms--and known for two related
things, its annual Customs of blood sacrifice and its army of Amazons.

Sir Richard Burton, who went on mission to King Gélélé in 1863, bearing
Queen Victoria’s urgent request that he abolish the slave trade and
human sacrifice in his dominions, has written the account of this
nearest modern approach to the Amazon state. It is a veracious report
and it reads like an evil dream. The _Thousand and One Nights_ has been
called a blend of blood, musk, and hasheesh. The Dahomey story is an
African _Arabian Nights_, with native beer and trader’s rum in place of
hasheesh, with blood flowing in more turbid torrents than at Bagdad,
and with a ranker musk--and under the musk the overpowering reek of the
body odors of Negroland.

In this nightmare state, half hid behind the swamps and forests of
the coast, one senses the controlling and corrupting presence of some
primitive and abominable religion. Africans, says Burton, worship
everything except their Creator. Those of Dahomey worshiped, among
other things, their ancestors. The Dahoman sovereign must enter
Deadland in royal state, with a ghostly retinue of leopard wives, head
wives, birthday wives, eunuchs, singers, drummers, bards, soldiers.
The retinue was swollen yearly at Customs time when criminals and
prisoners of war, publicly sacrificed under the king’s eye, went
drunken and giggling to their doom, while at the same hour the palace
Amazons dispatched female victims to the land of shades. Throughout the
year, whenever the king would send a message to his deceased father,
he killed a subject and forwarded his soul with it. If he had invented
a new drum, or received a visit from a white man, or even removed from
one palace to another, the soul of some man or woman, slain for the
purpose, must carry the news to the paternal ghost.

It was impossible, says Lady Burton, to venture from one’s hut without
seeing something appalling--skulls on posts, living victims impaled,
evidences of cannibal feasts, animals tied in every agonizing position
and left to die. Burton himself figured that there was an annual
slaughter of at least five hundred persons, and during the year of
the Grand Customs perhaps a thousand. The institution was strenuously
upheld by a powerful and interested priesthood; “to abolish human
sacrifice was to abolish Dahomey.”

This was the woman’s state, somewhat as early Greek legend pictured the
Amazon commonwealth of the Black Sea, before art and song refined the
fable. Women in Dahomey took precedence over men and the warrior women
called themselves men. When one of the king’s Amazons walked abroad, a
slave girl with a bell went ahead, and men had to get out of the way.
It seemed to Burton, when he went up from the coast to the capital
city of Abomey, that the older and uglier the slave girl the louder
she rang the bell, and the more she enjoyed the ignoble scamper of his
interpreters and hammock men. The popular name of these women was Our
Mothers. Their official name was The King’s Wives, a title of courtesy
only, for the monarch had his own harem and these other women were
supposed to be a kind of fighting nuns.

The Amazon army consisted of the Fanto company of the king’s bodyguard,
and the right and left wings, comprising five arms. The former were
distinguished by a headdress in the form of a narrow white fillet on
which was the figure of a crocodile in blue, and their hair was cropped
instead of shaven. The body of the force was composed of blunderbus
women, elephant hunters, razor women carrying eighteen-inch blades
attached to a two-foot handle, archers with poisoned arrows, and
infantry with tower muskets. The archers were little more than heavily
tattooed, lightly clad camp followers with knives lashed to their
wrists. The elephant hunters were the élite. They wore knickers under
short skirts, their breasts were bound with linen strips, and antlers
were attached to their caps. Other Amazons had the same uniform, but
wore on their shaven heads small caps on which were blue tortoise
figures.

Travelers of two centuries ago computed the female army as about ten
thousand strong. The court may have deceived them by having the women
march like a stage army across the parade ground, slip around, and come
back again; or the kingdom may have been depopulated by its incessant
wars, its blood sacrifices, the slave trade, and the dedication of a
fourth of the females to the celibacy of arms. When Burton was there
in 1863 he figured the total number of Amazons at about twenty-five
hundred, of whom one-third were unarmed.

The nature of this force seems to have varied from generation to
generation. Travelers report in turn that the Amazons are cadets of
the leading families; that they are slaves made in war; that they
are criminals, common scolds, and women taken in adultery; that they
are loose in morals and that they are celibates; and that the custom
of permitting those no longer young enough to bear arms to marry was
a thrifty substitute for a state pension. Burton recites the common
belief that two-thirds of them are maidens, the remainder unfaithful
wives condemned to soldiering. He thinks pretty well of their morals,
which were protected by tabu, although while he was in Dahomey the
king had to judge the cases of more than a hundred Amazons about to
become mothers. The crime was lèse majesté, for in theory these were
royal brides, but the punishment was moderate--a few beheadings, and
imprisonment, banishment, or pardon for the rest.

Dahomans themselves supposed that their peculiar institution was of
their own time, had forgotten, what Europe knew, that women guarded
their court two centuries before, did not dream that back to an
unfathomed antiquity, it may be, theirs had been a woman state.

Burton was present at the annual saturnalia of the Customs, and to his
sometimes sardonic vision all was invested in African grotesqueness.
He noted the immense thighs of the women officers and found it hard to
reconcile celibacy and corpulency. He described their dances, for also
they danced before the king, “clapping palms on thighs, or on something
fleshier.” The women stamped, wriggled, kicked the dust, and ended with
a violent movement of the shoulders, hips, and loins--an anticipation
of the most modern of popular terpsichorean contortions. One captain
is pictured in terms that approach admiration--a fine, tall woman with
glittering teeth and a gait that was partly a military swagger and
partly a sensuous dance. But the costumes of all had a phantasmagoric
quality--Amazons with beards of monkey skin, with men’s nightcaps, with
red liberty caps, with fools’ caps, with human skulls, or the lower jaw
of a skull, dangling at the waist.

These women paraded past the king while Burton looked on. It may be he
tried to take notes and tired at the task. His narrative reads as if
his own head whirled with the dancers, until he could no longer frame
complete sentences. He concludes that it was something like a pawnshop,
for the King’s Valuables went by with his women.

About in his own words and manner, but condensed, this is the picture:

“Sixteen brilliant banners held horizontally, preceding a wheelbarrow
with a fancy red-and-blue flag. Five huge fans, followed by razor
women. Eight images, of which three were apparently ships’ figureheads
whitewashed, and the rest very hideous efforts of native art.
Sixty-seven women with brown faces and bead mittens. Twenty-one girls
carrying cylinders of red and white beads. Seventeen women with
silver plates fastened to the sides of their skulls, habited in red
clothes and handling bead cat-ó-nine tails. Twelve women, also in red.
Seventeen fetish pots, three jars, one silver plated urn, attended
by singing women. Twenty casque women with red tunics and plumes and
black horse tails. Eight helmet girls with red plumes, dark coats, and
white loin cloths. Six pieces of plate, a tree, a crane, a monkey.
After singers and dancers, a huge drum carried by a woman porter. Three
large chairs, preceding about fifty heavily armed elephant huntresses,
clad in chocolate and dark blue, with bustles of talismans behind
and strings of cowries before. Four pots. A bullock trunk. Fourteen
fetish women in white caps and tunics and bright yellow grass cloth.
Five black girls dressed in blue. A line of 703 women and girls with
country pots of native beer and bottles of trade rum and gin. A motley
group surrounding two women in big felt hats. A band and a troop
of bardesses. Two girls with serpent flags. Seven troubadour women
dancing. Two warming pans. An escort of bayonet women. Royal equipages
hauled by men harnessed with ropes. A body of armed women preceding
seven umbrellas and drinking rum. A troop of girls with jugs, ewers,
and jars. Twenty blunderbus women in red caps. Six kettledrum girls in
scarlet caps and bodices and blue skirts. A calabash with a pyramid of
four skulls. Two dancing women with long switching tails. Fifty captive
female dancers. An old cut-glass chandelier. Living representatives of
the mothers of the Dahoman dynasty. A company of singers commanded by
an old woman in a broad-brimmed hat. A stunning salute of blunderbuses.
Good night after seven mortal hours.”

Yet there was no doubt that these fantastic women could fight.
Their frames were as powerful as those of the men, whose military
organization their own paralleled; and their hearts were higher. They
were the king’s own troops with his favor to vindicate and a tradition
to sustain. They had greater ferocity as well as greater courage than
the men--“savage as wounded gorillas,” Burton called them, and he laid
this to their enforced chastity. With them, two centuries ago, Dahomey
conquered the joint forces of Whydah and Popos, and the women fought
bravely against the French. Travelers who saw them in maneuver at the
annual Customs tell how they charged barefoot and half naked through
barriers of thorny acacia, and emerging, torn and bleeding, but with
impassive faces, passed in review before their sovereign.

Out of one passage in the history of Dahomey a ray of light streams.
When a king died at Abomey a wild orgy began among the Amazons of the
palace. They took their own lives and they slew one another. When
Sinmenkpen passed to his fathers, five hundred and ninety-five Amazons
died with him; only by extorting a solemn fetish oath did Gezo end
this custom. There were similar practices elsewhere. Among the Behrs
of the White Nile, Rawlinson reports, a woman’s guard prevented any
man from approaching the king, except the ministers who came to
strangle him when his end was near. Megasthenes, Greek ambassador to
the court of Sandrokotos at about B.C. 300, says that the Indian king
was surrounded by armed women who guarded his chamber and attended his
hunts in chariots or upon horses and elephants. Sometimes it was their
right to kill their lord, and the slayer married his successor. In
Bantam half a century ago the king was escorted by a girlish cavalry
that rode astride and carried muskets and lances; it was said that if
he died without issue the custom was for them to meet and elect a new
sovereign.

When kings died, their women guards functioned. It was the function of
priestesses of death. This is the secret of the Amazon legend and the
key to practises of human sacrifice and periodic and indiscriminate
sexual intercourse with which, alike in Asia, Africa and America, the
legend is associated.

Before fitting the key into the lock of legend it will be well to
let the rule of reason say its word. That large bodies of women
should withdraw themselves from the state, abjure the society of men
altogether or except at stated intervals, live their own lives and
develop their own social tradition, has seemed to skeptical opinion in
all ages a thing not to be believed because against nature. Yet in all
ages women have done before the eyes of men something very like this.
Thousands of them have gathered in great convents, or as temple harlots
have served at the vast shrines of the Farther East, or as armed
priestesses of the Nearer East have loosed the leash of fable. Their
periodic withdrawals from society for the performance of the Eleusinian
and other mysteries were a routine of the classic civilizations.

There have been times when the woman state was a fact of a season,
or of a year, or more--as when the men of an island were fishing
elsewhere, or the able-bodied members of a tribe were away on the
annual hunt, or the warriors were on a long campaign; and the traveler,
seeing none but women, might misread what he saw. Doubtless there have
been instances where the men of a tribe were exterminated in war, and
their women, retiring to inaccessible retreats, maintained their
independence for a while. Time was when everywhere the women commanded
and the men obeyed. It is not beyond imagination that, sometimes and
in some places, with the memory of the matriarchate to inspire them,
women have revolted against the cruel lot which was theirs in primitive
society, and set up for themselves; for they were the daughters as well
as the wives of the hard-headed men of the caves. This is perhaps as
plausible as the conjecture that savage man merely concocted the story
to dramatize the natural antipathy of the sexes, to account for the
deep groove of division which this sentiment had run through primitive
society and to justify the fact that society gave men so much the
better of it.

The roots of the Amazon tradition, however, lie deeper than what may be
called the politics of sex. The truth underlying the several legends
is to be found where, according to report, the fighting women had
their commonwealth. The descendants of the Cappadocian Amazons who
came to the aid of Troy are to be found in the Armenian highlands. The
descendants of the West African Amazons, on whom, as Diodorus fables,
the vengeance of Hercules fell, are to be found in Dahomey and near-by
negro states. The secret of the Brazilian Amazons is to be sought,
among other places, in Mexico.

With a single word out of the Old Testament the door of legend opens.
Of the Hittites the Hebrew writers seemed to know only that they
occupied mountainous districts in the land flowing with milk and honey;
that for a space the Jews dwelt with them and “served Baalim and the
groves”; and that Solomon put a tribute upon them. From the rock
carvings of Asia Minor and from Assyrian and Egyptian inscriptions the
present age has learned more. The discovery by Sayce and other modern
scholars of the important place once held by the Hittites has been
called the romance of ancient history.

That place may be likened to the place held by the Ottoman Empire in
its strength. Like the Turks, the Hittites were a Turanian people who
planted themselves across the great roads of Asia Minor and absorbed
and crudely reproduced the culture of more civilized neighbor peoples.
Their capitals were at Carchemish, where they commanded the fords of
the Euphrates, and at Kadesh on the Orontes, whence they ruled Syria
and the cities of the Ægean. They were mountaineers from the Taurus,
with olive skins, mongoloid features, and the Chinese cue. Their
double-headed eagle passed through the Turkomans and the Crusaders into
the imperial arms of Russia, Austria, and Germany; the Phrygian cap of
their successors has become the headgear of revolutionary woman, and
the Turks still wear their peaked shoes.

The Hittite Empire flourished in the Bronze Age, when it met Egypt,
Babylon and afterward Assyria on equal terms. It began to loom in the
sixteenth century B.C. and it was a power to be reckoned with until
well into the first millennium before Christ. On its ruins arose
Cappadocia, Phrygia, Lydia, and later Pontus. The rock carvings that
proclaimed its sway, and that Herodotus described but misread, still
look down on the Pass of Karabel along an old road of empire.

The Amazons of Greek legend, according to the convincing scholarship of
Sayce, were the armed priestesses of the Hittites. Their fabled capital
of Themiscyra is the ruined city of Boghaz Keui in Asiatic Turkey not
far from the Black Sea. The authentic likenesses of the warrior women
are to be found, not in the temple friezes of Attica, but in the rock
carvings on the hills that overlook this ancient ruin. Yet Greek art
reflects correct observation or trustworthy report, for its warrior
maidens wear the kilt of the mountain-dwelling Hittites and carry the
same double-headed ax that is seen in their crude sculptures.

In the service of the Asiatic goddess, known variously as Astarte,
Derceto, Cybele, the Great Mother, and Diana of the Ephesians, was a
multitude of armed priestesses so numerous that to the Greeks they
seemed not a cult but a nation. Whole cities were in effect mere temple
precincts populated by these women and by eunuch priests; the high
priestess of the temple ruled the city and the surrounding country,
and had some claim, therefore, to the title of Amazon queen. At Komana
were six thousand of these armed maidens of the shrine. At Ephesus vast
throngs of them served a high priestess who called herself the Queen
Bee.

These Hittite women worshiped the Asiatic goddess with orgiastic
frenzies that simulated, or literally repeated, the primal processes
of dissolution and reproduction. It was easy for the Greek mariners
who saw them dancing to the goddess and flourishing their weapons on
the shores of the Black Sea to infer that a woman’s capital lay a
short distance inland. It was natural, also, to attribute to them the
actual feats of the Hittite armies, and fable that the cities founded
or subjugated by that empire on the Ægean--Ephesus, Smyrna, Cyme,
Myrina--were colonies of Amazonian origin.

The Amazon legends of Africa and South America and the customs of the
female palace troops of Africa and Asia are made clear if one goes
behind the cult of the Asiatic goddess to the domain of primitive
magic whence it arose. There one finds beliefs that belt the earth and
are reflected not only in ancient tradition, but in modern practises
associated with May day and Midsummer Eve, with sowing and harvest,
with the summer and winter solstices. Frazer’s examination of these in
the _Golden Bough_ is deeply illuminating.

Following the laws of sympathetic magic, men believed that in order
to make the grain flourish and the grass renew itself in the annual
death and resurrection of nature, it was necessary by some drama of
their own to repeat the phenomena of decay and of new life. There must
be a noteworthy human death and a resurrection. Sometimes men killed
a scapegoat, sometimes a divine animal, sometimes a divine man--a
god-king, as he was called--such an impersonation of divinity, for
example, as the Grand Lama of Tibet. The killing of the god-king was
preferred as a magic more constraining than any other upon the forces
of nature.

There were several means of simulating the phenomena of resurrection.
This might be done by having two couples appear in the annual
drama--two sets of divine and royal mates. Frazer suggests that the
book of _Esther_, names and all, is based on a Babylonian religious
festival of this kind--that the gentle Esther is none other than the
lustful Astarte, that Mordecai is the god Merodach, that Haman is
Hannum the Aramite god, and Vashti a goddess unidentified. The triumph
of one set of characters and the humiliation and death of the other are
supposed to represent the bourgeoning of spring after the long death of
winter.

The common means of symbolizing and constraining the reproduction
of new life in nature was through a period of promiscuous sexual
intercourse in which designated persons or whole populations took part.
It was deemed necessary to set an example to the woods and fields, and
in the woods and fields it was set. The saturnalia, the carnivals,
the May Days and St. John’s Eves of old time were not, in intent,
excursions into debauchery; they were exercises in sympathetic magic.
So it befell that in savage vision the withered leaf and the green
shoot, winter and spring, death and resurrection, came to mean two
things--periodic murder and lust.

After a while the priest-kings sought escape from the custom that
gave them only a year of life upon their throne of grace. They chose
substitutes--a son, a slave, a malefactor--who for a few days reigned
in their stead, and as a sign of kingship were made free of their
harems, as Absalom went in unto King David’s concubines in the sight
of Israel. The king, or the mock-king, devoted to death but attended
by beautiful women, crowned with flowers and worshiped as a god--this
spectacle, as profoundly ironical as life itself, was staged in Mexico
when Cortez came; and when Huc visited Lhasa in 1846 he found the
Tibetans electing a monarch of misrule to carouse and suffer in place
of the pope of Buddhism, God’s vicar for Asia.

The bacchic procession of the doomed king and his women, this dance of
death that went around the world, was the real Amazon march. It was the
part of the warrior women to kill the man-god whose last days they had
beguiled. It was their part, also, to co-operate with a multitude of
men in a lustful drama, so that every acorn and grass root and grain of
corn might heed the command to bring forth and multiply; back of the
myth of annual Amazon matings with neighbor tribes was this reality of
the saturnalia. In places the legend has suffered confusing changes, as
in the Dahoman Customs, where the king kills instead of being killed.
But the same meaning underlies the Phrygian worship of the Great
Mother, the lethal privileges of the female palace guards in Hindostan,
the self-slaughter of the warrior women when a king died at Abomey, the
going of women into the hills of Brazil with one old man as companion,
and the recurrent tragedy of the god-man of Mexico, who dismissed the
fair partners of his revelry, snapped the strings of his harp, flung
away his chaplet of flowers, and ascended the altar where an Aztec with
a knife awaited him.

The meaning is death and life in nature, and the Amazon as priestess of
both.




Chapter XIV. The Folk of Tradition


Among the peoples of prodigy there were races without deformity and yet
set apart from other men by their peculiar habits or habitat, or, as
in the case of the giants of geography, by their unusual stature. Men
who dwelt in caves or whose diet was too much unlike their fellows’
were themes of marvel. Under fables told about them the outlines of
historical peoples may often be discerned.

While the tall men merge on the one side into the colossal creatures
of mythology, on the other they approach mortal size and the human
quality. Their tradition has been shaped by nature myths growing out of
volcanic eruptions, the phenomena of frost and darkness, and storms in
the desert. But popular beliefs rest mainly on more tangible things--on
the argument that since there are giant individuals there may well be
giant races; on the actual existence of tall races; on the presumption
that men of old time were taller than those of to-day; on dim memories
of tall vanished races such as the Cromagnous, and on an ancient notion
that the fossil remains of extinct animals were the bones of giants.
Travelers have done much to build the legend. Almost always they
underestimate the mean stature of a people with many small individuals
and overestimate that of a people with many tall individuals, the usual
margin of error running from two to four inches.

Above all, there has been the witness of geological strata uncovered to
eyes that misread their record. On the basis of a five-pound tooth and
an eleven-foot thigh bone, found in New England in 1712 and supposed to
have been a mastodon’s, Increase Mather reported to the Royal Society
of London that men of prodigious stature had inhabited the New World.
Other fossil bones found in Switzerland in 1577 became the basis of a
legend, which is commemorated in the colossal statues of Basle and in
the figures supporting the arms of Lucerne, that a race of giants from
sixteen to nineteen feet high lived in the Alps.

Ctesias reported that the Seres, whom he located in upper India,
reached a stature of fourteen feet and an age of two hundred years.
Onesicritus declared that in those parts of India where the sun cast no
shadow the men were eight feet high. But ancient writers were neither
so specific nor so insistent upon the existence of a colossal race as
later writers have been. Near the Vale Perilous, says Maundeville, are
two islands occupied by giants. The tenants of the first of these are
of comparatively modest stature, from twenty-eight to thirty feet.
Those of the farther isle are from forty-five to fifty feet.

“I saw none of these,” admits Sir John, “for I had no Lust to go to
those Parts. But men have seen many times those Giants take Men in the
Sea out of their Ships, and bring them to Land, two in one Hand and two
in another, eating them going, all raw and all alive.”

Amerigo Vespucci found a prodigious people in the island of Curaçoa
off the coast of Venezuela, “every woman appearing as a Penthesilea,
and every man an Antæus.” Pigafetta, writing of Magellan’s cruise,
is responsible for the belief, long held in Europe, that the tall
Patagonians were true Titans. One of them he pictures as advancing to
greet the white men, dancing and singing and putting dust on his head,
as if in token of peace. The savage towered above the Spaniards, who
came only to his waist. Dismissed with gifts, he returned at length
with other men of a like stature, and two of these the mariners decoyed
on shipboard. Leg irons were placed on them on the pretext that they
were ornaments, but when the Spanish purpose was disclosed they broke
in pieces as easily as if they were the baubles they were represented
to be.

Herrera, Van Noort, Le Maire and other travelers confirmed the account
of the size of the antipodal Indians. Lopez Vaz described them as “very
mightie men of bodie of ten or eleven foot high, and good bow-men, but
no man-eaters.” It remained for Drake to correct report when he made
his own circumnavigation of the globe. This was one of the “notorious
lies” which the Spaniards disseminated; the Patagonians were “but of
the height of Englishmen”; they are, however, somewhat above it. Five
feet eleven inches is the average among them and individuals reach the
height of six feet seven.

At the other extremity of South America the natives of the northern
Andes have a legend of a monstrous race that arrived in huge boats
at Cape Santa Elena about the beginning of the Christian era. Their
knees stood as high as the heads of other men and their eyes were like
small plates. They abused the Indians, their habits were abominable,
and fire from heaven destroyed them. This is perhaps a reminiscence of
an extinct civilization, the grotesque art of which has been brought
to light by recent excavations. There is an Oregon tradition of an
underground village of gigantic Indians on Coos Bay. They bashed each
other over the head with heavy bone knives without being hurt. When the
smaller Indians attacked them they fled down the river and out to sea
on two rafts and never came back.

Buffon, who would not credit the pygmies, believed there had been
giants of from ten to perhaps fifteen feet in height. The Bible
narrative giving Goliath, the Philistine bravo, the stature of six
cubits and a span, or three inches above seven feet, is conservatively
phrased. Buffon to the contrary notwithstanding, it is generally
thought that no man ever lived who reached the stature of ten feet, and
no race that reached the mean stature of seven. A very few individuals
have exceeded the height of eight feet and there is record of one or
two who have passed nine feet. According to the principles governing
the distribution of the overlarge individuals of a race, as worked out
by Quetelet, the appearance of a twenty-foot giant would imply the
existence of a race with a mean stature of from twelve to fourteen feet.

If there was once a race a foot or so above the stature of modern man,
it may be that the tall individuals who appear in each generation are
not the product of a favorable environment and fortunate combination of
elemental forces, but represent remote ancestors of unusual size. Zell
in his _Polyphem ein Gorilla_ argues that if races of average height
are the normal, and if there are dwarf races, then there must have been
giant ones to strike the balance. At any rate, tales of such races are
world-wide and a tang as of reality is in some of them. The Celt, for
example, said that giants had a strong body odor. “Giants,” says Grimm
in his summary of their tradition, “consider themselves the old masters
of the land, live up in the castle, and look down upon the peasant;”
the picture might be of something fabled, or of something vanished.


_The Macrobians_

As report gave certain races a great stature, so it gave others a great
age. These were known as the Macrobians. Herodotus mentions such a
people in Ethiopia; “the venerable and harmless men of Ethiopia,” Walt
Whitman calls them. Such also were the Hyperboreans, on the other side
of the north wind. The tall Seres lived to be two hundred years old. In
tropical India another tall race lived to the age of one hundred and
thirty years, and died just as if they were in the middle period of
life. Some writers called the elderly Indians Gymnetæ, or Naked Folk.
Another Indian people, the Cyrni, were reported to attain four hundred
years. Holding that the Indians were exceedingly just, and that the
just are long lived, the ancients credited the general statement of
Ctesias that the nations of the Indus live to one hundred twenty, one
hundred thirty, and one hundred fifty years, and the very old to two
hundred years. Pliny adds that they never expectorate and are subject
to no pains in the head, teeth, or eyes. There were Macrobians in
Brazil. A German woodcut of 1505 pictures them at a cannibal feast, and
the accompanying legend says, “They become a hundred and fifty years
old, and have no government.”

There was a reason, named by Isogonus, for the longevity of the
inhabitants of Mount Athos in the Balkans. They used the flesh of
vipers for food, and hence were “free from all noxious animals both in
their hair and their garments.”


_Albinos_

The Albania of the ancients was a country of Asia in the eastern part
of the Caucasus. Somehow the early writers confused its inhabitants,
the Alani, with Albinos. Beeton says that there is in Albania “a
certain race of men whose eyes are of a sea-green color, who have white
hair from childhood, and who see better by night than by day.” In the
kingdom that men call Mancy in “Ind the More,” says Maundeville, “they
be full fair Folk, but they be all pale. And the Men have thin Beards
and few Hairs, but they be long. In that Land be many fairer Women than
in any other Country beyond the Sea, and therefore Men call that Land
Albany.” Also, the hens are white.


_Sun-hating Folk_

There were sun-haters as well as sun-worshipers in the sun-smitten
lands of the older day. Carpini tells of the troglodytes of the
Caucasus who “lived in terror of the mysterious and fatal sound which
accompanied the rising of the sun.” Herodotus and Pliny describe the
Moroccan peoples called the Atlantes. When they look upon the rising
and the setting sun they “utter direful imprecations against it as
being fatal to themselves and their lands.” If one believes what is
said of these tribes beside the western sea, says Pliny, they have lost
all characteristics of humanity. They do not distinguish one another by
names, “nor are they visited with dreams, like the rest of mortals.”


_A Poisonous Nation_

The Psylli were a nation dwelling near the Great Syrtis on the North
African coast. Pliny, who sponsors them and says they were exterminated
by the Nasamonians, tells a story which reveals the two great
obsessions of the ancients--a curious credulity as to poisons, and an
incredulous curiosity as to the continence of women. In the bodies of
the Psylli, there was by nature a certain kind of poison that was fatal
to serpents and the odor of which rendered them instantly torpid. It
was the custom to expose newly born infants to the fiercest serpents
“and in this manner to make proof of the fidelity of their wives, the
serpents not being repelled by such children as were the offspring of
adultery.”


_The Troglodytes_

What the moderns call cave-men the ancients called troglodytes. In
the phrase of Æschylus they knew not how to build a house against the
sun, but “lived like silly ants, beneath the ground, in hollow caves
unsunned.” Because they shared the habitations of bats and snakes,
their voices were bat-like in their shrillness, and with hissing
tones; and they ate reptiles and crickets. They were fleet-footed
like the creatures of the rocks, the troglodyte Ethiopians being, says
Herodotus, the swiftest of men. The inhabitants of the country of the
Robbers (Lestai) in Farther Asia, says Ptolemy, were savages, living
in caves, and “having skins like the hide of the hippopotamus which
darts cannot pierce.” Artemidorus speaks of naked night-traveling
troglodytes of Arabia who put away their dead amid laughter. There are
cave-dwellers to this day in southern Cambodia, and a Chinese account
of the thirteenth century tells of the skin breastplates which they
wore.

The ancients knew of various races of troglodytes, notably those along
both shores of the Red Sea. Others were in Syria, and upon the Nile,
and in Fezzan, and in the Caucasus. The voiceless troglodytes of Pliny
are supposed to be the Rock Tibboos on whose whistling speech their
neighbors still comment. The best account of the elder cave-dwellers
happens to be authentic history. When Xenophon was retreating with the
Ten Thousand to the Black Sea he found upon the Armenian frontier a
people who lived in underground burrows with vertical entrances like
wells, up and down which they passed on ladders. Their beasts used a
sloping path and lived with them underground, cattle, goats, and sheep
thriving there on green fodder gathered above. These subterranean
habitations were also granaries and wine-cellars.

With all their lively interest in the ways of troglodytes, the ancients
knew less than the moderns about them, and were perhaps farther in
spirit from the cave-man. In the caverns of western Europe men of
to-day have studied his household economy, his art, and the animals he
tamed or hunted. Travelers in various lands have come upon underground
chambers, many of them still occupied. In the Berber rock-towns these
subterranean dwellings number thousands, and the ravines which furrow
the plateaus serve as their streets. On the Cappadocian plain deserted
subterranean villages, called _kataphugia_, or places of refuge,
underlie occupied villages of the surface, and thither the cattle
descend in severe weather, as in Xenophon’s time twenty-three centuries
ago. The peoples of the surface are supposed to be descendants of true
troglodytes.


_The Anthropophagi_

It never occurred to the early writers to classify men according to the
color of their skins, or the breadth of their skulls, or fundamental
differences in their languages; and the Greeks and Romans were
ignorant of the Noachian genealogy and heedless of the apportionment
of the earth among the sons of Shem, Ham and Japheth. But they had a
rough-and-ready method of cataloguing savage races according to what
they ate, in the thought that whatsoever a man ate, that in some degree
he became. After naming the races of fable from the size of their feet
or ears or other bodily peculiarity, they grouped and named, according
to their supposed diet, various races of reality that dwelt at a
distance.

Classic writers took passing note of the Anthropophagi, or tribes that
ate human flesh. There were such peoples in Africa and in Asia. The
best known account is the description in Herodotus of the Issedones.
These Scythians of Central Asia ate the flesh of their deceased
relatives prepared with other meat, and made gold-rimmed drinking cups
of their skulls--a rite of honor to the dead. A tribe in northern Tibet
is supposed to be descended from them.


_The Ichthyophagi_

The races that subsisted on fish, the Ichthyophagi, were described
by the ancients with unusual detail. One of the first accounts is
by Herodotus, who tells of the folk that lived on platforms above
Lake Prasias. They drew their fish through trap-doors from the water
beneath, and the custom was that for every woman a man took to wife he
drove three piles into the lake.

All along the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea there were tribes of
Ichthyophagi. Their very cattle ate dried fish and the beef had a fishy
flavor; Ibn Batuta remarked this in Yemen, and it is still true of the
Coromandel Coast. Arrian’s account of the voyage of Nearchus describes
the Ichthyophagi as occupying for four hundred miles the barren shores
of the Mekran; they had few boats and were indifferent fishermen, but
by intercepting the ebb tide with palm-bark nets they obtained their
food.

Arrian repeats a legend of the origin of these tribes in whose lines
one hears faintly the wild music of the Sirens. The island of Nosala,
off the Mekran coast, was the residence of a Nereid “whose practice
was to seduce such mariners as landed there to her embraces, and then,
after transforming them into fish, to throw them into the sea.” But the
sun ordered the nymph to quit the island and himself changed the fish
back into men. These were the first Ichthyophagi.

Farther west, in Ariana, were fish-eating tribes who made their
dwellings, Strabo says, of shells and of the bones of large whales, the
ribs furnishing the beams and supports, and the jawbones the doorways.
Sections of the backbones of whales were used as mortars wherein
sun-dried fish were pounded.

Diodorus Siculus has a spirited account of the Ichthyophagi along the
Red Sea. This people, he says, do not use nets, but so wall the caverns
and gullies of their rocky shore that the receding tide leaves the fish
imprisoned there. Whereupon, with a shout, the tribe assembles on the
beach. Women and children gather the little fish next the shore; with
sharp goats’ horns the men dispatch the larger ones, throwing all upon
the land. The booty is put into stone pots tilted toward the south and
the fish are fried by the sun until the flesh drops off. The bones are
cast into a pile and the meat boiled with fruit seeds. Then everybody
falls to and gorges. The heap of bones is a dietary reserve which the
tribe pulverizes and devours when storms shut off the shore.

The life of these Ichthyophagi is thrown into a sort of rhythm by the
need, every fifth day, of going inland on an extended journey for fresh
water. For four days they fish continually and make merry in great
throngs, “congratulating one another with harsh and discordant songs;
then they fall promiscuously, as every man’s lot chances, to company
with their women for procreation sake.” On the fifth day the tribe goes
in a body to a district lying under the foot of the mountains where
there are springs of sweet water. Hither, also, the shepherds drive the
flocks. Nor do the shore folk differ much from the herds, for “they go
making a horrid noise and without articulate voice.” Arrived at the
springs, they throw themselves on their faces and “drink as beasts
until their stomachs are distended like a drum.” Slowly they wend
their way back to salt water, and for a day recline without tasting
food. The following day they begin anew their fishing and feeding. Such
is the round of their lives.

Diodorus remarks, apparently to commend, that these fish-eaters “far
exceed all other men in freedom from boisterous passions.” They give no
heed to a stranger, nor even look at one when he addresses them: “Nay,
if they be assaulted with drawn swords they will not stir; and though
they are hurt and wounded, yet they are not in the least provoked. Even
though their wives and children be killed before their eyes, they show
no sign of anger.”

These accounts are not fables. But there is fabulous admixture, most
of it arising from the primitive belief that a fish diet makes men as
cool-blooded as the creatures upon which they live.


_Other Dietary Nations_

Akin to these nations were the Chelonophagi, or turtle-eaters,
concerning whom Strabo recites facts entirely in keeping. This tribe
lives under the cover of turtle shells, which also it uses as boats.
Some of its members, however, collect seaweed in heaps, hollow the
heaps, and dwell under them. Their dead are cast into the sea, and
carried away by the tide to become food in turn for the fish and
turtles.

The Acridophagi were grasshopper-eaters--insectivorous, ornithologists
would call them. The locust was, and is, a favorite diet of desert
peoples, a staple food of the Arab, as well as of the pygmy folk and
other singular breeds. Niebuhr likens its taste to that of “a small
sardine of the Baltic, which is dried in some towns of Holstein.” What
Dampier has to say of customs he found in two Pacific islands in 1687
may stand without essential change for the ways of earlier acridophagi:
“They had another dish made of a sort of locusts, whose bodies are
about one and one-half inches long, and as thick as the top of one’s
little finger; with large thin wings, and long and small legs. These
came in great swarms to devour their potato leaves and other herbs; and
the natives would go out with small nets and take a quart at one sweep.
When they had enough they would parch them in an earthen pan; and then
their wings and legs would fall off, and their heads and backs would
turn red like boiled shrimp. Their bodies, being full, would eat very
moist, their heads would crackle in one’s teeth. I did once eat of this
dish, and like it well enough.”

Certain other races living in Africa the ancients knew chiefly as
specialists in diet. Pomponius places the Ophiophagi, or snake-eaters,
on the Red Sea. Homer gives the Lotophagi, or lotus-eaters, a habitat
on the Mediterranean coast. Agatharcides names the Rhizophagi or
root-eaters who dwell on the banks of the Atbara and subsist on reed
roots; and the Elephantophagi, farther inland, who hunt and eat the
elephant. Also in the interior Diodorus places the ostrich-eating
Struthophagi, and there Pliny places the Agriophagi “who live
principally on the flesh of panthers and lions,” and the Pamphagi “who
will eat anything.”


_Geographical Glimpses_

The citations below, from classical, mediæval and modern writers, are
reproduced because of their flavor and for whatever they are worth:

The Gamphasantes, who go naked, are unacquainted with war and hold no
intercourse with strangers.

In the African deserts “men are frequently seen to all appearance and
then vanish in an instant,” says Pliny--perhaps the mirage.

“On the one side of the Senegal,” says John Lok, “the inhabitants are
of high stature and black, and on the other side of browne or tawnie
colour.” The latter are the “tawny Moors” of Prince Henry’s ship
captains.

The Annamese of pure stock have a peculiar formation of the great toe
whereby they are able to pick up small objects with their prehensile
feet, says Keane. Their ancient Chinese name was Giao-chi, which
signifies “with the big toe.”

“Many of Canton and Quansi Provinces,” says a Jesuit missionary in
Purchas, “on their little toes have two nailes, as they have generally
in Cochin-China.”

On the west coast of the Malay Peninsula, says the seventh-century
_History of the T’ang Dynasty_, is a naked swarthy race with red
frizzled hair, bestial teeth, and hawk claws who hold their markets at
night with veiled faces.

The Korwars of India, according to a local legend, “derive from
scarecrows animated by a prowling demon.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Because they are recognizable peoples with representatives who may
still be studied, the folk of tradition are useful exhibits in the
museum of history.




Chapter XV. The Horizon Lands


Not until yesterday did men encompass the earth. But their minds were
always more adventurous than their feet, and from the beginning,
almost, the sense of remote horizons was in them. Fantastic though
its form might be, there was a divine breadth in their speculation as
to the earth and its peoples. The peasant of antiquity, who knew only
his township in Europe or his mountain canton in high Asia, had yet a
vision of continents and distant seas. His imagination explored the
waste places, ascended the high places, descended into the earth. Its
product was the geography of legend, which gave ground but slowly to
the geography of reality.


_Beyond the North Wind_

One of the earliest countries to find a place in the geography of
legend was that of the Hyperboreans. It lay on the other side of the
north wind. These people lived so far toward the pole that they were
beyond the icy blasts, and beyond all contacts of war or commerce with
the peoples of the south. Only the priests and the poets knew of them.

The priests knew of them because of the yearly offerings sent in to the
temples of Tempe, Delphi, and Delos. These were gifts of amber, and
virgins bore them from nation to nation across the whole of Europe.
For many years the holy maidens had honor and hospitality from all the
countries along their path. When violence was done them the journeys
ceased. Not, however, the offerings. The Hyperboreans deposited these
upon the boundary of the people who adjoined them. The latter carried
them to their neighbors; and so by successive stages the tribute came
to the shrines of Apollo, whom the distant nation held in especial
honor. At last the custom fell into disuse.

No return visits were made from the south, for the way was hard. Yet
the poets had, as always, their own means of information. Homer has
nothing to say of the Hyperboreans, but Hesiod speaks of them, and
Pindar, and Æschylus, and a host of later and lesser voices. From
these authorities it appeared that the Riphæan Rocks, an imaginary
prolongation of the Ural group westward across Europe, shut the
Hyperboreans off from the south. Out of the rocks the north wind came
sweeping down over the lower latitudes, but on the farther side of the
range was summer. It was a favored land, and this a favored people.
“The muse is no stranger to their manners,” says Pindar. “The dances of
girls and the sweet melody of the lyre and pipe resound on every side,
and twining their hair with the glittering bay, they dance joyously.
There is no doom of sickness or disease for this sacred race; but they
live apart from toil and battles, undisturbed by exacting Nemesis.”
Isidore adds that when the cithara players smite their instruments the
swans fly up and sing very harmoniously.

Rightly discerning that this was no region of the earth, Herodotus
assigns its inhabitants to the realms of fable. But Hecatæus, Damastes,
Diodorus, Pliny and others credit the legend, though sometimes with a
note of doubt, as when Pliny begins, “Beyond the region of the northern
winds, there dwells, if we choose to believe it, a happy race known as
the Hyperboreans.” From their country Hercules brought the olive. They
were a pious folk, loving justice, dwelling in woods and fields, living
on the fruits of the earth and abstaining from taking even animal life.
No rude winds agitated this delicious land. Here were “the hinges upon
which the world revolves, and the extreme limits of the revolutions of
the stars.” There was but one rising of the sun for the year, and that
at the summer solstice, and but one setting, and that at the winter
solstice; and the day and night each lasted six months. In the morning
of the long day the people sowed, at midday they reaped, at sunset they
gathered the fruits of their trees; and the long night they spent in
caverns; and so their lives were passed.

They lived to be very old in the country beyond the north wind,
sometimes as much as one thousand years. But a fateful note runs
through all accounts of them. The happy Hyperboreans were wont to tire
at last of their felicity. They ended a career of feasting and an old
age sated with every luxury by leaping from a rock into the sea. At
the close of each life lay the rock and the sea.

Just where was this worshipful nation? The answers are vague and
conflicting. On the left bank of the Danube, it was first thought; on
the very verge of Asia, others said. Later its home was fixed “midway
between the two suns, at the spot where it sets to the antipodes and
rises toward us.” There were Greek writers who confused the Riphæan
Rocks with the Alps and Pyrenees, and confounded the Hyperboreans
with the Etruscans and the Gauls. Hecatæus gives them an island home
as large as Sicily, lying under the arctic pole, over against Gaul.
Here Apollo has a stately grove and a renowned temple in a city where
all the residents are harpers. This is the Britain of the bards and
druids, of whose people it was said in later time that they take their
pleasures sadly.


_At the Cardinal Points_

While the ancients peopled the rim of the earth with deformed races
and monstrous animals, their pictures of the nations that dwelt at
the cardinal points show mainly the ideal treatment. In the far east,
in the far west, in the far south, there were men like unto the
Hyperboreans of the far north. Of the Indians, the Ethiopians, and
the Iberians of early story the same report was had. They were “just”
and “blameless”--these words recur again and again--and they were
long-lived and fortunate. Thus real races took on some quality of myth.
The classic sense of equilibrium demanded this equal reverence to the
four quarters of heaven, just as it was fancied that, to balance the
Pillars of Hercules in the west, Bacchus had set up two columns “by the
farthest shore of the Ocean stream, on the remotest mountains of India,
where the Ganges pours down its white waters to the Nysæan shore.”

This cast of thought did not die with the ancients. The epithets,
“just” and “blameless,” reappear in the writings of eighteenth-century
philosophers when they speak of the Chinese. A little later the
beautiful and artless natives of the South Seas laid upon the thought
of more sophisticated lands a spell that endures. Now, as always, the
four points of the compass are points of fable, and the primitive
worship that was paid them lurks in the magic with which the number
four is invested. The rising and setting of the sun fixed two of these
points and the course of the Nile northward through Egypt may have
fixed the other two.

“All evil comes from the northeast,” say the Japanese. Thoreau usually
walked southwest. “Eastward,” he said, “I go only by force; but
westward I go free.” Tartar tent doors, as Marco Polo notes, face
south. The mythical Irish voyages were toward the west. In the thought
of many races witchcraft is of the north. In Norse mythology hell-way
is always downward and northward. When cutting black hellebore the
hedge doctors of Greece faced eastward and cursed. “Altars should
regard the east,” said Vitruvius. Thither the Mohammedan turns in
prayer. The manifestations of God are in the west, says the Talmud. The
Babylonian temples lay due east and west so that the rising sun would
illumine their altars at the equinoxes. Some of the Egyptian temples
were so planned that this would happen only on Midsummer Day. The
older Christian churches lie east and west, although some of them are
oriented to permit the rising sun to gild their altars on the day of
the saint whose name they bear. The west was the seat of darkness and
hence the rose-window was placed high in the cathedral’s western wall
to illumine the benighted, with the bell-towers flanking it to summon
them to Christ. The eastern side with its altar and the southern with
walls and windows consecrated to saints and martyrs were both sacred.
But the northern, or Black Side, was Satan’s, and effigies of unclean
beasts and sculptured allegories of lascivious deeds proclaimed it.

The cities of ancient Yucatan had gates toward each of the cardinal
points. With the Aztecs all the world directions were significant--the
north standing for emptiness, the east for sterility, the west for
fertility, the south for good fortune. In the symbolism of the Navahos,
white, the dawn color, stands for the east; blue, the sky color, for
the south; yellow, the sunset color, for the west; and black, the
curtain of night, for the north. The Pueblo Indians assigned the north
to the air, the west to water, the south to fire, and the east to earth
and the seeds of life. In old Chinese writings the men of the north
are called brave, the men of the south wise, the men of the east kind
and friendly, the men of the west upright and honest. Over the four
cardinal points the old Brahman gods presided.

Thus by a primitive law of the mind illusion lurks in every corner of
the heaven. It lies deepest in the track of the sun. From east to west
go the great wanderers--Hercules, Ulysses, and the rest--and solar
myths thicken along their path through legendary lands. The east and
west dominate the thoughts of men with their eternal spectacles of
sunrise and sunset. Whatever commerce, geography, or political history
may teach them, the east is still the region of the morning sunlight
and the west of the evening shadow. Though their steps turn westward,
men’s thoughts drift eastward. Though the east be hunger-bitten and
poverty-stricken and its subjugated millions seem to count but little,
it is still the gorgeous east, “the dancing-place of the dawn.”

Beyond the curtains of the west lie the realms of repose: “If sunrise,”
says Max Müller, “inspired the first prayers, called forth the first
sacrificial flames, sunset was the other time when again the whole
frame of man would tremble. The shadows of night approach, the
irresistible power of sleep grasps man in the midst of his pleasures,
his friends depart, and in his loneliness his thoughts turn again to
higher powers. When the day departs the poet bewails the untimely death
of his bright friend; nay, he sees in its short career the likeness of
his own life. Perhaps, when he has fallen asleep, his sun may never
rise again, and thus the place to which the setting sun withdraws in
the far west rises before his mind as the abode where he himself would
go after death.”

Though the westward journeys of the sun are but a seeming, their trail
lies broad across the spiritual life of mankind.


_On the Mountains_

Half of history has been written in the passes of the mountains. What
lies above these deep saddles of the ranges belongs in the main to
legend. Not much, even now, is known of the mountain tops, for men do
not dwell there. Antiquity seldom went up to see. The high places of
old sacrifice were hilltops, not mountain peaks.

Men have been content to travel the valleys and, where necessity
impelled, to cross the passes. The steeps overhead seemed fit abode for
the elder gods, for giants and dwarfs and griffins, for dragons whose
breath was the avalanche, for ghosts whose voice was the echo, for the
carnal revels of Satan and his witches; sometimes, also--since legend
is its own law--for cities of enchantment, invisible and beautiful.

Most famous mountain of classic story was the Atlas; the most fabulous
locality, even in Africa, is the superlative of Pliny. Its summit
reached beyond the clouds and well nigh approached the very orb of the
moon. Rugged and precipitous on the side of the ocean to which it gave
a name, it fell by a gentler slope on the side toward Africa, and dense
groves covered its flanks where streams flashed and fruits abounded.
But in the daytime men were never seen there. All was silent like the
dreadful stillness of the desert. A religious horror stole over those
who drew near. At night, fires innumerable gleamed upon its sides. “It
is then,” says Pliny, “the scene of the gambols of the Ægipans and the
Satyr crew, while it re-echoes with the notes of the flute and the
pipe, and the clash of drums and cymbals.”

The legend of a mountain of nightly tumult and illumination recurs
in Arab and Christian chronicle. Solinus repeats it. The mountain is
Felfel in the Sahara, says an Arab author of the twelfth century,
and genii hold court in towns on its slopes whence the people have
fled. Ibn Khordadbeh places the realm of nocturnal revel in the
Southern Ocean. Argensola, writing of the Moluccas in the sixteenth
century, reports that for ages “cries, whistles, and roarings” had
been heard from a mountain in Banda. The spot is inhabited by devils,
he concludes. Sindbad tells of an island, called Kasil, where nightly
resounds the drumbeat of rebellious djinns. So was Prospero’s isle full
of noises, but these were “sound, and sweet airs that give delight and
hurt not.”

[Illustration: _The Steeps Overhead Seemed Fit Abode for Giants and
Dwarfs and Griffins--for Cities of Enchantment_]

It may be that the Atlas story grew out of the habits of the Kabyles
who tenant the mountain’s recesses. During the heat of the day they
would retire to their dwellings, coming out at night to dance about the
village fires to the music of drums. Similar legends among the Indians
of South America of strange lights seen upon the mountains appear to
have a basis of fact. Sir Martin Conway tells of a village where the
bells were rung and the people flocked to church in dreadful fear
because, after sunset, the peak of Illampu glowed red like fire and
the end of the world seemed at hand. In Venezuela Im Thurn beheld a
mountain strangely luminous at night. Humboldt saw a similar spectacle
in Venezuela and guessed it might be the burning of hydrogen gases. In
Colombia, Zahm saw brilliant lights along the crest of the Cordilleras,
and judged it was an electric phenomenon, the summits acting as a vast
condenser from which electricity escaped by a silent glow or brush
discharge--St. Elmo’s fire. Here, perhaps, is the key to the Old World
story.

The Mountains of the Moon, which lift their snowy peaks on the line of
the equator in East Africa not far from the springs of the Nile, bear
a myth-engendering name. It was given them by Ptolemy, who perhaps
translated it from native words of the same meaning. Lying within the
sphere of Arabic mediæval geography, Eastern fable enveloped them.
One story was that whoever looked upon them was drawn to them as by a
magnetic influence and only death would release him. According to an
Arab compiler, “a certain king sent an expedition to discover the Nile
sources, and they reached the copper mountains, and when the sun rose,
the rays reflected were so strong that they were burnt.”

To the early Greeks the Caucasus was the end of the world; beyond
it was naught but the Ocean Stream. Æschylus describes it in his
_Prometheus Bound_ as the loftiest of mountains and speaks of its
“star-neighboring summits.” Here he pictures the fire-stealing Titan as
chained to a rock with a vulture at his vitals. Herodotus repeats that
these peaks are higher than any other. No Roman general ever passed
them. And they stood for things dreaded and unknown--the sanguinary
Amazons, fugitive and barbaric tribes of Israel, and the sinister
nations of Gog and Magog. These are perhaps the mountains of Aaf of
Malay tradition, which run their ramparts of green chrysolite clear
about the earth and the encompassing sea.

The high places of American Indian tradition lay in the west. The
plains savages and some of the forest tribes looked upon the Rocky
Mountains as the boundary of the known world. These peaks held up the
sky; the spirits of the storm haunted them, and stone giants, and
huge-bellied anthropophagi. Into this west ran the underground trail
to the land of the dead. In South Dakota was the Hill of Little Devils,
malignant pygmies with unduly large heads, of whose arrows the prairie
tribes stood in awe.

There were seven sacred mountains in the land of the Navahos--four at
the cardinal points, and three at the center; and legend gave each its
own color, jewels, birds, and plants. One mountain was fastened to the
earth with a lightning flash, another with a stone knife, another with
a sunbeam, a fourth with a rainbow. Almost in the Greek spirit the
Indians of Guiana chanted the glories of “Roraima of the red rocks,
wrapped in clouds, ever-fertile source of streams.” White jaguars and
white eagles were upon it, a magic circle surrounded it, and demons
guarded its sanctuary.

Whenever the Kirghiz pass by Mustaghata, loftiest of the Pamirs, they
fall upon their knees in prayer, for threescore and ten saints live
there. Sven Hedin, who made four attempts to ascend it, repeats its
legends. One story tells of a holy man who, climbing it, found on its
slopes a garden with plum trees where old men in white garments were
walking. He plucked and ate the fruit. One of the graybeards told him
it was well he had done so, for had he despised the fruit, as they had
done, it would have been his fate to stay, as they must, walking up and
down the garden till time was no more. Then a rider on a white horse
dashed into the garden, and seizing the holy man, galloped with him
down the mountain side, leaving him in the valley, dazed and with only
a confused memory of what he had seen. Another story tells of forty
giant horsemen who swept down the mountain and routed a Chinese army.

On the summit of Mustaghata, to which neither Sven Hedin, nor the holy
man, nor the graybeards could climb, the Kirghiz say is the ancient
city of Janaidar, built in a golden age when everyone was happy and men
were at peace. Its inhabitants had no intercourse afterward with the
peoples below, and all the ills and woes of life are stranger to them.
Their groves bear fruit the year around, their flowers are unfading,
their women never grow old. Cold, darkness, and death are alike unknown
to them. The ramparts of Mustaghata are one of the seats of the realm
of eternal youth.

Though its name is but the Latin word for “bald,” a grim Swiss legend
has it that Mount Pilatus is the burial place of the Roman viceroy who
surrendered Jesus to the mob. When he took his own life, neither the
Tiber nor the Rhone, into which in succession his body was flung, would
contain it. Evil and sordid spirits raised such storms that it was
carried farther. An uncanonical book of the thirteenth century recites
that it was dropped at last “into a well surrounded by mountains,
where, according to some accounts, certain diabolic machinations and
ebullitions are still seen.” This spot was identified with a marshy
pool near the summit of Pilatus.

Throughout the Middle Ages it was believed that if anyone threw a stone
in this little lake, a tempest would follow. Once a year Pilate left
it and sat on a rock arrayed in scarlet. Whoever beheld him died in a
twelvemonth. The fearful burghers of Lucerne made an ordinance that no
one should approach the pool unless one of their number went with him
to see that he cast no stone. At length, in 1585, Johann Mueller, state
pastor of Lucerne, climbed the mountain with a party of friends, flung
stones into the water, and derisively challenged the evil spirit to
come forth. Nothing happened, and the legend lapsed.


_In the Desert_

The desert holds the green surprise of the oases, the promise of
mysteries beyond its veil, and, as men have thought, the memory of
wonderful things that were. Tradition broods over it, legends of
caravans that never came back, of armies swallowed up in its silences,
of vast cities buried in the sand. Where there is so little for the eye
to see, the most haunting things are those the ear has heard--music
that steals from the under edges of the dunes; voices, mocking or
beguiling, which call to caravan stragglers; the crash of ghostly drums
and the clash of arms heard afar.

Any survey of the deserts of history reveals the stuff of wonder. There
each man’s hand is turned against his brother, and yet in every tent
all are safe; masked tribesmen roam the waste; stealthy slave columns
cross it by abandoned routes; hereditary clans of dancing girls supply
the streets of women in the environing lands; hermits wither in rocky
cells and militant fanatics range the plateaus; the bustard and the
wild camel show along the uncertain skyline, and remnants of forgotten
peoples rove below it. These are momentous details; legend has done
much with less to work upon. It needs only that thirsty wayfarers
shall have, as sometimes they do, the sudden vision of lakes of water
shimmering in the distance, with palms fringing them and temples
mirrored in them. Realities of an instant only, their passing leaves a
sense of wonder that expects, and invents.

Much of the tradition of the waste places has been set down by Marco
the Venetian in his account of the passage of the desert of Lop. It
is asserted as a well-known fact, he recites, that here is the abode
of evil spirits “which amuse travelers to their destruction with most
extraordinary illusions.” During the daytime, if men fall behind the
caravan, or are overtaken by sleep so that the column has passed a hill
and is out of sight, they hear voices calling their names in tones to
which they are accustomed. Following these, they are lured from the
direct road and perish alone. At night men seem to hear the march of
a large cavalcade on one side or the other of the road. Again they
follow, in the belief that the camel bells are of their own party; the
daybreak finds them pursuing strange paths alone. Day or night, evil
spirits take the shape of their companions and seek to decoy them from
the proper route. Ghostly bodies of armed men seem to rush upon them,
and in the terror of flight they lose the way.

“Marvelous indeed,” concludes Marco, “and almost passing belief are the
stories related of these spirits of the desert, which are said at times
to fill the air with the sounds of all kinds of musical instruments,
and also of drums and the clash of arms, obliging the travelers to
close their line of march and to proceed in more compact order.”

This is such a recital as one would rather have expected concerning
the desert of ancient Egypt. There were the graves of the dead, and
report had it that their spirits, doomed to a miserable existence in an
inhospitable land, developed into predatory demons who meant no good to
the traveler.

Stories still current in Asia, however, have the flavor of Marco’s
report of seven centuries ago. Doughty tells of the fantasy they have
at Teyma of a neighboring spectral oasis, often beheld by the Bedouins.
Slaves and horses issue from the enchanted appearance of palms; “but
all fadeth soon if a man approach them.”

In the little desert of Reig Rawan at the foot of the heights of
Kohistan the wind-blown sands sweep through the rocky fissures with
a sound that is like the music of an æolian harp accompanied by the
distant beating of drums. These wild harmonies of the wind in open
spaces are the source of many strange tales. In Reig Rawan they are
fabled to be the martial strains of armies which have been swallowed up
in the sands, but march on to unknown destinies.

The kingdom of Prester John has been mapped in Asia, in Africa, and in
the imagination of men. In the latter domain lies the Gravelly Sea, a
desert phenomenon which Maundeville describes: “It is all Gravel and
Sand, without any Drop of Water, and it ebbeth and floweth in great
waves as other Seas do, and it is never still nor at Peace, in any
Manner of Season. And no Man may pass that Sea by Ship, nor by any
Manner of Craft, and therefore may no Man know what Land is beyond that
Sea. And albeit that it have no Water, yet Men find therein and on the
Banks full good Fishes of other Manner of Nature and Shape, than Men
find in any other Sea, and they be of right good Taste and delicious
for Man’s Meat.”

What lies beyond it? Mezzoramia, it may be, if it is accepted that
Prester John was an Abyssinian. This is an earthly paradise, situated
somewhere in Africa. Only one road leads to it, and the road is hard to
find and easy to lose again. No man ever found this secret highway save
Gaudentio di Lucca. He traveled it to its end, and for twenty years
lived behind the desert’s curtains in a country of every felicity.

Fables of the waste tell of cities on which some sudden curse has
fallen and turned their people into stone. The sand has not covered
them with the decent pity of its mantle. They lie open to the air. The
sunshine falls on their silent market places and only the wind wanders
in their streets. The stony figures of the men and women that once
lived there stand where the curse had found them, disquieting things in
their semblance to statuary and their ancient caricature of humanity.

The map on which Anthony Jenkinson recorded his travels in Tartary
makes note of a petrified city in the plains of Central Asia.
Garcilasso de la Vega, Inca historian, tells a like tale of
petrification based on a numerous group of stone images. The Museum
Metallicum of Aldrovandi pictures an assemblage of men, sheep, and
camels converted into stone. The Arabs have a story of a petrified camp
at Hamam Meskouteen in Numidia, where they assert that stony tents
are pitched and stony sheep dot the plain. Most circumstantial of all
such legends is that of Ras Sem, an extensive petrified village in the
Cyrenaica. It was surmised that this might be the region of the Gorgons
of classic story, whose frightful glance turned everything into stone.

This village figures in old travel books, one of them dating as far
back as 1594, and Sir Kenelm Digby may have had access to these when
he printed in the _Mercurius Politicus_ his travel tale of a petrified
city in northern Africa. The Tripolitan ambassador in London asserted
that a thousand persons had seen the wonders of Ras Sem. It was a large
town of circular outline, with streets and shops and a central palace.

The olive and the palm stood in the courtyards, but the trees had been
turned into a cinder-colored stone. There were men also in different
postures. Some were plying their trade and occupations in the bazaars
or holding fabrics and breadstuffs in their hands, as if to attract
the passer-by. There were women suckling their children or kneeling at
the kneading trough. In the palace a man was lying on a bed of state,
and guards armed with pike and spear stood at the door. The tenants of
the palace, and the men and women without--they, too, were of the same
bluish stone. The heads of some were wanting and others of the Silent
People had lost a leg or an arm.

There were camels, oxen, asses, horses, and sheep in the market place,
there were large birds perched on the walls, and in the houses there
were dogs, cats, and even mice--and all these, like their masters and
hosts, were petrified. The pieces of money which had been brought
thence were “of the bigness of an English shilling, charged with a
horse’s head on one side and with some unknown characters on the other.”

The quotation is from Shaw’s _Travels in Barbary_. The writer tells of
an inquiry into these stories by order of the French court made some
time before by M. Le Maire, consul at Tripoli. The Turkish janizaries
who gathered the tribute would not bring him the body of an adult
person from Ras Sem, alleging it would be cumbersome to carry. But for
a thousand dollars they did bring the body of a little child. They
declared they had run the risk of being strangled by their companions
for having delivered to an infidel the mortal remains of one of their
unfortunate Mohammedan brethren, as they deemed these people to be.
What they brought was the statue of a small Cupid taken from the ruins
of Leptus.

The consul sent other persons, but none could find a trace of walls,
buildings, animals, or utensils where Ras Sem was said to be. They
did find one thing he could not explain. This was what seemed to be
tiny loaves of petrified bread; but Shaw declares these were fossil
echinites of the discoid kind. Little pools of “heavy and ponderous
water” were also come upon, which the wind had uncovered. This,
continues Shaw, “may be the petrifying fluid which has contributed to
the conversion of the palm trees into stone.” He thinks the country of
the Gorgons was farther west.

From any one of several causes the fable of stony cities might arise.
While sand does not petrify, it does preserve; and sometimes, with
the winds for its artisans, it has wrought its own architecture and
sculpture in the living rock, repeating in the infinite chances of its
labors the outlines of minarets and templed columns, and other contours
in which fantasy may find the forms of bygone worshipers. There seem
to have been cases where peoples of a higher culture have built their
cities in the desert, and have passed; and a ruder race, coming later
upon the scene, mistook their statuary for the breathing handiwork of
nature stricken into stillness and stone.

The typical desert legends are of splendid cities that the sands have
covered. There is truth under them, as there are ruins under the sand;
how much truth and how many ruins is a secret the desert yields but
grudgingly. In a series of striking passages the Jewish Scriptures have
sketched these dead capitals of the waste with their jackal tenants.
The Arab deems them the home of evil spirits and hastens by. The nomads
of Central Asia speak of opulent cities which sandstorms have blotted
out in a night and of treasure to be found in them if one digs for it
under a fortunate star. But there are unearthly chances to be faced,
and treasure-seekers will not invite them by venturing many days’
march from the desert’s rim. One legend tells of the vanished city of
Ho-lao-lo-kia and the princes who came from many lands to excavate the
site. “But every time they try to dig the sand away a violent wind
arises, setting up whirlwinds of smoke and a thick mist, which sweeps
away the path and leads the workmen astray into the desert.”

A passage from an antique Indian script, describing a city which
perished two thousand years ago, may stand for a silhouette of the
buried cities of Iran and of Turkestan, as legend has pictured them:
“The temples and the palaces of Anuradhapura are numberless, and their
golden cupolas and pavilions shimmer in the sun. In the streets are
crowds of soldiers armed with bows and arrows. Elephants, horses,
chariots, and countless multitudes pass in a continual turmoil. There
are jugglers, dancers, and musicians from many lands, whose timbals
gleam with golden ornaments.”

It is more than conjecture that in these ancient lands not only cities
but states have disappeared under the sand. Gradually they have yielded
to their fate, as the desert has moved upon them through periodic
cycles of deficient rainfall. It may be that sometimes destruction came
with almost its fabled swiftness. MacGregor saw the sands in the very
act of billowing over the walls and rolling through the streets of
the Persian town of Yazd. Much may have happened, must have happened,
in forgotten times in the great space of fifteen hundred miles of
longitude and four hundred miles of latitude comprised in the Lop
basin; and many and circumstantial are the legends thereof.

In the Gobi Desert Sven Hedin discovered one of these buried
cities--God-accursed he calls it--over which the wind had flung the
sands, only to sweep them away and leave the site bare to the sun
after uncounted centuries had passed. Its walls had once been washed
by a powerful stream along which millstones turned under the shade of
luxuriant groves. There were apricot trees in the gardens, and mulberry
trees where the silkworm fed and spun its cocoon. There were bazaars
loud with the tumult of craftsmen. This was the city of Takla-makan.

What the explorer found was a dead forest, and ruins several miles
across. The timbers of hundreds of houses were still standing,
chalk-white poplar wood brittle as glass. Among them were fragments of
images in gypsum, showing the Buddha and praying women with faces of
the Aryan type, all executed with refinement of taste; and there were
even figures of boats rocking on the waves of vanished seas.

“At what period,” asks its discoverer, “was this mysterious city
inhabited? When did its last crop of russet apricots ripen in the sun?
When did the sour green leaves of its poplars yellow for their last
fall? When was the trickling hum of its millwheels silenced forever?
When did its despairing people finally abandon their dwellings to the
ravenous maw of the desert king? Who were the people who lived here?
What was the tongue they spoke? Whence came the unknown inhabitants of
this Tadmor in the wilderness? How long did their city flourish, and
whither did they go when they saw that within its walls they could no
longer have a safe abiding place?”

Passing the ruins of other cities, the nomad has asked himself these
and stranger questions. And out of the answers which his superstition
and fancy have suggested has been woven the myth of the desert.


_In the Forest_

Men can lose their way in the deep forest, easily become confused
there, and make it a proverb that friends are not to be met in a wood.
There races that have passed out of the primitive culture do not feel
at home. Through successive stages of their history the forest was held
to be sacred, then enchanted, then ill-omened and haunted.

In the beginning men worshiped trees and groves. Pan, with his
attendant fauns and satyrs, presided in the forest. The hamadryads
lived in trees, and died with them; and they might contract marriages
with mortal youths. Sometimes the tree had its own soul, sometimes
it was possessed by a spirit which had entered it, sometimes it was
the symbol, sometimes the sanctuary, of a god. Deity dwelt in the
oak of Dodona. Diana in Autun was a midday demon of the forests
and crossroads. In the tabooed grove near Marseilles the trees were
stained with sacrificial blood, the flames burned without consuming the
boscage, and even the priests dared not venture there at midnight or
midday. The sacred bo tree is still worshiped in India. The mistletoe
is magical above all other objects. Savages hang offerings upon trees,
and in the same spirit the gypsy spits when he passes under them.

The wood spirits of the primitive mythologies became at length the
stuff of folklore and travel tale--degenerate Pans and dryads that
wanderers saw sometimes in the shadows of trees. The Old Man of the
Woods, lame, hairy, green-eyed, ranges many countries and is most
clearly pictured in the tales of the Brazilian Indians and the eastern
Slavs. A mocker, misleader, and seducer, he cast a spell of terror
upon the forest. In the wild women of Russian story it had still other
perturbing tenants. These were good-looking creatures with shaggy
bodies, square heads, and long hair. Sometimes they came into the
villages to borrow kneading troughs, but it was dangerous to meet them
in their own domain, for they turned the solitary intruder round and
round until he lost his way. They were fond of music and might invite
lads and lasses to dance with them; whistling, however, they could not
endure. Polish tales picture them as tall, thin-faced, sensual females,
with disheveled hair and garments in constant disarray. When groups of
them encountered human beings they tickled the adults to death and took
the youths with them for their lovers; wherefore young people never
went singly to the woods. In Swedish tradition this was the terrible
Skogfrau, or Woman of the Thicket.

These beings personified the mystery of forest shadows and what
Ruskin called the mediæval dread of thick foliage. “Forest in every
semicivilized land,” says Belloc, “is ever a word of fear.” There
the knights of old tale had adventure with giants and dwarfs and
spell-weaving witches, and there the younger sons of folklore followed
lonely paths with beasts and birds to counsel them. As the enchanted
woods of romance with their goblin glooms and talking trees faded from
the minds of men, in their place appeared the real terrors of thickets
where robbers, banished men, and fugitive peoples beset the ways with
danger. The conception of forests as sanctuaries of peace is modern.

[Illustration: _The Enchanted Woods of Romance with Their Goblin Glooms
and Talking Trees Faded from the Minds of Men_]


_Under the Ground_

The cellar strain that is in human nature betrays itself in the
satisfaction men take in roaring songs and drinking bitter liquors
in rat-haunted sunken spaces. If groves were God’s first temples,
grottoes were men’s first dwellings. They came out of caves, and in
flight sometimes they return to them. For their extremity mother earth
has provided a rocky roof, a bedchamber, a storeroom, and a fireplace.
Wherefore they deem no habitation complete until they have dug a cave
under it.

“Men,” said the Caribs, “should avoid places which are enlightened
neither by the sun nor by the moon.” Yet there are races whose legends
have dug a cellar under the entire earth; if its surface is the floor
of one world, it is the roof of another. Beneath it are the happy
hunting grounds of the Indian. According to Cherokee myth the living
can descend thereto if, after fasting, they follow back the streams to
their springs and have one of the underground folk to guide them, for
the springs are doorways to the world below. There one finds people,
animals, and plants about as they are above, but the seasons are
different, for are not the springs warmer than the air in winter, and
cooler in summer? Navaho legend makes the surface of the earth the top
story of a structure five stories high. Beginning as ants, beetles,
dragonflies, locusts, and bats, mankind climbed from one story to
another, or rather was expelled from each, usually for sexual sin.

The gods’ land, or Elysium, of the Celts was commonly placed upon far
islands of the west, but sometimes in the hollow hills called Sid. Here
were fair meadows and stately palaces and musical trees and a beautiful
people whose berry diet kept them ever young; in the song of the magic
birds of this underworld there were seven years of joy and oblivion.
These people were the Tuatha Dé Danann. Giraldus Cambrensis describes
a like people, but of fairy stature, dwelling underground, swearing
no oaths, forswearing human ambition and inconstancy, and subsisting
on milk and saffron. Yet the Nagas of Hindoo story and the gnomes of
European folk-tale may be true historical races.

With his keen sense of an earthly origin primitive man was deeply
interested in burrowing creatures--in the scarab with his little round
ball that symbolized the sun in Egypt; in the beetle of the South
American pampas, which symbolized the Creator; in the rats and mice
which various tribes worshiped; in the runway of the armadillo which
in Brazil was an entrance to the land of shades; in the tunnel of the
mole, and the cities of the marmot. This underground world of tiny
animals figures large in the folklore of early peoples, shaping their
genealogies, influencing their councils, intervening in their affairs
for good and ill, at times deciding their destinies.

There was sorcery underground. Life came from it with each recurring
spring. The dead were laid there, and far beneath were the abodes of
their spirits. In the caverns were witches who had some command over
life and death. There also were the haunts of necromancers, and though
their dens were squalid, all the riches of the world were around them.
Legend became sumptuous and prodigal when it left the surface of the
earth and plunged into the darkness under it.

The story of Aladdin’s descent into this realm carries nearly all the
elements of subterranean myth. His false uncle, the African magician,
conducted him to a valley between mountains near a large Chinese town.
When he muttered a spell the earth opened, and the lad went down a
stone staircase into a palace where were brazen cisterns brimming with
gold and silver. Beyond in a terraced garden was a magic lamp. Securing
the latter and starting back, the youth paused to look at the fruits
that hung from trees in the garden. These were of various hues, and
though he did not know it, they were precious stones. Aladdin would
have wished they were figs or grapes or pomegranates; but he filled his
purse with them and crammed them in his bosom.

Because the youth was slow in passing up the lamp, the magician who
was waiting without lowered the stone over the staircase, and Aladdin
was left in darkness. But a genie of frightful aspect appeared when he
chanced to rub a ring his false uncle had given him. The apparition was
a slave of the ring, and with it began the cycle of deeds and gifts
that won the Chinese gamin a princess and a throne.

One element is missing in this descent, type otherwise of a thousand
others. That is women. There were beautiful enchantresses as well as
foul witches under the ground. They figure in a characteristic story of
India told by Hiouen Thsiang. A good-natured fellow, versed in magic
formulas, entered a cavern with thirteen companions. They came to a
walled city with towers and lookouts of gold, silver, and lapis-lazuli.
Young, laughing maidens greeted them at the outer gates, and at the
inner gates were two slave girls each holding a golden vessel full
of flowers and scents. Before the men went farther, these told them
they must bathe in the tank that stood there, anoint themselves with
perfumes, and crown themselves with flowers. But they must wait awhile
before they bathed; only the master of magic could immerse at once.
Of course the thirteen ignored the warning, and when they entered the
tank they became confused. They were found afterward, says the Chinese
author, “sitting in the middle of a rice-field distant from this
due north, over a level country, about thirty or forty li,” with no
recollection of how they got there.

The sorceress and enchantress motives are developed into drama in
the great myth of Tannhäuser. This minnesinger of the Middle Ages
was riding through the dusk toward Wartburg, where minstrels were to
compete for a prize, when he saw a glimmering figure on the slopes of
the mountain called the Hörselberg. White arms were stretched to him
in the gesture that is always more eloquent than words, and, leaving
his charger, he followed the woman. Flowers bloomed in her footsteps,
nymphs attended her, and a rosy light lay on the path as she led the
knight to a cavern’s mouth and thence to her palace in the heart of the
mountain. There for seven years he was the willing slave of the pagan
Goddess of Love, and partner in the revels of her court.

Satiety and an awakened conscience came together. The minstrel longed
for a breath of pure mountain air, for the tinkle of sheep bells,
for the sky of night and its stars. When Venus would not release her
thrall, he spoke the Virgin’s name--and the mountain-side opened. He
found himself again aboveground and heard the chime of church bells.

To one priest after another Tannhäuser made confession of his great
sin, but the shocked clerics dared not give him absolution, and at
length he stood before the Pope.

“Sooner shall this staff in my hand grow green and blossom,” said
the stern vicar of Heaven, “than that God should pardon thee.” With
darkness in his soul, Tannhäuser turned away. Three days afterward
the papal staff put forth buds and blossoms, and messengers were sent
in haste from Rome. They reached the Hörselberg only to learn that a
haggard wayfarer had just entered the mountain. The minstrel was never
seen again.

The golden age will issue from underground, according to a noble legend
of the mediæval time which concerns Frederick Barbarossa, head of the
Holy Roman Empire. He was not drowned in Cilicia while on crusade, as
report had it. He is sleeping in a cavernous chamber in the Kyffhäuser
Berg which rises from the emerald meadows of Thuringia. His long red
beard has grown quite through the stone table where he sits in slumber.
The good knights surround him, and once in a hundred years he rouses
himself and asks if the ravens still fly around the mountain. When the
birds of omen no longer call about the steeps he shall awake and sally
forth with his horsemen, and the peace of all men shall follow.

Thus at times has legend walked the earth, as men might cross the flat
housetops of an Eastern city, with the thought that what counted most
was just beneath its immense roof.


_Darkness_

The dark has other creatures besides the bat and owl, other spectacles
than those that pass in dreams. Sometimes in Celtic legend a mist
descended on a man, and until it lifted the towers and orchards of
elysium were all about him. There is a class of Eastern legends which
tell of men around whom a sudden shadow fell, so that they were seen no
more, or next were seen in another place. Maundeville has a tale of a
cloud which settled down upon a land and did not lift again. This was
a province called Hanyson in the kingdom of Abchaz which is next to
the kingdom of Georgia. One must travel three days to ride around the
province, and one dare not ride through it, for thick twilight covers
it. Out of the gloom the people of neighboring lands hear voices of
folk, and horses neighing, and cocks crowing.

The story is that a cursed emperor of Persia that was hight Saures
overtook a Christian host in the plain that was hight Megon and would
have destroyed it. “But anon a thick Cloud came and covered the Emperor
and all his Host. And so they endure in that Manner that they must not
go out on any Side; and so shall they evermore abide in Darkness till
the Day of Doom, by the Miracle of God. And then the Christian Men went
where liked them best. Also ye shall understand that out of that Land
of Darkness goeth out a great River that sheweth well that there be
Folk dwelling there by many Tokens; but no Man dare enter into it.”

Some report of the long Arctic night reached the Asiatic countries of
lower latitudes, and Marco Polo when he traversed them. He gives a
hearsay account of what he calls the Region of Darkness. It is distant
fourteen journeys by dog-sled across the tundras from the country of
the Tartars. The atmosphere in this twilight land is “as we find it
just about the dawn of day, when we may be said to see and not to see.”
Its people are tall and well made, but pale, stupid, and brutish, and
without prince or other governance. They have great stores of furs of
ermines, martins, and foxes. Under cover of the prevailing darkness the
Tartars raid them, plundering them of their furs and driving off their
cattle. That they may not become lost forever in the gloom, the raiders
ride mares that have young foals, and these are left on the frontiers.
When the Tartars would return, they lay the bridles on the necks of the
dams, and maternal instinct finds the homeward track.

Fable and fact ride abreast through this narrative, as horsemen through
the chill obscurity of dawn, and a great thing has come of it. Marco’s
account of the peltry of the north had more to do than aught else,
tradition says, with the founding of the Hudson Bay Company and the
opening of the northern half of the American continent.


_Distance_

The haze on all these horizon lands is the haze of distance. There are
two phrases which come to the ear with the sound of unlocking doors.
One is Once upon a Time, which children hear; it is distance measured
in years. The other is Beyond the Mountains, which plainsmen use; it
is distance measured in miles and difficulties. For either distance,
fetters fall.

Three tales may declare this as well as a thousand, and a thousand
might be told. Russian peasants speak of a land which they call
Bielovodye, and which lies, as they think, somewhere on the borders of
Mongolia in the distant east. It is a country of peace and plenty, and
nobody lives there.

Rubruquis gives just a glimpse, as of something seen afar through a
narrow window. “A Chinese priest,” he says, “told me also for truth
(which neverthelesse, I doe not believe) that there is a province
beyond Cataia, into the which, at whatsoever age a man enters, he
continueth in the same age wherein he entred.”

The widest horizons of time and space are reached in a single artless
sentence in a gypsy folk tale: “They went then further than I can
remember, till they reached the knoll of the country at the back of the
wind and the face of the sun, that was in the realm of Big Women.” The
men who made this journey skirted all the coasts of illusion.




Chapter XVI. Lands of Legend


There are countries whose boundaries have not been fixed by armies or
treaties, nor their ways marked out by trade. The dreams of men have
made them. Their substance is reality, yet their effect is vision. By a
sort of conspiracy of wish, to which men of imaginative mind have been
parties and all others have yielded assent, these countries have been
supposed to be different from what any was or could be. It has been
easy enough to create the illusion, for one’s view of another land is
always more or less a symbolic drawing.


_Ophir_

The geographical table in the tenth chapter of Genesis tells a straight
tale which men debated for something more than two thousand years and
only in the present century have accepted at its face value. In one
phrase the Scriptures link Ophir and Havilah, and then add that “their
dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar, a mount of the
East.” Where was Ophir? Perhaps the learned men of Alexandria were the
first to ask the question. What was Ophir? This question nobody thought
of putting, and it was vital.

Ophir was a magic word which let no man rest once he had heard it. The
spell of gold was in it. Even as they wrote, it seemed to intoxicate
the Jewish prophets, poets, and chroniclers. Isaiah speaks of the
“golden wedge of Ophir.” It is said of wisdom in the Book of Job that
it cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx or
the sapphire. “Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of
Ophir as the stones of the brooks,” says another passage Oriental in
its opulence of suggestion.

From Ophir came the fleet of Solomon and Hiram of Tyre, fetching gold,
four hundred and twenty talents, and sandalwood. The arrival of the
treasure fleet is associated in the narrative, for some reason one may
only guess, with the coming to Jerusalem of the Queen of Sheba. The two
incidents constitute the most gorgeous episode in Jewish history.

Sheba’s queen comes to visit Solomon with a very great train, with
camels that bear spices, and very much gold and precious stones. She
sees the meat of his table, the sitting of his servants, and the
attendance of his ministers. She proves him with hard questions, and
pride dies in her. The report she has heard in her own land of his
wealth and wisdom was a true report, she declares, but the half had not
been told. Then she goes back, and her camels take across the deserts
gifts richer than they had brought. Gold of Ophir travels north, and
south again, and legend follows it.

Two other place-names appear on this piece of Hebrew brocade. One is
Ezion-geber, Solomon’s port on the Red Sea in the land of Edom. The
other is Tharshish, where the king had ships. Once in three years
came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold and silver, ivory and apes
and peacocks. There was nothing in these imports that one might eat
or drink or use for shelter or raiment. The commodities were typical
of ancient commerce in their magnificence, their vain show, and their
uselessness--and the cargo has freighted the imagination of men ever
since. There was contraband in the ships of Tharshish. Among the
elephants’ teeth and peacocks was stowed away the spirit of the East.

Where was Tharshish? Where was Ophir? Where was Havilah, mentioned
rarely, but in a significant context?

It was long thought that Tharshish was the Carthaginian port of
Tartessus beyond the Pillars, where now is the Spanish port of Cadiz.
But Spain had few apes, little gold, and no ivory. The text of Genesis
seemed to point to the Arabian coast as the seat of Ophir. But Araby
had no elephants and its gold came from elsewhere. Ophir was sought
also in the African spiceland of Punt, in the Midian country of
northern Arabia, and at the mouth of the Indus in Hindostan. Once in
every three years came the fleet, so said the text; and into this was
read the meaning, not of periodic sailings, but of voyages that covered
three years. Ophir, therefore, must lie in the far East, and men sought
it in the Malay Peninsula, in that Golden Chersonese where were ivory
and apes and peacocks, as well as precious metals.

For one splendid century it was Portugese instinct to advance steadily,
to see clearly, and to do great things easily--the legacy, perhaps,
of that incomparable spirit, Prince Henry the Navigator. Within the
century after his death, his countrymen had gone around Africa, opened
a sea route to the Indies, and made the coveted Spice Islands their
own. Also, they had discovered Ophir, or rather almost discovered it.
What they found was the missing port of Tharshish, and Havilah, the
land which scriptural writers linked with Ophir, and dismissed.

A Portugese squadron, outbound for the Indies in 1505, put in at the
little African port of Sofala on the Mozambique Channel, looking east
toward Madagascar. Learning that the Arabs, or Moors, as they called
them, were trafficking here for gold brought down to the coast from the
interior, its captains said that this must be Ophir. It has taken four
centuries to show how near this casual judgment was to the truth. The
gold of Ophir reached the Indian Ocean through the African port once
named Tharshish and now called Sofala, and came from the Mashona and
Matabele region between the lower Zambesi and the Limpopo rivers in
what is now Rhodesia. It was Hottentot gold, not gold of Araby.

What was Ophir? When at length this question was asked, the Scripture
texts, which pointed eastward toward Arabian regions where gold was
not, slowly yielded their paradox. Ophir was not a country at all.
It was a port, perhaps the greatest of the ancient world. Here the
products of India, of Africa, and of the Eastern Mediterranean were
interchanged. The gold of ancient Rhodesia (Havilah) became gold of
Ophir, just as figs of the Levant become Smyrna figs and the white
grapes of Spain become Malaga grapes, when freighted on ships outbound
from those ports.

In the days of its decline Ophir was known to Ptolemy, the Alexandrian
geographer, as the Sapphar Metropolis; to Arrian, the Greek geographer,
as Portus Nobilis, and to the Romans as Moscha. It lay where Genesis
places it: “and their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto
Sephar a mount of the east.” There, under the shadow of Mount Sephar,
nearly opposite the island of Socotra and about midway along the
southern coast of Arabia, its ruins lie around a silted inlet of the
sea. Mesha, or Moscha, signifies a wharf or landing place, and was
at the inlet’s mouth. Ophir stood at the head of the inlet. The name
signifies simply The City, The Metropolis, as the Roman used the single
word _urbs_ to designate his capital.

This was the great mart of Himyaritic civilization. The Himyarites were
the settled folk of southern Arabia--the Minæans and their successors,
the Sabæans. It may be that their civilization was the earliest in the
world, still older than the Egyptian and Chaldean. There is reason to
believe that the carrying trade of the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean
was in their hands for a greater part of the period during which it
has been assumed that the Phœnicians controlled it. The merchants of
Tyre and Sidon were brief interlopers in a sea-borne commerce which
for thousands of years had been the monopoly of the Sabæan Arabs.
That the latter worked the mines of ancient Rhodesia in the land they
called Havilah is the simple and unavoidable inference from facts which
nevertheless required about a generation of archæological research to
establish, and which the geographer, A. H. Keane, has summarized in
his striking monograph. The Himyaritic inscriptions in southern Arabia
and the inscriptions on the extensive ruins of ancient gold workings
between the Zambesi and the Limpopo were made by the same people.

The going of Solomon’s ships and the ships of his Tyrian ally to Ophir
and on to Tharshish, and the coming of Sabæa’s queen to Jerusalem, were
what they are represented to be, brilliant and exotic incidents in the
troubled march of Jewish history. This traffic covered only about a
century, and millenniums of Arab commerce between Ophir and Tharshish
envelop it. After that century Israel and Phœnicia disappear from the
Indian Ocean, and the South Arab takes up the gold trade anew. At this
task the Portuguese found him.

The Jew was the prosperous visitor of an hour at the port of the
Sabæans. Perhaps their queen made a return call to learn why he had
come and whence the gold in his wallet. The answer was not in Solomon
himself; truly, indeed, the half was never told her. It was David whose
conquest of Edom had given Israel temporary control of important trade
routes. The wealth of Solomon was in part a transportation charge, and
in part a police tax upon “the traffick of the spice merchants and all
the kings of Arabia.” They paid it rather than have their caravans
plundered on the roads the Jew controlled. The gold that Israel and
Phœnicia brought from Tharshish direct, like the gold which Spain
brought from Peru, was not obtained in trade exchanges. It was wrung
from slave labor, Hottentots and Bushmen--whose present physiognomy and
complexion show an Asiatic strain--toiling for taskmasters, as since
they have toiled, under the sjambok.

Ezion-geber, the Jewish port, lay at the head of the Red Sea. Tharshish
lay nearly six thousand miles to the south as coasting vessels made
it, and voyages were probably by way of some port in the west of
Madagascar, where Semitic influences have been discovered. Midway
between Tharshish and Ezion-geber, and midway between the east and west
of antiquity, lay Ophir. The age-long vision of a golden land lifts
from its name. In its stead loom the shadowy outlines of a mighty port,
with strange ships at anchor, and clinking bags and odorous bales upon
the wharves, and hawk-faced merchants at their traffic, where now are
ruins and the oblivious sea.


_Lotus-land_

The country of the lotus-eaters was a promontory jutting out into the
Mediterranean Sea from the land of the Gindanes. Whoso tastes the fruit
of the lotus, Homer said, forgets his native shore, his family, and his
friends. In an age that avows a world-weariness to which the wandering
Greeks were strangers, this brief glimpse of a land released from
remembrance has been an arresting thing.

Later poets expanded the Odyssey legend, wrote new significances into
it, and sometimes provided it with a different ending, as in the fine
poem of Tennyson. The Victorian gives no hint that the companions of
Ulysses fled from Lotus-land. It seemed to them better to stay there.
They had traveled unto fatigue, and their island homes were still
far beyond the wave. Dear as were the last embraces of their wives,
it was likely that themselves were now all but forgotten, that their
sons had inherited them, and that their deeds before Troy were sung
by minstrels as things of long ago. Why return like ghosts to trouble
joy? So the mariners burst into choric song declaring the delights of
long rest and dreamful ease and mild-minded melancholy upon a slumbrous
shore. Then the rhythm changes to carry their resolve:

  We have had enough of action, and of motion we,
  Rolled to starboard, rolled to larboard, when the surge was seething
  free,
  Where the wallowing monster spouted his foam-fountains in the sea.
  Let us swear an oath, and keep it with an equal mind,
  In the hollow Lotos-land to live and lie reclined
  On the hills like Gods together, careless of mankind.

In the Homeric story the lotus strand was a halting place for Ulysses
and his men on the way from the Ciconian coast to their adventure with
the giant Polyphemus. Their momentary pause in the enchanted Libyan
land is the slightest episode in the Odyssey. After nine days of stormy
faring they anchor by a fragrant beach and go ashore for water and a
feast. Three of their number wander farther and hospitable natives bid
them eat the fruit of their trees. Having eaten, a spell of oblivion
falls on them and they would travel no more; but their comrades bind
them and carry them aboard the ships, and hastily the company sails
away.

Herodotus locates the land of the lotus-eaters in the Syrtic district
of the North African coast, whence a caravan route leads to Egypt.
This people, he says, live entirely on the fruit of the lotus tree.
The fruit is about the size of the lentisk berry, and in sweetness
resembles the date. The lotophagi even succeed in obtaining from it a
sort of wine. Rawlinson, who identifies the lotus with the rhamnus,
asserts, however, that it looks and tastes “rather like a bad crab
apple.”

There has been controversy as to what the ancients meant by the lotus.
Some writers said it was a kind of clover, the poa of Strabo. The lotus
of Egypt and India is a water lily whose roots and seeds are eaten by
the poor. Pliny says that the lotus of Homer was a tree “the size of a
pear tree, though Cornelius Nepos calls it low.” The latter describes
its fruit as yellow, the size of a bean, and sweet and pleasant to
the taste. It was pounded into a paste and stored for food, and a wine
like mead was made from it. In the district where Ulysses anchored,
and which has been identified with the modern Jerba, the tree still
flourishes; Arabs eat its fruit and make a wine of it. Its commercial
name is jujube, and in the Mediterranean countries it is prized as a
winter dessert fruit.

If there were poppy dreams in the orchards of Africa, the secret of
them passed with the wine the ancients brewed there. The longing for
forgetfulness remains. Those who have come by it honestly through toil
have found, as Ulysses did, that lotus-land is a port of call upon
struggling seas.


_The Incense Country_

The world commerce of ancient times was in four commodities--gold,
amber, precious stones, and incense. With transportation by pack,
caravan, and small coasting craft, nothing of greater bulk or less
intrinsic worth could be carried far at a profit. The first three of
these commodities were come upon more or less by accident. Incense was
the root, bark, gum, seeds, dried leaves, or flowers of various trees,
shrubs, and plants, and was gathered at stated seasons of the year.
The business had the element of certainty, so far as anything could be
certain in ages when land and water travel were pursuits of hazard,
when there was little law upon the desert and none upon the sea. The
incense trade was therefore the great trade of antiquity. By it the
nations of the east, west and south first came to know one another.

How important was this traffic Pliny bears witness in his _Natural
History_. Page after page, chapter after chapter, book after book are
devoted to the incense, perfumes, and unguents of the East. It is an
impatient, although a faithful, testimony. The Latin writer groans over
the enormous prices the precious gums command, recites how they are
sophisticated in the Alexandrian warehouses with resin, turpentine,
and Cyprian wax, lists the nine substances with which Indian nard
is imitated, and rails at the superstition which uses scents for
sacrifice, the sinful luxury which drenches the body with them, and
even mingles them in the wines of the table. Consider, he says, the
vast number of funerals celebrated every year throughout the world,
the heaps of incense piled up in honor of the dead, the quantities
offered to the gods. Is anybody the better off? It seems to Pliny
that the immortal ones were kinder to men when a salted cake was the
best they could hope to find on their altars. At the very lowest the
Indians, Seres, and Arabians took from the empire one hundred million
sesterces every year--“so dearly do we pay for our luxury and our
women.”

Not content with the prodigality of nature, Pliny continues, luxury has
seen fit to combine all pleasant odors into a single whole, and hence
have come unguents. The Persians quite soak themselves in these blended
perfumes, to conceal from themselves that they live in dirt. There are
Romans who go still further, for they plaster themselves with unguents.
Some of them, and Nero of the number, even sprinkle therewith the soles
of their feet. On festival days the very eagles on battle standards,
thick with the dust of the camps, are anointed. Pearls and jewels have
a value that lasts, but scents die as soon as they are born. To what
good is this all, Pliny asks again.

Few others put this question. For the living, for the dead, and for
the very gods, there must be a savor of satisfaction. Gums were burned
to purify the air of dwellings, to mask the odors of burnt sacrifice,
to disguise the intimations of mortality when the bodies of the dead
smoked on funeral pyres. Their use to these ends was the primitive
sanitary science of the East. In the rites of embalming, their fumes
reanimated mummy and mortuary statue and nourished the souls of the
departed on the journey to the spirit-land. The gods above were fed by
the smoke of sacrifice and their favor was flattered for the projects
of men. So it befell in Egypt, and the pages of Herodotus are in
evidence that the whole country had become a vast drug shop.

Musk came from the highlands of China, and from India, gum benzoin
from Java, sandalwood from the Golden Chersonese, cloves from Eastern
islands unknown. Balm of Gilead, the most precious of odoriferous
substances, came from Judea, and according to Pliny battles had been
fought over it between Jews and Romans. There were other spicy roots,
leaves, and petals that grew in desert gardens or mountain parks of
the East; the geography of scents was wide and vague and little known.
But the true incense land of the ancients had definite bounds. It
lay on both sides of the promontory known variously as the Aromatic
Cape and as the Cape of Spices and now as Cape Guardafui, where the
continent of Africa juts farthest into the Indian Ocean. This land had
two provinces--Punt, which is the modern Somaliland, and Sabæa, which
is southern Arabia.

Cinnamon and cassia were taken from Punt, and some frankincense, the
“true incense,” as the name signifies and as the Christian altars
of Europe afterward came to know it. From Sabæa were taken large
quantities of frankincense, as well as myrrh and ladanum. The latter
country had credit also in the ancient world for a long list of balms
that came from elsewhere. The secret, never more than half known, was
that Sabæa imported odorous things as well as grew them. It brought
them in from more eastern countries and sent them forth on its ships,
or on the camels that traveled the incense route northward to Petra,
whence they were dispensed to the Mediterranean peoples. The incense
land was the center of world commerce, which was above all a traffic
in sweet savors, and the countries commanding the southern approach to
the Red Sea had the same significant relation to it that now belongs to
Suez, the northern approach to that sea.

The air of incense-land was as heavy with traditions as it was reported
to be with odors. The desert hemmed in both Punt and Sabæa, and its
mysteries stole in with the sands. The rites of a dim religion were
wrapped around the harvest of the precious gums. Merchant subtleties
spread afar the stories of more than mortal perils to be met by those
who entered the places of fragrance. The effect of these fables was to
enhance prices and confirm the Arab monopoly. To the ancient world the
land of incense was an enchanting, and yet a forbidding and a forbidden
land.

Its enchantments were felt even at a distance. The whole country of
Arabia, says Herodotus, is scented with spices, and exhales an odor
marvelously sweet. Diodorus declares that even before the mariner
sights this coast its delights come out to meet him upon the sea. The
breezes of spring waft to him the fragrant breath of trees and shrubs,
and keener satisfactions than he may have elsewhere, for these are
no old and stored aromatics, but fresh from new-blown flowers. Pliny
is skeptical, yet repeats the story with further detail. Under the
rays of the noonday sun, he says, the entire peninsula gives forth an
indescribable perfume, the blend of many beguiling odors. Thus it was,
while still far out, the fleet of Alexander knew it was nearing Araby
the Happy.

The languors of incense floated through the towns and villages of Sabæa
and enveloped its lofty capital. Timbers and floors of the houses
were of sweet-scented woods, and fagots of frankincense and sticks of
myrrh, burning in the fireplaces, gave them a perpetual fragrance of
sacrifice. To counteract these bland but debilitating suavities the
Arabians of the south brought the gum of storax down from Syria. This
they burned in goat skins and found its pungent smell a reviving thing.

Saba, the country’s capital, was a dream-city of spices and gold. From
a steep which commanded the surrounding lands its temples and palaces
reared their roofs amid delightful groves. The trade of countless
centuries had drawn vast riches to the incense metropolis. The houses
of the merchants were resplendent with precious metals and precious
stones. Reclining upon couches inlaid with silver, they drank from
gem-studded goblets of gold. The camels padding northward, and the
ships faring north, east, and south, brought back the wherewithal to
sustain a life of sensual magnificence. Chief among the voluptuaries
was the Sabæan king. From his seat of judgment in a gorgeous palace he
determined all disputes with the authority of an absolute sovereign.
Yet his own freedom of movement was restrained by the priestly class.
He was a prisoner of the palace, and, should he venture outside its
scented courts and shaded gardens, the rabble assailed him with stones
and drove him back to them. So an oracle had prescribed.

Over the gathering of incense, and its coming and going in the land
of the Sabæans, priestly tradition had flung a mantle rich in fable
and somber with fear. Eight days’ journey to the northeast from the
capital, in a district a hundred miles long by fifty miles wide, stood
the sacred groves in a soil of milky white a little inclining to red.
Thither at the time of the rising of the Dog Star, when the heat was
most intense, went the Arabians to make incisions in the trees. The
unctuous foam which gathered on the bark was permitted to remain and
harden; nor was it removed until autumn. The gum which assumed the
form of globular drops was called male incense. More esteemed were the
pieces where two drops had adhered into the semblance of breasts, which
were called female incense.

By inherited right the harvest was the privilege of three thousand
families. Their persons were deemed to be holy. While pruning the
trees and gathering the gum they must receive no pollution either by
intercourse with women or by coming in contact with the dead. They
carried their produce to the capital upon camels by an appointed road
and were admitted at a single gate. It was death to deviate from this
road.

Various deductions were made from the camel loads to pay for carriage,
the service of the temples, the expenses of the state, and the
transportation taxes laid by other countries through which the overland
caravans were to pass. The entertainment of strangers at the capital
was provided for out of a tithe taken from frankincense. In its journey
of more than a thousand miles northward from Saba to Petra in the land
of the Nabatheans, successive peoples, beginning with the Minæans,
received the freight and passed it on. Mecca and Medina, afterward
holy places of Islam, were stations on the incense route. It was a
drowsy traffic that went up and down this ancient road. The suns of
the desert, falling upon the bales, drew from them that which made the
carriers nod upon their beasts in a dream of delight. They revived
themselves, legend continues, by inhaling the pungent fumes of bitumen
and goat’s-beard.

There were other than ritual terrors in gathering frankincense and the
related substances. Herodotus heard the story that the groves were
infested by small winged serpents of the same sort that invade Egypt.
These clung to every branch, but if one burned gum storax under the
tree they were dislodged; a like report had it that in Malabar great
serpents coiled themselves about the sandalwood trees.

The cinnamon and cassia which the Sabæans imported from Punt, on the
African side of the Gulf of Aden, or themselves gathered there, were
harvested with difficulty and peril, and only after the consent of the
god had been given. The entrails of forty-four oxen, goats, and rams
were offered up, nothing could be done before sunrise or after sunset,
and when the harvest was made a priest set aside the god’s portion with
the point of a spear. A third portion was devoted to the sun, and this
burst at once into flame.

There were great birds which collected sticks of cinnamon for their
nests, which were fastened with mud to a sheer face of rock that foot
of man could not climb. Sometimes these nests were broken down by means
of leaden arrows. Sometimes the merchants, like the diamond-seekers in
the Sindbad tale, placed large pieces of meat on the ground, and their
weight caused the nests to fall when the mother birds bore the meat
aloft to their young. The Arabians, returning, collected the cinnamon.

Cassia grew on the marshy shores of a lake where were a number of
winged animals much resembling bats, which screeched horribly and were
very valiant. The Arabians covered their bodies and faces with the
hides of oxen, leaving only holes for their eyes. While they gathered
the bark they were kept busy shielding their eyes from assault from the
air.

There was still a long journey for these aromatic stuffs before
they reached the marts of Arabia, at least when the people of Punt
themselves made it. They put forth over vast tracts of sea upon rafts
which were neither steered by rudder nor impelled by oar or sail. At
the time of the winter equinox they went to sea on a wind from the
southeast, and when they doubled the promontory of Arabia the northeast
wind met them and took them from gulf to gulf. They skirted shores
where forests, set afire by the heat of the sun, were blazing. It might
be five years before their rafts, laden with copper, cloths, bracelets,
and necklaces, were hauled up again on the beaches of Somaliland.

There may have been a memory of musk in stories told about cassia
and about ladanum. The ends of cassia branches of the length of two
fingers were cut off and sewn in fresh skins of cattle. When the skins
putrified, maggots ate away the woody parts but left the bark, which
was too bitter to invite their attack. As to the ladanum of northern
Arabia, Herodotus remarks that, although found in a most inodorous
place, it is the sweetest-scented of all substances. Goats gathered
it. These animals cropped the sprouting shoots of mastic branches when
they were swollen with a juice of remarkable sweetness. Drops thereof
were wiped up by their unlucky beards, and became clotted with dust and
dry from the sun. Men with shears collected it, and that was why the
Romans found goats’ hairs therein.

Out of such stories were framed the geography, polity, and ritual of
the land of incense. What came of them was a monopoly, a mystery, a
spell that was slow to pass. In the smoke of altars one may almost
glimpse the temples of this dim domain, and in the tinkle of the
censing bell hear the bells of camels along an ancient path.


_Gog and Magog of the North_

The pastures of High Asia were the range of Gog and Magog. The Caucasus
was their prison home. Sometimes these formidable races were pictured
as roving the steppes and deserts of the north, sometimes as swinging
back and forth against the walls of mountain valleys, where the policy
of Alexander or divine compassion for the rest of mankind had confined
them. Always they were seeking a way out, and sometime they would find
it, and the world would shudder down in ruin under their tread.

These races were the nightmare vision of two thousand years. There are
words the very sound of which evokes the myths of fear. Such are Gog
and Magog, with their harsh internal echo and inhuman suggestion. They
were associated with the terrors of Scythia, known and unknown--the
incursions of dwarfish, shrill-voiced nomads upon the civilizations of
the south, the sense of vast desolate spaces where prodigious things
had their beginning. These misgivings, made definite by biblical
imagery and by the literal statements of the Koran, grew into legends
which were enriched by contributions from classic fable and shared by
the Jewish, Christian, and Moslem worlds.

Magog was a son of Japheth, says Genesis. In the book of _Ezekiel_ it
is declared that the Lord will bring Gog with his horses and horsemen
out of the north, and Persia, Ethiopia and Libya with them. They shall
ascend and come like a storm and like a cloud shall cover the land.
They shall think an evil thought, to take a spoil and to take a prey.
But the fury of the Lord shall come up in His face and there shall be
a great shaking in the land of Israel. Gog shall fall upon the open
field, and a fire will be sent upon Magog and among them that dwell
carelessly in the isles. The wreckage of their shields and staves shall
burn for seven years, and Gog shall have a place of graves in Israel,
the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea.

The burden of prophecy is taken up anew in _Revelation_. When the
thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed from his prison and
shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of
the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle. They shall
compass the camp of the saints about, and fire will come down out of
heaven to devour them.

The Koran buttressed biblical prophecy with a historical narrative.
It concerns the journeys of Doul-Karnain, the Lord of the Two Horns,
a personage variously identified with Alexander, Julius Cæsar and
Augustus, but by the east believed to be Alexander. When he went forth
with his army he marched to the going down of the sun and found it set
in a miry fount. He marched to the farthest east and found a people
oppressed by the heat. Then he marched north and in a valley between
two mountains he found a people who told him that Gog and Magog laid
waste their land. “Build us, O Doul-Karnain,” they begged, “a rampart
between us and them.” He bade them bring him blocks of iron, and when
he had filled the space between the mountains, he caused them to blow
upon the wall with bellows, and heated it fiery hot, and poured molten
brass upon it. Gog and Magog could not scale it, nor were they able to
dig through it.

Ezekiel wrote when the memory of an invasion of Scythian horsemen
was still fresh in Asia the Less, and he drew his imagery from it;
to him, and to John after him, Gog and Magog were symbols of earthly
power opposed to Jehovah. But the Semitic world, Jew and Arab alike,
scanned the vigorous picture of a nation from the steppes riding over
the world, and saw in it inspired prophecy of a Mongol devastation
of civilization. So Josephus thought: Gog and Magog were Scythian
peoples. Thrice and four times, on the immense canvases of Asia and
eastern Europe, the fading colors of the Ezekiel vision took on the
freshness of actuality--and the restoring brush was wielded in turn by
Genghis Khan, Othman, Tamerlane and Akbar. Thus history has been kind
to men of literal minds; but it has seen a misshapen fable grow up
in its shadow. The north had been the home of the monstrous races of
classic myth, and all their bestial and godless traits were merged in
the Tartar tradition.

[Illustration: “BUILD US, O DOUL-KARNAIN,” THEY BEGGED, “A RAMPART
BETWEEN US AND THEM”]

Bald, deformed anthropophagi mustered behind the barrier of the
Scythian mountains. Gog was the Turkish race, Magog was the Mongol.
The campaigns of Alexander had left legends that persist to this day
in Central Asia, and these were gathered up in the accumulating myth.
Alexander had also left earthworks and monuments of his marches in
those regions, and these became memorials of the terrible peoples of
Ezekiel. At first the two races were placed a little to the north of
Palestine, but tradition moved them farther to the north and east to
bring them within the Alexander cycle. As Eden was at the end of the
east, so Gog and Magog were in the farther north, “in Scythia beyond
the Caucasus and near the Caspian Sea,” says St. Jerome, writing in an
age when that sea was thought to be a gulf of the Arctic Ocean.

Confused reports about the Chinese wall grew into a fable of Iskander’s
wall, which at one time was deemed to be in the Far East, and again
was identified with the fortifications which the Sassanid kings had
built in the passes of the Caucasus, fragments of which are still to
be seen at Derbent. It seemed most fitting that the Caucasus with its
towering peaks, its broken valleys, and its remnants of diverse peoples
should be the mountain prison of these predestined scourges of mankind.
There also were to be found the Ten Lost Tribes, who had joined them.
Maundeville merges the two traditions and connects them with a third;
Gog and Magog and their Jewish associates all paid tribute to the queen
of Amazonia. According to Ricold of Monte Croce, they could not with
patience hear Alexander’s name.

There was a legend that both races escaped, guided by an owl and a hare
over their mountain walls; wherefore the Tartars wear owl feathers
in honor of their deliverance. But Astrakhan has the story that they
are prisoned still in remote valleys of the Caucasus, where twelve
trumpets, blown by the winds, keep them in terror against the day when
they shall break forth and destroy the world.


_Prester John’s Kingdom_

When the Christian world was hard put to hold its own in its crusading
adventure in the Holy Land, word came to it that it had an ally in
the rear of Islam. Somewhere in the remote east, on the farther side
of Persia and Armenia, there was a king and priest who ruled over a
Christian people. He had taken the field with a great army, defeated
the Moslem kings of Media and Persia, seized their capital of Ecbatana,
and marched to the relief of Jerusalem. Without boats to cross the
Tigris, he had gone north into colder lands, intending to cross upon
the ice and reach the holy city by a roundabout road. But the winters
proved too mild, and after waiting several years he had gone home again.

Thus the Europe of the twelfth century heard the story of Prester
John. In one form or another it was repeated by Otto of Freisingen, by
Maimonides, and by Benjamin of Tudela. In the travels of the latter,
John is a Jewish king reigning in gorgeous state over a Jewish nation
of the deserts. Popular tradition had it that the royal Christian of
Asia had addressed a letter to the Pope of Rome and to the Greek and
Roman emperors. Its recital of splendors and prodigies was a challenge
to the spirit of wonder.

“I, Presbyter Joannes, the Lord of Lords, surpass all under heaven
in virtue, in riches and in power,” runs the letter. “In the three
Indies our Magnificence rules, and our land extends beyond India; it
reaches towards the sunrise over the wastes, and it trends towards
deserted Babylon near the tower of Babel. Seventy-two provinces, of
which only a few are Christian, serve us. Each has its own king but all
are tributary to us. Our land streams with honey, and is overflowing
with milk. In one region grows no poisonous herb, nor does a querulous
frog ever quack in it, no scorpion exists, nor does the serpent glide
amongst the grass, nor can any poisonous animals exist in it or injure
any one. With us no one lies, for he who speaks a lie is thenceforth
regarded as dead.”

The royal letter writer recites that in his dominions is the earthly
paradise, claims as his subjects all the peoples of prodigy, and
describes in detail his human menagerie in the Caucasus. The accursed
fifteen nations imprisoned there eat their foes, only desisting at
Prester John’s word. They will “burst forth at the end of the world,
in the time of Antichrist, and overrun all the abodes of the Saints as
well as the great city Rome, which, by the way, we are prepared to give
our son who will be born, along with all Italy, Germany, the two Gauls,
Britain and Scotland.”

Whether this letter was ever received or no, Pope Alexander III did
dispatch to Prester John a letter which, between the lines, reads like
the reply to an irritating missive. It asserted the papal claims to
universal dominion and demanded that the priest-king recognize them.
The messenger who bore it eastward in 1177 was never heard of again.
Meanwhile the pagan Mongols had broken into Europe and it became papal
policy to conciliate their good will and if possible win them over
as allies of the Cross against the Crescent. The monkish envoys who
penetrated the heart of Asia found a power as vast as that claimed for
the Christian monarch, but it was in the hands of the sons of Genghis
Khan; and there was no Prester John.

This was a Nestorian fable, said Rubruquis; “about nothing they make a
great fuss.” As to their King John, “I traversed his pastures and no
one knew anything about him.” Rubruquis speaks of Ung-Khan, prince of
a province in Mongolia southeast of Lake Baikal. According to Marco
Polo, who entered Asia in the same generation, this was Prester John.
The Christian chief of a Hunnish tribe, he was defeated and slain by
Genghis Khan. The legend faded out of the consciousness of the west,
only to be revived and domiciled in Abyssinia when Europe learned of
the power of its sovereigns and that they were Christians of the Coptic
faith.

The tale of this Asiatic priest-king who wanted to put his armies at
the disposal of the hard-beset Christians of the west has the irony
and pathos of allegory. Without purporting to do so, it tells the
story of a great eastern adventure of the church which the Greek and
Roman communions had almost forgotten. The Nestorians had been cast
into outer darkness in one of the schisms of the Eastern Empire in the
unhappy sixth century, when, as Gibbon says, Christians were “more
solicitous to explore the nature, than to practice the laws, of their
founder.” The offense of Nestorius, patriarch of Constantinople, was
that he called Mary the Mother of Jesus and not the Mother of God,
and contended that in Christ the divine and human natures subsisted
independently of each other. He was excommunicated, and died in exile.

His followers, driven from the empire, went forth into Asia and
established an empire of the spirit wide as that afterward claimed for
the Prester John of legend. They founded churches in Persia, Bokhara,
Siam, and Sumatra. They penetrated India and contended with Buddhism
in Tibet. They won millions of followers in Cathay, where their
religion was tolerated under an imperial edict of the seventh century
as “virtuous, mysterious, and pacific.” From Palestine to China they
held the field for the Christian faith, and their communicants were
more numerous than those of either the Greek or Roman church. There
are places in Asia which have not seen a Christian missionary since
the Nestorians passed, as soon they did. In Kurdistan and Persia their
faith survives in the affections of perhaps three hundred thousand
worshipers.

It was the weakness of this faith that it nowhere had a country of
its own, and therefore no powerful central hierarchy sleepless in its
cause. For better or worse it was never able to draw the sword; it
spread itself only by persuasion and the tolerance of pagan countries
whose princes followed other cults. It must be that some dreamy
Nestorian monk, familiar with the west and its ways, and pondering what
his church had done in Asia and might have done had the fates been
kinder, wrote in the days of its decline the letter which gave it the
country it lacked and set forth its spiritual dominion in terms the
west would understand.


_The Witch Realm of Lapland_

In the dark ages a tradition arose that there was a witch nation in
the north of Europe. Its citizens were the Lapps, whose descendants
still fish, hunt and pasture their reindeer in the wilder districts
of Norway, Sweden, Russia, and Finland. They are the most timid and
inoffensive of men. They seem never to have had government of their
own, but have been overtaxed, exploited, and at times enslaved by
stronger neighbors. Swarthy, dwarfish, and shrill-spoken, with broad
heads, upturned noses, and bandy legs, they may be the survivors of
the small, dark race that once overspread the continent. Such a people
would need supernatural powers to overcome their manifold handicaps,
and with these legend endowed them.

Their sinister reputation came to them because of their gnome-like
aspect, because they were still in the stone age of culture, and
perhaps because they were pagans after the remainder of Europe had
become Christian. Their magic drums were the terror of settled lands.
They could make themselves invisible. They could raise the winds. “They
tye three knottes on a strynge hangying at a whyp,” wrote Richard Eden
in 1577. “When they lose one of these they rayse tollerable wynds.
When they lose another the wynd is more vehement; but by losing the
thyrd they rayse playne tempests as in old time they were accustomed
to rayse thunder and lyghtnyng.” Tales of ships which went too near to
Lapland and were heard of no more were rife among the seafaring states.
Yet Ivan the Terrible sent for Lapp magicians to read the portent of a
comet, and the Norse princess Gunhild lived in their country to learn
its lore.

Much of the superstition of the neighbor Finns has entered into the
Lapland tradition. Their magic songs picture their small cousins
as living in almost legendary lands--Lapland itself, a dark, vague
northern country where the people wore tall hats and spoke in whining,
mumbling voices: Turja Fells, with its wonder-working maidens; and
Pohjola, “home of the north,” where the old woman, Louhiatar, “the
blind whore of Pohjola,” queened it in a realm that had neither sun nor
moon. These songs have much to say of hazy headlands and spells wrought
upon them and on the main. A furious old wife sweeps the sea, with a
cloth of sparks on her head, and on her shoulders a cloak of foam.
Four maidens of the air mow grass on a cloudy cape in a foggy island.
The sharp maiden Terhetar sifts the mist on a shrouded promontory. A
wood spirit shrieks at people and fills the forest with murk when they
wander there.

In the Orkney and Shetland islands, the Lapps were known as Finn-folk.
Sometimes they crossed the North Sea and, hiding their identity,
appeared among the islanders, with whom they intermarried; skilled
persons, however, detected them by their wrinkled visages and the odd
blemishes upon their skins. The visitors knew the language of birds
and beasts, into which, indeed, they could transform themselves; and
with impunity they rode the tricky water-horse. They could control the
weather, predict the future, cure diseases of men and cattle. It was
a slight task for them to make the passage from the continent. Most
people believed they swam across--for either they were seals who took
human form, or men who could take the seal form. Sometimes when fisher
folk harpooned a large seal they found a strange little man struggling
in the waves.

These credulous island tales carry the legend of a witch nation of the
north almost into the twentieth century.


_The Spice Islands_

The ninth edition of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ forgot to mention
the Moluccas. A standard atlas of the world published in the United
States neglects to describe them. A day’s sail to the southeast from
the large Philippine island of Mindanao brings one to them, but
American travelers do not make this trip. Only a strait, to the right
and to the left, separates the group from New Guinea and Celebes, and
narrow are the seas between it and Java to the south; yet these are
names of consequence in modern geography, while it is a name all but
unknown. There is magic, modern magic, in the tropic islands of the
Pacific. These islands do not share it, though they lie on both sides
of the Line in the fairest of summer seas.

They have another name, the Spice Islands. For the space of two
centuries men who followed the great waters thought of them and of
little else. It was spices that Columbus sought when he sailed west
from Palos in 1492 and the man who discovered sassafras in America had
honors comparable to his own. It was an eastern route to the spice
regions that engaged Portuguese endeavor and conducted the ships of da
Gama into the Indian Ocean in 1497. It was a western route to the Spice
Islands that Magellan sought in his voyage around the world a score of
years afterward. The royal grant to del Cano, who brought one ship
home from that expedition, was conditioned on the annual payment of
two cinnamon sticks, three nutmegs, and twelve cloves; and the coat of
arms which he was licensed to bear had the effigies of two Malay kings
holding spice branches; to have gone around the world seemed to Spain
a lesser thing than to have discovered a route to these islands. To
reach them was the object of the attempts to open a northeast passage
around Asia and a northwest passage around America. To determine their
ownership was the subject of two papal bulls and a dynastic agreement
between the royalties of Spain and Portugal; and they fell at last as a
prize of war to Holland.

In the age of discovery India and China were small words compared
with the Spice Islands. The place this forgotten group once held in
the imagination of men is one of the great illusions of commercial
geography.

Nor was it all illusion. If the world trade of antiquity was mainly
in incense, the world trade of the Middle Ages was mainly in spices,
and for a similar cause--with the primitive transportation of the
period, less valuable and more bulky things could not be carried far
at a profit. Nowadays the meats, grains, vegetables, and fruits of
all climes travel long distances to the dinner table, and men’s diet
has both variety and quality. In former times the range of eatables
was small, the quality poor. The service of spices was to improve
and diversify the flavors of viands, to disguise the shortcomings of
mediæval cookery as well as mediæval larders. The salt-fish diet of
European winters created the spice trade with the east.

When the Turkish seizure of Egypt in 1521 closed the southern overland
route to the east the same year that both the Portuguese and the
Spanish reached the Moluccas, the stage was set for the romance of
spice. Passing from unknown sources through various hands, it had
reached the west at a tenfold price. Here was opportunity to deal
direct in what all Europe wanted.

It was known that these were not the only spice lands. Cassia grew in
Somaliland and cinnamon in Ceylon, and both were used in food as well
as incense. The ginger root came from a reed of Cochin-China. Benjamin
of Tudela, Ibn Batuta, and Friar Odoric had described the pepper
“forests” of Malabar, and Marignolli had even told of pepper wars
between Jews and Christians. Through the Chinese port of Amoy, so Polo
thought, there passed a hundred times as much pepper as came to all
Christendom. But somehow the Moluccas, whence came cloves, nutmegs, and
mace--the husks of nutmegs--seemed to be the kingdom of spicery.

They had won this distinction centuries before the first western
ship entered those seas. Although the islands have an area of only
twenty-five thousand square miles and a population of less than four
hundred thousand persons, their two sultanates of Tidor and Ternate
achieved dominion at about the same time as the Italian republics of
Venice, Genoa, and Pisa, which in power they paralleled; and the one
group of states, no less than the other, lived on the spice trade.
The colonial empire of the Moluccas extended over the neighboring
archipelagoes and penetrated the continent; their trading settlements
dotted the wide spaces of Malaysia. Java was their export market, and
there Polo saw the testimonials of their power in a spice trade that
seemed to him to account for the greater part of the world’s supply of
aromatic and pungent vegetable substances. They had already entered
into a political decline when the Europeans came, and this eastern
venture of the Portuguese executed for them the same decree of fate
that it was to do for the maritime states of the Mediterranean.

When Serrano reached the Moluccas he wrote to his friend, Magellan:
“I have discovered yet another new world, larger and richer than that
found by Vasco da Gama.” The caravels of Portugal went no farther, and
the nation took such pains as it could that none others should go so
far. It was Portuguese policy in the spice trade, as it had been Arab
policy in the incense trade, that the sources of supply should remain
unknown. Always the unknown is magnified. Robert Thorne, writing from
the Spanish court in 1527, declared that the islands abounded not
only in cloves, nutmegs, mace, and cinnamon, but in “Golde, Rubies,
Diamondes, Balasses, Garnates, Jacincts, and other stones and pearles.”
The precious commodities he thought the simple natives would part with
on equal terms for the lead, tin, and iron of the north; and, measure
for measure, they would traffic their spices for corn, their diamonds
for pieces of glass.

In these islands fable found another home. Here, it was said, were men
having spurs on their ankles like cocks, horned hogs, hens that laid
their eggs several feet under ground, oysters so large that the shells
were used as baptismal fonts for children, crabs with claws so strong
that they could break the iron of a pick-ax, stones which grew like
fish and out of which men made lime, and a river well stored with finny
creatures and yet so hot that it scalded the unwary bather. Drake,
refitting here in his voyage around the world, saw “an infinite swarme
of fiery wormes flying at night making such a shew and light as if
every twigge or tree had been a burning candle.” Also he saw bats as
big as hens and crayfish that dug holes like conies, and one of which
was a meal for four hungry men.

These decorations of fancy can add but little to the great theme of
forgotten islands once the goal of the world’s desire.

There was another curious chapter written when Dutch succeeded
Portuguese. It was such a chapter as monopoly writes, and it comes
down into the nineteenth century. The ships of Holland cruised in the
surrounding seas, cutting down spice groves wherever they found them.
Before they were exported, all nutmegs were treated with fire and lime,
so that no plantations could be started elsewhere--but pigeons carried
them to other islands and mother cloves were taken away in hollow
bamboos, and the produce of home orchards multiplied, and the world
spice trade dwindled in relative importance as the food of mankind
became more varied.

Dampier tells of an island where the ground under the trees was
carpeted with cloves several inches thick, left there to decay. Another
traveler tells of seeing three heaps of nutmegs burning at one time,
each of which would have filled a church. So the Dutch East India
Company reduced supplies in striving to maintain prices. The spicy
odors that floated over the seas surrounding the Araby of fable became,
on occasion, a fact of the Molucca group. It was the incense neither of
nature nor of religion, but of a dying commerce.

The nutmegs of to-day are grown mainly in the island of Penang in the
British East Indies and in the island of Grenada in the British West
Indies, while cloves come from the African island of Zanzibar.


_Arcadia_

Arcadia is at once a country and a province of the imagination.

The real Arcadia is a mountainous plateau some forty miles square in
the central part of the Peloponnessus of Greece. Its chief exports in
the old time were asses. Its inhabitants were--and are--gruff-spoken
herdsmen and peasants, equally scornful of letters and politics. They
seldom went outside their own valleys, and few strangers came among
them. They had no central government and no relations with the other
states of Greece, and they wanted to be let alone. Yet they were
willing to fight--for pay; and sometimes they had to fight because
Sparta was their neighbor and they were on a war track. When Arcadia
took the field in force as the ally of another state, almost always it
espoused the wrong side. In the quarrels of the Greek republics, and
in the series of wars in which Pompey, Julius Cæsar, Mark Antony, and
Augustus figured, it shared the hard lot of the vanquished. Although it
lay remote and its spirit was aloof, the plateau had at least its share
of the troubles of the world.

The Arcadia of poetry occupies the same boundaries, but has had a
different history. All that the poets have done has been to stress
certain facts and forget the others. This land, as it seemed to them,
stood like a fortress of rustic innocence above the turmoil of politics
and the bustle of maritime trade that was ancient Greece. At each of
the corners of the plateau, like bastions, rose a group of mountain
peaks, from which, on a fair morning, one might see the whole of
Arcadia, the neighbor states of the coastal plains, and beyond them
the Mediterranean. Great groves of gnarled oaks grew upon the mountain
sides, there were pine forests, and in the open fields stood the
graceful plane tree, beloved of the classic world. Though the Arcadians
were unlettered, pastoral song had its birth among them, before the
inspiration of Theocritus gave it a home in Sicily. Pan was their
tutelar deity, and it seemed to the rustics sometimes that they could
hear the plaintive music of his pipes as the goat-god reclined under
the plane tree. In this artless land, myth has it, Hermes strung cords
across the shell of a giant tortoise and made the harp.

Arcadia was equally skilled at the harp and the flute, and to these
the shepherds sang their simple lays. Aside from their love of music,
they seemed to the Greeks of the towns men of ignorant rusticity, and
they figure as simpletons--“acorn eaters”--in the Middle Comedy. The
Romans copied this as they did everything else in Greek drama, and the
dull Arcadian of the stage moved Latin audiences to laughter; “Arcades
ambo,” both sweet innocents, is a phrase of the period. But the Romans
caught also the spirit of their rustic song, and the Arkady of poetry
was born in the Virgilian bucolics. Its outlines are disclosed in
the Tenth _Eclogue_, in passages which tell of browsing goats, and
clover-rifling bees, and bubbling springs where dark-blue violets
blow, and, animating the scene, the vintagers of mellow grapes and Pan
himself, red with elderberries and with cinnabar. “Arcadians, none but
ye can sing!” exclaims the poet.

On this delicate outline the Renaissance laid the rich colorings of its
fancy. The rugged, troubled mountain land became the one land in all
the world of simple peace and rustic innocence and wistful charm of
things ideal. Sanazzaro’s Arcadian pastoral went through sixty editions
in a century. France, Spain, England, and Holland, following Italy, all
made their excursions into Arkady. There was a succession of romantic
sketches wherein lyrics declaring the loves of swains and bewailing the
death of virgins are interspersed with dialogues that tell in prose
the poetry of pastoral life. The classic work of this school is the
_Arcadia_ of Sir Philip Sidney. There, and not in the Morea, the Arkady
that is a province of the imagination may best be explored.

It is a tale of knightly youths and dainty maidens and one sentence
will declare its quality. When Pamela disrobed for the bath and set
foot in a stream “the touch of cold water made a pretty kind of
shrugging come over her body, like the twinkling of the fairest of the
fixed stars.”

Here, says Sidney, the very shepherds have their fancies lifted to
so high conceits as the learned of other nations are content both to
borrow their names and imitate their cunning. The hills garnish their
proud delights with stately trees, the humble estate of valleys is
comforted with the refreshing of rivers, and the thickets declare the
cheerful disposition of well-tuned birds. Sheep pasture with sober
security and by them are pretty lambs whose bleating oratory craves the
dam’s comfort. The herd girls sing their lays, while on the uplands
pipes the shepherd boy “as though he shall never be old.”

This is vision, all of it, sunshine and haze working their spell upon a
rocky hillside. There are wolves in the sheepfolds of life.


_Bohemia_

Bohemia is a subtler Arcadia, another province of youth and love and
dreams; but youth passes thence, and love is a brief madness, and the
dream may fail of fulfillment. Like Arcadia, the Bohemia that is a
state of mind has its reality in a mountain-girdled land, but, unlike
Arcadia, it has shifted on the map, refusing to be confined by any
boundaries known to geography.

Now even the name of it, with its music and implications of poetry,
is lost to geography, and in its stead is the harshly named
Czecho-Slovakia. Wherefore the Bohemians of art and literature, and
unregulated impulse and fantasy, have no homeland they can call their
own. This is a fitting thing. In a sense there never was a Bohemia,
although there was always the fortress land which nature placed at the
headwaters of the Elbe on the borders of Germany. The Celtic tribe
whence it was named is only a shadow in history, and the Bohemians who
fought with Poles and Germans, who wanted to be Protestant, who started
the Thirty Years’ War, who were a dukedom, and a kingdom, and a part of
the Holy Roman Empire, were Slavs who called themselves Czechs.

Their literature is older than the German, their university at Prague
was one of the earliest centers of European culture, their capital is
the westernmost outpost of the east in Europe, their patriotism is a
proverb, and their glass fabrics, their beer, and their beet sugar
are staples of world commerce. Upon this people and their hill-walled
home the name of Bohemia and the traditions of “the gayest and most
melancholy country of the world” fit but loosely. Whence the Bohemia
that is a haunting word on the lips of youth?

Shakespeare budded it, and the gypsies, and Frenchmen who knew too
little, and Frenchmen who may have known too much. _Winter’s Tale_ gave
Bohemia a seacoast and centuries of critics a chance to say its author
nodded. Yet under the puissant Ottokar the country did have coasts on
both the north and south of Europe. The scene of the play is near the
head of the Adriatic. The Bohemia it pictures, instead of lying inland,
is probably the maritime province of Istria, and historically the
background is correctly named.

From _Winter’s Tale_ the Bohemians of the studio and pothouse got
themselves a coast, a glamour, and their First Citizen. “Places remote
enough are in Bohemia,” the poet says. Here again is shepherd’s love,
and a prince whose courtship of a “queen of curds and cream” is timed
by the flowers as they pass--“daffodils that come before the swallow
dares, and take the winds of March with beauty,” and violets dim, pale
primroses, bold ox-lips and the flower de luce. “The fanned snow that’s
bolted by the northern blasts” is far away.

On this scene of Arkady enters a figure in no wise Arcadian--Autolycus,
earliest Bohemian, citizen of no country and of all. He is a vagabond,
a minstrel, a ballad-monger, a ribbon peddler, a cut-purse. His is
the footpath way, and his revenue, he explains, is the silly cheat.
“Enter Autolycus singing” is the stage direction. Exit Autolycus also,
singing, “A merry heart goes all the day, your sad tires in a mile-a.”

Here is a blood-brother of Villon, and Bohemia is already a province
of his song. It becomes a kingdom with the coming of the gypsies.
Mediæval France called them Bohemians, and thought them such, as other
countries thought them Egyptians. The roadside was their home, the
world was their country, they paid no taxes or rents, and report had it
that they had written the canons of their creed on cabbage leaves which
a donkey found and devoured. They practiced the wandering arts, were
musicians, metal-workers, horse-dealers, bear-leaders, snake-charmers,
herb-venders; their women read palms, and were “pleasaunt dauncers.”

The gypsy philosophy found its first devotees in rogues of old Paris,
who called themselves dukes in Bohemia; Hugo has sketched their lawless
commonwealth in his _Notre Dame_. The Bohemia of artists and dreamers,
like many a country of the map, had ruffians, cheats, and vagrants for
its early colonists. It was left to Murger to fix its frontiers, write
its laws, and treat for its admission into the league of ideal lands.
The results are spread at large in his _Scenes de la Vie de Bohème_.

Much has been written of the whereabouts of this land and of the
conditions by which one becomes a citizen, but the matter is found
entire in Murger’s preface and in Arthur Symons’s introduction to
this preface. “Any man,” says Murger, “who enters the path of Art,
with his art as his sole means of support, is bound to pass by way of
Bohemia.” To Symons, Bohemia is “the sentiment youth has of itself
at the flowering moment of its existence”; the sadness of it is the
consciousness of the flight of youth.

The whereabouts of the country that has been mapped as neighbor both to
Germany and Italy? Murger answers that Bohemia “neither exists nor can
exist anywhere save in Paris.” But that is only Murger’s answer.




Chapter XVII. Islands of Enchantment


“The thirteenth day of May we passed by the Island of Paris, and
the Island of the bankes of Helicon, and the Island called Ditter,
where are many boares and the women bee witches.” This glimpse of
Mediterranean travel from one of the sixteenth-century wanderers whose
voyages are recorded in Hakluyt might be paralleled from the outer
Atlantic, the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean, or the South Seas. In the
_Arabian Nights_, for example, Sayf Al-Muluk and his companions came in
turn to the isle of the old men of the sea; to the isle of ghouls who
sleep under cover of their ears; to the isle of gigantic blackamoors
with protruding eyeteeth; and to the isle of trained apes “bigger than
he-mules.”

Such folk seem at home in the wilderness of waters. These distant
spaces of the sea are little worlds of their own which imagination
feels free to dower with peculiar institutions and stock with peculiar
peoples. In islands of reality or fantasy men place their ideal states,
their pirate realms, their abodes of exile, their refuges from the
restraints and traditions of life--the sanctuaries of pursuits and
companionships other than those of which they have tired. In them,
also, they place the regions of repose; to reach felicity one must
cross water.

On journeys thither one might sight the shores of the folk of prodigy.
There were islands of men, and islands of women, and islands of
hermits, and islands of witches, and islands of satyrs, and islands of
giants, and islands of dwarfs, and islands of dog-headed, ox-worshiping
cannibals. The impulse thus to set aside a maritime domicile for the
nondescript nations was strongest with Arab geographers and Celtic
story-tellers. It culminates in the romancing narrative of Maundeville,
who dotted the eastern seas with the archipelagoes of his fancy and
settled them with the creatures of fable.

When the spell of terror woven in classic times began to lift from
the Atlantic, its islands swam into sight as to the strains of harp
music. They appeared to belong equally to geography and to poetry.
Of Madeira, the discovery of which is associated with the romance of
fugitive English lovers, an old writer declared that such a delightful
land “could only have been discovered by love.” For reasons as yet
unexplained, nearly all the newly found islands of the eastern Atlantic
bore the names of animals or birds. About them, Sir John Hawkins wrote,
“are certaine flitting Ilands which have been oftentimes seene, and
when men approched neere them, they vanished.” The older maps show one
such island which was called St. Brendan’s. It is a memory of the Irish
sea epics, and the latter are themselves a review of the entire island
story.

In these five wander-tales the empty spaces of the Atlantic are filled
in with islands which were loaned to the Irish by Homer from the
Odyssey and Plato from his Atlantis; by the Greek, Lucian, from his
Rabelaisian _True History_; by the Roman, Seneca, with his vision of a
continent in the west; by him who saw the Sea of Glass from the rock
of Patmos; by Arab story-tellers, and by early Moorish and Spanish
chroniclers from their narratives of the shadowy Antillia, the Isle
of the Seven Bishops, and the legendary journey of the Deluded Folk.
Celtic fancy passed a wand over this jumble of material, and a strange
new world appeared. Headlands of snow and ice and islands of perpetual
summer were within a day’s sail of one another, pagan fables and
monkish marvels were domiciled together, there was much mist and much
sunshine, and around all was “the mighty and intolerable ocean” which
St. Brendan saw at Sliabh Daidche.

Tennyson has set one of these tales, _The Voyage of Mældune_, to his
own music. It was a journey of revenge a chieftain made with his men to
slay the man who has slain his father. They came to the Silent Isle,
where their voices were thinner and fainter than any flittermouse
shriek; to the Isle of Shouting where wild birds cried from its summit
till the steer fell down at the plow and the harvest died in the field;
to the Isle of Flowers where were blossom and promise of blossom and
never a fruit; to the Isle of Fruits, and in every berry and fruit the
poisonous pleasure of wine; to the Isle of Fire, which shuddered and
shook like a man in a mortal affright; to the Bounteous Isle, where the
men began to be weary, to sigh and to stretch and yawn; to the Isle of
Witches, naked as heaven, who bosomed the burst of the spray; to the
Isle of the Double Towers, that shocked on each other and butted each
other with clashing of bells; and to the Isle of a Saint, who told the
men, “Go back to the Isle of Finn, and suffer the past to be past.”

This narrative may stand with variations for all of the Irish sea
tales. Under the sway of some overmastering motive the hero puts forth
upon the deep--for revenge, or to save a comrade condemned, or to seek
a woman, or to reach the Land of Promise, or to find the Lord upon
the sea. The voyagers pass from island to island. Complaisant Circes
greet them from one shore and indignant female virtue repels them from
another. They come to the isle called the Delicious, to the Isle of
Sheep, to the Isle of Laughter, to the Moving Isle which was a whale’s
back, to the isle which is the mouth of hell. They see demons racing
their horses on a magic course, and red-hot swine issuing from caves,
and stinging cats, and Judas on his rock, and ants the size of foals.
A griffin assaults them, the Cyclopes threaten them, birds sing psalms
to them. Repentant, or triumphant, or prophetic, or stricken in years,
they come back at last to an Ireland that has forgotten them.

Who fares on from island to island with these Celtic dreamers may visit
the whole realm of fable.


_The Sunken Lands_

Gazing into the ocean depths in warm latitudes one sees the fronds of
tall aquatic plants sway slightly as if a slow breeze stirred them.
Walls of coral rise there with a wavering semblance to palaces. The
purple mullet swims in and out of sunken grottos. Such sunlight as
reaches them is subdued to softness, like that admitted by cathedral
windows when it is late afternoon. These seem to be groves and gardens
and habitations under the sea. Beings like one’s fellow mortals, but
more beautiful and gentle, might live there and rove in the dim peace
of meadows beneath the foam and tumult of the reefs.

Such thoughts come without bidding. Always men have sought the land of
heart’s desire, and sometimes they told themselves that it was under
the sea; or perhaps that what they saw there was not the promise of
what should be but the wreck of what had been.

The sea is a mirror as well as a window. It repeats the curves of
shore and sky and all that is between--cornfields, and grazing cattle,
and the burden of orchards, and cottage smoke, and the loom of church
towers. Here is an underworld, though it be but the simple magic of
light upon smooth water. There is a subtler magic of mist and water
and uncertain sun gleams when one stands on the west coast of Ireland
and looks seaward through the eyes of a people in whom wonder never
flickered down in doubt.

Dwelling alone on the outer coast of the world as the ancients knew it,
these folk had beheld strange things in the great waters that roared
along their cliffs. Shadowy islands showed themselves in thick weather,
and, though no trace of them remained when the cloud bank lifted, these
were no tricks of mirage wrought by fog and muffled sunlight. They were
isles of enchantment that might have floated out of sight, but more
likely had sunk beneath the wave, not to emerge again until another
seven years were gone. The glints of splendor upon the distant sea were
not the track of the sun in broken water. They came from the golden
roofs and spires of a sunken city.

So out of things seen--as in a glass darkly--upon, above, and under the
billow, and out of things imagined or hoped for, men have wrought the
legend of cities that sleep beneath the ocean. The tale of Atlantis
is the oldest form of the legend. But the tales of lost cities are
not legend altogether and the tale of Atlantis may not be legend
altogether. There are submerged ruins on which romance bases itself as
upon reality, there are authentic historical happenings, and there are
local traditions which, it may be, retain the memory of cities that
were upon islands or coasts engulfed by the sea.

[Illustration: _In Islands Men Placed Their Ideal States.... To Reach
Felicity One Must Cross Water_]

Along the Italian coast the columns of sunken Roman villas have given
rise to stories of drowned cities. The ruins of towns lie under the
Zuyder Zee. Some inroad of the deep may be preserved in the legend of
Vineta, the fabled city beneath the Baltic near the Holstein coast.
There have been subsidences within historical time in the waters about
the British Isles, and the ocean has taken toll of the English coast
itself. The Channel shoal called the Goodwin Sands, and Seal Rock,
fragment of the Irish island of Inis Fitæ which was split into three
pieces in the eighth century, are tokens of these subsidences. In the
Azores group, scene of the Atlantis legend, four islands appeared in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and sank again. Expedition
Island, northwest of Australia, which Dutch naturalists visited within
a generation, lies under seven fathoms of water. The populous island
of Torca in the Indian Ocean went out of sight in a sheet of flame in
1693. Tuanaki, an island in South Polar waters, has not been seen in
ninety years. The cloud bank which Peary called Crocker Land has been
removed from maps of the Arctic region. Three new islands have been
born in the Aleutian group, one of them as late as 1909. The strange
stone images on Easter Island have given rise to conjecture that it
might be the remnant of a continent and a civilization lost beneath the
Pacific.

Thus there is a broad basis of fact for the legends of sunken cities.
Some of these are of great beauty. Whether the product of pagan or
Christian brooding, the sound of church bells is in them--peals that
come floating solemnly to the surface from towers through which deep
waters are moving. When the sunshine falls upon calm seas, so fisherman
say, they can discern these towers, and rising about them the peaked
roofs of houses like those of the Middle Ages.

Beyond all others the Celts are the people of the lost lands. These
seem part of the Celtic heritage of defeat and dreams. The legends of
Wales tell of a fair land sunken by the folly of a drunken prince.
The lost Lyonesse, a great promontory of Cornwall, was such another
land, and the Scilly Islands are the remnants. Tennyson and Swinburne
have rescued its memory from oblivion and Walter de la Mare pictures a
scene “in sea-cold Lyonesse, when the Sabbath eve shafts down on the
roofs, walls and belfries of the foundered town.” The story of Is, the
vanished Breton capital, has been told in folk-song, in poetry, in
stately music. It is one of the haunting fables of men, and back of it,
as of so many tales of ruin and overthrow, is the figure of a beautiful
and wicked woman.

The city of Is lay far in the west of France, where the coast of
Brittany makes its great thrust into the Atlantic. Peasants point out
the blocks, visible at low tide in the Bay of Douarnenez, which they
say are its foundations. The city was builded in a wide plain below
the level of the sea, and strong walls, controlled by sluice gates,
defended it from the encroaching waves. It was an habitation of vice
and pleasure, and it had a king as blameless as Arthur, and he a
daughter as cruel, as lustful, and as fair of face as Arthur’s sister,
Morgan le Fay. King Gradlon and Princess Dahut are the central figures
in the drama of Is.

Dahut dwelt in a tower, where she entertained a long train of lovers,
drowning each as she tired of him. To please a paramour she stole from
her father’s neck in his sleep the silver key which unlocked the sluice
gates and let in the sea. Awakened by the warning tumult of the waters,
Gradlon mounted a horse and fled, bearing his daughter with him. But
the floods moved after him and a voice bade him sacrifice to the sea
the beautiful demon who rode with him. Dahut fell to her death in the
waves, and their course was stayed. At Quimper the king rebuilt his
seat, but Is was lost forever beneath the Atlantic. Though it happened
fifteen centuries ago, there are Bretons who say that the faint chime
of bells still comes to them when wind and tide move shoreward together.

Nine is the number of islands under the sea to the west of Erin.
They appear above the surface once in seven years. Though a man may
descry them from the coast, yet might he go toward them in a currach
for two days and not come up with them. Some of them are larger than
Ireland itself. They have been seen by trustworthy observers,--Otway,
for example. In a paper read before the Royal Irish Society, Westropp
describes O Brasile, the best known of these, as he saw it in 1872: “It
was a clear evening with a fine golden sunset, when, just as the sun
went down, a dark island suddenly appeared far out to sea, but not on
the horizon. It had two hills, one wooded; between these, from a low
plain, rose towers and curls of smoke. My mother, brother, and several
friends saw it at the same time. One cried out that he could see New
York!”

Illusion, but for thousands of years Irish eyes have beheld these
phantom islands lift and fade in the west, and the Celtic glamour is
in the legends that tell them. “Lost Kilsapheen,” sighs the poet,
“its palaces and towers of pride ... all buried in the rushing tide
and deep sea waters green.” Churches and convents and castles are in
these islands, and those who have seen them or thought they saw them
report more intimate touches--an old woman coming out of a cabin to cut
a cabbage; the bleating of sheep and lambs heard in a fog on the open
sea; the apparition of “an old Scotch gentleman” wearing the raiment
of another century upon an enchanted shore. Sometimes a seeming of
tumult troubles these realms of shadow. There are flames and smoke and
fugitives. Then the spell passes and there is naught but the slant of
the gull’s wing and the roll of a porpoise on a distant billow.

The inhabitants of the islands are people of a vanished time, and
sealmen, and mermen, and giants, and the prisoners of giants. If you
can find the golden key to one of the sunken lands it will rise to the
surface and remain there; but the key has been hidden under a cairn
or is buried in the ruins of a Druid temple. There are other ways of
lifting the spell. Casting a clod of earth upon an island when it is
above water may disenchant it. Another way is by dropping a coal of
fire upon it, or knocking the glowing ashes from your pipe upon the
shore, or shooting a red-hot arrow from a boat, for “fire is hostile
to anything phantasmal.” So was Inishbofin fixed above the surface of
the sea. Fishermen landed upon it in a fog and lit a fire. Then the fog
cleared and they saw an old woman driving a white cow to drink. One of
them seized the cow’s tail and found in his hand a spray of seaweed;
and the woman and cow were turned into rocks. This was ages ago.


_Where Eden Lies_

Eden, Elysium, and the Fortunate Isles are one. They are upon the earth
and yet not of it. They are no part of the realm of shades and it is
not through the gates of death that one enters them. Mortal men have
dwelt in them, or may reach them, and thither the heroes pass without
leaving “the warm precincts of the cheerful day.” These are the ideal
lands of afternoon sunshine and airs that are at once a sigh and a
caress. The poetry and pity of men created them that there might be
some place of happiness with portals less somber than those of the
tomb, and without the sadness of irrevocable farewells upon the paths
that lead to it.

So the realms of bliss were placed afar, at the end of difficult
journeys which yet might be attained, or at least attempted. Eden lay
eastward. The Fortunate Isles of the Roman and the Elysian lands of
the Greek and Celt lay westward. In the conception of men these were
islands, Eden almost as much as the others. The four sacred rivers
flowed from it and around it, and in later times, what men who came
near to it particularly noticed was the sound of falling water.

It seemed to Columbus that the rushing current of the Orinoco flowed
down from Eden’s steeps. It seemed to men before him that paradise
might lie in the southern hemisphere, deemed “the noblest and happiest
part of the globe,” and perhaps in the South Seas. There were those
who made Eden a coast on the northern ocean, and others who placed it
among the fountains of Armenia. To most men the island of Ceylon was
its seat. There Carpini heard the plash of its waters, and Maundeville
drank thereof, as he reports, to his bodily betterment.

The Fortunate Isles, the Elysian abode of the heroes, were placed by
the Greeks in the extreme west, near the river Oceanus. Their position
receded with the advance of world-knowledge and finally was fixed in
the Canary and Madeira islands, furthest outpost of Roman discovery.
Satire though it is, the _True History_ of Lucian describes the Blessed
Islands in the very term men used when they were glad to believe.
As his party approached these islands, odorous airs came out from
shore, in which one could detect the mingled breath of the rose, the
narcissus, the hyacinth, and the lily. There was music from harp and
lute, and then, as the boat grounded on the beach, “the guardians of
the isle immediately chained us with manacles of roses, their only
fetters.”

These were the same islands which the Celts called by many beautiful
names and whither the coracles of legend journeyed. It is hard to tell
where the sunken islands of their history give way to the imaginary
islands of their geography, and these to the ideal lands of their
myths. The three groups seem to lie one behind the other in the outer
seas of the _Imrama_. The farthest group was the Celtic other-world,
and yet so near was it to the coasts of the New World, that a claim
for the discovery of America is based on St. Brendan’s voyage to the
Land of Promise. The group may best be called an archipelago where
pagan and Christian ideals shared dominion. Therein was not only the
Land of Promise, but “Magh Mell of many flowers,” the Land of Truth,
“whose truth was sung without falsehood.” There was the Land of the
Living, and the sensuous Land of Fair Women. In all these happy
islands music swelled, and laughter, and there was neither wailing nor
treachery, and death was not; and the magic food was unsalted pork, new
milk, and mead.

It was the singular fate of this god’s land of the Celt to become
confused with the geographical story of both Europe and America. The
memory of actual Irish voyages to the New World may be in the legend,
and inference from wreckage carried from afar, along with the stuff
of old dreams. Of the latter is a Spanish story wherein the Celtic
paradise masks itself as the Island of the Seven Cities to which seven
bishops had led their flocks to escape the Moor. Men whose hap it was
to sight this shadowy coast were carried in a barge to the shore and
entertained in a lofty hall by men who spoke their own tongue, though
with the antique accent. Europe credited the tale, nor guessed that the
barge was the same as that which bore the wounded Arthur unto Avalon.

These dream isles, at once aspiration and allegory, were found also,
or rather they were sought, in the eastern seas. It is recited in the
Buddhist records that the king of Udyana had a true report of the
silver walls and golden roofs of an island of the sages in distant
waters. The Chinese emperor, Tshe Huan Ti, of the third century before
Christ, heard of a happy land seven hundred miles to the eastward in
the Yellow Sea, and sent young men out to find it. They saw it on a far
horizon and a roseate light was upon it. But storms drove them back.
The Japanese tell of such a land lying toward the sunrise, and call it
Oraisan.

Maundeville knew of an island in the eastern ocean. It was something
like the places of eternal bliss in the far west, and yet was the home
of people who were much as other men are except that they were better.
When Alexander would have conquered them, an embassy bore him this
message, “Nothing may thou take from us but our good Peace,” and he let
them alone. In this isle of Bragman was “No Thief, nor Murderer, nor
common Woman, nor poor Beggar, nor ever was Man slain in that Country.
And because they be so true and so righteous, and so full of all good
Conditions, they were never grieved with Tempests, nor with Thunder,
nor with Lightning, nor with Hail, nor with Pestilence, nor with War,
nor with Hunger, nor with any other Tribulation, as we be, many Times,
amongst us, for our Sins.”

The island paradises of mankind lie upon many waters and in every
quarter of the earth. Alike for the Indians of Chile and of the
American Northwest, Elysium was in the distant Pacific. The natives
of Haiti believed it was in western valleys of their own island. The
natives of Australia called it “the gum-tree country.” The Semang of
the Malay Peninsula said it was across the sea in a land of screw
pines and thatch palms. It was their ancient island home, said the
people of the Celebes. It was northwest of Tonga, the Friendly
Islanders thought, and Bulotu was the name they gave it; yams and
breadfruit were plentiful there, hogs abounded, and there were reefs
for shark-catching. Many Kanaka tribes named it Havaika, which is
perhaps Java, or the Samoan island of Savaii, points of dispersion
in their migrations. The natives of Torres Straits called it the
island of Kibu; in its treetops ghosts sat twittering. But the Solomon
Islander could hear their laughter as they bathed in the surf of his
own sea-befriended paradise. “These Marquesas,” a nun said to Frederick
O’Brien, “make no more of death than of a journey to another island,
and much less than of a journey to Tahiti.”

Among races of higher culture Elysium takes on a more ordered beauty,
yet remains naïve. Annwfn is its Brythonic name and it lies at the end
of a long voyage; no infirmity is there, and sweeter than white wine is
the drink from its mighty well. Before men embarked for it, they said
in Babylon, there was a formidable land journey to take, over a high
pass guarded by scorpion men in the mountains of Masu, along a road
of black darkness, through a park of precious stones, across a bitter
river--and then the waters of death; these may have been the Atlantic,
or the sea of the Arabs. Elysium was far to the east in some mellow
clime beyond the ocean, so the Slavs thought; and thither the birds and
insects went in autumn. It is a land of lotus lakes in the west, and
its name is Sukhavati, say the Buddhists of Nippon; out of it comes a
continual harmony of flowing rivers, murmuring leaves, and soft bells
swung by softer winds. It is a kingdom in the northern ocean and its
name is Vaikuntha, some Hindus say. Others speak of a paradise which
they call Svetadvipa, “the white island” that is somewhere in the north
beyond the Sea of Milk.

For inland peoples the thought of a sea to be crossed, as every day
the sun crosses the sea to its rest, gave way at times to the thought
of a river with a difficult bridge, and paradise on the farther side.
Such in the Hindu classics was the land of the Uttarakarus which lay
on the shores of the northern ocean beyond the radiance of the sun and
the moon. A river that petrified whatever entered it flowed between it
and the countries of the south. Lakes with golden lotuses and tanks
of crystal water shimmered in the light airs of this favored land. In
its odorous orchards birds always sang, and beautiful maidens, hanging
by their long hair, grew among the blossom-burdened branches--another
glimpse of the enigmatic women of Wak-wak. Amid the sound of music and
laughter these Indian Hyperboreans did their pious deeds, nor shed the
god-unlawful tear, until ten thousand and ten hundred years had passed.
Then they died, and fowls with sharp beaks carried their bodies to
mountain caves.

An Irish myth of the Middle Ages holds closer to the facts of existence
than any of these stories of terrestrial felicity, and there is a
note of sadness in the beauty of it. In a lake in Munster were the
islands of life and death. There was no port for death to enter the
first island, but age and pain and sickness were there, and all the
wearinesses of years. Its inhabitants learned at last to look on the
opposite island as the place of repose, and, steering their barks to
its shore, they entered upon eternal rest.




Chapter XVIII. The Terrible Ocean


In some of its moods the sea presents itself as a symbol of eternity.
For ages it was more than the symbol; it was eternity itself.
Men shrank from contemplation of it, as they might shrink from
contemplation of the hereafter. A voyage into its outer spaces was like
the voyage of the soul into the shadows that lie beyond life. Still,
this conception shapes the imagery and colors the faith of the race.
Life is a passage down a river that reaches an immeasurable sea. Death
is a journey upon dark waters. The bark of salvation spreads its sails
for the pure of heart, and favoring winds waft them to the Beautiful
Shore. In the songs of Christendom one hears soft winds blowing over
expanses of peaceful water. The earth geography of Homer is the
heavenly geography of Bunyan. The Ocean Stream that flowed around the
world is the river that flows by the Throne of God.

Classic mythology ties up the sea’s infinities with those of time
through the medium of the Styx, which was at once a branch of the Ocean
Stream and the river that encircled the land of shades. The lake of
Avernus which afforded entrance to the nether world, Charon’s ferry,
the rivers Cocytus, Acheron, and Phlegethon, and the Stygian Pool
itself, all gave to a Roman death the aspect of maritime adventure,
although underground. The freer Greek fancy placed the Elysium of the
soul somewhere in the western ocean, where the sun sank to rest. There
were the Isles of the Blessed, or Fortunate Isles, where there was
neither rain nor snow, but the shrilly-breathing west wind fanned and
watered the land.

Other isles were there, the abodes of formidable men and dangerous
women and prodigious animals. But one could get along very well by
accepting the fictions of the poets as good enough geography and
ethnography without launching maritime expeditions to confirm them.
The western ocean offered the peoples of the Mediterranean no present
promise or profit to match its terrors, and to alloy delights that
had too spectral a cast. Unlike the Indian Ocean, it was not a great
highway of trade. Thick clouds covered it, perpetual darkness reigned
upon it. It was an unnavigable morass and a confusion; so said Hesiod,
Pindar, and Euripides, voicing the beliefs of their time.

There was one race that without fear put forth upon the sea. This was
the Phœnicians, and their rich African colony, the Carthaginians. Their
adventures beyond the Pillars of Hercules brought profit to them, and
they saw to it that the tidings of them should bring dismay to others.
A Phœnician fleet sent out by Necho, a Pharaoh of the XXXVIth dynasty,
seems to have sailed around Africa. About B.C. 500 a Carthaginian fleet
under Hanno explored the African west coast as far as the mouths of
the Senegal and Gambia. At nearly the same time another Carthaginian
fleet under Himilco discovered the British Isles, but it brought back
depressing stories. The islands were four months’ distant from the
Straits of Gibraltar, and the voyage thither was through waters haunted
by frightful monsters and thick with entangling seaweed, where wild
storms and protracted calms succeeded one another.

These were not true tales, but other nations believed them, and the
seafaring Semites were permitted to build up trading stations along
the coasts of the outer ocean--in western Africa, in Lusitania, in the
Scilly Islands, and in Cornwall. None challenged their monopoly of
the tin trade of the Cassiterides. They covered their tracks so that
whoever had the temerity to test their fables, or seek to tap their
sources of raw material, would not know whither to go. Strabo tells
how the Carthaginians concealed from everyone the passage to the Tin
Islands: “When the Romans followed a certain shipmaster, that they also
might find the market, the shipmaster of jealousy purposely ran his
vessel upon a shoal, leading on those who followed him into the same
destructive disaster. He himself escaped by means of a fragment of the
ship, and received from the state the value of the cargo he had lost.”

According to Eratosthenes, the Carthaginians went further: “They drown
any strangers who sail past on their voyage to Sardinia or to the
Pillars.” Thus through piracy, stratagem, and fable they maintained
their monopoly on the waters of the west, and for once Greek curiosity
played into a rival’s hands. Tyrian and Punic marvel tales were
elaborated and adorned by the poets of Attica, until everyone felt that
a journey beyond the Pillars was a thing not to be undertaken. All that
the earlier Greeks knew, even of the western Mediterranean, was that
near it was a mountain called Atlas on which the sky rested, and that
the world ended at the pillars set up by Hercules.

One Greek was determined to learn more, and see if his countrymen could
not also profit from the tin and amber trades. The journey of Pytheas
of Massilia, at about B.C. 333, along the coasts of northern Europe
is one of the noteworthy scientific expeditions of history. He is the
first to speak of Thule. He found where amber came from. He noted that
the cereals gradually disappeared as one traveled north, that the
northern grain was threshed in barns instead of upon open threshing
floors, and that fermented drinks there were made from corn and honey.
In a peculiar passage he asserted that beyond Britain there was neither
earth, air, nor sea, but a mixture of all three--something like the
element which held the universe together. This substance, which he
compared to the jellyfish, rendered navigation impossible and led the
Romans later to name those waters the Sluggish Sea. The apparently
fabulous statement, made on hearsay, has been interpreted as referring
to the dense fogs of the northern seas, to the blended effects of
mist and light, and to the broken ice or slush that floats there in a
translucent state. The reference to the jellyfish may be either to its
translucence or its luminosity.

All that Pytheas reported of northern Europe was discredited. How, asks
Polybius, could a private individual conduct such a vast expedition
with his narrow means? Strabo accuses the Massilian of having forged
his tales, “making use of his acquaintance with astronomy and
mathematics to fabricate his false narration.” His complete vindication
is the work of modern scholarship.

The next report of consequence from the outer seas comes nearly three
centuries later and was made to Sertorius, the Marian general under
whom for a time Spain maintained its independence of Rome. A tale of
the Fortunate Islands--probably of the Canaries--drifted in through the
Straits and found the great soldier weary of life in camp and field.
Two sailors had arrived from islands which they described as about
twelve hundred miles west of the coast of Africa. Rains seldom fell
there, they said. The dews watered the earth, which yielded its fruits
in abundance without the labor of man. The seasons were temperate,
the air was serene and pleasant, and soft winds blowing from the west
and south brought days of bright moist weather. Even the barbarians
believed that this was the seat of the blessed.

There was that in the jaded commander which lifted to the thought of
new horizons. Sertorius, says Plutarch, was seized with a wonderful
passion for these islands and had an extreme desire to go and live
there in peace and quietness, safe from oppression and unending wars.
But the Cilician pirates, who were his allies, wanted not peace, but
spoils. So the remainder of his life was spent in wars and government,
and the world was denied an adventure instinct with romance and
pregnant with the potencies of great discovery.

With the voyage of Polybius in the fleet of Scipio along the west
African coast, the campaigns of Cæsar in Gaul and Britain and the
reduction of both into imperial provinces, even the incurious Roman
became possessed of adequate geographical knowledge of the western
coasts of Europe and the waters near them. This knowledge, however, was
tinctured with the marvelous, and was not long retained. Strabo, for
example, pictures the men of the Scilly, or Tin, Islands as wearing
black cloaks and tunics reaching to the feet, and as walking with
staves, thus “resembling the Furies we see in tragic representations.”
He must have meant the Druids.

In the same century in which the legions were withdrawn from Britain,
Procopius, the foremost historian of the Eastern Roman Empire, was
born. Yet in that century of dissolution most of what the ancient world
had learned of the coasts and waters of the Atlantic was forgotten.
The western ocean had been a domain over which mists of ignorance and
superstition hovered, sometimes rising for a moment of distant vision,
sometimes falling like a blank curtain. In the sixth century A.D. they
drew so closely to the shores of Europe that even England was lost
behind them. It had ceased to be a Roman province and was become a land
of ghosts.

Procopius tells his story with due note of its dreamlike quality; and
yet, he says, numberless men vouch for its truth. It is the story of
the English Channel become the ferry of souls. The fisher folk on the
continental side are subject to the Franks, but pay no tribute, because
it is their task in regular turn to transport the souls of the dead to
Britain. Those on duty for each night keep indoors until a knocking is
heard and a mysterious voice summons them. Arising from sleep, they go
down to the beach, where they find strange boats awaiting them. These
seem to be empty, but when they seize the oars and push off they find
the gunwales only an inch above the water. In silence they make the
journey and in an hour find themselves on the opposite shore, although
their own skiffs could scarcely cross in a night and a day. When the
keels grate on the beach, suddenly the boats ride high on the waves.
There is none to greet them, but again a voice is heard, announcing the
name and station of the spectral passengers.

Thus the end of the ancient world found men knowing only a little more
about the western ocean than they did at the beginning. The chief
advance over the Homeric age was that they knew it was an ocean and not
a circumfluent river. The old idea was not dead that it was a morass
made unnavigable by seaweed and mud, too thick and too shallow for
sailing ships to venture upon. This notion was fostered by observing
the unfamiliar phenomena of ebb tides, with the long windrows of weed
and the wide expanses of muddy flats they laid bare upon the coasts.
Plato had deepened the belief and provided a reason for it in his story
of Atlantis. “That is the reason,” he concludes, “why the sea in those
parts is impassable and impenetrable, because there is such a quantity
of shallow mud in the way.”

Men had no such notions, or fears of the open seas to the east,
although they were careful not to get too far from their shores.
They knew that inhabited lands were beyond them, and that by not
impossible shores and islands they could reach these. The Periplus of
the Erythræan Sea had full accounts of the coasts from Aden clear
to the mouth of the Ganges, and reports also on Indo-China and China
itself. There were pirate-haunted archipelagoes and islands tenanted
by the monsters of Oriental fancy. But these were Eastern waters and
it behooved men to know something about them and to take a chance upon
them, for a great traffic moved across them--silken fabrics, spices,
pepper, gold and silver and precious stones from the hidden storehouses
of Asia. Wherefore men faced the seas of sunrise with no such fears as
invaded them when they looked out upon the empty and spectral Atlantic.

Another race beside the Phœnician was unafraid of the western sea. This
was the Northmen, of whom it was said that they never slept under a
smoke-blackened roof, nor ate and drank at any hearth. Their tradition
looked outward, where that of the Mediterranean races looked inward.
The ocean was the whale path of their skalds, and their hearts sang
along it. Its waters carried the challenge and promise of the present,
not the glooms or pallors of the hereafter. When their long boats drove
through the Straits of Gibraltar into the old Roman world to pillage
and rule there, it was the return visit of the men of the outer spaces,
ferocious and blithe sea-rovers who thus requited the trafficking and
timid excursions of Phœnician and Roman into the seas that washed the
continent.

The very names of Viking chieftains--Sigurd Snake-eye, Thord the
Yeller, Ottar the Swart, Harold Blue-tooth, Eric Blood-ax, Thorfinn
Skull-cleaver, Sweyn Split-beard--sketched a hardihood that made light
of supernatural terrors upon the sea and knew none other. These men of
the viks or fjords rid the coasts of Europe in the eighth and ninth
centuries of every fear except of themselves. Then they went westward
to America.

There is a bolder note in their geographical tradition than in aught
that had been before. One catches the swing of the Atlantic surges and
the pulses of people at home there in the chapter, “On the Situation of
Countries,” which begins the chronicle of the _Heimskring’la_: “It is
said that the earth circle which the human race inhabits is much cut
asunder with bights and bays, and that great seas run into the land
from the outer ocean. Of a certainty, it is known that a sea goes in at
the Norva Sound (Gibraltar) right up to the land of Jerusalem; and from
that sea, again, a long bay, which is called the Black Sea, goes off
to the northeast, and it divides the two World-Ridings, that is to say,
Asia on the east from Europe on the west. To the north of the Black
Sea lies Sweden the Great, or the Cold (Russia); and this is reckoned
by some as not less in size than the Great Saracen Land, or even the
Great Land of the Bluemen (the Moors). And the northern parts of this
Sweden are unpeopled, by reason of the frost and the cold, just as the
southern parts of Blue-Land are waste because of the sun’s burning.
Mighty lordships are there in this Sweden, and people of manifold kind
and speech; there are giants and there are dwarfs--aye, and Bluemen,
and folk of many kinds and marvellous, and wild beasts, and dragons
wondrous great.”

When the pagan Northmen became Christians their ferocity was moderated,
and their spirit of enterprise, as it seemed, almost extinguished.
Their old contempt of the sea did not pass into the veins of the
peoples over whom for a time they had dominion. Rather the confused and
credulous views of the churchmen became their own, henceforth occupying
the entire field of European thought. Adam of Bremen, eleventh-century
churchman, pictures the sea as his time conceived it--the old
forbidding canvas of classic legend framed with the icicles of Gothic
discovery.

Terra Firma, says Adam, is entirely surrounded by the infinite and
terrible ocean. The northern spaces of the deep are covered with ice
and darkness and this expanse is called the frozen, glutinous, or
darkling sea. It is stiff with salt and covered with black ice, formed
long before and so dry that it will burn like peat.

The German bishop even borrows a tale from the Northmen to engender
terrors to which they had been stranger. Their king, Harald Hardrada,
the most daring of men, had reports from Frisian mariners which caused
him to set sail for the limits of the earth. In the darkness he
arrived at the North Pole--a profound vortex into which the ebb tides
were sucked and out of which the flood tides were disgorged. His ship
plunged down into the boiling chaos, but the sea which took could also
give, and the outward heave of its vast bosom flung the vessel back
again beyond the clutch of the whirlpool.

[Illustration: ROARING FORTIES _By_ F. J. Waugh]

As late as 1406 a chronicler tells of English ships, bound for
Bordeaux, which penetrated an unfrequented sea where four vessels from
Lynn were swallowed up in a whirlpool, which thrice a day drew in and
cast out the flood. When fishermen of that time went a few miles from
land they used only haaf-words--a sea speech in which persons, animals,
and things had other names than what they bore ashore; so might they
avoid offense to whatever was astir in the deep.

It is refreshing to turn from the gloomy imaginings of the West to
Indian and Chinese legends of the Seven Seas. In the quainter fancy
that animates them, at least the note of fear is missing. From the
Puranas, Gerini has made these identifications: The Sea of Salt Water
surrounds India. The Sea of Sugar Cane Juice surrounds Burma. The Sea
of Wine surrounds the Malay Peninsula. The Sea of Clarified Butter
surrounds the Sunda Archipelago. The Sea of Milk surrounds Siam and
Cambodia. The Sea of Curds or Whey surrounds South China. The Sea of
Fresh Water surrounds North China and Mongolia.

Fear of the ocean, and above all of the Atlantic, is, however, the
distinctive note in mediæval Arab geography. This was perhaps a native
growth of the desert, and its spirit is in the Koran passage which
speaks of “black night upon the deep, which wave on wave doth cover,
cloud upon cloud, gloom upon gloom.” Arab merchants and pilgrims
ranged to the ends of the Moslem world. Save Marco Polo, Ibn Batuta
was the earth’s greatest and most curious traveler. To the Arab port
of Bassorah, sailors from the Nile, the Mediterranean, and even the
China Sea brought the gossip of mankind. Yet a dread of the deep sounds
through the works of Arab geographers, as through the saga of Sindbad,
with the effect of a refrain.

Around the fair meadows of the world swung the terrible ocean, the Sea
of Darkness as the Arabs called it. To Massoudy the Atlantic was the
Green Sea of Gloom. None dwelt there, none could sail there, none knew
to what infinite distances it reached. Ibn Khaldun described it as
the boundless, impenetrable limit of the west. Other lights of Islam
spoke of the whirlpools into which vessels were drawn, and argued that
even if sailors knew the direction of the winds they did not know
whither the winds would carry them; nor could they carry them anywhere,
for there was nowhere to go, and in the realms of mist no prospect
of getting back. Sane men would not attempt a venture out of sight
of land, said certain of the doctors. To plan such a journey, it was
asserted, was evidence of an unsound mind; to embark upon it was ground
for depriving a man of his civil rights.

Idrisi, Mohammedan savant in the service of King Roger of Sicily in
the twelfth century and the greatest of Arab geographers, utters the
authoritative Arab word upon the sea: “The ocean encircles the ultimate
bounds of the inhabited earth, and all beyond it is unknown. No one
has been able to verify anything concerning it, on account of its
difficult and perilous navigation, its great obscurity, its profound
depth and frequent tempests; through fear of its mighty fishes and its
haughty winds; yet there are many islands in it, some peopled, others
uninhabited. There is no mariner who dares to enter its deep waters; or
if any have done so, they have merely kept along its coasts, fearful of
departing from them.”

Whether this was in some part a literary convention--a gesture of
geography--or the expression of an unshakable dread, the sentiment
limited the service of Islam to mankind. The Arab coasting trade had
reached as far as China and as far down the eastern side of Africa
as Zanzibar. But this people, so resourceful on land, never pushed
their coasting adventures around the Cape of Good Hope, as Prince
Henry and his Portuguese successors did from a farther north on the
other side of Africa. Nor did they attempt, as Columbus did, the
crossing of a great sea. Nor did they essay, as Magellan did, to prove
by a circumnavigation the rotundity of the earth on which their own
geographers had spoken with the clearest voices of the Middle Ages.

A group of remarkable legends illustrates the later annals of the
western ocean and carries them on to the Columbian adventure. Idrisi
tells a story of the eight Deluded Folk, or Lisbon Wanderers, who went
out to sea when the wind blew from the east and for more than a month
were carried before it. They reached an island supposed to be one of
the Canaries, where they found a people who spoke Arabic and who sent
them back when a wind arose from the west. St. Brendan voyaged for
seven years among seven islands of the west, according to a story
widely circulated in the eleventh century. The tenth-century tale of
the island of the Seven Spanish Bishops who had left Spain to escape
Moslem rule was revived by a Portuguese ship captain who claimed to
have reached the island; but when Prince Henry bade him go back for
proofs, the romancer took refuge in flight.

It may have been that the Phœnicians made atonement at last for the
fables of paralyzing fear which they had spread abroad, and on the
outer verge of the Old World in the days of their decline left their
secret as a legacy for the bold to profit from. The scene is Corvo,
westernmost of the Islands of the Sun, as the Azores were called;
and the passage, though from a Portuguese writer of the seventeenth
century, refers to events a generation before the Columbian discovery.
Says Manoel de Faria y Souza: “On the summit of a mountain called
the Crow was found the statue of a man on horseback, without saddle,
bareheaded, the left hand on the horse’s mane, the right pointing to
the west. It stood on a slab of the same stone as itself; beneath it,
on a rock, were engraved some letters in an unknown language.”

One explanation of the legend is given by a traveler of the last
century, who said that the superstitious folk of the island fancied
they saw in a promontory which reaches far into the sea the semblance
of a person with his hand stretched out toward the New World. This,
they declared, was the work of Providence, and Columbus read the sign
aright. But the tale may not so easily be interpreted and dismissed.
A hoard of Carthaginian coins, so runs a report which Humboldt
accepts, was discovered in Corvo in 1749; and there are other stories
of equestrian statues of Carthaginian design erected upon Atlantic
islands. Against the utter drama of the legend--the parting gesture of
good will of a bold and subtle race of ancient time--may be set another
legend, more in keeping with the superstition and fears of the Middle
Ages. This was no equestrian statue pointing westward, if the Pizzani
map of 1367 was to be believed. It was the figure of a saint with his
back to the sunset and his outstretched hand warning mariners away from
the unnavigable seas behind him.

The monkish monument was the parable of a twilight time. To the
fifteenth century the deep was an eerie domain where the creatures of
pagan and Christian story couched upon the ocean floor, showed their
unholy shapes among the waves, chattered on desert island strands,
and wove their enchantments in the mists. In the north the witches of
Lapland raised storms and wrecked the ships that passed their shores.
To the south none might sail beyond Cape Bojador on the African Gold
Coast. Who did so was turned from white to black, and never came
back. There the flaming sword of the sun was laid across the paths of
the sea. What was beyond it was boiling brine and air heated into a
flame--a landless firmament of water and a starless firmament of sky.

Looking westward, men cowered before visions of the Hand of Satan,
thrust upward from far horizons to drag ships into the depths. Or “the
wind that blows between the worlds” might carry mariners away on a
journey from which was no returning. Or currents, setting always in one
direction, might sweep them into illimitable space. If the world was
flat, one might sail off its edge. If it was round, its very rotundity
would present a sort of mountain up which no ship could climb on the
backward voyage. As to the Atlantic races, the mediæval maps told
one what to expect. What chance of succor, or agreeable converse,
or a profitable traffic from spouting monsters, satyrs, sirens and
conch-blowing tritons? Could one warm his hands at the witch-fires of
the sea?

Out of these gray forebodings the ships of Columbus, with one stout
heart and many questioning ones aboard, sailed into the unknown, as
vessels move through the sluggish dark before the dawn breeze springs
up and the sky reddens toward sunrise. Ere long the caravels were
steering among isles fanned by soft breezes and bathed in tropical
sunshine, and naked, kindly peoples were hailing the mariners as
visitors from the skies. Morning had broken at last upon the western
ocean, and in its level rays a path lay sparkling clear across the
sea--the path of enterprise, of conquest, of gold, the path of
victorious dreams. Along that highway hardy spirits soon would press
on great adventures. In the stead of ghost-ridden hearth-keepers,
mumblers of old fable, shrinkers from the outer surges, there were
men who dared go round the earth in flimsy barks and lead a handful of
followers against the haughty empires of the Cordilleras.

Terror was dead upon the deep. Somewhat of fable remained.




Chapter XIX. The Sargasso Sea


If there were no Sargasso Sea there would still have been a legend of
one to satisfy the demand of the mind, in a world of change and motion,
for a place where there was neither. Conscious of the flight of time,
noting the flow of rivers, the wind’s wandering, and the climbing and
falling of the waves of the ocean, the mind has created realms where
time stands still, countries of morning calm and afternoon sunshine,
and spaces where the pulse of the sea is asleep. Peace there was in
the grave, but what was sought was a paradox--something alive and
yet motionless in time and space. There were stagnant pools in the
imagination, grotesqueries, junk heaps, a sense of silences and of slow
decay that was no decay at all but the serenity of noon in a swamp. The
outward symbol of these moods men would have in the world about them.

For uncounted ages that symbol had been a fact of the mid-Atlantic.
People must have known of the Sargasso thousands of years ago, though
the memory of the voyages in which they learned of it is no more, and
the tales that seem to speak of it are not accepted as facts. Plato
had told of the thick waters that rolled over the sunken Atlantis,
preventing the passage of ships. When Columbus entered this sea and
saw tunny fish playing about his caravels, he remembered a story of
Aristotle that certain ships of the Semites, coasting beyond the
Pillars of Hercules, were driven before a gale from the east until they
reached a weedy sea, resembling sunken islands, among which were tunny
fish. On his voyage to Britain Himilco reported that he found vast
fields of floating weeds which retarded his vessels and brought them to
danger.

The ancient view of the Atlantic was that it was a region of baffling
calms and shallow water and mud and seaweed. This was based on Punic
reports, and the Carthaginians told such tales of the open seas
as would frighten other nations from them. Yet their distorted
statements had so much of truth intermixed with error that it is hard
to believe they intended altogether falsely, and were vindicated only
by coincidence when a grassy sea, greater than their dominions at their
widest, was found west of the Azores. With flagrant exaggeration,
however, they had spoken of sea grasses with needle-like tops, a sort
of marine wheat with stalks as close together as in sheaves of grain.
In B.C. 300 Theophrastus had written of wide-leaved weeds that drifted
from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean. In his poetic account of
the African west coast Festus Avienus described in detail the weedy
impediments to navigation, using, so he says, the journals of Punic
ships. Scylax recited that the sea beyond Cerne on the coast of
Mauretania could not be navigated “in consequence of its shallowness,
its muddiness, and its sea grass.” With easy exuberance of fancy Lucian
had told in his _True History_ of encountering a floating forest in
the sea and of sailing right over the tops of the trees toward “that
continent which we supposed lies opposite our own”--a reference which
gains in significance from its casual character.

Though most of them have been lost, there were strange Sargasso
legends in the ancient world, based on reports of floating seaweed and
the claims of captains that this had put them in hazard. What weedy
growths could do in restless water men knew by observing their effects
in rivers, notably on the upper Nile. The envoys of Nero had been
halted there by a sea of floating vegetation; a long line of travelers
thereafter had a like experience, and a tragedy of this floating
greenery is of our own time. By the blocking of the Nile channel in
1880 Gessi was held prisoner for three months with five companies of
soldiers and a multitude of freed slaves, and most of them died before
help came.

The burden of these old fables was of a stagnant death in silent spaces
of the sea where nothing ever happened. The weedy continent was a trap
which closed in upon ships and suffered no escape, even though with
double banks of oars the rowers strove. Death claimed the crew, and
slowly the sea claimed the galleys. Marine plants crept over bow and
stern and writhed into the cabins and climbed the masts and swathed all
in a green decay; and silently, as the timbers parted below and the
weight of vegetation massed above, the vessel sank, perhaps into some
harbor of the lost Atlantis.

A prison for lost souls, the St. Brendan legend calls the grassy sea
of the west. The ferment was working in men’s imaginations. There must
be a spectral haven in the sea, a place into which vessels might come,
out of which they could not go. For a while in the waters of the east
this was the Island of Lodestone, which drew and held to itself all
craft that had iron in their timbers. In Maundeville the legend of
the Sargasso Sea is full blown, though with him it is truth--travel
truth--of a magnetic rock.

“I myself,” he said, “have seen afar off in that Sea as though it had
been a great Isle full of Trees and Bush, full of Thorns and Briars,
great Plenty. And the Shipmen told us, that all that was of Ships that
were drawn thither by the Adamants, for the Iron that was in them. And
from the Rottenness and other Things that were within the Ships, grew
such Bush, and Thorns and Briars and green Grass and such manner of
Things, and from the Masts and the Sail-yards it seemed a great Wood or
a Grove. And such Rocks be in many Places thereabouts. And therefore
dare not the Merchants pass there, but if they know well the Passages,
or else that they have good Pilots. And also they dread the long Way
more far by many dreadful Days’ journeys than Cathay.”

Thus the Port of Missing Ships came into view as the creation of
classic and mediæval legend, to which modern exploration had given a
sure place in the sea. It fulfilled a stagnant something in the souls
of men. It offered harbor to certain of their dreams. It yielded a
last resting place to derelicts that had wandered far, among them the
derelicts of fancy. It gave reply to questions that arose whenever
the argosies went out and did not come back. Against the eternal
restlessness and fated journeyings of the Flying Dutchman it summoned
up the picture of a fated and eternal calm. It added to the terrors of
the sea a horror that was half poetry. This became poetry altogether
when men had ceased to believe and yet wanted to believe, and in their
art evoked the vision of ruinous hulks of Tyrian, Roman, and Spanish
ships side by side upon a spectral main, silent witnesses of all the
maritime adventures of mankind.

The actuality behind the mask of legend, a vast expanse of sea in the
Atlantic, in many places resembling an inundated meadow, Columbus
discovered on his first voyage, when for three weeks he traversed it.
But instead of having misgivings, he rejoiced at what he conceived to
be evidence that land was not far distant. On one of the floating weed
masses he saw a white tropical bird of a kind that does not sleep upon
the sea. His journal speaks little of the apprehensions of the sailors,
but his son Fernando recites these--their fears that the weeds, which
plainly retarded the ships, would halt them altogether; that the
marine growths might conceal the lurking rocks, shoals and quicksands
of a shallowing ocean; and that, run aground or fatally entangled in
gulfweed, the ships might rot and fall apart far from any shore or any
hope of aid. Memories of the Atlantis legend raised in their minds the
menace of drowned lands and the monumental ruins of a lost continent.

To Columbus, however, the Sargasso Sea stood, not for a lost continent,
but for the boundary between the worlds. Where it began, west of the
Azores, the New World began also, and the Old World ended. This was
no theoretical meridian, he thought, but a true physical line of
demarcation drawn by nature between the hemispheres. He could sense a
difference in climatic conditions in crossing the line, and the compass
seemed to show magnetic deviations. On his return he believed that he
could determine his longitude by observing the first floating masses
of tangled seaweed. So persuasive was his imaginative force, so great
his influence in Europe, that soon after his arrival there the eastern
boundary of the weedy sea became the globe’s first, and last, political
boundary of an all-embracing kind. Title to newly discovered lands
east of it was awarded by a papal bull to Portugal. Title to newly
discovered lands west of it was awarded to Spain.

Oviedo gave this expanse the name of Sargasso Sea, from Sargaço, the
Portuguese word for seaweed. It was freely traversed by the explorers
who followed Columbus. The world-rounding expedition of Drake reports
that for five days “wee sayled through the sea of Weedes, about the
space of one hundred leagues, being under the Tropicke of Cancer.” The
size and exact location of the sea were long a matter of conjecture.
Varenius, for example, placed its northern limit opposite the
mid-Sahara and its southern opposite the Cape of Good Hope. The note
of Humboldt in his _Views of Nature_, published near the middle of
the nineteenth century, is the first scientific account of it. This
was based on rather scanty observations of English and Dutch sailing
vessels which took a course through it from the West Indies to Europe.
Humboldt thought the Sargasso Sea comprised two weed banks, the larger
one west of the Azores, the smaller between the Bermudas and Bahamas,
with a transverse band connecting them. Fuller reports, since made by
steamers, with the careful records of the German Hydrographic Office,
have enabled scientists, and particularly Doctor Krümmel, to correct
these conclusions and plot the true outlines of the sea.

The Equatorial Current sets west from the coast of Africa. The Gulf
Stream sets north and east from the Straits of Florida--still following
the direction, Donnelly ingeniously contended, that was given it by the
lost continent of Atlantis, around which it flowed. The two currents,
moving in nearly opposite directions, impart a circular motion to
the waters that lie between, so that all things adrift over an area
of millions of square miles, seaweed, driftwood, and hulks of ships
are drawn toward a common center, which may be called the floating
storehouse of the North Atlantic. Banks of weed are found as far west
as the Bermudas, and this outer grassy sea covers an expanse of about
three million square miles, or as much as continental United States.
But the true Sargasso Sea of dead waters, where gulfweed is found
thickly, covers an area of about one million two hundred thousand
square miles, or the size of the Mississippi Valley. It is an ellipse
with the Tropic of Cancer as its longer axis. The sea stretches through
fifteen degrees of latitude and more than twenty-five degrees of
longitude, the two foci of the ellipse being near 45° and 70° west.

With the shift of winds and calms the weedy sea itself shifts somewhat,
but its mean location remains unchanged. Humboldt was convinced that in
his time it was precisely where Columbus had found it three and a half
centuries before, and Maury’s study of marine observations leads to the
conclusion that there has been no change in the last fifty years. Of
all the larger aspects of nature this is perhaps the only one that is
just as it was in the time of Columbus. During thousands of years, when
the ocean was battering at the coasts of the continents, breaking down
or building up the shore; when earthquakes and volcanoes were causing
islands to appear and disappear; when the wind and rain were at their
unending tasks of bearing everything terrestrial into the deeps; and
when races of men were remodeling some small portions of the earth’s
surface with roads and ports and bridges, the Sargasso Sea may have
been the only thing immune from change. This eternal vortex might well
be called the true Navel of the World.

Even now, when many ships ply these waters, and after the records
of centuries seem to have assured that there are no reefs or shoals
under their greenery, travelers admit a sense of uneasiness as their
craft plunges into what seems a sunken meadow. Nearer view, however,
discloses that the patches of vegetation are discontinuous. The larger
single masses may be several acres in extent, or may not be more than a
hundred feet across. The weeds commonly lie in long parallel rows that
tail to the prevailing winds. By noting the rows, the mariner can tell
whether the wind has been blowing steadily, or has recently shifted,
and in which direction. The lines are sometimes so near together as to
seem one mass, or they may be as far apart as two hundred feet. In some
places the weeds in them barely touch, in others they are so crowded
that their tops are thrust a little distance above the water.

A distinctive fauna, sparse in species but unnumbered in individuals,
has been developed among these masses. The floating berries are thickly
incrusted with white polyzoa. About sixty animal species peculiar
to the area have been noted, among them small fish, shrimps, crabs,
molluscs, gastropods, and one insect. The fishes have developed a
strong protective resemblance to the shapeless weeds among which they
feed. Strangest of these is the _Antennarius marmoratus_, a little
creature not more than four inches long and indistinguishable from a
plant spray. It seems half adapted for walking; its fins, which suggest
the extremities of four-footed creatures, have real toes, and the front
fins have the form of arms with elbows and fingered hands.

The Prince of Monaco conducted a scientific expedition into these
waters in 1905, and in 1911 the United States Hydrographic Service sent
a party of scientists for a three months’ study of them; but adequate
knowledge is still wanting.

There is a Sargasso question: How does the weed get into the sea? The
old theory was that it is a true oceanic plant. To those who held to
the belief in a sunken continent the grassy domain was a sort of canopy
suspended over it, the flying banners of the lost Atlantis. There is
still good scientific opinion of which the French are the leaders, that
the weed grows in the area where it is found, reproducing itself by
fissure, the parent stem throwing off branches which multiply in turn.
The bulk of scientific opinion outside of France is that these meadows
of the sea are the spoil of the neighboring islands and continents. The
gulfweed which covers them, it is held, has been torn from the shores
of northern Brazil, of the West Indies, and of North America as far as
Cape Cod, and has drifted into this vortex--a journey that may take
almost half a year. The French contend that even without these admitted
contributions from America there would still be a weedy sea about the
Tropic of the Crab.

From time to time commercial enterprise has canvassed the possibilities
of a Sargasso adventure. It may be that a profitable fishery will
yet be established there with the Azores for its base, and that the
kelp will be converted into potash for fertilizer or for gunpowder.
Thus would the arts of war and peace draw support from the sea, that,
if legend speaks truly, sleeps over the continent which spread them
through the antediluvian world.




Chapter XX. Atlantis


Under the Sargasso Sea, if a few accomplished thinkers, a somewhat
larger number of speculative scientists, and a host of dreamers are
right, lies the lost Atlantis. This legend of a continent beyond the
Pillars of Hercules, which reached a high level of civilization,
extended its rule along both shores of the Mediterranean, sent its
armies to battle with Egypt and Athens, and “in a day and a fatal
night” sank beneath the sea eleven thousand years ago, is the most
haunting and poignant thing that has come down from antiquity.

The story derives from Plato, who attributes it to his relative, Solon,
who had it from a priest of Egypt. It is told briefly and completely
in the _Timæus_ and with much greater detail in the _Critias_;
unfortunately, the latter portion of this work is wanting and the
narrative ends abruptly, before recounting the cataclysm outlined in
the earlier work. Both are built upon the conversation between Solon
and the Egyptian priest. Discoursing on the ignorance of the Greeks
concerning their own history, the priest said that they knew nothing
of a thing which was preserved in the sacred books of the temple at
Sais--that, nine thousand years before, the Athenians had repelled an
invading force which threatened the conquest of Europe and Asia. This
force had come in through the Straits of Gibraltar from the Atlantic
Sea, “which was at that time navigable.”

Beyond the Straits, according to the _Timæus_, lay the island of
Atlantis, greater than Libya and Asia (Minor) together. Other islands
surrounded it, and farther west was a continent. Between Atlantis and
this continent rolled an ocean so great that, compared with it, the
land-locked Mediterranean was merely a harbor. A powerful dynasty of
kings arose on the island, subjugated the surrounding archipelagoes
and a part of the unnamed continent beyond, and in the Old World
swayed Libya up to Egypt and the northern shore of the Mediterranean
as far as Tuscany. They undertook to complete their conquest of the
Mediterranean coasts, but the Athenians, though deserted by their
allies, beat off their ships. While the fleet from beyond the Straits
was still in the Inland Sea, it would seem, the island of Atlantis was
sunk, and the earthquakes that submerged it and the monstrous waves
that followed spread ruin all along the Mediterranean shores.

Here is the passage in which Plato records the concluding words of
the priest of Solon: “But after (the battle) there occurred violent
earthquakes and floods, and in a single day and night of rain all your
warlike men in a body sunk into the earth, and the island of Atlantis
in like manner disappeared and was sunk beneath the sea. And that is
the reason why the sea in those parts is impassable and impenetrable,
because there is such a quantity of shallow mud in the way; and this
was caused by the subsidence of the island.... There are remaining in
small islets only the bones of the wasted body, as they may be called,
all the richer and softer parts of the soil having fallen away, and the
mere skeleton of the country being left.”

The longer account in the _Critias_ describes the civilization of
Atlantis. It begins, as all chronicles used to do, with the affairs of
the gods, and their amorous interest in the daughters of men (_Gen._
vi: 2). The sea god Poseidon fell in love with Cleito, a mortal island
maiden, and she bore him five sets of twins. The ten sons became kings,
each ruler of a tenth part of Atlantis, but all subject to the eldest
son, Atlas. The capital of the island became his abode, as it had been
his mother’s before him. Poseidon himself had laid out the palace
compound, making alternate zones of sea and land; “there were two of
land and three of water which he turned as with a lathe out of the
center of the island.”

At this point in the account, the divine figures disappear and it
becomes seemingly a straight historical narrative. Its picture of
the capital is more exact in its topographical, architectural, and
engineering detail than many that have come down to us of the older
capitals of Asia, or than any biblical picture of Jerusalem. The laws,
religion, and arts of the people are all adequately noticed.

There was a barrier of lofty mountains around the shores of the
island, their flanks sloping precipitously to the sea. In the upland
valleys were rich and populous villages. The middle of the island was
a great and fertile plain surrounded by a ditch one hundred feet deep.
Abundant rivers coursed the plain and the moisture of the rainy season
was supplemented in the summer by a system of aqueducts. In the center
of the plain was a magnificent city.

Assuming that this is no dream geography, it is necessary to determine
the size of Atlantis, and in doing so to reconcile a conflict of
statements in Plato’s story. He speaks of it as a large island, though
small as compared with a land domain west of it, which “may be most
truly called a continent”; yet he says Atlantis was larger than Libya
and Asia combined. The tale becomes incredible if Libya receives its
common Greek extension as the whole of Africa, and if Asia is taken in
the larger sense; for such an island there would not be room in the
Atlantic. The passage is brought into harmony with the context if other
ancient definitions are followed, so that Libya is made to mean the
district immediately west of Egypt and Asia to mean Asia Minor. This
would give the legendary Atlantis a territory of perhaps three hundred
thousand square miles, or about twice that of the state of California.

There are precise figures for the great central plain and they
harmonize with such an estimate of the island area. The plain was
three hundred and forty miles long by two hundred and thirty wide--in
other words, exactly the size of the state of Washington, but with
its greater dimension from south to north. The topography of the
whole island suggests that of California, although its shape was more
compact. Its central plain lay within its mountain barriers as the San
Joaquin and Sacramento valleys lie between the Sierras and the Coast
Range. And in its mineral riches, its mild climate, its system of
irrigation, and in the products of its fields, orchards, and vineyards
it was very like the Pacific coast state.

“Whatever fragrant things there are in the earth,” says Plato, “whether
roots or herbage or woods, grew and thrived in that land.” He mentions
melons--“fruits with a hard rind”--chestnuts, and “the pleasant kinds
of dessert which console us after dinner when we are full and tired of
eating,” which may mean, among other things, grapes and oranges; and
all these “the sacred island lying beneath the sun brought forth fair
and wondrous in infinite abundance.” In this picture there is but one
unfamiliar figure. Herds of elephants roved there, where California can
show only the fossil remains of the mastodon.

In the account of the capital city it is illuminating to recur to the
Pacific state, for the metropolis of Atlantis lay in the midst of a
mountain-girdled plain, and yet, like Sacramento, had access to the
sea, in this case by a ship canal perhaps connecting with a river.
If one can imagine the buildings and grounds of the Panama-Pacific
Exposition of 1915 with the wharves and commerce of San Francisco
removed to Sacramento, one may glimpse the legendary metropolis. In
the center of the city, on an artificial island, were temples and
palaces like those of the exposition, but of a barbaric splendor.
Greatest of these was the temple to Poseidon, a structure about as
large as one of the palaces surrounding the Court of the Universe at
the exposition, and doubtless of no greater height, for this was a
region of earthquake, and within the temple was one statue that reached
quite to the roof. Its walls were silvered, with gilded pinnacles,
and under the ivory roof the interior blazed with gold and silver and
“orichalcum”--copper, or an alloy of it, and esteemed next to gold.

The wall that encircled this inner island or citadel “flashed with the
red light of orichalcum.” There was a broad canal around it, and then
an encircling zone of land, about which was a wall sheeted with tin.
Around this was still another canal encircled by another land zone, and
here was a wall coated with brass, beside which ran a racecourse two
hundred yards wide where horses contended. Encircling this again was
the outermost canal. Beyond it lay the city.

The buildings of the outer city, as well as those of its sacred
citadel, were of stones in three colors--white, black and red--which,
with all the minerals useful to man, were taken from the bosom of the
island. There were hot and cold springs, with baths and with pools
for horses and cattle; the surplus water was conveyed by aqueducts to
the grove of Poseidon. Around the harbor front were docks, triremes,
and naval stores. Back of them the plain was densely crowded with
habitations. The harbors were full of vessels, and merchants coming
from all parts who from their numbers kept up “a multitudinous sound of
human voices and din of all sorts night and day.”

A copper column stood in the temple of Poseidon, on which the laws of
the land were graven. The chief of these were that the people should
not take up arms against one another, and that they should all come
to the rescue if anyone in any city attempted to overthrow the royal
house. On the plain and in the populous mountain valleys there was
a system of military service by districts and chiefs of districts,
somewhat like that of ancient Peru; and when Atlantis went to war ten
thousand chariots moved in front of its armies, and twelve hundred
vessels swept the sea lanes east and west. It was a powerful nation and
a happy--so long as the divine nature of their founder retained its
force among the people. Says Plato:

“They despised everything but virtue, not caring for their present
state of life and thinking lightly on the possession of gold and
other property which seemed only a burden to them; neither were
they intoxicated by luxury; nor did wealth deprive them of their
self-control; but they were sober and saw clearly that all these goods
are increased by virtuous friendship with one another, and that by
excessive zeal for them, and honor of them, the good of them is lost
and friendship perishes with them.”

At length, however, the divine nature in the Atlantines became diluted
by mortal admixture. They were filled with avarice, pride, the lusts
of the flesh; and “the fairest of their precious gifts” departed from
them. Base to men of insight, they still appeared to others as glorious
and blessed. In order to effect their chastisement and correction,
says Plato, returning to the mythological vein, a council of the gods
was called, and Zeus “spoke as follows.” What the Olympian said will
never be known, for here the _Critias_ ends, and for the fate of the
Atlantines one must recur to the _Timæus_.

The mythical prologue and epilogue excepted, the whole account
reads as if the author believed it himself. It is singularly free
from fantasy--this is no Cloud-Cuckoo Land of an Aristophanes. The
transcriber of the legend was perhaps the largest mind of antiquity
and a man of unblemished character; and “strange but altogether true”
he calls his own story. He was, however, a constructive dreamer, and
in his _Republic_ he has given a detailed sketch of an ideal state.
Was this another essay of a like nature? Might not the narrative
carry further if it came from a man of less imaginative sweep--from
the contemporary Xenophon, or from Plutarch, both of them vivacious
chroniclers with their eyes on facts? Phædrus had said to Socrates,
“You can easily invent a tale of Egypt.” Has the great disciple of
Socrates done this?

These questions are asked still, and antiquity asked them. Proclus in
his commentary on the _Timæus_ assumed that the legend was a symbol
of the contest between the primeval forces and the spirit of art and
science; he recites that Crantor, the first commentator, accepted it
as literal history and was ridiculed for it. Strabo and Pliny barely
mention the story. Thus Plutarch sets down the circumstances of its
relation: “Solon attempted in verse a large description, or rather
fabulous account of the Atlantic Island, which he had learned from the
wise men of Sais; but by reason of his age he did not go through with
it. Plato laid out magnificent courts and inclosures, and erected a
grand entrance to it, such as no other story, fable, or poem ever had.
But he began it late, he ended his life before the work, so that the
more the reader is delighted with the part that is written, the more
regret he has to find it unfinished.”

There is evidence that at any rate the legend is not an invention
of Plato. It was claimed by Plato himself that the victory of the
Athenians over the Atlantines was depicted on one of the ceremonial
tunics which were borne in the midsummer festival of the Panathenæa.
Diodorus has a reference to this war. Ælian says that Theopompus heard
a similar story in Phrygia, in which, however, the island was called
Meropis. Proclus quotes from the _Æthiopica_ of Marcellus a tale of ten
islands in the outer sea, the inhabitants of which preserved the memory
of a large island that had ruled over the archipelago and was sacred to
Poseidon.

The following are the main explanations, ancient and modern, of the
legend: 1. Atlantis was no island, but a part of either Europe or
Africa--the Iberian peninsula, or Senegal, for example--so remote from
Egypt as to seem an island to mariners who reached it after beating
about beyond the Straits. 2. Atlantis was Minoan Crete, resembling
Plato’s island in its configuration if not in its site; the ancient
Cretan civilization was destroyed about B.C. 1500, almost as completely
as if by a submergence in the sea. 3. “Atlantis is too obviously an
earlier and equally colossal Persia, western instead of eastern.”
4. Atlantis is pure fiction, arising, like the tales of Homer and
Hesiod, in the belief that the abodes of the heroes were in the extreme
west. 5. Atlantis is a variant of the old tradition of a Golden Age.
6. Atlantis and the Fortunate Islands and the Azores are one, but
tradition placed them too near the Straits, and the legend of a great
sunken island arose when no land was found where people thought land
should be. 7. Atlantis is another form of the solar myth--the setting
of the sun in the red ruin of evening, and the coming of dark upon the
deep. 8. Atlantis and the Republic are companion realms, the one no
less imaginary than the other, and each intended to illustrate Plato’s
conception of ideal polity.

These are the conjectures of a skepticism which properly refuses to
believe that so great a thing has happened and left such slight traces
in monuments or in tradition. Yet there are some details in Plato’s
story not so easily disposed of, and they appear more distinctly when
Atlantis itself is erased from it. These are the islands on both sides
of the legendary continent, the impassable sea that covers its site,
the great ocean beyond it, and the continent in the west which hems in
that ocean. None of these things the men of Plato’s time knew of, but,
to give them their modern names, they seem to be Madeira, the Canaries,
the Cape Verde Islands and the Azores on the one side of the Sargasso
Sea, the West Indies on the other, the Sargasso Sea itself, the open
Atlantic, and the American continent.

If the classic world had few and faint traditions of a sunken
continent and ignored them or dismissed them as idle tales, it had one
overmastering feeling that could not be called a superstition because
it never took a tangible form. The feeling was a blind terror of the
Atlantic Ocean, as if something dreadful had happened there, but so
long before that nobody knew what it was.

Nothing has developed in Europe itself that makes Plato’s story of a
lost continent a whit more probable or less plausible than it was when
he wrote it; but there have been contributions to the legend from the
ocean floor and from the New World. The variations, and in a measure
the shifts, of opinion on the Atlantis story in the last hundred years
are represented by three names--Humboldt, Ignatius Donnelly, and
Pierre Termier. Writing in 1826, the German savant noted evidences
of an external influence in the historical monuments of Central
America. In his book, _Atlantis: The Antediluvian World_, Donnelly
boldly contended that a continent had disappeared in the mid-Atlantic,
that this sunken domain had been the cradle of civilization, and
that the widespread traditions of a deluge were race memories of its
disappearance. This writer’s identification with the Baconian cipher
theory, and his espousal of fanciful beliefs and lost causes, political
or other, together with his credulity and his snap judgments, obscured
the industry, the wide range of information, and the real gift of
generalization to which his book bore witness. It came with something
like a shock to the scientific world when the French scholar, Prof.
Pierre Termier, Director of the Geological Survey of France, read his
paper on Atlantis before the Oceanographic Institute of France in
1912. This was published at Monaco in the Bulletin of the Institute of
Oceanography in 1913, and a translation, included in the annual report
of the Smithsonian Institution for 1915, provoked a discussion among
geographers in America that continued for several years.

“It seems more and more evident,” concluded Termier, “that a vast
region, continental or made up of great islands, has collapsed west
of the Pillars of Hercules, and that its collapse occurred in the not
distant past.”

In support of this inference Termier arrays the evidence of the
Atlantic’s surface and of the floor which its waters conceal. A ship
sailing due west from the Straits of Gibraltar four thousand miles
to Cape Hatteras would meet with no land. But if it lengthened its
course a little by making a detour, first toward the southwest, then
toward the northwest, then again toward the southwest, it would bring
in view Madeira, the more southern Azores, and the Bermudas. And if it
took soundings it would discover that, the marine depths over which it
was passing were strangely unequal. If the ocean were drained dry,
what would be seen would be a long elevated region lying between the
Old and New Worlds, separated from both by two enormous valleys, the
wider and deeper one on the American side. This is the revelation of
oceanography--a hidden continent in the Atlantic basin with the islands
named above as its mountain peaks.

Geology adds that the eastern region of the Atlantic over all its
length and probably from pole to pole is a great volcanic zone.
“Everywhere,” says the French geologist, “earthquakes are frequent,
here and there islets may spring up abruptly from the sea, or rocks
long known may disappear.” The ocean may conceal the continuity of
these changes, but to geological science they are incontestable and
they affect a zone which reaches from Iceland to the Cape Verde Islands
and is about 1,875 miles broad.

When a ship was laying the cable between Brest and Cape Cod in 1898,
the cable broke and was recovered by grappling. The grappling irons
encountered various submerged rocks with hard points and sharp edges,
and brought to the surface fragments of the vitreous lava called
tachylyte. These “precious fragments,” as Termier calls them, are
in the Museum of the School of Mines in Paris. The significance of
their structure is that if they had solidified under water they would
have been composed of confused crystals. In the form in which they
were found they must have cooled when they were still above the sea’s
surface. The sharp edges of the marine rocks, whence these fragments
came, argue that the region collapsed suddenly and recently. Had they
remained after the volcanic disturbance a long time above the sea, they
would have been smoothed by atmospheric erosion. Had they been a long
time under the sea, they would have been smoothed by marine abrasion.
The inference is that “the entire region north of the Azores and
perhaps the very region of the Azores, of which they may be only the
visible ruins, was very recently submerged, probably during the epoch
which the geologists call the present, because it is so recent, and
which for us, the living beings of to-day, is the same as yesterday.”

The evidence of zoölogy has been arrayed by another French scholar, M.
Louis Germain, briefly as follows: The present fauna of the Azores,
Madeira, the Canaries, and Cape Verde Islands originated in Africa; the
Quaternary formations of the Canaries resemble those of Mauretania and
inclose the same species of mollusca. Therefore these archipelagoes
were connected with Africa up to an epoch near our own, at the very
least until toward the end of the Tertiary. Among the present mollusca
of the archipelagoes are some species which seem to be survivors of the
European Tertiary. Therefore there was a bond between the islands and
Spain which was severed during the Pliocene. The _Pulmonata mollusca_,
called oleacinidæ, are found only in Central America, the West Indies,
the Mediterranean Basin, and the Canaries, Madeira, and the Azores,
and are larger in America than in these other regions. Therefore the
continent which included these islands had extended to the West Indies
at the beginning of the Miocene, but had been separated from them
during the Miocene. Fifteen species of marine mollusca lived at the
same time both in the West Indies and on the coast of Senegal, and
nowhere else. Therefore until very near the present time a maritime
shore extended from the West Indies to Senegal.

The arguments of geology and zoölogy may be combined. Termier is of
those geologists who believe the ancient alignment of continents was
east and west instead of north and south. There was a North Atlantic
continent comprising Russia, Scandinavia, Great Britain, Greenland and
Canada, and later a large part of central and western Europe and of the
United States. There was also a South Atlantic or African-Brazilian
continent extending northward to the Atlas, eastward to the Persian
Gulf, westward to the Andes. Between the two continents was the
Mediterranean depression, the ancient maritime furrow still marked in
the present Mediterranean and Caribbean seas. These continents were
broken up by foldings and collapses and a new design appeared, the
general direction of which is from north to south.

M. Germain, confining himself mainly to the middle region between these
two supposed continental areas, infers the existence of an Atlantic
continent connected with Spain and Morocco and prolonging itself so far
south as to take in regions of desert climate. During the Miocene this
continent reaches the West Indies. It is then broken up and portioned
off, at first in the direction of the West Indies; then in the south,
by the establishment of a marine shore which reaches Senegal; then in
the east, probably during the Pliocene, along the coast of Africa. “The
last great fragment, finally engulfed and no longer having left any
further vestiges than the four archipelagoes, would be the Atlantis of
Plato,” says Termier, himself reviewing the conclusions of Germain.

Thus the geological and zoölogical arguments correspond very closely.
To Termier there is no doubt at all that until an epoch near our own
there was a continental domain in the Atlantic west of the Pillars
of Hercules, and that it was sunk in a cataclysm. There is only one
question left: “Did men then live who could withstand the reaction
and transmit the memory of it?” Geology and zoölogy have perhaps told
all they could tell by way of answer. “It is from anthropology, from
ethnography, and lastly from oceanography,” says Termier, “that I am
now awaiting the final answer.”

Anthropology and ethnography have provided some hints, such as they
are. Men of scientific or of speculative cast have noted cranial and
other correspondences in the subtropics on both sides of the Atlantic,
and what seemed to be African influences in the civilizations of
Central and South America. Quatrefages named five races of American
Indians which seemed to him “true negroes.” Le Plongeon remarked the
thick lips and woolly hair of certain sculptured figures at Chichen
Itza. Retzius thought there were the same form of skull and the same
reddish-brown complexion in the Carib Islands and in the Canaries.
Elephant heads with trunk and tusks have been discovered in the friezes
of ruined temples in Yucatan. Wiener contends, on the evidence of
philology, that yams, manioc, peanuts and tobacco came to America from
Africa before Columbus rather than went out from America afterward.

In ancient times the people of the Old World and the New were in
contact. The belief has been that this was across the Pacific, but the
traditions of Mexico and its neighbors point in a different direction.

Two dominant notes are struck in the legends of the races fronting on
the Caribbean. One is the belief that civilization was brought to them
by white, bearded strangers who came over the sea from the east. The
other is the tradition of a deluge or related cataclysm. And sometimes
the two stories are grouped; the beneficent strangers are refugees from
the disastrous something that had happened upon the sea. Cataclysm has
been called the pivot of Central American myth and the basis of the
Mexican calendar.

The legendary founder of the oldest Mexican civilization, the Toltec,
was Quetzalcoatl, who was worshiped as a god, but was reputed to
have been a bearded white man who came from the east with a band
of colonists and instructed the natives in the arts and sciences;
his symbol was a boat. The story was that he was driven out by the
witch doctors, but promised to return. Aztec belief that the Cortes
expedition was the return visit made easier the Spanish conquest. Among
the Mayas the divine stranger was known as Kukulcan, and his title
was Lord of the Hollow Tree (the ark?). Coming from “Valum Chvim,” he
founded the ancient city of Palenque. His company was described as
wearing black mantles with short sleeves; the Mayas called them “men
with petticoats.”

Native legends of tropic America, some of which Spence has marshaled,
present a panorama of flood, fire, hilltops of refuge, arks, survivors.
According to the Arawaks of Guiana the world was smitten by fire, from
which men hid themselves in caverns; and then by flood, from which
a leader and his followers saved themselves in canoes. In the Carib
deluge myth men escaped to the mountain tops. In the Tupi-Guarani myth
the Creator scourged the world with fire but a great magician put it
out with a rainstorm and men took to trees (boats?). In the Karaya
myth an evil spirit invoked the deluge and sent fish to pull the
survivors down from the hill Tupimare. Various hills in Mexico and the
American southwest are pointed out as the Ararats of flood refugees.
There is even an account in the Nahuatl language of the building of an
ark. According to early Spanish writers there were similar stories of
oceanic upheaval among the natives of the Antilles.

All the New World flood myths, the Chaldean, Aramæan, and Iranian, the
Hebrew story of Noah, and the Greek story of Deucalion, as well as the
indicated ending of Plato’s tale of Atlantis, agree in their main
lines--that a malevolent spirit sought to drown all men, or that an
angered divinity sought by a deluge to punish their lusts and pride,
and that a few righteous or lucky men escaped. One of these stories,
recited in the sacred book of the Quiche Indians of Guatemala, was
believed by the Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg to be an account of the
disaster to Atlantis. As the briefest of the flood myths, and not the
worst, it may be repeated:

“They did not think or speak of the Creator who had created them, and
who had caused their birth. They were drowned, and thick resin fell
from heaven.

“The bird Xecotcovach tore out their eyes; the bird Camulatz cut
off their heads; the bird Cotzbalam devoured their flesh; the bird
Tecumbalam broke their bones and sinews and ground them into powder.

“Because they had not thought of their mother and father, the Heart of
Heaven whose name is Hurakan, therefore the face of the earth grew dark
and a pouring rain commenced, raining by day, raining by night.

“Then all sorts of beings, little and great, gathered together to abuse
the men to their faces; and all spoke, their millstones, their plates,
their cups, their dogs, their hens,” denouncing them and railing at
them.

These traditions of disaster, survival, and immigration are the
collateral support of native American myth to Plato’s narrative of
Atlantis. The monumental ruins of Central America yield some evidence
which in no wise confirms the traditions, but into which they fit.
The Maya civilization has been described as immigrant from a region
unknown. Its palaces and temples and columns, and the figures and
inscriptions upon them, represent an art that seemingly had reached
its maturity when the earliest of them was made. There are no local
evidences of the slow evolution of skill and taste, such as would be
expected in an indigenous culture. The resemblances to the monuments of
Burmah and Siam are superficial. The evidences of a European influence
are practically _nil_. The indications of a civilization remarkable
along certain lines are convincing; the Mexican calendar, the Maya
astronomy, betray a knowledge of the movements of the heavenly bodies
which was equal to that of Europe in the Columbian period, and yet
independent of it.

The Maya monuments have one singularity which has challenged
speculation. “It has been found,” says Spence, “that the starting
point of all the dates found on the monuments, save two, is the same.
Thus all Maya reckoning dates from one definite day in the past, a
day 3,000 years prior to the first date in Maya history which can be
described as contemporary with the monument upon which it is found.
Upon this practically all Maya scholars of repute are agreed.” It has
been conjectured that this normal date of the Mayas is the date of a
cataclysm, somewhat as the people of San Francisco, with the memory of
their earthquake and conflagration strong in them, date many events in
their conversation as since the Fire. It has also been conjectured that
this date, and a developed civilization, were brought to the Mayas by
the survivors of the cataclysm.

Such is the case for Atlantis as it has been made up by men with some
rank as students or specialists. The bold guesses of Donnelly, from
whose work several of these citations have been taken, must be added.
His most interesting contention, perhaps, is that the Bronze Age in
Europe must have been preceded by a Copper Age, since bronze is an
alloy of copper and tin; but that there is no evidence of a Copper Age
in Europe. There was, however, a Copper Age in America, from Bolivia to
Lake Superior, and therefore Atlantis was the bridge between the Copper
Age of America and the Bronze Age of Europe.

With a characteristic sweep of statement Donnelly announces his
conclusions. The people of Atlantis “were the founders of nearly
all our arts and sciences; they were the parents of our fundamental
beliefs; they were the first civilizers, the first navigators, the
first merchants, the first colonizers of the earth; their civilization
was old when Egypt was young, and they had passed away thousands of
years before Babylon, Rome, or London was dreamed of. This lost people
were our ancestors, their blood flows in our veins; the words we use
every day were heard, in the primitive form, in their cities, courts,
temples. Every line of race and thought, of blood and belief, leads
back to them.”

For every fact, tradition, or coincidence which seems to point toward
the disappearance of a continent in the Atlantic sea, there are other
explanations with authoritative names behind them. The old dread of the
Western Ocean is attributed to the teaching of primitive religions that
there was the land of shades, and to the colossal trickery of Phœnician
mariners who wanted no competitors beyond the Pillars. The American
legends of bright-faced strangers coming over the water from the east
are declared to be still another form of the sun myth. The world-wide
tradition of a deluge may represent the independent thinking of various
races of men who found fossil shells on their hillsides and reasoned
that at some time a sea had covered them. It is asserted that Termier
assumed too much for his specific evidence of a recent submersion--the
fragments of tachylyte dredged from the ocean floor--when he declared
that vitreous lava could not form under the sea. Accepting, as many
geographers do, that a great land domain has sunk near the coast of
Africa, they say that this was not a historic, nor a prehistoric, but a
geologic event.

The controversy reduces itself, at last, to a question of time: Did
the large island which Plato called Atlantis disappear after men came
upon the earth? Termier does not assert this, but thinks it possible,
and in some measure the wish is father to the thought. As an American
geographer puts it, “It is well known that Professor Termier is not
only a good geologist, but also a great lover of the beautiful and
much given to the poetic in speaking and writing.” This passage in the
Termier address is in point:

“Meanwhile not only will science, most modern science, not make it a
crime for all lovers of beautiful legends to believe in Plato’s story
of Atlantis, but science herself through my voice calls their attention
to it. Science herself, taking them by the hand and leading them
along the wreck-strewn ocean shores, spreads before their eyes, with
thousands of disabled ships, the continents submerged or reduced to
remnants, and the isles without number enshrouded in the abyss.”

Beyond the appeal to poetry the Atlantis legend has another--an appeal
which is also a temptation. It explains much, perhaps too much. There
are gaps in the story of human origins, and in the history of the arts
and sciences, that are as wide as the black voids the astronomer sees
in the skies. Atlantis fills them all. Science has sought to fill
them by assumptions--the origin of man in a drowned continent of the
Pacific called Lemuria, of which Australia is a fragment; the origin of
civilization on the Mediterranean floor when it was dry land. These are
assumptions without a tradition behind them. Paradoxically enough, the
point of attack upon the Atlantis theory is that a legend supports it,
and other legends fit into it. The whole matches into an ingenious and
simple design, and are the affairs of nature and man ever so simple?

It is not for anyone to answer yet, perhaps ever. But one has license
from Termier to speculate, and, if one will, to dream. If in substance
Plato’s tale was true, it needs no effort of imagination to picture the
empire of Atlantis as it was eleven thousand years ago, for all its
drama save the dreadful end has been repeated. The British Isles, with
their sea-borne commerce, their Mediterranean and Caribbean garrisons,
their mines and metal workings, their ancient Druidical religion
and costume, even their addiction to horse-racing, reproduce in the
northern seas the story of this vanished island dominion south and west
of Gibraltar.

The outlines of the crowning calamity of history--if history it
was--have already been drawn by legend, and there are authentic human
experiences on a lesser scale, and in other times and places, to
fill in the canvas. In the European port nearest the supposed site
of Atlantis, on the first day of November, 1775, a sound of thunder
was heard underground, and in an earthquake that shook twelve million
miles of sea and land the city of Lisbon fell in ruins, burying sixty
thousand persons beneath it.

“About one o’clock in the afternoon”--it is Pliny the Younger speaking,
the place is near Pompeii, and the time August 24th, A.D. 79--“a vast
and singular cloud was seen to elevate itself in the atmosphere.
It spread horizontally, in form like the branches of the pine, and
precipitated the burning materials with which it was charged upon the
many lovely but ill-fated villages which stood upon this delightful
coast.... Multitudes crowded toward the beach, but the boisterous
agitation of the sea, alternately rolling on the shore and thrown back
by the convulsive motion of the earth, precluded every possibility of
escape.... Now were heard the shrieks of women, screams of children,
clamors of men, all accursing their fate and imploring death, the
deliverance they feared, with outstretched hands to the gods whom many
thought about to be involved together with themselves in the last
eternal night.”

Let the biblical account of the deluge speak the closing word upon
Atlantis: “And all the high hills that were under the whole heaven were
covered, and the waters prevailed upon the earth.”

One turns from the convulsion and welter of the deep, and the beautiful
and dreadful thing that lay beneath it, and fixes the gaze on archaic
ships, laden with strangely robed men and women, riding the long
billows of the Caribbean toward a quiet shore. There--if the dreamers
are right--they built another civilization, which flourished and in
turn vanished, with its temples and palaces, beneath the green mantle
of the tropic forest. If the dreamers are right.




Chapter XXI. The Gilded Man


The high plateau of Cundinamarca in the interior of Colombia was once
an inland sea. Its vestiges remain in small lakes which the Indians
held sacred, and into which they cast offerings of emeralds and golden
ornaments. There was a special ceremony at Lake Guatavitá. When a
cacique died and another was chosen, a long procession moved down to
the shore. At the head went mourners, nude and wailing, their bodies
stained with red ochre. Behind them were other groups in jaguar skins,
their hair dressed with feathers, their limbs agleam with barbaric
jewelwork. Amid the joyful tumult of horns and pipes followed the
priests in tall black caps and long black robes. In the rear came high
priests and nobles carrying a barrow hung with disks of gold. Upon the
barrow rode El Dorado--the Gilded Man--newly chosen chief of an obscure
native tribe, and destined to become, through no quality of his own,
the elusive central figure in the most singular chapter in exploration,
above all others the figure of fate in South America.

He was well named, with the poetry wherewith Spain had invested the
very headlands and harbors that her sons had found in the west. Like
the mourners, the Gilded Man was naked, and yet he was clad. His body
had been rubbed with fragrant gums, and priests with tubes had blown
gold dust over him, until he gleamed like the god of day incarnate.
Arrived at the shore, the enameled chief went upon a raft with his
cortège and was ferried to the middle of the lake. There he plunged
in and laved himself while the people shouted and the trumpets brayed
on the beach. The golden dust that had covered him glimmered down
through the water as an offering to its deity. In its wake followed the
bracelets and brooches which the attendant lords flung into the pool.
So the ceremony ended.

This rite, beautiful and significant, is history, and not baseless
legend. Golden ornaments have been uncovered in the lake, which was
drained by modern treasure-seekers; among them was a piece wrought with
some art which seems to be a representation of the sacred raft and its
passengers. Humboldt thinks that the rite came from warmer regions and
that the nude figures and coronation bath are alien to the climate of
the tableland. But the fatal feature of the ceremony is that it was
already history when the Spaniards heard of it. The Muysca Indians of
the Bogota region subjugated the Muysca Indians of the Guatavitá region
about the time of the discovery of America. The custom of bathing a
gilded cacique passed with this small tribal conquest. The memory of it
remained. Unique among the customs of the continent, it was talked of
along the coasts of the Caribbean when the Spaniards came. There were
rumors of it in Peru, and even farther south.

“Let us go in search of that gilded Indian,” said Belalcazar when a
native of the north brought the first news of him to Quito, which had
fallen to Pizarro a few years before. The Spaniards went, and found
all there was to find--the deep waters of Guatavitá. But this did not
content them. The Gilded Man was a symbol. He stood for something
larger than a rite that might take place once in a generation. He stood
for the very arrogance and folly of a royal and a priestly wealth that
must be beyond measure. Every sunrise the body of the haughty savage
was covered afresh with glittering dust. Every sunset, so the Spaniards
fabled, he cleansed himself in a pool, the bottom of which had slowly
paved itself with gold, as generation after generation of his dynasty
performed their ablutions. Only a mighty nation and a rich could have
so prodigal a king; and so El Dorado came to mean not so much a man as
a golden city in a gilded land. The altars and ewers and basins of its
temples, the furnishings and plate of its palaces, the jewels and table
service of its nobles--here was promise of a booty to match the loot of
Mexico and Peru.

In seeking it Spain spent more lives and sank more treasure than in all
its conquests in the New World.

Somehow the land that held it seemed to recede as the exploring columns
advanced. It was sought in Colombia, in Venezuela, in eastern Peru,
in northwestern Brazil, in Bolivia, and from Paraguay. Over a great
inverted triangle the base of which was a line nearly a thousand
miles long drawn east from the Cordilleras of Colombia nearly to
the mouth of the Orinoco, and the apex of which was in Paraguay two
thousand miles to the south, ceaselessly marched the expeditions. The
El Dorado country of the exploring parties--the region which knew
their tread--was thus a territory of about a million square miles.
It repeated the general lines of the continent itself, an enclave of
illusion surrounded by the realities of mountain and coast.

Into this triangle from all sides struck the Spanish columns. They
moved east, north, and south from Quito, south from the Caribbean,
south and west from Trinidad, north from Asuncion. They climbed
mountains, forded rivers, penetrated deserts. They froze in the passes
of the Andes, sickened in the flooded, fever-haunted valley of the
Amazon, died of hunger in the pathless plains; and everywhere the
poisoned Indian arrows found their targets. Three of the columns, one
of which had been on the road for five years, entered the plateau
of Cundinamarca at the same time--a coincidence without parallel in
history. Germans and Englishmen also essayed the adventure. As for
Spain, when de Silva appealed for funds and followers, the country
could have been depopulated, says Padre Simon, so strong was the belief
in the Gilded Land.

Under the fable of the Gilded King ran other delusions. It was thought
that the northern part of South America was rich in the precious
metals. It was thought that the auriferous steeps of Peru and New
Granada swept eastward almost to the mouth of the Orinoco. There was
no comprehension of the continental extent of intertribal trade, and
the presence of gold among Indian tribes was thought to be proof that
it could be had in their country, even when this was flat prairie or
inundated forest. Native traders followed their own path from the Andes
to the Caribbean; it is significant that the site of the legendary city
moved along it through successive generations almost from end to end.

The search for it falls into four chapters--the quest of El Dorado of
Cundinamarca; the quest of El Dorado of Canelas; the quest of El Dorado
of the Omaguas; the quest of El Dorado of Manoa.

By the chance meeting of three expeditions, already noted, the end of
the quest for El Dorado of Cundinamarca is sheer pageantry. Belalcazar,
lieutenant of Pizarro and governor of Quito, had sent his captains in
1535 to discover what he conceived to be a golden valley between Pasto
and Popayan in the Cordilleras of southern Colombia, not far from the
South Sea. The following year he undertook the search in person and
pushed it farther north to the plateau of Bogota. There he found two
other expeditions already in contact. Quesada had started from Santa
Marta with eight hundred men and a hundred horses. With this command
he had subjugated the Chibcha nation, numbering a million persons if
the chroniclers are right, and dispersed an army of twenty thousand men
which they had put in the field. After difficult marching and fighting
he brought a handful of men--a hundred foot and sixty horse--to the
neighborhood of Bogota. Soon he saw approach the remnants of an
expedition which had left the coast of Venezuela five years before. The
German, Federmann, brought to the plateau a hundred ragged men out of
the four hundred well-equipped soldiers with whom he had started.

The three commands bivouacked almost within striking distance of each
other. They presented a spectacular contrast, for the men from Peru
were in Spanish steel and scarlet, those from Santa Marta wore Indian
fabrics, while the men from Venezuela were clad in the skins of wild
animals. The clergy labored feverishly to avert the expected appeal to
arms, and for once in the history of New World exploration resolute men
of the Iberian strain settled their differences without fighting. The
three captains went back to Spain together where each laid his claim
to the governorship of New Granada before the throne. Only Belalcazar
was recognized and he only with the post of Adelantado in the Popayan
region.

The quest of El Dorado of Canelas is the story of the expedition
of Gonzalo Pizarro and the secession therefrom of his lieutenant,
Orellana. Across all the history of Spanish exploration flashes the
treacherous and brilliant deed of Orellana, somewhat as the “moving
equator”--the Amazon--which he discovered, cuts across the meridians
of longitude between the Andes and the Atlantic. Canelas was the Land
of Cinnamon, and here, and here only upon the soil of America, the
two leading motives of exploration--the search for gold, the search
for spices--were interwoven. Pizarro had heard of a fabled spiceland
hard by the territories of the Gilded King, and this was his avowed
objective. But his imagination roved further. In the valley of the
Napo, a stream which for a space forms the boundary between Ecuador and
modern Colombia, there were plains where the inhabitants wore armor of
“massy gold.” Gonzalo would have a look at this armor. He set forth
with 500 Spaniards, 4,000 Indians, 150 horses, 1,000 dogs, and 5,000
swine and “Peruvian sheep.”

While threading the passes at the very threshold of the journey a
tremendous earthquake rocked the mountains under his feet, and an
Indian village with hundreds of houses sank out of sight. Followed
the tempests, and for six weeks tropical rainstorms with incessant
thunder and lightning beat upon the men. It was a prelude in keeping
with the disasters to come. The Land of Cinnamon was found, and left
behind as too remote to offer present profit. A brigantine was built
on the Napo, and Orellana was sent ahead with it to gather supplies in
the Indian settlements. The party never came back, but swept down the
Amazon in a wild adventure to the Atlantic sea, whence their tales of
the mighty river, its warrior women, its still stranger peoples, and
its temples roofed with gold, set Spain on fire. Gonzalo waited for
months, but he was of the strain of the Pizarros--all hero as well as
all scoundrel--and did not succumb when he knew he had been betrayed.
In a march of over a year he led the remnant of his command back to
Quito. All his Indians had died or deserted, and only eighty Spaniards
remained. When they entered the City of the Line in June 1542, it
seemed, says Prescott, as if the charnel-house had given up its dead.

El Dorado of the Omaguas had many seekers, and in some measure unveiled
itself before the eyes of Philip Von Hutten. After him, the Gilded
Land had for a time a place certain on the map. It was the region
between the Guaviare and Caqueta rivers in southeastern Colombia and
northwestern Brazil--the territory of the Omaguas, a rich and numerous
Indian nation.

Von Hutten was a relative of the Welsers, the Augsburg bankers to whom
Charles V had ceded a large tract in Tierra-firma, and who had already
sent out Federmann for the adventure of Cundinamarca. The second German
expedition began almost humbly. Von Hutten had only 130 men, and when
he found that Quesada was ahead of him with 250 men, he was content to
follow in his tracks, hoping to share the rewards of discovery. But
when Quesada reached the headwaters of the Caqueta, he had seen enough,
and Von Hutten pushed ahead into the unknown.

His Indian guide told him of a populous city called Macatoa in a
country rich with gold, and he even displayed small golden apples which
came from there. The winter rains overtook the command on its road to
this halfway house to El Dorado, and, marooned on high ground, the men
subsisted on maize and ants, and on grubs, beetles, and roots. Their
very hair and beards fell off, but at length they reached Macatoa, and
went on to the land of the Omaguas.

From a hill they saw at last the city they sought. It stretched beyond
the utmost range of the vision--long streets and densely clustered
houses, and a temple. In the temple, the guide said, were idols of
gold as tall as small children, and one golden statue as tall as a
woman, with other treasures above price. Beyond, he assured them, lay
still richer cities. What they saw and what they heard were enough
for Von Hutten and his band. There were only forty left of them, and
within the city, they were told, was a large force of native warriors.
The adventurers clapt spurs to their horses and dashed in--and then
dashed out again, their leader wounded and fifteen thousand Indians
in pursuit. The figures are their own, as well as the statement that
they beat off the attacking force and retired. Afterward Von Hutten was
murdered by his men.

To die on the march, to be stabbed by one’s companions, or to be
beheaded by one’s king, seemed the lot predestined for captains who
sought the Gilded Devil.

As was proved again when the Spaniards quested for Cibola, an Indian
town is a deceptive thing when seen at a distance. What Von Hutten
really saw was probably a collection of closely grouped villages, and
among them a council house or temple, larger than the others but no
more imposing than the bark communal houses under which at that time
Algonquins were living upon Manhattan Island. Yet the bruit of his
discovery launched expedition after expedition from New World and Old.
Martin de Proveda, starting from Peru, reached the country of the
Omaguas and went on to Bogota. Pedro de Silva brought a party of six
hundred out of Spain, and in a six months’ journey across the llanos of
Venezuela saw all but thirty die or desert. He tried again with another
party of 170 Spaniards going up the Orinoco. Famine, disease, and
Indian arrows accounted for every member of his party save one.

There is evidence that unruly spirits were encouraged to seek El
Dorado in order to rid the settled places of the New World of their
turbulence. Such was the expedition which Pedro de Ursua led out of
Peru in 1559. A rabble of lawless adventurers had been attracted
thither by the civil wars which followed the conquest. The viceroy was
glad to commission this young officer and see him depart with these
“Gentlemen and old souldiers of Peru” as Lopez Vaz called them. When
they reached the Indian villages of Omagua the expected happened.
The men murdered their leader, and the command fell to Aguirre, who
told them that whoever spoke further of El Dorado should die. With
his followers he set forth to reach the Atlantic and return by way of
Panama to Peru, where he purposed to seize “riches, bread, wine, flesh,
and faire women also.” His men murdered him in turn, but not until he
had done an amazing thing. Starting down the Amazon, his boats won the
sea by way of the Orinoco, having used the Cassiquiare to cross from
one river system to the other.

The Omagua chapter ends with the great and tragic expedition of
Gonsalo Ximenes de Quesada, conqueror of New Granada, and one of the
largest figures among the conquistadors, brother of the Quesada who
had sunk his means in a like search eighteen years before. With 350
Spanish soldiers, 1,500 Indians, a number of negro slaves, and a train
of cattle and swine, Ximenes left Bogota in 1579. Torrential rains,
inundated lands, prairie fires, mosquitoes, Indian warfare, disease,
famine--the disastrous routine of other expeditions--were repeated on a
larger canvas. Quesada got as far as the confluence of the Guaviare and
Orinoco, and then had to return. He brought back seventy-four Spaniards
and four Indians, and he left behind with his dead a fortune of two
million dollars scattered along the trails of the wilderness.

The quest of El Dorado of Manoa lowers a curtain, rich and somber
and yet of fantastic design, upon the career of the most remarkable
Englishman of the Elizabethan age. In this last phase of a long
delusion other explorers led their thousands to die in the jungles
of the Orinoco, but their endeavor does not so engage attention as
that of Raleigh, who lost little save his own fortune and head. There
are two names, and then the Elizabethan. Antonio de Berreo, married
to Quesada’s niece, came from New Granada down the Meta and part way
down the Orinoco for three years of dark futility. He came again and
founded towns at the confluence of the Caroni and the Orinoco, and in
the island of Trinidad at the Orinoco’s mouth. His lieutenant, Domingo
de Vera, went on to Spain and came back with a fleet and two thousand
men. These perished, all but a few, in the two towns de Berreo had
founded, or in the leagues of turbulent river that rolled between them,
or in the fever-wasted jungles into which they set forth to find Manoa.
De Berreo himself fell a prisoner to Raleigh, who had set sail from
England about the same time that de Vera embarked from Spain.

This time the Gilded Phantom, in order to make sure of victims in an
age about to grow weary of long quests and wary of far horizons, had
come almost across the continent to entrap them. Not in the eastern
foothills of the Andes, but along the lower reaches of the Orinoco
where the Atlantic tides still throbbed, the snare was spread. In the
mighty empire of Guiana, it was said there was a lake of salt water
almost as great as the Caspian Sea, and upon it the largest, the
fairest, and the richest city of the world. A fugitive Inca had come
down from the Andes, and the nobles and merchants had followed him,
and long trains of llamas had borne their possessions through the
wilderness, and an armed host went before. They “conquered, reedified
and inlarged” Manoa, says Raleigh.

So vast was the city that when the Spaniard, Juan Martinez, was brought
into it blindfold at noon, and his face then uncovered, he moved
through it all that afternoon and night, and the next day from sun
rising to sun setting, before he came to the palace of the emigrant
Inca. At the feasts of this emperor, so de Berreo told his captor,
when he “carouseth with his captaines, tributaries and governours,”
the company stripped and were anointed with balsam and dusted off with
finely powdered gold, blown through hollow canes. So they sat, in
radiant drunkenness, for six or seven days together.

Thus the striking inaugural ceremony of a vanquished Indian tribe
on the tableland of Bogota had become in the lowlands of Venezuela
the symbol of a luxurious and sensual court, and of an intolerable
splendor. Not one man, once in a lifetime, but a host of drunken
sybarites, carousing in repeated revels, wore the golden coat; the raft
on a tarn of the western plateau had become a palace and a city greater
than any other, and seated in the eastern wilderness on a lake that was
an inland sea. Upon the mythical estate and possessions of the Gilded
King had been piled the fugitive prestige and riches of the Incas.
The magnificent and yet sordid culmination of a century of splendid
dreams and desperate endeavor, with cupidities, basenesses and heroisms
uncounted, it needed for its final victim one who embodied in signal
fashion the strength and the weaknesses of the age. It found him in Sir
Walter Raleigh.

Raleigh was the most accomplished man of his time, and every fiber of
him was Elizabethan. On the scaffold he said, “I have been a soldier,
a sailor, and a courtier, all of them courses of wickedness and vice.”
Let it be added that in them he excelled most other men. He learned
soldiering under Coligny, fighting the battles of the Huguenots. As a
sailor he took prizes of Spanish treasure ships, captured Fayal, led
the attack on the Spanish fleet at Cadiz, contributed to the strategy
that threw back the Armada; with him, as with Drake and his companions,
the ruling passion was to singe the beard of the king of Spain. As a
courtier he had his place among the vivacious friendships of the Virgin
Queen, and he was rewarded and rebuked in turn with honors, monopolies,
rustication, exile.

Raleigh introduced the use of tobacco in England and the culture of
the potato in Ireland. He founded two short-lived colonies in North
Carolina, which has honored his memory in the name of the state
capital. He aided the colonizing ventures of his stepbrother, Sir
Humphrey Gilbert, and came to North America with him. He encouraged
and aided the poet Spenser. He assisted Richard Hakluyt in bringing
out his remarkable collection of explorers’ manuscripts. It falls in
with the picture that Raleigh was skilled in brewing new drinks, one of
which bore his name; in the Tower of London he divided the time between
his library and a small distillery he had set up in a hen-house.

Like his great contemporaries, Raleigh was both a man of action
and a man of affairs--compound of statesman, _condottiere_, and
merchant-adventurer. He was also a writer of noble gifts. Instead of
moping in his long years of confinement in the Tower, he wrote there
his _History of the World_. And he made beautiful poems. “If all the
world and love were young” is his line. His is the epigram, “The
shallow murmur, but the deep are dumb.” In one mood he could pen the
invocation beginning, “O eloquent, just and mightie Death,” and in
another carol,

  If she undervalue me,
  What care I how fair she be?

His best-known line, “Fain would I climb, yet fear I to fall,”
graven by him on a windowpane for the eye of Elizabeth, was least
characteristic of Raleigh. If always he sought to climb the heights
of adventure, he had little fear to fall. This record concerns his
strangest adventure and his final fall. In most part it is the
story as recounted in his book, _The discoverie of the large, rich,
and beautiful Empire of Guiana, with a relation of the great and
golden citie of Manoa, which the Spaniards call El Dorado_. It is a
fascinating book, for seldom before or since has pen so gifted set
down a travel tale; but there is tragedy in the very title, which is
the memorial of a vain dream. Let the historian Bancroft recite the
justification, or the excuse, for the illusion of a worldly-wise man
who was also an Elizabethan: “If Elizabeth had hoped for a hyperborean
Peru in the arctic seas of America, why might not Raleigh expect to
find the city of gold on the banks of the Orinoco?”

The bare narrative of Raleigh’s first quest of El Dorado of Manoa
need not long detain, for this skillful administrator, intrepid
explorer, and subtle diplomat found no golden city, lost no men in
the wilderness, and had no trouble with the Indians, whom his engaging
bearing and politic address won to his side. He had sent a ship to
reconnoiter in 1594, and after his own expedition came and went in
1595, he sent another ship in 1596 to continue the exploration, while
he himself took command of the squadron that dashed in upon the Spanish
shipping at Cadiz. Raleigh’s Guiana flotilla of the year before
consisted of five ships, one of them from the British Admiralty. That
there might be no enemy behind him, he seized the Spanish settlement at
Trinidad, capturing de Berreo; anchoring his ships there, he set off in
barges with a hundred men up the stubborn current of the Orinoco. Six
months after he sailed from England, he was back again with some Indian
hostages, some pieces of golden ore, and the marvelous stories with
which his _Discovery_ is adorned.

His travel narrative lays its scenes in “the insular regions and broken
world” of Guiana, which then included a good part of Venezuela. Through
its pages flows “the great rage and increase” of the swollen Orinoco.
Through them flit “birds of all colours, some carnation, some crimson,
orange-tawny, and purple,” so that “it was unto us a great good passing
of the time to behold them.” “I never saw a more beautifull countrey,
nor more lively prospects,” exclaims Raleigh. From afar off he gazed on
a “mountaine of Christall.” “There falleth over it,” he says, “a mighty
river which toucheth no part of the side of the mountaine, but rusheth
over the toppe of it, and falleth to the ground with so terrible a
noyse and clamour, as if a thousand great bels were knockt one against
another.” Enters the note of gold and of politics: In Guiana, it
seemed, “every stone that we stouped to take up, promised either golde
or silver by his complexion.” For “health, good ayre, pleasure and
riches,” he concludes, “this country hath no equal, East or West.” It
would be easy for the English to defend it, for the woods are so thick
along the rivers that “a mouse cannot sit in a boat unhit from the
banke.”

The book holds also the statement of the large national aims of
Raleigh, into which, as he assured himself, the gold hunt fitted. Not
for him were mere “journeys of picory,” nor “to go long voyages, to lie
hard, to fare worse, to be parched and withered,” solely to “cozen
myselfe.” Here was “a better Indies for her Majestie than the King of
Spaine hath any.” With the gold of western America Spain bade fair
to dominate the world. Only by tapping the Indian treasure-house of
eastern America could the balance of power be restored. In a notable
passage Raleigh enunciates a theory of international politics that
would sound familiar to modern ears, if for the gold lust there were
substituted the lust of markets.

“If we consider,” he says, “the affaires of the Spanish king, what
territories he hath purchased, what he hath added to the acts of his
predecessors, how many kingdoms he hath indangered, how many armies,
garrisons & navies he hath and doth mainteine, the great losses
which he hath repaired, as in 88 above 100 saile of great ships with
their artillery, & that no yeere is lesse unfortunate but that many
vessels, treasures, and people are devoured, and yet notwithstanding
he beginneth againe like a storme to threaten shipwrack to us all: we
shall find that these abilities rise not from the trades of sacks, and
Sivil oringes, nor from ought else that either Spaine, Portugal, or any
of his other provinces produce: it is his Indian gold that indangereth
and disturbeth all the nations of Europe, it purchaseth intelligence,
creepeth into counsels, and setteth bound loyaltie at libertie, in the
greatest Monarchies of Europe.”

This enterprise of matching gold with gold, Guiana against Peru,
Raleigh hoped would be intrusted to him, and he must have pictured
himself as viceroy, under England, of such another India as Englishmen
of later centuries were to attain. Yet the _Discovery_ is a defense,
as well as a political tract and a collection of mirabilia. Raleigh’s
return, empty-handed, had aroused the resentment of some who had put
money into his venture, and the ridicule and censure of more. It was
alleged that he had procured his golden ore in Barbary, and naught
better than marcasite from Guiana. It was even noised abroad that he
had not been with the fleet at all, but had been concealed in Cornwall
while his ships were away. The dreaming adventurer had his enemies.

After his second voyage to Guiana they were able to destroy him.
Twenty-one years had elapsed since the first expedition. Twelve of
these Raleigh had spent in the Tower, imprisoned on one of the
charges of treason which in those days meant little save that a man
was disliked by the royal favorites of the moment. At sixty-four years
of age he was paroled and went to Guiana with a squadron of fourteen
vessels and the coveted commission of governor of the country. He spoke
now of a wonderful mine and little of a thing that was in the back of
his head, for still he dreamed of Manoa’s golden towers, which, as many
men would have it, were nowhere on earth.

The expedition turned out disastrously. King James had submitted to
Spain through its ambassador at London a detailed copy of Raleigh’s
plans and had received what was represented to Raleigh to be a pledge
of unmolested passage to the up-river country claimed by him by right
of discovery. He found the Spaniards fortified against him. There were
clashes in which his own son lost his life and also the governor of a
river town, kinsman of the Spanish ambassador.

Raleigh returned to face his fate, and in effect it was Spain’s
own hand that wrote the decree of death, for the two royal houses
were about to be united by marriage, and the Stuart was studiously
complaisant to the Hapsburg. Sir Walter was tried on a charge of
masking, under a project to discover a mine, a piratical raid on the
Spanish settlements--a charge which the national contacts of a hundred
years invested with a grim humor. But he was executed on a more
serviceable pretext, the long-suspended sentence for treason; nor did
it avail him to urge that the king’s commission for his voyage was in
itself a grant of pardon. The night before his death on the scaffold he
wrote these lines:

  E’en such is Time, who takes in trust
  Our youth and joys and all we have,
  And pays us but with age and dust.

Thus the great Elizabethan faced and dismissed two vanities. Equally
so he had found life itself and the mocking parable of his New World
quest--for hopes, frustration; dross for gold.

With Raleigh ended the larger expeditions to find El Dorado. There is
a little more to say. Some years before, two parties had sought the
Gilded City, starting from far south. One came from Buenos Aires in
1537, all the colonists leaving that ill-fated city, and passing up
the river in the hope either of finding El Dorado or of reaching the
Spanish settlements on Lake Titicaca. A detachment of this party halted
on the Paraguay and founded Asuncion. Another detachment, numbering two
hundred persons, pushed on into Bolivia, where the Indians ambushed and
killed them all. A later party which was led by De Chaves left Asuncion
in 1560, wandered northwest into Bolivia and there disbanded.

The imaginary lake of Manoa, sometimes called Mar Eldorado or the
Golden Sea, was delineated on maps of South America for nearly three
centuries after the time of Columbus. Periodical overflows of the
Orinoco tributaries, which cover wide regions with standing water,
serve to explain the origin and persistence of the lake legend. For the
shift of the basic legend from Colombia to Guiana, Humboldt suggests an
explanation in a custom of native tribes in the latter country. Instead
of tattooing themselves, the Indians anointed their bodies with turtle
fat and stuck spangles of mica with a metallic luster, white as silver
and red as copper, upon their skins, so that at a distance they seemed
to wear laced clothes.

In 1740 Don Manuel Centurion, the Spanish governor of Santa Thome del
Agostina, made further search for the fabled lake of Manoa and the
city washed by its waters. The popular imagination was inflamed by the
reports of an Indian who came down the river Caroni. In the southern
sky he showed the natives the dim radiance of the Clouds of Magellan.
This he said was the reflection of golden ore on an island in the lake
of legend. So may one leave the city of illusion where it belongs, in
cloudland.




Chapter XXII. The Dream Quests of Spain


The search for El Dorado was the greatest of the dream quests of Spain.
It was not the first, it was not the last. Along with lesser ventures
without number Spain sought certain grand objects. These included the
Fountain of Youth, the Earthly Paradise, the Temple of the Sun, the
Cradle of Gold, the Country of Cinnamon, the Enchanted City of the
Cæsars, the Islands of Solomon, El Gran Moxo, El Gran Paititi, the
Sepulchres of Zenu, the Temple of Dobayba, the Seven Cities of Cibola,
Quivera the prairie capital. And Spain sought also buried cities and
phantom lakes and craters abrim with liquid gold.

Through most of these quests is the flow of delusive water. It sparkles
in the youth-conferring spring which De Leon failed to find. It moves
in the River Jordan, for which red man and white hunted in Florida.
It sweeps past the mythical Quivera, bearing huge canoes with prows
of gold. It shines on the far horizon of Cibola, and on it there are
barks of Cathay. It glimmers in the tarn of Guatavitá. In the legendary
sea of Manoa it reflects the fugitive gold of El Dorado. It laves the
enchanted City of the Cæsars hard by the lake of Nahuelhuapi. In the
Laguna de los Xarayes it ripples around the island home of El Gran
Moxo. It flashes on the beaches of fabled islands west of the southern
continent.

There were reasons for the illusory lakes of Spanish adventure. The
City of Mexico was seated in a lake with causeways crossing it and
canals reaching the heart of the city. The Empire of Peru held Lake
Titicaca as sacred. The scarcely less remarkable civilization of the
Chibchas of Colombia rendered homage to the lakes of the central
plateau. So the Spaniards thought that when they sought other golden
cities in the wilderness they would find them on the shores of inland
seas.

The periodic inundations of the Orinoco, the Amazon, the Paraguay,
and the tributaries of these streams deceived and disturbed men with
appearances which they could not understand. One explorer would come
upon a vast sheet of still water, and in due time it would get upon the
maps. Another would lead his column dry shod over the same place, and
men were slow to realize that each had made correct report of what he
saw. For example, the legendary lake of Xarayas, long supposed to be
the source of the Paraguay, is merely a seasonal inundation; but during
high water this transitory sea extends three hundred and fifty miles
north and south and one hundred and fifty miles east and west.

The things of the spirit--religion, romance, pure fantasy--animated
Spain in some of the quests it followed beside the still waters of the
lakes of dream. Its rude chivalry could serve the ideal with a whole
heart. But for the most part cavalier and muleteer sought gold alone.
Gems, spices, pepper, dyewoods, grain fields, raw materials, rubber,
bananas, coffee--these are objects of ancient or modern enterprise in
strange lands. They meant little to the Spaniard. Nor was his deepest
interest in metal that was still underground. He was looking for the
gold that for generation after generation Indian civilizations had
brought to the surface and stored in their capital cities. The rewards
of savage toil he would seize for himself who better knew their value,
or thought he did.

That is why the visionary expeditions of Spain are in the main a search
for cities, or, failing these, projects to loot temples and rifle
graves. Neither the digging nor the assembling of the golden treasure
was in the scheme. The purpose was to take the central treasure houses.
So Spain had already done in Peru. The captive Inca Atahuallpa had
himself suggested a kindred thing. For ransom he offered to fill his
prison chamber, a room seventeen feet wide and twenty-two feet long,
with gold to the depth of nine feet, or as high as the reach of the
tallest cavalier. When the bargain was made, gold began to pour in from
all corners of the empire--statues, vases, vessels, utensils, plaques,
disks, chains, temple ornaments, nuggets, and golden dust. Of course
his captors killed the Inca, and rushed on to seek the sources whence
flowed the maddening stream; and what they found did not satisfy. Much
of the treasure of the Incas had disappeared. Nor has it been uncovered
since.

Those vain enterprises of Spain, with which a great part of the New
World’s sixteenth century was filled, were attempts of adventurers to
lay hold of the gold which had escaped the conquistadors in Mexico and
Peru, or which it was imagined had escaped them. It was supposed that
the descendants of the Montezumas, taking rich treasures with them, had
retreated northward to Cibola or to Quivera, and there renewed their
state. It was reported, and with some basis of fact, that princes of
the Inca blood had gone north, south, or east from Cuzco and set up new
cities in the wilderness. The basis of fact was the flight of Manco
Capac, called the Last of the Incas. This prince raised the country
against its conquerors, flung an army of two hundred thousand warriors
against the Spanish garrison in Cuzco, and before night settled on the
empire of the Andes gave proof on the battlefield that there was valor
in the Quichua blood. At the mountain fortress of Choquequirau, the
Cradle of Gold, six thousand feet above the valley of the Apurimac,
Peruvian geographers believe the Last of the Incas made his seat.


_The Fountain of Youth_

It is best to begin the recital of the dream quests of Spain with the
dream of all ages--the search for lost youth. It was the first of those
adventures in the New World in which the sons of Spain were to show
they were different from other men, in that when they imagined a vain
thing their imagination rushed on to action.

In an unfinished poem Heine sketches the beginning of this quest. Ponce
de Leon, the veteran ex-governor of Porto Rico, lies in his hammock
and an old Indian servant sings to him of the Bahama island of Bimini
with its bird song and undying flowers, and of its interesting tenants.
These were old men restored by a magic spring to riotous youth and
beldames who had drunk of its waters and regained girlhood’s bloom;
they were afraid to return home because of the scandal their shamefully
youthful appearance would work among their friends. Poetic license
carries this sketch only a little beyond the credulity of the period,
for Peter Martyr had written at length to the bishop of Rome of an
island with a youth-restoring spring some three hundred leagues north
of Hispaniola.

[Illustration: _The Things of the Spirit Animated Spain in Some of the
Quests It Followed Beside the Still Waters of the Lakes of Dream_]

The Spanish cavalier set sail with three ships in 1512, in search of
Bimini. There were nearly seven hundred islands and islets in the
Bahamas and his journey was through a labyrinth. For a part of the
voyage he had the strangest, and perhaps the most fitting, of pilots.
To a clump of islands near the Lucayos he gave the name of La Vieja
or the Old Woman group because he found them without inhabitants save
one ancient woman. Her he took aboard to help guide him through the
sea passages. He found Florida, but he did not find Bimini, which was
discovered later by his captain, Juan Perez de Ortubia, the sagacious
old woman directing him to its shore. The water there was like any
other water. Ponce de Leon, however, escaped the disabilities of age. A
poisoned Indian arrow launched from a Florida bow did for him when he
was about sixty-one.

Before his death, the quest for a fountain from which one might quaff
the draught of youth had been broadened to include a River Jordan of
rejuvenating baths. This was somewhere on the peninsula of Florida,
where for half a century red men and white searched for it, bathing
in every stream, lagoon, and swamp they found, in the hope that the
magic water, in some sudden transformation scene, might betray its
whereabouts.

Though they did not know it, the Spaniards themselves brought to the
New World the legend of the fountain of youth and the name of Bimini,
as well as that of the River Jordan. Wiener has traced each step. In
1493, a year before the Pope made the line of demarcation between the
Spanish and Portuguese discoveries, he had given to Spain the newly
discovered lands on condition that the natives should be baptized
in the Catholic faith. Amerigo Vespucci falsely reported that, in
compliance therewith, a fountain of baptism had been placed on an
island in the Gulf of Mexico. Peter Martyr in his _Decade of 1511_
called this the _fonte perenni_, but the cartographer misread his
Latin, and on the map attached to his work a coast line north of Cuba
is called _isla de beimeni parte_. Thus the perennial fountain became
Bimini, and the fiction of a Christian baptismal font revived a pagan
myth.


_The Enchanted City of the Cæsars_

The quest of the Enchanted City of the Cæsars was the southernmost
adventure of the dreaming mind of Spain. It was prosecuted along the
slopes of the southern Andes and the Patagonian plains beyond--that
mysterious and desolate region which made so deep an impression upon
Darwin. Over the remote prairies, peopled only by huanacos and roving
bands of tall savages, Spanish commands hunted for a capital which the
natives called Trapalanda, and which, according to the oath of those
who said they had seen it, was as great as ancient Nineveh and as
populous as Peking.

Outbound to the Moluccas, the story ran, a vessel belonging to the
bishop of Palancia was shipwrecked in the Straits of Magellan. The
captain of the stranded craft, Sebastian de Arguello, found himself on
the Patagonian coast with three thousand miles of mountain and plain
between his little band and the outpost of Spanish power at Cuzco.
Followed by about two hundred soldiers and sailors, thirty adventurers,
twenty-three married women, and three priests, he struck boldly into
the heart of the pampas, moving northward. When the company reached
a region of lakes and meadows rimmed by snowy summits resolution was
taken to found there an independent state aloof from the perturbations
of the world. Other fugitives had reached this inviting spot before the
Spaniards--a numerous native people flying from the wreck of Peru.

It would seem from the rapid growth of the city which was said to
have arisen upon the shore of Lake Nahuelhuapi that red men and white
mingled their blood. The first report of the austral capital reached
Concepcion in Chile, in 1557.

The Spanish settlements were led to picture a great, rich city in the
south. A strong wall ran around it, and over it the roving Indians
of the prairies could see reddish roofs that gleamed as with gold.
The houses were of cut stone and those who had been within them
spoke of beds, chairs, and table service made of precious ores. The
central edifice in the capital was a noble church roofed with silver,
and from it were decreed and regulated the pompous festivals of the
ecclesiastical year.

Wishing to keep their isolation inviolate, its inhabitants had an
understanding with the Indians that the secret of the city should be
told to none. But when it received the name of _La Ciudad encantada
de los Cæsares_ (the enchanted City of the Cæsars), it was a presage
that from all the Spanish settlements of the south, expeditions should
go forth to seek it out, for the very words were a challenge to the
imagination.

It was called the city of the Cæsars because the men who founded it had
been subjects of Charles V of Spain, whom men had styled the Cæsar in
recognition of his world-wide dominion. It was called enchanted because
of the beauty of its lake setting and the splendors within its walls.
Soon its people became known as the Cæsars, and the men who conducted
expeditions to reach them as the Cæsaristas.

There were other motives for the quest beside the golden treasure
to be found there and the wish to visit a clime so fair that none
died save of old age. Here were a kindred people, cut off from their
fellows, and, it might be, lapsing decade after decade into a splendid
barbarism. The purity of their Christian faith was in danger of
corruption from every sort of heathen error. Civilization and religion
were both concerned in the rescue of this fascinating creole capital,
which had done so well by itself and yet needed to renew its contacts
with the world. So said the Spaniard wherever fortune had placed
him--in the homeland, in Mexico, in the Philippines, and most of all in
the colonies of the southern Cordilleras and the eastern plains.

There were a number of small expeditions to seek the legendary city,
and three of importance. Diego Flores de Leon reached Lake Nahuelhuapi
from the Pacific side, heard of savage armies massed on his front, and
went no further. Half a century later came the Jesuit father, Nicolas
Mascardi. Fearing that the southern capital might have forgotten the
mother tongue of Spain, he collaborated with another churchman in
a letter which was translated into seven languages--Greek, Latin,
Spanish, Italian, Chilean, Puelche, and Poya. The letter was sent
ahead by an Indian courier after he reached the shores of Nahuelhuapi.
Hearing a report that the site of the city was near the Atlantic, he
crossed the continent, and then turned southward toward the Straits of
Magellan, falling at last to an Indian arrow. This was in 1673. More
than a century afterward the Franciscan friar, Menendez, was sent out
by the viceroy of Peru, but found no city beside Nahuelhuapi.

Thereafter faith in the fable died, save among the imaginative and the
credulous. Of the former was Charles III of Spain, who died believing
it in 1788. Of the latter are the common people of Chile and Argentina,
who see in the streams of lava and volcanic sand at the foot of Osorno
the roads of a hidden people, and who still hear in the noise of the
avalanches upon Tronador the thunder of artillery along enchanted
battlements.


_The Seven Cities of Cibola_

In the quest of the Seven Cities of Cibola Spain dreamed northward,
and again deluded itself by the magic and sonority of a name. When
the fable was full blown it was of a city as great as the capital of
the Montezumas and ruled by a fugitive prince of that house. Lesser
cities surrounded it, as they surrounded Tenochtitlan on the plateau
of Anahuac. It stood beside a great inland sea out of which flowed the
Colorado, and on the coasts of this land were ships from China.

The inhabitants of the plains were cattle of deformed shape and
ferocious aspect, which the Spaniards called the kine of Cibola. The
inhabitants of the seven cities, says Friar Marcos, who saw them at a
distance, were a people “somewhat white,” clad in cotton garments and
dwelling in stone houses with flat roofs. The Franciscan continues:
“They have emeralds and other jewels, although they esteem none as much
as turquoises, wherewith they adorn the walls and porches of their
houses, and their apparel and vessels, and they use them instead of
money through all the country. They use vessels of gold and silver,
for they have no other metal, whereof there is greater avail and more
abundance than in Peru.”

This capital of the buffalo country was located within the limits of
the present United States. Somewhat shrunken from the dimensions of
legend, it is still in existence and the descendants of the men fabled
to traffic with Cathay go about its streets. Their skins are darker
than Marcos reported them, but they have the features and expression of
white men.

Here is another myth of a gilded land and a refugee king, but overlaid
with material of a strange texture brought from afar. Its scene is
inland where buffalo are feeding; yet one of its windows commands the
Pacific with slanting Chinese sails upon it, and into the other comes
an old tale of the open Atlantic. The Seven Cities of Cibola are the
legendary seven cities of Antilia, founded by seven Spanish bishops
who fled the Moor, and they are the seven caves out of which came the
Aztecs. But they are also seven towns, the remains of which, waste or
tenanted, are to be found in New Mexico near the Arizona line. The vice
of the legend is that they are small towns, and poor.

There are names of consequence in the quest of the Seven Cities of
Cibola, but a broad blotch of buffoonery is smeared across it. Alone of
all the visionary searches of Spain, it invites the treatment of ironic
burlesque. Yet there is heroism in the story and a great chapter of
geography.

The first of these names is that of the luckless but stout-hearted
Cabeza de Vaca who left a trail of wandering mishap clear across the
continent of North America, and who was yet to break new paths through
the forests and savannas of South America where he founded the capital
of the Silver Republic. In 1536 the outposts of Melchior Diaz, who
commanded in the northern Mexican district of Culiacan, came upon a
strange party--a white man, nearly naked, with matted hair and beard,
a negro, and eleven Indians. The white man spoke in Spanish and with
such joyful agitation as to arouse a momentary suspicion. It was Cabeza
de Vaca. His negro companion was named Estivanico. There were three
other Spaniards a day’s march behind. In what was to follow, singularly
enough, the negro is the central figure; in what had gone before the
story is the Spanish captain’s.

In 1527 he had sailed for Florida as treasurer of an expedition with
five vessels and six hundred men, in search of the Golden Apalache, one
of the minor dream quests of Spain. Quitting the fleet in a Florida
bay, three hundred men marched inland to their objective. What they
found was a collection of forty wigwams on the Suwanee River and a
rude people that engaged them in daily skirmishes at arms. So they
marched on, became entangled in the swamps and bayous along the coasts
of Alabama and Louisiana, made one fatal attempt to build rafts and
cross the Gulf to the Mexican coast, and then succumbed by degrees
to the wilderness. All but four of the Spaniards perished and these
were buffeted from tribe to tribe in an aimless drift westward. They
had almost reached the Gulf of California when they met the Spanish
outpost, and in eight years they had wandered from Atlantic to Pacific.

What they told launched the search for the Seven Cities of Cibola.
Farther north they had found tribes of sedentary Indians living in
stone houses, wearing cotton garments and turquoise ornaments, and
with indications of stores of gold to draw upon. Francisco Vasquez
Coronado, governor of Northwest Mexico, was commissioned by Mendoza,
Viceroy of New Spain, to explore in that direction. Distrusting
the reports of Cabeza de Vaca, his first step was a reconnaissance
under the Franciscan, Fray Marcos. As guide and attendant the negro
Estevanico went with him, and a party of Pima Indians accompanied them.
They started northward from Culiacan in 1539, following the coast. In
Sonora the friar committed the folly of sending the negro ahead with
instructions to report to him at intervals by messenger. If he found
a mean thing he was to send a cross a hand’s length long; if a larger
matter, a cross two hands’ long; if the negro found a country better
than New Spain he was to send back a great cross.

That was the last Fray Marcos saw of the negro, but he heard from him,
and from time to time he heard about him. Four days after his departure
an Indian came back bearing a wooden cross as high as a man and the
word of Estevanico that thirty days’ march ahead were seven cities
abounding in pearls and gold, and all subject to one lord. The houses
were of stone and mortar, one, two, and three stories high, and the
chief’s house was of four stories. One of the cities was named Cibola.
As the friar proceeded, the natives brought tales which seemed to
confirm the reports, and used place names that suggested grandeur. He
heard of a province called Totoneac, of the city of Ahacus, and of the
kingdoms of Hacus and Marata.

Meanwhile Africa was blazing a trail far ahead into Darkest America.
It was broad, dusty with the feet of an accumulating multitude, and
finger-posted by avarice and imposture. The negro had taken the
adventure out of the hands of the too-trusting monk. In his wanderings
with Cabeza de Vaca he had won assurance, some knowledge of the
Indian nature, and a gourd rattle. He moved with the state and tumult
of a medicine-man, this clapper his potent emblem of authority. The
superstitious natives met all his demands, and he demanded much--more
food than he could use, gold, green stones, women. The monk followed,
several journeys behind, in a sort of anti-climax.

The procession of the black Bacchus had its inevitable ending. Marcos
learned it while he was still some days from his goal. He met a number
of the Indians who had been with Estevanico, and they were flying
toward Mexico. They told of entering Cibola with the negro, where his
arrogance and folly mounted to new levels. Noting the lowering looks
of the sedentary Indians, several of these plains Indians went outside
and, hiding themselves, awaited the finish they foresaw. One day they
beheld their companions running from the town with men in pursuit. The
negro was not with them. His hosts had killed him.

With two of the Indians Marcos went on to a hill from which he looked
down upon a valley dotted with villages. The nearest of these and not
the largest was Cibola. To Marcos it seemed “as large as the City of
Mexico.” It is situate, he says, “on a plain at the foot of a round
hill, and maketh shew to be a fair city, and is better seated than any
that I have seen in these parts. The houses are builded in order, all
made of stone with divers storeys and flat roofs.” Then he adds from
hearsay details of golden vessels and turquoise-studded porches.

Setting up a wooden cross, Marcos hastened back, rejoicing, to make his
report to the viceroy. Out of what he told, and the far-sounding names
of provinces and kingdoms which he had heard, the Spanish mind made a
thing too rich for the haggard realities of the American southwest. It
seemed to call for a well-appointed expedition, and Coronado urged this
on the viceroy.

With Marcos as his guide he was dispatched with a land force of
three hundred and twenty Spaniards, three hundred native allies,
and a thousand Indian and negro camp followers. He left San Miguel
in February, 1540, and in May a fleet under Alarcon was sent from
Acapulco to act in concert with him along the coast of the Gulf of
California. Alarcon went to the head of the gulf with his ships, and up
the Colorado, but, learning from natives that white men had already
entered Cibola, he returned with his fleet to Acapulco.

What Coronado had entered was the Indian pueblo of Zuñi and its
attendant villages in northwestern New Mexico. As soon as his soldiers
beheld these little settlements, writes Castaneda, who went with the
expedition, they “broke out in curses against Fray Marcos.” They
accused him of deceiving them, and in fear of his life he was glad
to go back with the courier who bore to the viceroy the report of
Coronado. “I can assure your honour,” says the report, “the friar said
the truth in nothing that he reported, saving only the names of the
cities and great houses of stone; for although they be not wrought with
turquoises, nor with lime nor brick, yet are they very excellent houses
of three or four or five lofts high, wherein are good lodgings and fair
chambers. The seven cities are seven small towns, and they stand all
within four leagues together, and none of them is called Cibola, but
altogether they are called Cibola.”

In his scholarly account of this expedition Bandelier defends the
credulous monk, and urges that the Spaniards had tricked out his story
with their own imaginings. He argues that the comparison with the City
of Mexico was not with the old Aztec capital, but with the new Spanish
town which, as Fray Marcos knew it in 1539, may not have had as many
as a thousand inhabitants. As to the statement that the citizens of
Cibola embellished their houses with green stones or turquoises, it
has been learned that it was an old custom in Zuñi to decorate the
roof hatches by which the people descended to their chambers with
turquoise, malachite, phosphate of copper and other stones or ores
of green and blue. This was truthful detail, although lending itself
to exaggeration. But the golden vessels, which most concerned the
Spaniard, were fable, and the Coronado expedition had cost $250,000.

Despite the forthright words of Coronado, one conquistador who would
look facts in the face, his countrymen were unwilling to surrender the
vision all at once. The English merchant, Henry Hawks, spent five years
in Mexico and in 1572 made this report: “The Spanyards have notice of
seven cities which old men of the Indians shew them should lie towards
the northwest from Mexico. They have used and use dayly much diligence
in seeking of them, but they cannot find any one of them. They say that
the witchcraft of the Indians is such, that when they come by these
townes they cast a mist upon them, so that they cannot see them.”

Zuñi lies south of the great Navaho reservation, and is a pueblo
of the same type as Taos, Acoma, Laguna, and the Hopi towns. Its
identification with the Seven Cities of Cibola rests on the reports
of the explorers themselves, on an examination of their routes, and
especially on the researches of Frank H. Cushing, commissioner of the
American Bureau of Ethnology, who became a member of this Indian tribe
in 1880 and lived with it four years while he studied its traditions.
At that time Zuñi had sixteen hundred inhabitants.

These people called their home Shivano (Spanish, Civano). Cushing
found that the sonorous Marata and Tontoneac were not kingdoms or
provinces, but directions, and that one of the distant “cities” named
by the natives was Acoma, which lies near the Mesa Encantada. While the
Spaniards had denied that Marcos and Estevanico really made a journey
to the north, Cushing heard from the Zuñi story-tellers that a “black
Mexican” had come among them and had been killed for his rudeness to
their women. Soon afterwards the first “white Mexicans” they had seen
entered their land as conquerors.


_Quivera_

Coronado was not content to bring back his costly expedition,
empty-handed, from the fiasco of Cibola. Again he dreamed northward,
and the name of his dream is Quivera. Between this city of illusion in
the Mississippi Valley, and the city of enchantment which the Cæsars
had reared on the edge of the Patagonian plain, it is six thousand
miles in a straight line. These two capitals of the mirage are the
farthest north and farthest south of Spanish fantasy.

The conqueror of Cibola drifted into the Quivera adventure by degrees.
There must be richer pueblos east of the seven towns, he thought, and
went in search of them, discovering and occupying many. But he found
New Mexico a sterile land. He became interested in the great buffalo
herds that roamed the plains to the north and sent his lieutenant,
Alvarado, on a hunt to secure meat. Alvarado took with him as a guide
an Indian from somewhere far to the east whom he found living with
the Pecos tribe and who figures in Spanish writings as El Turco, “the
Turk,” which was what he looked like. The Spaniard did not stay long
among the buffalos, for the homesick Turk had an exciting tale to tell.
With it, Alvarado hastened back to his chief, and soon, with El Turco
as pathfinder, the columns started toward the northeast and Quivera.

This was another golden city in a prosperous land. Through the land ran
a river two leagues wide in which swam fish as large as horses. There
were great canoes upon the river, with as many as forty men to drive
them, and these had golden eagles for figureheads. The native sovereign
slumbered in the afternoons beneath a tree the branches of which were
hung with golden bells, where the wind made music. The houses of
Quivera were built of stone and were like those of the pueblos of New
Mexico, but larger and fairer. The meats and drinks of its citizens
were served in vessels of precious metals.

Of this land the Turk himself was a native. But there was another
Indian exile with the party. His name was Ysopete, and he, too, spoke
of Quivera. It seemed to be a different place farther north.

With one guide bent on leading him northward and the other eastward,
the expedition which Coronado conducted toward Quivera moved like a man
lost in the wilderness. It traveled to the right for thirty-seven days
and partly returned on its tracks. Soon the Spaniards became confused
and ill at ease. In the vast monotony of the staked plains they saw
no marks by which they could guide themselves forward or find the way
back. A sense of helplessness stole over them. The very bison that
grazed around them excited a sort of fear. Their horses went wild with
terror when for the first time they saw these huge, misshapen beasts,
whose glowing eyes and hollow bellowing were calculated to inspire awe
even in men.

The wanderers were in latitudes less kindly to illusion than those
where other men were seeking the Gilded King, and a glimmer of the
scientific and reasoning spirit which weighs motives and scrutinizes
facts was born in them. Was not this story of Quivera the Golden just
a tale told by the settled Indians in order to get rid of them? Had
not El Turco been instigated to lure them by confused trails into the
wilderness and leave them to perish there? Had not one of them detected
him talking to the devil in a pitcher of water?

While they harbored these distrustful forebodings the Spaniards fell
in with a party of plains Indians who knew Quivera. It was forty days’
march ahead, they said, and the columns would die for lack of food
and water upon the way. Stone buildings and plentiful provisions in
precious vessels at the end of the way? The prairie nomads knew of none
of these things. They spoke of an encampment where the houses were
made of straw and skins, and a little maize in them, naught else. The
shifty Turk changed his story. He had not told the truth, he admitted,
as to the houses of Quivera, but it had a numerous population and a
store of precious metals. In anger the Spaniards put shackles upon
him. They were ready to go back, but Coronado was determined, without
risking too many lives, at least to see for himself what lay at the end
of the trail. He took twenty-nine horsemen, the manacled El Turco, and
Ysopete, and rode northward with the plains Indians.

After thirty days of hard riding through a great treeless plain dotted
with buffalo herds and watered by a number of small streams, Coronado
reached Quivera, where he stayed twenty-five days. He describes the
region about it as a rich land in which grew plums like those of Spain,
mulberries, and well-flavored grapes. But the settlement itself was
merely the summer camp of an Indian horde that followed the buffalo and
supplemented a beef diet with corn cakes, made from maize grown in the
river bottoms.

The explorer tells the story with rough candor. “I had been told,” he
says, “that the houses were made of stone and were several stories;
they are only of straw, and the inhabitants are as savage as any that I
have seen. They have no clothes, nor cotton to make them out of; they
simply tan the hides of the cows which they hunt, and which pasture
around their village and in the neighborhood of a large river. They
eat their meat raw, and are enemies to one another and war among one
another. All these men look alike.”

As Estevanico had met his fate at Cibola, so the Turk met his at
Quivera. Its people did not know him, but they welcomed Ysopete, and
for his sake the Spaniards. El Turco sought to lay the blame on the New
Mexican Indians, who, he said, had engaged him to lead the Spaniards to
their fate on the prairies. This tale failing to help his credit, he
tried to raise Quivera against his masters, who incontinently hanged
him.

Before turning southward to rejoin his command and take it back
to Mexico, Coronado set up a wooden cross which bore a soldierly
inscription, “Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, leader of a campaign, came
to this place.”

Four states claim Quivera, and the blind wanderings of the Spaniards
give conjecture a broad field to work in. One thing certain is that
La Gran Quivera, the new Mexican mission, established after the
suppression of the Indian uprisings in 1580, does not stand on its
site. Bandelier thinks the site was in central Kansas about a hundred
miles north of the Arkansas River. It has severally been contended that
Quivera was a camp of the Wichita Indians; that it was in Nebraska not
far from the state capital; and that the place the Spaniards reached
was in the southwest corner of Missouri. Cyrus Thomas, who supports
the latter view, holds that El Turco came from some tribe near the
confluence of the Arkansas and Mississippi, that the great stream of
which he spoke was the latter river and Quivera a town on its banks,
while the place seen by Coronado was simply the homeland of Ysopete.
Whatever the region, it would be as vain to seek the site as to look
for the camping ground in the desert where some forgotten Arab tribe
pitched its tents for a night, and struck them at sunrise.


_The Islands of Solomon_

There came a time when the New World was too small to hold the visions
of Spain. North and south the conquistadors had marched, seeking what
they did not find. So they dreamed westward over the sea. They had
plunged their hands in gold. They might yet bathe in it at the Baths of
Sunset.

As always, there were stories of islands in near-by waters where the
superstition or simplicity of the natives had heaped up treasure
that more deserving men might seize. The Spaniards went after it, at
first from Mexico. Then from the harbors of Peru ships began to sail
westward, and fantasies spread over the deep.

These voyages add two titles to the dream quests of Spain--the
Enchanted Islands and the Isles of Solomon--and the names may stand
for one reality. About six hundred miles west of the mainland of South
America, and on the line of the equator, lie the Galapagos, comprising
five large and ten smaller islands. From the Peruvians the Spaniards
learned of them, but for a while they could not find them. They were
vaguely called the Islas Encantadas because they seemed to elude the
search. The buccaneers used them later as sallyports from which to
attack the Peruvian plate fleet. Still later whalers resorted thither,
but not until 1832 did Ecuador occupy the group.

This archipelago of the west may have been the basis of the legend that
grew up among the seafaring folk of Peru. It was told that the Inca
Tupac Yupanqui had made a voyage and come upon two islands which were
called Nina-chumpi and Hahua-chumpi, or Fire Island and Outer Island.
He brought back gold and silver, a throne of copper, black slaves, and
the skin of an animal like a horse. Another account said the islands
were distant a journey of two months, and one was so large it might be
a continent. There were sheep, llamas and deer upon it and a bareheaded
people who wore cotton and woolen garments. Although their king dwelt
in a palace with mud walls, a frieze of gold ran around it.

A later legend, purporting to tell of a Spanish discovery, is very
definite: A long time before, a ship from Chile had been driven out
of its course to a large island, which it coasted for fifty days. One
of the seamen, Juan Montanes, went ashore and found a race of tall,
bearded Indians and women whose braided hair reached to their ankles.
They lived in communal houses four hundred feet long by one hundred
feet wide. Numerous rafts and sumptuously decorated canoes thronged
with people plied along the coasts. Because of his beard, the natives
treated the Spaniard kindly and pressed a gold plate and emeralds upon
him.

The account continues with the exactness of a seaman’s chart: “These
islands must be reached from Puerto de Arica, taking the volcano in the
bay as a landmark, such being the custom of the Indians who come and
go thither. As soon as the said volcano disappears, the desert islands
are reached. Going in among them, after two days the large island which
seems to be a continent is sighted, and what lies to the west is still
to be discovered.”

There are elements in this story, such as the communal houses and the
ornate canoes, borrowed from actual expeditions to the South Seas which
the earlier legend itself had launched. What these expeditions had
set out to find was a continent about two thousand miles to the west,
which stretched northward for three thousand miles from the latitude
of Tierra del Fuego to 15 degrees south, or almost on a line with
Callao; a domain about the size of that afterward discovered and named
Australia, but lying on the near side of the Pacific. Rumors of such a
continent passed from tavern gossip to palace conferences. Sarmiento
de Gamboa had gathered and analyzed Inca traditions of Pacific islands
and the learned men of the colony assumed that a continental mass lay
behind them. So in 1567 the governor of Peru dispatched two small ships
with one hundred and fifty men and put his youthful nephew, Alvarado de
Mendana, in command.

An incredible thing happened. These frail vessels, provisioned for a
voyage of two thousand miles, drove westward without sighting land
for seven thousand miles. In two months they crossed the width of the
Pacific, making their land-fall in the East Indies. For six months the
crews explored the capes, creeks, and jungles of a group of islands
flanking New Guinea on the east. Then the ships started back and were
off Callao twenty months after they had left it. They brought no
gold, but stories of “a naked, cheerful people of a bright reddish
colour”--in reality, head-hunting cannibals, to this day the most
savage of men.

Nearly thirty years went by before another expedition was undertaken,
and meanwhile legend was at work. It gave the distant group the name
it bears upon the map. These were called the Isles of Solomon, says
Lopez Vaz, “to the ende that the Spaniards, supposing them to bee
those Isles from whence Solomon fetched gold to adorne the temple at
Jerusalem, might bee the more desirous to goe and inhabit the same.”
But the Portuguese writer adds that because Drake and other raiders
had entered the South Seas, it was determined not to settle them, so
that interloping vessels Molucca-bound might have no succor on the way.

In 1595 Mendana, now middle aged, undertook to colonize the islands,
going out with four ships and 368 emigrants--men, women and children,
his own wife among them. Then another amazing thing happened. The
Spaniards could not find the Solomons. They discovered the Marquesas,
and in the island of Santa Cruz founded a short-lived colony where
Mendana died and whence the expedition went forth again to disaster.
Quiros, Mendana’s great lieutenant, returning to Peru, represented to
the viceroy that the islands come upon by his chief must screen an
unknown continent, as in fact they did. In 1605 he was sent out to find
them. He discovered the Society Islands, the Duff group and the New
Hebrides, but nowhere was there trace of the Isles of Solomon.

Dissolved into fable, for two centuries they were lost to geography. In
the waterside taverns of Peru, people still talked of them. But it had
become a maxim of the viceroys to treat the discovery as a romance, and
learned men concurred. The group was erased from the maps of the world.
Although it includes ten great islands stretching for six hundred
miles in an almost unbroken barrier across the track of navigators,
and although the first Spanish expedition brought back information
so detailed that every headland and harbor which Mendana passed has
since been identified, yet for two hundred years nobody could find the
archipelago. When it was rediscovered it was from the other direction.
Carteret and Bougainville, rounding Africa and entering the South Seas
in the latter part of the eighteenth century, came upon islands which
were found to be the lost lands of Spain.


_The Sepulchers of Zenu_

There are significant words in Raleigh’s _Discovery of Guiana_. Here,
he says, “commanders that shoot at honour and abundance shall find
more temples adorned with golden images, more sepulchres filled with
treasure, than either Cortez found in Mexico or Pizarro in Peru.”
Moreover, it is virgin soil: “the graves have not bene opened for
golde, nor the Images puld downe out of their temples.” Spain’s hunger
for gold pursued the Indians into their sanctuaries, and even into
their graves.

The Bachelor Enciso and Balboa, each in turn commander of Darien,
sought golden treasures, which, as report ran, Indian piety had heaped
in the wilderness.

Enciso went forth to sack the Sepulchers of Zenu. This province lay
some twenty leagues west of Cartagena. From its steeps the rains washed
gold down in such profusion that the natives caught in nets nuggets
as big as eggs. Zenu was also the cemetery for all the tribes of the
country. For ages they had brought their dead thither for burial, and
deposited golden ornaments with the bodies in the tombs. The soil, the
Spanish lawyer thought, must have become incredibly rich from this long
accumulation. It was no sacrilege to plunder the dead, for were these
not pagans, buried according to the rites of an idolatrous faith?

Landing on the coast of Zenu, Enciso found an army under two caciques
drawn up to oppose him. The lawyer in him prompted him to put his
opponents in the wrong before appealing to arms. So he had a formal
statement read to the two chiefs. The colloquy which followed, and
which he reports himself, is one of the most interesting incidents in
all the contacts of white men with savages. The statement recited that
there was one God who ruled in heaven, that in the Pope He had a vicar
who ruled on earth, and that the latter had awarded Zenu to the King of
Spain. The Indians replied that they accepted the sovereignty of God in
heaven, but nothing further. The Pope, they said, must have been drunk,
to give away what did not belong to him, and the King somewhat mad, to
ask of him what was not his to give. If the King came to take it, they
would cut off his head and set it on a stake; and they pointed to other
stakes on which heads were set.

Whereupon there was fighting, in which, Enciso says, the Indians had
the worse of it. But two of his men, slightly wounded by poisoned
arrows, died raving; the country was hostile beyond what he had
anticipated, and his force small. He went away without rifling the
sepulchers.


_The Temple of Dobayba_

Balboa, succeeding Enciso at Darien, heard of a province called Dobayba
forty leagues away on the banks of the Atrato. It was named either
from a goddess or from an Indian princess to whom, after death, divine
honors were paid. Her worship was conducted in a great temple, whither
natives came with their offerings. At stated times the caciques of
remote provinces sent a golden tribute, together with slaves for
sacrifice.

Superstition and fear piled up treasure at this shrine. At one time its
worship had been neglected. Then a great drought fell upon the land,
the springs and rivers dried up, and a scourge of death was visited
upon the neglectful nations. The survivors renewed their zeal and
redoubled their offerings of slaves and gold. Thus from generation to
generation the wealth of many peoples drained into the blood-stained
temple. The prospect of spoiling a heathen shrine profaned by human
sacrifice and piled high with idolatrous gold presented itself not as a
desecration but as a duty.

On his first journey Balboa mistook a deserted frontier village for the
temple town. When he went again, it was at the behest of Pedrarias,
who had been made governor of the colony, and whose jealousy prompted
him to set Balboa a task that might bring disgrace. The quest of
Dobayba was now deemed an enterprise of romantic promise but of high
hazard. The way thither led through tribes of bold and crafty savages.
In the dreary fens lurked animals to be dreaded, including monstrous
importations from classic myth. Clouds of mosquitoes swarmed above
the stagnant water, sinister lizards crawled on the banks, crocodiles
haunted the ooze. Dragons couched there, so said report, and huge bats
flitted by on vampire errands. Peter Martyr even mentions two harpies.
A later age was to discover the enigmatic White Indians. Rather than
enter this accursed region, the coast natives were wont to shun the
direct routes and travel the steep paths of the mountains.

Balboa was to win neither gold nor glory upon his forbidding mission.
Passing up the Gulf of Oraba and into the river Atrato with a fleet
of canoes, the expedition was ambushed by Indian canoes, losing half
its number. Its leader, wounded, made shore with the remainder and at
sunset began a crestfallen retreat to Darien.

The temple of Dobayba--if there was a temple--was left inviolate, to
receive the gold and shed the blood of heathen until the tropical
forest swept in and buried it in a green oblivion.


_Other Quests_

Of certain other Spanish quests less has been recorded, because they
were incidental to larger undertakings or were conducted by small
parties of adventurers, monks, or treasure-seekers, rather than by
columns of troops sent out by provincial governments. Pious men sought
the Terrestrial Paradise toward the headwaters of the Orinoco. From
all points of the compass explorers hunted for the Kingdom of Women.
Sometimes the conquistadors reiterated their own exploits, as when
Federmann looked for the House of the Sun in the Colombian Andes,
although under the name of the Temple of the Sun it had already fallen
to Pizarro. The adventure of the Golden Chain was attempted on several
occasions, parties of Spaniards undertaking to drain the crater lake of
Urcos, into which, tradition said, had been flung a massive chain of
gold long enough to encircle the great square at Cuzco.

The quest of the Cradle of Gold is of the last century, and here the
magic of a name again wrought its spell, two hundred years after the
feet of the conquistadors had passed. Bingham, who climbed to this
ruined mountain fortress a dozen years ago, believes that Choquequirau
is just a name of Indian poetry, misunderstood. Seen from a distance,
the ridge on which it lies resembles a hammock, and its only gold may
be that which the setting sun flings upon it. But the name itself, and
the vagueness of knowledge as to its last defenders, led to various
attempts to reach the ruin from the valley below. One party brought
back reports of rock-built “palaces, paved squares, temples, prisons
and baths.” The prefect of the Peruvian department of Apurimac, using
a company of soldiers and Indian carriers, built a way across the
rocky gorges and up the steep mountain side to Choquequirau. This, it
is thought, was the eyrie of the last Inca--neither temple town nor
treasure house, but a frontier fortress of the long ago.

The legendary Laguna de los Xarayes was indicated on the early maps
of South America as lying at the sources of the Paraguay. In it was
the splendid island home of El Gran Moxo. The imagery of the Hebrew
prophets was borrowed to describe his palace with its golden and
silvern vessels, its doors of bronze where living lions in chains of
gold kept guard, its cloud-like tower where a disk of silver, in shape
like the moon, shed light over the waters.

Explorers sought this island magnificence in vain. When they came in
the dry season, they could not find even the lake in which it swam, for
what seemed to be a vast lagoon was merely high water on the Paraguay.

One of the golden visions of Spain recoiled upon its head. The
Spaniards would not have it that with a single blow they had struck
down the power of the Incas and laid hold of all their riches. It
seemed to them they had merely precipitated a dispersal and an
exodus--the going out of Indian princes and property to found new seats
elsewhere. One of these was the great city of Paytiti, also called
the White House, which had risen near the confluence of the Huallaga
and Marañon in the forests of Peru. The legend which the conqueror
propagated of a fugitive dynasty grown strong in exile was cherished by
the humbled Quichuas, and twice it roused them to arms.

In 1740 Juan Santos assumed the name of Atahuallpa, raised an army from
the uncivilized members of various tribes, drove out the missionaries,
and for a space made the name and power of Paytiti a fact on the
borders of Peru. Again, in 1780, Tupac-Amaru, a descendant of the
Incas, appealed to the legend, aroused the country, abolished enforced
mine service and ecclesiastical dues, and became master of most of
the Peruvian plateau. The insurrection was put down and its leader
executed, but the injustices he had fought were never restored in full
vigor, and passed altogether when Peru rose against Spain in the War of
Independence. The dream of Paytiti had become a vision of liberation.




Chapter XXIII. The Fabric of Illusion


The traditional world, like the modern world, is a fabric woven of many
stuffs and colors, and patched with strange materials, some old, some
almost new. If one wonders how it was all thrown together, one must
consider that the type of mind which collects and analyzes facts, which
experiments in order to discard error, which defines terms and reasons
from them, did not appear until late in the world’s history and even
now is not common. Aristotle, the chief scientist of antiquity, debated
why a dead kingfisher, suspended from a string, should foretell the
direction of the winds by turning its bill toward that corner of the
heavens whence they were to come. Sir Thomas Browne hung a kingfisher
on a string, and found that it did not do this thing.

Except when directed to its immediate problems of food and shelter,
the antique mind thought in images, rather than in definite terms. Its
processes were akin to dreams, in which one takes strange things for
granted, nor seeks to verify anything. Save when they drove a bargain,
men took one another’s statements for granted. Much the same thing is
true of the savage to-day.

The realms and races of prodigy form the main burden of travel tale.
Except when travels took the form of commercial voyagings, or military
expeditions, and with a few other exceptions, such as the journeys
of Pytheas the Massilian and Marco the Venetian, their theme, almost
until modern times, was wonder. Home-keeping folks wanted to hear, as
still they do, of countries and customs, and men and animals, that were
different. The myths of geography have come out of the contacts of the
dreaming mind of savagery and early civilization with the unknown. They
represent men in the process of getting acquainted with the world about
them.

For primitive man they began at the very boundary of his district.
Mystery was there, and forbidding things were suspected; and if waste
lands lay beyond, these got themselves uncouth populations. The
stranger that crossed the boundary was dreaded and hated as something
not quite human, or at least as wielder of a magic that might work
harm. It is said of wild tribesmen in Borneo that when they meet a
stranger they turn their backs and hide their faces because the sight
of him makes them dizzy. “The stranger is for the wolf,” is an Arab
saying, and the early rule of the world was that he must die in the
interest of those upon whom he had thrust himself. “He had salt water
in his eyes,” was the Fiji formula when castaways were clubbed to
death. Many tribes call themselves by names which mean simply “men,”
as distinguished from all other peoples, whose human nature is not
conceded.

But the cruel host of to-day might be the helpless guest of to-morrow.
There came a time of toleration, the limited toleration recorded in
the Slavic proverb, “A guest and a fish smell on the third day.” As
men crossed and recrossed the tribal boundary its weird legends were
shifted to remoter horizons, became things to gossip about rather than
act upon, and might mellow into genial report. Even historical peoples
living at a distance were swathed in horizon haze. The justice of the
Indians, their freedom from bodily ailments, and their contempt of
death are favorite themes of Ctesias. Herodotus spoke of the Egyptians
as later ages have spoken of the Chinese. Adam of Bremen gave a
fantastic picture of the peoples of the far north--small, sinister
Finns, whose magic could wreck passing ships and draw the very fish
out of the sea; cruel islanders colored bluish green by salt water,
and the “most noble” Northmen, bravest, most loyal, most temperate of
men. Above all other races in consideration, so the west agreed for
some centuries of unwonted humility, were the Chinese. Among them, says
Purchas, “is reported to be neither Thiefe nor Whore, nor Murtherer,
nor Hailes, nor Pestilence, nor such like Plagues.” And they live to be
two hundred years old.

Travelers were the agents of distance, bringing the woof which the
stay-at-home worked into the warp of his fancy. Until very recent times
they were the world’s telegraph, mails and newspapers, all in one.
Their coming was an event, and their going was remarked upon. Over
rough ways, through countries where inns were not, among peoples who
had instinctive dislike of a stranger and deemed it no fault to despoil
or enslave him, the wanderer pursued his uncertain fates as merchant,
pilgrim or mendicant. He paid his fare by the stories he took with
him--winning a precarious hospitality in strange lands and an eager
welcome when he reached home. The more curious the tale he told, the
more kindly he was entreated--Ulysses repaid royal hospitality with
royal guerdon--and in the ancient world so little was known that one
might tell almost any tale he pleased. There was no means of checking
up a report. Of course there were skeptics here and there, and there
was, and is, a suspicion that old men and wanderers use rather more
than the truth. The Ancient Mariner, being both old and traveled, had a
great tale to tell.

Whole races wandered as well as single individuals. The migrations of
peoples, and most if not all of them have had a nomad period, have
had something to do with bringing the more beautiful of their legends
into being--the tales of ideal lands, abodes of the blest where their
dead are, or whither their heroes are translated without dying. The
journeys of the sun are tracked upon them and human wistfulness has
builded there, but so has memory. The homeland which the ancestors of
a people abandoned long before, driven out, it may be, by an invading
host, lives in its legends as a region desirable above all others. The
hardships of the exodus are remembered also, and tradition magnifies
the cruel height of the mountains, the swiftness of deep, unfordable
rivers, the terror of moonless trails and all the heavinesses of the
way. When the dead go home, or the heroes pass to rest, the path of
souls which they travel back is the path their forefathers followed
and the one journey ends where the other began, in a land that is a
province of the Golden Age.

This hypothesis, which is Herbert Spencer’s, may not explain all the
elysiums that a yearning fancy has created. Yet in the South Seas they
lie in the direction whence the islanders came; the Hindu legend of
the blissful Uttarakarus of the north is thought to hold the memory of
a migration southward from some Himalayan valley; while the curious
Persian legend of the enclosed garden of Yima, where was neither
deformity nor iniquity, may be a note on the early movement of the
Iranians from their cold ancestral home to the Azerbaijan region, and a
halt there before renewing their march toward the sun and the sea.

Though seldom we may follow the process, religion, and symbolism,
which is its handmaiden, and magic, which is its elder brother,
traced the outlines of most of the fabulous animals and peculiar
peoples; human forgetfulness, savage logic and hearsay have filled
them in. The natural history of the traditional world was in good
part the contribution of the religions of Egypt, Assyria, Persia, and
India. The tribes of grotesque peoples, the dog-faced generations,
the satyrs, the demons of the waste, the fowls with woman faces, the
women with fish-tails, the winged quadrupeds, all seem more like the
carven creatures which populate the walls and towers of mediæval
cathedrals than breathing tenants of fields and waters. The seeming
is significant. When the hunchback, Quasimodo, was on the roof of
Notre Dame at night, “then said the women of the neighborhood, the
whole church took on something fantastic, supernatural, horrible;
eyes and mouths were opened here and there; one heard the dogs, the
monsters, and the gargoyles of stone, which keep watch night and day,
with outstretched necks and open jaws, around the monstrous cathedral,
barking.” When the edifice took fire, continues Hugo, “there were
griffins which had the air of laughing, gargoyles which one fancied one
heard yelping, salamanders which puffed at the fire, tarasques which
sneezed in the smoke.”

In the temples of the Middle Ages the fabulous birds of the traditional
world came home to their roosts, and the fabulous animals to their
dens. They had been taken from the temples of earlier religions and
they found their way back through the medium of an art which did not
know where these creatures came from. Nor did ancient travelers and
geographers. These, they supposed, were real races of men, real beasts
and birds. They had never seen them, for they roamed the outer spaces,
but everywhere they saw their effigies--in the porches of palaces, upon
the columns of imperial courts, and on the monuments of princes, as
well as within the shrines of strange gods.

Creatures of allegory these were, religious symbols, survivals of
totemistic worship of beasts. Yet the entablatures on which their
outlines were graven were mistaken for illustrated natural history,
accepted as literal records of fact, like the columns which companioned
them and which kings set up along the highways of the east to proclaim
that hither they had come and here they had prevailed in battle.

The imagery of all religions musters them. Eskimo mythology is a
witch-haunted shore, Aztec mythology a charnel-house, Chilean mythology
a forbidding menagerie. The Chiriqui of Panama have an alligator, a
jaguar, and a parrot god, all with human bodies. In Egyptian myth one
reads of the watch-dog of Osiris in the underworld--the Swallower
of the West, mixture of crocodile, lion, and hippopotamus. On a
man’s shoulders Anubis carried a jackal head; and half human were
the bull-gods, hawk-gods, goat-gods, vulture-gods, cat-gods. The
Ægean pantheon shows human figures with the heads of asses, lions,
bulls, and birds. The god Brhaspati of Hindu myth was seven-mouthed
and seven-rayed, beautiful-tongued, sharp-horned, blue-backed, and
hundred-winged. Hanuman was a monkey-god. The goddess Kali was a
dark-blue female with four arms and three eyes. Siva himself had four
faces, which appeared in turn when a ravishing nymph created by Brahma
walked quite around him to tempt him.

The evolution of these divine beast-men, ancestors of the fabulous
races of geography, begins with the annual sacrifice of a sacred animal
and the preservation of its skin for the ensuing year. At first this
was stored, then stuffed, then drawn over a wooden or stone image,
to which, as worship lost its primal grossness, the human form was
imparted. The result might be an ass- or goat-god, a centaur or satyr.
Yet, with religious symbolism shaping it, evolution has operated also
in reverse, dowering anthropomorphic deities with animal parts to
signify typical qualities. This is seen even in Christian story. On
the choir stalls of a Rhine church begging friars were depicted with
the cowled head of a monk, but with a pig’s body and fox tail, while
a Bible of the tenth century shows the evangelists as beast-headed
men, and the four gospels as a four-headed composite animal called the
tetramorph.

[Illustration: THE GARGOYLES OF STONE WHICH KEPT WATCH DAY AND NIGHT]

Out of the magic dances of men, as out of their temples, the races of
fable have come trooping. By donning the heads and perhaps the tails
of horses, bulls, asses, and goats, and treading certain measures,
ritual mummers became, in the thought of the time, horse-demons,
ox-demons, ass-demons, and goat-demons, and as such semidivine. They
danced to bring fertility to the flocks and herds, while the god--it
is Pindar speaking--“laughed aloud to see the romping license of the
monstrous beasts.” The masks of wild animals and of reptiles and birds
were worn also, and the motions of these creatures were repeated in
other dances, as they are to-day, in order to propitiate dangerous
beasts, or bring luck in the chase, or constrain heat and cold, sun
and rain, through animals that were their symbols. Possibly the First
People of Indian myth, equally with the satyrs of the classics, derive
from rites in which dancers simulated beasts, and seemed, therefore,
both human and bestial. Belief that ritual dancers donned the animal
nature with their masks; travelers’ reports; the ambiguous records
of pictograph and frieze, and tribal forgetfulness of the meaning of
long-abandoned rites--all were avenues by which the mummers passed out
of the atmosphere of a naïve township magic into the spacious precincts
of marvel. Greek tragedy and Greek comedy grew up in their steps,
flourished for some splendid moments, and died out. But the ritual
mime, whence these came, is still danced by peasants clad in skins.

If, as pragmatism claims, the intellectual world is “pervaded and
perverted by errors, lies, fictions, and illusions”--things real only
in the sense that they can be talked about--it could not be otherwise
than that the folk-mind would throng the galleries of fable with its
cruder creations. Was it not a slighter thing to picture “gorgons,
hydras, and chimæras dire” than to give the wood its guardian deity, or
to reach the poetry of Indian belief that the echo is the Lizard-Man
telling back? The night terrors of the savage, the dream figures of an
age when dreams were very real, the hallucinations of medicine-men,
the deep reactions of the imagination to what seems abnormal but
is merely strange, even the easy success of the alarming masks and
deforming paraphernalia of tribesmen on the warpath--all contributed
to the fabulous populations. In the house of the mind, one chamber is
a museum where it strives to improve on nature’s handiwork. It invents
no new thing, but it shifts familiar combinations, exaggerating,
deforming, recombining. The product is either a caricature or a
composite, a grotesque or a chimæra. Nature itself has set a pattern
in the bat, which the Persians say is compounded of bird, dog, and
muskrat, since it flies like a bird, has dog teeth and lives in holes
like a muskrat.

By his own handiwork has man been misled, or led away into curious
valleys of vision. Savage art seems constrained by some obscure law
of the mind to give its subjects, be they god, man, or beast, a
grotesque delineation. It may be that primitive drawing was evolved
inversely from the drawing of children, whose first animals are usually
horizontal human beings; the first men pictured by the cave artists
were more like erect animals. Paleolithic man, so Luquet thinks,
learned how to represent animals before he did men, and gave the latter
beast countenances and misshapen members in his early attempts to
represent them. The stuff of myth is in the rock drawings. In sculpture
itself its influence is clearly marked.

On the evidence of broken statues, desert peoples based tales of
forgotten races that had been turned into stone. On the evidence
of wooden idols, snow-mantled in the land of the Samoyeds, their
neighbors based tales of a northern nation frozen into immobility with
each recurring winter and thawed out by the sun’s return. There were
sculptures and bas-reliefs in Egypt which ministered to the pride of
kings by picturing them several times as large as their subjects and
vassals; and these were evidence to the stranger that he had come
into a country which held both giants and dwarfs. Primitive drawings
betray ignorance of perspective, and this archaic style was retained by
religious conservatism after art had found itself. The sculptures that
show Egyptian countenances in profile, with eyes as long as in the full
face, also show profiles of quadrupeds having but two legs and a single
horn. Here, and not in “the wild, white, fierce, chaste moon, whose
two horns are indissolubly twisted into one,” may be the secret of the
unicorn.

The power to evoke myths of the living has been in marble statues and
wooden images from the beginning, for in the beginning they were
wrought in the thought that life would enter them. A passage in _The
Flame of Life_ reveals the creative quality in D’Annunzio reacting
to their spell: “In the fruit orchards, in the vineyards, among the
vegetables, among the pastures, rose the surviving statues. They
were numberless like a dispersed people. Some still white, some gray
or yellow with lichens or greenish with moss, or spotted; in all
attitudes, with all gestures, goddesses, heroes, nymphs, seasons,
hours, with their bows, with their arrows, their garlands, their
cornucopias, their torches, with all the emblems of their riches,
power, and pleasure, exiled from fountains, grottos, labyrinths,
harbors, porticos; friends of the evergreen, box, and myrtle,
protectors of passing loves, witnesses of eternal vows, figures of a
dream far older than the hands that had formed them and the eyes that
had seen them in the ravaged gardens.”

Sovereign reason itself has sent emissaries to the courts of fable.
Science is tolerant and until it knows it speaks the language of
Montaigne, “It is a sottish presumption to disdaine and condemne that
for false, which unto us seemeth to beare no show of likelihood or
truth.” Empedocles, precursor of physical scientists, and perhaps first
to glimpse the doctrine of evolution, provided the classic world with
a working explanation of the prodigious animals and peoples and gave
a law to the menageries of myth. He thought that the various parts of
men and animals were separately created by the elements, which were
his deities. There were heads without necks, arms without shoulders,
eyes without sockets; and as they wandered about in space these members
united, forming man-headed beasts, beast-headed men, and various
bizarre beings which because of their maladjustment did not survive in
competition with normal men and animals. The doctrine has been echoed
in modern times in the contention that the composite creatures of
fable--part reptile, part bird, and part beast--represent intermediate
forms, experiments which nature inaugurated and abandoned in evolving
higher types of life. The marsupial kangaroo, the duck-billed platypus,
and the flying lizard are surviving testimony to such experiment.

A kindred philosophy may be discerned here and there in the folklore
of aboriginal Americans. In the deluge legend of the Pimas, Fox and
Sister, escaping in two arks, set to work to fashion a new world of
men out of mud; Fox molds manikins with one arm, one leg, one eye, but
Sister derides these and tells him to put his journeyman’s product
away behind the ocean in another world; then she breathes into her own
better handiwork the breath of life; these deformed folk are still
living somewhere, the Pimas think. The haunting Indian myth of a First
People, who had the human form but the beast nature, and from whom
the animals derive, and the companion myth of a First People who had
the brute form, but discarded it for the human, are things with the
Empedoclean quality, but reach deeper; and a true note of observation
is in them. Somewhere in every man one catches a glimpse of some
animal. All created things are reflected in his form, his gait, his
face. “Somewhat of me down there?” was the question of Emerson when he
caught a dog’s understanding glance; and in men’s countenances he had
seen, he thought, “the features of the mink, of the bull, of the rat,
and the barnyard fowl.”

Thus the _Metamorphoses_ of Ovid take on a tinge of plausibility.
“What keeps these wild tales in circulation for thousands of years?”
asks Emerson. “What but the wild fact to which they suggest some
approximation of theory!” In lighter vein in _Penguin Island_ Anatole
France sketches the metamorphosis of birds into men: “Immediately the
penguins were transformed. Their foreheads enlarged and their heads
grew round like the dome of St. Maria Rotunda in Rome. Their oval eyes
opened more widely on the universe; a fleshy nose clothed the two
clefts of their nostrils; their beaks were changed into mouths, and
from their mouths went forth speech; their necks grew short and thick;
their wings became arms and their claws legs; a restless soul dwelt
within the breast of each of them. However, there remained with them
some traces of their first nature. They were inclined to look sideways;
they balanced themselves on their short thighs; their bodies were
covered with fine down.”

There is good terrestrial history as well as the dreams and guesses of
the mind hidden in travel tales, and in them are embalmed some of the
oldest memories of mankind. Paleolithic man found various subraces of
men in Europe when he came there, savage prowlers from whose skeletal
remains modern science has restored the outlines of squat, ape-necked,
beetle-browed human beings, crudely formed as a heathen idol. Against
these he waged the relentless war of one species against another--a
war of extermination. The memory of their odious appearance would
survive longest in the stories told to entertain or frighten children.
As Sir Harry Johnston has suggested, “the dim racial remembrance of
such gorilla-like monsters, with cunning brains, shambling gait, hairy
bodies, strong teeth, and possibly cannibalistic tendencies, may be the
germ of the ogre in folklore.”

It is certain that folklore shows the traces of other and less
frightful races of men who in turn were driven off the European
scene. The giants of nursery tales are identified by Tylor with Stone
Age heathen, shy of the conquering tribes of men, loathing their
agriculture and the sound of their church bells. When the Scandinavian
sagas speak of dwarfs, furtive and cunning, garbed in reindeer kirtle
and colored cap, hiding in caves, and armed with bone-tipped arrows,
they are picturing the persecuted and once widely spread Lapp race.

It may be that a vague recollection of now extinct animals has survived
in legend. There is an Iroquois story recorded by Father Charlevoix of
a great elk which stood so high that eight feet of snow did not impede
his movements, and with “a sort of arm which comes out of his shoulder
and which he uses as we do ours.” Kaska tribesmen speak of a large,
hairy, tusked animal which roamed their land long ago. The Indians
of North America must at some time have seen living members of the
elephant family. It has been suggested that the tortoises of Hindu myth
which bear the world on their backs are a memory of the huge Himalayan
tortoise.

There are legends that are true myths of observation, exercises not
of memory, but of primitive logic. They disclose man pondering the
ruinous records of the past and satisfying the necessity for a theory
that shall explain them. The diminutive burial cysts and dolmens made
by departed races and scattered over the world were thought to be the
graves of dwarfs, or their houses, or their treasure places. Fossil
bones have produced a veritable cycle of these philosophic myths. The
frozen mammoths and fossil bones of Siberia have been known to man
from earliest times and have produced a stock of legends as well as
an immemorial trade in ivory. Some of these, reciting the battles of
prehistoric animals with one another and with men, have almost the
dignity of epics.

The mistaken logic that produced the creatures of legend has had
at various points a sort of whimsical confirmation. Save for his
fiery breath, the dragon of fable mirrors the leathern-winged,
serpent-tailed, crocodile-bellied saurians that haunted the marshes of
the ancient world and passed from the scene ages before man is supposed
to have come upon it. There are living things as weird of aspect as
any created by the unbridled imagination of man, but most of them are
small. Such are the vampire bat, the dragon fly, and the so-called
fiend fly, the black face and curved horns of which gave it in the
Middle Ages a diabolic name. Seas and fresh-water streams and marshes
all contain creatures which so much resemble, and so much differ from,
the familiar land animals as to seem the product of a conscious venture
into the grotesque. With a fish net and microscope one might bring to
view an array of animals that in everything save size would rival the
exhibits of fable. The wildest dream of man has not pictured anything
so beautiful and strange as the life-drama of the little creature that
is first a larva, then a chrysalis, and then the butterfly of a single
summer.

There are words in which the germinal idea has been so enveloped in
wrappers of metaphor and inference, so incased in concentric shells of
rationalization, so burdened with borrowed significances, so freighted
by sentiment and reflection, and so enriched by art and historical
accretion that they may be called microcosms of the world of fable; the
proper noun, Babylon, is one of these. In large measure the peoples of
prodigy and in some measure the lands of legend owe their being to a
search for causes confined within the domain of etymology. They may be
called a literary phenomenon, a product of words and the ways of words,
and a by-product of libraries. Words breed myths. Given a Rome, people
will invent a Romulus. Given the ancient Britons and Celts, people will
invent a Britannus and a Celtus, their eponymous chiefs. The theory of
totemism--supposed descent from an animal ancestor--arose, as Spencer
thinks, from the efforts of savages to explain the animal names which
they bore.

When the meaning of words becomes forgotten or their form corrupted, a
myth follows. Mediæval Spain, for example, believed that Jews were born
with tails, confusing the word rabbi with rubo (a tail). Château Vert
in England has become Shotover, and peasants have it that Little John
shot over a high hill near by. Maid Marian of the Robin Hood ballad
cycle is the Mad Morion of the Morris dance, a boy who whirled through
its measures wearing a morion or helmet.

How names can become corrupted the public-house signs of England will
attest. The Bag O’Nails should be the Bacchanals; the Bully Ruffian
should be the ship Bellerophon; the Cat and Wheel should be St.
Catherine’s wheel; the Goat and Compasses should be God Encompasses Us;
the Iron Devil should be Hirondelle (the swallow), and the Queer Door
should be the Cœur Doré (the golden heart). The effigies of bags of
nails, cats, goats, and doors under these uncouth names are pictorial
fables based upon bad etymology.

In like fashion Pliny confused the name of the Canaries with the Latin
_canis_ (dog) and says these islanders are called thus because, like
dogs, they devour the entrails of wild beasts. Similar confusions
of words have brought legendary islands upon the maps. Avalon, the
Celtic paradise in the west, whither Arthur was ferried unto peace, is
Apple Island of the classics, the place of the golden, dragon-guarded
apples of the Hesperides. Antilia, mystic mediæval island of the
remote Atlantic, is perhaps Ante-ilya, or island off the Portuguese
coast. Milton’s “cold Estotiland” and Estland, islands which held
their place for centuries on the maps of the northern seas, are
probably misreadings for Scotland and Iceland, transferred from faded
sketch-maps to a Venetian chart of the sixteenth century.

“Not Angles, but angels,” said a punning ecclesiastic when he saw
fair-haired Saxon captives in the slave markets of the Mediterranean.
So the Greeks and Romans gave to savage tribes the names that in their
own tongues sounded most like what these tribes called themselves. A
myth might result--a record of some deformity, or some inhuman custom.
A larger number of myths arose from men’s giving a literal meaning
to figurative terms in their own language. To speak in riddles was
more than a social game with the ancients, is more than a social game
now with various peoples. There were certain things which must not be
named, but only referred to indirectly. There were times when riddles
must be propounded and times when they must not; and riddle-time, says
Frazer, was usually in the presence of a dead body or at a sacrifice.

What might follow, a glance at a few Finnish riddles will show. One
of them runs, “Beyond the great water a large old man shouts,” and
another, “A cry from the forest and light from the hill.” In each case
thunder is the answer. The sky is described as a blue field strewn with
silver. “A child looks through the hedge” means the sunrise. “A red
cock springs from house to house” means fire. “A small white man was
sowing, he became very mischievous,” means snow. As Müller remarks,
here are elements which in the mind of a poet or a grandmother would
soon create a number of delightful myths.

In its contacts with enigmatic language the end of literalism is
fable. Speak of fleet horses as children of the wind, and you have the
story of Iberian mares impregnated by the west wind. Speak of swift
runners as shadow-footed, and there appears on the canvas of Ind the
silhouettes of natives asleep under the shade of their gigantic feet.
“We are a people without a head,” said the kingless Turkomans, and the
Headless People shouldered their way into the map of fable. “Their
shoulders are where our heads are,” Indians of Guiana told Raleigh,
describing a tall neighbor race, and artists delineated them with eyes,
noses, and mouths where their breasts ought to be. Sometimes savage
tribes stretch their ears by attaching weights to them; hence, perhaps,
the tale of folk who used one ear as mattress, the other as coverlet.
As to the people whose feet were turned backward, may these not be,
Tylor asks, the Antipodes on the other side of the globe, whose feet,
surely enough, are planted “the opposite way” every time they set them
down?

The method explains much, although care must be taken that it be
not made to explain too much. The germ of fable is found in such
figurative epithets as bull-browed, long-headed, horse-faced, ox-eyed,
lion-hearted, bird-witted. But for these phrases to fructify in
marvel, it would need that in a time more naïve and among a people who
knew neither the ends of the world nor the ways of speech, men of one
race should use them in telling another the manners and customs of
a third. For cultivated minds these conditions cannot be reproduced
except in the magic and make-believe of poetry. For the unlettered,
alike in lands of culture and of barbarism, they still exist.

The power of wish and the power of words are chief gods in the world of
fable.




Chapter XXIV. The Travel Tales of Mankind


When the travel stories of mankind were first set down in writing the
list was already nearly complete. Little was added afterward until the
modern age began the systematic collection of a mass of folklore which,
with all its significance, had scant literary backgrounds and less than
the old geographical quality. This is a strange thing. From generation
to generation men increased their stores of knowledge, but from century
to century they neither greatly increased nor greatly reduced their
stock of fables. There were periods when men forgot the wisdom of the
ancient world, but they remembered and repeated its pleasant marvels.

These have had a long journey down the ages. The Greek had them from
the Persian, Indian, and Egyptian; the Roman had them from the Greek;
the Arab merchant and Christian pilgrim had them from the Roman;
the Celtic monk and the viking had them alike from Roman, Arab, and
Christian; and the Spanish explorer had them from every mediæval
source. In the Spanish Americas of the sixteenth century the Age of
Fable blazed forth again and then grew dark.

The things added in this journey to the original stock of travel
tales were mainly local legends and variations on older themes. The
grasshoppers in one province chirped or were silent in obedience to
provincial ordinance, the fountains of another had curative properties,
there was an enchanted forest in a third. Celtic glamour passed a wand
over familiar material and it yielded the veiled or sunken islands of
the western ocean. The quest of El Dorado came out of a Spanish dream.
Nearly all other travel tales are found in the earliest literature. It
must be that men told them to one another ages before writing was known.

Various of the older books record them. They are interwoven with myths
of the supernatural in epic poetry. They are included in accounts of
countries and peoples in histories, encyclopædias, and guide-books.
They decorate the narratives of ancient and mediæval travelers. They
are compiled in volumes of mirabilia. Instances of these several
records are the Odyssey of Homer, the _History_ of Herodotus, the
_Travels_ of Marco Polo, and the _Collecteanea_ of Solinus.

The special type of letters which travel tales have developed is
the collections of mirabilia. Most, perhaps all, of these have been
library pilferings and borrowings. Photios culled from the _Indika_
of Ctesias everything that was difficult to believe, and the rest of
this survey of ancient India is lost. Solinus won the name of Pliny’s
Ape by extracting the curious things from the writings of the Roman
encyclopædist and combining them in a work which was standard for a
thousand years.

The very skepticism of other writers evidences the industry of the
historians of marvel. In his _Attic Nights_, Gellius, a Roman of
the second century A.D., tells of a bundle of musty books which he
bought for a few coppers in Brundusium. “They were all in Greek,”
he says, “and full of wonders and fables, containing relations of
things unheard of and incredible, but written by authors of no small
authority--Aristeas of Proconnesos and Isogonos of Nicæa, and Ctesias
and Onesikritos and Polystephanos and Hegesias.” Swiftly he lists their
races of dog-headed, one-legged, headless, and feathered mortals.
“As we perused them,” says the practical but too-scornful Roman, “we
felt how wearisome a task it is to read worthless books which conduce
neither to adorn nor to improve life.”

When Huc was ascending a Chinese river in the middle of the last
century his native servant used to go ashore at every stopping place
and bring aboard a stock of pamphlets to read. These products of the
ready pens of the literary class included fantastic stories of various
kinds, some of them very coarsely written. Says Huc: “The Greeks fixed
the abode of their monsters and ephemeral creatures in the east, and
the Chinese have returned the compliment by placing theirs in the west,
beyond the great seas. There dwell their dog-men, their ears long
enough to trail on the ground as they walk; there is the Kingdom of
Women, and of the people with a hole right through them at the breast.”

Best of all skeptical discussions of prodigy is the _Enquiries into
Vulgar and Common Errors_ (1646), which bears the high name of Sir
Thomas Browne. Its author challenges the entire array of travel
tales, closes his eyes to the truth hidden in many of them, recites
the means by which impostors fabricate imaginary animals, denounces
“saltimbancoes, quacksalvers, charlatans, astrologers, fortune tellers,
jugglers, geomancers and the like incantatory impostors,” and sounds
a warning against Herodotus, Ctesias, Maundeville, Pliny, Ælian,
Solinus, Athenæus, Philes, Tzetzes, and “even holy writers such as
Basil and Ambrose and Isidore, Bishop of Seville, and Albertus, Bishop
of Ratisbone.” Preachers and moralists, he says, have made occasion for
error by using for illustration the fables of the phœnix, salamander,
pelican and basilisk. The root of the matter, he concludes, is the
“deceptible condition” of men, of which Satan took advantage in the
beginning.

In whatever books one finds these pictures of strange lands and races
they have the effect of cameos, in that they are miniatures, and the
outlines are not subject to change. The description is always brief,
and next to nothing is added to it from age to age. The griffin has
no new habits, the dog-faced men lived under the old law, the pygmies
of the Middle Ages have not yet won the battles with the cranes which
they were waging in the time of Homer. If a traveler sees these strange
creatures he has nothing fresh to say of them. The main thing that
happens is that they shift their places on the map, retiring always
before the advance of knowledge. Æthicus of Istria contributes almost
the only really novel touch in a thousand years. He saw, so he says,
the Amazons in the region north of the Caspian suckling the centaurs
and minotaurs.

That these fables came down through the centuries unchanged is a
tribute to the hold of tradition, to men’s reverence for the written
word. It is also a revelation of the way natural histories and
encyclopædias were compiled until about the time of Buffon and Cuvier.
When a thing got itself said, it had a good chance of surviving,
provided it was interesting. Other men copied it out of a book without
demanding proofs, authority taking the place of research. The ancient
geographers cited the very poets as authorities.

Because they passed through endless compilations the fables remained
brief, or became so. Despite its vigor and penetrating quality, even
the _Geography_ of Strabo rests for its main facts on a multitude of
travel books whose statements it abridged. What the Greek writers could
not wholly avoid was too much for the Roman encyclopædists. They were
note-takers, compilers, abridgers, and they tried to make all learning
their province. The encyclopædias of Varro, Verrius, Flaccus, Pliny,
Suetonius, Pompeius Festus, and Nonius Marcellus were the product
not of a staff of experts, but in each case of a single mind. The
editors epitomized everything. They made extracts from books, extracts
from extracts, abridgments of abridgments. The original works they
consulted were lost, and only fragments of the mental inheritance of
the Roman world were transmitted from age to age. Under the modern
system of specialized inquiry the frontiers of knowledge press ever
outward. Under the old encyclopædists they drew inward and the body of
known facts shrank continually. This tendency culminated in Isidore,
Bishop of Seville in the seventh century, last of the Roman, first of
the Christian, encyclopædists. He devotes two sentences to the small
island of Thanet, now a part of Kent. He gives three sentences to Great
Britain; “jet is very common there, and pearls,” he says.

From works prepared under such conditions one must be content with a
treatise as brief as this in Isidore’s _Etymologies_: “The Cynocephali
are so called because they have dogs’ heads and their very barking
betrays them as beasts rather than men. They are born in India.”

The ideal lands, the prodigious races, and the fabulous animals were
first made known to the world by the Greeks. Few of the classic travel
tales, however, originated with them. Most of them trace back to Egypt
and India; if their sources are still more remote, the track has been
lost. The mythical peoples and animals dwelt in the deserts of Africa
and the deserts and mountains of Asia. India, even more than Egypt, was
their home. The mighty mountains that bordered it, the multitude of
peoples that inhabited it, the strong touch of the grotesque in their
art and ritual, and their curious sense of kinship with the elephant,
the tiger, the snake, and the jackal made theirs the native soil of
marvel. Many of the singular creatures that peopled the hinterlands of
Africa seem to be emigrants from India and beyond.

The earliest travel tales in Greek literature are found in Homer’s
Odyssey commingled with accounts of places and peoples that are not
of the earth. These stories of the tenth century before Christ look
westward from Greece. In the poems of Pindar the strange outlines of
eastern marvel appear on the Mediterranean scene and a new aspect
of reality animates them. With the history of Herodotus, written in
the fifth century before Christ, the invasion is well-nigh complete.
Imbedded in the greatest of all histories, passages about the griffin,
the phœnix and kindred creatures are scattered through volumes that
contain the high story of the Persian attempt upon Greece, and the best
accounts which the Mediterranean world had of the back lands of the
earth. Herodotus had heard of so many wonderful things which were true
that he made it a rule to report what he heard even where he doubted
its truth; and to this rule the world owes much. The Halicarnassian
doubted the existence of a sea north of Europe, or of the Tin Islands,
but he gave them a place in his pages. He could not believe that
the Phœnicians had circumnavigated Africa, but his record of their
incredible assertion that as they sailed they “had the sun on their
right” is evidence that the thing was done.

Herodotus was attacked as untruthful by Ctesias and the
Pseudo-Plutarch, and his monument at Thurium in Italy recites that
he removed thither to escape ridicule; but in the main this was the
ridicule of men who accepted his pleasant stories and doubted his
history, and who were offended because with too candid a pen he
sketched faction and faint-heartedness in the Greek states when Xerxes
led his host across the Hellespont.

After Herodotus the chief sponsor for antique marvel is Ctesias the
Cnidian, whose work falls in the following generation. If the one
history was the product of travel, the other was the product of
prolonged residence abroad, Ctesias having been stationed as physician
for seventeen years at the Persian court. He gave the Greeks their
first special treatise on India, introduced the Deformed Folk to the
west, and pictured the peninsula as a preserve of curious peoples
and animals. So he made a notable book of his _Indika_, but among
the learned it had small credit. “A writer not to be depended on,”
Aristotle calls the author, and where Herodotus was accused of
credulity, Ctesias was assailed for mendacity. Modern criticism,
however, has identified several of his monstrous races with tribes
still inhabiting Hindostan and partly excused other fables on the
ground that he never saw India and put in his book only what the
Persians told him of their neighbors to the east. When one people tells
another the ways of a third, the theme is marvel.

What was denied to Ctesias was vouchsafed to Alexander in the next
generation. With his own eyes he saw India. The European race before
which the east unveiled was the most gifted, curious, and imaginative
of all peoples, and the east beheld it personified in the captivating
figure of Alexander. The expedition brought legends back with it, and
left other legends behind. Indian and Afghan and Turkoman and Arab
never forgot the great Macedonian, while the whole literature of the
west was colored by this eastern contact.

A few other Greek names are linked with the travel tale. Scylax of
Caryanda taxed credulity with his fabric of wonder. Aristotle examined
reports of fabulous creatures, and fables as to actual species, and
rejected most, but not all, of them. The study of anthropology,
developed at Alexandria, found its harvest in the geography of Strabo
and in the survey of the Erythræan Sea by Agatharcides. Both works
contain curious accounts of curious tribes of men.

Pausanias the Lydian, who lived in the second century of the Christian
era, is better remembered than men with better title to remembrance,
because his work happened to survive. His _Description of Greece_ has
been compared to an old shoe flung high on the beach of time. An old
man wrote it, interested in old things. Pausanias has much to say
of the wonders of sacred grottos, trees, and springs. His method of
taking a road and describing everything along it was copied by pilgrim
writers, who clogged the paths of Palestine with their marvels. Modern
criticism has discovered that he repeats as interviews with natives
statements he had read in local handbooks, and that, betrayed thereby,
he tells of seeing cities as flourishing places which had been in
ruins for centuries. Yet Pausanias was a real traveler, although at
times a luckless compiler.

Lucian the Samosatan was his contemporary, but his contribution to
marvel is a satire on the credulity of all travelers, among whom he
arraigns Homer, Herodotus, and Ctesias. His _True History_ relates an
imaginary voyage to the moon, and thence to the Fortunate Isles, where
Ulysses entrusts him with a letter to Calypso. In the belly of a whale
nearly two hundred miles long, which had swallowed his ship, he finds
lakes, woods, and strange races of living men. It was the singular
fortune of this travesty to provide material for epics which the Celts
accepted as history and for adventures which were foisted on the
narrative of Baron Munchausen.

The Latin mind was inferior to the Greek chiefly in that it was
deficient in curiosity. The Romans were content to rule the world
rather than to understand it. It was enough that amber and silk and
incense and spice should come to them from the four corners of the
earth without their following the trade routes back to find what manner
of people sent these things. Yet legend was active among the mariners
and camel-drivers and porters of the races that served the Roman on the
fringes of his empire. The fables of these porter-nations were passed
on to the Arab and are preserved in the _Thousand and One Nights_.

Rome, however, performed a service to the traditional world by
producing the elder Pliny and his amazing _Natural History_. Pliny has
not the charm, narrative gifts, or historical genius of Herodotus,
but he comes half a millennium afterward and has more to report. He
lacks the comprehensive and penetrating intelligence of Aristotle, but
he knows more--of things that are so, and of things that are not so.
His great work is perhaps the most impressive monument to industry
raised by a single mind. The entire body of learning of the ancient
world passed through his mind and came out again in the volumes which
he calls a natural history but which are in fact an encyclopædia.
These thirty-seven books record twenty thousand matters of importance
collected from about two thousand volumes, only a few of which have
survived. As his nephew, the younger Pliny, recites, it was his maxim
that “there is no book so bad but some good may be got out of it.”

To get it Pliny made notes, even in the bath. When he traveled, his
secretary was by his side with a book and tablets, and if it was winter
the scribe took dictation with his gloves on. In Rome Pliny never moved
about except in a litter, reading while he was being carried through
the streets. Once he rebuked his nephew for walking and “losing all
those hours.”

While tracing the courses of the stars, the description of countries,
plants and animals, the anatomy of man, the properties of drugs, the
nature of gems, the uses of metals, the science of farming and the
fine arts, Pliny contrives also to sketch the geography of marvel. “It
is really wonderful,” he declares, “to what a length the credulity of
the Greeks will go.” Yet he draws most of his material from them, and
whatever his own attitude toward the things he recites, the result of
the recital was to give credulity its own text-book for a thousand
years. Cynical as was his point of view, Pliny was yet a lover of
marvel and searched it out and set it forth in his pages whether he
believed it or not. It was enough that it was interesting.

His was the journalistic angle. The _Natural History_ is in effect
a vast newspaper report of the world of about A.D. 77. The columns
of curious miscellany which newspapers print sometimes under such
headings as “Oddities in the Day’s News” are legacies of his spirit.
The monument to his immense industry and reportorial instinct is a
work which fabulists of all succeeding ages used as a quarry for their
own building materials. Had his been the questing mind of the Greek,
instead of the drag-net intelligence of the journalist of an incurious
but marvel-loving world, the view of the central countries of culture
and of the horizon lands presented in the _Natural History_ would have
less the aspect of a main circus tent surrounded by side shows.

Solinus, surnamed Polyhistor or the Varied Narrator, distilled the
marvels from Pliny, making some seven hundred extracts, adding to them
from other sources, and producing a work which supplanted the older
writer in the affections of the multitude throughout the Middle Ages.
His _Collecteanea_ appeared in the third or fourth century of the
Christian Era, and although he seems to have been a pagan grammarian,
he had mainly Christian readers. St. Augustine quotes him four times
in his _City of God_, and Isidore uses no less than two hundred
extracts in his _Etymologies_. The pagan’s work was both a symptom and
a cause of the intellectual decline in the Middle Ages. Other men did
as he did, or accepted the results of his labors as sparing them its
pains. What he did, and what Europe did after the breakdown of the old
order of things, was to forget ancient wisdom and hold fast to ancient
wonder. Solinus was spiritual father of the Christian fabulists, mentor
of the Christian pilgrims.

What Pliny wrote, perhaps with his tongue in his cheek, Solinus copies
with mouth agape. The world is become a playhouse, a curio hall, a
province of faerie. One learns that, like man, the quail suffers from
the falling sickness and that the cranes of Thrace travel southward
in ballast, stuffing their craws with sand and pebbles. In the
Mediterranean islands there is a “sardonic” plant, on eating which
one grins horribly and dies of lockjaw. In Germany are the Hercynian
birds whose feathers give light in the dark. Here also is a mule-like
pastoral beast with so long an upper lip that he “cannot feed except
walking backward.” In Africa are jovial apes which rejoice in the new
of the moon and lament in its wane, and sphinxes and satyrs “easily
taught to forget their wildness, very sweet faced, and full of toying
continually.” There are no snakes in Ireland--and no sense of right and
wrong.

The _Physiologus_, an Alexandrian compilation, companions the
_Collecteanea_, but introduces a moralizing note and thereby
ushers a rabble of real and fabulous animals into the symbolism of
ecclesiastical architecture. Isidore of Seville is a desiccated
Solinus, dried out by theology and the specialized pursuits of the
grammarian. He wrote at the opening of the seventh century. His
_Etymologies_ has already been cited as that irreducible minimum of
knowledge to which the epitomizing habit of Roman encyclopædists tended
always. It shows also the Roman dependence on authority as a substitute
for research, and the Roman worship of words. Easy it was for early
Christian writers to take up the tradition of the encyclopædists, for
it needed only that the authority of the pagan be replaced by that of a
purer faith. The pagan marvels were accepted almost in a body and many
of them are briefly recited by Isidore.

How words breed legend is disclosed in the very title of the
_Etymologies_. Carrying a little further the tradition of the Romans,
with whom philology was almost as old as poetry and more important than
natural science, Isidore seemed to think that when he had given the
derivation of a term he had accomplished a complete description of the
thing that bore its name. Words themselves were things transcendental.
Thus he defines Barbarism as “the uttering of a word with an error
in a letter or in a quantity.” _Nox_, the Latin word for night, “is
derived from _nocere_ (to injure) because it injures the eyes.” “_Homo_
is so named because he is made of _humus_ (earth), as it is told in
_Genesis_.” “_Corpus_ (the body) is so called because being corrupted
it perishes.”

Isidore writes the texts for the chapter in the history of marvel that
deals with Christian fabulism, pilgriming, and cosmography. It is
Christian only in the sense that Christians of the earlier centuries
tell the tales, make the journeys, and construct the world theories.
Its subject matter is Jewish and pagan, with the two elements sometimes
in an artless, sometimes in a forced, combination; it presents one
side of that contact and conflict between Aryan and Semitic cultures
which is the history of the last nineteen centuries. For the first part
of the period the result of the conflict in the field of geography,
travel, and tradition was what might be expected where simple-witted
peoples, lately emerged from barbarism and not yet nationally minded,
meet a race of ancient culture and intense national spirit. Jewish
conceptions prevailed. It was thought that children, if taught no other
tongue, would naturally speak Hebrew. Europe accepted as a literal
recital of fact the Sumerian legend preserved in Hebrew Scriptures
that the human race began with Adam--“the mean, toolless and frivolous
Adam,” as Andrew Lang calls him--and his consort in the Garden of Eden;
and from Hebrew chronology it figured that the earth must be about
four thousand years old. It made over its geography to conform to Old
Testament texts, and, discarding the world-knowledge of the classic
civilizations, it made over its maps to show Jerusalem in the center of
a flat earth.

When pilgrims to Palestine had visited the scenes of the birth and
passion of Christ they proceeded to explore the Jewish background for
memorials of Old Testament history, with side trips into the realm of
pagan marvel. All of them looked for the pillar of salt by the Dead
Sea in which Lot’s wife was entombed; for centuries this column comes
and goes in their narratives. Silvia of Aquitaine, whose journey falls
in the fourth century, says there was no pillar there--the sea had
engulfed it--but others saw it later. Theodosius says it waxed and
waned with the phases of the moon. Antoninus denies the report that
pasturing sheep had diminished its size by licking it. A fragment of
this marvel is in the Library of Congress at Washington, together with
the report of an American traveler who measured the pillar and found it
sixty feet high and forty feet around, larger than he believed Lot’s
wife could have been.

Other of the earlier pilgrims are said to have gone into Arabia to see
the dunghill where Job contended with his comforters. The pyramids,
some thought, were the barns of Joseph. The Apples of Adam still showed
the marks of his teeth. The Jordan halted its waters at the time of
the Epiphany. Devils were seen on Mount Gilboa. The torments of hell
lay under the Sea of Sodom and Abbott Daniel had a whiff of them from
its surface. In Samaria, Paula, friend of Saint Jerome, saw “devils
writhing and yelling in different kinds of torture, and men before the
tombs of the saints, howling like wolves, barking like dogs, roaring
like lions, hissing like serpents, bellowing like bulls.” One pilgrim
writer copied another, few took any note of the natural features of
Palestine, most of them were of primitive culture, and the women had a
wider outlook than the men.

The Jew, Rabbi Moses Petachia, made a pilgrimage, reporting among other
things that the wind which blew from the shallow parts of the Sea of
Azov, the Stagnant Sea of old geography, was fatal to passers-by; he
saw on the Euphrates a flying camel which could go a mile in a second.
Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela undertook a remarkable journey in the twelfth
century to learn the condition of the Jewish communities of the east.
He brought back valuable information, but said he could not approach
the vast ruins of Babylon because of the scorpions and serpents that
haunted them, located mythical Jewish states in the deserts of Arabia,
and repeated numerous fables on hearsay. If he ever took this journey,
says the elder Disraeli, it must have been with his nightcap on.

How the new peoples of the west lost the sense of historical
perspective under the Jewish impact is shown in the long speculation
over the whereabouts of the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. Classic learning
was dismissed as “windy babble.” The fate of the peoples of the
great monarchies of antiquity aroused no curiosity. But everywhere
were sought the footsteps of the vanished Israelites. They were
imprisoned in the Caucasus, they had become Afghan mountaineers, they
were privileged subjects of Prester John, they were settled in the
Canaries, they had reached China, they had colonized Peru, they were
the progenitors of the British and American peoples, they were the
ancestors of the North American Indian, and the first Mormons.

While Europe was curious about the shrines, landmarks, and legends of
Asia, and held it to be the continent of wonder, Asia did not return
the interest. It had few travel tales to tell of the peoples of the
west, few reports of any kind. The Chinese saw little of note in
the Roman Empire, “Great China,” save that it had good jugglers and
asbestos cloth and that the eastern gate of Constantinople was covered
with shining gold leaf and was two hundred feet high. India ignored the
sea, and was self-contained in its life and legends; the fabulous and
felicitous peoples of the Puranas dwell in trans-Himalayan valleys.
Arab sailors were carriers of Indian fables and may have taught them to
the Chinese; a large part of Chinese marvel has a quality suggesting
importation. Yet the superior historical sense of the Chinese,
preserving almost intact marvel tales that were brought to them, made
the rest of the world their debtor. Their encyclopædias and classics
are quite in the style of Pliny, as, for example, the _Shan Hai King_,
or _Wonders by Land and Sea_, to which the dates of B.C. 2700, 2205,
and 222 have been severally ascribed, and which is also alleged to be a
Taoist forgery of the fourth century A.D. Monster peoples and animals
are in this work, and one of its early prefaces relates the journey of
a king to the Halls of the Giants in the east, to the mansions of the
Fairy Queen in the west, across a bridge of tortoises in the south and
over streets made of feathers in the north. It is also recited that by
imperial decree nine urns were set up in various parts of China on
which, to the fear of the people, the common and the strange animals of
each region were pictured.

Religious fervor at length set the feet of Chinese upon paths along
which wonder grew. Buddhist priests and scholars went east to teach and
west to learn. If the annals of the Middle Kingdom are to be credited,
a fair interpretation of the record is that the Chinese reached the
coast of North America in A.D. 499 and again in 502 and 556. They
found countries which they described as the Land of Marked Bodies and
the Great Han country. The natives of the former had horses and draft
deer with great horns (reindeer) and esteemed copper more than gold. A
thousand furlongs east was the Kingdom of Women--erect, white-skinned,
hairy, timorous, subsisting on a salt plant like wormwood. The
residents of the Land of Marked Bodies, supposed to be the Aleutian
Islands, were tattooed, joyous, rich in gold and silver. Eastward was
Great Han, possibly British Columbia, the wild beasts of which devoured
guilty criminals, but spared persons falsely accused. There was also a
country of dog-headed men.

These lands have been identified with regions of northeastern Asia,
and because of their climate and products with American regions as far
south as California and Mexico.

The westward journeys of Buddhist scholars are historical and
important. They went to India at various periods from the beginning of
the fifth to the latter part of the seventh century of our era to study
the Law of Buddha, to visit the sites associated with Sakya Muni and
to collect sacred books and relics. One Chinese work has a record of
fifty-six of these worthies. The Buddhist pilgrims were men of higher
intelligence and still greater credulity than those who at about the
same time were journeying out of Europe to the shrines of Palestine.
Their largest figure, and one of the world’s greatest travelers, is
Hiouen Thsang, who left China in A.D. 629 and returned seventeen years
later.

In the desert of Gobi, Hiouen saw spectral armies charging down upon
him and at night the flare of spectral torches, but at a word of
scripture the glamour faded. In the T’sung-ling mountains Fa-hien found
poison dragons that spat the storm and avalanche; here, says Hiouen,
one should not wear red garments nor carry loud-sounding calabashes.
The pass of Varasena was so high that birds could not fly over it,
but crossed the summit afoot. Report had it that in the deserts of
Turkestan a sandstorm covered in a single day as many cities as there
were days in the year.

The India that Hiouen traversed was a land of ruins and marvels.
He tells of demon women and miracle gold and wonder-working Buddha
teeth; of a shepherd that became a dragon; of a roe that brought forth
a beautiful girl with deer feet; of a risha that could fly until a
princess touched him, and thereafter he merely walked; of a holy man
whose sanctity made light in a dark wood. There are elephants in his
pages that tend shrines with flowers and perfumes, and wild asses
that protect an altar, and desert ants as large as hedgehogs. There
are dragon domains and serpent palaces underground, and aboveground a
Buddhist tower made of cows’ dung. There is a City of Hump-backed Women
and on a distant island the Kingdom of Western Women who traffic in
gems with Byzantium and accept lovers from there.

Most of these things of Chinese report the west knows also from
Herodotus and Pliny and Polo. Out of India, marvel.

The Nestorian chapter in the joint history of religion and wonder bears
a twelfth-century date, but deals with the inheritance of classic
fable. Although the mediæval legend of a powerful Christian monarch
named Prester John, who reigned amid pagan enemies somewhere in the
heart of Asia, was based on rumors of the eastward spread of the
Nestorian faith, the Christian element in it is weighted with all the
pagan wonders of an earlier time. The realm of Presbyter John is the
range of strange animals and stranger men. Thus the apocryphal letter
bearing his signature which reached the west declares: “Our land is the
home of elephants, dromedaries, camels, crocodiles, meta-collinarum,
cametennus, tensevetes, wild asses, white and red lions, white bears,
white merles, crickets, griffins, tigers, lamias, hyenas, wild horses,
wild oxen, and wild men, men with horns, one-eyed men, men with eyes
before and behind, centaurs, fauns, satyrs, pygmies, forty-ell high
giants, cyclopes, and similar women; it is the home, too, of the
phœnix, and of nearly all living animals.”

Here, continues the royal letter writer, are the accursed Gog and
Magog, and the Lost Israelites, and the worm Salamander, and Amazons
and Brahmans, and paradise and pearls and pepper. And when John goes
to war a million and a half soldiers follow him. The epistle is pagan
marvel’s broadest gesture over lands unknown.

With differences of Oriental temperament and cast of thought, Arab
geography and travel parallel every phase of the west except the Age of
Ignorance. The Arabs escaped a Lactantius and a Cosmas, but they had
their Plinies and Ptolemies, their own sea epic, and in Ibn Batuta a
traveler second only to Marco Polo. Until the Middle Ages were ending
the centers of world culture were at Bagdad and Cordoba. If Christendom
accepted the ancient fables and rejected the ancient learning, Islam
embraced both.

The great Arab geographers blended in their works the methods of
Ptolemy and Pliny, together with a story-telling strain from the
coffee-houses of the east. The very titles of their works suggest
this--Aljahedh’s _Book of the Cities and Marvels of Countries_,
Massoudy’s _Meadows of Gold and Mines of Precious Stones_, Al
Istakhri’s _Book of Climates_, Ibn Haukal’s _Book of Roads and
Kingdoms_, Ibn Khordadbeh’s _Principal Trade Routes_, Abulfeda’s
_Encyclopædia_, and Idrisi’s _The Delight of Those Who Seek to Wander
Through the Regions of the World_. These are treatises such as would
be expected from a race which had found its destinies in trade routes,
which had pitched its tents in the seats of the ancient culture, and
which took its ease in coffee-houses. They show Ptolemy’s sense of
distances and measurements, Pliny’s note-taking habits and appetite for
marvel, the bazar instinct for entertaining stories, and the Arab’s
poetic fancy. Massoudy’s is the typical product of his race. It is a
vast and glittering collection of history, science, travel, and legend,
thrown together by an imagination to which the varied and shifting
shows of life and nature were perpetual delight. What mainly it and
its companion works lack is the Greek sense of form and capacity for
precise thinking.

Arab geography and marvel are best to be studied in the seven voyages
of Sindbad the Sailor. These are true travels, tricked out with
legendary travel tales, taken by a number of men, notably the Two
Mussulman Travelers of the ninth century, and all ascribed to one man
in order to give them the epic quality. Sindbad is the Arab Ulysses and
this the Arab Odyssey. The theater of the eastern epic is the Indian
Sea, rather than the Mediterranean, it is well-nigh free from myths of
the supernatural, and its geographical notes, although disguised, are
definite. One can trace, and Beazley has done so, the itineraries of
the much-buffeted merchant-wanderer, and identify the material of many
of his adventures.

Wak-wak, the destination of the first voyage, is perhaps Japan; the
island of mysterious nightly music is an echo of Solinus; the adventure
of the whale’s back is repeated by St. Brendan’s companions, and the
owl-headed fish are borrowed from Khordadbeh. The accounts of the roc
of Zanzibar and the Indian valley of diamonds in the second voyage are
to be found also in the _Travels_ of Marco Polo. The third voyage is
lifted from Homer; the hairy, ugly little dwarfs are the pygmies of the
Iliad, and the one-eyed giant who ate Sindbad’s companions is a negro
Polyphemus out of the Odyssey. The fourth voyage, with its incidents
of cannibal ghouls and their reason-destroying herbs, the burial of
Sindbad alive with his deceased native wife, and his encounter with
pepper-gatherers, is a distorted narrative of Indian races, customs,
and products. The Old Man of the Sea, or Sheikh of the Seaboard, in the
fifth voyage is the orang-utan of Sumatra. The sixth voyage is mainly a
description of Ceylon. In the seventh voyage the account of elephants
that transported Sindbad to their cemetery, where without killing them
he could have all the ivory he required, is about as Pliny would have
written it.

Into this east of glowing sorceries came two men of the west in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the one to traverse Asia from end
to end, and see more of wonder than any man had seen before, the other
to roam still farther, for his journeys were in his imagination and
had only its limits. The _Book of Diversities_ of Marco Polo is the
greatest of all narratives of wanderings. The _Marvellous Adventures
of Sir John Maundeville_ is the wildest of all romances that purport
to be fact. The two works may be considered together if for no other
reason than the ironic comment they afford on popular judgments before
time redresses them. The facts of Polo were long treated as fables.
The fables of Maundeville were accepted as facts. Sir John’s book was
translated into every European tongue and passed through hundreds of
editions. Because of his reports on the wealth of Kublai Khan, Marco
was nicknamed Il Milioni; he was asked on his deathbed if he would
not recant some of the things he had said, and after his death there
figured in Venetian masques a comic character who told unbelievable
tales to guffawing street crowds and was called Marco Milioni.

The Venetian spent twenty-four years in Asia, most of the time in the
service of the philosopher-monarch, Kublai Khan, and returned to his
native city in 1295. There are fables in his book, hearsay statements
usually reported as such; but their effect of illusion is slight
compared with the staggering and splendid realities which the narrative
unfolded before eyes unprepared for them. Marco drew aside the curtain
of Asia. It was as if the spectators in some provincial theater,
used only to the antics of vagrant mountebanks and the crudities of
folk-drama, saw for the first time one of those extravaganzas of
music, movement, and color, built around a tale of the Orient, which
tax even the dramatic resources of world capitals to produce. Sitting
in their own darkness, the simpler peoples of the west saw on a stage
hung with costly draperies and dim with clouds of incense, a stage of
vast spaces and long perspectives, the civilizations of the venerable
east--India, dreaming in the sun with its jeweled rajahs and naked
fakirs; China, with its teeming populations, its immense inland fleets,
its wisdom and its riches; Burma, serene amid the clang of its temple
bells; the golden roofs of Japan rising out of cherry blossoms; Tibet,
wrapped in a vision; the Indian Archipelago, with its spices, pearls,
and cannibals. Other figures less clearly defined appeared in the
background--nomads of the steppes, fur-hunting Samoyeds of the tundras,
mountain tribes that pressed their women upon stranger guests; glimpses
even of farthest Africa, of a Christian Ethiopia, of the Zanzibar of
negroes, ivory, and ambergris, and of Madagascar, past which the sea
bore relentlessly southward.

Of many of these things Europe heard for the first time from Marco,
of all of them his was the first illuminating report, and most of them
his own eyes had seen. Here Truth is the stuff of Illusion. Though
Marco speaks of dog-faced Andamanese, and islands of Amazons, and Lop
with its evil spirits, and the storm-raising witches of Socotra, and
the roc, it is not on these, but on his verities, that wonder waits.
The center of the wonder is Kublai Khan, who built the pleasure-dome
in Xanadu. Greatly is he beholden to the traveler, who came to him
one morning out of the unknown. But for Marco, as Masefield finely
says, this lord of lords, ruler of so many cities, so many gardens, so
many fish pools, would be only a name, an image covered by the sands.
Remembrance is with those who see, and write.

Though he did not see, Maundeville wrote. The author of the volume
that bears this name may have seen Syria, but he claims to have been
everywhere. He served the Sultan of Egypt against the Bedouins and
declined his daughter’s hand in marriage. He drank of the Well of
Youth. He served the emperor of China in his war against Mancy. He took
astronomical observations in the Indian Ocean. He traversed Russia,
Livonia, Asia Minor, Amazonia, Persia, India, Tartary, China, Arabia,
Libya, Ethiopia. One great thing his humility forbade him to essay, and
that was the Terrestrial Paradise. “I was not worthy,” he says.

The fabricator of the Maundeville narrative seems to have been Jean de
Bourgogne, a physician of Liège, who died there in 1373, long enough
after his book appeared for it already to have won reputation; on his
deathbed he was proud to avow his authorship, though not his imposture.
It is to be inferred that he appropriated his pen name of Maundeville,
knight of St. Albans in England, from the title of a romantic satire
by Jean du Pin published a few years before, in which the writer is
conducted in a dream through a world of allegory by a knight named
Mandevie whose home was on a white mountain--Mons Albus or St. Albans,
as has been suggested. Where the adventures of Maundeville came from is
not in doubt. Friar Odoric, a great but credulous traveler, had spent
fourteen years in Asia, largely in India and Cathay, and had written
out his story on his return to Italy in 1330. Maundeville, whose book
is perhaps of twenty years later, looted his predecessor so thoroughly
that the friar was deemed the copyist of the knight; Samuel Purchas
thought that “some later fabler,” like Odoric, had stuffed the knight’s
tale. Maundeville raided also the fables of Solinus, the forged letter
of Prester John, the travels of King Hayton of Armenia, and the varied
lore and legend of all lands and times collected in the preceding
century by the great encyclopædist of the Middle Ages, Vincent of
Beauvais. Apparently he never heard of Polo.

The bogus knight won a wide and fascinated audience by throwing his
marvels into a tale of which he is the hero. His own adventures, his
travels from land to land, his comments on countries and peoples, give
his book unity, movement, and the narrative interest which is lacking
in the works of Ctesias, Pliny, Solinus, and their school. Ctesias
writes of India, but never professes to have been there, and Pliny and
Solinus sit afar and look over the world. Maundeville comes out of
the library and crosses the earth, staff in hand, in an earlier, and
unhallowed, _Pilgrim’s Progress_. His is the method, and his almost was
the vogue, of the Odyssey and of the Sindbad saga. The classic brevity
and sterility in recounting mirabilia, he escapes in some measure,
robbing several fables to enrich one. It happened that an early
rendering of his work into English was done when the island tongue was
in a fluid state, and done with such sense of idiom that he has been
called, although falsely, the father of English prose.

Maundeville is most interesting when he is most audacious, or when
he stumbles most. At Joppa he transposes the figures of a classic
myth, and reports seeing a rib forty feet long of “Andromeda a great
giant,” chained there before Noah’s flood. The chameleon (chamois?) is
“a little Beast, as a Goat.” In Pathen the giant tortoise of Odoric
becomes “a kind of Snails that be so great that many Persons may lodge
them in their Shells.” The rats in the Isle of Charia are “as great as
Hounds here.” There are wool-bearing hens in Mancy. The manna in the
Land of Job “cleanseth the Blood and putteth out Melancholy.” Chaldea
is a country of fair men and evil women. In the Pepper Country “the
Women shave their Beards and the Men not.”

The author scatters his mythical islands even over the mainland of
Asia. Yet his sense of the shape and rotundity of the earth was far
in advance of his time. In the midst of romancings, one finds this,
the clearest word of his century, and in the field of exploration the
most constructive: “I say to you certainly that Men may environ all the
Earth of all the World, as well underneath as above, and return again
to their Country, if that they had Company and Shipping and Conduct;
and always they should find Men, Lands and Isles, as well as in this
Country.” For this declaration, for the vision of the Valley of the
Shadow of Death which Bunyan took from him and he from Odoric, for
the delight that his fictitious narrative still conveys, and for the
English prose which is its vehicle, one may half forgive the physician
of Liege his pose of a gouty English knight, dictating the true story
of adventurous years to ease hours of broken rest, and ending it with a
benediction, followed, anthem-wise, by a chorus of amens.

The remainder of the story of marvel, so far as it is a literary
phenomenon, is a sea tale told by men of the west, for Prince Henry
the Navigator was born a few years after Jean de Bourgogne died, and
with his manhood there opens the era of maritime discovery. Meanwhile
the northwest of Europe had entered the record with Norse and Irish
chapters. Though maps of the early Middle Ages placed the griffins and
the cynocephali in the north of Europe, the north knew them not. Giants
and trolls it knew, and the Iceland sagas tell of vampires that hid in
heaps of stockfish, and monster men, dragons, and bulls that guarded a
haunted shore. The inevitable compilations came later. The history of
Norway written by Pontoppidan in the eighteenth century is a brief for
Scandinavian waters as the habitat of prodigious things.

The Celts neither robbed nor traded on the sea, and the very ports of
Ireland were opened by Northmen; yet one of the three great epics of
the deep, the _Voyage of St. Brendan_, is Irish, and monks are its
heroes. The five Irish _Imrama_ or sea tales, of which this is the
chief, weave a spell beyond any other woven upon the deep, because they
look westward toward hidden continents that presently were to loom
through the mists, and track with spectral craft the very seas that
foamed erelong around the prows of Spain. Working with bits of old
beliefs, as a craftsman with bits of broken glass, the Celt fashioned
an oriel window through which he glimpsed the lands of dream. It was
magic like that of Gwyn ab Nudd, King of Faerie, who spread before St.
Collen the semblance of a feast in a great court. “I will not eat the
leaves of trees,” said the saint, and flung holy water about him, and
“there was neither castle, nor troops, nor maidens, nor music, nor the
appearance of any thing whatever, but the green hillocks.”

Fables of old time which had smoldered through the later Middle Ages,
and which were rekindled by fresh contacts with classic marvel in the
revival of letters, blazed into fierce life in the age of discovery.
When new continents swam into ken, and hidden empires showed themselves
for a moment on distant mountain sides, only to crash down at the onset
of a handful of adventurous men, nothing seemed incredible. A world
which had denied its own shape awoke to the fact of antipodal lands and
peoples and was prepared to believe anything. The extravagant things
it credited--and herein is palliation for its credulity--were yet
small beside the wonders with which reality smote it in the face. The
prodigious races of antiquity that had retreated before the traveler
seemed at last to have been run to cover in those parts of the New
World whither Spanish explorers penetrated. South America presented
itself as a fulfillment of classic wonder and a proof of the unity of
the human story.

Mythical America was in part a projection of the dreaming mind of
Spain upon the sensitive consciousness of savages. There are stories
that have a way of taking root as soon as they are transplanted, and
by the incorporation of native elements of accommodating themselves
so completely to new surroundings as to deceive the very men who had
loosed them. Hence the mingling of Old and New World elements in
the tales of giants, pygmies, Amazons, satyrs, and acephalites. The
conquistadors put leading questions, and had the answers they wanted.
If they were deceived, yet there was more of the scientific spirit in
the men who set out in search of Paradise or El Dorado, than in all the
generations of encyclopædists who copied down incredible things and
never went forth to find them.

One may trace the outlines of Mythical America in the journals of
Columbus; in the writings of Peter Martyr and Garcilaso de la Vega;
in the monographs of conquistadors like Coronado; in the _History of
the Indies_ by Oviedo, which Las Casas unjustly declares is “as full
of lies almost as pages,” and in Hakluyt’s _Principal Voyages_, justly
called the English prose epic. For the most fabulous and fascinating
picture one turns to Raleigh’s account of his expedition to Guiana in
1595. It is at once a collection of mirabilia, a story of adventure, a
courtly address to the “Lady of Ladies” (Queen Elizabeth), a commercial
prospectus, and the brief of a man on the defensive. In its pages the
southern coasts of the Caribbean are as rich in marvel as the southern
coasts of the Mediterranean in the pages of Pliny.

Earlier travelers had found it well to secure specimens of ores,
plants, and savages as vouchers for their credit among skeptical
stay-at-homes, and the Spaniards took the precaution of carrying
notaries in their ships to attest their statements. In the eighteenth
century a more effective check was developed for travel tales.
The science of criticism superseded the habit of compilation. The
reports of travelers were examined, sifted, and compared by closet
philosophers. French savants like Buache, Delisle, and Fleurieu
challenged the realms of prodigy and had no answer from them.
Humboldt’s great journey into Spanish America at the end of the century
is the recessional. Through the lands of legend he wends his way, a
patient, sometimes a pensive, observer, and puts Atlantis, El Dorado,
the Amazons and the wild men of the woods to the question. His report
is the most tolerant, suggestive, and illuminating document in the
literature of marvel. Soon afterward began the scientific study of
European folklore with the brothers Grimm as pioneers.

The remarkable things which the North American Indian had to tell,
most of them, were not assayed until after Humboldt’s time. Save where
the Spaniard had been, they have the undiluted aboriginal quality;
yet a bookish note, which has been imputed to Viking influence before
Columbus, is in eastern Algonquin and Eskimo sea lore and giant lore.
These tales of the northern continent did not launch expeditions, nor
enter the great narratives of travel, and they have yet to win their
indicated place in literature. There is wonder in them, and poetry, and
the deep reflection of untutored minds; though crude the backgrounds
and the figures that animate them, they parallel almost the entire
array of legendary lands and peoples which the classic world assembled.
Skillful old story-tellers--“delight-makers” they were called--told
them at night about a dim fire in the ceremonial roundhouses. Winter
was the time, for then, says Schoolcraft, the strange beings that might
be underground or in the lakes and streams could not hear through the
frozen surfaces the merry tales that the Indian dared tell about them,
and the laughter of the roundhouse.

Rude are these records of a people whose trickster-hero might be the
obscene and ofttimes ridiculous coyote instead of Ulysses; who spoke
of caribou back-fat and not of the lotus, and who had “the sacred
groaning stick” rather than the lyre of Hermes. Their myth-figures, no
demigods of marble perfection, are the coyote, the buzzard, the hare,
the loon, the lizard--in reality the Indian in his nakedness; and their
evil beings are flint people and awesome rolling skulls. Yet they could
see in the stars the light of lodge fires, speak of the rainbow as the
road of the dead, picture the whirlwind as the dance of a ghost, find
a relation between a gust and the flutter of a moth’s wings, trace the
drift of spirits down the wind, and catch on the throat of the humming
bird a gleam of the fire it stole in a Promethean adventure. No weary
Titan upholds the Indian sky, but in Tlingit story an old woman stands
under the earth with a mighty post and supports it.

Shape-shifting is at the basis of North American myth, and the
substantial identity of men and animals is proclaimed by it. “Baalam’s
ass,” says Leland, “spoke once for every Christian; every animal spoke
once for the Indian.”

If one marvels how the fabric of fable held together so long alike
in classic and savage lands, one has only to make some change in a
familiar bedtime story told to children. Their protest is instant; they
want the tale as they have heard it. So do men.




Chapter XXV. The Gains of Fable


It has been well for men that they have been citizens of two
worlds--the traditional world and the world of reality. Whatever harm
they have suffered in either has come from but two things. These things
are fear and selfishness, wherein are all the frustrations and all the
cruelties. The rest has been good.

The myths of fear kept men from sailing west and south. Until a few
centuries ago the imaginary terrors of the Atlantic and of the tropics
hid from them the knowledge that men like unto themselves lived in
all parts of the earth, and that the winds would waft them to these
along smooth pathways of the sea. The myths of selfishness--the tales
that maritime nations told of evil things in waters and upon coasts
which they would close to the enterprise of others--wrought the same
mischiefs that greed and falsehood work anywhere. They retarded the
advance of learning, restrained the intercourse of nations, and
recoiled at last on the heads of those who invented them.

The gains of fable are writ large in the history of modern exploration.
Error was the guiding star of discovery. A vain fancy was the most
precious cargo of the caravels, as it was the keenest weapon of the
conquistadors. The coasting voyages around Africa into the eastern
world would have been longer deferred if men had known that the Dark
Continent reached so far to the south. The discovery of America was due
to three stupendous mistakes--the belief that Asia stretched thousands
of miles farther eastward than it does; the belief that Japan was
a thousand miles farther from Asia than it is; the belief that the
circumference of the earth was three thousand miles less than its true
dimension. The total of these mistakes was so great that the whole of
the New World lay concealed within it. Had Columbus known that he must
sail due west for nearly twelve thousand miles to reach Cathay, he
would have foregone his enterprise.

Because the Spaniards made marvels the text for launching expeditions
instead of telling or compiling stories, their delusions as to the
Americas of the sixteenth century constitute the strangest chapter of
travel tale. But “he that would bring home the wealth of the Indies
must carry the wealth of the Indies with him”; the illusory expeditions
of Spain had results that were denied to the more pedestrian
adventuring of other nations. One of these led Cabeza de Vaca across
the territory of the United States from Atlantic to Pacific, as early
as 1539. It was not until 1805, in the Lewis and Clark expedition,
that the cooler advance of the Anglo-Saxon matched this feat. In their
search for illusive golden cities the countrymen of the Cid explored
the mountains and savannas of South America, the American Southwest,
and even the South Seas, and did it all so far ahead of the English
and American penetration of the northern continent that the story of
their adventures was an old tale before the Saxon had entered the Great
Plains, or climbed the Great Divide, or dropped down to the Pacific.

Such is the service of dreams. They fire the mind and make the feet of
young men restless. The province of wonder has been to rescue men from
their heaviness. They settle down in one place, and their children and
chattels tie them there, but the nomad in them droops within unchanging
horizons and sickens down in dullness. No report of other lands like
their own and other peoples like themselves will arouse them. They want
to hear of marvels, and every tale of them is a pleasant tale even if
it is of one-eyed cannibal giants, or malignant dwarfs, or headless
men, or the storm-winged roc, or the Swallower of the West. At least
it opens new vistas, and peoples them with creatures such as cannot be
seen at home. So it was that William of Wykeham instructed the scholars
of New College, Oxford, to occupy the long winter evenings in the
Middle Ages with “singing, or reciting poetry, or with the chronicles
of the different kingdoms, or with the wonders of the world.”

The spirit that leads men to seek distant markets, or dig for gold in
mines, or search for raw materials on the other side of the earth, is
modern, and still only a few have it. Through most of the story of man
it has seemed a better thing to hunt for hidden treasure, to seek for
the Golden Fleece or a golden city, to set out for the Terrestrial
Paradise, to win to the back of the north wind. Even now, report that a
prehistoric monster haunts a lake in Patagonia, or that an expedition
will hunt pirate gold on an island of the Pacific, stirs pulses
that would not respond to the news that a great coal field had been
uncovered in Alaska or China.

Imagination and curiosity, whence have come most of the travel tales,
have builded where building was needed to fill in empty places whereon
men refused to rear the structures of reality, or to replace what
they tore down. In their passages from age to age and in their long
migrations, men have been constantly forgetting things, carrying over
long stretches of the sea such memorials of the heliolithic culture as
a particular process of mummification, but not the arts and sciences
that had gone with it. They have discovered lands only to lose track
of them. Authentic notes of distant countries and customs they would
not credit; there has been ignorant incredulity as well as ignorant
credulity. The true things in geography to which men have shut their
eyes are no more than countervailed by the vain things they thought
they saw. The tales of afternoon lands and the singular peoples of
the mountains and deserts widen, if only with the shifting contours
of legend, horizons which had been narrowed by forgetfulness and a
perverse refusal to believe.

Nor have even these tales been enough to satisfy with their close
likeness to realities. Men have played with the thought of other
countries above the clouds or in far-off seas, imagining things which
none was expected to believe, and yet which copyists repeated and
literal-minded men accepted sometimes as having basis of fact. Such
are Plato’s Republic, More’s Utopia, Campanella’s City of the Sun.
Aristophanes pictured a Cloud-Cuckoo Town, which the birds built
between earth and heaven to bring the gods to terms, and filled it
with the trillings and pipings of feathered creatures. The satirist
who wrote of Lilliput, Brobdingnag and Laputa had read Lucian’s _True
History_. In Ariosto’s Limbo of the Moon were stored such treasures as
time misspent in play, vain efforts, good intentions, unpaid vows, the
promises of princes, and deathbed alms.

Three of these imaginary countries were sketched with such fidelity to
detail, poetic or grotesque, that they lived in the thought of men
with almost a sense of the actual. Scobellum was a fruitful land, the
people of which went beyond the cannibals in cruelty, the Egyptians in
luxury, the Persians in pride, the Cretans in falsehood, the Germans in
drunken license. Whereupon the gods turned the drunkards into swine,
the lecherers into goats, the gamblers into asses, the idle women
into milch cows, and the misers into moles. The Land of Cockaigne was
a country of luxury and high feeding where the houses were built of
barley sugar and the streets were paved with pastry and goods were free
in the shops. Fiddler’s Green is a place where always the fiddlers are
fiddling and the pipers piping, and the dancers dancing; it lies on the
other side of hell.

Travel tales that purport to be true have a way of rebuking unbelief
with their half triumphs. Noting only the impossible items in a
tradition, learned skepticism has opened itself to discomfiture by
rejecting the whole. The two outstanding figures of fable, the pygmy
and the Amazon, point the moral. In the more grotesque forms may be
found notes on forgotten history and on palæontology. Those tales for
which no basis of fact can be discerned are yet projections of the
minds of primitive men on the clouds, seen after the men themselves
have dropped below the horizon, like the red in the sky after sunset.
At least their colors illumine the manuscript of antiquity and the rude
scroll of savagery.

Though fantastic fables were bred thereof, it has been loss and not
gain that the old sense of kinship with the fowls of the air and the
beasts of the field is no more. There were compassions and tolerances
in this imagined relation, with just a hint of deep insight. Before the
brotherhood of man became so much as a phrase, the brotherhood of all
created things was a fact. Killing for the mere stupid sake of killing
had no place in a world in which men believed that the first men were
ants; in which they made the hare, the coyote, and the raven heroic
figures of their epics; in which they celebrated the piety of the oryx,
the elephant, and the llama; in which they acclaimed the strength of
the lion, the keen sight of the eagle, and the sagacity of the fox,
and in which they spared the bear, the deer, and the parrot because
it seemed to them that these were ancestral folk. Were these savages
farther from the truth than men of the present day whose interest is
not in the lives but in the deaths of beasts, and who rob the woods and
fields of half their beauty and significance by their senseless pursuit
of the pathetic, defenseless, and yet kindred beings that harbor there?
“My sister the swallow” is the chant of St. Francis. In a better time
when wild life will be cherished and not hunted, it will be remembered
that the dawn-peoples had a vision which was not all vanity.

The world of reality wears a rich garb that was woven for it by the
world of tradition ages ago. Shifting lands of legend have become solid
ground. There was no island of Brasil, but the country of Brazil bears
its name. There was perhaps no Antilia, domain of the Seven Bishops,
but the Antilles stretch their veritable ramparts across the Caribbean.
The Amazons are commemorated by the earth’s greatest river. There are
beasts and birds which perpetuate the names of the dragon, the harpy,
the sea horse, the unicorn, the satyr. The pity of the pelican lives
in Christian symbolism. The wisdom of the brute runs through Æsopian
fables and mediæval bestiaries. The creatures of classic prodigy--the
griffins, the phœnix, the dragon--animate the blazons of heraldry.
The ideal lands and marvelous peoples of ancient story lend a strange
beauty to the romances of chivalry. Half of the appeal of cathedrals is
in the monstrous figures--bestial, grotesque, devilish--which proclaim
from their roofs and buttresses and sculptured walls a paradox which
is no paradox at all, that the sanctuaries of the spirit are set among
the perilous ways of the world. The old credulities are enshrined in
the language of every people, in the imagery of the arts, and in the
bedtime tales that follow the settings of the sun from station to
station around the earth.

These things have spoken neither the last nor the greatest word they
are to utter. The fruitful use of the collections of savage myth and
peasant lore is yet to come, when classic legend will take its place as
but a chapter in the volume of fantasy. What will be revealed therein
is the mind of man in the presence of the spectacle of beauty and
terror which is the world. Here the themes of poetry, painting, and
the plastic arts await a new treatment. Not so much the councils of
the gods, the myths of creation and of natural forces, as the simpler
travel tales that are close to the soil will be drawn upon. Olympus
towers afar with its divinities. Nearer to the earth, for example, is
the mountain of San Francisco in Arizona, which the Navahos say was
“bound with a sunbeam, decked with haliotis shell, clouds, he-rain,
yellow maize, and animals, nested with eggs of the yellow warbler,
spread with yellow cloud and made the home of White-Corn Boy and
Yellow-Corn Girl.” However high their spirit soars, men’s feet are
on the ground. If it is the limitation of their nature it is the
liberation of their art that their interest is more in quests of the
Terrestrial Paradise than in myths of things unearthly.

It was the first belief of man that with a thought he could change
the outer world. What was it, indeed, but the projection of his
own soul--the demons that were his evil thoughts, “the savage and
voluptuous beasts that were the emblems of his folly,” the ideal lands
that were the dawn and afterglow of his own days? The beginning of art
was magic, alike in the chants of rainmakers, the cave paintings of the
Dordogne, and the sculptures of Egypt; and magic is its end. Still may
the artist soul of man fashion its own realities.

While he builds the pleasant marvels of his yesterdays into habitations
of fancy, he will rear other structures of the like insubstantial stuff
and deem them the abiding places of reality. The shows of nature are
a pageant through which man moves in a dream of his own making. The
piling and passing of the clouds, the fog’s oblivion, the sunset, the
night and the stars, work their spells about him, masking, concealing,
revealing. With the harmless revel of fireflies in the dew and dusk,
fairy locks unbolt for him. He cannot look upon life save as a drama or
an allegory, with the earth as the stage and the sky for its hangings.
By the law of his being he must be maker of myths.

Only a divine animal could question what was behind the hills, win the
vision of unconjectured oceans, hear the note of eternity in the sound
of running water, and, flashing into a brief ecstasy, sink back again
with the cry of Eheu Fugaces. The brute-gods of his myths, are they
not man himself with his animal routine and his divine moments? When
he crosses the barrier of dreams, when he sits at the gates of memory,
when contemplation holds him motionless “like a flame in a windless
spot,” in his Dionysian intoxications, in the very dances wherein he
merges the god and the brute, he creates worlds that ensphere his every
mood. The Iranian who calls the abode of the blest the House of Song,
and the Mongol whose official scrolls speak of the continents as the
Golden Surface have made a new heaven and a new earth.

It is not given man to envisage reality. His is the greater gift to
brood over Chaos and shape it as he will.




Bibliography


In preparing this book the works most frequently consulted have been
Pliny’s _Natural History_, Browne’s _Enquiries into Vulgar and Common
Errors_, Beazley’s _Dawn of Modern Geography_, Frazer’s _Golden Bough_,
Tylor’s _Primitive Culture_, Hakluyt’s _Principal Voyages of the
English Nation_, and Pinkerton’s _Collection of Voyages and Travels_.
Both the Hakluyt and Pinkerton collections are libraries in themselves,
each with some hundreds of titles, and the travel narratives they
contain will not be separately listed here.

Following are the main sources drawn upon for the materials of this
study:

 ABERCROMBY, JOHN. _The Pre- and Proto-historic Finns._

 AELIAN. _De Natura Animalium._

 ADAMS, CYRUS C. “The Sargasso Sea,” in _Harper’s Monthly_ for 1907.

 ALBERTUS MAGNUS. _Egyptian Secrets._

 ALDROVANDI. _Opera Omnia._

 ALLEN, PAUL. _History of the Lewis and Clark Expedition._

 ALEXANDER, HARTLEY BURR. _North American Mythology_; _Latin-American
 Mythology_.

 “ARABIAN NIGHTS.” Burton Edition.

 ANUTSCHIN. Interpretation of old Russian manuscript on “_The Unknown
 Peoples of the East_,” translated by Dr. H. Mirchow in proceedings of
 the Anthropological Society of Vienna, 1910.


 BABCOCK, WILLIAM H. _Legendary Islands of the Atlantic_; “Atlantis and
 Antillia,” in _Geographic Review_ for 1917.

 BALCH, EDWIN SWIFT. “Atlantis, or Minoan Crete,” in _Geographic
 Review_ for 1917.

 BANDELIER, A. F. _The Gilded Man._

 BATES, HENRY WALTER. _The Naturalist on the River Amazons._

 BEAZLEY, C. RAYMOND. _The Dawn of Modern Geography._

 BEDDARD, FRANK EVARS. _A Book of Whales._

 BINGHAM, HIRAM. _Across South America._

 “BLACKWOOD’S MAGAZINE” for 1904. “Heraldry.”

 BOTCHKAREVA, MARIA. _Yashka; My Life as Peasant, Officer and Exile._

 BRADLEY, HENRY. _Ptolemy’s Geography of the British Isles._

 BREHAUT, ERNEST. _An Encyclopedist of the Dark Ages; Isidore of
 Seville._

 BREWER, E. COBHAM. _Dictionary of Phrase and Fable._

 BROOKS, NOAH. _First Across the Continent._

 BROWNE, SIR THOMAS. _Enquiries into Vulgar and Common Errors._

 BUDDHIST _Records of the Western World_. Truebner’s Oriental Series.

 BUFFON, GEORGE LOUIS L. _Natural History._

 BULFINCH, THOMAS. _Legends of Charlemagne_; _The Age of Fable_.

 BUNBURY, E. H. _History of Ancient Geography._

 BURTON, SIR RICHARD F. _A Mission to Gélélé, King of Dahome._

 BURCKHARDT, JOHN LEWIS. _Travels in Arabia._


 CARLYLE, THOMAS. _The French Revolution._

 CARNOY, ALBERT J. _Iranian Mythology._

 CAXTON, WILLIAM. _History of Reynard the Fox._

 CHAMBERLAIN, ALEXANDER F. “Recent Literature on the South American
 Amazons,” in _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, 1911.

 CHAMBERS, W. & R. _The Book of Days._

 “CHAMBERS JOURNAL,” for 1844. “The Dwarf Nation Idea.”

 CHARNAY, DÉSIRÉ. _The Ancient Cities of the New World._

 CHURCHWARD, ALBERT. _The Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man._

 COOK, CAPTAIN JAMES. _Voyages of Discovery._

 CORONADO. _His Journey as Told by Himself and His Followers_,
 translated by George Parker Winship.

 COX, SIR GEORGE W. _An Introduction to the Science of Comparative
 Mythology and Folklore._

 CTESIAS, _Indika_. Translation by John W. McCrindle.

 CUVIER, GEORGES. _Animal Kingdom._


 DALTON, LEONARD D. _Venezuela._

 DIODORUS SICULUS. _The Historical Library._

 DISRAELI, ISAAC. _Curiosities of Literature._

 DIXON, ROLAND B. _Oceanic Mythology._

 DONNELLY, IGNATIUS. _Atlantis: The Antediluvian World._

 DOUGHTY, CHARLES M. _Travels in Arabia Deserta._


 “ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA.” _Ninth and eleventh editions._

 “ENCYCLOPEDIA OF RELIGION AND ETHICS.”

 EVANS, E. P. _Animal Symbolism in Ecclesiastical Architecture_; _The
 Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals._


 FISHER, RUTH B. _On the Borders of Pigmy Land._

 FISKE, JOHN. _Myths and Myth Makers._

 FOUQUÉ, DE LA MOTTE. _Undine._

 FOX, WILLIAM SHERWOOD. _Greek and Roman Mythology._

 FRANCE, ANATOLE. _Penguin Island._

 FRAZER, J. G. _The Golden Bough; Folk-Lore in the Old Testament._

 FREUD, SIGMUND. _Totem and Taboo._


 “GEOGRAPHICAL REVIEW” for 1917. “Proposed Expedition to New Guinea.”

 GERINI, COL. G. E. _Researches on Ptolemy’s Geography of Eastern Asia._

 GESNER, KONRAD. _History of Animals._

 GOULD, CHARLES. _Mythical Monsters._

 GOULD, S. BARING. _Curious Myths of the Middle Ages._

 GRAY, LOUIS HERBERT. _North American Mythology._

 GRIBBLE, FRANCIS. _The Early Mountaineers._

 GROOME, FRANCIS H. _Gipsy Folk-Tales._

 GROTE, GEORGE. _History of Greece._

 GUERBER, H. A. _Myths and Legends of the Middle Ages._

 GUILLIM, JOHN. _A Display of Heraldry._


 HAKLUYT, RICHARD. _Principal Voyages of the English Nation._

 “HARPER’S BOOK OF FACTS.”

 HARRISON, J. E. “Satyrs” and “Silenoi,” in _Encyclopedia of Religion
 and Ethics_, vol. xi.

 HEDIN, SVEN. _Through Asia_; _Central Asia_.

 HERODOTUS. _History._

 HOMER. _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_, Pope’s Translation.

 HUGO, VICTOR. _Notre Dame de Paris._

 HUMBOLDT, ALEXANDER VON. _Personal Narrative of Travels to the
 Equinoctial Regions of America_; _Views of Nature_; _Researches
 Concerning the Institutions and Monuments of the Ancient Inhabitants
 of America_.

 HYAMSON, ALBERT H. “Sambatyon,” in _Encyclopedia of Religion and
 Ethics_, vol. xi.


 IBANEZ, V. BLASCO. _Mexico in Revolution._

 IRVING, WASHINGTON. _Tour of the Prairies_; _Life and Voyages of
 Christopher Columbus_; _Voyages and Discoveries of Companions of
 Columbus_.


 JACOBS, JOSEPH. _The Story of Geographical Discovery._

 JOHNSTON, SIR HARRY H. _British Central Africa._

 JOSEPHUS. _Antiquities of the Jews_.

 JOHNSON, WILLIAM HENRY. _The World’s Discoverers._

 “JOURNAL OF AMERICAN FOLK-LORE,” 1901 to date.

 JOYCE, THOMAS A. _Mexican Archæology._


 KEANE, JOHN. _The Evolution of Geography._

 KEANE, A. H. _The Gold of Ophir_; _Man, Past and Present_.

 KEITH, A. BERRIEDALE. _Indian Mythology._

 KINGSLEY, CHARLES. _The Hermits._

 KNAPP, PHILIP COOMBS. “Crete and Atlantis,” in _Geographic Review_ for
 1919.


 LANDRIN, M. ARMAND. _Les Monstres Marins._

 LANG, ANDREW. _Custom and Myth_; _Modern Mythology._

 LANKESTER, E. RAY. _Secrets of Earth and Sea._

 LAUFER, BERTHOLD. “The Story of the Pinna and the Syrian Lamb,”
 _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, 1915.

 LELAND, CHARLES G. _The Algonquin Legends of New England._

 LIVINGSTONE, DAVID. _Missionary Travels and Researches in South
 Africa._

 LOWER, MARK ANTONY. _The Curiosities of Heraldry._

 LUCIAN. _The True History._

 LUQUET, G. H. “Human Figures in Paleolithic Art,” _L’Anthropologie_,
 1910.


 “MABINOGION.” Translation by Lady Charlotte Guest.

 MACHAL, JAN. _Slavic Mythology._

 MAHAFFY, ARTHUR. “The Solomon Islands,” in _Empire Review_ for 1902.

 MAJOR, RICHARD HENRY. _Discoveries of Prince Henry the Navigator and
 their Results._

 MCCRINDLE, JOHN W. _The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great, as
 described by Arrian, Rufius, Diodorus and Plutarch._

 MCCULLOCH, JOHN A. “Celtic Mythology”; “Abodes of the Blest,” in
 _Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics_, vol. i: “Monsters,” in vol.
 viii.

 MACIVER, D. RANDALL. _The Ancient Races of the Thebaid._

 MACRITCHIE, DAVID. “Dwarfs and Pygmies,” in _Encyclopedia of Religion
 and Ethics_, vol. 1.; “Giants,” in vol. vi.

 MARIE DE FRANCE. _Lays._ Translation by Eugene Mason.

 MAUNDEVILLE, SIR JOHN. _Marvelous Adventures_, edited by Arthur Layard.

 MENDANA, ALVARO DE. _The Discovery of the Solomon Islands_, Hakluyt
 Publications.

 MERRIAM, C. HART. _The Dawn of the World._

 MILLINGTON, ELLEN J. _Heraldry in History, Poetry, and Romance._

 MILLINGTON, W. H. (and BERTON L. MAXFIELD). “Philippine
 Superstitions,” in _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, 1906.

 MORTIMER, W. GOLDEN. _History of Coca._

 MÜLLER, F. MAX. _Contributions to the Science of Mythology_;
 _Comparative Mythology._

 MÜLLER, W. MAX. _Egyptian Mythology._

 MURGER, HENRI. _Scènes de la Vie de Bohème._


 PIGAFETTA, ANTONIO. _Magellan’s Voyage Around the World_, edited by
 James Alexander Robertson.

 PINKERTON, JOHN. _Collection of Voyages and Travels._

 PLINY. _Natural History._ Bohm’s Classical Library.

 PLUTARCH. _Parallel Lives._

 POLO, MARCO. _Travels._

 PONTOPPIDAN, RT. REV. ERIK. _The Natural History of Norway._

 POWELL, TALCOTT. “Lumberjack Legends,” _New York Herald-Tribune_, 1924.

 PRESCOTT, WILLIAM H. _Conquest of Mexico_; _History of the Conquest of
 Peru_.

 PURCHAS, SAMUEL. _Purchas, his Pilgrims._

 PHYFE, WILLIAM HENRY P. _Five Thousand Facts and Fancies._


 QUATREFAGES, A. D. _The Pygmies._

 QUINN, DANIEL. “In Arkadia,” in _Catholic University Bulletin_ for
 1900.


 RECLUS, ELISÉE. _The Earth and Its Inhabitants._

 REDDALL, HENRY FREDERIC. _Fact, Fancy, and Fable._

 REDWAY, JACQUES W. _The New Basis of Geography._

 REICH, EMIL. _Woman Through the Ages._

 REID, MAYNE. _Odd People._

 ROTHERY, GUY CADOGAN. _The Amazons in Antiquity and Modern Times_; _A
 B C of Heraldry_.


 ST. JOHN. _The Lives of Celebrated Travellers._

 SAWYER, FREDERIC H. _The Inhabitants of the Philippines._

 SAYCE, ARCHIBALD HENRY. _The Hittites._

 SCHOOLCRAFT, HENRY R. _The Indian Tribes._

 SCHMITZ, LEONHARD. _A Manual of Ancient Geography._

 SCHUCHERT, CHARLES. “Atlantis the Lost Continent,” in _Geographical
 Review_ for 1917.

 SCHULLER, RUDOLPH. “Atlantis the Lost Continent,” in _Geographical
 Review_ for 1917.

 “SCOTTISH GEOGRAPHICAL MAGAZINE” for 1902. _The Discovery of the
 Solomon Islands._

 SIDNEY, SIR PHILIP. _Arcadia._

 SMITH, GRAFTON ELLIOT. _The Migrations of Early Culture_; _The
 Evolution of the Dragon_.

 SMITH, J. RUSSELL. _The World’s Food Resources._

 SMITH, WILLIAM. _Dictionary of Ancient Geography._

 SOLINUS. _Collecteanea._

 SPENCE, LEWIS. _An Introduction to Mythology_; “Atlantis and the Maya
 Civilization,” in _Occult Review_ for 1921; “Traces of Atlantis in
 American Myth,” in _Occult Review_ for 1920.

 “STANDARD ILLUSTRATED BOOK OF FACTS.”

 STANFORD’S _Compendium of Geography and Travel._

 STANLEY, HENRY M. _Through the Dark Continent._

 STRABO. _Geography_, in Bohm’s Classical Library.

 SULLIVAN, LOUIS R. “The Pygmy Races of Man,” in _Journal of the
 American Museum of Natural History_ for 1919.

 SWEET, WILLIAM WARREN. _A History of Latin America._

 SWIFT, JONATHAN. _Gulliver’s Travels._

 SYNGE, M. B. _A Book of Discovery._


 TEIT, J. A. “Water Beings in Shetlandic Folk-Lore,” in _Journal of
 American Folk-Lore_, 1918.

 TERMIER, PIERRE. “Atlantis,” in _Annual Report of the Smithsonian
 Institute_ for 1915.

 THOMAS, CYRUS. “Quivera--A Suggestion,” in _Magazine of American
 History_ for 1883.

 THOMAS, NORTHCOTE W. “Animals,” in _Encyclopedia of Religion and
 Ethics_, vol. i.

 TOZER, H. F. _History of Ancient Geography._

 TYLOR, SIR EDWARD BURNET. _Researches into the Early History of
 Mankind and the Development of Civilization_; _Primitive Culture_.


 VAN LOON, HENDRICK WILLEM. _The Golden Book of the Dutch Navigators._

 VERY, BARON DE SANTA-ANNA. _The Land of the Amazons._


 WALLIS, W. D. “Prodigies and Portents,” in _Encyclopedia of Religion
 and Ethics_, vol. x.

 WALSH, WILLIAM S. _Curiosities of Popular Customs_; _Handy Book of
 Curious Information_.

 “WARNER’S LIBRARY OF THE WORLD’S BEST LITERATURE.”

 WEIGALL, ARTHUR E. P. “A Nubian Highway,” in _Blackwood’s Magazine_
 for 1907.

 WELLS, H. G. _The Outline of History._

 WESTROPP, THOMAS J. “Brasil and the Legendary Atlantic Islands,” in
 _Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy_ for 1912.

 WHEELER, WILLIAM A. _Familiar Allusions._

 WIENER, LEO. _Africa and the Discovery of America._

 WILLIAMS, ARCHIBALD. _The Romance of Early Exploration._

 WILLIAMS, HENRY S. _The Historians’ History of the World._


 XENOPHON. _Anabasis._


 ZAHM, J. A. _Along the Andes and Down the Amazon_; _The Quest of
 Eldorado_; _Up the Orinoco and Down the Magdalena_; _Through South
 America’s Southland_.




Index


  A

  Aaf Mountains, 207

  Abarimon, 114

  Abbadie, 130

  Abchaz, 220

  Abdallah of the Land, 3

  Abdallah of the Sea, 3

  Aberdeen Almanac, 102

  Abodes of the Blest, 257-261, 262, 336-337

  Abomey, 180, 183, 188

  Absalom, 188

  _Abu baraquish_, 60

  Abul Abbas, 61

  Abulfeda, 362

  Abyssinia, 38, 54, 74, 75, 76, 130, 178, 239

  _Academy of Armory_, 66

  Acephalites, 109, 346, 349, 368, 372

  Acheron River, 262

  Achilles, 152, 153

  Acoloro, island of, 158

  Acoma, 323

  “Acorn-eaters,” 247

  Acridophagi, 198-199

  Acroconopes, the, 103

  Actæon, 28

  Actium, 97

  Adam assayed, 357

  Adam of Bremen, 160, 268, 335

  Adam’s footprint, 8

  Adam’s Peak, 8

  Addison, Launcelot, 42

  Aden, 267;
    Gulf of, 233

  Adriatic Sea, 249

  Ægean Sea, 186, 187

  Ægipans, 206

  Ælian, 39, 53, 55, 56, 81, 96, 123, 286, 350

  Æneas, 76

  _Æneid_, 75

  Æschylus, 96, 194, 202, 207

  Æsculapius, 84

  Æsop’s fables, 375

  Ætas, the, 137, 148

  Æthicus of Istria, 138

  _Æthiopica_ of Marcellus, 286

  _Æthiopis_, 152

  Afer, Dionysius, 8

  Afghans, 353, 359

  Africa, 2, 49, 78, 105, 122, 125, 134, 143, 145, 147, 153, 196, 199,
          206, 207, 211, 263, 270, 351, 364

  Africa’s warrior women, 178-184

  Age of Fable, 348

  Agate, 24

  Agatharcides, 199, 353

  Age of Ignorance, 362

  Agira, 163

  Agostina, 174

  Agriophagi, 199

  Aguirre, 304

  Ahacus, 320

  Aigamuxa, 115

  Aigiarm, 170

  Aikeambenanos, 166

  Ajasson, 90

  Akbar, 237

  Akkas, the, 132, 144, 145, 147, 149

  Alabama, 319

  Aladdin, 72, 73, 218

  Alani, the, 193

  Alarcon, 321

  Albany, land of, 194

  Albatross, 74

  Albertus Magnus, 140, 350

  Albinos, 193-194

  Alciphron, 60

  Aldrovandi, 79, 140, 212

  Aleutian Islands, 106, 255, 360

  Alexander, 19, 63, 81, 91, 232, 235, 236, 237, 259, 353

  Alexandria, 223, 353, 354

  Algonquins, 81, 118, 119, 303, 369

  Al Istakhri, 362

  Aljahedh, 362

  Allerion, 66

  Alligator god, 338

  Alps, the, 80, 191, 203

  Altai Mountains, 55, 117

  Alton, 80

  Alvarado, 323, 324

  Alvares, Father, 178

  Amazons, 2, 84, 118, 151-189, 207, 237, 362, 365, 368, 369, 375

  Amazon march, 177

  Amazon stone, 24

  Amazons, River of the, 161, 300, 304, 312

  _Amazuni_, 167

  Amber, 105, 201, 229, 264

  Ambergris, 364

  Ambrose, 350

  America, dragon in, 85;
    Lucian’s reference to, 275;
    Plato’s reference to, 287;
    claim that St. Brendan discovered it, 259;
    Chinese Buddhists reached it, 360;
    Norse discovery of, 267;
    discovery of by Columbus, 272-3, 371

  American Bureau of Ethnology, 323

  American Indian myths, 65, 117-120, 368-370

  American Museum of Natural History, 146

  American southwest, Ararats in, 292

  Amerigo Vespucci, 191, 315

  Amethyst, 24

  Amiens, cathedral at, 47

  Ammon, Abbot, 45

  Amoy, 244

  Amycteres, the, 108

  Anahuac, plateau of, 318

  Anamba Islands, 129

  _A’nasa_, 54

  Ancient Mariner, 336

  Andaman Islanders, 106, 147, 148, 365

  Andari, 144

  Andes Mountains, 139, 149, 192, 290, 300, 305, 316, 332

  “Andromeda, a great giant,” 366

  Angola, 102, 125, 179

  Anguilla, 96

  Animal kingdom, 27-48

  Animals, Avenue of, 54

  Animals, criminal trials of, 31

  Animals, their names borne by men, 29;
    taking human form, 29;
    politics of, 42

  Annam, 149, 199

  Annwfir, 260

  Ant, 42, 43, 217, 253, 303, 361;
    gold-guarding, 62-64

  _Antennarius marmoratus_, 279

  Anthropology, 291, 353

  Anthropophagi, 114, 117, 128, 196, 207, 237

  Antichrist, 239

  Antigon, 28

  Antilia, 252, 345, 375

  Antilles, the, 163, 292, 296, 375

  Antiope, 153

  Antipodes, 9-10, 346

  Antoninus, 358

  Antony, Mark, 97, 246

  Anubis, 338

  Anuradhapura, 214

  Anutschin, 115

  Ape, 48, 121, 356

  Aphrodisiacs, 20, 22

  Apollo, 201, 203

  Apple Island, 345

  Apples of Adam, 358

  Apurimac, valley of the, 314

  Arab geography, 269, 362-363

  Arabia, 1, 2, 50, 69, 95, 104, 171, 195, 224, 229, 231, 234, 245,
          358, 365

  _Arabian Nights_, 3, 16, 63, 74, 110, 159, 251, 354

  Arabian Sea, 261

  Araby the Happy, 232

  Arachne, 28

  Arapahoes, the, 139

  Arawaks, the, 292

  Arcadia, 1, 77, 246-248

  Arctic night, 221

  Arctinus, 151, 152

  Ardnainiq, the, 112

  Aretias, island of, 77

  Argensola, 206

  Argonauts, 75, 77

  Argos, 174

  Ariana, 197

  Arimaspians, 55, 107

  Arinadillo, 218

  Ariosto, 373

  Aristeas of Proconesus, 107, 349

  Aristophanes, 285, 373

  Aristotle, 12, 16, 39, 50, 51, 59, 135, 334, 353, 354

  Arjuna, Rajah, 156, 157

  Ark, 87, 292

  Arkansas River, 326

  Armada, the, 306

  Armenia, 60, 100, 113, 151, 171, 185, 195, 238, 258

  Aromatic Cape, 10, 231

  Arngrim, 92

  Arrian, 154, 196, 197, 225

  Artemidorus, 81, 195

  Artemis Stymphalia, 77

  Arthur, King, 64, 256, 259

  Art’s beginning in magic, 376

  Aryan culture, 357

  Asafœtida, 94

  Asesa, 143

  Asia, 1, 2, 109, 135, 136, 148, 196, 211, 212, 213, 267, 351, 364

  Asia Minor, 135, 153, 169, 186, 281, 283, 365

  Ass, 46, 48, 122, 338, 361, 374;
    Feast of the, 48;
    Baalam’s, 370

  Ass-bittern, 67

  Assuan, 143

  Assyria, 56, 66, 169

  Astarte, 186, 187

  Astolpho, home of, 76

  Astomi, the, 107-108

  Astrakhan, 237

  Astronomy, Maya, 293, 294

  Asuang, 111

  Asuncion, 300, 311

  Aswamedha quest, 156, 157

  Atahnallpa, Inca, 313, 333

  Atbara River, 199

  Athenæus, 350

  Athens, 83, 281, 286

  Athos, Mount, 193

  Atlantes, 194

  Atlantic Ocean, 1, 104, 252, 256, 261, 262-273, 277, 278, 287,
                  289, 291

  Atlantis, 1, 252, 254, 255, 266, 274, 276, 277, 278, 280, 281-297, 369

  _Atlantis: The Antediluvian World_, 288

  Atlas Mountains, 140, 206, 264, 282, 290

  Atrato River, 331

  Attica, 122, 152, 153, 154

  _Attic Nights_, 349

  Augustus, 90, 96, 236

  Aurochs, 55

  Aurungzebe, 170

  “Austin the monk,” 128

  Australia, 11, 255, 328, 329

  Autolycus, 249

  Avalon, isle of, 259, 345

  Avernus, lake of, 262

  Ayamanes, 139

  Azerbaijan, 337

  Azores, the, 12-13, 255, 271, 275, 277, 280, 287, 288, 289, 290

  Azov, Sea of, 154, 156, 358

  Aztecs, 189, 204, 292, 338


  B

  Baalam, 53

  Baalim, 185

  Baboons, fear of, 126

  Babylon, 122, 204, 238, 260, 358

  Babylonia, 85, 87

  Bacchus, 203

  Bactrians, 55

  Badger’s legs, 44

  Bagdad, 362

  Bagrada River, 37

  Bahama Islands, 278, 314

  Bailey, 128

  Baker, Sir Samuel, 36, 135

  Ba-Kwamba tribe, 130

  Balasses, 244

  Balboa, 76, 330, 331-332

  Balm of Gilead, 230

  Baltic Sea, 100, 114, 151, 160, 254

  _Bamboo Books_, 71

  Bancroft, 307

  Banda, 206

  Bandelier, 322, 326

  Bangkok, 177

  Banshee, 99

  Bantam, 177, 184

  Bantu, the, 149

  Barbarism defined, 357

  Barbarossa, Frederick, 220

  Barcelona, 174

  Barentz, 41

  Barns of Joseph, 358

  Basil, 20, 350

  Basilisk, 2, 78

  Bassorah, Hassan el, 159

  Bastards of the Kalahari Desert, 146

  Bat, 76, 77, 217, 245, 331, 340, 344

  Bates, 75, 76, 126

  Battalion of Death, 154, 156, 174-177

  Batu, 106

  Batwas, the, 145

  Baurded, Treasurer, 143

  Bears, 43, 65, 118, 128, 374;
    as men bewitched, 29

  Beasts, fabulous, 49-67

  Beasts of Revelation, 65

  Beazley, 363

  Becket, Thomas à, 128

  Bede, 6

  Bedouins, 365

  Bedtime stories, 370, 375

  Bee, 44

  Beelzebub, the fly god, 30

  Beetle, 217, 218, 303

  Beeton, 193

  Behrs, the, 184

  Belalcazar, 299, 301

  Bellerophon, 152

  Belloc, 216

  Belzoni, 18

  Benjamin of Tudela, 108, 238, 243, 358

  Bennu, 70

  Benzom, gum, 230

  Berber rock-towns, 195

  Bermuda Islands, 101, 278, 288

  Bernier, 170

  Bertinoro, 17

  Beryl, 25

  Bes, 150

  Bestiaries, 46, 375

  Bezoar, 24, 38

  Bible, 83, 86, 122, 185, 192, 213, 338

  Bibliography, 378-383

  Bielovodye, 222

  Big-footed men, 2

  Billdad, 66

  Bimini, 314, 315

  Bird of paradise, 43

  Birds, 373

  Birthstone, 24

  Bishop-fish, 100

  Black River, 136

  Black Sea, 135, 151, 153, 187, 268

  Black Side of Cathedral, 204

  “Black Virgin,” 171

  Bladder as sky, 119

  “Blameless” peoples, 203

  Brazil, 95, 123, 126, 188, 193, 218, 299, 375

  Blefkens, 133

  Blemmyes, the, 109

  Blessed Islands, 258-261, 262

  Bloodstone, 24

  Blue-land, 268

  Boadicea, 169

  Boccias Islands, 102

  Bogaz Keni, 186

  Bogota, 301, 304

  Bohemia, 171, 248-250

  Bokhara, 240

  Bolivia, 294, 299, 311

  Bongo tribe, 129

  _Book of the Cities and Marvels of Countries_, 362

  _Book of Climates_, 362

  _Book of Diversities_, 363

  _Book of Roads and Kingdoms_, 362

  Books, virtue in all, 354

  Borneo, 94, 129, 158, 159, 335

  Bororo Indians, 27

  Bosman, 179

  Bossewell, 66

  Boston Linnæan Society, 94

  _Botanic Garden_, 58

  Botchkareva, Maria, 156, 174-177

  Bothnia, Gulf of, 93

  Bo-tree, Sacred, 216

  Bottle-imps, 22

  Bouchey, Margaret, 23

  Bougainville, 138, 329

  Boundary between Old and New World, 277

  Bounteous Isle, 253

  Bourbourg, Abbé Brasseur de, 293

  Bourgogne, Jean de, 365, 367

  Boys, maiming of, 172

  Bradamante, 172

  Bragman, isle of, 260

  Brahma, 205, 338

  Bran, 89

  Breadfruit, 260

  Breezes, generative, 50

  Brest, 289

  Brhaspati, 338

  Bridge of tortoises, 359

  Bridinno, dwarf land of, 138

  Britannus, 344

  British Columbia, 360

  British Isles, 9, 203, 254, 263, 264, 274, 290, 296, 351

  Brittany, 256

  Brobdingnag, 373

  Bronze Age, 294

  Browne, Sir Thomas, 23, 39, 44, 53, 69, 78, 99, 140, 334, 350

  Bruce, 71

  Brundusium, 349

  Brushwood Town, 128

  Brusilov, 175

  Brynhild, 79

  Buache, 369

  Bucephali, 103

  Buchanan, 125

  Buddha, 215, 361

  Buddhism, 188, 240, 261, 360

  Buenos Aires, 311

  Buffalo, 6, 318, 319, 323, 324, 325;
    Caffrarian, 56

  Buffon, 33, 35, 43, 77, 111, 140, 141, 192, 350

  Bull, 81, 338, 342, 367

  Bulotu, 260

  Bunyan, 262, 367

  Bunyan, Paul, 66

  Bunyip, 95

  Buried cities, 213-215

  Burma, 269, 293, 364

  Burrowing creatures, 218

  Burton, Lady, 180

  Burton, Sir Richard, 159, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183

  Busbequins, 63

  Bushmen, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 227

  Bustard, 210

  Butterfly, 344

  Buzzard, 370

  Byssus silk, 59

  Byzantium, 361


  C

  Cabeza, de Vaca, 319, 372

  Cabul, 62

  Cadiz, 224, 306, 308

  Cæsaristas, the, 317

  Cæsars of South America, 317

  Calabash, 159, 321, 361

  Caldilhe, 58

  Caliban, 104

  California Indians, 8

  California, island of, 158

  California, State of, 127, 283, 360

  Callao, 328

  Calypso, 354

  Cambodia, 195, 269

  Cambyses, 15

  Camel, 42, 50, 62, 63, 81, 210, 232, 361;
    flying, 358

  Cametennus, 361

  Campanella, 373

  Camulatz, the bird, 293

  Canada, 290

  Canary Islands, 258, 265, 270, 287, 290, 345, 359

  Canelas, 300, 301

  Cape Bojador, 272

  Cape Cod, 289

  Cape of Good Hope, 270, 278

  Cape Guardafui, 10, 156, 231

  Cape Hatteras, 288

  Cape Santa Elena, 192

  Cape of Spices, 231

  Cape Verde Islands, 287, 289, 290

  Cappadocia, 185, 186, 195

  Capricorn, 67

  Caqueta River, 302, 303

  Carbuncle, 24

  Carchemish, 185

  Cardan, 140

  Cardinal Points, 203-205

  Caribbean Sea, 160, 290, 291, 296, 299, 300, 369

  Carib, island of, 160

  Caribs, the, 166, 217, 291, 292

  Caribou, 29

  Carlyle, 172

  Caroline Islands, 158

  Caroni River, 305, 311

  Carp, 81

  Carpini, 104, 106, 113, 194, 258

  Cartagena, 330

  Carteret, 329

  Carthage, 123, 263, 264, 271, 274

  Cartooning humanity, 103

  Caspian Sea, 237

  Cassia, 231, 233, 234, 243

  Cassiquiare River, 304

  Cassiterides, the, 263

  Castaneda, 322

  Castelnau, 125, 130

  Castor, 94

  Cat, 253, 338

  Cataclysm in New World myth, 292, 294

  Catalan map, 90, 160

  Cat-fish, 6, 67

  Cathay, 106, 113, 222, 240, 312, 365

  Cathedrals, animal symbolism in, 46-48, 375

  Catoblepas, 36

  Caucasus Mountains, 72, 114, 153, 171, 193, 194, 195, 207, 235, 237

  Cave drawings, 340

  Celtic glamour, 256, 348

  Celts, 83, 367

  Central America, 77, 291-294, 297

  Celebes, 242

  Cellar strain in human nature, 217

  Cellini, Benvenuto, 38

  Centaur, 66, 114, 361

  Central point of earth, 7

  Cephalopod, 95

  Cercopes, the, 125

  Cerne, 275

  Ceylon, 42, 157, 160, 258, 363

  Chalcedony, 25

  Chaldea, 98, 159, 366

  Chambers’ _Journal_, 142

  Chameleon, 366

  Chamlakhu, 127

  Chains of Indo-China, 31

  Chao Fu-Kua, 137

  Chaos, 86

  Chardin, 171

  Charia, Isle of, 366

  Charlemagne cycle, 56, 75, 76, 95

  Charles III of Spain, 318

  Charles V of Spain, 317

  Charlevoix, Father, 343

  Charon’s ferry, 262

  Chassenée as rat advocate, 31

  Chatan, pygmy city of, 138

  Chelonophagi, the, 96, 198

  Chenoos, the, 119

  Cherokees, the, 217

  Chestnuts, 283

  Chiau Yau, 136

  Chibcha Indians, 301, 312

  Chichen Itza, 291

  Childbirth, a means of promoting, 24

  Chilean mythology, 338

  Chimæra, 66

  China, 59, 60, 72, 73, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 113, 137, 147, 203, 218,
         230, 259, 267, 269, 318, 335, 349, 359, 360, 364, 365

  China seas, 74

  Chinese discovery of North America, 360

  _Chinese Encyclopedia_, 57, 107

  Chinese wall, 139, 237

  Chiquitos, the, 139

  Chiriqui Indians, 338

  Choquequirau, 314, 332

  Choromandæ, the, 104

  Chrism, devil’s, 78

  Christ symbolized by unicorn, 53;
    called the phœnix, 69

  Christian fabulists, 356

  Christian pilgrims, 356, 357-358

  Christian symbolism, 375

  _Chronicle of the Cid_, 177

  Chrysolite, 25, 207

  Chrysoprase, 24

  Churchward, 149

  Cibola, 303, 312, 314, 318-323

  Ciconian coast, 228

  Cilician pirates, 265

  Cimarron republics, 165

  Cimbri, the, 3

  Cinnabar, 33

  Cinnamon, 231, 233, 234, 243;
    Land of, 301, 312

  City of Brass, 110

  City of God, 356

  City of Hump-backed Women, 361

  City of Mexico, 312, 321, 322

  City of the Sun, 2, 69, 373

  Classic myth, 375

  Claudius, 69

  Closet philosophers, 369

  Clothing, origin of, 87

  Cloud-centaurs, 103

  Cloud-Cuckoo Town, 285, 373

  Clouds of Magellan, 311

  Cloves, 230, 243, 245

  Coast Range, 283

  Coata, 124

  Cobra, 112

  Cochin-China, 137, 243

  Cock, 30, 44

  Cockaigne, Land of, 374

  Cockatrice, 66, 77-78

  Cock’s egg, 78

  Cocytus River, 262

  Cod, 96

  Colic, a cure for, 24

  Coligny, 306

  _Collecteanea_, 355, 356

  Colombia, 207, 300, 301, 302, 311, 312

  Colorado River, 318, 321

  Columbus, 10, 12, 102, 130, 151, 160, 161, 167, 242, 258, 270, 271,
            274, 277, 279, 368, 371

  Comedy, Greek, 339

  Commercial subtlety, 244

  Communal houses, 303, 327

  Comorin, Cape, 149

  Compass, 7

  Composite creatures, doctrine of, 341

  Concepcion, 316

  Condor, 74

  “Conflict between Horus and Set,” 86

  Confucius on jade, 24

  Congo, 178, 179

  Conquistadors, 299-333, 368, 369

  Constantinople, 359

  Constellations, animal forms of, 30

  Conway, 206

  Cook, Capt., 124

  Cool Lake, 7

  Coos Bay giants, 192

  Copper, 327;
    Age, 294;
    Mountains, 207

  Coptic Christians, 239

  Cordilleras, 207, 273, 300, 301

  Cordoba, 60, 362

  Corentyne River, 167

  Cornelius Nepos, 228

  Corn spirit, 30

  Cornwall, 255, 263, 309

  Coromandel Coast, 196

  Coronado, 320, 321-326, 368

  Corsali, 74

  Cortez, 188, 292, 329

  Corvo, 271

  Cosmas, 6, 34, 52, 362

  Cossack colonel a woman, 177

  Costa Rica, 127

  Cotton-plant, 59

  Cotzbalam, the bird, 293

  Cougnantainsecouima, the, 164

  Council of Virgins, 172

  _Country of the Dwarfs_, 142

  Country of Widows, 158

  Country of Women, 156

  Court of the Universe, 284

  Cow, 257, 374

  Cowry shell, 87

  Coyote, 106, 118, 370, 374

  Crab, 30, 43, 61, 97

  Cradle of Gold, 312, 332

  Cramps, a cure for, 24

  Crane, 2, 42, 118, 350;
    war with pygmies, 141

  Crantor, 286

  Crayfish, 245

  Creative caricature, 340

  Credulity of Greeks, 353

  Crete, 287

  Cricket, 81, 361

  Crimean war, 171

  Criminal courts of birds, 42

  _Critias_, the, 281, 282, 285

  Crocker Land, 255

  Crocodile, 36-37, 45, 47, 338, 361

  Cromagnons, the, 190

  Crow Indians, 139

  Crusaders, 186

  Ctesias, characterized, 352-353;
    cited, 18, 19, 25, 35, 37, 51, 52, 55, 57, 63, 105, 106, 109, 113,
           133, 135, 191, 193, 335, 349, 350, 352, 353, 354, 366

  Cuatas, the, 123

  Cuba, 130

  Cuchiviro, Rio, 166

  Cuckoo, 44

  Cundinamarca, plateau of, 298, 300, 301

  Cupidity, a cure for, 24

  Curupira, 126, 127

  Cush, 17

  Cushing, 323

  “Customs” of Dahomey, 179

  Cuttlefish, men mistaken for, 27

  Cuvier, 36, 54, 140, 141, 142, 144, 350

  Cuzco, 314, 316, 332

  Cybele, 186

  Cyclopes, 253, 361

  Cyme, 153, 187

  Cynocephali, 105, 351, 367

  Cyrenaica, 212

  Cyrene, 78, 134

  Cyrne, 193

  Cyrus the Great, 169

  Czecho-Slovakia, 248


  D

  Da Gama, 242, 244

  Dahomey, 179-183

  Dahut, Princess, 256

  Dalay River, 138

  Damastes, 202

  Dampier, 77, 198, 245

  Dance macabre, 47

  Dancing negresses, 182

  Dandini, 25

  Daniel, Abbott, 358

  D’Annunzio, 341

  Danube River, 153, 203

  Dardæ, 63

  Darkness, legends as to, 220-221

  Darwin, Charles, 112, 316

  Darwin, Erasmus, 58

  David, 226

  Davy, 102

  De Acunha, Father, 163

  Dead Sea, 358

  Deadly upas tree, 20

  De Arguello, 316

  Death-watch, 44

  De Berreo, 305, 306, 308

  Deccan, 177

  De Chaves, 311

  Dee, River, 102

  Deer, 81, 127, 327, 374

  Deformed Folk, 352

  De Gamboa, 328

  De la Mare, 255

  De Leon, Diego Flores, 317

  De Leon, Ponce, 314, 315

  Delicious Isle, 253

  Delight-makers, 370

  _Delight of Those Who Seek to Wander Through the Regions of the
  World_, 362

  Delisle, 369

  Delos, 201

  Delphi, 201

  Deluded Folk, eight, 270

  Deluge, 87, 292, 297

  Delusive water, 312

  De Maillet, 89

  Demons, 376

  De Ortribia, 315

  De Proveda, 304

  Derbent, 237

  Derceto, 98, 186

  Descouret, 130

  _Description of Greece_, 353

  Desert, 2, 199, 209-215

  De Silva, 300, 304

  “Destruction of Mankind,” 86

  Deucalion, 292

  De Urreta, 15

  De Ursua, 304

  Devil, cult of in Florida, 4

  Devil-fish, 67

  Devil-mask of the Jurupary, 163

  De Weltheim, 64

  Diable Borteux, 126

  Diamond, 24, 87, 244

  Diana of the Ephesians, 186

  Diana in Autun, 215

  Dicuil, 8

  Digby, Sir Kenelm, 212

  Dinosaur, 82

  Diodorus Siculus, 25, 35, 43, 49, 77, 96, 153, 165, 185, 197, 198,
                    199, 202

  Dionysus, 122

  Disappearing Islands, 1, 256-257

  Disraeli, 359

  Ditter, island of, 251

  Dobayba, temple of, 76

  Dodona, oak of, 215

  Dog, 30, 49, 56, 64, 89, 293, 340;
    husbands, 29

  Dogfish, 87

  Dog-headed people, 105-107, 349, 351, 360, 367

  Dog-ribs, the, 106

  Dog Star, 14, 233

  Dolmen, 343

  Dolphin, 90-91, 103

  Dondun, 109

  Donnelly, Ignatius, 278, 294

  Don steppes, 156

  D’Orbigny, 139

  Dordogne cave paintings, 376

  Dos Santos, 35, 73

  Doughty, 210

  Doul-Karnain, 236

  Dove, 47

  Dowarnenez, Bay of, 256

  Dragon, 2, 32, 45, 47, 53, 56, 58, 65, 66, 79-88, 98, 268, 331, 344,
          360, 361, 367, 375

  Dragonfly, 217, 344

  Dragon-tyger, 67

  Dragon-wolf, 67

  Drake, 3, 245, 277, 306, 329

  Dravidians, 146

  Drawings, Primitive, 340

  Dread of thick foliage, 216

  Dream Quests of Spain, 312-333

  Dreams, 339, 372

  Dromedary, 361

  Druids, 257, 265, 296

  Drums, magic, 241

  Drunkards, 374

  Dryads, 216

  Du Chaillu, 142

  Duck, 30

  Duff Islands, 329

  Duirs, the, 129

  Dumb-barter, 15, 104

  Dunashki, 137

  Du Pin, Jean, 365

  Dutch East India Company, 245

  Dwarf-gods of Egypt and Phœnicia, 150

  Dwarfs, 268, 343, 363, 372

  Dyaks, the, 36


  E

  Eagle, 47, 56, 81, 374

  Eagle-stone, 24

  Earth, size and shape of, 5-13

  Earth-holders, 6, 30, 370

  East, 204-205

  East African islands, 96

  Easter Island, 255

  Eastern Roman Empire, 239, 265

  East Indies, 79, 328

  Ecbatana, 238

  Ecclesiastical suits against vermin, 31-32

  Echo, the, 339

  Eclipses, 30

  Ecuador, 13, 302

  Edam, 100

  Eden, 87, 257, 258, 357

  Eden, Richard, 241

  Edom, land of, 224, 226

  Eel, 43, 96;
    “eel-mother,” 96

  Eel-like men, 112

  Egede, Hans, 94

  Egypt, 2, 69, 85, 142, 143, 144, 169, 186, 204, 210, 230, 281, 286,
         340, 351, 365

  Emmet valley, 63

  Elbe River, 248

  Elders, Animal, 65

  El Dorado, 161, 298-310, 348, 369

  Elephant, 32-34, 43, 46, 51, 57, 109, 284, 291, 343, 351, 361, 374;
    tower, 33

  Elephantine, 143

  Elephantophagi, 199

  Eleusinian mystery, 184

  El Gran Moxo, 312, 333

  El Gran Paititi, 312, 333

  Elixir of life, 88

  Elizabethan age, 305

  Elizabeth, Queen, 306, 307, 369

  Elm’s refreshing shadow, 19

  El Turco, 324, 325, 326

  Elysium, 217, 220, 257-261, 262

  Emerald, 24, 318

  Emerson, 342

  Empedocles, 341

  Enchanted City of the Cæsars, 312, 316-318

  Enchanted Islands, 327

  Enchantments, a defense against, 24

  Enciso, Bachelor, 330

  Encyclopædia Britannica, 79, 144, 242

  Encyclopædists, 350, 351, 356

  Engano, 158

  English Channel a ferry of souls, 266

  Englishmen, tailed, 128

  Enmities of birds, 44

  Enotocoitae, the, 109

  _Enquiries of Browne_, 350

  Ephesus, 153, 186, 187

  Epilepsy, treatment of, 24, 56

  Epiphany, 358

  Equatorial Current, 278

  Equestrian statues, Carthaginian, 271

  Eratosthenes, 10, 263

  Ericson, Thorwald, 113

  Eriphia, 20

  Error the guiding star of discovery, 371

  Erythræ, 63

  Erythræan Sea, 353

  _Esdras_, books of, 11

  Eskimos, 4, 106, 108, 110, 112, 141, 145, 338, 369

  Essay-writing, a dragon diet for, 81

  Estevanico, 319, 320, 321, 323

  _Esther_, book of, 187

  Estland, 345

  Estotiland, 345

  Etearchus, 134, 135

  Ethnography, 291

  Ethiopia, 68, 104, 108, 113, 178, 193, 203, 235, 364, 365

  Etymology as source of myths, 344-347

  Eudoxus, 113

  Euphrates River, 7, 185, 358

  Euripides, 263

  Europe, 106, 202, 264

  Evangelists as beast-headed men, 339

  Evans, 47

  Eve, 84, 87, 112

  Evolution of divine beast-men, 338

  Evolution of the Dragon, 84

  Ewaipanoma, 110

  Expedition Island, 255

  _Ezekiel_, book of, 235, 236

  Ezion-geber, 224, 227


  F

  Fabric of Illusion, 334-347

  Fabulous winged creatures, 68-78

  Fa-hien, 360

  Fairies, 150;
    queen of, 359

  Falcon-fish, 67

  Falcon-man, 159

  Falconry, 133

  Familiars, 99

  Fang-chang, 82

  Farissol, Abraham, 17

  Faroes, the, 93

  Fatephur Sikri, 33

  Father John, bird called, 71

  Faun, 122, 361

  Fayal, 306

  Fear, myths of, 371

  Feast of Reason, 173

  Feast of the Valiant Women, 174

  Feathered men, 349

  Febrifuge, a, 24

  Federmann, 301, 303, 332

  Felfel Mountain, 206

  _Fen-shu_, 57

  Female Crusade, 172

  Female incense, 233

  Fertility emblems, 30

  Festus Avienus, 275

  Fezzan, 195

  Fiddlers’ Green, 374

  Fiend fly, 344

  Fijis, 335

  Filipinos, 127

  Finland, 240, 335

  Finn-folk, 242

  Finnish magic songs, 241;
    riddles, 346

  First People, Indian, 28, 118, 119, 339, 342

  Fish, a polygamous, 43

  Fish-eating races, 196-198

  Flaccus, 351

  _Flame of Life_, 341

  Flavianus, 90

  Fleurieu, 369

  Flint people, 370

  Florida, 53, 102, 315, 319

  Flying Dutchman, 276

  Foersch, 20

  Folk of Tradition, 190-200

  _Fonte perenni_, 315

  Forest, beliefs as to, 215-217

  Formosa, 129

  Fortunate Isles, 257-261, 262, 354

  Fossils as source of myths, 295, 343, 344

  Fountain of the Sun, 18

  Fountain of Youth, 15, 312, 314-315, 365

  Fouqué, 99

  Fox, 29, 47, 342, 374

  Fragrant Mountains, 7

  France, 249, 255

  France, Anatole, 342

  Frankincense, 231

  Franks, the, 266

  Frazer, 187, 346

  French Amazons, 172-174

  Friar-fish, 67

  Friars, begging, 338

  Friedemann, 139

  Friendly Islanders, 260

  Friendships of birds, 44

  Friesland, West, 100

  Frobisher, 52

  Frog, 30, 118

  Fu-lin, 61

  _Fung-wang_, 70

  Furies, the, 265


  G

  Gadarenes, country of the, 44

  Gaditanian Sea, 92

  Gains of Fable, 371-377

  Galen, 24

  Galvano, 129

  Gambia River, 263

  Gamblers, 374

  Gamphasantes, the, 199

  Ganges River, 7, 203, 267

  Garcias ab Horto, 53

  Garcilaso de la Vega, 212

  Gargoyles, 337

  Garnet, 24, 244

  Garuda, 134

  Gaul, 9, 90, 203, 265

  Geese, wild, 41-42

  Gélélé, King, 179

  Gellius, 349

  _Genesis_, book of, 7, 22, 83, 224, 235, 282

  Genghis Khan, 237, 239

  Geographers, ancient, 350

  Geography of Scents, 230-231

  Gerini, 17, 129, 136, 269

  Germain, Louis, 289, 290, 291

  German Hydrographic Office, 278

  Germany, 83, 96, 97, 99, 156, 356, 374

  Gesner, 79

  Gessi, 275

  Getæ, the, 3

  Ghauts, the, 149

  Ghosts, merriment of, 4

  Ghouls, 363;
    isle of, 251

  Giants, 190-193, 257, 268, 343, 361, 367, 368, 372;
    stone, 117, 119

  Gibbon, 240

  Gibraltar, 1;
    Straits of, 265, 267, 287, 288

  Gihon, 7

  Gila Canyon, 139

  Gilbert, 306

  Gilboa, Mount, 358

  Gilded Man, the, 298-310

  Gindanes, land of the, 227

  Ginger, 243

  Ginseng, 22, 23

  Giraldus Cambrensis, 217

  Glistening Heath, 79

  Glooskap, 91, 119

  Glow-worms, 245

  Gnomes, 150

  Gnu, 36

  Goat, 30, 43, 122, 235, 338, 374

  Gobi, Desert of, 2, 214, 360

  Goddess of Liberty, 173

  God-man, 188

  God’s land of the Celts, 217

  Gog and Magog, 1, 9, 207, 235-238, 362

  Gold, 229, 244, 284, 327;
    origin of use as money, 87;
    Spanish quest of, 298-333

  Gold Coast, 272

  Golden Age, 208, 287, 336

  Golden Apalache, 319

  _Golden Bough_, 187

  Golden Chain, adventure of, 332

  Golden Chersonese, 12, 224, 230

  Golden Fleece, 372

  Golden Surface, the, 377

  Goliath, 192

  Good intentions, 373

  Goodwin Sands, 255

  Goose, 30

  Gonges, Olympede, 173

  Gorgons, 153, 212, 213

  Gorilla, 123

  Goths, 169

  Gould, Baring, 98, 130

  Gould, Charles, 54, 82

  Gradlon, King, 256

  Grand Lama of Tibet, 187

  Grapes, 284

  Grasshoppers, 38, 348

  Grasshopper-eaters, 198

  “Grasshopper warriors,” 144

  Gravelly Sea, 211

  “Great China,” 359

  Great Han Country, 360

  Great Mother, 186, 188

  Great Saracen Land, 268

  Great Syrtis, 194

  Great toe, peculiar formation of, 199

  Great Year, 70

  Greece, 90, 100, 246, 247, 262, 352

  Greenland, 94, 106, 133, 290

  Green Sea of Gloom, 1, 269

  Grenada, island of, 245

  Gribble, 80

  Griffin, 2, 55-56, 63, 64, 66, 67, 152, 253, 337, 350, 361, 367, 375

  Grimm Brothers, 22, 193, 369

  Guacaris, the, 163

  Guadeloupe, 160

  Guatemala, 118, 127, 293

  Guatavita, Lake, 298, 299

  Guaviare River, 302, 304

  Guiana, 3, 110, 163, 292, 309, 310, 311, 346

  Guillim, 52, 66

  Gulf of California, 320, 321

  Gulf of Mexico, 315, 319

  Gulf of Oraba, 331

  Gulf of Paria, 13

  Gulf Stream, 278

  Gulfweed, 280

  Gumberoo, 66

  Gum camphor, 20

  Gum-tree country, 260

  Gunhild, 241

  Gwenland, 160

  Gwyn ab Nudd, 368

  Gymnetæ, the, 193

  Gypsies, 222, 248, 249


  H

  Hacus, 320

  Hadam, Eldad, 17

  Hahua-chumpi, island of, 327

  Haida, 6

  “Hairy ones,” 122

  Haiti, 260

  Hakluyt, 3, 20, 34, 37, 101, 251, 307, 369

  Halcyon, 43

  Half-men, 111-112

  Halls of the Giants, 359

  Hamam Meskouteen, 212

  Haman, 187

  Hand of Satan, 272

  Hanno, 123, 263

  Hannum, 187

  Hanuman, 124, 338

  Hanyson, 220

  Happy hunting grounds, 217

  Harald Hardrada, 268

  Hardouin, 70

  Hare, 81, 374

  Harem of a queen, 179

  Harpies, 2, 66, 75-77, 375

  Hart, 47

  Hathor, 85, 87

  Hatusapur, 156

  Havaika, 260

  Hav-fruen, 101

  Havilah, 1, 7, 9, 223, 224, 225, 226

  Hav-manden, 101

  Hawk, 78, 338

  Hawkins, 52, 252

  Hawks, Henry, 322

  Hayton, King, 106

  Headless People, 109, 346, 349, 368, 372

  Hebrew the natural speech, 357

  Hecatæus, 202

  Hedgehog, 47

  Hedin, 208, 214

  Hedjaz, 138

  Hegesias, 349

  Heifer, 28

  _Heimskringla_, 267

  Heine, 314

  Helicon, Island of, 251

  Heliogabalus, 69

  Heliolithic culture, 373

  Heliopolis, 69, 70

  Hellebore, 204

  Hellespont, 352

  Hell-way, 204

  Helyon, 52

  Hen, 27, 245, 293, 366

  Henry VII, 99

  Henry the Navigator, Prince, 199, 225, 270, 271, 367

  Heraldry, 2, 66-67

  Herbenstein, 102

  Hercules, 38, 77, 132, 152, 153, 202, 205

  Hercynian birds, 356

  Herkhuf, 143

  Hermes, 96, 246

  Hermits, beasts of, 45

  Herodotus, characterized, 352;
    cited, 14, 26, 55, 62, 63, 71, 72, 77, 104, 107, 123, 132, 134,
           151, 154, 155, 193, 194, 195, 196, 202, 207, 228, 230, 231,
           233, 234, 335, 349, 350, 353, 354, 361

  Heroes of beast epics, 29

  Heron, 70

  Herrera, 191

  Hesiod, 75, 202, 263, 287

  Hesperides, the, 345

  Hibernating Samoyeds, 116-117

  Hiddekel, 7

  Hierro, island of, 20

  _Hill and Sea Classic_, 136

  Hill of Little Devils, 208

  Himalayas, the, 135, 149, 336, 343

  Himantopodes, the, 114

  Himilco, 263, 274

  Himyarites, the, 226

  Hionen Thsang, 157, 219, 360, 361

  Hippocampus, 67

  Hippo Diarrhytus, 90

  Hippogrif, 56

  Hippogypi, the, 103

  Hippolyte, 153

  Hippopotamus, 34-35, 338

  Hiram of Tyre, 223

  _History of the Indies_, 369

  Hittites, 185-187

  Ho-lao-lo-kia, vanished city of, 214

  Holland, 245

  Holme, 66

  Holstein coast, 254

  Holy Roman Empire, 99, 220, 248

  Homer, 5, 7, 22, 132, 133, 140, 141, 199, 202, 227, 252, 287, 349,
         352, 354, 363

  Homocane, 67

  Homunculus, 22

  Hopi towns, 323

  Horizon Lands, 201-222

  Horned hogs, 245

  Horned men, 361

  Horneman, 130

  Horse, 30, 51, 56, 122, 156, 157, 324

  Hörselberg, 219

  Horus, 86

  Hospitality, proverb on, 335

  Hottentots, 131, 146, 225, 227;
    “click” of, 105

  House of Song, 377

  Houses of the Sun, 161, 332

  Huallaga River, 333

  Huanacos, 316

  Huc, 115, 349

  Hudson Bay Company, 221

  Hugag, 66

  Hugo, Victor, 249, 337

  Huguenots, 306

  Humboldt, characterized, 369;
    cited, 26, 42, 126, 165, 166, 207, 271, 278, 288, 311

  Humming bird, 30, 370

  Hungarian Plain, 156

  Huns, 154, 239

  Hurakan, 293

  Hyderabad, 177

  Hydra, 66

  Hyena, 35-36, 361

  Hyparkhos River, 105

  Hyperboreans, 201-203, 261


  I

  Ibanez, 169

  Iberia, 203, 286

  Ibis, 43, 71

  Ibn Batuta, 42, 95, 106, 196, 243, 269, 362

  Ibn Haukal, 362

  Ibn Khaldun, 269

  Ibn Khordadbeh, 137, 206, 362, 363

  Iceland, 101, 289, 345

  Ichthyophagi, 196-198

  Ideal lands, 2, 257-261, 336-337, 351

  Ideal states, 251

  Idrisi, 8, 137, 270

  Ignatius, 81

  Iguanodon, 81

  Iliad, 81, 133, 152, 363

  Illampu, peak of, 207

  Imaus, Mount, 114

  Immaculate Conception, 42

  _Imrama_, 258, 367

  Im Thurn, 207

  Incas, fugitive, 305, 333

  Incense Country, the, 1, 229-235;
    Route, 233;
    battles, 230

  Incontinency, how discovered, 24

  India, 9, 55, 57, 64, 85, 104, 105, 106, 109, 113, 122, 124, 128,
         133, 136, 141, 148, 188, 193, 203, 216, 219, 230, 261, 269,
         351, 353, 359, 361, 364, 365

  Indian Archipelago, 364

  Indian Ocean, 1, 89, 91, 93, 196, 226, 231, 255, 263, 363, 365

  _Indika_, 349, 353

  Indo-China, 106, 136, 267

  Indonesia, 135

  Indus River, 7, 224

  Inis Fitæ, 255

  Inishbofin, 257

  Insanity, a cure for, 24

  Institute of Oceanography, 288

  _Insula de ben faminill_, 160

  _Insula mulierum_, 160

  _Insula virorum_, 160

  Insurrection of Women, 172

  Intoxication, a preventive of, 24

  Io, 28

  Iran, 214, 337, 377

  Ireland, 95, 99, 254

  Irijo River, 165

  Irish sea epics, 65, 252-253, 258, 367

  Iron city, 157

  Iroquois, 119, 343

  Irving, 26

  Is, sunken city of, 255-256

  _Isaiah_, book of, 30, 77, 122

  Isidore, characterized, 356-357;
    cited, 121, 350, 351, 356

  Iskander’s wall, 237

  _Isla de beimeni parte_, 315

  _Isla de Mugeres_, 160

  Islam, 171, 233, 269, 270

  Island of Death, 261

  Island of Females, 158

  Island of Life, 261

  Island of Males, 158

  Island of the Seven Cities, or of the Seven Bishops, 252, 259, 271,
                                                       319, 375

  Islands, number of, 8

  Islands of Enchantment, 251-261

  Islands of the Sun, 271

  Islas Encantadas, 327

  Isle of the Blessed, 91

  Isle of the Double Towers, 253

  Isle of Finn, 253

  Isle of Fire, 252

  Isle of Flowers, 252

  Isle of Gems, 158

  Isle of Laughter, 253

  Isle of a Saint, 253

  Isle of Sheep, 253

  Isle of Shouting, 252

  Isle of witches, 253

  Isogonus, 193, 349

  Israel, 207, 226

  Issedones, the, 107, 196

  Istakhri, 60

  Ister, the, 26

  Istria, 249

  Italy, 9, 129

  Itys, 28

  Ivan the Terrible, 241

  Ivory, 57, 364

  Ivory, apes and peacocks, 224

  Ivory Coast, 179


  J

  Jacinth, 244

  Jackal, 29, 338, 351

  Jade, 23-24, 87, 162, 164;
    Gate, 24

  Jaguar god, 338

  Jaitwas, 124

  Janaidar, 208

  Japan, 12, 97, 148, 259, 363, 364, 371

  Jasconius, 91

  Jason, 75

  Jasper, 24

  Java, 106, 158, 230, 242, 244, 260

  Jehovah, 125, 236

  Jenkinson, Anthony, 212

  Jerba, 229

  Jerusalem, 125, 238, 267, 282, 328, 357;
    center of the earth, 7

  Jesuits, 102, 317

  Jet, 351

  Jews, 47, 185, 244, 357, 358;
    legendary kingdoms of, 18, 238;
    with tails, 345;
    black pygmy, 138

  Jew’s-harps, 110

  Jinga, Queen, 179

  Joan of Arc, 169;
    and bottle imp, 23

  Job, 46;
    his dunghill, 358

  _Job_, book of, 223

  John of Herse, 52

  Johnson, Doctor, 50

  Johnston, Sir Harry, 126, 150, 343

  Joliet, 80

  Joppa, 366

  Jordan, River, 315, 358

  Jordanus, 104

  Josephus, 7, 17, 22, 71

  Judas on his rock, 253

  Judy, the, 100

  Jujube, 229

  Julian, Emperor, 22

  Julius Cæsar, 236, 246, 265

  Juno, temple of, 123

  Jupiter Ammon, oasis of, 18

  Juruena River, 124

  “Just” peoples, 203

  Justin, 165


  K

  Kabyles, the, 206

  Kadesh, 186

  Kaidu, 170

  Kali, 338

  Kalm, 40

  Kanakas, the, 260

  Kangaroo, 341

  Kansas, 326

  Karabel, Pass of, 186

  Kara-Khitai, the, 113

  Karaya myth, 292

  Karelian, 149

  Kasil, island of, 206

  Kaska tribesmen, 343

  _Kataphugia_, 195

  Kathkuri, 124

  Kazwini, 60, 104, 114

  Keane, 199, 226

  Kent, 128

  Kerensky, 175

  Kerner, Justinus, 25

  Kibu, island of, 260

  _Ki-lin_, 54

  Kilsapheen, Lost, 256

  Kine of Cibola, 318

  King of Faerie, 368

  Kingdom of Dogs, 107

  Kingdom of Women, 349, 360, 361

  Kingsley, 45

  Kinship with animals, 374-375

  Kirata, the, 134, 136

  Kirghiz, the, 208

  Klebermeer, 16

  Kobolds, 150

  Kohistan, 211

  Koliwan, Lake, 117

  Kollman, 148, 150

  Komana, 186

  Koran, 235, 236, 269

  Kordofan, 54

  Korean tradition of inhabited lands, 8

  Kors Trold, 92

  Korwars, the, 200

  Kraken, 2, 92-93

  Krokottas, 35

  Krümmel, 278

  Kublai Khan, 12, 73, 364, 365

  Kukulcan, 292

  Kurdistan, 171, 240

  Kwan-lun hill, 81

  Kyffhäuser Berg, 220


  L

  _Lachryma Crocodili_, 37

  La Condamine, 164, 165, 166

  Lactantius, 10, 362

  Ladanum, 231, 234

  Ladrones, the, 158

  Lafitan, Père, 121

  La Gran Quivera, 326

  Laguna, 323

  Lahore, 177

  La Maillard, 173

  Lamary, land of, 124

  Lamb of Revelation, 59

  Lamberti, 171

  Lambri, 128

  Lamias, 361

  Lamprey, 44

  Lampridius, 55

  Lamya, 67

  Land of Darkness, 221

  Land of Fair Women, 259

  Land of Ghosts, 143

  Land of Job, 366

  Lands of Legend, 223-250

  Land of Marked Bodies, 360

  Land of the Living, 259

  Land of Promise, 253, 259

  Land of Truth, 259

  Lane, 159

  Lang, 357

  Lanuvium, 81

  Laos, 136

  Lapis lazuli, 24

  Lapland, 101, 141, 145, 147, 149, 272, 343

  Laputa, 373

  Large-eared men, 2

  Las Casas, 369

  Las Jurdes, 147

  Lassen, 25

  Last of the Incas, 314

  Latin mind, 354

  Laufer, Berthold, 59

  Laurel-tree and lightning, 19

  La Vieja Islands, 315

  Lecherers, 374

  Leems, Knud, 101

  Legion’s winter camp, 30

  Leigh, 78

  Leland, 118, 149, 370

  Le Maire, 191

  Lemuria, 1, 296

  Lenin, 177

  Leopard, 49, 65

  Le Plongeon, 291

  Leptus, 213

  Lesiy, the, 127

  _Les Merveilleuses_, 173

  Lestai, the, 195

  Lethe, fountain of, 18

  Leuke, isle of, 153

  Leviathan, 91

  Levine, 174

  Lewis and Clark expedition, 372

  Lhasa, 188

  Library of Congress, 358

  Libussa, 171

  Libya, 2, 134, 135, 153, 235, 281, 283, 365

  Liège, 365, 367

  Lilliput, 373

  Limbo of the Moon, 373

  Limpopo River, 225, 226

  Linnæus, 43

  Lion, 43, 44, 45, 47, 49, 51, 55, 58, 65, 66, 338, 361, 374

  Lipo district, 128

  Lisbon earthquake, 296

  Lisbon Wanderers, 270

  Little Black Men, 145

  Livonians, 3, 365

  Lizard, 82, 118, 341, 370

  Lizard-Man, 339

  Llama, 302, 305, 327, 374

  Lliuga, Princess, 178

  Lobo, 38, 54

  Locris, 38

  Locusts, 44, 65

  Lodestone, Mountain of, 16-17, 276

  Lofoden, 93

  Logic, Indian, 330

  Lok, John, 32, 104, 199

  _London Graphic_, 142

  Long, 146

  Loon, 370

  Lop, desert of, 210, 365

  Lopez, 179

  Lord of the Hollow Tree, 292

  Lord of the Two Horns, 236

  Lords of the Field, 61

  Lotophagi, 199, 227, 229

  Lot’s wife, 358

  Lotus-land, 227-229

  Louhiatar, 241

  Louisiana, 319

  Lucan, 81

  Lucayos, the, 315

  Lucca, Gaudentio di, 211

  Lucerne, 80, 190, 209

  Lucian characterized, 354;
    cited, 103, 252, 258, 275

  Lucknow, 177

  Lucky-stone in toad’s head, 44

  Ludolf, 37

  Lumberjack legends, 65-66

  Lusignan, house of, 99

  Lusitania, 50, 263

  Lust, ritual, 187

  Luxembourg family, 99

  Lydia, 186

  Lynn, vessels from, 269

  Lyonesse, 255

  Lyon-poisson, 66


  M

  Macassar poison, 20

  Macatoa, 303

  McCrindle, 64

  Mace, 244

  Macrobians, the, 193

  MacGregor, 214

  Madagascar, 73, 74, 106, 138, 159, 225, 227, 364

  Madanino, 160

  Madeira Islands, 252, 258, 287, 288

  Mældune, 89

  Maelstrom, 93

  Magellan, 138, 191, 242, 270

  Magh Mell, 259

  Magic dances as sources of the races of fable, 339

  Magic Food, 259

  _Mahabharata_, 156

  Maid Marian, 345

  Maidu Indians, 127

  Maimonides, 238

  Majorca, 174

  Malabar, 112, 125, 233, 243

  Malacca, 149, 159

  Malatu, Sea of, 158

  Malays, 9, 57, 129, 145, 244

  Malay Peninsula, 124, 145, 147, 149, 199, 224, 260, 269

  Maldive Islands, 95

  Male incense, 233

  Male infants, killing of, 178

  Malory, 64

  Mambuti, 144

  Mammoths, frozen, 344

  Mamore River, 139

  Manannan, 89

  Manatee, 102

  Manco Capac, 314

  Mancy, 365

  Mandrake myth, 21-23, 87

  Mangi, 130

  Mangou, 130

  Manhattan Island, 304

  Manikins, 122, 342

  Manioc, 291

  Manlius, 69

  Manoa, 300, 305, 307, 310, 311

  Man of the Mountain, 61, 62

  Manticora, 57

  Maps, mediæval, 11

  Mara River, 52

  Maranon River, 333

  Marata, 320, 323

  Marcasite, 309

  Marcellus, 286

  Marco Milioni, 151, 364

  Marcos, Friar, 318, 320, 321, 322, 323

  Mare, 50, 221, 346

  Mareb, 125

  Mar Eldorado, 311

  Marignolli, 8, 244

  Marining animals, 67

  Market of the Sea, 89

  Markets, Night, 200

  Marquesans, the, 260

  Marquette, 80

  Marseilles, 216

  Martikhora, 57-58

  Martinez, 305

  Martlet, 66

  Martyr, Peter, 331, 368

  _Marvellous Adventures of Sir John Maundeville_, 363

  Mascardi, 317

  Masefield, 365

  Mashona region, 225

  Massagetæ, the, 169

  Massoudy, 269, 362

  Masu, Mountains of, 260

  Matabele region, 225

  Mather, Increase, 190

  Matriarchate, 185

  Matrimonio, island of, 161

  Ma Tuan-Len, 128

  Maundeville, characterized, 365-367;
    cited, 19, 25, 55, 58, 61, 63, 68, 104, 108, 109, 110, 113, 114,
           115, 119, 124, 130, 133, 138, 151, 159, 191, 211, 220, 237,
           251, 258, 259, 276, 350, 363, 364

  Mauretania, 275

  Mayas, the, 292, 293, 294

  May Day, 187, 188

  Mead, 259

  _Meadows of Gold and Mines of Precious Stones_, 362

  Mecca, 138, 233

  Mediæval Trade, 243

  Medicine bag, 30

  Medicine men, 321

  Medina, 233

  Mediterranean Sea, 89, 90, 93, 199, 227, 251, 263, 267, 281, 282,
                     290, 296, 356, 369

  Megasthenes, 108, 109, 114, 133, 184

  Mergui archipelago, 158

  Megon, plain of, 221

  Meir, Rabbi, 621

  Mekong River, 136

  Mekran, 196

  Melanesia, 148

  Melons, 283

  Melusina, 99

  Memphis, 143

  Mendana, 328, 329

  Menendez, 318

  _Mercurius Politicus_, 212

  Merfolk, 89, 98-102, 257

  Mericourt, Theroigne de, 172, 173

  Merles, 361

  Mermaids, 2, 66

  Merodach, 187

  Merolla, 101, 105

  Meropis, island of, 286

  _Merveilles de L’Inde_, 128

  Mesa Encantada, 323

  Mesha, 223, 225, 226

  Mesopotamia, 169

  Meta-collinarum, 361

  _Metamorphoses_, 125, 342

  Metamorphosis, 28

  Meta River, 305

  Mewan Indians, 74, 118

  Mexico, 83, 160, 188, 291, 360;
    calendar of, 292

  Mezzoramia, 211

  Miami River, 102

  Miaotze, 128

  Micmacs, the, 118

  Middle Comedy, 247

  Midgard serpent, 83

  Midian country, 224

  Midsummer Eve, 187

  Miletus, 152

  Miltiades, 171

  Milton, 345

  Minæans, the, 226, 233

  Mincoupies, 148

  Mindanao Island, 242

  Mingrelia, 171

  Ming tombs, 54

  Mink, 342

  Minocane, 67

  Minotaur, 152

  Mirabeau, 172

  Mirabilia, 349

  Mirage, 199, 210

  Misers, 374

  Mississippi River, 326

  Missouri, 326

  Mistletoe, 19-20, 216

  Mnemosyne, fountain of, 18

  Mock king, 85, 188

  Mole, 374

  Molucca Islands, 1, 206, 242-245, 316

  Moly, 20

  Monaco, Prince of, 280

  Mongolia, 113, 222, 236, 237, 239, 269, 377

  Monoceros, 51

  Monocoli, the, 113

  Monomatti, the, 107

  Monomotapa, 179

  Montaigne, 341

  Montana, 139

  Montanes, 327

  Montegre, 57

  Montserrat, island of, 160

  Montygre, 66

  Moon goddess, 98

  Moon, voyage to, 354

  Moorish warrior queen, 178

  Mordecai, 187

  More, 373

  Morea, the, 2, 247

  Morgan le Fay, 256

  Mormons, 359

  Morocco, 140, 290

  Morris, 75

  Moscha, 225, 226

  Moses and an Ethiopian princess, 71

  Moslems, 138, 140, 238, 271

  Mount of Eden, 8

  Mount Ida, 25

  Mount Sion, 62

  Mountains, beliefs relating to, 205-209;
    lights on, 2, 206, 207

  Mountains of the Moon, 207

  Mouse-Apollo, 30

  Moving Isle, 253

  Müller, Max, 205, 346

  Müller, von, 54

  Mummification, 87, 373

  Munchausen, 354

  Munster, a lake in, 261

  Munza, King, 144

  Murder, ritual, 158

  Murger, 250

  Muscovites, 58

  Musk, 230, 234

  Mustaghata, Mount, 208

  Myrina, 153, 187

  Myrrh, 231

  _Mythical Monsters_, 82

  Myths of observation, 343-344

  Muysca Indians, 299


  N

  Nabatheans, 233

  Nagas, 112, 217

  Nahuatl ark legend, 292

  Nahuelhuapi, Lake, 312, 316, 317

  Nairs, the, 125

  Nanling Mountains, 128

  Narwhal, 51, 53

  Nasamonian youths, 134

  Natural histories, 350

  _Natural History of Norway_, 92, 93

  _Natural History, Pliny’s_, 354-355

  Nature a pageant for man, 376

  Nausicaa, 99

  Navahos, 83, 95, 164, 204, 208, 217, 323, 376

  Navel of the World, 279

  Nearchus, 63, 91, 196

  Nebraska, 326

  Necho, 263

  Necromancers, 218

  Negrillos, 145

  Negritos, 145

  Negritos del Monte, 145

  Negro Indians, 291

  Negroland, 179

  Negro, Rio, 161

  Nekhbet, 75

  Nephrite, 24

  Nereids, 90, 197

  Nergal, 55

  Nero, 169, 230, 275

  Nesnas, 111

  Nestorians, 239-240, 361

  Nestorius, 240

  New Calabar, 98

  New Granada, 300, 301, 304

  New Guinea, 106, 145, 147, 148, 242, 328

  New Hebrides Islands, 329

  New Mexico, 62, 139

  New Towns, 144

  New York, 256

  Niam-Niams, the, 130

  Nicander, 39

  Nicobar Islands, 17, 106

  Niebuhr, 156, 198

  Niger, 135

  Nightingale, 28

  Nile River, 85, 86, 87, 132, 135, 148, 195, 207, 275

  Nina-chumpi, island of, 327

  Ninth wave, 14

  Nixie, 99

  Njogel, 97

  Noah, 292

  Nomad spirit, the, 372

  Nonius Marcellus, 351

  Nordland, 93

  North, 204

  North Atlantic continent, 290

  North Atlantic, floating storehouse of, 278

  North Brother Island, 167

  North Carolina, 306

  Northmen, 267-268, 335

  North Pole, 268

  North Sea, 94

  North wind, 56, 201, 202

  Northern Lights, 4

  Norva Sound, 267

  Norway, 240

  Nosala, island of, 197

  Noseless nations, 108

  Notaries on shipboard, 369

  Nova Zembla, 101

  Novgorod manuscript, 115, 116, 117

  Nubian Highway, 144

  Nulo Mountain, 114

  Numantranus, 9

  Number of peoples, provinces, rivers, and towns, 8

  Numidia, 212

  Nutmegs, 243, 245

  Nysæan shore, 203


  O

  Obongos, the, 142

  O Brasile, 256, 375

  O’Brien, Frederick, 260

  Oceania, 145

  Ocean Stream, 8, 11, 203, 207, 262

  Odoric, 58, 61, 96, 137, 243, 365, 366, 367

  Odyssey, 81, 228, 252, 352, 363, 366

  Ogier the Dane, 16

  Ogre, 343

  Ojibwas, the, 106

  Olaus Magnus, 92, 93

  Old Man of the Sea, 102, 363

  Old Man of the Woods, 216

  Old men’s tales, 336

  Old Woman Islands, 315

  Oleacinidæ, 290

  Olisipo, 50, 90

  Olive, 19, 202

  Olympus, 7, 376

  Omaguas, the, 300, 302, 303

  Onesicritus, 191, 349

  Onoscileas, the, 103

  Ophiophagi, the, 199

  Ophir, 1, 223-227

  Opinicus, 66

  Oraisan, 259

  Oranges, 284

  Orang-utan, 363

  Orc, 2, 95

  Orellana, 151, 161, 163, 167

  Orgy of death, Amazon, 183

  Orichalcum, 284

  Orinoco, River, 110, 258, 304, 305, 308, 311, 312, 332

  Orkney Islands, 241

  Orlando, 95

  Ormuz, 25

  Orontes River, 186

  Orsæan Indians, 51

  Ory, 51, 55, 374

  Osiris, 85, 86, 338

  Osorno, 318

  Ostrich, 43, 50, 114

  Othman, 237

  Otter-men, 117

  Otto of Freisingen, 238

  Ottokar, 249

  Ottoman empire, 185

  Otway, 256

  Ovid, 121, 125, 342

  Oviedo, 277, 369

  Owl, 47, 237

  Ox, 47, 58, 361;
    burrowing, 57

  Oxus River, 7

  Oysters, government of, 42


  P

  Pacific Ocean, 260, 296;
    lost continent in, 255;
    island traditions of, 327, 328

  Padua, 96

  Pajarito plateau, 62

  Palenque, 292

  Paleolithic artists, 340

  Palestine, 353

  Palomides, 65

  Palos, 242

  Palus Mœotis, 154

  Pamirs, the, 208

  Pamphagi, 199

  Pan, 2, 122, 127, 215, 216, 246

  Panama, 304, 338

  Panama-Pacific Exposition, 284

  Panathenæa, 286

  Pandavas, 146

  Pandore, 109

  Panther, 42, 47

  Paracelsus, 6

  Parade, negro Amazon, 182-183

  Paradise and pearls and pepper, 362

  Paraguay, 299, 300

  Paraguay River, 139, 312, 313

  Paranunta, Rani, 156

  Pard, 49

  Parik, 100

  Paris, 250

  Paris, Island of, 251

  Parroquet, 89

  Parrot, 338, 374

  Partridge, 47

  Pasto, 301

  Pastoral song, 246

  Patagonia, 316

  Pathen, 366

  Paula, 358

  Pausanias, characterized, 353-354;
    cited, 77, 129

  Peacock, 44, 60

  Peanuts, 291

  Pear, earth shaped like, 12

  Pearl, 87, 98, 351, 364

  Peary, 255

  Pedrarias, 331

  Pegasus, 66, 68, 152

  Pegu, 34

  Pelican, 44, 350, 375

  Pellinore, 64-65

  Peloponnesus, 246

  Peltry, Siberian, 221

  _Penguin Island_, 342

  Penang, island of, 245

  Peoples of Prodigy, 2, 103-120, 351

  Pepper, 363;
    Pepper Country, 366;
    Pepper “forests,” 243;
    pepper wars, 244

  Pepy II, Letter of, 143

  Perforated people, 349

  Periplus of Erythræan Sea, 266

  Perotti, 40

  Persia, 63, 82, 111, 230, 235, 240, 287, 352, 365

  Persian Gulf, 59, 91, 290

  _Persica_, 63

  Peru, 139, 285, 299, 300, 304, 309, 316, 327, 328, 333

  Petachia, Rabbi Moses, 358

  Peter Martyr, 314, 315

  Petra, 231, 233

  Petrified cities, 211-213

  Petrifying river, 261

  Petrograd snipers, 176

  Phædrus, 286

  Phæacia, 99

  Pharaoh’s Red Sea hosts, 102

  Pheasant, 28, 78

  Philes, 350

  Philippines, 111, 138, 145

  Philology, 291

  Philomela, 28

  Phineus, King, 75

  Phlegethon, 262

  Phœnicians, 98, 226, 263, 264, 295

  Phœnix, 2, 60, 68-70, 71, 350, 361, 375

  Phong, the, 136

  Photios, 349

  Phrygian cap, 186

  _Physiologus_, 46, 91

  Piasa petroglyph, 81

  Piedras hijades, 162

  Pigafetta, 138, 191

  Pigeon, 44

  Pig of the ocean, 67

  _Pih T’an_, 89

  Pike, 97

  Pilate, Swiss legend of, 209

  Pilatus, Mount, 209

  Pillar of salt, 358

  Pillars of Hercules, 129, 203, 264, 274, 281

  Pima deluge myth, 342

  Pindar, 202, 263, 339, 352

  Pinkerton, 4, 102

  Pinna, 59, 61

  Pippilika, 64

  Pison, 7

  Pizzani, 271

  Pizarro, the brothers, 161, 299, 301, 302

  Plague, a remedy for, 24

  Plato, 15, 266, 274, 281, 282, 283, 285, 286, 287, 293, 295

  Platypus, 341

  Pliny, characterized, 354-355;
    cited, 10, 16, 17, 18, 19, 26, 27, 32, 34, 35, 37, 39, 43, 49, 50,
           51, 53, 55, 68, 72, 78, 90, 91, 92, 96, 97, 104, 108, 109,
           111, 113, 114, 115, 128, 133, 135, 141, 193, 194, 199, 202,
           206, 228, 229, 230, 232, 286, 345, 349, 350, 351, 359, 361,
           362, 363, 366, 369

  Pliny’s Ape, 349

  Pliny the Younger, 296, 354

  Plutarch, 36, 43, 69, 174, 265, 286

  Poetry, magic of, 347

  Pohjola, 241

  Poland, 100, 154, 156

  Polish women fighters, 177

  Polo, Marco, characterized, 363-365;
    cited, 8, 12, 19, 34, 72, 73, 106, 128, 138, 158, 160, 167, 170,
           204, 210, 221, 239, 244, 334, 349, 361, 362

  Polybius, 264, 265

  Polyhistor, 355

  _Polyphem ein Gorilla_, 192

  Polyphemus, 90, 228, 363

  Polystephanos, 349

  Pompeii, 296

  Pompeius Festus, 351

  Pompey, 246

  Pomponius, 199

  Pontoppidan, 42, 92, 93, 94, 100, 102, 367

  Pontus, 153

  Popayan, 301

  Pope, Alexander, 108

  Pope Alexander III, 239

  Popinjays, in the deserts, 105

  Popol Nuh, 118

  Popos, 183

  Porcupines, 43

  Pork, 259

  Porter-nations, fables of, 354

  Port of Missing Ships, 276

  Porto Rico, 314

  Portugal, 112, 162, 178, 225, 243, 244, 277

  Portus Nobilis, 225

  Poseidon, 282, 283, 285

  Potato, 306

  Pottery, animal outlines of, 30

  _Prabhâsakhanda_, 106

  Prague, 172, 248

  Prasias, Lake, 196

  Precious stones in Christian symbolism, 24-25

  Prejevalski, 54

  Prescott, 302

  Prester John, 1, 12, 17, 63, 211, 238-240, 359, 361, 362, 366

  Priestesses, armed, 184

  Priest-king, 85

  _Primum mobile_, 9

  _Principal Trade Routes_, 362

  _Principal Voyages_, 369

  Prison for lost souls, 276

  Proclus, 286

  Procopius, 60, 265, 266

  Progne, 28

  _Prometheus Bound_, 207

  Promises of princes, 373

  Prophecy: how the gift is conferred, 24

  Prospero’s isle, 206

  Psalm-singing birds, 253

  Pseudo-Plutarch, 352

  Psylli, the, 194

  Psyllotoxotæ, the, 103

  Pterodactyl, 79

  Ptolemy, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 129, 195, 207, 225, 362

  Public-house signs, 345

  Pueblo Indians, 204

  Puerto de Arica, 327

  Pu-lu tribe, 136

  Punt, 143, 224, 231, 233, 234

  _Puranas_, 269, 359

  Purchas, 3, 42, 53, 74, 199, 335

  Purgative, a, 24

  Pygmies, 2, 108, 117, 132-150, 208, 350, 361, 368

  Pygmy Highway, 144

  Pyramids, 358

  Pyrenees Mountains, 56, 203

  Pytheas of Massilia, 264, 334


  Q

  Quail, 44, 356

  Quatrefages, 146

  Queen Bee, 186

  Queen of Sheba, 224, 226

  Quesada, 301

  Quesada, Ximenes, 304

  Questing beast, 64-65

  Quetelet, 192

  Quetzalcoatl, 161, 292

  Quichna Indians, 314, 333

  Quimper, 256

  Quiros, 329

  Quito, 299, 300, 301, 302

  Quivera, 312, 314, 323-326

  Quoyas Morrov, 125


  R

  Rabbit, 29, 127

  Race-course, 253, 284, 296

  Rainbow, 370

  Rain trees, 20-21

  Rajputana, 124

  Rakshasis, 156, 157

  Raleigh, 3, 36, 110, 111, 151, 152, 162, 163, 166, 305-310, 329,
           346, 369

  Ram, 47

  Ram-eagle, 67

  Rami, the, 137

  Ramni, 104

  Ramus, Jonas, 41

  Ras Sem, petrified village of, 212, 213

  Rat, 342, 366;
    worship of, 30-31;
    monster, 57

  Rath, 100

  Raven, 42, 43, 374

  Raw materials, search for, 372

  Rawlinson, 184, 228

  Realm of Big Women, 222

  Red River, 136

  Red Sea, 1, 195, 196, 199, 226, 227

  _Regio feminarum_, 160

  Region of Darkness, 221

  Reig Rawan, Desert of, 211

  Reindeer, 240

  Remora, 97

  Repose, regions of, 251

  _Republic_, Plato’s, 286, 287, 373

  Retreat of the Ten Thousand, 195

  Retzius, 291

  _Revelation_, book of, 236;
    Horsemen of, 62

  Regnard, 40

  Reynard the fox, 47

  Rhegium, 38

  Rhine maidens, 99

  Rhinoceros, 34, 46;
    of the air, 74-75;
    horn for detecting poison, 34

  Rhizophagi, the, 199

  Rhodesia, ancient, 1, 225, 226

  Rhodope Mountains, 100

  Rhone River, 209

  Ribbon fish, 95

  Ribeiro, 125, 166

  Ricold of Monte Croce, 237

  Riddles, 346

  Rights of Women, 173

  Riphæan Rocks, 202, 203

  Ritual mimes, 339

  Ritual murder, 85

  River of China, 7

  River that flows by the Throne of God, 262

  Robin Hood cycle, 345

  Roc, 72-74, 363, 365

  Rock crystal, 24

  Rock Tibboos, 195

  Rocky Mountains, 207

  Rodriguez, Barboza, 164

  Rodzianko, 175

  Roebuck, 43

  Roger, King of Sicily, 270

  Rogero, 95

  Rohan, family, 99

  Roman pharmacopeia, animal items in, 27

  Rome, 90, 96, 230, 247, 258, 262, 265, 349, 354

  Romulus, 344

  Root-eaters, 199

  Roraima, Mount, 208

  Rothery, 163, 179

  Rotundity of the earth, 272, 366-367

  Roulin, 141

  Roundhouses, ceremonial, 370

  Royal Irish Society, 256

  Ruad, 100

  Rubruquis, 113, 222, 239

  Ruby, 24, 244

  Ruskin, 216

  Russia, 154, 240, 290, 365;
    fighting women of, 174-177;
    strange peoples of, 115-117


  S

  Saba, 232, 233

  Sabæans, the, 226, 231, 232, 233

  Sacramento, 284;
    Valley, 283

  “Sacred groaning stick,” 370

  Sacred Promontory, 10

  Saffron as magic diet, 217

  Sagittary, 66

  Sago tree, 138

  St. Augustine, 355

  St. Bernard, 47, 172

  St. Brendan, 91, 259, 271, 276, 363;
    island of, 252

  St. Clement, 69

  St. Collen, 368

  St. Colodoc, 45

  St. Costinian, 45

  St. Francis, 375

  St. Gerasimus, 45

  St. Guthlac, 45

  St. Helenus, 45

  St. Jerome, 237, 358

  St. John, 65

  St. John’s Eve, 188

  St. Leonor, 45

  St. Maria Rotunda, 342

  St. Mark, treasure of, 53

  St. Sulpicius, 45

  St. Vitus dance, 39, 40

  Sais, temple at, 281

  Saint, statue of a, 271

  Salamanca, 147;
    Council of, 10

  Salamander, 38-39, 47, 70, 337, 350

  Salmon, 89

  Salt fish diet, 243

  Salvaje, 126

  Samar, 158

  Samarcand, 170

  Samaria, 358

  Sambation, the river, 17-18

  Samoan Islands, 260

  Samoyeds, 56, 57, 74, 115, 116, 117, 364

  Sanazzaro, 247

  Sandalwood, 230, 233

  Sandrokotos, 184

  San Joao River, 124

  San Francisco, 294

  San Francisco, mountain of, 376

  San Joaquin Valley, 283

  Santa Cruz, island of, 329

  Santa Marta, 301

  Santa Thome del Agostina, 311

  San Thome River, 124

  Santom aborigines, 136

  Santos, Juan, 333

  Sapphar Metropolis, the, 225

  Sapphire, 24, 25

  Saragossa, feminine defense of, 174

  Sardinia, 96, 264;
    pygmy survivals in, 147

  Sardonic plant, 356

  Sargasso Sea, 274-280, 281, 287

  Sarmatians, 156

  Sassafras, 242

  Satan, 112, 204, 236, 350

  Satyr-fish, 67

  Satyrs, 2, 66, 121-131, 206, 272, 356, 361, 375;
    Satyr Islands, 129

  Saures, 221

  Savaii, 260

  Sayce, 185, 186

  Sayf Al-Muluk, 251

  Scaliger, 58, 112, 140

  Scalping, 120

  Scandinavia, 290

  Scapegoat, 187

  Scarab, 218

  Scarecrows as tribal ancestors, 200

  _Scenes de la Vie de Bohème_, 250

  Schenchzer, 80

  Schomburgk, 167

  Schoolcraft, 119, 370

  Schorodomachi, the, 103

  Schweinfurth, 142, 144, 147

  Sciapodes, the, 113

  Scilly Islands, 255, 263, 265

  Scipio, 265

  Scobellum, 374

  Scorpion men, 260

  Scotland, tide myth of, 9, 345

  Scrofula, animal remedies for, 27

  Scylax, 275, 353

  Scyritæ, the, 108, 114

  Scythia, 82, 107, 141, 154, 155, 156, 196, 235, 236, 237

  Scythian lamb, 58-62

  Sea a symbol of eternity, 262

  Sea creatures, 89-102;
    named after land animals, as sea-dragons, hares, horses, kites,
    lions, mice, oxen, spiders, 89

  Sea serpent, 2, 93-95

  Sea of Clarified Butter, 269

  Sea of Curds or Whey, 269

  Sea of Glass, 252

  Sea of Milk, 261, 269

  Sea of Salt Water, 269

  Sea of Sugar Cane Juice, 269

  Sea of Wine, 269

  Seal, 42, 89

  Seal-men, 117, 242, 257

  Sebo, 77

  Sedentary Indians, 320

  Selfishness, myths of, 371

  Semangs, the, 147, 260

  Semiramis, 18, 169

  Semites, commercial fictions of, 9;
    culture of, 357

  Seneca, 252

  Senegal, 286, 290, 291

  Senegal River, 263

  Sephar, Mount, 223

  Sepulchers of Zenu, 312, 329-330

  Seres, 191, 193, 230

  Serrano, 244

  Sertorius, 264, 265

  Set, 86, 87

  Seven Cities of Cibola, 312, 318-323

  Seven Seas, 269

  “Shadow-footed,” 346

  Shagamaw, 66

  Shakespeare, 109, 248

  _Shan Hai King_, 359

  Shantung, 89, 137

  Shape-shifting, 28, 370

  Shark, 87, 95, 97-98, 260

  Shaw, 212

  Sheep, 257, 327, 358

  Sheikh of the Seaboard, 363

  Shetland Islands, 97, 241

  Shikh, 111

  Shoshones, the, 6

  Shrewmouse, 43

  _Shu-king_, 71

  Siam, 33, 34, 137, 240, 269, 293

  Siberia, 115, 116, 117, 344;
    women fighters of, 177

  Sicily, 147, 246

  Sid, the, 217

  Sidney, Sir Philip, 247

  Sierras, the, 283

  Sigismund, King, 101

  _Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man_, 149

  Silent Isle, 252

  Silver, 284, 327

  Silvia of Aquitaine, 358

  Simeon, Rabbi, 62

  Simhala, 157, 158

  Simon, Padre, 300

  Sinai, 143

  Sind, 158

  Sindbad, 3, 33, 72, 91, 137, 206, 234, 362, 363, 366

  Singular speech, 104-105

  Sinmenkpen, 183

  Siptakhora tree, 105

  Sirens, 48, 89, 90, 197, 272

  Siva, 338

  Skeletons, animated, 117

  Skin-shifting, 28

  Skogfrau, 216

  Skulls as drinking cups, 196;
    talking, 117;
    rolling, 119, 120, 370

  Slave Coast, 179

  Slavs, 100, 248, 261

  Sliabh Daidche, 252

  Sluggish Sea, 264

  Smith, Grafton Elliot, 84, 87

  Smithsonian Institution, report of, 288

  Smyrna, 153, 187

  Snails, 366

  Snake, 30, 37-38, 43, 45, 64, 78, 79, 81, 84, 112, 351, 361

  Snake-eaters, 199

  Snakes in Ireland, no, 356

  Snoligoster, 66

  Snowy Mountains, 7

  Society Islands, 329

  Socotra, island of, 226, 365

  Socrates, 286

  Soe-Drawl, 92

  Soe-Ormen, 94

  Sofala, 225

  Solar mythology, 83, 287, 295

  Solinus, characterized, 356;
    cited, 9, 35, 38, 42, 53, 206, 349, 350, 363, 366

  Solomon, 125, 185, 223, 224, 226, 227

  Solomon Islands, 260, 312, 327-329

  Solon, 281

  Somaliland, 1, 234

  Sombreron, 127

  Sorcerers that took hyena form, 36

  South, 9, 204

  South America, 2, 3, 65, 126, 291, 298

  South Atlantic continent, 290

  South Arabs, 226

  South Brother Island, 167

  South Dakota, 208

  South Seas, 203, 258, 336

  Southern hemisphere noblest, 9

  Souza, 271

  Soviets, 156

  Spain, 9, 161, 162, 224, 243, 264, 277, 290, 299, 300, 309, 333,
         368, 372;
    treasure ships of, 306, 309

  Sparta, 246

  _Speculum Regale_, 101

  Spence, 292

  Spencer, 336, 345

  Spenser, 306

  Sphinx, 66, 356

  Spice Islands, 1, 12, 90, 225, 242-245

  Spices, 302, 364

  Spider, 28

  Spitzbergen, 41

  Splinter cat, 66

  Springs, magical, 18, 353

  Spurred men, 245

  Squid, 95

  Squonk, 66

  Stag, 28, 45, 48, 51

  Stagnant Sea, 358

  Staked plains, 324

  Stanley, 132, 144, 145

  Star of the Archers, 178

  Statues as source of myths, 340, 341

  Stone Age heathen, 343

  Stone giants, 207

  “Stone of the eyes,” 26

  Storax, 232

  Stork, 28, 42, 44

  “Story of the Winged Disk,” 86

  Strabo, 3, 8, 9, 25, 38, 55, 107, 135, 140, 154, 197, 198, 228, 264,
          286, 351, 353

  Straits of Florida, 278

  Straits of Magellan, 316

  Street of feathers, 359

  Streets of women, 209

  Struthocameli, 50

  Struthophagi, the, 199

  Struthopodes, the, 113

  Struys, 129

  Stygian Pool, 262

  Stymphalian birds, 2, 77

  Subraces, 342

  Suffolk, 101

  Sukhavati, 261

  Sumatra, 128, 129, 137, 159, 240, 363

  Sun-haters, 194

  Sun, track of the, 205

  Sunamukha, the, 106

  Sun-Carrier, 6-7

  Sunda Islands, 148, 269

  _Sung Geography_, 128

  Sunken Lands, 254-257

  Sunset, hissing sound at, 14

  Superior, Lake, 294

  Suwanee River, 319

  Svetadvipa, 261

  Swallow, 28, 40-41, 45, 81, 375

  Swallower of the West, 338, 372

  Swan song, 44, 202

  Sweden, 240;
    the Great, 268

  Swine, 30, 44, 48, 87, 127, 253, 260, 338, 374

  Symmetry, sense of cosmic, 7

  Symons, 250

  Sympathetic magic, 187

  Syria, 61, 169, 186, 195

  Syrian lamb, 61

  Syrtic district, 228


  T

  Tabernacle form of earth, 6

  Table of the Sun, 14-15

  Tachnin River, 102

  Tachylyte, 289, 295

  Tae-Ping women fighters, 177

  Tagus River, 50

  Tahetan tide myth, 9

  Tahiti, 260

  Tailed men, 121-131

  Takla-makan, dead city of, 215

  Talmud, 60, 61, 91, 204

  Tamerlane, 237

  Tanganyika country, 145

  Tangi, 97

  Tannhäuser, 219, 220

  Taos, 323

  Tapio, 128

  Tapirs, king of the, 127

  Taprobane, 10, 63

  Taranto, 39, 59

  Tarantula, 39-40

  Tarascon, shield of, 66

  Tarask, 66, 337

  Tartars, 108, 130, 147, 154, 170, 221, 237, 365

  Tariessus, 224

  Tatius, 37

  Tauron, 104

  Taurus Mountains, 186

  Tawny Moors, 199

  Tchad, Lake, 135

  Tchudi, the, 117

  Tecumbalam, the bird, 293

  Tembandumba, 178

  Tempe, 201

  _Tempest, The_, 103

  Tempests, how to avert, 24

  Temple harlots, 184

  Temple of Dobayba, 312, 331-332

  Temple of the Sun, 332

  Ten Lost Tribes, 17, 138, 237, 359, 362

  Tennyson, 227, 252, 255

  Tenochtitlan, 318

  Tensevetes, 361

  Terhetar, 241

  Termeh, 153

  Termier, 288, 289, 290, 291, 295, 296

  Ternate, 244

  Terra Australis Incognita, 11

  Terrestrial Paradise, 7, 8, 117, 158, 239, 312, 365, 368, 373, 376

  Terrible Ocean, 262-273

  Tetramorph, 338

  Texera, 163

  Teyma, 211

  Thalestris, 154

  Thanet, island of, 351

  Tharshish, 224, 225, 226, 227

  Thebaid, 148

  Theocritus, 246

  Theodor, Bishop, 117

  Theodosius, 358

  Theophrastus, 275

  Theopompus, 286

  Thermiscyra, 186

  Thermodon River, 153

  Theseus, 152, 153

  Thevet, 53

  Thirty Years’ War, 248

  Thomas, 326

  Thoreau, 204

  Thorne, 244

  Thought, fancied omnipotence of, 376

  Thrace, 135

  Thule, 10, 264

  Thunberg, 34

  Thunder bird, 81

  Thunderbolts, 26

  Thuringia, 220

  Thurium, 352

  Tiber River, 209

  Tiberius, 19, 90

  Tibet, 54, 64, 124, 187, 188, 196, 240, 364

  Tides, 9

  Tidor, 244

  Tierra del Fuego, 328

  Tierra-firma, 13, 303

  Tig-balang, 127

  Tiger, 49, 57, 81, 351, 361

  Tigris River, 238

  _Timæus_, the, 281, 285, 286

  Tin, 284

  Tin Islands, 263, 265, 352

  Titan, 370

  Tithonus, 38

  Titicaca, Lake, 312

  Tityrus, 66

  Tlingit myths, 29, 370

  Toad, 78

  Tobacco, 306

  Toltecs, 292

  Tomyris, 169

  Tonga, 260

  Topago, province of, 162

  Topaz, 24

  Topographical legends, 14

  Topsell, 51

  Topsy-turvy, law of, 3

  Torca, island of, 255

  Torres Straits, 260

  Tortoise, 6, 47, 96, 343

  Toscanelli, map of, 12

  Totemism, 29

  Totoneac, 320, 323

  Toucan, 42

  Tower of London, 307

  Traconda, island of, 104

  Tragedy, Greek, 339

  Trapalanda, 316

  Travel Tales of Mankind, 348-370

  _Travels in Barbary_, 212

  Travelers, Lot of, 335-336

  Travelers’ Trunk, earth like a, 6

  Trebizond, 153

  Tree of the Sun, 19

  Trees, 19-21, 353

  Trickster-hero, 370

  Trinidad, 300, 305, 308

  Trinity, the earliest, 85, 86

  Tritons, 89, 90, 272

  Troglodytes, 2, 25, 106, 109, 138, 158, 194-195

  Troll, 367

  Tronador, 318

  Tropic of Cancer, 277, 278, 280

  Trotzky, 177

  Troubadours, 47

  Troy, 75, 133, 152

  _True History_, 103, 275, 354

  Tsheremis, 107

  T’sung-ling Mountains, 360

  Tuanaki, island of, 255

  Tuatha Dé Danann, 217

  Tumbleweed, 120

  Tupac-Amaru, 333

  Tupac Yupanqui, Inca, 327

  Tupi-Guarani myth, 292

  Tupimare, the hill, 292

  Turanians, 151, 185

  Turkestan, 87, 214, 361

  Turkey, 108, 154, 170, 237

  Turkomans, 186, 346, 353

  Turja Fells, 241

  Turquoise, 24, 318

  Turtle, 81, 119

  Turtle-eaters, 198

  Tuscany, 282

  Twelfth Day, 31

  Two Mussulman Travelers, 363

  Two Sisters, isles of, 158

  Tylor, 123, 343, 346

  Tzetzes, 109, 350


  U

  Udyana, 259

  Ulloa, 21, 38

  Ulysses, 99, 205, 228, 229, 336, 354

  Underground, beliefs as to, 217-220

  _Undine_, 99

  Ung-Khan, 239

  Unicorn, 2, 50-55, 66, 67, 340, 375;
    horn of, antidote for poison, 51

  Unicorn bird, 75

  Uniped, 113

  United States, 290

  Universe an egg, 6

  Unpaid vows, 373

  Ural Mountains, 107, 202

  Urcos, lake of, 332

  Urdu-begani, 177

  Utopia, 373

  Uttarakarns, the, 261, 336


  V

  Vaikuntha, 261

  Vain efforts, 373

  Valasca, 172

  Valencia, 178

  “Valentines,” Amazon, 152, 162

  Vale Perilous, 191

  Valley of Apes, 125

  Valley of Diamonds, 73

  Valley of the Shadow of Death, 367

  Valum Chvim, 292

  Vampires, 367

  Vancouver Island, 28

  Van Diemen’s Land, 95

  Van Noort, 191

  Varasena, Pass of, 361

  Varenius, 278

  Varro, 351

  Varthema, 138

  Vartomannus, 53

  Vashti, 187

  Vassals of the beasts, men as, 28

  Vaz, Lopez, 163, 304, 328

  Veddahs, the, 148

  Vegetable lamb, 58-62

  Venetus, Paulus, 53

  Venezuela, 126, 207, 301, 304, 306

  Venice, lion of, 66

  Venus, 219

  Venus, Mandragorolis, 22

  Vergil, Polydore, 128

  Vermin, a diet against, 193

  Verrius, 351

  Versailles, march on, 172

  Vicarious sacrifice, 86

  _Views of Nature_, 278

  Viking names, 267

  Villon, 249

  Vilna unit of girl soldiers, 177

  Vincent of Beauvais, 366

  Vine, 19

  Vineta, legendary city of, 254

  Vine-women, 103

  Virgil, 75, 247

  Virgin gift-bearers, 201

  Virgin Mary, 240

  Virtues and vices pictured, 47

  Vishnu, 134

  Vitruvius, 204

  Vokearos, the, 166

  Volcano Island, 137

  Volga River, 107

  Von Hutten, 302, 303

  Votiaks, the, 29

  Voyage of Maldune, 252

  _Voyage of St. Brendan_, 367

  Vulture, 43, 338


  W

  Wagon homes, 155

  Wak-wak, 111, 159, 261, 363

  Wales, legend of, 255

  Wallerius, 41

  Walnut tree, 19

  Walton, Isaac, 43

  Wandering arts, 249

  Wapaloosie, 66

  Wars over women, Indian, 162-163

  Wartburg, 219

  Water gods of northern Europe, 97

  Water horse, 97, 242

  Water sheep, 60

  Weddell, 102

  Weigall, 143

  Welsers, the, 302

  West, 204-205;
    as home of marvel, 349

  West African Rain Forest, 132, 148

  West Indies, 287, 290, 291

  Westropp, 256

  West wind, 262

  Whale, 3, 47, 94, 354, 363;
    bones of for dwellings, 197

  Wheel-shaped maps, 7

  Whirlwind the dance of a ghost, 370

  White-Corn Boy, 376

  White House, 333

  White Indians, 4, 331

  White Nile, 184

  Whitman, Walt, 193

  Whore of Babylon, 65

  Whydah, 179, 183

  Wichita Indians, 326

  Wiener, 291, 315

  Wild Women, 216

  William of Wykeham, 372

  Wind-egg, 50

  Winged serpents, 70, 233

  _Winter’s Tale_, 249

  Wish, power of, 347

  Witchcraft, 78, 204, 218, 240-242, 272, 292, 365

  Witch Realm of Lapland, 240-242

  Wolf, 28, 30, 43, 45, 48, 58

  Wolf, Dr., 130

  Woman of the Thicket, 216

  Women for guests, 364

  Women in Mexican revolutions, 169-170

  World, a living being, 6

  Woodpecker, 29

  Words, power of, 347

  World summit, theory of, 12-13

  Woruisamocos, the, 167

  Wu-lung-li-tan, village of, 129

  Wyvern, 66


  X

  Xanadu, 365

  Xarayes, Laguna de los, 312, 313, 333

  Xecotcovach, the bird, 293

  Xenophon, 195, 286

  Xerxes, 352


  Y

  Yacu-mama, 95

  Yakuts, the, 57

  Yams, 260, 291

  Yangste Kiang, the, 137

  Yao, the, 128

  _Yashka_, 174

  Yazd, 214

  Yazel, Abraham, 17

  Yedua, 60, 62

  Yellow-Corn Girl, 376

  Yellow Sea, 259

  Yemen, 196

  _Yen-men_, 57

  Yima, garden of, 337

  Yoruba, 179

  Ysopete, 324, 325, 326

  Yucatan, 204

  Yule, Colonel, 129

  Yunnan, 128, 136


  Z

  Zahm, 207

  Zambesi River, 225, 226

  Zanzibar, 3, 245, 270, 363, 364

  Zell, 192

  Zenobia, 169

  Zephyria, 50

  Zipangu, 12

  Zulus, 111, 125

  Zuñi, 322, 323

  Zuyder Zee, 254


THE END




_Distinguished Books_


  BARE SOULS      BY GAMALIEL BRADFORD

This volume goes beyond the geographical limits of Mr. Bradford’s
successful “Damaged Souls,” and includes a group of the world’s most
mysteriously fascinating personalities. Under Mr. Bradford’s magic
touch they spring to life as self-revealing human beings. His subjects
include John Keats, Thomas Gray, Flaubert, Voltaire, Edward Fitzgerald,
Charles Lamb and Horace Walpole.


  LEVIATHAN      BY WILLIAM BOLITHO

“If you are a discriminating reader you will have marked William
Bolitho as a man whose stuff you will follow anywhere, for he stands
out from the hordes of excellent and gentle essayists as boldly as
does a woodcut when placed next a half-tone engraving.”--_Laurence
Stallings_ in the New York _World_.


  THE LIFE OF THE BAT      BY CHARLES DERENNES

An exciting personal narrative is told in this book--the life story of
the bat, much of it threaded on the life experiences of a captive bat
called Noctu. He very soon develops a strong personality, and through
his story we learn the life history of bats generally,--their apparent
pastimes,--as in their aerial ballets--their mating, their search
for food and the whole fascinating range of their daily and nightly
activities.


  AT A VENTURE      BY CHARLES A. BENNETT
        _Illustrated by Clarence Day, Jr._

“How delightful to run across a new writer of such subtle penetration
combined with a light and lazy humor. Mr. Bennett has a fine sense of
satire, of character, of life, and is a master of the luminous phrase.
He discusses live subjects, and his papers cover all sorts of topics
from advertising to zebra-raising, written with ease, elegance and
grace. The pictures are priceless, all movement, irony and grin.”--_W.
E. Woodward_ in the _Nation_.


HARPER & BROTHERS




_A Miscellany_


  THE BIBLE AND COMMON SENSE      BY BASIL KING

Here is a book in which honest people of every communion, groping
their way through the storms of controversy, will find fresh light to
guide them. Mr. King tells eloquently what the Bible means to him as
an individual, and frankly and fearlessly discusses such topics as the
Virgin Birth, the divinity of Christ, and the effect of scientific
criticism on the Bible. His tone is always constructive, always
reverent, always inspiring.


  THE MYSTERY OF RELIGION      BY EVERETT DEAN MARTIN

What is religion? Has it any real bearing on morality and the
unescapable facts of human relationship? The author of “The Behavior
of Crowds” here scientifically analyzes, in the light of social
psychology, the ceremonials and taboos of religion, and the fundamental
meaning and cause of group religion as a universal human need.


  THE SEVEN LIVELY ARTS      BY GILBERT SELDES

A spirited and entertaining discussion of the “low-brow” arts and
artists of comic stage and screen, of song and dance and newspaper
humor, by a “high-brow” young critic who sees in them the flourishing
germ of a native American expression.


  A MAGICIAN AMONG THE SPIRITS      BY HOUDINI

A master magician here reveals the results of years of careful study
of noted mediums and of spiritualistic phenomena of all kinds. This
account of his adventures during his investigations, and the striking
conclusions to which he has been forced form an important--and
entertaining--chapter in the crusade for truth.


  THE AMERICAN MIND IN ACTION
        BY HARVEY O’HIGGINS and DR. E. H. REEDE

A keen analysis of the typical American attitude, as exemplified in the
lives and personalities of a dozen outstanding Americans. “The work is
absorbingly interesting, holding the reader as with a magic spell from
beginning to end. The American reader feels as he follows the analysis
of the American mind that he is gradually penetrating to the mystic
depths of his own soul.”--_Boston Transcript._


HARPER & BROTHERS




  Transcriber's Notes:

  Italics are shown thus: _sloping_.

  Variations in spelling and hyphenation are retained.

  Perceived typographical errors have been changed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COASTS OF ILLUSION ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


