The Project Gutenberg eBook of The dinky ducklings
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The dinky ducklings

Author: Lang Campbell

Release date: May 4, 2025 [eBook #76014]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Algonquin Publishing Company, 1928

Credits: Bob Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DINKY DUCKLINGS ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




  THE DINKY
  DUCKLINGS

  [Illustration: Two ducks]

  by

  LANG CAMPBELL

  PUBLISHED BY
  ALGONQUIN PUBLISHING COMPANY
  NEW YORK      LONDON




[Illustration:

  _Dedicated to
  “Butterfly Auntie”_]

  Copyright MCMXXVIII
  ALGONQUIN PUBLISHING CO.
  Copyright, Great Britain, MCMXXVIII
  PRINTED IN U. S. A.


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted without
written permission of the publishers, except by reviewers who wish to
quote short passages in their reviews for magazines or newspapers.




_A Word About This Book_

[Illustration]


The duck brothers, Peter and Puddle, had an invitation to spend the
night with their aunt and uncle. On a good breakfast of hot cakes
and syrup they started out, but a cunning fox led them far off their
path. In a journey of great excitement Peter and Puddle meet Mrs.
Hen and Mrs. Bunny-Brown and old Toby Turtle, who help them to reach
Aunt Daffy’s house before bedtime. The pictures of the ducks eating
strawberries, diving with Toby Turtle, and bouncing along in their
little red wagon, will be among the treasured possessions of the
children.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is another one of the Sunny Books that take children on lively
adventures with new friends, and here again are rich colors handsomely
designed and beautifully blended to aid in the development of good
taste in books.

[Illustration: Duck standing on chair looking at clock.]




THE DINKY DUCKLINGS

    Peter was a white duck,
    Puddle was black:
    Peter could waddle
    And Puddle could quack.


Peter and Puddle were two little ducklings. Peter was snowy white but
Puddle was black as a tar baby. They had shiny eyes that looked like
yellow shoe buttons, and yellow bills to pick up their food. Yellow
feet, too, with cunning toes on each foot, all joined together so they
could swim.

[Illustration: Four ducks dancing.]

Of course when Peter and Puddle were baby ducklings just out of the
shell their mother and father took them down to the pond near the house.

“Come,” said mother; “follow me!” and she swam out in the deepest
water. Both the little boy ducks obediently put one tiny foot, and then
the other, into the cool pond.

“Heads up!” the mother duck quacked, splashing along, “Kick your feet
like this!”

Father stood on the bank and chuckled behind his collar as he watched
his babies trying their best to follow.

[Illustration: Mother and baby duck swimming.]

“Oh, Puddle, look quick! I can do it! See how fast I am going!” And
sure enough, Peter was sailing quietly along on top of the water, his
little head held high and the tip of his white tail showing, as he swam
after the mother duck.

[Illustration: Duck jumping into the water.]

“See how easy it is!” called out Peter.

“Oh, no!” sputtered Puddle. “It’s not easy. My feet want to stay up and
my head down.”

“I’ll show you how,” said father, from the shore, and he swam out to
take the black duckling’s wing.

Very soon Puddle was swimming all by himself. He quacked with joy when
he caught up with mother and Peter. He didn’t want to be a little
left-behind.

Both the baby ducklings begged to come to the pond every day; so their
kind mother took them swimming each morning and taught them many
things—to swim and how to dive and float.

[Illustration: Two ducks getting the mail.]

The Duck family had just finished breakfast, one bright and sunny
morning, when old Mister Chuck, the postman, blew his whistle at the
front door. The two little ducklings hurried out to get the mail. There
was a large white envelope, addressed to “Masters Peter and Puddle
Duck, 16 Poultry Row, Back Behind the Barn.”

The two little fellows were so excited they could scarcely stand still
long enough to open the letter. What could it be? Who could have
written to them?

At last, after the envelope had been torn open, the letter was spread
out on the kitchen floor and mother read it aloud.

[Illustration: Ducks reading the mail.]

  “Duckville on the Ditch.

  Dear Peter and Puddle:

 Won’t you come over and visit us? Aunt Dilly has promised to cook the
 nicest things and we will have lots of fun.

 You must be big boys, by now.

  Your loving,
  Uncle Daffy.”

Of course, the ducklings wanted to go, for they loved Aunt Dilly and
Uncle Daffy. Mother Duck wrote an answer and they dropped it in the
mail-box that very morning.

Oh, my! Such excitement! Mother Duck was busy ironing collars, pressing
neckties and smoothing down little feathers just right. They were ready
for an early start in the morning.

That night Peter slept badly; he was up looking at the clock so many
times. Puddle never opened his eyes once, however. At the first streak
of dawn the white duckling pulled the bedcovers off his black brother.

“Wake up, Puddle!” he quacked loudly. “We are going to visit Uncle
Daffy today!” He was so excited! He danced a little riga-majig.

[Illustration: Duck sliding down the handrail.]

After two faces and two long necks were washed clean, and two little
neckties tied, they were ready. Puddle paddled down the stairs, but
Peter slid the banister. Mother was waiting for them with their
breakfast plates piled high with griddle cakes and a jug of maple syrup.

[Illustration: Two ducks eating pancakes.]

“Oh, goody! What fun we will have! It begins right this moment!”
quacked the white duckling. He took a griddle cake and spilled syrup
down the middle of it. One by one, the cakes followed each other down
the little red lane until the plates were empty. The two little chaps
wanted more breakfast, but the Mother Duck said they had eaten enough.
They slid down from their chairs and put on their hats. There were
kisses and promises to be good.

“Goodbye, children!” quacked Mrs. Duck. “Don’t get lost, and remember
to turn right at the crossroads!”

[Illustration: Mother duck waving goodbye.]

The two little ducklings waved back and would have hurried on but Peter
had forgotten and left his red express wagon out all night, and Puddle
spied it in the back yard. It looked new and shiny, and a wee bit
lonesome at being left behind.

“Let’s take our cart with us! It will be lots of fun.”

“All right,” said Peter. “But it’s more fun to pull a wagon with
someone in it. You ride.”

[Illustration: Two ducks running.]

“Thank you!” answered Puddle, very politely. He scrambled up.

But Peter started so fast that poor Puddle was all bounced and jiggled
about. The wheels hit a rut and the black duck nearly fell out.

“Whoa, horsey! Not so fast!” he quacked. “I’m almost falling out and so
busy holding on that I can’t see anything!”

“I was hurrying to get there sooner,” replied his horsey, but he slowed
up and waddled along the dusty road. Now Puddle began to enjoy his
ride, looking at the nice tender clover and grass growing along the way.

“That duckweed looks greener, and maybe it would taste better than
the kind we have at home,” said Puddle. Peter and Puddle stopped and
sampled a bit of this and a bite of that. They said, “Good morning,” to
Cock Robin, who was out looking for the early worm. They even offered
to help him look, but he answered, “No,” that he would rather look
alone.

They nibbled at sweet clover and Peter scrambled up on a rock and saw a
pretty blue butterfly. “Come on, brother, help me catch it!”

[Illustration: Two ducks chasing a butterfly.]

Suddenly the two little fellows saw something running along behind the
fence and they scurried for their wagon. It was only a playful pup but
he made so much noise that the ducklings thought he must be some bad,
wild beast.

Puddle climbed in and Peter started to pull, but he gave the wagon such
a jerk that poor Puddle bounced up in the air. Luckily he hit the wagon
when he landed, but with a terrible thud. His hat flew off, but they
never stopped to pick it up.

“Waddle for your life!” squeaked Puddle, hanging on tight.

“I am waddling as fast as I can!” panted the white duckling, jumping
and bumping along the road, with the wagon trailing behind. On and
on, hurried the frightened little ducklings until they came to the
crossroads. There, they forgot and ran the wrong way. They took the
road to the left!

[Illustration: Dog running.]

When Peter was all tired out from running and Puddle was all tired out
from hanging on, they stopped behind a big rock and cautiously peeped
out to see if they were followed. There wasn’t a sound, except a song
sparrow singing his lively song in the birch trees, and some frogs in
the distance were beginning to tune up for their daily concert.

[Illustration: Duck pulling a wagon.]

The little ducklings were so tired from their long run that they sat
right down in the grass, and soon were fast asleep.

[Illustration: Fox talking to ducks.]

Puddle woke up with a start and shook Peter. But he could hardly rouse
him, for poor Peter had had so little sleep the night before.

“Wake up, brother!” whispered Puddle, hoarsely. “Someone is here!”

[Illustration: Fox head.]

On the rock, close to them, sat a large handsome fellow. He had a red
coat and a long bushy tail, black ears, a sharp black nose and a wide
grin. Oh, such a polite gentleman!

“We are on our way to visit Uncle Daffy Duck, at Duckville on the
Ditch!” exclaimed Puddle, in his embarrassment.

“Duckville on the Ditch, yes,” the red stranger answered. “I have seen
it often. I know where your Uncle Daffy lives and would like to make
his acquaintance,” and slyly grinning, he drew his red tongue across
his large white teeth.

“Come along,” he said. “I’ll lead the way,” and he started to pull the
wagon for them.

This was great good luck, the two little brothers thought. They
scampered along behind, up hill and down hill. The red stranger looked
back from time to time to see that they followed him.

Very soon the country began to look wild, not at all like the road to
Uncle Daffy’s, and the ducklings began to wonder if the stranger really
knew the way, but he kept right on.

“How much farther is it?” asked Puddle.

“Just about a hop and a jump from here,” he answered, with the same sly
smile, which he tried to hide behind his paw.

“Oh, I’m getting afraid!” quavered little Peter to his brother. “It’s
getting late! See how long the shadows are!”

It was getting late and the sun was sinking fast as the stranger led
them farther into the deep, dark woods. The little ducklings were so
frightened that when a big crow, black as night, flew over their heads
and croaked, “Stop! Stop!” they both dodged behind an old stump, then
madly running down a small ravine they reached a brook. Then they half
flew, half swam across and scurried into the high grass on the other
side.

[Illustration: Two ducks in high grass.]

Peter was ahead and Puddle followed his white tail. They had often
played follow the leader, so that one duck kept right on the heels
of the other, dodging this way and that. Back in the distance the
red stranger could be heard crashing through the underbrush and
brambles—then all was quiet in the distance. They sat down and longed
to see Aunt Dilly and Uncle Daffy, who were waiting for them, but
sitting down would get the little ducklings nowhere, so wing in wing,
they trudged on.

After waddling and waddling and waddling, they came to a path that led
out of the woods and up to a cute little white house with a green door.
It had a high picket fence around and the ducklings cautiously peeked
through it.

[Illustration: House with fence.]

There was a pretty little garden with sunflowers at one end and
hollyhocks at the other. In between were planted radishes, lettuce and
carrots in neat rows; some parsley fringed the edge. On the stoop was
a mat to clean your feet, and a cunning brass knocker hung from the
door. There were window boxes, too, with red geraniums growing in them.

The two Dinky Ducklings could not quite reach the latch to the gate so
they crawled under and tiptoed up the walk. Their knees fairly shook
with excitement. Who could live in this cunning little house at the
edge of the woods?

[Illustration: Two ducks knocking on door.]

Of course Peter and Puddle knew that it wasn’t polite to peep into
windows so Peter stood on Puddle’s back and lifted the knocker. It fell
with a thud and echoed throughout the house. They could hear someone
hurrying around, then a voice clucked, “Who is it?”

“Two little lost ducklings, if you please!” squeaked Puddle in a small
voice, which he tried to make steady.

“My soul and body!” exclaimed old Black Biddy. She let down the bolt
and opened the door.

Peter took off his hat and smiled, but Puddle was very much disturbed
to find that he had no hat to take off. It had been lost when they ran
away from the pup.

“We are just two little lost ducklings,” repeated Puddle.

“On our way to visit Aunt Dilly and Uncle Daffy,” added the other one.

[Illustration: Old hen.]

The kind old hen asked the tired youngsters in and made them sit right
down at the supper table, where she gave them all the chicken feed that
they could eat. It tasted very good to the Dinky Ducklings, too. As
it was almost dark Black Biddy insisted that the two of them stay all
night and start out to Uncle Daffy’s next morning. The ducklings wanted
to go on, but they were very tired, so they accepted the offer of the
very kind old lady.

She hurried about setting the guest room to rights and then clucked
for Peter and Puddle to come in to bed. Maybe they weren’t glad to
crawl into that soft bed, made from Black Biddy’s spare feathers! In
two shakes of a lamb’s tail the ducklings were fast asleep. Old Black
Biddy looked at them lovingly:

“Ah, me!” she sighed. “It’s great to be young—and a duckling!”

The next morning, she fed them a good breakfast of sunflower seeds and
nice green lettuce. Before they left, Peter filled the woodbox in the
kitchen, while Puddle pulled up every weed in the garden and watered
the hollyhocks.

[Illustration: Duck watering plants.]

When it was time the old hen was sorry to see them go. She told them to
keep right ahead on the little path until they reached the crossroads,
and hoped that they would see nothing of the bad fox, that almost ate
them for supper, the night before.

[Illustration: Rabbit and two ducks.]

[Illustration: Hen waving goodbye to two ducks.]

So bright and gay, this morning, the two little ducks shuffled along,
side by side, Peter who was all snowy white, and Puddle, black as a tar
baby. It was early and the dew was still on the grass, but the Dinky
Ducklings didn’t mind that, as wet feet never hurt them.

They were playing tag with a bumble-bee and a grasshopper when they
suddenly came upon an old rabbit lady, who was carrying a large bundle
of red clover in her apron and another bundle under her paw. On hearing
the ducklings she stopped in fright and was going to hop away, but they
were such cunning and innocent-looking little fellows that she knew
there was nothing to be afraid of.

Peter politely took off his hat to the rabbit, but Puddle had no hat to
take off. “Good morning, Mrs. Bunny! Can we help you carry the clover?”
asked the white duck.

“Mrs. Bunny-Brown, if you please,” answered the long-eared old lady,
with a smile. “I would be very glad if you could help me.”

[Illustration: Bunny house.]

So the two ducklings carried part of the clover and waddled along
behind the bunny. She soon turned off the path and picked her way up
a steep hill. After climbing a bit farther and jumping over rocks and
logs she pushed aside a bush which cleverly hid the doorway of her
house. It was just a hole that wound back into the hillside, and as the
ducklings followed along they were surprised to see such a comfortable
home, with cute little rag rugs in the hallway and when they reached
the living-room it was as cozy as one could wish.

Mr. Bunny-Brown was seated in an easy chair at the window, which opened
out on the side of the hill, with a view of the front door and the
winding path. He was home with a hurt foot that had been caught in
the bramble bushes, so Mrs. Bunny-Brown must do all the marketing and
clover picking until the foot was well.

The Dinkies laid down their bundles, having seen the old bunny lady
home with her clover. They were politely backing out of the door when
Mr. Bunny-Brown reached around the back of his chair and said, “I’ve
whittled out a nice toy for some good little chap,” and he showed them
a toy duck on wheels, painted with a red head, green body and red
wheels. A string was tied around its neck to pull it along.

“Oh!” quacked Peter, in excitement.

“Ah!” squeaked Puddle, jumping up and down and waving his wings. “Let
us see it!” Mr. Bunny-Brown gave the Dinky Ducklings the cute toy duck
that he had whittled out of wood.

“Now where are you two going?” he asked, after the Dinkies had played
with the toy for a while.

“To visit our Uncle Daffy,” answered Peter.

“At Duckville on the Ditch,” added Puddle.

Mr. Bunny-Brown hopped to the front door on his one good foot, and
pointed out the best way to go, as far as he knew. “When you get to
the brook, swim over to the flat rock and call for Toby Turtle. He can
tell you the way anywhere.”

[Illustration: Bunny waving goodbye to ducks.]

Now there were three ducks going down the path, two live Dinky
Ducklings and one toy duck that Puddle pulled along by the string. The
toy duck’s head was painted so red that they named him Pepper.

The path turned this way and the path turned that way until the white
duck and the black duck heard the running water of the brook. Pepper
didn’t hear a thing, as he had no ears in his wooden head.

The flat rock that the rabbit had told them about was right at their
feet. They scrambled down the bank and waded through the shallow water,
with Pepper bumping along after them. The three cute little ducks stood
on the rock in the sun and looked up and down stream—at least two of
them did, anyway.

“Quack! Quack! Toby Turtle!” cried Peter.

“Yoo-hoo! Oh, Toby Turtle!” called Puddle.

Pop! Right in front of their eyes an ugly old head came up out of
the water, then a long scrawny neck and old Toby Turtle himself was
crawling on the rock with the ducks. The Dinkies would have been afraid
of anyone so ugly looking if they had not seen the smile on old Toby’s
wrinkled face.

[Illustration: Two ducks.]

“Who calls for Toby—you three little ducks?” asked the old fellow.

“If you please, there are only two of us, or two and a half,” explained
the white duckling. “Pepper is only a wooden duck with a head painted
red.”

“We are on our way to visit Uncle Daffy Duck, at Duckville on the
Ditch!” gulped Puddle, all in one breath. “Can you tell us the way?”

[Illustration: Turtle in the water.]

The old turtle pulled out a pair of spectacles from somewhere and set
them on the end of his nose, then peered over the glasses at the three.
He took a battered old high hat from somewhere else and put it on his
head. Smoothing out his vest he stood up on his hind legs and twiddled
his coat tails. “Yes, yes, indeed, I know your Uncle Daffy well. In
fact I remember when he was a smooth greenish egg, and after he was
hatched how Daddy Duck brought the little shaver down to the water for
his first swimming lesson. Such a long time ago!” rambled on the old
fellow. “How time flies!”

[Illustration: Two ducks on a small island.]

“Time does fly,” thought Puddle. He looked up at the sun; it was high
noon and he was hungry.

“How would you like to have me go along with you?” asked Toby. “For
there is no one knows the way better,” he added.

[Illustration: Two ducks talking with old turtle.]

“Yes, sir, we would like to have you!” quacked Peter.

“Yes, sir!” Puddle said, but Pepper said not a word.

First the old gentleman turtle invited them to lunch in his wild
strawberry patch. Such large, juicy berries—and dead ripe! The
ducklings and the turtle ate until they were full, but Pepper didn’t
touch a berry. So they promised to get him a good meal of sawdust at
the very first chance.

[Illustration: Two ducks and a turtle.]

Lunch was over and the three and a half of them started out for
Duckville on the Ditch. The old turtle gentleman led the way and the
ducklings told how the bad fox almost caught them, about Black Biddy
and the Bunny-Browns. The old turtle knew them all and told how the
bad fox’s father, years ago, had tried to catch him, but he pulled his
head, tail and feet into his shell, so there was nothing to carry him
by. Then he cautiously stuck out his head and nipped the fox’s tail—and
you know that when a turtle bites he doesn’t let go until it thunders.

[Illustration: Toy duck on a turtle back in water.]

The old fellow talked faster than he walked, for he said a slow steady
pace was best, one could last mighty near all day and night at that
rate. The ducklings had been hurrying and they were tired out. The
turtle invited them to ride on his back, said he didn’t mind it in
the least. So there they sat dozing away, with Pepper tied onto old
Toby’s tail and rolling along on its red wheels. They all seemed very
comfortable, indeed. Maybe the old turtle told some more stories but
the ducklings didn’t hear them.

It was very late in the afternoon when the strange party stopped with a
jerk. The ducklings slid off the turtle’s back and old Toby said, with
a grand sweep of his front flipper, “There is Duckville on the Ditch!”

There it was just across the water, Uncle Daffy and Aunt Dilly’s house
with Uncle Daffy walking up and down the front porch, wondering where
his little nephews were.

Such a quacking and cluttering as there was! The ducklings and old Toby
plunged into the water and swam across the ditch, but the toy duck rode
over on the turtle’s back, for Red Pepper had never learned to swim.

Aunt Dilly and Uncle Daffy were very glad to see the Dinky Ducklings
and soon there was a piping hot supper for all. Old Toby was invited to
draw up a chair, also.

[Illustration: Two ducks returning home to the aunt and uncle.]

After the meal was over, the ducklings told all the adventures that
had happened to them. Uncle Daffy hopped right up and said he was proud
of his brave boys, and Aunt Dilly kissed them all again, not forgetting
Red Pepper.

Then the Dinky Ducklings spoke up and said they wanted to thank Toby
Turtle for taking such good care of them.

“Yes,” said Puddle. “We want to give you our new shiny toy duck, Red
Pepper to remember us by.”

“Won’t you take him?” asked Peter, unselfishly.

“I certainly will! Thank you both!” answered Toby Turtle. “He will be
fine company for an old turtle with no family. I can talk and talk and
he will just sit and listen to my stories and never interrupt.”

[Illustration: Fox and turtle.]

Toby took the toy duck by the string and pulled him up alongside. Next
he lit his pipe and started to tell of the olden times, when he was
a youngster, and about his grandfather, who raced a rabbit and beat
him. It was very exciting but the ducklings couldn’t stay awake any
longer, while even Aunt Dilly and Uncle Daffy napped a little. Only Red
Pepper, the wooden duck, was wide-awake. His painted eyes never so much
as blinked, and he seemed to nod at everything old Toby said. They had
become fast friends.

It was soon time for bed, so Aunt Dilly tucked the Dinky Ducklings
under the covers and kissed them goodnight. The old turtle preferred
a nice soft place in the mud, near the ditch, where there was lots of
air. The mosquitoes didn’t trouble him and he claimed the mud was good
for his complexion. Red Pepper sat up on the bank and kept guard.

Uncle Daffy went all around the house and tried the windows and doors
to see if they were fastened tight. Then he peeped into the Dinky
Ducklings’ room and smiled to see them sleeping so peacefully. Quietly
shutting the door, he blew out the candle and tiptoed to his own bed.

[Illustration: Two ducks in bed.]

    To the land of dreams
    They all set sail.
    And this, my dears,
    Is the end of my tale.

[Illustration: Black duck diving in water.]




[Illustration: Ducks and ladybugs.]




_Make Your Children Happy with Algonquin “Sunny Books”_


It is the Algonquin ideal that books should make children happy and
build character unconsciously and should contain nothing to cause
fright, suggest fear, glorify mischief, excuse malice or condone
cruelty.

 =101 LITTLE SLAM BANG.= An elephant child and his jungle friends.

 =102 MERRY MURPHY.= The adventures of an Irish potato.

 =103 HONEY BEAR.= A baby and a bear who have a sticky party.

 =104 GRASSHOPPER GREEN AND THE MEADOW MICE.= About the things that
 happen down in the grass.

 =105 THE DINKY DUCKLINGS.= Two ducks go visiting.

 =106 SUNNY BUNNY.= A bunny family of ten children find a new home.

 =107 BILLY BUNNY’S FORTUNE.= The eldest son of a bunny family goes out
 to seek his fortune.

 =108 THE LOVELY GARDEN.= Queen Yolande and the selfish king.

 =109 THE BAM BAM CLOCK.= A magic time-piece which teaches promptness.


ALGONQUIN PUBLISHING COMPANY

NEW YORK and LONDON





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DINKY DUCKLINGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


