The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Orchid Album, Volume 3
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Orchid Album, Volume 3

Author: Thomas Moore

Editor: Robert Warner
        Benjamin Samuel Williams

Illustrator: J. N. Fitch

Release date: May 1, 2019 [eBook #59411]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Carol Spears and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORCHID ALBUM, VOLUME 3 ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Carol Spears and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  THE
                             ORCHID ALBUM,


                               COMPRISING
                   COLOURED FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS
                                   OF
                        NEW, RARE, AND BEAUTIFUL
                          ORCHIDACEOUS PLANTS.


                              CONDUCTED BY
                    ROBERT WARNER, F.L.S., F.R.H.S.,
                 Author of SELECT ORCHIDACEOUS PLANTS,
                                  AND
              BENJAMIN SAMUEL WILLIAMS, F.L.S., F.R.H.S.,
               Author of the ORCHID-GROWERS’ MANUAL, etc.

     The Botanical Descriptions by THOMAS MOORE, F.L.S., F.R.H.S.,
                CURATOR of the CHELSEA BOTANIC GARDENS.

          _THE COLOURED FIGURES BY JOHN NUGENT FITCH, F.L.S._


                              VOLUME III.


                                LONDON:
                      Published by B. S. Williams,
                                 AT THE
          VICTORIA AND PARADISE NURSERIES, UPPER HOLLOWAY, N.
                              MDCCCLXXXIV.

                               DEDICATED
                         BY SPECIAL PERMISSION
                                   TO
                    _H.R.H. The Princess of Wales,_
                                   BY
                          HER ROYAL HIGHNESS’
                                      Very obedient and humble Servants,
                                                          ROBERT WARNER,
                                                   BENJAMIN S. WILLIAMS.




                            INDEX TO PLATES.


                                                                   PLATE
  AËRIDES VANDARUM, _Rchb. f._                                       116
  ANGULOA EBURNEA, _Williams_                                        133
  ARUNDINA BAMBUSÆFOLIA, _Lindl._                                    139
  CALANTHE VESTITA WILLIAMSII, _Moore_                               134
  CATTLEYA LABIATA PALLIDA, _Hort._                                  121
  CATTLEYA LABIATA PERCIVALIANA, _Rchb. f._                          144
  CATTLEYA MOSSIÆ HARDYANA, _Williams and Moore_                     125
  CATTLEYA SKINNERI ALBA, _Rchb. f._                                 112
  CATTLEYA TRIANÆ FORMOSA, _Williams_                                108
      [_See note under t._ 113.]
  CATTLEYA WHITEI, _Rchb. f._                                        115
  CŒLOGYNE BARBATA, _Griff._                                         143
  CORYANTHES MACULATA PUNCTATA, _Lindl._                              98
  CYMBIDIUM AFFINE, _Griff._                                         140
  CYPRIPEDIUM CALURUM, _Rchb. f._                                    136
  CYPRIPEDIUM CURTISII, _Rchb. f._                                   122
  CYPRIPEDIUM MELANOPHTHALMUM, _Rchb. f._                            109
  CYPRIPEDIUM SPICERIANUM, _Rchb. f._                                119
  DENDROBIUM DEARII, _Rchb. f._                                      120
  DENDROBIUM DRACONIS, _Rchb. f._                                    103
  DENDROBIUM FARMERII AUREUM, _Williams and Moore_                    99
  DENDROBIUM LINAWIANUM, _Rchb. f._                                  141
  DENDROBIUM WARDIANUM GIGANTEUM, _Williams and Moore_               113
  LÆLIA ALBIDA, _Batem._                                             138
  LÆLIA AMANDA, _Rchb. f._                                           135
  LÆLIA DAYANA, _Rchb. f._                                           132
  LÆLIA ELEGANS PRASIATA, _Rchb. f._                                  97
  LÆLIA HARPOPHYLLA, _Rchb. f._                                      117
  LÆLIA GRANDIS, _Lindl._                                            123
  LYCASTE HARRISONIÆ EBURNEA, _Moore_                                100
  MASDEVALLIA HARRYANA ATROSANGUINEA, _Hort. Williams_               105
  MASDEVALLIA HARRYANA MINIATA, _Williams and Moore_                 110
  MAXILLARIA LUTEO-ALBA, _Lindl._                                    106
  ODONTOGLOSSUM ALEXANDRÆ COOKSONII, _Williams and Moore_            118
  ODONTOGLOSSUM ALEXANDRÆ STEVENSII, _Williams and Moore_            127
  ODONTOGLOSSUM ELEGANS, _Rchb. f._                                  111
  ODONTOGLOSSUM LEEANUM, _Rchb. f._                                  101
  ODONTOGLOSSUM NEVADENSE, _Rchb. f._                                131
  ONCIDIUM FORBESII, _Hooker_                                        104
  ONCIDIUM LANCEANUM LOUVREXIANUM, _Rchb. f._                        129
  ONCIDIUM TIGRINUM, _Llave et Lex_                                  137
  PILUMNA NOBILIS, _Rchb. f._                                        128
  PLEIONE HUMILIS TRICOLOR, _Rchb. f._                               102
  SACCOLABIUM CURVIFOLIUM, _Lindl._                                  107
  THUNIA MARSHALLIANA, _Rchb. f._                                    130
  TRICHOSMA SUAVIS, _Lindl._                                         114
  VANDA SANDERIANA, _Rchb. f._                                       124
  WARSCEWICZELLA WENDLANDI DISCOLOR, _Rchb. f._                      126
  ZYGOPETALUM BURKEI, _Rchb. f._                                     142




                      INDEX TO NOTES AND SYNONYMS.


                                                             UNDER PLATE
  Aërides cylindricum, _Hooker_                                      116
  Aërides Lawrenciæ, cost of                                         109
  Angræcum fastuosum, Sir T. Lawrence’s                              143
  Angræcum sesquipedale, Mr. Graham’s                                118
  Bletia albida, _Rchb. f._                                          138
  Bletia graminifolia, _Don_                                         139
  Bletia grandis, _Rchb. f._                                         123
  Calanthe Veitchii, Mr. Gaskell’s                                   127
  Calanthe vestita, Mr. Gaskell’s                                    127
  Cattleya Percivaliana alba, Mr. Percival’s                         131
  Cattleya Rothschildiana, _Hort._                              117, 135
  Cattleya Skinneri, gigantic                                        142
  Cattleya Trianæ formosa, correction                                113
  Cattleya Trianæ, Mr. Philbrick’s                                   131
  Cattleyas, Mr. Lee’s                                               140
  Cattleyas, Mr. Percival’s                                          101
  Cœlogyne coronaria, _Lindley_                                      114
  Coryanthes punctata, _Lindley_                                      98
  Cymbidium affine, Mr. Wyatt’s                                      123
  Cymbidium bambusifolium, _Roxb._                                   139
  Cymbidium elegans, Mr. McDonald’s                                  122
  Cymbidium micromeson, _Lindley_                                    140
  Dendrobium crassinode Barberianum                                  138
  Dendrobium eburneum, _Parish_                                      103
  Dendrobium Harveyanum, Sir T. Lawrence’s                           143
  Dendrobium moniliforme, _Lindley_, non _Swartz_                    141
  Dendrobium nobile formosanum, _Rchb. f._                           141
  Dendrobium Paxtoni, Mr. Mainwaring’s                               142
  Dendrobium Wardianum Lowii, _Smith_                                113
  Disa grandiflora, Duke of Devonshire’s                             107
  Epidendrum vitellinum giganteum, Mr. Shaw’s                        126
  Eria coronaria, _Rchb. f._                                         114
  Esmeralda Sanderiana, _Rchb. f._                                   124
  Lælia amanda, Mr. Brymer’s                                         117
  Lælia anceps, Mr. Percival’s                                       128
  Lælia anceps Williamsiana, Messrs. Sander’s                        131
  Lælia pumila Dayana, _Burbidge_                                    132
  Lælia purpurata, Mr. Buchanan’s                                     98
  Lycastes, Mr. Lee’s                                                134
  Manchester Whitsuntide Exhibition of 1883                           97
  Masdevallia Chimæra, Marquis of Lothian’s                          120
  Masdevallia Harryana atrosanguinea, _Hort. Williams_                99
  Masdevallia Harryana longiflora, _Warner_                           99
  Odontoglossum Alexandræ, Mr. Bockett’s                             119
  Odontoglossum Alexandræ aureum, Mr. Philbrick’s                    131
  Odontoglossum cinnamomeum, Sir T. Lawrence’s                       143
  Odontoglossum mulus, Mr. Tod’s                                     142
  Odontoglossum Pollettianum, Mr. Pollett’s                          131
  Odontoglossum sceptrum, Mr. McDonald’s                             136
  Odontoglossums, Mr. Warner’s                                        99
  Oncidium anthrocene, Messrs. Sander’s                              131
  Oncidium Barkeri, _Lindley_                                        137
  Oncidium Jonesianum, Mr. Smee’s                                    131
  Oncidium Lanceanum, _Lindley_                                      130
  Orchid, a gigantic                                                 142
  Orchids, New                                                  131, 143
  Orchids, Mr. Bull’s Exhibition of                                  104
  Orchids, Dr. Paterson’s                                            114
  Orchids, Mr. Warner’s                                               99
  Orchids at Dunlop House                                            118
  Orchids at Downside, Leatherhead                                   134
  Orchids at Eastwood Park, Glasgow                                  116
  Orchids at Gouville                                                108
  Orchids at Melrose                                                 115
  Orchids at Sandringham                                             103
  Orchids at The Dell, Staines                                       110
  Orchids at Upper Holloway Nursery                                  100
  Orchids in Vineries                                                125
  Phaius tuberculosus, successful treatment of                       139
  Phalænopsids, Mr. Lee’s                                            134
  Pilumna fragrans grandiflora, _Linden_                             128
  Renanthera Lowii, Baron Rothschild’s                               106
  Saccolabium miniatum, _Hooker_                                     107
  Stanhopea gibbosa, Mr. Wallis’s                                    107
  Trichopilia fragrans nobilis, _Lind. et And._                      128
  Vanda Cathcartii, Mr. Heriot’s                                     131
  Vanda Lowii, Baron Rothschild’s                                    106
  Vanda Sanderiana, Mr. Lee’s                                        111
  Vanda suavis and tricolor, Mr. Graham’s                            118
  Vanda teres, Mr. Broome’s                                          102
  Warscewiczella Wendlandi, _Rchb. f._                               126
  Zygopetalum Burkei, Messrs. Veitch’s                               122
  Zygopetalum Wendlandi, _Rchb. f._                                  126

    [Illustration: PL. 97.
    LÆLIA ELEGANS PRASIATA]




                        LÆLIA ELEGANS PRASIATA.
                              [Plate 97.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ erect, clustered, terete, clavate, jointed, about
  one and a half foot high. _Leaves_ in pairs at the top of the stems,
  linear-oblong, obtuse, coriaceous, deep green. _Racemes_ short, erect,
  six to eight-flowered, issuing from an oblong purplish compressed
  bract, the peduncles and pedicels green. _Flowers_ large and showy,
  five inches across; _sepals_ about three inches long, oblanceolate,
  the edges revolute and the tips recurved, of a light magenta-rose,
  paler towards the base, having a greenish tint along the centre, and a
  distinct flush of purple; _petals_ obovate-lanceolate, acute, an inch
  broad, of a deeper rose than the sepals, and having a flush of green,
  the margins undulated; _lip_ three-lobed, the lateral lobes elongate,
  white, rolled over the column, tinted with rose at the edges; and of a
  bright rosy crimson at the tips; the front lobe an inch and
  three-fourths in breadth, transversely-reniform, crenate and much
  undulated at the margin, of a rich magenta-crimson, traversed by veins
  of deeper crimson, the veins most evident in the centre where the
  ground colour is paler; disk smooth. _Column_ clavate, marginate,
  enclosed.

  Lælia elegans prasiata, _Reichenbach fil., in litteris_, 1863; _Id._
  _Botanische Zeitung_, _October_, 1864; _Id._ _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xix., 11 (sub-variety).


The Lælias form a glorious class of Orchids, including many noble
species which certainly rank amongst the most beautiful of the whole
family. Their flowers embrace nearly every shade of colour, including
bright orange, yellow, pure white, magenta, rose, and many others. They
are all extremely beautiful, notwithstanding that some of them produce
large flowers, while those of others are much smaller, for the latter
are often of a more brilliant colour than the larger kinds, which is an
ample compensation. The whole family, without exception, is well worth
growing.

The particular form we now bring before the notice of our readers is a
very handsome variety, and when first bloomed had the flowers _prasiato
aspersis_; it is of the same type as _Lælia Turnerii_, of which there is
a grand plate in the first series of Mr. Warner’s _Select Orchidaceous
Plants_. Our illustration was prepared from a drawing taken from a
specimen, bearing two spikes, and which produced six beautiful flowers
on each, in the select collection of Baron Schröder, The Dell, Staines.

_Lælia elegans prasiata_ is an evergreen plant, producing stems or
pseudobulbs about eighteen inches high, furnished with two leaves which
are six inches long and of a dark green colour. It produces its flowers
from the new bulb when it has completed its growth, and they issue from
a sheath, six or more together. The sepals and petals are of a dull
magenta, tinged with green, the lip being of a bright magenta, while the
external port of the lateral lobes, where they roll inwards over the
column, is white. The flowers are very fragrant, the scent being a
mixture of “May” and “Gardenia.”

This plant blooms during September and October, and lasts in beauty for
about three weeks. We find it requires the same treatment as _Lælia
purpurata_. It should, moreover, be grown in similar material, namely,
good fibrous peat, with perfect drainage, and as much light as possible.
Mr. Ballantyne, the gardener at the Dell, cultivates this with his
Cattleyas, which are well grown, there being among them some wonderful
specimens, many having over a hundred pseudobulbs. When in bloom, these
plants are quite worth a journey to see.


The Manchester Whitsuntide Exhibition of 1883 was a great success. Over
£2,000 was taken at the gates. We generally make a point of jotting down
a few notes concerning this show, as its chief attraction consists of
the Orchids, in which of course our readers are most interested.
Although the show had lost several of its largest supporters, such as
Mr. Percival, Mr. Hardy, and the late R. B. Dodgson, Esq., of Blackburn,
there were others who exhibited in strong force. We will mention a few
of the most noteworthy of the plants. O. Schneider, Esq., showed a very
fine collection, including _Cattleya Mendelii_, a grand variety with
sixteen flowers; also a splendid plant of _C. Mossiæ_, with over twenty
beautiful flowers; and _Dendrobium Devonianum_, a splendid plant with
its long stems bearing over two hundred flowers; in front of this was
_Odontoglossum Pescatorei_, with fourteen spikes of its lovely white and
spotted flowers; and a fine _Lælia purpurata_, with its rosy sepals and
petals, and bright crimson-purple lip. Dr. Ainsworth exhibited some very
fine specimens of _Dendrobium thyrsiflorum_, with fifteen of its
beautiful spikes; the pure white _Phalænopsis amabilis_, a splendid mass
with twelve spikes and a hundred flowers; a wonderful specimen of _Vanda
suavis_, with twelve spikes; _Phalænopsis grandiflora_, with more than
fifty flowers; and _Aërides Fieldingii_, a fine specimen with five
spikes and six branches. Mrs. Leach, of Gorse Hall, Stalybridge,
exhibited six good plants, among them was a fine _Cattleya Mossiæ_, with
a splendid dark lip; also _Dendrobium nobile_, fine, and the beautiful
_Odontoglossum Hallii_. There were some fine specimens exhibited from
the collection of W. Leach, Esq., Fallowfield, among which was a
wonderful plant of _Dendrobium Falconeri_, with two hundred flowers;
next to this was the curious _Cypripedium caudatum_, with six spikes,
also _Aërides crasssifolium_, and other good Orchids. Mr. Upjohn
exhibited a wonderful _Vanda tricolor_, the finest-grown plant we have
seen, with five spikes. Mr. Hodgkinson exhibited a very fine variety of
_Vanda suavis_ with three spikes. Mr. James, of Norwood, Surrey,
exhibited two fine collections, including a wonderful plant of
_Dendrobium Paxtoni_; _Cattleya Mendelii_, with ten flowers;
_Masdevallia Harryana_, a fine variety; a good plant of _Dendrobium
Jamesianum_, with thirty-six flowers, and many other fine specimens. Mr.
Cypher, of Cheltenham, also showed some good plants, among which we
remarked a fine _Dendrobium Freemanii_, with one hundred flowers of a
beautiful colour; _D. Devonianum_, with two hundred of its lovely
blossoms; also some other good plants. Messrs. Ireland & Thomson, of
Edinburgh, also exhibited a very fine collection of cut Orchids that was
much admired.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 98.
    CORYANTHES MACULATA PUNCTATA.]




                     CORYANTHES MACULATA PUNCTATA.
                              [Plate 98.]
                          Native of Demerara.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ ovate or sometimes narrowed and elongate,
  furrowed, two to three inches long, tapering upwards, clustered.
  _Leaves_ two, from the apex of each pseudobulb, broadly lanceolate,
  plicate, submembranaceous, light green, about a foot long. _Scape_
  radical, pendent, one and a half foot long, brownish purple, bearing a
  _raceme_ of several flowers. _Bracts_ large, membranaceous,
  ovate-lanceolate, two or three sheathing ones on the scape, and one at
  the base of each pedicel. _Flowers_ large, very peculiar in form,
  ochraceous yellow, curiously spotted and blotched with deep
  wine-purple; _sepals_ conduplicate flexuose, membranaceous, the dorsal
  one small, oblong, the lateral ones broad, at first spreading, but at
  length becoming reflexed and resembling bats’ wings, pale ochraceous
  yellow, the surface thickly spotted with small dots of deep
  wine-purple; _petals_ oblong, erect, twisted, much smaller than the
  sepals, of the same colour, but having the spots larger; _lip_
  stipitate, continuous with the base of the column, cup-shaped, having
  a large helmet-shaped pedunculate appendage, the cup yellowish, the
  appendage creamy white, spotted and blotched on both surfaces with
  deep wine-purple, the purple colour almost covering the anterior side.
  _Column_ terete, recurved, two horned at the base, two winged.

  Coryanthes maculata punctata, _Lindley, Folia Orchidacea_, art.
  _Coryanthes_, No. 2.; _Reichenbach fil._, in _Walpers’ Annales
  Botanices Systematica_, vi., 598.

  Coryanthes punctata, _Lindley, Botanical Register_, t. 1793.


_Coryanthes_ is a most curious and interesting genus of Orchids, and but
few species have yet come under our notice. We have long known _C.
macrantha_ and _C. speciosa_, which are two distinct kinds. That which
we now figure is much like _C. macrantha_, with the exception that the
crimson colouring is darker. Our drawing was taken from a fine specimen
in the superb collection of W. McDonald, Esq., Woodlands, Perth, who is
a great admirer of good Orchids.

_Coryanthes maculata punctata_ is an evergreen plant, with short, thick
pseudobulbs about two inches in height, bearing light green foliage
about a foot in height. The flower spike proceeds from the base of the
pseudobulbs, several flowers being produced together on the some scape;
they are yellow, spotted with crimson. The plant, which blooms during
October and November lasts but a few days in flower; it is, however,
well worth growing on account of the extraordinary form of its flowers.
Before they open they remind one of a Chinese foot; after opening they
form a kind of cup having above it a pair of fleshy horns from which a
liquid is distilled which drops into the cup.

These plants come from Demerara. They are found growing on the outside
branches of trees, where they get all the light possible. They will
thrive on blocks of wood, also in baskets or pots. If grown on blocks
they require some good live sphagnum moss about their roots; if in
baskets or pots, a little rough fibrous peat and charcoal mixed together
will suit them, but they must have ample drainage as they require a good
supply of water in their growing season. When at rest they should get
just enough water to keep the bulbs in a plump state. We have found the
warm end of the Cattleya house to suit them. These Coryanths require a
good deal of care to grow them well. We used, some years ago, to grow
fine specimens and exhibit them, and they were always a source of great
attraction.

They are propagated by dividing the plants, leaving several old bulbs at
the back of the leading one. This should be done just after they have
started into growth. They must be kept free from insects which are apt
to injure the young leaves as they are thin in texture. Sometimes thrips
and red spiders will attack them, but they must be quickly exterminated.


Lælia purpurata.—A very fine spike of flower of this most beautiful and
chaste Orchid was received by us from J. Buchanan, Esq., of Edinburgh.
This plant has its sepals and petals quite flat, and holds them so till
the last, whereas many of the purpuratas curl up a little after they
have been open a short time. The sepals and petals are white, with a
broad finely-coloured dark lip, of which the front portion is rich
crimson-magenta, and the basal part paler and distinctly veined, the
throat being yellow, beautifully veined with dark crimson. Each flower
measured as much as seven inches across, the petals being two inches
across. Mr. Grossart, the gardener, says, the flowers show well up above
the foliage, which gives it a most striking appearance among the other
varieties.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 99.
    DENDROBIUM FARMERII AUREUM.]




                      DENDROBIUM FARMERII AUREUM.
                              [Plate 99.]
                       Native of India: Moulmein.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ short, clavate, with a thickened bulbiform base,
  jointed, deeply furrowed, the internodes almost wholly covered by
  membranaceous sheaths, bearing leaves at the apex. _Leaves_ two or
  four, lanceolate, ovate, coriaceous, dark shining green. _Racemes_
  many-flowered, drooping, lateral, proceeding from near the top of the
  stem, just beneath the leaves, the pale green pedicels with a small
  concave ovate bract at their base. _Flowers_ bright golden yellow,
  showy; _sepals_ oblong-ovate, bluntish, spreading, of a clear bright
  golden yellow; _petals_ of the some colour, much broader,
  roundish-ovate, almost meeting at the edges; _lip_ concave, roundish,
  subunguiculate, with a small blunt spur behind, pubescent on the upper
  surface, and denticulate at the edge, of a deep rich orange-yellow,
  which contrasts agreeably with the lighter and brighter yellow of the
  outer perianth segments. _Column_ small, pale yellow.

  Dendrobium Farmerii aureum, _supra_.


Here we have a most charming Orchid, and one that blooms very freely on
short bulbs or stems. The plant is of less vigorous habit than certain
other of the varieties of _D. Farmerii_, some of which grow as
vigorously as _D. densiflorum_. Indeed, excepting by cultivators who are
well acquainted with the plants, it is a most difficult matter to
distinguish them readily from each other. The plant we now describe and
illustrate is a yellow-flowered variety of _D. Farmerii_, the typical
form of which has pinkish sepals and petals and a rich yellow lip. It is
a very lovely species. Our drawing of this rare variety was taken from a
plant in the Victoria Nursery, Upper Holloway, where we have had the
different forms flowering during the months of May and June, many of
them growing on a back wall on blocks of wood, and producing a fine
effect with their spikes of yellow blossoms hanging over the foliage.
Even when grown in pots or baskets they have a pleasing effect, and take
but little space.

_Dendrobium Farmerii aureum_ is a compact evergreen species from
Moulmein. It grows about ten inches high, with dark green shining
foliage. The flower spikes proceed from the top of the old bulb stems,
and are sometimes ten inches in length. The sepals and petals are bright
golden yellow, and the lip rich orange. The plant blooms during March,
April, and May, and lasts about a fortnight in perfection.

We have found the plants do well in the India House, under the same
treatment as _D. Farmerii_ itself. If grown in a pot give good drainage
by filling the pot three parts full with crocks, adding a little rough
fibrous peat and a small quantity of charcoal mixed with it, so that the
plants may be well elevated above the rim, and thus be enabled to throw
out their roots freely, while at the same time the water may pass off
quickly. If they are grown in baskets, the same treatment may be given.
A little water at the roots will suffice, as these plants do not like
too much moisture. The soil must be kept moist during the growing
season, but in their resting season only just sufficient must be given
to keep their bulbs and leaves plump. As soon as they begin to show
flower more water may be supplied in order to encourage the spikes to
come out more freely. If grown on a block a little live sphagnum moss
should be placed about their roots, and this must be kept moist during
the growing season. When they are at rest a little less quantity will do
until they commence to show their flowers.


Mr. Warner’s Orchids.—Those who wish to see Odontoglossums and
Masdevallias grown and flowered as they should be, should pay a visit to
the renowned collection of Orchids at Broomfield, Chelmsford. After
having inspected the principal collections both in Europe and America,
we have not the slightest hesitation in saying that this is one of the
finest displays of flowering Orchids ever brought together. These
Odontoglossums are grown by the thousand, Mr. Warner having sent a
collector to New Grenada, a few years ago, to select and bring home the
best varieties. This has resulted in getting together a collection of
about 12,000 Odontoglots, comprising all the best species and varieties
known to cultivators. On entering the Odontoglossum house we were
enchanted with the sight before us. Let the reader imagine a large house
sixty feet long by sixteen feet wide, with a centre and two side tables,
literally crammed with flowering Orchids, consisting of hundreds of
spikes of Odontoglossums and Masdevallias, intermixed with a profusion
of the beautiful _Epidendrum vitellinum majus_ and other Orchids, and he
will form some idea of the magnitude of this show. Leaving the
Odontoglossum house we entered the Masdevallia house, where there was
also a grand display, among which we noticed particularly _M. Harryana
atrosanguinea_, a fine form with large crimson-magenta flowers,
measuring two and a half inches long by two inches broad; _M.
Dennisoniana_, with richly coloured flowers, two and a half by two and a
quarter inches; and _M. Harryana longiflora_, a variety with immense
flowers, having blossoms three inches by two and a half of a rosy
magenta colour, faintly striped with a darker tint of the same colour.
In addition to these, there was another house about forty feet long
filled with flowering Odontoglossums, Masdevallias, and other things, a
perfect fairyland as viewed from the door. Leaving this house, we came
to the Cattleya house where, although the collection of these plants is
not large, there are nevertheless some fine varieties in bloom, more
especially of _Lælia purpurata_ and the ever varying _Cattleya Mossiæ_.
Altogether we were highly delighted with our visit, and greatly
appreciated the hospitality of our host.—H. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 100.
    LYCASTE HARRISONIÆ EBURNEA.]




                      LYCASTE HARRISONIÆ EBURNEA.
                              [Plate 100.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ ovate, tetragonal, furrowed, monophyllous,
  the young ones sheathed with brown membranaceous bracts. _Leaves_
  broadly lanceolate acute, narrowed to the base, strongly ribbed or
  plicate, rigid, dark green. _Raceme_ two-flowered, radical, erect,
  shorter than the leaves, the peduncle furnished with appressed bracts.
  _Flowers_ large end attractive, nearly three inches across; _sepals_
  ivory-white, waxy in texture; dorsal one oblong, obtuse, broader
  upwards, somewhat incurved, the lateral ones spreading horizontally,
  falcato-oblong, the lower side produced so as to cover the spur of the
  lip; _petals_ obovate, about as long as the dorsal sepal, of an
  ivory-white wax-like appearance and stout fleshy texture; _lip_ large,
  erect, narrowed at the base where it is enclosed by the lateral
  sepals, broader upwards, three-lobed: lateral lobes incurved and
  meeting the column, which they exceed, the margin with one or two
  broadish lobes primrose-yellow, covered with strongly marked forked
  reddish purple veins: front lobe smaller, oblong obtuse, recurved,
  undulated, white, with a few finer purple veins at the edge; _disk_
  with a broad orange-yellow hairy crest, which is blunt and much
  thickened in front. _Column_ adnate for much of its length, and
  meeting the base of all the petals and sepals, the free portion
  incurved, semiterete.

  Lycaste Harrisoniæ eburnea, _Moore_, _supra_.


We trust that the illustration we have now the pleasure to submit to our
readers, may be the means of inducing Orchid Growers to take up the
cultivation of the plants of this family for decorative purposes more
than is done at the present time. They produce fine handsome flowers,
and such kinds as _L. Skinneri_ are most useful for winter decoration.
There is a fine plate representing _L. Skinneri_ in Mr. Warner’s _Select
Orchidaceous Plants_, in which the light and dark coloured varieties are
well shown. There are among them many distinct and varied colours, and
they are all free blooming, lasting for six weeks in beauty; indeed,
when grown in a cool house, they continue still longer in perfection.
Some persons object to the Lycastes on account of the stiff rigid form
of their flowers, while other cultivators selecting the best forms and
varieties, find in them a source of much gratification. W. Lee, Esq., of
Leatherhead, has some wonderful varieties of the _L. Skinneri_ type,
some of them dark red, others mauve-pink or pure white, and there are
besides various other shades of colour; these all blooming at the same
time, and intermixed with plants of graceful foliage, produce the
decorative effect that one looks for in our orchid houses.

The plant our plate represents belongs to a different species, _L.
Harrisoniæ_, one of the older of cultivated Orchids. The drawing was
taken from a specimen bloomed and exhibited by ourselves at the Royal
Horticultural Society’s Show at South Kensington in April last, and
which was deservedly awarded a First Class Certificate for its ivory
white flowers with a slight pencilling of purple on the lip. The typical
_L. Harrisoniæ_ although one of the oldest inhabitants of our stoves is
well worth cultivating more extensively; it has creamy white flowers,
with a purplish lilac lip, the flowers being larger, and the plant more
robust in growth than in the present variety, _eburnea_, which, however,
blooms more freely and retains the purity of its whiteness for some
time. There are some yellow-flowered species, such as _L. cruenta_ and
_L. aromatica_, which are worth growing for their colour and fragrance.

_Lycaste Harrisoniæ eburnea_ is an evergreen plant eight inches in
height, with deep green foliage; the flower spikes proceed from the base
of the pseudobulb and are about six inches in length. The sepals and
petals are of pure ivory-white, and the lip is also white faintly
striped with crimson; the throat yellow, striped with purplish red. It
blooms during April and May, and lasts for several weeks in flower.

We have found this plant do well at the cool end of the Cattleya house.
A cooler situation even than this will do. It must be potted in rough
fibrous peat, with good drainage, and must be well elevated above the
pot so that its roots can work about the soil. A little charcoal
intermixed with the peat helps to keep the soil open; moreover, the
roots like to cling to it, and it prevents the material from becoming
sour. This plant will also do well in a basket suspended from the roof,
as it likes a considerable amount of light to ripen its bulbs and
foliage; this causes it to grow stronger and flower more freely. It
requires the same treatment as _L. Skinneri_ as regards watering during
the growing season, but when at rest must be kept drier.


Orchids at Upper Holloway.—We were much gratified, when recently calling
at the Victoria Nursery, to see the excellent condition of the Orchids
generally, and the fine display of flowers. Some of Mr. Williams’ Orchid
houses are provided with a vestibule, which, from its contiguity to the
outer atmosphere and the frequently open doorway, is cooler and drier
than the growing houses attached, and into these the blooming plants are
brought for display, with the result that they are thus kept much longer
in a state of beauty. The stock here is large and in first-rate
condition, as, indeed, one would expect it to be in the hands of so
skilful a grower. The plan of shading adopted in this establishment is
much to be commended; the canvas, which is of a special construction, is
so fixed that it is kept quite clear of the glass, and a space is thus
provided through which the air is constantly passing. In the case of
cool Orchids this is of great importance, as it acts so as to moderate
any excess of summer heat. We were much pleased to see that Mr.
Williams’ large specimen plants, now in flower, are legitimately “grown
on” and not “made up” as has lately been much the fashion, a practice
which, it may be hoped, the rule now adopted at some exhibitions, to the
effect that “made up” plants will disqualify, will put an end to. Many
fine species were in bloom, but as the object of this note is not to
make a catalogue of them, we will only add that the Cattleyas, Vandas,
Odontoglots, and Masdevallias were blooming very freely and were
represented by many finely grown specimens.—T. M.

    [Illustration: PL. 101.
    ODONTOGLOSSUM LEEANUM.]




                         ODONTOGLOSSUM LEEANUM.
                              [Plate 101.]
                         Native of New Grenada.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ ovate obtuse, nearly two inches long,
  pea-green, compressed, diphyllous. _Leaves_ oblong-ligulate, acute,
  channelled towards the base. _Scape_ radical, produced in the axil of
  a leaf investing the base of the pseudobulb, and terminating in an
  erect many-flowered raceme, furnished with small ovate bracts at the
  base of the pedicels, and having a few more elongated bracts below.
  _Flowers_ stellate, about three and a half inches across, handsomely
  spotted; _sepals_ slightly wavy, lanceolate, attenuately acuminate,
  narrowed to the base, clear bright yellow, deeper at the tips, dotted
  all over with rather small brownish crimson spots, which are here and
  there somewhat larger, those towards the apical part being less
  crowded by the smaller spots, the dorsal sepal with three red lines at
  the base; _petals_ similar in form and colour, the larger less crowded
  spots being more evident, and the base marked by three lines of red;
  _lip_ ovate-lanceolate, about two-thirds the length of the sepals,
  attenuated at the apex, bright yellow, deeper at the base, where there
  are a few red streaks, and with a large brownish crimson blotch
  towards the front, and a few marginal spots, the disk appressed to the
  column at the base, and bearing a thick linear keel, which extends
  into two rhomboidal toothletted lamellæ. _Column_ sulphur-yellow, with
  a few reddish-brown spots, and a pair of falcate subulate ears or
  wings at the apex.

  Odontoglossum Leeanum, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xvii. 525; xix. 694.


This is one of the most distinct Odontoglots that has come under our
notice; and its prettily-spotted flowers are so attractive that every
grower will be anxious to procure it. We believe, however, that the
plant from which our drawing was made, is the only one known at the
present time. It is in the possession of W. Lee, Esq., Downside,
Leatherhead, in whose honour it has been named, and who is very
fortunate in being the possessor of such a gem. There is little doubt of
its being a natural hybrid. The plant was imported along with many
others, none of which, however, have produced flowers approaching it in
beauty.

_Odontoglossum Leeanum_ is of evergreen habit, with pseudobulbs about
two inches high, of a pea-green colour. The leaves also are of a lively
light green colour, and about ten inches in length. The sepals and
petals are of a pale yellow margined with orange, and spotted with rich
red-brown, the lip yellow, also spotted with the same colour. It blooms
during the winter months, and lasts for several weeks in beauty, forming
a most effective contrast to the white flowers of _O. Alexandræ_ and _O.
Pescatorei_. The plant requires the same treatment as the two species
just named, and blooms in the same way.

We paid a visit to the Downside collection of Orchids in June of the
present year, and were greatly surprised to see the progress that had
been made as regards the erection of new houses for each section of
Orchids, and the pains and trouble which had been taken to make each
house complete as regards ventilation, stages, and tanks for the
reception of rain-water; even the paths are made to do their part
towards the growth of the plants, as well as to provide for the comfort
of those who have to do the work, as well as of the visitors, who may
walk on them without wetting their feet, a paving brick with a scored
surface being used, so that the water thrown down remains in the
depressions of the surface, and gives off by evaporation a continuous
supply of moisture to the atmosphere, which is what the plants require
in the summer season when in full growth.

There was one long house filled with Masdevallias in grand beauty—a
glorious sight, embracing all the best species and varieties that can be
procured. Close by was the Odontoglossum house, with the plants on the
side tables one mass of bloom; and besides these, there was a fine lot
of Odontoglots, including some good forms, blooming in full beauty, in
another house. Here also was the finest Cattleya house we have yet seen,
there being many hundreds of flowers, consisting of _Cattleya Mossiæ_,
of which there were some of the grandest varieties we have met with;
also some fine examples of _C. Warnerii_, rich in colour, intermixed
with _C. Mendelii_ in variety, _C. gigas_, with its bold richly coloured
flowers, and many fine specimens of _Lælia purpurata_ in full beauty. In
the same house was a fine lot of specimen Vandas, placed on the centre
table, they were in fine health, and with their graceful foliage
towering above them, and their distinctly-coloured flowers, altogether
formed a pleasing contrast to the Cattleyas.

The India house was gay with species of _Aërides_ and _Saccolabium_,
among which were some very rare ones, too numerous to mention. There was
also a fine house devoted to _Phalænopsis_, as well as one for
Dendrobes, many of which were in bloom. Next to these was a structure
devoted to a good collection of _Lycaste Skinneri_, and other kinds that
require the same treatment. Much credit is due to Mr. Lee’s gardener,
Mr. Woolford, for the great interest he takes in maintaining the health
of the plants under his care.


Mr. Percival’s Cattleyas.—We have received from R. P. Percival, Esq. of
Southport, a box containing a fine series of _Cattleya Mossiæ_, _C.
Mendelii_, &c. Mr. Percival informs us that he has now (June) as many as
three hundred and thirty-six blossoms of _C. Mossiæ_ open; and taking
the flowers sent us as a sample, they are of a very fine strain, and
must present a gorgeous _coup d’œil_ in the Orchid house. Accompanying
the Cattleyas was a grand spike of _Odontoglossum vexillarium
splendens_, with very large flowers fine in form and deep in colour.—B.
S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 102.
    PLEIONE HUMILIS TRICOLOR.]




                       PLEIONE HUMILIS TRICOLOR.
                              [Plate 102.]
                       Native of the Indian Alps.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ lagæniform or bottle-shaped, that is, ovate
  with the neck narrowed, at the flowering period leafless. _Leaves_
  produced subsequently to the flowers, oblong-oblanceolate,
  five-nerved, membranaceo-herbaceous, of a dark green colour, paler
  beneath, the base enclosed in a tubular sheath. _Peduncles_ short,
  one-flowered, furnished with sheathing bracts, the upper of which is
  oblong-lanceolate, petaloid, longer than the ovary, and becoming at
  length contracted, leaving the peduncle exposed. _Flowers_
  proportionately large, showy, four inches across and three inches
  deep, produced before the leaves are developed; _sepals_
  narrow-lanceolate, spreading, and of a delicate blush or pale rosy
  purple tint; _petals_ similar in form and colour, recurved; _lip_
  large, obovate, emarginate, closely frilled at the edge, and
  distinctly fringed with long hair-like teeth, sulphur-yellow, the
  central portion having about six longitudinal fimbriated veins,
  alternating with a corresponding number of pale tawny brown lines, the
  broad margin wavered by irregular divergent bars and blotches of the
  same colour. _Column_ free, erect, winged.

  Pleione humilis tricolor, _Reichenbach fil. MS_.


_Pleione_ is a small genus, an offshoot of _Cælogyne_, distinguished,
perhaps, mainly by habit, which we are pleased to bring before our
readers, since the species form a charming group of dwarf-growing
free-blooming plants, easy of cultivation, and blossoming at a
time—autumn and winter—when flowers are most useful. They may, indeed,
be grown on a shelf in any warm house. Several of them are very
beautiful in colour, such as _P. Wallichiana_, which is of a deep rose;
_P. Reichenbachiana_, lilac-purple and magenta; _P. maculata_, white and
crimson; _P. lagenaria_, mauve and white; besides which there are
several others of almost equal beauty. In those we have here mentioned,
however, we get a charming contrast, and they flower about the same
time. In their native country the Pleiones are called Indian Crocuses, a
very appropriate name for them, as they are low-growing and destitute of
leaves when flowering. In our houses this apparent defect can be met by
intermixing them amongst Ferns, setting their flowers just above, and
the Ferns as a carpet or border for them. The variety of _P. humilis_,
figured in the accompanying plate, is a most beautiful one, which was
bloomed at the Victoria and Paradise Nurseries, and was named by
Professor Reichenbach. It is quite distinct from those already
mentioned, and it blooms very freely in winter, which makes it a
desirable plant for cultivation.

_Pleione humilis tricolor_ is of dwarf deciduous habit, with dark green
foliage, attaining about six inches high, which is cast off after the
growth is completed: these leaves have about five principal nerves, with
five intermediate ones extending from the base to the apex. The flowers
proceed from the base of the curious flask-shaped pseudobulbs, and grow
on scapes about three inches high, the flowers being large in proportion
to their stature. The sepals and petals are of a pale rose colour, while
the lip is pale yellow, distinctly spotted with dull brownish orange.
The blossoms are produced during January and February, and last about
two or three weeks in beauty. This plant is best grown in a pot with
good drainage, of which, in the first place, the pots should be half
filled; then mix some good fibrous loam and peat, with a little sphagnum
moss and sand, and use this as a compost. They must have a good supply
of water during the growing season, but when the pseudobulbs have
matured their growth, they must be kept nearly dry until they show signs
of flowering, when a little moisture will help them to swell. After the
blossoms have faded, they require potting into fresh material, when they
will soon begin to grow, and send new roots into the fresh soil. We
always pot them afresh every year, since they lose all their roots. If
requisite, several bulbs may be placed in a pot on the top of the soil.
They must never be over-potted, indeed, we think they look better in
small pots.

All the kinds we have mentioned require the same treatment, and will do
well in a cool part of the East India house. We grow them in the
Cattleya house, but they must be near the glass, and shaded from the
bright sun, which soon affects their foliage, and if this happens, the
bulbs will not be so plump and vigorous, and the result will be that the
flowers will not be either so fine, or so numerous, or so well-coloured.


Vanda teres.—We recently received from J. Broome, Esq., Wood Lawn,
Didsbury, Manchester, some fine spikes of blossoms of this most
beautiful _Vanda_, and were surprised to hear that the plant had borne
over two hundred and fifty flowers. What a glorious spectacle! On one of
the spikes there were five of these charming flowers, each measuring
three inches across. We saw this plant last year, and a most wonderful
old specimen it is. It is trained cylindrically, and forms a grand
massive plant, curious, withal, on account of its terete dark green
climbing stems, thinly clothed with leaves, which are also terete, and
of the same colour. No doubt it is one of the most distinct-looking of
Orchids, and one, moreover, that few growers succeed in flowering well.
It requires to be grown vigorously, with all the light that can be given
to it in the growing season, during which period it should be well
supplied with moisture. When at rest in winter it should have very
little water, but should receive all the light and sun that can be
secured for it, in order to cause the stems to ripen. When it shows
signs of flowering, water may be supplied in order to induce the plant
to throw out its flower-spikes more freely and with greater vigour.—B.
S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 103.
    DENDROBIUM DRACONIS.]




                          DENDROBIUM DRACONIS.
                              [Plate 103.]
              Native of Moulmein, Siam, and Cochin China.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ robust, jointed, the internodes nearly covered by
  the sheathing base of the leaves, striate, nigro-hirsute, about a foot
  in height. _Leaves_ leathery, dark green, oblong-lanceolate, about
  three inches long, obliquely notched at the apex. _Flowers_ in short
  three to five-flowered racemes, terminal or borne in the axils of the
  upper leaves, conspicuous from their fine ivory-white colour and
  distinct eye; _sepals_ lanceolate, acute, entire, spreading, the
  dorsal one erect; _petals_ also pure white, broader, ovate-lanceolate,
  spreading, the tips often recurved; _lip_ three-lobed, the lateral
  lobes short, roundish-ovate, white, pencilled with cinnabar-red, the
  middle lobe three times longer, elongate-oblong, apiculate, the veins
  thickened, the margins crenulate and undulated, the disk minutely
  downy, and like the lateral lobes marked with a tuft of longitudinal
  cinnabar-red lines; _spur_ funnel-shaped, horizontal, about equalling
  the sepals. _Column_ short, greenish.

  Dendrobium Draconis, _Reichenbach fil._, _Botanische Zeitung_, 1862,
  214; _Id._, _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S., xix., 598.

  Dendrobium eburneum, _Parish MS._; _Bateman_, in _Botanical Magazine_,
  t. 5459; _Id._, _Second Century of Orchidaceous Plants_, t. 166;
  _André_, _Revue Horticole_, 1883, 132, with coloured plate.


Some confusion in reference to the name of this handsome Dendrobe has
arisen in gardens where it has for about twenty years been known as
_Dendrobium eburneum_. This name, a MS. one of the Rev. C. P. S. Parish,
was attached to it in the _Botanical Magazine_ for 1864, and by mistake
attributed to Professor Reichenbach, who had published the name _D.
Draconis_ for the same plant in the _Botanische Zeitung_ for 1862. The
name _Draconis_, of course, takes precedence.

The plant which we now introduce to our readers under its correct name,
is a most beautiful Indian Dendrobe, one which is quite distinct in
growth, belonging to the nigro-hirsute group of which _Dendrobium
formosum_ is an example; it is, however, smaller, and a much better
grower, and, in fact, more closely resembles _D. infundibulum_ and _D.
Jamesianum_, both in its habit and its flowers, which are produced very
freely, as may be seen from the faithful representation of the plum and
flowers which our artist has made. The drawing was taken from a specimen
which bloomed in the Victoria and Paradise Nurseries, one of a large
importation we received last year as _D. eburneum_, the true name of
which, on submitting flowers to Professor Reichenbach, we learned to be
_D. Draconis_. We have subsequently bloomed others with much larger
flowers. It will become a most valuable plant for decoration, as its
blossoms last so long after being cut, and being white it will be always
in request.

_Dendrobium Draconis_ grows about a foot in height. It is an evergreen
plant, with dark hairy stems, producing deep green foliage and short
racemes of flowers. The sepals and petals are pure ivory-white, and the
lip is also white, with a bright vermilion throat. It flowers in May,
June, and July, and lasts about six weeks.

This plant does well in pans or pots suspended from the roof of the East
India house, near the light, as like all the Dendrobes it requires all
the light possible in order to ripen its stems, but the burning sun must
be kept from it. We have grown it in the stove hanging under a plant of
_Stephanotis_, where there is little shade from the foliage of the
Stephanotis, and with this treatment it has bloomed very freely. The
best potting material for it consists of rough fibrous peat and sphagnum
moss, with a liberal supply of water at the roots in the growing season.
When the growth is completed give just enough to keep the stems in a
plump state. It will grow either in pots or baskets suspended from the
roof, and also on blocks of wood with live sphagnum moss about the
roots, but under the latter circumstances when in vigorous growth the
plants will require more water and attention.


Orchids at Sandringham, the residence of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.—A
short time since we paid a visit to Mr. Penny to see the Orchids at
Sandringham, and were much struck with the many fine specimens we saw in
bloom, the mass of flowers on some of them, and the colour and size of
the blossoms; they gave one the idea of being well cared for. Mr. Penny
is quite an enthusiast among good plants, and appears to have selected
some most beautiful species and varieties of the Orchid family,
especially among the forms of _Odontoglossum Alexandræ_ and _O.
Pescatorei_, the fine drooping spikes of which are cut and sent to the
Princess, who is a great admirer of them as decorations, intermixed with
the bright _Epidendrum vitellinum majus_ and _Masdevallias_, of which
there is here also a well-grown set of plants. The _Epidendrum
vitellinum majus_ was conspicuous for its large spikes of bright
orange-scarlet flowers; and we saw some splendid varieties of
_Masdevallia_, with fine bright colours and large flowers. We noticed
some well-grown plants of _Odontoglossum vexillarium_, with the flowers
five inches across, and good in colour; _Cattleya Mossiæ_ in good bloom,
some of the flowers measuring eight inches across, of fine substance,
shape, and colour; fine plants of _C. Mendelii_ and _C. gigas_; some
good plants of _Lælia anceps_, promising well for bloom in the autumn;
and well-grown plants of _L. anceps Dawsoni_. This choice collection
includes many other good Orchids grown for the purpose of cutting and
used for decorating the mansion. The great aim of Mr. Penny is to grow
those kinds that are most useful and lasting for that purpose. We quite
fall in with him in this respect, as there are no flowers that are
better adapted for decorative purposes than those Orchids which last
long after being cut.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 104.
    ONCIDIUM FORBESII.]




                           ONCIDIUM FORBESII.
                              [Plate 104.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ oblong obtuse, compressed, sulcate, two
  inches long, of a dull brownish green, each bearing one leaf from the
  apex. _Leaves_ lanceolate acute, leathery, eight to ten inches long.
  _Scape_ radical, bearing a many-flowered panicle. _Flowers_ large,
  numerous, very showy, measuring about two and a half inches in both
  directions, handsomely marked; _sepals_ obovate, recurved, about an
  inch long, deep chestnut brown, with indistinct transverse bands and
  marginal indications of yellow, the lateral ones connate; _petals_
  larger, about an inch and a half long, and an inch and a quarter wide,
  roundish-obovate, the margin undulate, the base suddenly narrowed into
  a claw, the central parts wholly deep glossy chestnut-red, the edge
  for about a quarter of an inch in width yellow, closely marked by
  short irregular transverse bars of chestnut-red; _lip_ with a longish
  narrow claw, and large transversely reniform deeply bilobed front
  segment, an inch and three fourths broad, which is coloured like the
  petals, the claw spotted with yellow and red, crested, the crests
  usually consisting of five rugged equidistant warts, the two middle of
  which are sometimes wanting. _Column_ with small angulate wings,
  banded with lines of violet.

  Oncidium Forbesii, _Hooker_, _Botanical Magazine_, t. 3705; _Lindley_,
  _Folia Orchidacea_, art. _Oncidium_, No. 60; _Williams_, _Orchid
  Grower’s Manual_, 5 ed., 254.


The genus _Oncidium_ is a very large one, and there are many species
well known in cultivation, but the one we now illustrate belongs to a
section in which there are few that are so distinct in colour. The
flowers are not so large as in _O. crispum_, of which there are many
distinct varieties, differing in size and colour—variations which often
depend on the vigour of the plants. The same may be said of _O.
Forbesii_, the stronger the bulbs the finer the blossoms. Our sketch was
taken from a well-grown plant in the collection of E. Bonny, Esq., Downs
Park Road, Hackney, who is forming a choice collection of Orchids.

_Oncidium Forbesii_ is an evergreen species, with pseudobulbs of a
greenish brown colour; the foliage is of a dark green, and the flowers
are chestnut-brown, with the sepals and petals irregularly margined with
bright lemon-yellow. It blooms at different times of the year, and lasts
for several weeks in perfection. We find the plants do well in small
pans or baskets, and also on blocks of wood. When grown in pans or
baskets we have found them grow freely in good fibrous peat, with pieces
of charcoal on the top of the peat, as they like to work their roots in
among the charcoal, and should have plenty of drainage, and but very
little peat earth. When cultivated on blocks they require more water in
the growing than in the resting season.

These plants are not long-lived under our artificial treatment. There is
something wanted that we do not or cannot supply, and hence it is
difficult to keep them for any long period in a thriving condition. They
seem, indeed, to wear themselves out by over-flowering or other causes
which are very difficult to find out. The same thing happens in the case
of some other Orchids. The bulbs of these plants should, if possible, be
kept from shrivelling. They often seem inclined to shrivel after they
have bloomed freely, and sometimes they lose their roots, especially
when they have their flower-spikes left on too long. If the plant is not
in a vigorous condition, it should not be allowed to bloom. We find they
do best at the coolest end of the Cattleya house, kept as near to the
glass as possible, but shaded from the hot sun, with sufficient water to
keep them moist during the growing season.

Insects should be assiduously kept in check, for cleanliness is a great
point in the culture of all Orchids. The plants are subject to the
attacks of white scale and thrips. In all cases every effort should be
made to keep the roots of the plants from being eaten off, as this would
soon cause the bulbs to shrivel and the plants to dwindle away.


Mr. Bull’s Exhibition of Orchids.—We have been particularly pleased with
this grand Exhibition. We thus see what the perseverance, courage, and
enterprise of one man can do in bringing together a magnificent show of
these gorgeous flowers for the gratification of the public—a show which
enables them without any personal inconvenience to gaze upon and admire
the wonderful floral products of distant lands. Indeed, even if the
visitors to Mr. Bull’s exhibition had travelled to their native
habitats, they could not have seen the plants under the same advantages,
for many of them grow on high trees and rocks almost out of sight, and
the different genera are nowhere to be found associated, except
artificially, as Mr. Bull has them in his Orchid house. There in the
month of June we saw some thousands of blossoms of different kinds of
_Cattleya_, _Odontoglossum_, _Oncidium_, _Lælia_, _Vanda_,
_Masdevallia_, _Anguloa_, _Epidendrum_, _Sobralia_, _Cypripedium_,
_Aërides_, _Saccolabium_, _Dendrobium_, _Phajus_, _Cœlgyne_, _Brassia_,
_Calanthe_, _Chysis_, _Cymbidium_, _Disa_, _Lycaste_, _Maxillaria_,
_Phalænopsis_, _Sophronitis_, _Thunia_, and various other genera, groups
of each kind being in many cases arranged in masses of different
colours; the whole being intermixed with Ferns, Palms, and other fine
foliaged plants, the combined effect was grand in the extreme—as those
persons who know Orchids will readily imagine, while those who are not
acquainted with their varied forms and lovely colours would not possibly
be able to form any idea of the wonderful display of beauty produced by
such an arrangement of such materials. We often see when there are
Orchids at Flower Shows that the visitors flock around them, admiring
their beauties of form and colour, but in the flower tent such a
glorious and gorgeous effect as that produced by Mr. Bull’s display is
never realized. We could say much more in respect to this Exhibition,
but space will not permit.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 105.
    MASDEVALLIA HARRYANA ATROSANGUINEA.]




                  MASDEVALLIA HARRYANA ATROSANGUINEA.
                              [Plate 105.]
                         Native of New Grenada.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ slender, short, tufted. _Leaves_ persistent,
  leathery in texture, with a nerveless elongate oblong-spathulate
  obtuse or somewhat acute blade, which is channelled at the base,
  keeled behind, of a dark green colour, narrowed downwards into a short
  petiole, three to four inches long, grooved in front, and invested at
  the base by long membranous brownish sheaths. _Scape_ erect, about a
  foot high, striately pencilled with purple, furnished with a few
  appressed sheathing bracts, bearing a solitary flower at the top.
  _Flowers_ richly-coloured and strikingly handsome; _tube_ a quarter of
  an inch wide and three-quarters of an inch long, dull orange-yellow
  stained with rosy purple in front, the mouth more closed than in some
  other forms; _dorsal sepal_ upwards of two inches long, narrow nearly
  to the base, filiform upwards; _lateral sepals_ deflexed, broadly and
  obliquely flacate-lanceolate, acuminate, two and a half inches long,
  and nearly an inch wide, of a rich glowing crimson flushed with
  magenta; _petals_ and _lip_ small, hidden at the base of the tube.

  Masdevallia Harryana atrosanguinea, _Hort. Williams_.


Of the genus _Masdevallia_ a few years ago there were but a very limited
number of species known in cultivation, but it is now becoming a very
comprehensive one, thanks to the perseverance or our energetic
collectors, who have striven hard to bring the plants home, and have in
a great measure succeeded, although with many of them the task of
importation has been very difficult.

The variety we now bring before our readers is one of the best forms of
the _Masdevallia Harryana_ group. The figure was taken from a fine plant
in the collection of R. Warner, Esq., Broomfield, who is a most
successful grower of _Masdevallias_, and blooms them with fine flowers
and brilliant colours. They are cultivated in pits after they have
bloomed in summer, and in autumn are brought back into the Odontoglossum
house, where they complete their growth and bloom in spring. They
require rough fibrous peat and sphagnum moss, and a good supply of water
nearly all the year round. They must never get dry, as they are found in
shady places, where the atmosphere is always moist. We find them to
succeed well with the same treatment as _Odontoglossum Alexandræ_, but
not in so cool a temperature as some growers keep these plants in. They
do not, however, like to be kept too close, so that a little air must
always be given, avoiding cold draughts, which are injurious to all
Orchids, whether grown in cool or warm houses. The rule applies in this
respect in both cases.

As regards shading none of these plants like the hot sun, but they need
all the light that can be given them, without exposing them to bright
sunshine. The blinds ought never to be let down when there is no sun, as
the shade will draw them up dwindling and weakly, whereas if they have
plenty of light they grow robust, and bring better flowers of a finer
colour. This is the case with those at Broomfield, as Mr. Warner uses a
very thin shading, and being in a fine open country place they get the
pure air and clear light which is so beneficial to them. We believe the
plants delight in this treatment, for we do not often see them doing so
well in close places or in large towns as when they are located a few
miles in the country. Most Orchids, indeed, thrive, fairly well in
towns, provided their wants are attended to, but the treatment of course
should be different, as when grown in close places they require more
ventilation, and all the light that can be secured, whereas when grown
in a country place like Broomfield, observation and experience must
decide as to the necessities of the locality and its surroundings. Even
then the cultivator requires much practice and forethought, in order to
produce the best results, especially as the temperature varies so much
in different situations: for instance, when, on the one hand, the houses
are on a high hill exposed to all weathers, or, on the other hand, are
in a sheltered spot on a hill-side, or in a valley, in all which
localities there will be experienced considerable differences of
temperature and light. The sun, moreover, varies in power. Orchid
growers should find out the peculiarities of place and climate in which
they are placed, and act accordingly. This is one of the great secrets
in the successful cultivation of all plants, not of Orchids only; and in
order to ensure success, all those points must be studied and acted on.
Many growers are fully aware of these requirements, but others are not
so well informed.

_Masdevallias_ are free-growing and free-rooting plants, and are easily
increased by dividing the tufts just as they are about to make their
growth; but it must not be expected that these will flower well until
they get established, which they will do best in small pots after being
divided. The second year the growth will be stronger and as they get
established larger pots may be given to them as required. Rough fibrous
peat, sphagnum moss, and good drainage should be given, and the roots
must be kept moist. Insects should be kept under. They are subject to
attacks of green fly on their young growths and flower spikes, and of
thrips on the leaves, which must be kept under, or the growth will be
crippled.

    [Illustration: PL. 106.
    MAXILLARIA LUTEO-ALBA.]




                         MAXILLARIA LUTEO-ALBA.
                              [Plate 106.]
                          Native of Colombia.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ large, about two and a half inches high,
  ovate obtuse, compressed, clustered, bearing at the apex a solitary
  leaf. _Leaves_ stalked by the folding of the basal portion, oblong
  obtuse, a foot long or more, of a dark green colour. _Peduncles_
  radical, about half the length of the leaves, invested throughout with
  green sheathing bracts. _Flowers_ large and peculiar in form,
  triangular in outline, and measuring about six inches from the top of
  the dorsal to the top of the lateral sepal, brownish externally;
  _dorsal sepal_ linear-oblong, acute, three inches long, of a tawny
  yellow in the upper two-thirds of its length, the basal third white,
  _lateral sepals_ of the same form, size, and colours, but twisted;
  _petals_ two, erect, or somewhat projecting like two horns, ovate
  oblong, about half as long as the sepals, white at the base, with a
  few splashes of purple, yellow at the tip, with a blotch of pale brown
  of about equal size between; _lip_ concave at the base, hairy, the
  margins undulated, three-lobed, the lobes obtuse, the lateral ones
  short, erect, yellow, striped with purple, the front one oblong,
  emarginate, recurved, the central portion convex, yellow, the margins
  paler, whitish. _Column_ short, curved, creamy-white.

  Maxillaria luteo-alba, _Lindley_, _Orchidaceæ Lindenianæ_, 20;
  _Reichenbach fil._, in _Walpers’ Annales Botanices Systematiceæ_, vi.,
  516; _Id._ _Bonplandia_, ii., 15, 280.


The _Maxillarias_ form a genus of Orchids not much appreciated by many
growers, but of late there has been greater variety introduced among
them, and they are becoming more popular in cultivation. Some of the
better and more showy kinds are quite worth bringing before our readers,
as they are free-growing plants, and most of them may be kept along with
the cool Orchids.

Our figure of _Maxillaria luteo-alba_ was taken from a plant we flowered
at Holloway, and exhibited at one of the meetings of the Royal
Horticultural Society, and for which we were awarded a First Class
Certificate. We bloomed it many years ago, but we found that Orchid
growers of the present day had many of them not seen it. We find it very
useful for cutting purposes, as it flowers when the plants are small,
which in our opinion is far better than making large specimens. When
they get too large we cut them into several pieces, and grow them on
again for blooming. The flowers having stalks about six inches long, may
be cut without damaging the plants; they are extremely useful for
button-hole bouquets, which are so much in request at the present day.

_Maxillaria luteo-alba_ is an evergreen plant, with dark green foliage,
and grows about eighteen inches high. The flowers proceed from the base
of the pseudobulbs at different times of the year. The sepals and petals
are of a yellowish brown, and the lip yellow margined with white, the
throat being striped with purple.

We find this species succeeds well in the cool house, with
_Odontoglossum Alexandræ_; good fibrous peat suits it well, and it
requires good drainage, with a liberal supply of water at the roots when
it is in vigorous growth, as it is a free-rooting plant. After the
growth is completed it should have only sufficient water to keep the
pseudobulbs in a fresh plump state. A little shade is beneficial to the
foliage of the plant in summer, but it should be grown as fully exposed
to the light and as near to the glass as possible. Under this treatment
it will be found to grow freely.


Renanthera Lowii.—This noble plant, also known as _Vanda Lowii_, has
bloomed very finely in the collection of Baron Alphonse de Rothschild,
at Ferrières, near Paris, this being the finest and best grown specimen
we have seen. The main stem is about six feet high, with four growths
from it, and every leaf is perfect, which is rarely the case. It bore
eleven of its charming pendulous spikes or racemes of flowers, each
spike extended to the length of nine feet; it had a noble appearance.
with its reddish brown flowers, marked by irregular lines of greenish
yellow; but the most curious part connected with the inflorescence of
this plant is, that at the base it produces two blossoms of a tawny
yellow, spotted with crimson, quite dissimilar from the others. The
plant in question is a most remarkable one, and we may say that it is
the finest specimen we have had the good fortune to behold. Great credit
is due to Mr. Bergman for the production of such a specimen. The eleven
spikes were, we understand, cut and sent to the Baroness in London.
Gardening is well carried on at Ferrières; every department is well
kept. There are many thousands of plants grown for purposes of
decoration, which is kept up through the whole year. The mansion is a
splendid structure, and the grounds are beautifully laid out, abounding
with fine trees, and provided with lakes. In fact, it is one of the
finest and best kept garden establishments we have seen, and great
praise is due to those who have the management of it.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 107.
    SACCOLABIUM CURVIFOLIUM.]




                        SACCOLABIUM CURVIFOLIUM.
                              [Plate 107.]
             Native of India (Nepal and Birmah) and Ceylon.


  Epiphytal. _Stem_ dwarf, erect, densely leafy. _Leaves_ crowded,
  distichous, linear, obliquely præmorse, with an acute apex, deflexed,
  channelled towards the base, pale green. _Racemes_ erect from the
  upper axils, six inches long, densely flowered, the peduncles pale
  green, bracteate, the pedicels red, six-angled, with a small ovate
  bracteole at the base. _Flowers_ bright cinnabar-red, about an inch
  across, somewhat concave; _dorsal sepal_ obovate, with a claw-like
  base, entire; _lateral sepals_ somewhat broader at the base, and
  unequal-sided, all spreading, and of a uniform dense cinnabar-red;
  _petals_ of the same form as the dorsal sepal, and of a similar tint
  of colour; _lip_ with a cylindraceous obtuse spur over a quarter of an
  inch long, to the front side of which is attached a tongue-like linear
  lamina, truncately-emarginate at the apex, and having a central paler
  orange rib with two knobs at the top of the spur-tube; at the back of
  the spur are two short erect lobes, which are convex outwardly, and
  with a boss or protuberance on the inner surface; lip more orange than
  the sepals, the processes at the end of the spur yellow; _spur_ of the
  same colour as the lip. _Column_ short, deep red, semi-terete, the
  angle winged upwards, the anther-case tinted with violet.

  Saccolabium curvifolium, _Lindley_, _Genera and Species of
  Orchidaceous Plants_, 222; _Bateman_, _Second Century of Orchidaceous
  Plants_, t. 130; _Lemaire_, _L’Illustration Horticole_, xii, t. 493.

  Saccolabium miniatum, _Hooker_, _Botanical Magazine_, t. 5326—fide
  Bateman and Lemaire.


The _Saccolabium_ rank among the richest and most beautiful of the
Orchid family; indeed, there are some magnificent species among those
cultivated in our Orchid houses, which we hope to figure as time passes
on. In the present illustration we introduce to our subscribers one of
the small growing kinds, and one of the most distinct which we have seen
as regards its habit and the colour of its flowers. Our figure was taken
from a well-grown plant in the fine collection of W. Lee, Esq.,
Downside, Leatherhead, whom we are glad to observe is collecting and
cultivating, along with the other East Indian kinds, the best species
and varieties of this genus that can be obtained.

_Saccolabium curvifolium_ is a dwarf and compact-growing evergreen
plant, seldom seen more than a foot in height, with foliage of a light
green colour, about four or five inches in length. It is a free-blooming
kind, producing in May and June its bright orange-scarlet flowers, which
continue in a fresh state for weeks. It is a very slow growing plant,
and is seldom seen forming large specimens. Sometimes masses of it are
imported, and these when set upon blocks of wood form charming
specimens. We saw one in the collection of the Comte de Germiny, in
France, which was most beautiful—two feet in height, and well bloomed;
this specimen, which was suspended from the roof of the house, had a
remarkably fine effect.

This plant will do either on blocks of wood or in small suspended pans
or baskets, so that, it gets all the light possible. We find the best
material to cultivate it in is sphagnum moss and a few pieces of
charcoal intermixed, and it must have good drainage; it requires very
little moss, as the roots like to enjoy the moist atmosphere of the
house. The species is found growing on trees where the roots get the
full benefit of the light and air; and if we imitate this as nearly as
possible as regards their roots, we shall not go far wrong. Of course in
our Orchid houses the treatment varies, and consequently the plant will
require a little shade. The temperature required is that of the East
India house.


Stanhopea gibbosa.—We have received from Alfred G. Wallis, Esq., of
Balham, a grand spike of this great beauty. The plant, Mr. Wallis
informs us, is growing in a wire basket about fifteen inches in
diameter, and has borne five spikes of flowers, four of them with two
flowers on a spike and one with one flower. The flowers are large, about
six inches across; the petals are yellow, barred and blotched with
crimson, the sepals assuming a darker tint of the same colour. Mr.
Peacock was also successful in flowering this plant in June of the
present year. It is a great pity Stanhopeas are not more popular among
Orchid cultivators, as they form a very showy group of plants, their
only drawback being the short time they continue in flower, and their
very powerful and unpleasant odour.—B. S. W.


Disa grandiflora.—We received a wonderfully fine spike of this superb
Orchid from Mr. Thomas Speed, the Duke of Devonshire’s gardener, at
Chatsworth. The spike was two feet six inches in length from the pot,
and bore twelve flowers of large size and fine colour—a bright scarlet
and crimson, the lip veined with pink, which gives a nice contrast. It
is a most charming cool-house Orchid that every one may grow who has an
ordinary greenhouse. Mr. Speed is a most successful cultivator of this
fine plant. We saw the first small plant he had to begin with some years
ago, and this plant has gone on improving, and many offshoots have been
taken from it which have also made fine specimens. The _Disa_ really
seems to be no trouble to cultivate. The way in which Mr. Speed treats
it is to grow it in a common greenhouse, where it gets plenty of fresh
air and light, and here it requires nothing but plenty of water in the
growing season. It is grown in sphagnum moss and rough fibrous peat and
loam. There is no doubt that this plant does not get shifted from the
place where it was found to do well. This is a great secret in plant
culture. When a plant is found doing well, let it remain where it is,
unless on trial another place is found to be equally suitable. Few
people grow this _Disa_ well. The reason is, that they keep it in too
warm a house, and coddle it too much. If they would follow Mr. Speed’s
plan, there is no doubt they would succeed, if the plants are kept free
from insects, and provided with sweet material about their roots.—B. S.
W.

    [Illustration: PL. 108.
    CATTLEYA TRIANÆ FORMOSA.]




                        CATTLEYA TRIANÆ FORMOSA.
                              [Plate 108.]
                          Native of Colombia.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ oblong, club-shaped, furrowed, the lower parts
  enveloped in whitish membranaceous sheaths. _Leaves_ solitary,
  coriaceous, ligulate-oblong, obtuse, emarginate, deep green. _Scape_
  two to three-flowered, proceeding from a terminal oblong compressed
  bract or sheath. _Flowers_ large, six inches in depth and seven inches
  in breadth, richly coloured; _sepals_ lanceolate, acute, about
  three-fourths of an inch broad, blush or very dilute rosy-purple;
  _petals_ much broader—two and a half inches, having the margins much
  undulated, of the same blush or pallid purple hue as the sepals; _lip_
  well displayed, convolute at the base so as to enclose the column, and
  of a pallid purplish colour, the apical portion roundish, emarginate,
  and expanded, nearly two and a half inches across, the margin
  including the portion surrounding the throat, very much undulated so
  as to form a crenate-lobate frill, the surface for about two-thirds of
  the front of a deep rich magenta-purple, the disk and throat
  orange-yellow, the upper edge paler, and the magenta tint passing
  backwards in streaks over the disk.

  Cattleya Trianæ formosa, _Williams MS_.


We now present to our readers a portrait of a most splendid variety of
_Cattleya Trianæ_, of which them are numerous handsome forms, varying in
colour from rose to crimson and magenta, and also to pure white, with
intermediate tints. During the past five years there have been very
large importations, but none that we have seen surpass the varieties we
have already in cultivation, such as _Dodgsoni_, _Osmanii_,
_Russelliana_, and _Williamsii_. These varieties are most difficult to
improve upon, but probably we shall get other splendid forms among the
large importations as they come to us from the different districts which
the species inhabits. The _Trianæ_ section has given us a grand lot of
varieties for winter decoration especially; there are very many distinct
types among them, and they come into blossom at a time, during the dull
months of winter, when flowers are wanted to make our houses gay. Our
drawing was taken from a very large specimen that has been grown and
bloomed by us for several years, and which we consider one of the most
beautiful varieties in cultivation—we believe our plate will show us to
be fully justified in so doing.

_Cattleya Trianæ formosa_ is a free and strong-growing evergreen kind,
attaining fifteen inches high, with dark green foliage and strong
sheaths. The flowers are of large size and substance, and are thrown
well up so as to have a bold appearance, much more so than many others
of its class. The sepals and petals are of a blush pink, and the lip
rich rose-magenta, being beautifully frilled and edged with a lighter
tint of the same colour, two and a quarter inches in diameter, have the
throat orange veined with a deeper orange. The flowers are produced in
February and March, lasting for several weeks in beauty.

It thrives best in a pot with rough peat and good drainage, and requires
the same treatment as _C. Mossiæ_ and _C. Trianæ_, beginning to grow
after it has finished blooming. These make their flower sheaths in
summer, much earlier than most of the _Cattleyas_, which secures to this
section more light and heat in which to finish off their growth before
winter sets in. Their pseudobulbs must be kept dry during winter, as if
allowed to get wet they will probably rot away; therefore, when their
growth is finished, give only sufficient water to keep the pseudobulbs
in a plump state.


Orchids at Gouville.—The Comte de Germiny, Chateau de Gouville, France,
has a noted collection of Orchids, which we recently had the pleasure of
visiting. We found many grand specimens that interested us exceedingly,
including fine _Cattleyas_, _Lælias_, _Saccolabiums_, _Aërides_,
_Vandas_, _Angræcums_, _Cypripediums_, _Phalænopsis_, &c. We gave a
short notice of this splendid establishment in our second volume, and
now confine our remarks to the specimens we saw in flower. Of _Cattleya
labiata pallida_ there were two wonderful specimens, with over one
hundred pseudobulbs on each; the first had forty-eight expanded flowers
on it, and the other twenty-eight, a most gorgeous sight. Contrasting
well with these were several good plants, in full bloom, of _Epidendrum
nemorale majus_, with their drooping spikes of showy delicate
rose-coloured flowers. These were backed up with a fine specimen of
_Sobralia macrantha_, bearing thirty spikes of its rich purple and
crimson flowers, of a large size. Then came _Epidendrum vitellinum
majus_, suspended on a block, with twelve spikes of its bright
orange-scarlet flowers, which always form a fine contrast with the
surrounding colours. Near this were fine specimens of _Cattleya crispa
superba_, and a specimen of _Cattleya Mendelii_. There were also some
fine _Vandas_ in full beauty, as well as _Oncidiums_ with bright yellow
blossoms, and _Dendrobium suavissimum_, with orange yellow and brown
spotted flowers. A fine specimen of _Epidendrum prismatocarpum_ was
showing fourteen spikes. M. Rondeau, the energetic gardener, informed us
that they had at one time three hundred and ninety expanded flowers of
_Cattleya Mossiæ_, _Mendelii Warnerii_, and others, which must have been
a gorgeous sight; also _Cattleya citrina_, different plants, that
produced fifty-two of their yellow fragrant flowers. It is always a
delight to a lover of good plants to visit a place where gems like these
are the pride of the owner; and in this case we found that the Comte de
Germiny not only has a good knowledge of his plants, but took the
greatest interest in showing them to us.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 109.
    CYPRIPEDIUM MELANOPHTHALMUM.]




                      CYPRIPEDIUM MELANOPHTHALMUM.
                              [Plate 109.]
                             Garden Hybrid.


  Epiphytal. Acaulescent. _Leaves_ distichous, coriaceous,
  oblong-lanceolate, acute, of a pale dull green colour, chequered with
  coarse elongate reticulations of a darker green. _Scape_ (peduncle)
  greenish, clothed with purple hairs, having near the apex a short
  acuminate hairy bract, which is strongly ciliated. _Flowers_
  medium-sized, of a rather showy character, solitary; _dorsal sepal_
  broad ovate-acuminate, an inch and a half long, white flushed with
  purple towards the base, distinctly marked with green veins, of which
  the two pairs on each side the central one are alternately long and
  short, while the rest become gradually shorter as they approach the
  edge; united _lateral_ ones narrow ovate, whitish with green veins;
  _petals_ glossy, linear oblong, dull purple on the upper side towards
  the base, and marked with a series of blue warty hairy dots on the
  upper edge, the apical portion bright reddish purple or wine-red, the
  lower half somewhat greener, both margins ciliate; _lip_ bold, an inch
  and three-quarters long, with a somewhat compressed pouch an inch
  long, of a dull reddish purple suffused with green—the green colour
  most apparent towards the tip and back—and distinctly marked with
  darker purple reticulations, the sides veined, pale yellowish spotted
  with crimson warts within, their upper angles produced into auricles.
  _Staminode_ very prominent, hexagonal, emarginate in front with a
  small tooth inside, veined with green in the centre, pale purplish
  green at the edge, the surface shortly downy.

  Cypripedium melanophthalmum, _Reichenbach fil._, _Gardeners’
  Chronicle_, N.S., xiv., 525.


This is one of the numerous hybrid Lady’s Slippers that have been raised
by R. Warner, Esq., Broomfield, Chelmsford. All these are of
free-blooming character, every small growth bringing its quota of
flowers. The foliage of the several forms is differently variegated,
while the flowers of all the kinds are of long duration, which is an
excellent quality in any plant. It will be seen from our illustration
that _Cypripedium melanophthalmum_ is a pretty plant, and one well
worthy of cultivation, since it produces flowers which are valuable for
cutting purposes, the stems being firm and long, which makes it useful
for vases and other decorations for the adornment of living rooms. The
plants are grand for exhibition purposes, as they carry well without
injury by tying each flower-stem to a small stick.

The _Cypripedia_ are of easy cultivation. They may, moreover, be freely
hybridized, and are more readily produced from seed than many other
subjects, as may be seen from the number which have been brought before
the public, by those who make it their study to raise them in this way.
Some persons are more successful in this branch of culture than others.
There is no doubt that it requires a good deal of skill and tact to find
out the best sorts for crossing, and also to effect the best crosses;
moreover, it occupies a good deal of time, but we do not know of
anything more delightful than this self-imposed task of improving the
beauties of nature, and where one can devote attention to it, there must
be a great deal of pleasure in watching the progress of one’s pets and
noting the results of one’s labours when they put forth their blossoms.

_Cypripedium melanophthalmum_ is an evergreen plant, having light
yellowish green foliage with dark reticulations and blotches. The flower
stems grow about six inches high, bearing the interesting flower at the
top; the dorsal sepal is white flushed with purple at the base, and
veined with green; the petals are bright reddish crimson, with darker
veins and black hairy blotches or wart-like spots on the edge; the pouch
is bright crimson with a green base, netted with green and reddish
brown.

It requires the same treatment as _C. barbatum_—that is, it should be
potted in rough fibrous peat, with good drainage, and the plant should
be well elevated above the pot-rim, so that the roots can run over and
also into the soil. These plants require a good deal of water, nearly
all the year round, as they have no thick fleshy bulbs to support them.
It must always be borne in mind that they must be kept free from insects
to ensure successful and satisfactory progress.


Aërides Lawrenciæ.—At Stevens’ Auction Rooms, on the 19th day of
September last, there was a magnificent new _Aërides_ offered for sale,
which realized the large sum of 235 guineas (£246 15_s._), the purchaser
being Sir Trevor Lawrence, Bart., M.P. It is encouraging to see that
Orchids are more esteemed than ever they were, and that in spite of the
enormous importations which are continually being received, good things
are realising higher prices than ever. This new _Aërides_ resembles in
habit a large growing form of _A. quinquevulnerum_: the flower-spike
measures two feet in length, and bears thirty-two of its lovely
blossoms, which seem to be intermediate between those of _A. odoratum_
and _A. quinquevulnerum_, possessing the strong aroma of the first-named
plant. The flowers are very large, the sepals and petals white tipped
with rosy-purple, the lip white marked with rich amethyst. It has just
been named in compliment to Lady Lawrence.—H. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 110.
    MASDEVALLIA HARRYANA MINIATA.]




                     MASDEVALLIA HARRYANA MINIATA.
                              [Plate 110.]
                         Native of New Grenada.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ short, tufted, slender. _Leaves_ persistent, of
  leathery texture, the blade spathulate, channelled at the base, keeled
  behind, tapering down into the petiole, which is invested by whitish
  brown membranaceous sheathing bracts. _Scape_ issuing from the bract,
  investing the leaf base, radical, about a foot high, stiff, pale
  green, thickly striate-blotched with purple, with one or two distant
  sheathing bracts, and surmounted by the curved six-ribbed ovary, which
  is dotted with purple. _Flowers_ remarkably brilliant in colour;
  _tube_ about a quarter of an inch wide and upwards of half an inch
  long, orange-yellow, the open tube forming a yellow eye to the flower;
  _dorsal sepal_ filiform, recurved, two inches long; _lateral sepals_
  deflexed falcate-ovate acute, fully two inches long by one inch wide,
  of a bright vermilion-red flushed with scarlet, and having the
  principal ribs of a rich deep crimson; _petals_ minute, oblong-obtuse,
  white tinged with purple; _lip_ still shorter, the tip recurved
  yellow, the disk with a deep furrow between two obtuse ridges.
  _Column_ white, shorter than the petals, the winged margin extending
  upwards into a toothed hood.

  Masdevallia Harryana miniata, _Williams and Moore_, _supra_.


This is a most charming variety of _Masdevallia Harryana_, being quite a
new colour in this section; it is the most distinct and beautiful for
its brightness of hue—one which we have not yet seen developed to such
perfection of brilliancy in any other variety. It may also be noted,
that when mixed with other forms of various colours it blends with them
most charmingly. How exceedingly bright and beautiful it is will be seen
from our figure, in which, however, it has been extremely difficult for
our artist to imitate the natural tint of the flower. Our sketch was
taken from a well-bloomed plant in the large collection of
_Masdevallias_ grown by W. Lee, Esq., of Downside, Leatherhead. It is a
very rare as well as showy plant, and we shall be glad to see more of
it, as it will assuredly be sought after.

_Masdevallia Harryana miniata_ is a dwarf compact-growing plant, with
foliage about eight inches high of a bright dark green colour. The
flowers are scarlet-vermilion with a bright yellow eye. It blooms during
May and June, and lasts about four weeks in full beauty.

This plant will thrive under the treatment recommended for the forms of
the _Harryana_ section in our first volume (Plate 24), where all the
necessary particulars will be found. Mr. Woolford, the gardener at
Downside, is a most successful cultivator, and has under his charge a
house nearly 100 feet long filled with _Masdevallias_, wherein, when we
last saw them, there were many hundreds of expanded blossoms of large
size and high colour. They are potted in the same way that we recommend.
Mr. Woolford seems to diffuse a great deal of moisture about the house
during the summer months, and the soil they are growing in is kept very
moist. If anyone wants to see these lovely plants in perfection and well
cultivated, this is the place at which to find them.


Orchids at The Dell, Staines.—The collection of Baron Schröder is well
worthy of a visit, there being always something to see and to learn. The
Baron takes such great interest in his collection that he will have good
species and good varieties. He does not fill his houses with numbers of
imported plants to take the chance of what he may get, but he secures at
once good healthy established plants of all the choicest and best known
kinds. Of course, there is a chance of getting good forms among the
imported plants, but along with them one finds a great many that one
does not care for, but which have occupied valuable space; besides which
such plants are unsightly in a show house. A few rough imported plants
spoil the appearance of a whole collection, and we know ladies prefer to
see good flowers accompanied by fine green foliage, which always renders
a plant more agreeable to the eye.

We noticed many fine plants here in August last, when but few Orchids
are in bloom: indeed there are always good plants blooming here. A
splendid house has been allotted to _Cattleyas_, of which there are some
grand and noble specimens; we noticed several fine plants of _Cattleya
exoniensis_, also of the best form of _C. labiata_, with some wonderful
specimens of _C. Trianæ_ and _C. Russelliana_, _C. Mendelii_, _C.
Warnerii_, _C. Dominiana_ in two varieties, and many new hybrids. Of
_Lælia purpurata_ there were fine specimens of the best varieties; also
some good forms of _L. elegans_. There were several fine _Vandas_ in
this house. We also noticed _Renanthera Lowii_, showing a vigorous spike
of bloom, and by the side of this was a good specimen of _Cattleya
crispa grandiflora_ with several spikes, one having nine flowers; also
one of _C. gigas_ which bore seven flowers, and had a very large lip,
quite distinct in colour. Associated with this was the rare _Lælia
callistoglossa_ with a rich magenta lip, in full beauty and very showy.
There were other good plants in bloom.

In the Saccolabium house there had been many fine kinds in flower. We
noticed a very handsome _S. Blumei giganteum_ with a spike two feet long
and of large size—the plant and spike we have seen. There were also fine
varieties of _Phalænopsis violacea_ in bloom, and grand specimens of
other rare species, also of _Cattleya Eldorado_, with some good
_Aërides_, _Angræcums_, &c.

There were some handsome Odontoglots in bloom, and others had thrown
some fine flower spikes; also some good plants of _Mesospinidium
vulcanicum_, one with nine spikes of its richly-coloured flowers and
others equally good; this plant produces a fine contrast among the white
_Odontoglossums_, and such effective colours should be sought after,
especially when, as here, associated with fine form.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 111.
    ODONTOGLOSSUM ELEGANS.]




                         ODONTOGLOSSUM ELEGANS.
                              [Plate 111.]
                           Native of Ecuador.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ oblong, somewhat furrowed, three inches long,
  diphyllous. _Leaves_ ligulate, acute, tapered and channelled towards
  the base, of a pale green colour. _Scape_ radical, slender, arching.
  _Flowers_ racemed or panicled, stellate, three inches in breadth,
  highly coloured, and showy in character, the yellow centre being very
  conspicuous; _sepals_ lanceolate, attenuately not suddenly acuminate,
  recurved and wavy at the edge, the dorsal two inches, the lateral ones
  about an inch and three quarters long, white, yellow towards the tip,
  with dark chocolate blotches, which almost cover the surface leaving
  only a few broken bars near the base and a patch at the apex; _petals_
  spreading at the extreme base, then incurved, and finally having the
  tips recurved, ovate-lanceolate attenuately acuminate, the basal part
  white with irregular spots and small blotches of chocolate brown, with
  a larger spot about midway, exterior to which the petal is sometimes
  spotless and sometimes marked with two or three spots; _lip_ having
  its basal portion parallel with the column, then turned down at a
  right angle, panduriform with a recurved cuspidate apex; at the angle
  is a spreading fringe of many (about eight) projecting processes, the
  two front ones continuous with the crest along the basal portion of
  the lip, yellow with chocolate tips, and three shorter ones yellow
  with a chocolate stripe; behind these are five reddish chocolate
  stripes which appear like continuations of the teeth; hinder portion
  about half an inch broad, pale yellow blotched with brown at the edge
  but strongly recurved, succeeding which is a restricted part wholly
  covered by a rich brown spot, after which the lip widens and passes
  into a recurved cuspidate apex, which is white with one or two
  chocolate blotches. _Column_ half an inch long, clavate, with two
  subulate horns, white spotted with chocolate, the stigmatic hollow and
  its margins stained with chocolate purple.

  Odontoglossum elegans, _Reichenbach fil._, _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xi., 462.


The subject of our present portrait is a most beautiful and distinct
Odontoglot, and one with which we believe our subscribers will be glad
to become acquainted. It is an extremely rare plant, and the only
specimen we have seen, was imported with a lot of _Odontoglossum
cirrhosum_. It is doubtless a natural hybrid, of which that species is
one of the parents, as it resembles it both in the shape of its flowers
and growth. This plant was exhibited by H. M. Pollett, Esq., Bickley,
Kent, before the Floral Committee of the Royal Horticultural Society,
from whom it received the highest honours. It has bloomed in this
well-known collection for two successive years, the flowers very much
finer and the growth stronger on the last occasion. It is an astonishing
trait in the character of this Odontoglot, that the stronger the plants
become the finer are the flowers, that is, provided they have a proper
house and proper treatment. Mr. Pollett has some small span-roofed
houses in which the plants seem to enjoy their position, as they are
thriving well under his gardener’s care.

_Odontoglossum elegans_ is an evergreen species of compact growth, with
light green foliage about ten inches in height. The pseudobulbs grow
about three inches high. The sepals and petals are cream-coloured,
tipped with yellow and irregularly blotched and barred with chestnut
brown; the lip is long and similar in form to that of _O. cirrhosum_,
having a large golden yellow crest. It blooms during the spring months,
and lasts in beauty for several weeks, its drooping spikes producing
more flowers than are shown in our drawing, as our artist was not able
to show the full spike in his representation, from its being too long.
This particular plant has been distinguished as Pollett’s variety, an
unwieldy form of naming which we prefer not to adopt.

The plant requires the same cultivation and treatment as _Odontoglossum
Alexandræ_ and others of that class, of which we have given full
particulars in our first volume, under Plate 47.


Vanda Sanderiana.—It is with great pleasure that we are able to announce
the flowering of this magnificent novelty, in the collection of W. Lee,
Esq., Downside, Leatherhead, where it may now (September) be seen,
bearing three spikes of its gorgeous flowers. One spike bears twelve
flowers, and another eight. If the reader will imagine a dozen of these
lovely blossoms, each from four to four and a half inches in diameter,
collected together on one spike, he may form some idea of the
magnificence of this grand novelty. In growth the plant resembles a
gigantic _V. cœrulea_, but having much broader and longer leaves, and
stouter stems and flower-spikes than that species. The spikes are
produced from the axils of the leaves in an erect position. The leaves
are from nine to twelve inches long, and about an inch broad, deeply
channelled. The flowers are fully four inches in diameter; the upper
sepal and the two petals are nearly of one size and of a blush-pink,
about the colour of a pale variety of _Odontoglossum vexillarium_; the
lower sepals are much larger and broader than the petals, two inches
across, tawny yellow distinctly and beautifully reticulated with dull
crimson over the entire surface; the lip is dull brownish crimson, and
has three keels along the centre extending from the apex to the base.
The contrast of the crimson markings on the yellow sepals renders this
new Vanda one of the most distinct species we have ever seen. We have
had a sketch of this plant prepared, and it will shortly be presented to
our readers.—H. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 112.
    CATTLEYA SKINNERI ALBA.]




                        CATTLEYA SKINNERI ALBA.
                              [Plate 112.]
                         Native of Costa Rica.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ obovate-oblong, compressed, furrowed, attenuated
  below into a terete jointed stalk. _Leaves_ two, palish green,
  spreading, leathery, oblong-obtuse, sub-emarginate. _Scape_ six to
  eight-flowered, issuing from a short oblong spathe. _Flowers_
  exceedingly chaste and elegant, pure white in colour, measuring four
  inches in depth and breadth; _sepals_ plane, lanceolate, acute,
  recurved at the extreme tip, half an inch in breadth, pure white;
  _petals_ ovate-obtuse, one and a quarter inch in breadth, slightly
  undulated towards the tips, also pure white; _lip_ white, the basal
  part very closely and narrowly rolled around the column, and there
  showing exteriorly on the lower side a slight stain of rose, which,
  when unrolled, appears as a small rosy blotch, the front lobe roundish
  reniform. _Column_ white, clavate, about an inch long.

  Cattleya Skinneri alba, _Reichenbach fil._, _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., vii., 810.


The fine genus _Cattleya_ is becoming more and more interesting and
valuable every year, since many new forms and colours are continually
coming before us. We feel great pleasure in being able to figure this
chaste and lovely variety of _C. Skinneri_, which has pure snow white
flowers. It is quite astonishing to find that white forms of so many
different kinds of _Cattleya_ are being brought home by our energetic
collectors. Many, indeed, have turned out to be white-flowered when we
have bloomed them, without any knowledge of the fact on the part of
those that have collected them, the reason being that often they do not
find them in bloom, and it is, of course, difficult to know their
colours unless they are in flower; moreover, it sometimes occurs that
there are not many of the pure white forms. There may be others of a
rosy hue, and it is frequently the case that seedlings come intermediate
in colour. We hope our collectors may be fortunate enough to find pure
white forms of other species in bloom, as they are so charming. The
variation of colour which occurs in some of the species in their native
country, is no doubt due to the intervention of insects, the action
being just the same as that of the hybridizer in our plant-houses.

We bloomed a very fine pure white _Cattleya Skinneri_, an imported
plant, some years ago, and we have since seen several white varieties,
but the figure we now publish was taken from a plant in the collection
of Sir Nathaniel de Rothschild, of Tring Park. The spike, as may be seen
from our plate, was a good one, with well-expanded blossoms, not quite
so large as in the parent _Cattleya Skinneri_, which is of a most
charming rosy purple, and one of the most distinct and showy of Orchids.
There are fine varieties of this species, especially one that has been
grown in collections for many years, and that we have been in the habit
of exhibiting for the past 35 years—even before that there were fine
specimens of it in cultivation. The species was named after the late G.
Ure Skinner, Esq., who imported it from Guatemala, together with many
other Orchids, and whose name will always be associated with this class
of plants, many fine kinds having been named after him.

_Cattleya Skinneri alba_ is an evergreen plant, with light green stems
and foliage. The stems are about twelve inches high, and each produces
two leaves about four inches long. The spikes proceed from an oblong
sheath at the top of the stem in March and April. The sepals and petals
are pure white with the throat of the lip pale yellow. It continues in
bloom for two or three weeks, but it must be kept free from damp, as
white flowers soon become spotted if kept in too cool and damp an
atmosphere; it is always best to have a dry, warm house for plants that
are in bloom, as they then last so much longer. Mr. Hill, the gardener
at Tring Park, must have kept this specimen in a dry, warm house, as the
flowers were most perfect when they reached us.

This plant requires the same treatment as _C. Skinneri_. It is best
grown in a pot or basket, with good fibrous peat and sphagnum moss, the
pots being filled three-parts full of drainage, then filled up with
rough peat, placing some pieces of charcoal amongst it; this will keep
it open and porous, and the roots will run freely among the charcoal. In
the growing season the soil requires to be kept rather moist, but the
plant does not like too much water about its roots at any time. It is
best grown near the light, with a little shade when the sun is hot, the
shading not being required at any other time. We find the warm end of
the Cattleya house to suit it, as it requires more warmth than some of
the other Cattleyas. When the growth is finished in autumn, very little
water should be given, and during winter only just sufficient to keep
the stems plump, until they begin to throw up their flower spikes in
March, when a little more may be supplied to assist the flowers in
opening, and to secure finer blossoms.

They begin to grow after their flowering season is over, which is the
best time for division if it is required, but it is best to avoid
cutting this rare plant as much as possible, as sometimes the divided
pieces will not succeed so well, especially if the plant is not strong
and vigorous. When divided, place them in a shady, moist place until
they get established; then they may be removed to a position more
exposed to the light.

    [Illustration: PL. 113.
    DENDROBIUM WARDIANUM GIGANTEUM.]




                    DENDROBIUM WARDIANUM GIGANTEUM.
                              [Plate 113.]
                           Native of Burmah.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ stout, pendulous, deciduous, attaining three feet
  in length, knotty at the nodes. _Leaves_ oblong-lanceolate, attenuate
  at the apex. _Racemes_ two or three flowered, issuing from the nodes
  of the matured stems. _Flowers_ large and conspicuous from their
  striking colours; _sepals_ oblong-lanceolate, bluntish, white tipped
  with magenta-rose, the margins reflexed; _petals_ oblong-ovate,
  obtuse, white more deeply tipped than the sepals; _lip_ cucullate, the
  base folded over the column, the anterior portion ovate-obtuse,
  recurved at the tip, entire, the surface covered with crystalline
  processes, the colour golden yellow at the base with a pair of
  maroon-crimson spots, the margin and middle portion creamy white, the
  apex tipped like the petals with deep magenta; _spur_ short. _Column_
  short, depressed, almost hidden in the base of the lip, the
  anther-case white.

  Dendrobium Wardianum, _R. Warner_, _Select Orchidaceous Plants_, ser.
  i., t. 19; _Jennings’ Orchids_, t. 2; _L’Illustration Horticole_, ser.
  3, t. 277; _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S., viii, 241, fig. 50.

  _Var._ GIGANTEUM.—Habit more vigorous and more erect than in the
  ordinary form; stems stouter and less nodose, four to five feet long;
  flowers larger, and of stouter substance, otherwise as in the type.

  Dendrobium Wardianum giganteum, _Williams & Moore_, supra.

  Dendrobium Wardianum Lowii, _Smith_, _Moral Magazine_, N.S., t. 212.


The flowers of the plant we now bring under the notice of our readers
are of the most perfect form, of the richest colours, and also of very
large size. It is altogether a stronger grower than the type of the
species named in compliment to Dr. Ward, of Southampton, and of which a
fine figure is published in Plate 19 of the first series of Warner’s
_Select Orchidaceous Plants_. By a comparison of the two illustrations,
it will be seen that the typical plant has much thinner and more
tapering stems, and that the flowers are of a smaller size than in the
variety now treated upon, though the colour and marking are equally
brilliant in both. The larger form, _giganteum_, also comes from a
different country, the smaller kind having been introduced from Assam,
while the larger one comes from Burmah, which difference may account for
the difference in their growth. Our sketch was taken from a plant in the
collection of D’Alroy Salamon, Esq., of Clapham Park, where it has
bloomed two years in succession. There is in cultivation a variety of
_D. Wardianum_ with white flowers, which has been bloomed during the
last two or three years from imported plants. It is quite interesting to
find that in most of the principal genera white varieties are turning up
to meet the growing taste for white forms of the different Orchids.

_Dendrobium Wardianum giganteum_ is a deciduous plant, sometimes
producing growths four or five feet long, with somewhat knotty joints
all up the stems. The foliage is of a bright green colour, and begins to
fall off after it has completed its growth. The sepals and petals are
white heavily tipped with deep magenta-rose, while the lip is of a deep
orange-yellow at the base, with two blackish crimson blotches, the tip
of the lip being bright magenta-rose. It blooms during the winter and
spring months according to the time of the completion of its growth. We
have seen it in bloom in the month of October, so by having a number of
plants started at different periods, it might be had in bloom for many
months, some of the plants being retarded by keeping them dry in a warm
house—for it is not safe to put them into a cold house, as this often
injures the growth for the following year.

The plants are best grown in baskets or pans suspended from the roof,
where they get all the light, but just keeping them from the burning
sun. We find rough fibrous peat with sphagnum moss and good drainage to
suit them. They must be kept moist at the roots during the growing
season, but when their growth is completed only just sufficient to keep
the stems plump must be allowed them until they begin to show their
flower buds: then give a little moisture at the roots, which will induce
them to bloom finer, and to start into growth after their flowers are
over. Sometimes they will start growing during the blooming season, and
if so this should not be checked.

We find the East India house the most suitable one for them, or they
will grow in any house where the heat is kept up during the growing
season. When at rest less warmth will suffice. They must be kept free
from insects. Sometimes the red spider and thrips will attack the
leaves, but these may be kept under by syringing or using
tobacco-smoke—the latter sparingly, as too much will be very injurious
to the young growths.


Cattleya Trianæ formosa (Plate 108).—In the remarks on this Cattleya,
instead of “the lip rich rose-magenta being beautifully frilled and
edged with a lighter tint of the same colour. The flowers, which are two
and a quarter inches in diameter, have the throat orange veined with a
deeper orange, and are produced,” &c., read “the lip rich rose-magenta
being beautifully frilled and edged with a lighter tint of the same
colour, two and a quarter inches in diameter, the throat orange veined
with deeper orange. The flowers are produced,” &c., &c.

    [Illustration: PL. 114.
    TRICHOSMA SUAVIS.]




                           TRICHOSMA SUAVIS.
                              [Plate 114.]
                    Native of the Khasya Mountains.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ thin, terete, tufted, from a short rhizome, with a
  few sheathing verrucose scales at the base, the apex diphyllous.
  _Leaves_ somewhat fleshy, broadly lanceolate acuminate, obsoletely
  three-nerved, the base contracted into a sheathing petiole. _Flowers_
  in short terminal racemes, fragrant; _sepals_ lanceolate, spreading,
  the dorsal one free, the lateral ones somewhat broader, adnate at the
  base with the foot of the column, so as to form a short chin, creamy
  white; _petals_ erect, lanceolate, resembling the dorsal sepal, creamy
  white; _lip_ articulated with the foot of the column, with a short
  incumbent claw, the limb three-lobed, the side lobes plane striped
  with brownish crimson, the middle one undulated, yellow spotted with
  red and bearing five crispy lamellæ or crests, there being also four
  such crests on the disk. _Column_ short, semiterete, marginate, the
  anther-bell irregularly toothed at the edge, the anthers incumbent
  affixed within the margin. _Pollen-masses_ eight.

  Trichosma suavis, _Lindley_, _Botanical Register_, 1842, t. 21.

  Cœlogyne coronaria, _Lindley_, _Botanical Register_, 1841, misc. 178.

  Eria coronaria, _Reichenbach_, in _Walpers’ Annales Botanices
  Systematicæ_, vi., 271.


The Orchid, of which we now submit a figure, is a very pretty
free-growing species; it is also distinct from any other Orchid, and one
well worthy a place in any collection. Almost every one who sees it in
flower admires it, not, perhaps, so much for its showy character, as for
its neat pleasing inflorescence and fragrant flowers. There are admirers
of small flowered Orchids as well as of those with larger and more showy
blossoms.

This _Trichosma_ has curious slender fleshy stems, scaly at the base,
and surmounted by a pair of dark green three-nerved leaves from between
which, at the top of this stem, the flower spike is produced, as will be
seen from our figure. The inflorescence forms a short erect spike or
raceme, bearing several very sweet-scented flowers, which have a
pleasing appearance.

_Trichosma suavis_ grows about ten inches in height, and produces its
blossoms very freely. The sepals and petals are of a creamy white
colour, the lip profusely striped with purplish crimson and having a
bright yellow crest.

This plant flowered with us in March, and continued for several weeks in
bloom; but we have also seen it blossoming at different times of the
year, according to the period of the completion of its growth. We find
it does well grown in a pot with rough fibrous peat and good drainage,
and when in vigorous growth it must be kept moderately moist at the
roots. It should never be allowed to get dry as it has no thick fleshy
bulbs on which to draw for support. We find it succeeds well in the
Cattleya house, shaded from the burning sun during the summer season.


Dr. Paterson’s Orchids.—The charming locality of the Bridge of Allan has
long been celebrated for this collection of Orchids. Dr. Paterson is an
enthusiastic lover of this most noble family, for as he truly says,
“There are no plants like them.” There are others of the same opinion,
and we believe there is no class of plants that afford such an amount of
pleasure and interest to the cultivator, for the more one gets
acquainted with them, the more one finds to admire, in their bright
colours and their infinite variety, the length of time they last in
blossom, and their usefulness when cut; besides all this there is the
interest of novelty attaching to them, many new species and varieties
continually appearing. There are, in fact, no flowers to surpass them.

At Dr. Paterson’s there is always to be seen a grand display of Orchids.
The way in which they are cultivated, and the order and cleanliness that
surround them, seem to be made quite the study of their owner. No doubt
cleanliness is one of the principal items in their successful
cultivation. It is marvellous how this collection has sprung up since
our visit in September of last year. Nearly all the best specimens had
then been sold, many of them at high prices, and scattered in different
directions; buyers came from far and near, as there were many unique
specimens of fine species and select varieties. These were sold to make
room for the young plants, which now bid fair to be as fine in a few
years’ time, for they are at present making rapid strides. The East
Indian kinds are in a specially flourishing condition. We noticed a
vigorous plant of _Vanda Cathcartii_, three feet high, and the specimens
of _Saccolabium_, _Aërides_, _Cattleya_, _Lælia_, _Vanda_, &c., are
making fine growths. To enumerate the plants that are doing well would
occupy too much of our limited space, but we cannot conclude this note
without mentioning the cool Orchids, such as _Odontoglossum Pescatorei_,
_O. Alexandræ_, and many other kinds, some in bloom, and others showing
fine spikes and making good pseudobulbs. The specimens of _Masdevallia_
were making good progress. Next to these was _Oncidium Barkerii_, with
its bright yellow flowers. The different kinds of _Pleione_ were also
finely in bloom.

Visitors go from all parts to see this collection, Dr. Paterson being as
pleased to show the plants as others are to see them. The Bridge of
Allan is a charming spot situated among the Perthshire Hills, and is a
place of healthful resort, especially in winter, as the climate is mild.
It is within easy distance of the town of Stirling; it can also be
reached from Glasgow and Edinburgh in very little time, and is well
worthy a visit.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 115.
    CATTLEYA WHITEI.]




                            CATTLEYA WHITEI.
                              [Plate 115.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ clavate, furrowed, monophyllous. _Leaves_ short,
  ovate-oblong, coriaceous. _Racemes_ three-flowered, issuing from a
  pair of oblong-obtuse compressed sheathing bracts. _Flowers_
  medium-sized, very handsomely coloured; _sepals_ ligulate-oblong,
  entire, recurved at the edge, of a deep rosy tint with a flush of
  olive green, which is more evident on the outer surface and at the
  tips, about as long as the lip, the dorsal one longer, the lateral
  ones falcately deflexed, all acute with the tips recurved; _petals_
  broader (an inch and one-eighth wide), ovate-oblong, acute, undulated
  towards the recurved apex, of a bright magenta-purple; _lip_ two and a
  half inches long, stipitate, the lateral lobes truncate with the upper
  angle acute, pale blush towards the base, where they are rolled
  closely over the column, the tip which is recurved tinted with
  magenta, the lower side of the tube and throat bright yellow; front
  lobe of lip an inch long and an inch and a half broad, roundish
  reniform, with the edge neatly undulated, and distinctly
  fimbriate-denticulate, the ground colour magenta-rose, veined closely
  all over except the extreme edge, which is white, with deep
  crimson-magenta, the veins running back in a wedge-shaped figure to
  just within the tube, where they pass to crimson; a strong central
  line of magenta passes half way down at the back. _Column_ clavate,
  semiterete, the edge thin, almost wing-like, whitish with a tint of
  blush at the apex.

  Cattleya Whitei, _Reichenbach fil._, _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S.,
  xviii., 586.


This most beautiful _Cattleya_ is of recent introduction, and is one of
the most rare, chaste and distinct kinds that has been introduced of
late. It is supposed to be a natural hybrid, the result of insect
fertilisation in its native country. The specimen in the hands of
Holbrook Gaskell, Esq., Woolton Wood, Liverpool, in whose fine
collection it bloomed in July last, and through whose kindness we have
been enabled to figure it, is believed to be the only plant ever
imported; and we must congratulate the owner on his being the means of
bringing such a magnificent species to the notice of Orchid growers. It
is very gratifying to find that so many new forms of _Cattleya_, both
species and varieties, have been brought home by our collectors within
the last few years; they are grand acquisitions to our collections, as
there are no other Orchids that make such an effective display. Now that
there are so many and such varied kinds introduced, we shall be able to
have Cattleyas in bloom all the year round, by procuring the different
species and varieties which are of nearly all shades of colour, many of
them being very brilliant and distinct. We are glad to know there are
some kinds that will do in cooler houses and others of them are
small-growing species, which will increase their value to those who have
only small houses in which to grow them.

_Cattleya Whitei_ is an evergreen plant with handsome, good-looking dark
green foliage. In growth it is much like the dark variety of _C.
labiata_, its foliage and pseudobulbs being similar; it produces three
flowers on a spike, the sepals and petals being bright magenta-crimson,
with a flush of brown on the front portion, the lip pale magenta
distinctly veined with intense magenta-crimson, and the throat bright
yellow. It blooms in July, and Mr. Davies, the gardener, tells us that
it lasts two or three weeks in beauty.

This novelty requires treatment similar to that given to _C. Mossiæ_ and
_C. labiata_—namely, to be potted in good rough fibrous peat, with
thorough drainage. It should have the heat of the Cattleya house, with
all the light possible, during the whole year, which will enable the
plant to properly mature its stems and foliage, after which we may
expect good results. A slight shading must be given during hot sunny
days.


Orchids at Melrose, the residence of A. Curle, Esq.—We paid a visit to
this place a short time since and were well pleased with the collection.
The mansion is prettily situated on rising ground, well backed up with
trees, while the view of the ruins of the old abbey in front gives the
place a quaint aspect which renders it specially interesting to
visitors. There is a range of glass houses consisting of vineries, and
greenhouses. Then we come to the Orchid houses, in which there is a
well-grown collection of these plants, which are doing well and making
fine growth. The centre table has a row of good plants, such as _Vanda
tricolor_ Dalkeith variety, also a beautiful _Vanda suavis_ which was
reported to be a fine variety, and some other good Vandas. We, moreover,
noticed a telling plant of _Cattleya Harrisoniana violacea_ finely in
bloom, which, with its violet-coloured flowers, is very showy. There are
some grand specimens of _Cattleya gigas_, _C. Mendelii_, and _C.
Mossiæ_, showing excellent growth, and many other Cattleyas and Lælias
making rapid progress. Suspended from the roof we noticed a plant called
_Lælia pumila spectabilis_, but it was not in blossom; since our visit,
however, we have received a fresh bloom of it from Mr. Sharp, the
gardener, and a most beautiful flower it is, being of good shape, the
sepals and petals dark rose, the lip rich purple and of stout substance.
The foliage is very dark which is the case with some of the varieties of
_L. præstans_, of which there are several in cultivation, this being one
of the best we have seen. In the same house was a good _Vanda cœrulea_
showing fine spikes, and associated with it were some handsome forms of
_Cypripedium Spicerianum_ in bloom. We noticed also some well-grown
specimens of _Dendrobium Wardianum giganteum_ making strong growth,
several plants being five feet high.

In the next house were many fine examples of _Odontoglossum Alexandræ_,
_O. Pescatorei_, and others making good pseudobulbs; also Masdevallias
and many other good plants. We noticed a splendid _Zygopetalum Mackayi_,
so called, but we think it was distinct from any we have seen, the
colour being intense, and the lip of a very rich purple.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 116.
    AËRIDES VANDARUM.]




                           AËRIDES VANDARUM.
                              [Plate 116.]
                            Native of India.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ terete, flexuose, rooting, clothed with the
  sheathing bases of the leaves, growing two feet or more in height, of
  it purplish brown colour. _Leaves_ distant, harsh in texture, four to
  six inches long, as thick as the stem, subulate, terete narrowed to an
  acute point, with a narrow furrow on the upper side, evergreen.
  _Peduncle_ lateral, opposite the leaves, one or two flowered.
  _Flowers_ rather large, delicate but durable, white; _sepals_
  spreading, the dorsal one ligulate with a stalk-like base, the lateral
  ones subcrenulate united to the foot of the column, the margins always
  undulated; _petals_ obovate cuneate, undulated; _lip_ tripartite, the
  lateral (basal) divisions linear-falcate, toothletted, the middle one
  deeply two-lobed, the lobes reniform, concave, crenate narrowed at the
  base into a claw, with a small toothed segment on each side and a
  sharp keel between; _spur_ extinguisher-formed. _Column_ short,
  wingless. _Pollen-masses_ two.

  Aërides Vandarum, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, 1867,
  997.

  Aërides cylindricum, _Hooker_, _Botanical Magazine_, t. 4982, non
  Lindley; _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S., iii, 537, fig. 115.


There is no doubt that the species of _Aërides_ rank among the most
beautiful of the East Indian Orchids. The one we now introduce to the
notice of our readers is very distinct in its manner of flowering, and
also in its foliage, the general aspect of the plant being much like
that of _Vanda teres_, whence the name given it by Professor Reichenbach
of _Aërides Vandarum_. The flowers are large and the manner of its
growth makes it a very interesting subject. Few cultivators, however,
have seen it in blossom. Our artist took a sketch last March from a
plant blooming at the Victoria and Paradise Nurseries, where it flowered
for several weeks.

_Aërides Vandarum_ is an evergreen species and grows about two feet in
height. The foliage is terete and acutely pointed, like that of a small
growing _Vanda teres_ and the stem is of a purplish brown colour. It
produces two flowers on a spike, and these are of a pure white colour;
it blooms in March and April, and lasts three weeks in perfection.

This plant requires the heat of the East India house, with all the light
possible. It will thrive in pots or baskets with sphagnum moss, or even
on rafts of wood, but when grown on these it requires more frequent
supplies of moisture. It should have about the same treatment as _Vanda
teres_, growing well during the summer if provided with plenty of
moisture over the foliage and roots during the growing period, and
having a good rest during winter, when it needs only just sufficient
moisture to keep the stems and leaves from shrivelling. When it begins
to show flower, it should have a little water to plump the stems and
encourage them to throw out the blossoms freely and to develope growths
for the summer season. We find it thrive best suspended near the glass,
so that it can have all the light possible.


Orchids at Eastwood Park, Glasgow, the residence of David Tod, Esq.—This
collection of Orchids is doing well, especially the cool kinds, and the
Cattleyas which latter are special favourites with Mr. Tod, since they
do not require so much heat as some others. There are here many hundreds
of Odontoglots, and we noticed some fine forms in bloom, especially in
the large house, in which was a grand display of _Odontoglossum
Alexandræ_, many of the plants with well furnished spikes. Of _O.
Pescatorei_ there are also some fine examples with vigorous branching
panicles, and other wonderfully fine specimens, having massive
pseudobulbs, which had produced noble spikes of blooms. Mr. Ewart, the
gardener, takes great interest in the plants, which have much improved
during the last two years.

There are two other houses filled with Odontoglots and Masdevallias.
Here many of the Odontoglots are smaller, but they are doing well. We
noticed two very fine specimens of _Odontoglossum Andersonianum_ showing
well for bloom, and these, Mr. Tod informed us, are very fine varieties.
By their side stood the rare _O. Ruckerii_, just coming into flower. The
collection also includes many other rare Odontoglots. In another house,
half-span roofed, there is a numerous collection of miscellaneous
Orchids, including some fine specimens of _Phalænopsis Schilleriana_ and
others. There are also good plants of Cattleyas of most of the leading
kinds, as well as Lælias and Dendrobiums; and fine specimens of
_Cypripedium caudatum_ on the front stage are doing well, and had
produced many flower spikes. In this house _Odontoglossum Roezlii_ grows
very freely, and is in a clean and healthy condition, the plants seeming
to get the treatment they like. Mr. Tod parted with his fine specimens
of this species last year, but the pieces that are left are making good
plants.

Adjoining this house is a most splendid Fernery, beautifully laid out,
and planted with the best Ferns, Palms, Begonias, &c., which are in
vigorous health.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 117.
    LÆLIA HARPOPHYLLA.]




                           LÆLIA HARPOPHYLLA.
                              [Plate 117.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ slender, terete, six inches to a foot high,
  invested with sheathing bracts, monophyllous. _Leaves_ ligulate,
  acuminate, about an inch in breadth, dark green. _Peduncle_ issuing
  from a longish terete sheath, and having raceme about six inches long.
  _Flowers_ four to seven in a raceme, rather small in size, but highly
  coloured, and very attractive; _sepals_ lanceolate, acute, one and
  three-quarter inch in length, and of a bright orange-vermilion;
  _petals_ similar in size, form, and colour; _lip_ three-lobed, the
  side lobes erect plane, of the some orange colour as the sepals, with
  the acute upper front angle whitish and somewhat drawn out, the
  margins just meeting over the column, the middle lobe creamy white,
  the disk marked with four orange-coloured lines, about twice as long
  as the side lobes, linear acuminate, recurved, with a crispy margin;
  keels nearly obsolete.

  Lælia harpophylla, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  1873, 542; _Floral Magazine_, N.S., t. 372; _Garden_, xxiii., 116, t.
  400.


This, observes Professor Reichenbach, is one of those curious plants
which “are not decided species, and yet they must be named and
registered. It would be _Lælia cinnabarina_, if it had not a stem as
thin as that of a showy _Pleurothallis_, a single acuminate leaf, and
much narrower and straighter parts of the flower.” * * * “Perhaps it is
a mule between a _Brassavola_ and _Lælia cinnabarina_?” Whatever its
origin and direct relationship, there is no doubt that it is one of the
most distinct and beautiful of Orchids, as it affords a colour that is
not only rare, but exceedingly effective. The flowers may be considered
small as compared with the majority of the species of _Lælia_, which,
indeed, are generally large-flowered, and rank among the most gorgeous
and showy of Orchids, but even in this species they measure fully three
inches across. It is a singular fact, that most of the orchidaceous
species with orange-vermilion flowers have blossoms smaller than those
of other colours. We have often noticed this fact amongst the Orchids
that we have met with, and, indeed, it my be observed through nearly all
the genera, that there are no large-sized flowers of this orange or
vermilion colour. We are, however, hopeful that our energetic collectors
may succeed in importing some having this character. It is true the
_Sophronites grandiflora_ bears highly coloured vermilion-scarlet
flowers which may be considered large in proportion to the size of the
plant, and a most charming Orchid it is, but we should, nevertheless,
welcome some examples, at least, of these brilliant and startling
colours among those larger-growing subjects which produce larger
flowers.

Our figure of this charming _Lælia_ was taken from a finely-bloomed
specimen in the well-grown collection of F. A. Philbrick, Esq., of
Bickley, under the care of Mr. Heims, who has succeeded in flowering it
very successfully. It was a very rare plant a few years ago, and then
commanded a high price; but of late years there have been received large
importations of it, and it may now be purchased at a more reasonable
cost. The varieties vary to some extent in the size of their flowers and
in the particular shade of colour, which is found to be the case with
nearly all the imported Orchids.

_Lælia harpophylla_ is an evergreen species, with thin stems and long
narrowish pointed foliage, of a dark green colour; it grows a foot or
more in height, the flower-spike proceeding from a sheath at the top of
the stem, and rising about six inches above it, several flowers growing
together on the spike. The blossom is of a beautiful bright
orange-vermilion, and the lip is edged with white. It is a
free-flowering plant, blooming in March, April, and May, and continuing
its inflorescence for four or five weeks.

We find it to succeed well potted in fibrous peat, to which must be
added good drainage, and a liberal supply of water during the time of
its growth. The soil should also be kept moist through the resting
season, so that the bulbs and foliage may be kept plump, as the bulbs
being very thin, they require a more constant supply of nourishment than
those of plants which have bulbs of a more substantial character. We
have grown these plants in the Cattleya house, as near the light as
possible, for they grow weakly if far off the light, though they require
shading from the burning sun. They must also be kept free from insects.


Lælia amanda (_Cattleya Rothschildiana_).—This fine species, or natural
hybrid, is cultivated under the two names above quoted, as we learn from
a letter which accompanied some flowers of the plant, for which we are
indebted to W. E. Brymer, Esq., Ilsington House, Puddleton, near
Dorchester, and of which our artist has taken advantage to secure a
drawing for the _Orchid Album_. The flowers somewhat resemble in
character those of _Cattleya maxima_, but the stems (pseudobulbs) and
foliage are quite distinct, being two-leaved, while the flowers are more
chaste-looking than those of that species. The plant is very beautiful,
and is a decided acquisition to this class of Lælias, the flowers being
bright rose veined with rosy purple, and produced in October, at a
season when there are but few Orchids in bloom, which makes it all the
more valuable.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 118.
    ODONTOGLOSSUM ALEXANDRÆ COOKSONII.]




                   ODONTOGLOSSUM ALEXANDRÆ COOKSONII.
                              [Plate 118.]
                         Native of New Grenada.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ oblong-ovate, compressed, diphyllous.
  _Leaves_ ligulate-oblong, acute, channelled and narrowed towards the
  stalk-like base, of a cheerful green colour. _Scape_ radical,
  supporting a many-flowered raceme exceeding the leaves, and having
  small acute bracts at the base of the pedicels. Flowers large and
  beautifully spotted; _sepals_ ovate acuminate, the dorsal one rounded
  at the base into a short broadish claw, the margins revolute and
  undulate, white, with a few bold irregular blotches of brownish
  crimson, of which one is placed near the apex, and another forms an
  irregular transverse bar across the centre; the internal ones
  narrowing towards the base; _petals_ broadly ovate acuminate, narrowed
  into a claw at the base, the margins entire, undulated, white like the
  sepals, with three or four rounder and smaller spots; _lip_
  oblong-ovate, with the shortly cuspidate apex recurved, the margins
  toothletted and much crisped, white, with a rich yellow stain on the
  disk, and a broad brown-crimson blotch on the anterior portion, the
  edges of the produced lobes inflected yellow striped with red, and
  broken up into a few short acute teeth; from its base proceed three
  blunt yellow ridges, of which the central one stops short with a blunt
  point, and the two side ones are continued into acute projecting
  yellow horns, having about midway an erect tooth on the upper margin.
  _Column_ arcuately clavate, yellowish, winged, the wings white
  stripped with brown, toothed in the upper part, the teeth large,
  irregular, and set on behind the margin of the brownish prominent edge
  of the stigmatic cavity.

  Odontoglossum Alexandræ Cooksonii, _Williams and Moore_, supra.


It is with the greatest pleasure that we are now enabled to present to
the notice of our readers an illustration of this most splendid variety,
which is, no doubt one of the best of the spotted forms of the Princess
of Wales’s Odontoglot, _Odontoglossum Alexandræ (crispum)_. We are
greatly indebted to N. C. Cookson, Esq. of Wylam-on-Tyne, in whose
honour it is named, for his kindness in sending such ample materials for
figuring so splendid a variety. We are constantly receiving examples of
charming forms of this beautiful Odontoglot, which is sought after so
much by those who grow cool Orchids, for the plants take no more, or but
little more room or heat than the commonest greenhouse plants. Indeed,
they are quite easily grown when they get the proper treatment, and are
planted in proper material. They must be kept cool during the summer
months; and in winter the thermometer may range from 45° to 55°.

_Odontoglossum Alexandræ Cooksonii_ is en evergreen plant, growing like
_O. Alexandræ_ itself, along with which it was imported. The sepsis and
petals are white, irregularly and heavily marked with brownish crimson;
while the lip, which is of the some colour—white, and spotted with
brownish crimson, bears in addition a golden yellow crest. It flowers
during the summer, and lasts for about six weeks in bloom, requiring the
same treatment as _O. Alexandræ_, which has been fully explained under
Plate 47 of our first volume.


The Orchids at Dunlop House, Ayrshire, the seat of T. D. Cunningham
Graham, Esq., include several wonderful specimens that have been many
years attaining their present size; while it is remarkable to find such
plants in perfect health. We were delighted to find such an example as
may here be seen, of _Angræcum sesquipedale_, which from its size must
have been one of those brought from Madagascar some years ago by the
Rev. W. Ellis. This plant was nearly four feet in height, with two
breaks at the bottom, and six flower spikes, perfect as a specimen, and
such as those who are fond of well-grown plants would consider worth a
long journey to see. Opposite to this were some remarkably fine plants
of _Vanda suavis_, one of which is nine feet high in the main stem, with
seven fine growths of four feet high, and five smaller growths. We
believe we may safely say that this is one of the finest specimens we
have ever seen. _Vanda tricolor_ is nearly equally fine, having the main
stem eight feet high, supplemented by four growths four feet high. There
are besides other fine Orchids in the same house, and some good foliage
plants, of which there is a fine collection. We have often heard it
stated that Orchids cannot be successfully grown unless there is a house
set apart for them; but the fact that these Vandas, Angræcums, &c., are
grown in company with ordinary stove plants, at once upsets this notion,
and proves that any one having a good stove may cultivate in them these
most beautiful Orchids, which, we may add, are nearly always in bloom.

After leaving these grand plants we entered the principal Orchid house,
wherein we also found many well-grown plants. We specially noticed
_Dendrochilum filiforme_, a fine specimen, which had produced a great
number of its drooping spikes. _Vanda cœrulea_ was finely in bloom, as
were _Phalænopsis violacea_, with its pretty violet coloured flowers,
and _P. grandiflora_, a fine plant of a good variety. We were also glad
to see the rare _Cœlogyne ocellata maxima_, a chaste and pretty Orchid.
_Arundina bambusifolia_, was well in bloom, with four spikes of its
light rose sepals and petals, and rich magenta lip. There were many fine
Cattleyas and Lælias making good growths for next year; also
_Cypripedium superbiens_, a fine specimen, and one of the best of the
barbatum section. Next to it was a very large _C. Dominianum_, a pretty
free-blooming hybrid, which continues flowering from the same spike for
some months, a new flower coming on as soon as one goes off. There are
many interesting plants grown at this place, and Mr. Kemp, the gardener,
seems to take great interest in them, which is the way to ensure
success.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 119.
    CYPRIPEDIUM SPICERIANUM.]




                        CYPRIPEDIUM SPICERIANUM.
                              [Plate 119.]
                            Native of Assam.


  Epiphytal. _Stemless_, with spreading distichous evergreen foliage.
  _Leaves_ few, oblong-ligulate, sub-acute, heeled beneath, and there
  purple-spotted towards the base, six to eight inches long or more,
  thick and leathery in texture, of a dull glossy green colour.
  _Peduncles_ erect, issuing from an oblong compressed basal sheath,
  dark reddish-purple, puberulous, eight to ten inches high, the flower
  emerging from an ancipitous linear-oblong obtuse bract shorter than
  the purplish three-ribbed ovary. _Flowers_ about three and a half
  inches across, with a large pouch or lip; _dorsal sepal_ large,
  standard-like, the base green, hairy, cuneate, suddenly expanding into
  an ovate, bluntly apiculate, transversely oblong lamina, two inches
  broad, the sides of which are recurved, auriculæform, white, or in
  some forms tinted with pink, the keel or central line being marked
  with a well-defined purple stripe; _lateral sepals_ short, connate,
  ovate, acute, whitish-green; _petals_ ligulate or linear-oblong,
  laterally deflexed, the margins neatly wavy, but most so upon the
  upper side, pale yellowish-green, with a median purple line and
  numerous purple freckles over the surface; _lip_ large, the pouch
  somewhat bell-shaped, with round everted auricles on each side, and a
  broad acute sinus in front, glossy, olive green, with the anterior
  part dark reddish-brown. _Column_ short, hairy. _Staminode_
  subquadrate, obsoletely three-lobed in front, mauve-purple, with a
  white border, and yellow markings in the centre.

  Cypripendium Spicerianum, _Reichenbach fil._, in _litteris ad cl.
  Veitch_, December, 1878; _Id._ _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S. xiii.,
  363; _Id._ _L’Illustration Horticole_, t. 473; _Id._ _Xenia
  Orchidacea_, t. 231; _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S. xiii, 40, fig. 7
  (woodcut); _Hooker fil._, _Botanical Magazine_, t. 6490; _Moore_,
  _Florin and Pomologist_, 1882, 179 (woodcut); _Garden_, xvii., 169
  (woodcut); xxiii., t. 378 (coloured figure of blush variety).


There is, no doubt, that this _Lady’s Slipper_, which was first received
in England by Herbert Spicer, Esq., of Woodlands, Godalming, in whose
honour it is named, is one of the most interesting and distinct species
that has been introduced of late years. It was also at one time very
rare, and realised high prices, being much sought after in consequence
of its being so different from the other species known in cultivation;
but now that it has been brought home in larger quantities it is more
accessible. The plant may be cultivated in any warm moist house, and is
of free-growing habit, as well as free in producing its blossoms. There
are several slight variations differing in the size and colour or their
flowers. That which we here figure has the dorsal sepal white, while
some plants have a shade of rose colour towards the base. Our drawing
was taken from a plant in the Nurseries of Messrs. Hugh Low & Co. of
Clapton, who received a fine importation about two years ago. Messrs. F.
Sander & Co. have also added to our stock of this species; and we learn
from them that “it grows on almost perpendicular rocks, from which the
plants are loosened with sticks, and so let down, during the months of
May and September. The water runs over these rocks—not in streams, of
course, but sufficient water hangs round the plants to keep the soil and
moss which is about them as wet as water itself. During the winter
months this Cypripedium should not be grown hot.”

_Cypripedium Spicerianum_ is a dwarf evergreen plant, with light glossy
green foliage, six inches or upwards in length, and throws up its
flowers on purplish downy stalks, some eight or ten inches above the
foliage. The flowers are very peculiar, from the singular twisting of
the dorsal sepal, which is white, or in some varieties suffused with
rose, green at the very base, and having a broad purplish stripe along
the centre; the petals, which are prettily waved especially along the
upper edge, are green, with a central stripe and numerous dots of
purple; and the lip is large, and of a brownish-green. The staminode in
this species is very brilliant and conspicuous, being of a beautiful
mauve-purple, with a white border. The plants bloom during September and
October; and when a number of them can be obtained, and their growth
regulated, they may be kept flowering for a much longer time, as each
individual blossom lasts several weeks in beauty.

This interesting novelty requires the same treatment as _C. Stonei_,
that is, to be potted in rough fibrous peat, intermixed with some
charcoal and sphagnum moss; good drainage must also be afforded, as the
roots must be kept moist during the growing season; in fact, they should
never be allowed to get dry, as it has no thick fleshy bulbs or stems to
support it. We find it do well in a warm house with other Cypripeds. Pot
culture is the most suitable for it, but it will succeed in baskets
suspended from the roof, if shaded from the sun.


Odontoglossum Alexandræ.—We have received a splendid variety of this
popular Orchid from J. S. Bockett, Esq., of The Hall, Stamford Hill. The
inflorescence was very distinct, and consisted of flowers of good form
and substance, with the margins beautifully serrated. The sepals and
petals were white flushed with rose, the sepals being in addition
spotted with reddish brown, and the white lip was also spotted with
brown. The flowers were, moreover, nicely regulated on the spike, so
that the entire inflorescence had a particularly good appearance.—B. S.
W.

    [Illustration: PL. 120.
    DENDROBIUM DEAREI.]




                           DENDROBIUM DEAREI.
                              [Plate 120.]
                Native of Mindanao, Philippine Islands.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ stoutish, many-leaved, two to three feet high,
  marked by numerous furrows, and invested by the sheathing leaf bases.
  _Leaves_ densely placed, oblong-ligulate, emarginate at the apex,
  leathery in texture, two inches or more in length, sub-deciduous.
  _Racemes_ numerous (six to nine) on one stem, issuing from the
  uppermost joints, each bearing from ten to eighteen flowers, terminal
  or sub-terminal. _Flowers_ three inches across, pure white,
  exceedingly chaste and delicate, attached by three-winged ovaries;
  _sepals_ lanceolate, acuminate, keeled; _petals_ rhomboid-oblong
  obtuse; _lip_ oblong obtuse, apiculate, the anterior part crenulate,
  with an obtuse angle on each side towards the base, which is somewhat
  cucullate, pure white, like the rest of the flower, but with a small
  blotch of pale green on the disk, crossed by about half a dozen green
  lines; _spur_ or _chin_ extinguisher-shaped. _Column_ much dilated at
  the base.

  Dendrobium Dearei, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xviii., 361.


This new species, which was imported last year, has now bloomed in many
collections, and has proved to be one of the most beautiful and chaste
amongst white-flowered Orchids—one that every Orchidophilist will
admire, since it has so many good qualities to recommend it, being
free-blooming, of a pure white, and lasting long in flower; moreover,
each flower can be cut separately for button-hole or bouquet use, and
the plant is also very effective for decorative and exhibition purposes
during the summer months. Thus, by having a goodly number of plants, it
may be brought in for several successive months; and the stronger the
plant is grown the finer will be its flowers. The individual plants vary
somewhat, which may be caused partly by some specimens being weakly, and
in that case they will improve as they gain strength. It appears to be a
very free grower, but time must prove that, and also if the plants are
of long duration or not. Many of our Dendrobes last but a few years, and
then require to be re-imported. Our sketch is from a well-grown plant in
the grand collection of Sir Trevor Lawrence, Bart., M.P., where we saw
several other examples in bloom, some of them being very strong, and
bearing as many as thirty flowers on a single stem.

_Dendrobium Dearei_, named in compliment to Colonel Deare, by whom it
was first brought forward, is partly deciduous, losing the older leaves
after it has bloomed; this is its aspect at present, but when we get it
into a good growing state its foliage may perhaps stand for a longer
time. It produces its flowers in spikes from the top of the stem, and
also from the side towards their upper end, many together on the spike;
they are pure white, with a little delicate green blotch and veins in
the hollowed-out throat. The blooming season occurs during the summer
months, and the individual flowers last for several weeks in beauty.

This species will do either in baskets or pots, filled with rough
fibrous peat, sphagnum moss, and good drainage, to which a few small
lumps of charcoal may be added. It will also thrive on blocks, with live
sphagnum moss about the roots; but cultivated in this manner the plants
require a more abundant supply of moisture during the growing season. It
is a plant that likes to be grown near the light, and the East India
house seems to suit it well. Both those in pots and those in baskets
require to be kept moist at the roots during their period of growth;
and, like other species of Dendrobe, this enjoys a good season of rest
to cause it to flower more freely. The plants must be kept free from
insects, and can be propagated by dividing the clusters of stems,
leaving two or three to each division. After they are separated they
should be put into a shady place until they begin to grow, when they may
be allowed more light.


Masdevallia Chimæra.—We saw a wonderfully fine plant of this curious
Orchid in the collection of the Marquis of Lothian, at Newbattle Abbey,
Dalkeith, N.B. The plant was suspended from the roof of the house, and
bore several finely expanded flowers, each measuring twenty inches
across from the tip of one tail to that of the opposite one. The flowers
were large in all their parts, of a dark purple colour, beautifully
spotted and clothed on the interior surface with dark hairs, which is a
peculiar feature of this section of the Masdevallias. Mr. Priest was
kind enough to send us some flowers of this species for figuring, but
unfortunately they withered before they reached us. It has always been
so when flowers of this species have been sent to us, as they last for
so short a time when cut from the plant.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 121.
    CATTLEYA LABIATA PALLIDA.]




                       CATTLEYA LABIATA PALLIDA.
                              [Plate 121.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ (pseudobulbs) erect, club-shaped, furrowed in age,
  eight to ten inches high, monophyllous, evergreen. _Leaves_ oblong
  obtuse, leathery in texture, about ten inches long, of a lively green
  colour. _Scape_ two-flowered, issuing from a short oblong bluntish
  sheath. _Flowers_ large, six to seven inches deep, and six inches
  broad, superbly coloured; _sepals_ lanceolate, three and a half inches
  in length, plane, recurved at the tip, of a delicate magenta blush,
  the lateral ones slightly smaller, of the same colour, with a paler
  central band, streaky; _petals_ broadly ovate (two and a half inches
  wide), finely undulated at the margin, narrowed towards the base, of
  the same colour as the sepals, but with the base of the costa whitish;
  _lip_ upwards of three inches long, obovate, the basal lobes connivent
  over the column, faintly stained with magenta, the front edge at the
  mouth of the tube spreading, of a creamy yellow, and undulated; the
  front lobe roundish, expanded, very finely undulated, deeply
  emarginate, the blush-tinted edge enclosing a band of creamy yellow,
  which becomes narrower towards the apex, where the roundish blotch
  (one and a half inches wide) of rich deep magenta runs out nearly to
  the margin, behind which, and extending backwards within the throat,
  is a radiate series of orange-yellow veins, with magenta coloured
  veins on each side within the tube. _Column_ clavate, enclosed by the
  base of the lip.

  Cattleya labiata pallida, _Hort._; _Williams_, _Orchid Growers’
  Manual_, 5 ed., 122.


The fine variety of _Cattleya labiata_ here illustrated, which was
introduced many years since, is still quite rare, indeed, as much so as
the type itself. It is a most beautiful variety, and the plant, though
seldom seen, is a most useful one, since it blooms at a time when there
are comparatively few Orchids in flower, although some other of the
Cattleyas that have been introduced during the last few years blossom at
the same time. The plant from which our drawing was taken bore
forty-eight expanded flowers, and was a grand example of good
cultivation. It was grown in the superb collection of the Comte de
Germiny, at Gouville, France, and was most perfect as regards foliage
and flowers. Mr. Rondeau, the gardener, seemed delighted to show us this
plant, as he might well be, as it made a grand floral picture. We gave a
description of this fine collection after our visit to Gouville, as
noted under Plate 108.

_Cattleya labiata pallida_ is an evergreen plant, with the stems or
pseudobulbs about eight inches in height, supporting one thick bright
green leaf, about ten inches in length, and is one of the most
compact-growing Cattleyas we have. The sepals and petals are of a deep
rose colour, the lip of a yellowish white, with a large patch of bright
magenta, the fore part margined with pale rose, and the throat bright
orange. It blossoms in July, August, and September, and continues in
beauty from three to four weeks.

This plant is best grown in a pot, with rough fibrous peat, perfect
drainage being secured by filling the pots three-parts full with crocks,
and mixing a few lumps of charcoal with the top of the drainage, and
also with the peat, as this keeps the latter more open; the roots,
moreover, like to cling to it, so that it is very beneficial to the
plants. The plants should be well elevated above the top of the pot, and
then the roots will run all over the soil among the charcoal and fibre,
which they delight to grow in. When potted in this way the material
keeps sweet for a much longer time, as the water is directly carried
away and cannot become stagnant about the roots. The great secret is to
have good drainage and sweet material for the roots to work in. If the
soil gets bad remove it, and give the plants a fresh supply without
injuring the roots.

Cattleyas do not like to be kept too moist at the roots even in their
growing season; and when their growth is completed only just sufficient
must be applied to keep their bulbs and foliage plump. We find it
beneficial when Cattleyas are in vigorous growth to syringe the plants
slightly between the pots, and should they have roots outside syringe
these also a little, as it will invigorate them. Care must be taken not
to wet the young growths, as water is apt to rot them, or cause than to
damp off. It is an excellent method in the hot days of summer to pour
water on the tables every morning and afternoon, giving air whenever
there is an opportunity. Let them have all the light possible, using the
blinds during the time the sun is hot, but never allowing the blinds to
be down when the sun is on the decline. A great deal of the success of
the plant depends on getting strong and well matured growth, which also
causes the flowers to come more freely, to open of a brighter colour,
and to last longer in bloom.

We find _Cattleya labiata pallida_ to thrive best at the warmest end of
the Cattleya house. It must be kept free from insects, as cleanliness is
with all plants a great help towards successful development. The thrips
and white scale attack these, and if not removed their foliage soon
becomes disfigured, and the growth is often mortally injured.

    [Illustration: PL. 122.
    CYPRIPEDIUM CURTISII.]




                         CYPRIPEDIUM CURTISII.
                              [Plate 122.]
            Native of the Sunda Isles, Asiatic Archipelago.


  Epiphytal. Acaulescent. _Leaves_ distichous, coriaceous, oblong acute,
  recurved, channelled and equitant at the base, of a dull green, the
  upper surface boldly chequered with oblong markings of darker green,
  the under side keeled with the surface paler and unspotted. _Scape_
  (peduncle) pubescent, dull wine-purple, with a short compressed ovate
  bract just below the ovary, which is green striped with brown.
  _Flowers_ solitary, remarkable for the small dorsal sepal and large
  pouch; _dorsal sepal_ short, ovate acuminate, curving from the base
  upwards, greenish with a white edge and about ten greenish-purple
  nerves; _lateral sepals_ united, very small, ovate, greenish with
  green veins; _petals_ measuring about four inches from tip to tip,
  linear-oblong, acute, wavy, recurved at the tips, greenish in the
  upper, white in the lower half, indistinctly veined with purple, and
  thickly spotted with small purple dots, the margin copiously fringed
  throughout with short purple hairs; _lip_ with a large oblong
  bluntly-rounded pouch (one and a half inch long) of a dull wine-purple
  with a few prominent darker purple veins, the upper edge of the sac
  with narrow side angles greenish inside, the basal part with the edges
  rolled inwards and dotted with purple. _Staminode_ transversely
  oblong, emarginate behind and having in front an inwardly curved tooth
  on each side with an apiculus between, pale yellowish green, with
  darker green reticulations in the centre.

  Cypripedium Curtisii, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xx. 8.


This new species is both distinct and rare. It is, moreover, very
beautiful and one that every lover of Cypripediums will be looking
after. There are some cultivators who do not care for this class of
Orchids, and there are some others who grow all the species and
varieties they can procure, making the collecting of them a hobby. We
can fully understand the pleasurable feelings of these latter, as the
plants are ornamental in foliage as well as in flower, thus always
keeping up a good appearance; they are also very easy of cultivation,
and most of them take but little room to grow in. There are now so many
species and varieties—blooming, too, at different periods of the
year—that a good display of flowers may always be had from them; and
there are some of the species that will do in the Odontoglossum and
intermediate houses, added to which their long-enduring quality scores
as a great point in their favour. We are never without Cypripediums in
bloom.

The specimen we are now figuring was flowered by J. Day, Esq., of
Tottenham, who, we are glad to say, after parting with one of the
largest and most rare collections of Orchids at that time existing, is
now fast forming another collection. We have no hesitation in saying
that Mr. Day has, to a greater extent perhaps than any other amateur
Orchidophilist, a correct knowledge of the genera and species of
Orchids. His first collection was of many years’ standing, and was the
most complete as regards species and varieties that we ever saw; he not
only had the plants under cultivation, but had besides many drawings
taken by artists, and also took pleasure in sketching and painting them
himself. We believe he still takes sketches of all the novelties which
he himself blooms, as well as of some of those flowered by other
growers, being a most proficient artist. All this shows what an intense
love he has for this noble class of plants.

_Cypripedium Curtisii_, as will be seen by our drawing, is an evergreen
plant with charmingly spotted foliage. The flowers are well thrown up
above the foliage; the dorsal sepal is white veined with green, the
petals crimson flushed with green and faintly veined and spotted with
purple, and margined with a dense fringe of purple hairs, while the lip
is large and of a reddish brown hue. This species blooms in July, and
continues in beauty for several weeks. It requires the same treatment as
_C. barbatum_ and others of that class, and from its appearance we
conclude that it will be found to be a free-growing as well as a
free-blooming plant.


Zygopetalum Burkei.—This new species was exhibited by Messrs. Jas.
Veitch & Sons at the meeting of the Royal Horticultural Society, on
November 13th, and was greatly admired both on account of its distinct
character and novel appearance. The pseudobulbs are about three inches
long, carrying long narrow leaves; the sepals and petals are green
transversely barred and spotted with brown; and the lip is white, and
furnished with a crimson ruff or frill. It has been introduced from
Guiana. Altogether this is a most distinct and desirable species, and we
hope shortly to figure it.—H. W.


Cymbidium elegans.—W. McDonald, Esq., Woodlands, Perth, has kindly sent
us a fine spike of this rare and distinct species. The spikes are very
dense, and contain a large number of yellow flowers, which are very
distinct. Mr. McDonald informs us that his plant bears seven spikes of
flowers, a rather unusual number, and a fact which we think worth
recording.—H. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 123.
    LÆLIA GRANDIS.]




                             LÆLIA GRANDIS.
                              [Plate 123.]
                        Native of Bahia, Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ (pseudobulbs) club-shaped, furrowed in age, about
  eight to ten inches in height, monophyllous. _Leaves_ oblong-ligulate
  acute, leathery and rigid in texture, dark green, growing to about ten
  inches in length. _Scape_ emerging from an oblong pale green
  compressed bluntish bract or spathe, about four-flowered, the racemes
  erect. _Flowers_ rather large, measuring upwards of four inches in
  each direction without being spread out; _sepals_ lanceolate, reflexed
  and much twisted, of a pleasing nankin or fawn colour; _petals_
  somewhat broader than the sepals, also convex and curled, finely
  toothed at the edge, of the same colour as the sepals; _lip_
  three-lobed, the lateral lobes rolled over the column at the base,
  spreading in front, where they are beautifully veined with
  magenta-rose, the middle lobe rounded with an apiculus, prettily
  crispate-undulate, creamy white pencilled over but more sparingly than
  the side lobes with delicate magenta lines; thus the whole surface of
  the lip is radiately venose with magenta-rose. _Column_ club-shaped,
  concealed by the infolding of the lateral lobes of the lip.

  Lælia grandis, _Lindley_, in _Paxton’s Flower Garden_, i., 60, fig.
  38; _Id._, _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, 1864, 1202; _Flore de Serres_,
  vii., 238, woodcut; _Id._, xxiii., 297, t. 2473; _Hooker fil._,
  _Botanical Magazine_, t. 5553; _Regel_, _Gartenflora_, t. 698;
  _Williams_, _Orchid Grower’s Manual_, ed. 5, 205.

  Bletia grandis, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Walpers’ Annales Botanices
  Systematicæ_, vi., 424.


We have now the satisfaction of submitting to our readers an
illustration of a very distinct plant, one that is little known, and
which is extremely rare. The flowers are most remarkable in the singular
colour of the sepals and petals, and in the chaste and prettily marked
lip or labellum. _Lælia xanthina_ is often sold for this plant, which it
much resembles in growth, but the flowers are totally different, as may
be seen by a comparison of our present plate with the figure of the true
_L. xanthina_, published in the first volume of the _Orchid Album_
(Plate 23). This comparison will show that the two species are quite
distinct in the form of their flowers, as well as in the colour and
markings of the lip. We are indebted for the opportunity of figuring it
to Baron Schröder, of The Dell, Staines, in whose fine collection it
bloomed in June last, and was very much admired by those who saw it.

_Lælia grandis_ is an evergreen plant, with the stems or pseudobulbs
about eight inches in height, and supporting a dark green leaf about ten
inches in length. The flowers are produced several together from a
sheath at the apex of the stems; the sepals and petals are
nankin-yellow, the lip cream-coloured distinctly veined over the
interior surface with rose colour. The plant blooms in May and June, and
the flowers last in beauty for two or three weeks.

This species is best grown in a pot with rough fibrous peat and sphagnum
moss, and should have good drainage, which is very essential for
securing the healthy condition of the roots of the plant; indeed, unless
a plant makes good roots, and they are kept in a healthy condition,
there is not much chance of its doing well for any length of time. When
Orchids are making their roots, it is important that all insects, and
other destructive pests, should be kept away from them, so that their
root-points may not be eaten away, but kept in a growing state. We have
often seen the roots of Orchids eaten off by cockroaches and wood-lice,
both of which are most destructive to the roots of the plants.

This _Lælia_ will also do well in baskets or pans suspended from the
roof, or will even succeed on a block of wood; but if grown in this way
the plants will require more attention as regards moisture at the roots.
It requires the same general treatment as _L. purpurata_, and should be
grown in similar materials.


Cymbidium affine.—At the meeting of the Royal Horticultural Society,
November 13th, there was exhibited by A. Wyatt, Esq., of Cheltenham, a
grand specimen of this rarity, bearing two spikes, one with thirteen,
the other with six flowers; it is altogether distinct from the other
species of _Cymbidium_, and seems intermediate between _C. Parishii_ and
_C. Mastersii_. The flowers are produced on upright spikes; the sepals
and petals are white, and the lip white, having a few rosy purple
blotches and stains in the throat and on its anterior part. The style of
growth resembles that of _C. Parishii_, and it has broad foliage as in
that species. It was deservedly awarded a First Class Certificate. Our
artist has taken a sketch of the plant, and we hope soon to be enabled
to present a representation of it to our subscribers.—H. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 124.
    VANDA SANDERIANA.]




                           VANDA SANDERIANA.
                              [Plate 124.]
                Native of Mindanao, Philippine Islands.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ short, tufted, densely leafy. _Leaves_ distichous,
  recurved, rigid and leathery in texture, broadly ligulate, channelled,
  obliquely cut away at the acute apex, evergreen. _Racemes_ axillary,
  many-flowered. _Flowers_ huge (fully four and a half inches across),
  and from the parts lying in one plane having a _primâ facie_
  resemblance to those of _Odontoglossum vexillarium_; _dorsal sepal_
  roundish, obovate (one and three-quarter inches by two inches), of a
  delicate rosy blush on both surfaces, slightly stained with
  buff-yellow at the base; _lateral sepals_ divergent, but overlapping,
  obliquely and broadly obovate (two and a quarter inches by three
  inches), pale nankin on the outer surface, the inner of a deep
  greenish yellow, with about nine longitudinal prominent veins of a
  bright purplish crimson, extending from the base to within a quarter
  of an inch of the tip, and connected by transverse lines of the same
  colour, breaking off into dots towards the margin; _petals_ much
  smaller than the sepals, obovate-cuneate (one and a quarter inch by
  one and a half inch), the principal portion rosy blush like the dorsal
  sepal, but the lower edge tinged with yellow, and bearing a few purple
  spots; _lip_ small, less than an inch broad, spurless, the basal part
  (hypochil) concave, pale purplish red, ribbed exteriorly with
  nankin-yellow, the front lobe (epichil) shortly stalked, bluntly
  heart-shaped, with the tip strongly recurved, chocolate-purple, with
  three prominent ridges or crests extending from base to apex, where
  the middle ridge just falls short of the two outer ones. _Column_ very
  short, pale yellowish, almost touching the sides of the concave basal
  lobes of the lip. _Ovary_ hexangular, pink.

  Vanda Sanderiana, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S.,
  xvii., 588; _Id._ xx., 440, figs. 67 (habit), 68 (inflorescence).

  Esmeralda Sanderiana, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_.
  N.S., xvii., 588 in note.


We have no hesitation in stating that this is the most wonderful Orchid
that has been introduced for many years—one which all growers will be
delighted to possess, as it belongs to a most noble section of the
Orchid family, of which there have long been many beautiful species in
cultivation. That which we now illustrate, however, as regards size, far
eclipses its congeners, since it produces the largest and most
extraordinary flowers of any that have yet been brought to light. The
Vandas are conspicuously beautiful in their foliage as well as in their
flowers, and the introduction of this magnificent species will, we
cannot doubt, be the means of inducing Orchid growers generally to take
a more lively interest in their cultivation. What can be more charming
than a fine variety of _Vanda cœrulea_, or _V. suavis_, or _V.
tricolor_, all of which, moreover, bloom at the same time, and some of
which blossom three times in the year; this, indeed, may be the case
with _V. Sanderiana_, for if we may judge from the remnants of spikes
which have bloomed in their native country, and are found on the
imported plants, we may reasonably expect the cultivated plants to
flower quite freely.

This will be a scarce Orchid for some time to come, if our collectors
are not more successful in getting it home, for hundreds of plants have
unfortunately been lost on the voyage, and we learn from Mr. Sander that
case after case has arrived with all the contents dead; thus of the
numerous importations a few plants only have reached England alive. Mr.
Sander further informs us that this magnificent Orchid comes from
Mindanao, a large southern island of the Philippine group, “where it
grows, high up on old trees perched upright between the branches in
situations which are not very shady. It requires a good heat and much
moisture. It flowers in October in its native habitat; and the blooming
of Mr. Lee’s plant would seem to indicate that in Europe also the plant
will be autumn or early-winter flowering. This, however, has yet to be
proved, as the time of the flowering of Orchids in their native country
rarely corresponds with that of their blooming in this country, the
difference, in many cases, being as much as six months.”

Our drawing was taken from a fine plant, imported, it appears, by
Messrs. Low & Co., and now in the choice collection of W. Lee, Esq.,
Downside, Leatherhead, who has had the good fortune to bloom this
magnificent species for the first time in Europe, under the care of Mr.
Woolford. This plant produced three spikes of its gorgeous flowers, one
spike having twelve blossoms, and another eight, which, we think, shows
that it will bloom freely. Each flower is considerably over four inches
in diameter; the dorsal sepal is, like the petals, of a blush-pink
colour, but is distinctly larger than the latter, which have a dash of
greenish yellow and a few crimson spots along their lower edge; the
lateral sepals are also much larger and broader than the petals, being
fully two inches in diameter, of a rich greenish yellow, distinctly and
beautifully reticulated with purplish-crimson over the whole of the
interior surface; the lip is dull brownish crimson, and has three keels
along the centre, extending from the apex to the base. The plant blooms
in September and October, and continues in blossom during several weeks.

We suppose this _Vanda_ will require the same treatment as _Vanda
suavis_, but time alone can prove this. We recommend it to be grown in
the East India house, in a basket, with sphagnum moss and good drainage,
and hung up as near the light as possible, since it appears to be a
plant requiring that mode of treatment. We have one growing in this way
suspended near the glass, and it is making fresh roots, but it does not
seem to be fast growing. The fine specimens that have reached this
country are from two to three feet high. We find it to keep healthy
planted in crocks until the roots make a good start, after which some
live sphagnum moss is placed in the pot or basket, and these being
provided with plenty of drainage, the roots cannot possibly have any
stagnant moisture hanging about them.

    [Illustration: PL. 125.
    CATTLEYA MOSSIÆ HARDYANA.]




                       CATTLEYA MOSSIÆ HARDYANA.
                              [Plate 125.]
                          Native of La Guayra.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ oblong, club-shaped, furrowed in age, and invested
  in the lower part by whitish membranaceous sheaths. _Leaves_ leathery,
  ligulate-oblong obtuse, recurved at the tip, deep green. _Scape_ about
  two-flowered, issuing from the broad compressed leafy sheath, both
  scape and pedicels tinted with reddish purple. _Flowers_ large,
  exceedingly attractive from their peculiar striate coloration, the
  colours very irregularly distributed, no two corresponding parts being
  alike in marking; _sepals_ lanceolate, slightly recurved, purplish
  blush, or very dilute lilac-purple, irregularly and striately blotched
  in the direction of the veins with rich magenta-purple; _petals_
  broad, ovate, undulated, irregularly striate-blotched with
  magenta-purple on the very dilute lilac-purple ground, in the same way
  as the sepals; _lip_ obovate, emarginate, with a densely frilled edge,
  the basal lobes enfolding the column of a deep rosy magenta on the
  outer surface, the middle lobe with a golden blotch on the throat and
  disk, the front portion striately marked with rich deep magenta-purple
  outside which is an irregular zone of white, more or less traversed by
  pale purple veins, the extreme margin being pale purple; otherwise as
  in the type.

  Cattleya Mossiæ Hardyana, _Williams and Moore_, supra.


This is the most extraordinary variety of _Cattleya Mossiæ_ that has
ever come under our notice, and, moreover, it is not only most distinct
but most beautiful. Its peculiar coloration is constant, for we have
received flowers of it in two successive seasons, and the colour and
style of marking have not appeared to vary in the least. We believe it
has bloomed three years in succession. Our figure was taken from the
fine plant in the noble collection of G. Hardy, Esq., Timperley,
Cheshire. This plant we believe is unique, there having been only one
example with striped flowers obtained from the whole importation, and
that was secured and first flowered by Mr. Hardy, in whose honour it is
now named. We know of no other like it, and we must congratulate the
owner on his good fortune in obtaining and blooming a variety with such
wonderfully variegated flowers.

There are many other fine species of Cattleya in this collection, and
these bloom magnificently, and are grown to great perfection. They are
cultivated in good-sized houses, and have plenty of light, which is a
great necessity to these plants, and they also get the proper degree of
heat and of moisture, and the annual rest, together with perfect
cleanliness, all which seems to be thoroughly understood by Mr. Hill,
the gardener, for the plants appear in the same vigorous state of health
year after year, and still go on improving.

_Cattleya Mossiæ Hardyana_ is like the type in its habit of growth,
having similar evergreen foliage, and producing its gorgeous flowers in
the some way. The sepals and petals are of a pale blush-rose colour,
curiously blotched and veined with rose-purple, while the lip is a
bright rose-purple, margined with dark rose, and the throat
orange-yellow. It blooms during May and June, and lasts about three
weeks in perfection.

The plant requires the same mode of treatment as that given to the other
forms of _Cattleya Mossiæ_.


Orchids in Vineries.—We frequently hear it remarked that Orchids cannot
be cultivated in this or that garden for want of a suitable house or
houses to grow them in. Now, we have repeatedly alluded to the fact that
Orchids do well when cultivated in houses in which other classes of
plants besides them are grown. We met with a convincing illustration of
this in November last, when calling upon John Heywood, Esq., of the
Grange, Stretford, near Manchester. Here we found houses allotted to
Orchids, and amongst them one cool plant-house in which there were many
fine Odontoglots, and some good specimens of _Epidendrum vitellinum
majus_, &c. We, however, wish chiefly to draw attention to the fact,
that we also found here two span-roofed Vineries, in which there were
good crops of Grapes, such as Muscat, Black Alicante, and others; and
beneath these Vines, standing on the curbs, or suspended from the roof,
was growing a collection of _Dendrobiums_, occupying the whole length of
the two houses, and among them many fine specimen plants, with well
ripened bulbs, and which promise well for bloom. We particularly noted
many well-grown plants of _D. Wardianum giganteum_, _D. Devonianum_ with
very strong bulbs, and _D. crassinode_. There was a fine plant of _D.
Ainsworthii_, which is still rare, and is one of the best hybrids yet
raised, as it bears fine handsome flowers, and is free in producing
them. _D. thyrsiflorum_ and _D. densiflorum_ were also well represented;
and there were fine plants of _D. nobile_, one of the most useful for
winter decoration, promising well for bloom. Mr. Elphinstone, the
gardener, informed us that these plants had been grown in the same
houses for some time past; and they are found to succeed well with the
treatment given to the Vines. Any one, therefore, having good Vineries
may use them for Orchids as well as for Grapes, as they are at the
Grange, thus making a double use of the houses, and saving expense.
Besides the cool Orchid house already mentioned, there is a good house
of _Cattleyas_, _Lælias_, &c.; and another full of fine _Vandas_, and
such other Orchids as _Phalænopsis_, _Aërides_, _Cypripedium_,
_Odontoglossum vexillarium_, and many others that require a similar
temperature.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 126.
    WARSCEWICZELLA WENDLANDII DISCOLOR.]




                   WARSCEWICZELLA WENDLANDI DISCOLOR.
                              [Plate 126.]
                         Native of Costa Rica.


  Epiphytal. _Stemless_, ebulbous, producing only a tuft of leaves and
  flowers from the crown of the roots. _Leaves_ cuneate,
  oblong-ligulate, acute, somewhat plicate, broad and channelled below,
  amplectant at the base, of a light green colour. _Scapes_ solitary,
  issuing from the leaf axils, about half as long as the leaves, and
  furnished in the upper part with a two-valved bluntish spathe, which
  is rather shorter than the united ovary and pedicel. _Flowers_
  moderately large, measuring from four to five inches in their broadest
  diameter, stellately expanded, interesting from the peculiar form of
  their lip, and pleasing from the contrast of their colours; _sepals_
  lanceolate, “white,” the dorsal one erect, the lateral ones somewhat
  deflexed; _petals_ of the same form and colour, spreading, somewhat
  twisted; _lip_ projected forwards, ovate-cordate, the apex recurved,
  about an inch and a half broad, the edges multilobulate and much
  undulated, white, the centre plane, with at large oblong blotch of
  violet-purple marked longitudinally by about seven darker purple
  lines, the base constricted, white, with a short chin behind; frill or
  ruff small, with about seven to nine violet-purple stripes,
  semilunate, gradually diminishing backwards till lost in the chin or
  mentum. _Column_ white, thickened upwards, semiterete.

  Warscewiczella Wendlandi, _Reichenbach fil._, in litteris.

  Zygopetalum Wendlandi, _Reichenbach fil._, _Beitrage zu einer
  Orchideenkunde Central-Amerikas_, 74.

  — _Var._ DISCOLOR, sepals and petals yellowish green.

  Warscewiczella Wendlandi discolor, _Reichenbach fil._, in litteris ad
  cl., Smee.


Both by Reichenbach in his various writings, and by Bentham in the
recently published _Genera Plantarum_, the group named _Warscewiczella_
is included under _Zygopetalum_. Putting aside the question of minute
botanical details, we prefer, in this case, to be rather guided by
habit, since habit is so important a factor in all that concerns
cultivation. Thus, while the species and varieties of _Zygopetalum_
produce pseudobulbs, those of _Warscewiczella_ are ebulbous, and this
difference necessitates a material distinction in the mode of
cultivation to be adopted for the well-being of the two groups.

The variety of _Warscewiczella Wendlandi_, which we now illustrate, is a
well marked form as regards the distinctive colours of the sepals and
the labellum or lip; it is a small plant of compact growth, taking but
little room, and blooming very freely. Our drawing was taken from a
healthy specimen in the interesting collection of A. H. Smee, Esq., of
the Grange, Carshalton, who is trying many experiments in Orchid
culture, some of which we have no doubt will succeed, and throw light on
obscure points of management. The present time offers a good opportunity
to make experiments with Orchids, as it can be done without the risk of
incurring any serious expense should they fail, for many kinds of
Orchids are cheap, and of course those which are costly would not in
this way be exposed to risk.

_Warscewiczella Wendlandi discolor_, the particular form here
represented, is an evergreen plant, with light green foliage, which
arises from a short stem scarcely forming a pseudobulb, and grows to the
height of some six or eight inches. The flowers proceed singly from the
axils of the leaves, and have the sepals and petals of a yellowish
green, while the broad squarish lip, which is white at the edge where it
is deeply cut and much crisped, bears a large violet blotch in the
centre. The perfume is very delicious. The plant flowers during August
and September, and lasts for about two weeks in beauty.

This plant is allied to the genera (or sub-genera) _Bollea_ and
_Warrea_, and requires the same kind of treatment as is successful with
them. We have seen them grown in different ways, and thriving well, but
they are plants that require careful treatment, and must never be
neglected. It is necessary always to give them close attention as
regards the supply of moisture at the roots, for they have no thick
fleshy pseudobulbs to support them should the artificial help fail. They
grow in tufts of small short crowns scarcely forming bulbs, and it is
from these that the leaves are developed. Being small growing plants, we
find they do well on blocks of wood, with the roots surrounded by living
sphagnum moss, the blocks being suspended from the roof. They must not
have too much sun; indeed, as the leaves are of a thin texture, they
require shade, but with all the light that can possibly be given them
without exposing them to burning sunshine. We find the cool end of the
East India house to suit them, and here we give them a good supply of
moisture at the roots during the summer season. They must always be kept
moist, and should not even during winter be allowed to get dry, for they
are nearly always growing, and so require a continual supply of
sustenance. If grown in pots or in pans, they will require less moisture
than when on blocks. One thing must always be borne in mind, and that is
to keep them free from insects.


Epidendrum vitellium.—A very fine spike of this charming species was
received by us from H. Shaw, Esq., of Buxton; it was eighteen inches in
height and bore twenty-one of its orange-scarlet flowers, of good size
and stout substance. This was certainly the best spike that has ever
come under our notice. Mr. Shaw calls it _E. vitellinum giganteum_. The
plant it appears has borne five spikes equally as good as the one which
was sent to us. There is no doubt that it is a gigantic form of the old
species, much finer than some of those called _majus_, which generally
flower in spring and summer while this one blooms in December which fact
alone makes it a valuable acquisition, as we have so few Orchids of this
colour blooming at that time of year, December and January.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 127.
    ODONTOGLOSSUM ALEXANDRÆ STEVENSII.]




                   ODONTOGLOSSUM ALEXANDRÆ STEVENSII.
                              [Plate 127.]
                         Native of New Grenada.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ ovate-oblong, compressed, generally in age
  becoming tinged with purple, diphyllous. _Leaves_ ligulate-oblong
  acute, channelled towards the base, of a bright light green colour,
  often with one or two accessory ones from the base of the pseudobulbs.
  _Scapes_ radical, issuing from the axils of the accessory leaves, and
  supporting a many-flowered raceme, or, in very vigorous plants, a
  panicle of flowers, having small acute bracts at the base of the
  pedicels. _Flowers_ large, and handsomely-spotted; _sepals_
  lanceolate-acuminate, undulately recurved at the edge, white, marked
  with three large oblong blotches of pale cinnamon-brown, the two lower
  bands transverse; _petals_ broader, ovate acuminate, the margins
  toothed, much undulated, the surface freely spotted all over,
  especially towards the margins, with the same tint of pale
  cinnamon-brown, the spottings forming smaller roundish or oblong dots,
  which are sometimes confluent, while numerous smaller ones occupy the
  base; _lip_ oblong-ovate acuminate, with a deeply cordate base, and a
  toothed undulated margin, the disk occupied by a broad patch of
  yellow; the other parts white, with one large conspicuous blotch of
  brown near the apex, and a few smaller ones behind it, the base marked
  with numerous small crimson dots, radiately cristate, with two of the
  lamellæ elongated, and most of them marked by a crimson line.

  Odontoglossum Alexandræ (crispum) Stevensii, _Williams and Moore_,
  supra.


We have had an almost endless variety of finely spotted forms of
_Odontoglossum Alexandræ (crispum)_, but this, of which we now publish a
figure, is one of the most densely spotted forms that have come under
our notice. It is also very distinct, not only in the tone of its
colouring but also in the character of its markings, as will be seen by
the accompanying plate. For the opportunity of figuring it we are
indebted to His Grace the Duke of Sutherland, in whose grand collection
of odontoglossums and other Orchids, at Trentham Hall, Staffordshire, it
has been bloomed by His Grace’s most efficient gardener, Mr. Stevens, in
whose honour it is named, and who cultivates these plants in great
perfection, many wonderful examples having been exhibited by him at the
London Shows. He has, moreover, always been particularly fortunate in
obtaining good varieties of this invaluable decorative species, the
flowers of which are turned to good account in the dinner-table and
other floral decorations at the Hall.

_Odontoglossum Alexandræ Stevensii_ is one of the bold-habited
strong-growing forms of this plant, and as regards its pseudobulbs and
foliage resembles any other of the more vigorous forms; like them, too,
its flower spikes may eventually branch out into panicles. The
individual flowers are of large size, and finely crisped and toothed;
the sepals and petals are white, heavily spotted and blotched with pale
sienna-brown, and the lip is white, having a large blotch of the some
colour on the anterior part, and numerous smaller spots towards the
base, where the yellow disk is prominent, and adds life to the
colouring. This plant produced its blossoms in March, and continued for
six weeks in beauty. Like all the forms of _O. Alexandræ_ it begins to
show its flower spikes as soon as the growth is completed.

This variety requires the same course of treatment as that given to this
class of plants generally, and which is commonly designated and
understood as “cool-house” treatment.


Calanthe Veitchii and C. Vestita.—We are always ready to record, for the
information of our subscribers, anything that strikes us as likely to be
interesting to them, whether the subject be an old plant or one of more
recent introduction. Recently, when visiting the garden of H. Gaskell,
Esq., of Woolton, Liverpool, and inspecting his collection of Orchids,
we were much pleased with the sight of a house full of Calanthes. On
entering the house, the charming appearance of their lovely and graceful
flower spikes was almost beyond conception. The spikes were more than
five hundred in number, overhanging each other, and so arranged that
their rosy and white flowers ware intermixed, thus producing an effect
which was indeed most beautiful. In the case of _C. Veitchii_ many of
the spikes were over four feet in length, and those of _C. vestita_ were
equally good. It is, indeed, difficult to describe or even to form any
idea of the lovely effect they produced; they must have been seen to be
fully appreciated. These Calanthes are invaluable as decorative plants,
blooming as they do during the dull winter months—a time when the
presence of flowers, especially if of cheerful colours, to enliven the
too often dreary sunless periods, is doubly welcome.

There were, besides, many _Lælias_, _Cattleyas_, _Odontoglossum_,
_Phalænopsis_, and a host of other good Orchids, many of them in their
full blaze of beauty, and many others with their spikes showing for
succession. Mr. Gaskell’s collection is making rapid strides in respect
to cultivation, a state of things we are at all times pleased to see and
to commend, inasmuch as it always gives one pleasure to see either
Orchids or other plants well cared for, its they are at this place.—B.
S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 128.
    PILUMNA NOBILIS.]




                            PILUMNA NOBILIS.
                              [Plate 128.]
                          Native of Colombia.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ elongate-oblong, compressed, narrowed to the
  top, three to four inches or more in length, clustered, monophyllous.
  _Leaves_ broadly oblong, acute, narrowed to a cuneate base, keeled.
  _Scape_ radical, from four to six inches high, about four-flowered,
  with two or three oblong acute scarious bracts below the raceme.
  _Flowers_ half expanded, white, with two orange-coloured spots in the
  centre, the club-shaped furrowed ovary decurved; _sepals_
  linear-lanceolate acuminate, undulated, narrowed to the base, pure
  white; _petals_ similar to the sepals both in size, form, and
  colouring; _lip_ indistinctly three-lobed, subquadrate, the rounded
  side lobes meeting over the throat, the front lobe larger, retuse, one
  and three-quarter inch broad, having on each side of the throat an
  orange-coloured blotch, the blotches meeting to form a central eye,
  and a slightly elevated line at the narrow base; the claw adnate to
  the base of the column, and then involute, so as to enclose the upper
  part of this organ. _Column_ clavate, terete.

  Pilumna nobilis, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Linnæa_, xxii., 843; _Id._ in
  _Walpers’ Annales Botanices Systematicæ_, iii., 541.

  Pilumna fragrans grandiflora, _Linden_, _Catalogue_.

  Trichopilia fragrans nobilis, _Linden et André_, _L’Illustration
  Horticole_, 3 ser., t. 94.


This small genus was established for the Orchid known as _Pilumna
fragrans_, a species bearing considerable resemblance to our present
subject but having smaller flowers. The great authorities—Reichenbach,
Bentham, &c.—now refer these plants to the genus _Trichopilia_, but we
have hesitated to follow them, as they appear sufficiently different
from the Orchid growers’ point of view to be allowed to enjoy the
distinct appellation which was originally given to them by Dr. Lindley,
the greatest of English authorities on Orchidaceous plants.

This pretty epiphyte, then, may be taken to represent a small genus of
interesting and useful—because free-blooming—plants. The particular
species now illustrated and described, is a very lovely plant, and can
be recommended as one of the best to be grown for decorative purposes,
the flowers being extremely useful for bouquets and button-holes. They
are pure white in colour, and have a delicious fragrance, and these are
qualities which will always cause them to be held in favour.

This _Pilumna_ is a species of free-growing habit, and very free in
producing its flowers. It requires cool treatment, and takes but little
room; moreover, it can be purchased at a moderate price, so that any one
that has a small house will be able to obtain it, and when obtained to
manage it. Thus it will be apparent that it is a most useful plant. Our
drawing was taken from a plant which was cultivated in the Victoria and
Paradise Nurseries, Upper Holloway.

The _Pilumna nobilis_ is an evergreen Orchid, and is furnished with dark
shining pseudobulbs four to six inches or sometimes more in height, and
dark green leaves about six inches in length. The flowers proceed from
the base of the pseudobulbs, three to four together in a loose raceme,
and are of a pure milk-white, with a pair of clear orange-coloured
spots, which impart a peculiar brightness to the throat; these flowers,
which are very fragrant, are produced during the autumn months, and each
lasts about two weeks in perfection.

We find the plants to thrive when grown in pots or baskets, with rough,
fibrous peat and good drainage. They need a moderate amount of moisture
during the period of growth, but when at rest less may be given, merely
enough to keep the bulbs in a plump state. They will thrive well in the
Odontoglossum house.


Lælia anceps.—We were very much surprised when calling on R. P.
Percival, Esq., of Southport, to see the well-grown specimens of _Lælia
anceps_ to be met with in his admirable collection of Orchids. On the
side stage of one house there were 230 spikes of this charming Lælia
just ready to burst their flower buds, some being open, and presenting
to view their fine richly-coloured lips, and their rose-coloured sepals
and petals. Some of the spikes, too, bore as many as four full-sized
flowers. This group must have formed a most gorgeous sight during the
dull time of year, namely, during November and December. Some of these
plants, moreover, were producing as many as thirteen spikes, others a
lesser number. This species is, as it deserves to be, a great favourite
with Mr. Percival. There was among them a fine specimen of _L. anceps
Percivaliana_, a most beautiful form, producing fourteen spikes of its
chaste flowers, the sepals and petals of which are blush-white and the
lip rosy purple.

There were many other fine Orchids to be seen here. We must congratulate
Mr. Percival on being so successful with his Cattleyas, which, when in
bloom, must have been a grand sight, especially the varieties of _C.
Trianæ_, _C. Mendelii_, and _C. Mossiæ_, which, between them, were
producing many hundreds of flower-sheaths. Of _C. Percivaliana_ there
were five plants throwing up their spikes, and they looked very
promising and distinct; doubtless, as in the case of other types of
Cattleyas, there will be many forms of this new species.—B. S. W.


[Since the above was written Mr. Percival has exhibited one of these
plants at South Kensington, and obtained for it a First Class
Certificate. The flowers are not so large as in _C. Mossiæ_, but the lip
is very richly coloured—a velvety crimson-purple with a border of pale
rosy purple.]

    [Illustration: PL. 129.
    ONCIDIUM LANCEANUM LOUVREXIANUM.]




                    ONCIDIUM LANCEANUM LOUVREXIANUM.
                              [Plate 129.]
                        Native of Dutch Guiana.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ forming a very short woody annulated rootstock
  (ebulbous), from which are protruded the thick greenish roots.
  _Leaves_ elliptic-oblong acute, leathery, slightly keeled, somewhat
  recurved at the point, a foot to a foot and a half in length, dull
  deep green speckled with purple, the speckling most strongly marked on
  the under surface and on the younger parts. _Panicles_ rigid,
  short-branched, on green peduncles, which spring from the base of the
  leaf, and are blotched with purple, and invested with scarious
  ovate-acuminate bracts, the lower ones being larger and much
  lengthened out. _Flowers_ showy, fragrant like vanilla; _sepals_
  oblong-obovate, narrowed below, concave, keeled, wavy at the edge,
  yellowish green externally, internally brighter yellow-green and
  spotted irregularly with reddish brown, a broad blotch of brown
  occupying the base; _petals_ similar to the sepals in size, form, and
  colour; _lip_ one and a half inch long, three-lobed, lateral or basal
  lobes magenta-purple, darkest at the centre, triangular-oblong, with
  three crests diminishing upwards on the disk between them; the middle
  or anterior lobe clawed, transversely-oblong, emarginate, the anterior
  half of the claw and the broad anterior lobe itself whiter. _Column_
  short, white, with a pair of magenta-coloured oblique oblong side
  wings, and a red anther cap.

  Oncidium Lanceanum Louvrexianum, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’
  Chronicle_, N.S., xvii., 218.


We now present to our subscribers the figure of a most beautiful Orchid
which belongs to an extensive genus, the species of which vary much in
their growth, bulbs, foliage, and flowers, the latter including almost
every gradation of size and many shades of colour. The Oncidiums are
among the most useful of plants for decorative purposes, as every one
must know who grows Orchids. _Oncidium Lanceanum_ is quite distinct as a
species from any others with which we are acquainted and is remarkable
for having a rich rosy violet lip; the typical form we hope to be able
to figure at some future time. The variety _Louvrexianum_, as will be
seen from the annexed illustration, differs from the type in having the
lip white. Our plate was prepared from an excellent drawing of a plant
which flowered in the fine collection of orchids belonging to Mons. D.
Massange de Louvrex, of Marche, in Belgium—one of the best collections
in that country, and one also in which the plants are well cultivated,
and many unique specimens are to be seen.

_Oncidium Lanceanum Louvrexianum_ is an evergreen plant like the type.
It grows to a foot or more in height, and has light green foliage which
is spotted all over with a darker green and purple. The flowers are
produced on an upright scape a foot or more in length, which springs
directly from the rhizome at the base of the leaf. The sepals and petals
are greenish yellow blotched with brownish crimson, and the lip being
white forms a pleasing contrast with the brown-crimson of the sepals and
petals. It blooms during the summer months, and lasts several weeks in
beauty.

We bloomed this variety many years ago, but it is still a rare plant;
indeed we now very seldom see _Oncidium Lanceanum_ itself well grown,
for it is found difficult to cultivate by our present Orchid growers.
Many years ago one frequently met with fine specimens of it exhibited at
our London shows, and others were to be met with in collections in
different parts of the country. We still hope to see it again taken in
hand by Orchid cultivators, for it is beautiful both in foliage and in
flower and altogether makes a distinct and handsome specimen. The manner
in which these plants fail—and it is one which is very annoying—is that
the leaves go spotted, a condition which is not only detrimental to
their well-being, but renders them unsightly, and thus cultivators get
tired of their plants and discard them, while others, who keep the
foliage good from year to year, are proud of their success. We believe
the spotting to be caused by giving the plants too much heat and not
sufficient air, when, if the foliage is also kept too moist, it will
spot; the leaves, it will be noted, are of a thick fleshy texture, and
when once they get spotted it is very difficult to restore them to
health. If a suitable place can be found for it, and one in which it
succeeds well, by all means let it be kept there. We have found these
plants do well grown in baskets, with good drainage, so that the roots
can be benefited by being suspended in the atmosphere of the house—in
fact they do not like their roots to be too much covered over, but they
should have a little live sphagnum moss or very good fibrous peat. This
compost should never be allowed to get into a wet or soddened condition;
but if this should occur clear all the old material away, and employ
fresh, putting some good lumps of charcoal, more of this than of moss or
peat.

The plants may also be successfully grown on blocks of wood and
suspended from the roof. We have found them succeed in an intermediate
temperature ranging about 60° by night in winter, and a trifle
more—about 65°—by day; in summer the heat may range to little higher,
but not very much. With the heat give all the light possible, avoiding
exposure to sunshine, as this will scorch the fleshy leaves, to prevent
which we find it quite advisable to shade during the sunny part of the
day.

See further observations relating to _Oncidium Lanceanum_ under Plate
130.

    [Illustration: PL. 130.
    THUNIA MARSHALLIANA.]




                          THUNIA MARSHALLIANA.
                              [Plate 130.]
                          Native of Moulmein.


  Terrestrial. _Stems_ reed-like, erect, glabrous, cylindrical, about
  two and a half feet high, becoming smaller upwards, swelling into
  roundish tuberous knobs beneath the soil, clothed above with
  distichous leaves, and terminating in a dense raceme of flowers.
  _Leaves_ oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, semi-amplectant, about six
  inches long, five to seven nerved, of a pale green colour, glaucous
  beneath. _Racemes_ terminal, nodding, dense, and many-flowered, the
  bracts large ovate-lanceolate, acute, concave, shorter than the
  ovaries, pale yellowish green. _Flowers_ large and delicately
  beautiful, white with orange-red veins; _sepals_ and _petals_
  lanceolate-oblong acute, spreading, nearly equal, about two and a half
  inches long, pure white; _lip_ white, with the lower part convolute
  around the column, produced behind into a retuse falcate spur and
  having in the centre five veins or ribs, fringed at the edge; the
  front part or limb flattened out, roundish, yellow with numerous
  forking veins of a deep orange-red colour, occupying the whole area,
  the disk traversed by five yellow raised veins, and about five shorter
  ones on each side, all pectinately fringed with crystalline hairs, the
  margin toothed and beautifully crisped, the extreme edge being white.
  _Column_ enclosed by the lateral lobes of the lip (which are yellowish
  striated with red near the front) terete below, widened above, with
  two prominent toothed wings near the tip forming a kind of hood.

  Thunia Marshalliana, _Reichenbach fil._, _Linnæa_ xli., 65; _Regel_,
  _Gartenflora_, t. 1098.


The _Thunias_ form a small genus of very beautiful Orchids, which have
the further recommendation of being easy of cultivation. They are
deciduous in habit, losing their stems and leaves after they have
bloomed and completed their growth. That which we now figure, _T.
Marshalliana_, is a most distinct and showy species. Our sketch of which
was taken from a well grown plant belonging to W. Cobb, Esq., Silverdale
Lodge, Sydenham, who has a well selected and finely grown collection of
Orchids. This plant was indeed a marvel of cultivation, and did great
credit to Mr. Catt, the gardener.

_Thunia Marshalliana_, like its congeners is a free-growing plant,
furnished with tall red stems. These stems are of annual duration only,
and grow from two to three feet in height, perishing as soon as the
flowering and growth is completed; they are thickly clothed with
distichous leaves, which are of a pale glaucous green colour, and three
inches or more in length. The flowers are produced in large terminal
spikes, and have the sepals and petals white, and the lip white,
beautifully veined and fringed with deep orange colour, margined with
white. The plant generally blooms in June and July, and continues
flowering on for several weeks; it makes a fine decorative subject, as
well as a fine plant for the exhibition table. We have more than once
seen some noble specimens shown at the Whitsuntide National Show of the
Royal Botanic and Horticultural Society of Manchester.

We figured the charming _Thunia Bensoniæ_ in our second volume at Plate
67, where will be found a full account of the treatment given to that
beautiful species. _T. Marshalliana_ requires a similar mode of
cultivation, and is propagated in the same manner.


Oncidium Lanceanum, a very handsome variety of which is figured on the
preceding Plate, was first discovered in Surinam by John H. Lance, Esq.,
by whom it was brought to England in the year 1834. In a letter quoted
by Dr. Lindley in the _Transactions of the Horticultural Society of
London_ (2 ser. ii, 100, t. 5.), Mr. Lance states that he first found it
growing on the trunk of a large Tamarind tree, near the Government
House, and that he subsequently met with a number of the plants in
different parts of the colony, generally attached to the stems or
branches of Tamarind, Sapodilla or Calabash trees. With him it failed to
grow in rotten wood and light earth, but grew well when fastened to the
branches of the Orange, the Soursop, the Mammee, and even the
_Brugmansia arborea_, producing vigorous stems with upwards of twenty
blossoms on each.

The scent of the blossom Mr. Lance goes on to state “is extremely
fragrant, and is retained after the flower is dried, only becoming
fainter and more of a spicy flavour than when fresh. The plant remains
in full beauty from ten or twelve days—a long period in that climate;
and I found that it always required a shady situation, and a living stem
to grow upon, without which it would not produce its flowers in the
highest perfection.” Dr. Lindley, in one place, compares the fragrance
to that of the Garden Pink, and in another to that of Vanilla.

    [Illustration: PL. 131.
    ODONTOGLOSSUM NEVADENSE.]




                        ODONTOGLOSSUM NEVADENSE.
                              [Plate 131.]
                         Native of New Grenada.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ large, oblong-ovate, compressed, about three
  inches high and two inches broad, diphyllous. _Leaves_
  lorate-lanceolate, keeled, very much narrowed to the base, of a dark
  green. _Scapes_ radical, bearing drooping racemes of from twelve to
  fifteen blossoms. _Flowers_ large and pleasingly coloured; _sepals_
  spreading in a narrow triangle, lanceolate, slightly grooved in the
  centre, clear bright chestnut, with a narrow even edge of yellow;
  _petals_ smaller, lanceolate, spreading, an inch and a half long, of
  the same colour as the sepals but with more distinct yellow tips, and
  about two forked bars of a pale yellow colour at the base, opposite
  the lateral lobes of the lip, the margin slightly wavy; _lip_ white,
  three-lobed, the lateral lobes erect, crescent-shaped, spotted with
  chestnut, the broad rounded front lobe deeply fringed,
  cuspidato-acuminate, the base cuneate, channelled, the disk with a
  bifid crest, and three obcuneate conical brown spots. _Column_ erect,
  half-an-inch long, galeate, spotted with red, and having two short
  horn-like lateral auricles.

  Odontoglossum nevadense, _Reichenbach fil._, _MS._ in _Horto
  Lindeniano ac Mendeliano_; _Id._ _Xenia Orchidacea_, ii., t. 191,
  figs. 1, 2; _Id._ _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S. xv., 136; _André_,
  _L’Illustration Horticole_, 3 ser., t. 45.


The _Odontoglossum nevadense_ is a very distinct and also a very rare
and beautiful species which was first discovered in 1868, by Mr. G.
Wallis, when travelling for Mr. Linden in the Sierra Nevada of New
Grenada. It is not often met with, as there are very few plants of it in
cultivation, so far as we know, but we may hope that our energetic
collectors will be fortunate enough to meet with and send home a further
supply of so lovely a plant. We are indebted to Dr. Boddaert, of Gand,
Belgium, for the materials which have been used in preparing our
illustration, the plant from which our plate was copied having been
grown in his fine collection of Orchids; this was the best specimen of
the kind which we have seen, and was, when in bloom, an object of
attraction of which Dr. Boddaert might well be proud.

In this _Odontoglossum nevadense_ we have a compact-growing evergreen
species, with small pseudobulbs, and light green foliage; it grows about
ten inches in height, and produces its spikes of elegant flowers during
the spring and summer months. The sepals and petals are reddish-brown,
margined and tipped with yellow; the lip is white, its side lobes
spotted with brown inside. It lasts about six weeks in beauty.

This species is best grown in a pot, with rough fibrous peat as a
compost, and good drainage. It should have the same treatment accorded
to it as that given to _Odontoglossum Alexandræ_ as regards water, and
the temperature of the Odontoglossum house. Dr. Boddaert grew his
specimen with the rest of his Odontoglots, and found it to succeed well
under this _régime_, the plant continuing to increase in size and in
value.


  The following New Orchids were exhibited at the meeting of the Royal
  Horticultural Society at South Kensington on February 12th, and were
  severally awarded First Class Certificates:—


Cattleya Percivaliana alba.—A most chaste and beautiful variety of this
novelty, having pure white sepals and petals, and a white lip marked
with a blotch of yellow in the throat. Exhibited by R. P. Percival,
Esq., Birkdale, Southport.

Lælia anceps Williamsiana.—A new variety of _Lælia anceps_, exhibited by
Messrs. F. Sander & Co., of St. Albans. The sepals and petals are pure
white, of good form, and stout substance; the lip white, having a yellow
patch at the base, and a yellow throat striped with deep crimson-purple.

Odontoglossum Alexandræ (crispum) aureum.—A very striking novelty, with
clear yellow flowers. The sepals and petals are of a deep lemon yellow,
the sepals spotted with brown, and the lip having one or two spots of a
similar colour. Exhibited by F. A. Philbrick, Esq., Bickley.

Odontoglossum Pollettianum.—This plant was much admired on account of
the distinct markings of the flowers. The sepals and petals were white,
tinged with purple, and heavily spotted with reddish brown; the lip
being wedge shaped, as in _O. Andersonianum_. It is, doubtless, one of
the many natural hybrids between _O. Alexandræ_ and _O. gloriosum_.
Exhibited by H. M. Pollett, Esq., Bickley.

Oncidium anthrocene.—In growth this plant somewhat resembles _Miltonia
Warscewiczii_ (_O. Weltoni_), but it is quite distinct in the character
of its flowers, and in its branched inflorescence. The sepals and petals
are much undulated, brown, faintly barred with yellow towards the base;
the lip is yellow, spotted with brown, and very distinct. Exhibited by
Messrs. F. Sander & Co., St. Albans.

Oncidium Jonesianum.—A new and distinct species, having terete foliage
eight to twelve inches long. The flowers are about two inches across,
greenish yellow, with reddish brown spots, the lip white spotted with
red. Exhibited by A. H. Smee, Esq., Wallington.

  The following were also submitted to the meeting:—


Vanda Cathcartii.—There was a well-grown specimen of this fine species
exhibited by Mr. Aldous, gardener to G. Heriot, Esq., Highgate, bearing
three spikes consisting of eleven flowers. It is a pity we so seldom see
this plant, as it is a real beauty. The plant was deservedly awarded a
Cultural Commendation.

Mr. Philbrick exhibited flowers of a fine series of _Cattleya Trianæ_,
among which some very nice varieties both of the light and dark coloured
sections.

    [Illustration: PL. 132.
    LÆLIA DAYANA.]




                             LÆLIA DAYANA.
                              [Plate 132.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ short, clustered, oblong, somewhat clavate,
  invested by dry membranous pale brown scales, the stronger and younger
  flowering stems with two or three blunter sheaths of a pale green
  colour. _Leaves_ elliptic-oblong, acute, three inches long, fleshy
  coriaceous, solitary. _Scape_ terminal, one-flowered, issuing from a
  leafy spathe. _Flowers_ nearly four inches across, showy, on account
  of the rich and strongly contrasted colouring of the lip; _sepals_
  lanceolate acute, entire, recurved at the top, pale lilac-mauve;
  _petals_ ovate acute, broader and somewhat deeper coloured than the
  sepals; _lip_ three-lobed, the lateral lobes having the sides
  convolute over the column, of a pale lilac-mauve, the truncately
  rounded denticulate front edge recurved, and together with the
  subquadrate emarginate undulated and recurved front lobe of a rich
  purple-magenta, contrasting strongly with the diluted mauve-purple of
  the sepals, petals, and base of lip; the _throat_ is white, marked by
  seven deep purple carinæ, which are depressed and more or less wavy on
  the edges. _Column_ quite enclosed, angulate on both sides at the
  apex.

  Lælia Dayana, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S.,
  vi., 772.

  Lælia pumila Dayana, _Burbidge_, _Floral Magazine_, N.S., t. 249.


This species belongs to a group of small-growing _Lælias_, several of
which are most beautiful. That of which we are at present treating is,
however, one of the best of this group. There are several forms of it to
be met with in gardens, but that which we have figured we consider to be
the type. It was first flowered by and named in honour of John Day,
Esq., of Tottenham, and was imported by Messrs. Low & Co., from Brazil,
some years ago, together with a batch of _L. pumila_, so that it is now
well distributed, and is to be seen in nearly all collections of any
importance. It is a most useful plant, and has many good qualities to
recommend it, amongst which we may mention that it is dwarf-growing as
well as free-blooming, and it is of easy cultivation, thriving under the
cool treatment given to Odontoglots, which it seems to enjoy. Our
drawing was taken from a well-grown plant in the collection of J.
Buchanan, Esq., of Oswald Road, Morningside, Edinburgh, who has some
well-grown specimens of the different classes of Orchids which are well
cared for by Mr. Grossart, the gardener.

_Lælia Dayana_ is a compact evergreen plant, growing about six inches
high, the stems being terminated by the short oblong leathery green
leaves; it produces its flowers with the young growth from the top of
the stem, and these are of large size, the sepals and petals being of a
light lilac-mauve and the lip of an intensely dark magenta-purple, with
a light throat, the crest much darker in colour. It blossoms during the
autumn months, and lasts about four weeks in bloom if the flowers are
kept dry.

This, as we have said, is a cool-house plant, doing well with the
Odontoglots if placed in pans or shallow pots amongst rough fibrous peat
with good drainage, filling the pots three parts full with a layer of
moss on the crocks, and the pot being then filled up with the peat,
adding some lumps of charcoal, which will encourage them to root more
freely. They will also do well in baskets suspended from the roof with
the same material, and they will thrive on blocks of wood, but grown in
the latter way they require more water in the active season.

When in pots or baskets they require to be kept moist in their growing
season, which continues during their period of flowering and some time
after. When their growth is completed less water will suffice, but their
stems must not be allowed to shrivel. Moreover, the soil must always be
kept in a sweet condition. If the soil decays remove it and supply
fresh, but in doing this carefully avoid injuring the roots. They must
be grown near the glass, with very little shade—just sufficient to keep
the burning sun-rays off them.

Insects must be well sought after and battled with. The White Scale will
attack them, and must be eradicated, as small-growing plants like this
cannot endure such enemies. Cleanliness is the chief virtue, not only in
cultivating Orchids but most other plants, and clean objects are always
worthy of admiration.

    [Illustration: PL. 133.
    ANGULOA EBURNEA.]




                            ANGULOA EBURNEA.
                              [Plate 133.]
                          Native of Colombia.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ oblong attenuated at the apex, four inches
  high, furrowed, dark green, sheathed while young with large leafy
  scales, which gradually pass into the true leaves, becoming leafless
  in age. _Leaves_ broadly elliptic-lanceolate acute, strongly ribbed
  and of thin herbaceous texture. _Scape_ stout, springing from the base
  of the pseudobulbs, eight to ten inches high, with one or two distinct
  sheathing ovate acuminate pale green bracts. _Flowers_ large, solitary
  at the top of the erect scape, subglobose, of a clear ivory white;
  _sepals_ broadly orbicular-ovate, acute, cucullately concave, the
  margins of the dorsal and the tips of the connivent lateral ones
  recurved, white; _petals_ smaller, enclosed, concave, also white;
  _lip_ white spotted with pink, turned up so to be parallel to the
  column, three-lobed, the lateral lobes broad narrowed to a point which
  is recurved, the middle lobe small, triangular, deflexed with a furrow
  down the centre. _Column_ clavate, the apex with three projecting
  subulate-triangular teeth directed downwards.

  Anguloa eburnea, _Williams_, _Orchid Grower’s Manual_, 3 ed., 67;
  _Id._, ed. 5, 91.


Of this small Orchidic genus there are but few species known in
cultivation. All those we have seen bear curiously-formed flowers, and
are very showy. The species now before us has the flowers of an ivory
white, and these when in bloom form a good contrast with the yellow
flowers of _Anguloa Clowesii_ and the beautifully spotted flowers of _A.
Ruckeri_ and its variety _A. Ruckeri sanguinea_, a figure of which
latter plant will be found at Plate 19 of our first volume. There are
besides other species, but those we have mentioned are among the most
showy.

_Anguloa eburnea_, our present subject, is an exceedingly rare and a
very distinct species, which indeed we have seen in very few
collections. We are indebted to Sir Trevor Lawrence, Bart, M.P., of
Burford Lodge, Dorking, whose collection, as is well known, abounds in
rare Orchids, for the opportunity of publishing the accompanying figure.

Like the other _Anguloas_ this is a plant of bold and majestic habit,
producing large dark green pseudobulbs several inches high, crowned with
the ample lively green foliage, which attains a foot and a half in
height. The flowers, which are ivory white, proceed from the base of the
pseudobulbs on scapes eight to ten inches in height. The character of
these plants is to show their flowers after their pseudobulbs are well
matured, and when the resting season has been completed, the young
growth also appearing at the same time. The flowers are generally
produced during the months of May and June, and last for several weeks
in beauty. It should, however, always be borne in mind that in order to
preserve them for any lengthened period, the flowers must be kept free
from contact with moisture, inasmuch as white blossoms seem to have a
greater tendency to spot than those of any other colours. Our present
subject makes a grand exhibition plant, and moreover, one which is quite
distinct in character.

We find the _Anguloas_ very accommodating, for in regard to their
cultivation they will do equally well either in the Cattleya house, or
in the cool Odontoglossum house. We cultivate them under both these
conditions, but when grown in the cooler atmosphere we generally take
them into the warmer house as they begin to show flower, and take them
back to the cool house after they have finished blooming. At this time
of the year—say June—the weather is warm, and we find that the cool
house suits them, and the conditions thus secured induce them to make
strong bulbs, which is a necessity if it is desired that they should
bloom freely.

We find rough fibrous peat to suit them as a compost, and they must have
good drainage. They should, moreover, be grown in pots. The roots
require to be kept moist during the time the plants are in vigorous
growth, but when their pseudobulbs are fully grown, which is the time
for rest, very little water is required, merely sufficient to keep the
bulbs plump. We find the best time for potting,—that is, if they require
it—to be just as they begin to grow, and show their flower buds. The
plants must be taken carefully out of their pots, and the soil being dry
it will readily fall from the roots; the old roots, then dead, must be
carefully cut away, and fresh ones will appear to supply their place.
After potting, the roots will become vigorous, which will enable them to
swell up their large pseudobulbs, and to perfect their flowers. They
must be grown near the glass in order to ripen their bulbs and
thoroughly mature their foliage, which, however, requires to be shaded
to keep it from getting scorched.

Insects should be always looked after to keep them in check. Sometimes
the scale attacks them, but this may easily be kept under by a sponge
and clean water. In this work of cleansing always avoid rubbing the
foliage too much, as this will cause bruises, which are very detrimental
to the plant and cause it to look unsightly; moreover, perfect and
uninjured foliage is a great adornment to a plant, and gives evidence of
good cultivation and judicious care. These plants are propagated by
dividing the pseudobulbs just as they begin to grow, leaving one or two
at the back of the leading one. The divided portions must be placed in
pots, using for compost the same kind of material as that recommended
above.

    [Illustration: Pl. 134.
    CALANTHE VESTITA WILLIAMSII.]




                      CALANTHE VESTITA WILLIAMSII.
                              [Plate 134.]
                        Native of Eastern Asia.


  Terrestrial. _Pseudobulbs_ broadly ovate or ovate-oblong, often five
  to eight inches long with a constriction above the middle, bluntly
  angular, in age furrowed, pale grey or ash colour, partially sheathed
  with membranaceous scales, and terminating in the remains of the
  previous set of leaves. _Leaves_ large, broadly lanceolate acuminate,
  a foot long, of herbaceous texture, and a pale green colour, nervosely
  striate, deciduous, appearing after the decay of the flowers, two or
  more from each bulb. _Scapes_ radical, tall, pale green, villous with
  spreading hairs, and having a few sheathing glabrous scales below,
  terminating in a raceme of fifteen to twenty or more flowers, with
  hairy pedicels, each subtended by a smooth, spreading or deflexed
  ovate-lanceolate boat-shaped bract, about an inch in length. _Flowers_
  showy, about two inches across, _sepals_ oblong-lanceolate acute,
  narrowed towards the base, the dorsal one white, the lateral ones
  white on the upper, rosy crimson on the lower side at the base, the
  tips being white; _petals_ similar in form, rather broader upwards,
  bluntly acute, margined with rosy crimson, and pencilled in the lower
  half with the same colour; _lip_ adnate with the column at the base,
  its limb broadly roundish, deeply three-lobed, the lateral lobes
  oblong-obtuse, the broadly cuneate centre lobe emarginate, entirely of
  a dense bright rosy crimson, the discal region of a much deepened
  tint, and the margins paler. _Spur_ slender, curved beneath and
  shorter than the lip, rosy, with a green tip. _Column_ adnate with the
  base of lip, the blunt projecting beak white.

  Calanthe vestita Williamsii, _Moore_, supra.


The genus _Calanthe_ which we now again bring under the notice of our
readers, ranks amongst the most useful in cultivation for winter
decoration. Several species and varieties have been introduced within
the last few years, and have proved to be a great boon to plant growers
and others who are fond of flowers, as the whole of this bulbous class
produce their blossoms at a time when the beauties of nature are most
appreciated. What can be more charming than the original _C. vestita_,
and its red-eyed and yellow-eyed varieties with their drooping flower
spikes; or what more pleasing than the _C. Veitchii_, figured at Plate
31 of our first volume, a hybrid raised by the Messrs. Veitch & Sons, of
Chelsea, and a most useful decorative plant, its long spikes of rich
rose-pink flowers producing a most charming effect when intermixed with
the white-flowered kinds.

We have now another variety to make known, and one which, as will be
seen from the accompanying figure, adds a new charm to the genus, since
it will introduce among our winter blooming Calanthes a most distinct
and showy form that will be welcomed by all plant growers as being
superior in beauty to all those which have preceded it. It has been
named in compliment to Mr. B. S. Williams, of Holloway. Our drawing was
taken from a plant that had been blooming during the months of December,
January and February in the Victoria and Paradise Nurseries. It seems to
be of free growth, the pseudobulbs being like those of _C. vestita
Turneri_, the spikes of flowers being also of similar character and
developed at the same time of year.

_Calanthe vestita Williamsii_ is a deciduous plant, with pseudobulbs
from five to eight inches in height, and leaves a foot high and of a
light green colour. The flower-spikes, which are produced from the base
of the bulb, are two feet or more in length, and bear many flowers; the
sepals and petals are white, faintly margined and striped with bright
rosy crimson; the lip and column are of a deep rosy crimson, with an
intense crimson eye. It continues to flower on for three months, when
the bulbs are strong.

This novelty requires the same mode of treatment as that recommended for
_Calanthe Veitchii_ at Plate 31 of our first volume, where full cultural
instructions are given.


Orchids at Downside, Leatherhead.—It is always a great treat to see the
Orchid collection of W. Lee, Esq. We always find something to note for
the advantage of our subscribers, who, like ourselves, are interested to
read of things they have not already seen. What we are now about to
describe was certainly a grand sight, namely, a house full of
_Phalænopsis_, of which there were many hundred spikes of blossom
hanging in profusion over and amongst each other, and thus showing off
their various tints of colour to advantage. There was first the white
_P. amabilis_ with capital spikes, and then _P. grandiflora_, an
extraordinary large kind with well formed flowers of _P. Stuartiana_,
with its white spotted flowers, there were many varieties, differing in
their spotting; and there were also two fine plants of _P. Brymeriana_,
a beautiful and rare kind. The most prominent, however, was _P.
Schilleriana_, with many spikes including some beautifully coloured
forms, the mauve-coloured flowers of which, hanging amongst the white
forms, produced quite a charming _ensemble_. The middle and side tables
were one mass of colour, while on one side, for the whole length of the
house, at the back of the _Phalænopsids_ was placed a row of the chaste
and beautiful white-flowered _Angræcum citratum_, displaying as many as
thirty spikes, each from eighteen to thirty inches long; these charming
flowers overhanging the _Phalænopsis_ produced a most exquisite effect,
well worthy a long journey to see. We may without presumption
congratulate Mr. Lee on having produced so grand a picture.

There were besides the foregoing many other Orchids in bloom. Amongst
other things we were glad to see the _Lycastes_ accommodated with a very
nice house, and making quite an attractive show. These most useful
flowers were arranged on a central stage, and included several pure
white forms which, intermixed with those of high colours, were
remarkably effective.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 135.
    LÆLIA AMANDA.]




                             LÆLIA AMANDA.
                              [Plate 135.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ thin, fusiform, a foot to a foot and a half in
  height, diphyllous, invested by a sheathing mucronulate scale.
  _Leaves_ cuneate ligulate, bluntly acute, six to nine inches long,
  coriaceous, of a light green. _Peduncles_ two flowered issuing from a
  small narrow spathe. _Flowers_ five to six inches across, delicately
  coloured; _sepals_ ligulate-oblong acute, entire, of a flesh-colour or
  pinkish blush with purple veins, the dorsal one three inches long and
  three-fourths of an inch wide, the lateral ones somewhat longer and
  broader, slightly falcate-deflexed; _petals_ linear-oblong blunt,
  three inches long, and an inch broad, of the same pinkish-blush or
  pale rosy-lilac as the sepals, but more distinctly veined; _lip_ three
  inches long, rosy lilac, marked by longitudinal veins, with a
  cordiform base, three-lobed, the lateral lobes folded over the column
  and about twice its length, the front edge rounded and slightly wavy
  the middle lobe projecting an inch and a half, roundish-oblong,
  obtuse, apiculate, prettily veined with magenta, the few strongish
  central veins parallel, the rest divergent and variously netted, the
  tip paler, the veins continued through to the margin which is
  crispulate. _Column_ decurved, semiterete, winged, magenta except
  about the stigmatic hollow which is white, the apex toothed.

  Lælia amanda, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S.,
  xviii., 776.

  Cattleya Rothschildiana, _of some gardens_.


We are pleased to be able to figure and describe such a distinct species
of _Lælia_ as the subject of our present plate, which forms quite a new
type in the genus. It produces very chaste looking flowers, and is
decidedly novel in the style of marking of its lip. There have been many
new varieties of the _L. elegans_ and _L. anceps_ type introduced of
late, but few have proved so good as those obtained many years before:
for example, of the forms of white _anceps_, none are so good as _L.
anceps Dawsoni_; and of the _elegans_ type, there are none to surpass
_L. elegans alba_ and the dark _L. elegans Turneri_, and other beautiful
sorts which might be named. Our drawing shows quite a distinct and novel
form as compared with these, and was taken from a plant in the fine
collection of W. E. Brymer, Esq., M.P., Ilsington House, Dorchester.
There are many fine Orchids included in Mr. Brymer’s collection.

_Lælia amanda_ is an evergreen species, with pseudobulbs attaining about
eighteen inches in height, and light green leaves. The flowers are
produced in upright spikes, the sepals and petals being of a pale tint
of rosy lilac, the lip bright rose with lilac, veined with brighter
rosy-purple. It blooms during the autumn, and according to Mr. Powell,
Mr. Brymer’s gardener, lasts for six weeks in beauty. It is a free
growing species, but like the forms of _L. elegans_ requires good
cultivation.

We find this kind does well either in a pot or basket. It should have
good drainage, and be grown in rough fibrous peat with lumps of charcoal
intermixed to keep the soil open, thus allowing the roots to run over it
and cling to the lumpy peat and charcoal. We find all this class of
_Lælias_ to thrive best elevated well above the pot or basket in which
they are grown; the roots then come down more freely, and can go either
into the compost or outside of it as they like, though in most cases it
will be found that they prefer the outside; and to us it appears very
delightful to see the fresh roots in this way enjoying the atmosphere of
the house in which they are cultivated. They do the same in their native
country, clinging to the trees, rocks, or any other firm substance on
which they can lay hold. By growing them here as we have indicated,
above the pot rim, the water passes off and most of the roots enjoy what
is natural to them. They require a good amount of moisture when in
vigorous growth, but should never be kept too wet, as this causes the
soil to become soddened, and in this way are brought about the many
failures that we hear of. Some cultivators imagine that because a plant
is in vigorous health and growing freely nothing can hurt it, but this
is a mistaken idea, as that really is the time during which they require
more than ordinary care and attention. On the other hand, if the plants
have become matured they will most probably suffer for it afterwards by
the rotting of the young growth. When kept too wet the plants often
become too sappy, and then after the growth is matured the cultivator
may be startled to find the stems and foliage turning black and rotting
away—a state of things which may frequently be attributed and often
traced to over-watering. Before proceeding to water plants their
requirements should be studied. Orchids require much forethought in
reference to their treatment, especially as regards the temperature of
the house compared with that of the atmosphere outside, the time of year
making a considerable difference, as does the condition of the plants.
All this has to be considered in reference to the treatment about to be
bestowed upon them. There is no doubt that Orchids, when understood, are
as easily cultivated as other plants, and some kinds more so, but on the
other hand some require extra care and judicious management as regards
light, air, potting material, and water; and unless a grower has some
idea what his particular plants require he will most likely meet with
failures. This is indeed sometimes the case with those who do know all
the various requirements of particular subjects, but there is no doubt
that where the treatment of a plant is well studied, a less amount of
failure will be experienced. If a plant will not succeed in one part of
a house, try it in another, and when a suitable spot is found let it
remain them.

We find _Lælias_ like to be as near the light as possible, and they will
thrive well in pots or baskets suspended from the roof, so that their
roots can throw themselves out where they please. They might indeed all
be grown in baskets if preferred.

    [Illustration: PL. 136.
    CYPRIPEDIUM CALURUM.]




                          CYPRIPEDIUM CALURUM.
                              [Plate 136.]
                            A Garden Hybrid.


  Epiphytal. Acaulescent. _Leaves_ spreading, tufted, ensiform,
  channelled especially towards the base, tapered to the apex, one and a
  quarter inch wide, green. _Scape_ of a brownish-red colour, tall,
  branched, bearing several flowers, with longish ovate-lanceolate
  boat-shaped bracts at the ramifications. _Flowers_ large and handsome,
  five inches in lateral, three and a half inches in vertical expansion;
  _dorsal sepal_ oblong ovate bluntish, pale watery green with several
  longitudinal purplish and darker green intermediate ribs, slightly
  flushed with red, the purple tint stronger on the glossy exterior,
  which is olive green, the extreme edge white; _lower sepal_ broad
  ovate, half as long as the lip; _petals_ two and a half inches long,
  over half an inch broad at the base, narrowing to the apex, pale
  greenish white in the centre with an edge of wine-red one-eighth of an
  inch wide which meets towards the end so that the apex is wholly
  wine-red, the colour deeper and glossy outside with the central parts
  olive, the inside covered over with pellucid hairs, those on the lower
  half near the base longer and purplish; _lip_ bold, oblong obtuse,
  nearly two inches long, the pouch deep wine-purple in front, paler
  behind, the sides deeply inflexed and with a roundish projecting lobe
  at the front angle of the aperture, greenish or creamy white with a
  few irregular purple spots, the inside of the pouch more distinctly
  spotted. _Staminode_ greenish white clothed with short stiff hairs,
  transversely oblong or reniform with an apiculus and having a fringe
  of short dark purple hairs on the front margin, the sterile lobe
  roundish, fleshy, greenish white, hairy.

  Cypripedium calurum, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xv. 41.


The class of hybrid _Cypripediums_ is becoming a numerous one, and some
of the novelties are very distinct and beautiful, for although it may be
difficult to beat the original types, yet in some cases they are
superseded as regards colour, shape or form. We are greatly indebted to
the Messrs. Veitch & Sons, of Chelsea, and others, for the good they
have done in taking up the fertilisation of Orchids, and in raising the
different forms which have appeared. The Lady’s Slippers are amongst the
easiest of Orchids to fertilize, and the plants likewise take less time
than any others of the family to attain the flowering stage. We trust
the hydridisers will continue their good work, as there is yet such an
abundance of choice materials to work upon, both as regards form and
colour, and that by careful selection some wonderful changes may yet be
wrought. We admit that a great deal has been accomplished, but there is
yet a large field remaining unoccupied for those who feel disposed to
take an interest in this most important and pleasing work.

The class of Orchids to which our present subject belongs, is one of the
most useful for the decoration of our Orchid houses and exhibition
tables, as they are free growing and profuse blooming plants, the
flowers being also of long duration. _Cypripedium calurum_ of which we
now present our readers with a portrait is a continuous flowering
variety, for as soon as one blossom dies off another appears, and so on
until the spike has exhausted itself; and then when the new growths are
made, fresh flower spikes appear, after the manner of _C. Sedenii_. It
is a hybrid between _C. longifolium_ and _C. Sedenii_, the latter itself
being a hybrid between _C. longifolium_ and _C. Schlimii_, and was
raised by the Messrs. Veitch & Sons, of Chelsea, to whom we are indebted
for the opportunity of preparing our drawing, and who have a most
wonderful lot of these beautiful hybrid Cypripediums, some others of
which we hope to figure in due time.

_Cypripedium calurum_ is an evergreen species of graceful habit, with
long arching bright green foliage. The flower spikes are branched,
several flowers appearing at the same time. They are large and
handsomely coloured, the dorsal sepal reddish-green striped with pale
purplish-crimson, the petals also pale crimson darkening towards the tip
to a rich crimson, and having one green vein down the centre; the
exterior of the lip is deep crimson, the inside greenish white, spotted
with dull purplish-crimson. Each flower lasts for several weeks in
perfection.

We find this plant does well grown in pots with rough fibrous peat or
fibrous loam mixed with some leaf soil, and good drainage. It requires a
moderate supply of water during the growing and flowering season. In
fact, these plants may be said to be always growing and blooming, so
that they should always be kept moist at the roots, as they have no
succulent pseudobulbs to support them. We grow this plant at the cool
end of the East India house with other Cypripediums, but it will thrive
well in any ordinary stove. It is propagated by dividing the plant when
there are several growths; this operation we find it best to perform
just as the new growths begin to appear.


Odontoglossum sceptrum.—We feel great pleasure in acknowledging the
receipt of a very fine spike of _Odontoglossum sceptrum_, from the
collection of W. McDonald, Esq., Woodlands, Perth. The panicle was
eighteen inches in length, and bore seventeen perfectly formed flowers.
It must have been cut from a well grown specimen. The sepals were large,
of a deep chocolate-brown, streaked and margined with yellow; the petals
were irregularly lobed at the edge, yellow, blotched with the same
colour as the sepals; and the lip was yellow with chocolate-brown on the
front part. This is a fine cool-house Orchid, and a native of New
Grenada.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 137.
    ONCIDIUM TIGRINUM.]




                           ONCIDIUM TIGRINUM.
                              [Plate 137.]
                           Native of Mexico.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ ovate, compressed, blunt-edged, two or
  three-leaved, three inches in length. _Leaves_ oblong-lanceolate
  acute, leathery in texture, folded and sheathing at the base. _Scape_
  radical, two feet long, bearing a panicle of numerous showy blossoms.
  _Flowers_ distinct in character from the marked contrast presented
  between the small tiger-striped sepals and petals, and the ample
  bright yellow lip, having a delicious odour of violets; _sepals_
  linear-oblong acute, wavy and revolute at the margins, the lateral
  ones curving upwards laterally, so that they all stand above the base
  of the lip, the colour yellowish green, heavily blotched with
  transverse bands of dark chestnut-brown; _petals_ similar to the
  sepals in form and colour, curving upwards laterally like the lateral
  sepals; _lip_ three-lobed, of a pure chrome yellow, paler on the outer
  side; the lateral lobes oblong with rounded angles, almost
  semicircular, entire, flat; the middle lobe large, about an inch in
  depth, and one and three-quarters inch in breadth, transversely
  oblong-reniform, emarginate, apiculate, with a distinct basal isthmus
  on which is seated a furrowed ridge or crest, one-eighth of an inch
  high, having a three-lobed tubercle in front. _Column_ short, yellow,
  with two lateral oblong hatchet-shaped wings.

  Oncidium tigrinum, _Llave et Lexarza_, _Novorum Vegetabilium
  Descriptiones_, fasc. 2, 36; _Lindley_, _Genera and Species of
  Orchidaceous Plants_, 203; _Id._ _Folia Orchidacea_, Oncidium, No.
  157; _Reichenbach fil._, in _Walpers’ Annales Botanices Systematicæ_,
  vi., 794.

  Oncidium Barkeri, _Lindley_, _Botanical Register_, 1841, Misc. 174;
  _Id._ _Sertum Orchidaceum_, t. 48; _L’Illustration Horticole_, t. 2;
  _Paxton’s Magazine of Botany_, xiv., 97.


_Oncidium tigrinum_ is one of the most beautiful and distinct of the
many yellow-flowered species of Oncids. It is a free-growing and
free-blooming species, of compact growth, with a moderate-sized
branching spike, and flowers of long duration. It blooms at a time, in
autumn, when Orchid flowers are most welcome. Another good quality of
this plant is, that it will thrive well in the cool house, with
Odontoglots, the bright colour of its blossoms proving to be extremely
effective among the white flowers of _O. Alexandræ_. It grows about the
same size as that plant, and has good evergreen foliage, which is a
great attraction in any plant, and helps to show the flowers off to
advantage. Our drawing, which was taken from a specimen grown in the
Victoria Nursery, represents one of the best forms we have seen. There
are smaller varieties of this species, but they are all worth
cultivating on account of their showy colours. This was, at one time, a
rare plant, but latterly our collectors have been able to import it more
freely.

_Oncidium tigrinum_ is, as we have remarked, an evergreen species, with
dark brownish green pseudobulbs, about three inches in height; and
usually produces two leaves, about a foot in length, of a lively green
colour, and a branching spike growing two feet long, and furnished with
many handsome blossoms—the sepals and petals of which are greenish
yellow, spotted and barred with brown, and the lip is bright yellow. It
blooms during the autumn and winter seasons, and continues in bloom for
six weeks. We grew this plant many years ago under the name of _O.
Barkeri_; it was very rare at that time, and we grew it with the
Cattleyas, but we have found since, that it succeeds well in the
Odontoglossum house. Since the plants may be bought at a cheap rate,
many duplicates of this species should be grown, for its brilliant
golden flowers produce a grand effect among the white and delicate tints
of _O. Alexandræ_. The yellow colour is required for contrast, and their
spikes being similar in habit of growth, they associate well together.

We find the best material to grow them in is rough fibrous peat, with
good drainage, which should be thus applied:—fill the pots three-parts
full of broken crocks and charcoal mixed together; add a few lumps of
charcoal to the peat, which helps to keep it open, moreover, the roots
of the plant like to cling to it; let the plant be elevated on this
material three inches above the pot rim, from which the roots will be
delighted to run down, and can either go inside or work over the
material, which should always be kept sweet and not allowed to stagnate.
The plant is easy of cultivation if its requirements are attended to. It
must be kept moist during the growing season, not, however, continually
soaked with water, but just sufficient being given to keep the plant in
vigorous state of growth. When the growth is completed, give just enough
water to keep the pseudobulbs and foliage in a good plump state.

    [Illustration: PL. 138.
    LÆLIA ALBIDA.]




                             LÆLIA ALBIDA.
                              [Plate 138.]
                           Native of Mexico.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ ovate, clustered, about the size of pigeon’s
  eggs, becoming furrowed in age, marked about the middle by a
  transverse ring or scar, diphyllous. _Leaves_ narrow lanceolate acute,
  somewhat leathery, of a deep green colour. _Scape_ terminal, slender,
  two or three times as long as the leaves, bearing a raceme of five to
  eight flowers, and furnished with rigid sessile ovate bracts.
  _Flowers_ white, powerfully sweet-scented, with an odour resembling
  that of the glandular leaves of the Chinese Primrose, but having a
  honey-like sweetness superadded, rather small as compared with other
  species of the genus, being a little over two inches in expanse in
  each direction; _sepals_ oblong-lanceolate acute, spreading, plane,
  mucronulate, ivory white; _petals_ oblong ovate, subundulate, rather
  shorter than the sepals, recurved at the tip, mucronulate, also of an
  ivory white; _lip_ obovate, three-lobed, the lateral lobes obtuse, of
  a rosy hue externally, inside veined with red-pink, erect, that is
  folded up against the column, the middle lobe roundish-oblong obtuse,
  obscurely apiculate, recurved, slightly tinted with rose; disk with
  three yellow crests running out in the front lobe into a pale red bar
  or central line, with rosy veins on each side which give a faint rosy
  tint to the surface, the two lateral crests yellow spotted with dark
  reddish-purple. _Column_ elongate, glabrous, crimson-purple on the
  inner face.

  Lælia albida, _Bateman_, in _Botanical Register_, 1839, misc. 4;
  _Lindley_, _Botanical Register_, 1839. t. 54; _Hooker_, _Botanical
  Magazine_, t. 3957.

  Bletia albida, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Walpers’ Annales Botanices
  Systematicæ_, vi., 428.


In _Lælia albida_ we introduce to the notice of our readers a very
pretty small-growing Orchid, which produces good useful flower spikes
according to the vigour of the pseudobulbs, and which should therefore
be grown in every collection. It blooms during the autumn months, and is
a plant of quite a distinct character. We have many large-flowered grand
species of this genus unsurpassed by any other Orchids, but the smaller
growing kinds come in very useful where space is an object, and can be
grown suspended from the roof, or on back wall of the house provided
they get plenty of light and air, which they require in order to enable
them to grow vigorously and flower freely. We are indebted to Herbert J.
Adams, Esq., Roseneath, Enfield, for the specimen from which our drawing
was taken, and which had been very successfully grown in his collection.

_Lælia albida_ is an evergreen plant, and of compact-growing habit, as
will be seen from the accompanying figure. It produces its flower scapes
from the top of the pseudobulb after the growth is completed, and the
spikes assume a drooping character. The sepals and petals are white, the
lip being rose-purple. It blooms in December and January and lasts for
three weeks in beauty. There are several varieties of it, varying in the
colour of the lip and the size of the flower.

These plants, we find, do well on a block of wood, or in a basket
suspended from the roof of the Mexican house, with as little shade as
possible, and they require a good supply of water in the growing season.
If grown on blocks they require syringing every day during their season
of growth—sometimes twice a day, morning and afternoon, according to the
weather and the state of the atmosphere of the house in which they are
grown. A great deal depends upon this point. It is a good plan to take
the blocks and soak them in water until the blocks and roots are
thoroughly saturated, and when this is done they will not require
syringing so often. If grown in baskets with rough fibrous peat or
sphagnum moss, they must be well drained by mixing a few pieces of
charcoal with the peat. They will also succeed well in the warmest end
of the Odontoglossum house.

Mr. May, the gardener at Roseneath, is very successful in cultivating
these _Lælias_, and they well repay all the attention that is given
them. The plants must be kept from insects; they are subject to the
white scale, which can easily be kept under when taken in time. Whenever
a plant shows signs of insects, let them be at once eradicated, as
delays are dangerous, and through procrastination much mischief may be
done before the remedy is applied.


Dendrobium crassinode Barberianum.—We have received a noble example of
this very fine Orchid from W. Turner, Esq., Over Hall, Winsford,
Cheshire. The stem bore twenty-four flowers of large size, and the
specimen from which it was cut was the best-grown plant we have seen. It
had sixteen bulbs, averaging from eighteen inches to two feet in length,
all in full bloom at one time, and presented a most glorious spectacle.
The sepals and petals are of a beautiful clear white, tipped with rich
purple, and the lip is white with a deep orange blotch at the base. We
are pleased to be able to mention Mr. W. Turner’s name in association
with so grand a plant, for he has been well known for many years as one
of the oldest of our Orchid growers.—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 139.
    ARUNDINA BAMBUSÆFOLIA.]




                         ARUNDINA BAMBUSÆFOLIA.
                              [Plate 139.]
              Native of India: Nepal, Sylhet, Burmah, etc.


  Terrestrial. _Stems_ erect, terete, striate, with the habit of a small
  bamboo, three to five feet high, as thick as a stout quill or one’s
  little finger, polyphyllous. _Leaves_ a span to a foot in length,
  distant, distichous, ensiform, with the base sheathing the stem, and
  the apex attenuated, erect and spreading, the upper ones on the
  flowering stems reduced to sheathing bracts, which are numerous,
  short, ovate acute, spreading at the tips, so that the _peduncles_ are
  ochreate, of a whitish green, and terminate in a spike, sometimes
  branched, of several showy blossoms. _Flowers_ large and effective,
  measuring about two and a half inches across; _sepals_ narrow
  lanceolate, entire, the dorsal one erect, the two lateral ones
  sub-parallel, directed downwards, of a pale pink colour; _petals_
  ovate, plane, spreading laterally, of a deeper pink than the sepals,
  with a rose-pink stripe down the centre; _lip_ three-lobed, the
  lateral segments rolled over the column, pink, abruptly abbreviated in
  front, where they are recurved and deeper in colour; middle segment
  larger, bipartite, the divisions bluntly obovate-oblong, divaricate
  and crisped, of a magenta-rose, the throat white in the lower part,
  marked with white lines on each side, the disk bearing two fleshy
  undulated lamellæ or crests, and a third shorter straight one between
  them. _Column_ clavate, semi-terete, lying parallel with the lip.

  Arundina bambusæfolia, _Lindley_, in _Wallich’s Catalogue_, No. 3751;
  _Id._ _Genera and Species of Orchidaceous Plants_, 125; _Griffith_,
  _Notulæ ad Plantas Asiaticas_, iii., 329, t. 314; _Wight_, _Icones
  Plantarum Indiæ Orientalis_, v., t. 1661; _Reichenbach fil._, in
  _Walpers’ Annales Botanices Systematicæ_, vi., 457.

  Cymbidium bambusifolium, _Roxburgh_, _Hortus Bengalensis_, 63.

  Bletia graminifolia, _Don_, _Prodromus Floræ Nepalensis_, 29.


The plant we now introduce to the notice of our readers is very distinct
from the ordinary types of Orchids, and is remarkable for its reed-like
stems, and its very charming and beautiful blossoms. Its habit is to
keep flowering in succession for a long period. When better known it
will be much sought after; at present there are but few plants in
cultivation, at least very few have come under our notice. There exist
several varieties which vary in the colouring of their flowers; that
which we now figure being a very good type. We are indebted to T. D.
Cunningham Graham, Esq., Dunlop House, Stewarton, Ayrshire, for his
kindness in sending the specimens for the use of our artist. A
description of the Orchids at Dunlop House will be found under plate 118
of our present volume.

_Arundina bambusæfolia_ is an evergreen plant, with reed-like or
bamboo-like stems, bearing foliage of a light green colour; the sepals
and petals are pale magenta-rose, the lip rich rose shaded with magenta.
It grows, in its natural state, from three to five feet in height, and
produces its flowers from the top of the stems about July, continuing to
bloom for some time during the summer and autumn months. Mr. Kemp, the
gardener at Dunlop House, thinks it a most useful plant.

We find this Orchid to do best when grown in a pot, with good drainage.
The material most suited to it is good rough fibrous peat and loam mixed
together. It is a free-rooting species, but has no thick fleshy bulbs
from which to draw support. These Orchids which have these reed-like
stems require to be potted in a richer soil than others; they grow after
the manner of the _Sobralia_, and require similar treatment, that is,
the treatment of the cool end of the East India house, with a good
supply of water during the growing season, and to have the soil kept
moderately moist when at rest; the plants need plenty of light, but
should be shaded from the rays of the burning sun.

They must be kept free from insects, or the thrips will soon injure
their foliage. They are propagated by dividing the crowns, and they also
produce plants on the stems, which can be taken off and potted when they
have formed roots. We saw some fine plants of this Orchid in the
collection of W. Lee, Esq., of Leatherhead, which were producing shoots
in this way quite freely, and these being taken off, soon formed young
established plants.


Phaius tuberculosus (for figure, see plate 91 of our second volume.)—We
are much pleased to be able to again record the flowering of this plant
in the collection of A. Sillem, Esq., Laurie Park, Sydenham. It is
generally considered a most difficult plant to cultivate, but here it
grows most luxuriantly, no less than four spikes having been produced on
three plants last February, all of which were distinct varieties. Mr.
Billiard, the gardener, seems to have hit upon a plan of cultivation
that suits this plant admirably, and great credit is due to him for his
perseverance in the matter. We were so much interested in this
successful treatment that we paid a visit to this collection to
ascertain the mode of procedure, and Mr. Billiard was kind enough to
give us the result of his experience, which we here reproduce for the
benefit of our readers. “Our plants,” he writes, “have been grown on the
northeast side of a sun-roofed house, close to the glass, in a
temperature from 65° to 70°. We keep the sun from them as much as
possible. They are potted in equal parts of peat and moss, with a small
quantity of sharp sand, and plenty of crocks and charcoal as drainage.
When making their growth they delight in an abundance of moisture at the
roots. We find it necessary to sponge them weekly, as red spider, thrips
and green fly are particularly fond of these plants. This year from
three plants we have four spikes, which have opened twenty-three
flowers; last year the same plants had one spike each, which gave us
eighteen flowers in all.”—B. S. W.

    [Illustration: PL. 140.
    CYMBIDIUM AFFINE.]




                           CYMBIDIUM AFFINE.
                              [Plate 140.]
                      Native of Assam and Khasya.


  Epiphytal. _Acaulescent_, with thick fleshy roots, forming a short
  rootstock, from which dense tufts of graceful erectly spreading
  foliage is produced. _Leaves_ distichous, erecto-patent, elongate,
  linear lorate, acute, channeled, three-fourths of an inch broad, dark
  green. _Scape_ stout, green, having just beneath the inflorescence two
  or three loosely sheathing leafy bracts; _raceme_ six to
  eight-flowered, decurved, terminal, each flower having a short ovate
  acute bract at the base of its pale green pedicel. _Flowers_ about two
  and a half inches broad, and as much in depth, ivory-white, with a
  pleasant scent of almonds; _sepals_ linear-oblong, somewhat broader
  upwards, acute, half an inch broad, the dorsal one incurved, and
  arching forwards over the lip, the lateral ones two inches long,
  somewhat widened at the base and apex, the rounded bases united with
  the base of the lip, to form a short blunt chin; _petals_ linear,
  about as long as the sepals, but distinctly narrower, one-fourth of an
  inch wide, acute; _lip_ three-lobed, saccate at the base, the side
  lobes folded close to the column, the front edge produced rounded and
  slightly spreading, spotted, as is also the mouth of the tube, with
  pale magenta, the front lobe hairy, half an inch long, with a narrowed
  claw-like base, ovate, with a wavy margin, white, with a central
  straight oblong, and lateral divergent blotches of magenta, the
  central one continued into a yellowish streak, which is produced
  backwards to the deeper yellow crest of two abruptly elevated
  papillose plates, which are further continued into two yellow lines.
  _Column_ white, one and a half inch long, curved, winged.

  Cymbidium affine, _Griffith_, _Notulæ ad Platas Asiaticas_, iii., 336,
  t. 291; according to _Lindley_, _Contributions to the Orchidology of
  India_, in _Journal of Linnean Society_, iii., 28; _Reichenbach fil._,
  in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, N.S., x., 810; _Floral Magazine_, t. 346.

  Cymbidium micromesum, _Lindley_, _Journal of Linnean Society_, iii.,
  29, _fide Reichenbach_.


_Cymbidium_, though a small genus of Orchids, contains within its limits
some beautiful species, varying considerably in colour; indeed, most of
them are worth growing. That which we now illustrate is a very chaste
and pretty species, and is still quite rare; very few plants having come
under our notice. We received the grand specimen here figured from the
fine collection of G. Nevile Wyatt, Esq., Lake House, Cheltenham, who
takes a great interest in the cultivation of good Orchids, and from whom
at different times we have received some fine cut specimens, especially
of the forms of _Cattleya Trianæ_.

_Cymbidium affine_ is an evergreen species, which in its growth
resembles _C. Mastersii_ and _C. eburneum_, but the leaves are somewhat
broader. It has dark green graceful foliage, and tall, erect scapes,
from which the drooping flower racemes depend. The sepals and petals are
of an ivory white, and the lip is white, spotted with dull
magenta-purple. The plant blooms during the autumn months, and continues
in flower for several weeks if the blossoms are kept dry. It will be
found to be a most useful plant for decorative purposes, as its blossoms
are so beautifully developed along with its graceful green foliage.

This class of plants is well cultivated by Mr. Simcoe, the gardener at
Lake House, who grows them as we do, in pots, with good drainage. We
have found them to do best in good fibrous loam, as they have thick
fleshy roots to support, and experience has convinced us that they
require something stronger than peat to feed upon, and consequently we
have substituted loam for peat, but it must have some charcoal mixed
with it so that the soil may be kept open, which is quite essential for
the plants; they require a good supply of water in the growing season,
and when the soil is kept porous and open the water passes off readily,
and does not stagnate, which is deleterious to all plants. When the
growth is completed, less water will suffice, but just enough should be
supplied to keep the soil damp, for their thick fleshy roots always
require to be in a fresh plump condition, and in a state of growth.

We find these _Cymbidiums_ thrive well in the Cattleya house, kept as
fully exposed to the light as possible, but shaded from the sun, for if
in the warm summer months the sun is allowed to shine upon them their
foliage is apt to sustain injury. When the sun is on the decline it will
do them no harm, and the early morning sun will be beneficial to them;
the foliage must, however, never be allowed to be wet when the sun comes
upon the plants, or it will most probably become spotted.


The Cattleyas at Downside (continued from plate 134).—The Cattleya house
at Downside, when we saw it a few weeks ego, presented a most
magnificent picture, there being at the time several hundred expanded
flowers of _C. Trianæ_, distributed over the whole length of a house one
hundred feet long, and showing a variety of colouring, which thus
displayed amongst the green foliage was truly marvellous. This
collection comprises some of the best kinds in cultivation. It would
take too much space to describe them here, but we hope to illustrate
some of the most striking among them in our subsequent volumes.

    [Illustration: PL. 141.
    DENDROBIUM LINAWIANUM.]




                         DENDROBIUM LINAWIANUM.
                              [Plate 141.]
                            Native of China.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ erect, club shaped, somewhat flattened, light
  green, one to two feet high, retaining the leaves for two years, when
  mature becoming deeply furrowed and swollen below the nodes, the
  internodes partially sheathed by the withered bases of the leaves: it
  is these tumid internodes which give the appearance of a necklace,
  whence the name _moniliforme_ came to be applied, though erroneously,
  to the plant. _Leaves_ distichous, oblong obtuse, obliquely
  emarginate, pea-green. _Peduncles_ from the axils of the leaves of the
  two-year old stems, or from the joints whence the leaves have fallen,
  two to three flowered, with small acute appressed bracts. _Flowers_
  bright coloured and pleasing, three inches across; _sepals_ oblong
  acute, venose, their base produced into a blunt striated spur, white
  below and of a bright rosy pink in the upper half; _petals_ ovate, of
  the same colour as the sepals; _lip_ ovate, cucullate, reflexed,
  obscurely three-lobed, attenuated at the base, and serrulate on the
  margin, with an elevated pubescent crest along the disk, white below,
  having two crimson spots about the centre, the apical portion wholly
  rich magenta-crimson. _Column_ short, the lip articulated at the end
  of its prolonged base.

  Dendrobium Linawianum, _Reichenbach fil._ _MS._; _Id._, _Walpers’
  Annales Botanices Systematicæ_, vi., 284.

  Dendrobium moniliforme, _Lindley_, _Botanical Register_, t. 1314, non
  _Swartz_; _Hooker_, _Botanical Magazine_, t. 4153; _Paxton_, _Magazine
  of Botany_, iii., 77; _Maund_, _Botanist_, iv., t. 194; _Annales de
  Gand_, 1847, t. 137.


This _Dendrobium Linawianum_ is a very old inhabitant of our Orchid
houses, and a most distinct and beautiful kind; it is better known,
however, under the name of _D. moniliforme_, which was formerly applied
to it in error, but which it will no doubt long retain. Amongst the
older race of Orchid cultivators, we used to exhibit it under the name
of _D. moniliforme_ at the Chiswick and Regent’s Park Exhibitions, where
it was shown in the form of large specimen plants, and formed one of the
prettiest and most distinct looking Orchids in the show. Although
amongst the numerous novelties, which have since been introduced, there
have been many which produce splendid flowers as regards size, form, and
colour, there has been one only that is at all similar to the present
species, and that, which Professor Reichenbach has named _D. nobile
formosanum_, and which is very much like _D. Linawianum_ both in its
growth and in its flowers, we imported about two years ago from the
Island of Formosa. The drawing, of our present subject, was taken from a
remarkably fine specimen grown in the collection of G. W. Law-Schofield,
Esq., New-Hall-Hey, Rawtenstall, near Manchester; the specimen was about
two feet high and as much through, and was one mass of blossoms. Mr.
Wise, the gardener, tells us it has flowered in this way for several
years; and we may safely say that it is one of the best grown plants
that have yet come under our notice.

_Dendrobium Linawianum_ is an evergreen species with flattish
club-shaped stems, which are of a light green colour, and remarkable for
becoming swollen just beneath the nodes. The leaves are of a pea-green
colour, and the flowers are borne on the stems of the second year, in
twos or threes at every node. The sepals and petals are white at the
base, and bright rosy pink in the upper half, while the lip is white,
beautifully tipped with bright magenta-crimson. The flowers are produced
during the winter and spring months, and last in perfection for two or
three weeks. It may be had in flower much later by retarding the plant
after it has finished its growth.

The present is a free-growing species if the plant is in good health. It
begins to grow when the flowering is over, and this is the best time for
repotting if the plant requires it; but care must be taken not to over
pot it, as this is dangerous in some cases, especially if the soil
should get into a bad state, for then the roots go rotten, and the plant
becomes sickly. If this should happen, shake away all the soil from the
roots and wash them well, afterwards repotting the plant in as small a
pot as the roots will allow; the fresh roots will then begin to work
about the new soil. Good drainage must always be given; and the plant
must be well elevated above the rim of the pot. The most suitable
potting material is good rough fibrous peat mixed with lumps of
charcoal, which will keep the soil open, and allow the water to pass off
freely. Over watering is dangerous, but the plants require to be kept
moderately moist at the roots during the growing season. To avoid risk
from excess of water, the pots should be three parts full of drainage
material. When the growth is completed, give sufficient water to keep
the stems plump until they show signs of flowering; then give a little
once or twice a week, the quantity and frequency of the application
depending mainly on the nature of the potting material; if it be rough
and porous, the plant will require it, and a slight syringing over the
soil and among the roots during a warm day, will also be beneficial.

We grow our plants at the cool end of the East Indian house, giving them
plenty of light, and no more shade than is necessary to keep the foliage
from burning. Light is the grand agent in ripening the stems; and it is
thorough ripeness which induces them to make vigorous growth, and to
develope their flowers freely.

Propagation is effected by dividing the stems just as they begin to
start into growth, leaving two or three old bulbs at the back of the new
one. It is the better plan to cut them a short time before they are
parted; and this should be done with great care. After dividing, place
them each in a small pot, with good drainage, and similar potting
material to that previously recommended. They thrive well in sphagnum
moss, but we prefer the peat.

    [Illustration: Pl. 142.
    ZYGOPETALUM BURKEI.]




                          ZYGOPETALUM BURKEI.
                              [Plate 142.]
                          Native of Demerara.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ clustered, narrow oblong, over two inches
  long, erect, shining, tetragonal, the surface furrowed, diphyllous.
  _Leaves_ elongate-lanceolate acuminate, nervose, somewhat leathery in
  consistence. _Scape_ radical, pale green, bearing a raceme of four or
  five flowers, furnished with ovate pale green bracts at the base of
  the pedicels. _Flowers_ about two inches across, of a peculiar and
  distinctive character; _sepals_ ovate-lanceolate, the lateral ones
  deflexed, bright green, with about seven wavy close-set longitudinal
  bands of dark umber-brown, the bars having a tendency to break up into
  lines of spots, wholly green outside; _petals_ spreading, of the same
  form and colour as the sepals; _lip_ unguiculate, auricled on both
  sides in front of the claw, obovate with a broad rounded apex,
  undulated margin, and furnished behind the disk with a callus or ruff
  of thirteen crimson plaits or ribs. _Column_ thick, greenish, galeate,
  with two projecting linear auricles.

  Zygopetalum Burkei, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’ Chronicle_,
  N.S., xx., 684.


This new species is a very pretty free-blooming plant. It belongs to a
genus that is well known to plant growers, and amongst the species of
which there are some grand decorative plants; indeed, we generally find
some of these plants wherever there is a stove, even if Orchids
generally are not professed to be grown. _Zygopetalum Mackayi_, _Z.
maxillare_, and _Z. Gautieri_, are the most useful. Of late some new
hybrids have been introduced, namely, _Z. Sedeni_ and _Z. Clayi_, which
latter will be found figured at Plate 50 of our second volume. The
species now under notice was introduced by the Messrs. Veitch & Sons, of
Chelsea; and in their fine collection it bloomed last November, and was
exhibited at South Kensington, gaining a First Class Certificate. It
will be found to be a most useful species for general cultivation. We
believe Messrs. Veitch’s to be the only plant that has yet flowered in
this country.

_Zygopetalum Burkei_ is a native of Demerara, and was found, it appears,
by Sir Robert Schomburgk some forty years since, but had not been
introduced until recently sent home by Messrs. Veitch’s collector, Mr.
Burke, after whom it is named. It is an evergreen species, with long
narrow erect ribbed four-cornered pseudobulbs, and light green foliage;
the sepals and petals are green, spotted and barred with brown, and the
lip is white, with a crest of crimson stripes on ribs. It blooms during
the autumn months and lasts for several weeks in bloom.

The East India house is the most suitable place in which to cultivate
it, for most of the species of _Zygopetalum_ like the temperature
therein maintained, and, indeed, they thrive well in any warm stove.
This new species will no doubt require as a root medium the same
material as the rest of the genus, that is, rough fibrous peat and loam.
As they generally have thick fleshy roots, they require an abundant
supply of moisture during the growing season; but of course a less
liberal supply will suffice after the growth has been completed, when
the ripening process comes on.


A Wonderful Dendrobium.—Mr. Blend, gardener to S. K. Mainwaring, Esq.,
Otley Park, Shrewsbury, has recently flowered a grand specimen of the
old and beautiful _Dendrobium Paxtoni_. The plant is in a 15-inch pot,
has 74 growths, and produced 123 flower spikes, containing in all 1,216
flowers. The longest growth on the plant measures as much as four feet
six inches. This plant is a marvel of cultivation, and we are much
pleased to be able to record such a splendid example of Orchid
management—B. S. W.


Odontoglossum mulus.—D. Tod, Esq., Eastwood Park, Thorliebank, by
Glasgow, has sent in flowers of a fine variety of _Odontoglossum mulus_,
which bloomed with him last April. The spike, Mr. Tod informs us, bore
sixteen flowers, and although this is no great number for _O. mulus_,
which generally comes with a large branched panicle, it must have been a
fine sight, as the flowers of Mr. Tod’s variety are not only very large,
but very brightly coloured.—B. S. W.


A Gigantic Orchid.—Messrs. F. Sander & Co., of St. Albans, have lately
received an enormous specimen of _Cattleya Skinneri_, certainly the
largest mass of an Orchid ever imported. The plant was found growing in
the crown of a tree, near Cartago, in Costa Rica, where it was
originally planted in a garden belonging to a native, by whom it has
since been cultivated, so that although this plant has been found in its
native habitat, it is, nevertheless, a cultivated specimen. This plant
has long been known to botanical travellers, Skinner, Roezl, and others
having seen it in flower. It is stated to have produced, at one time,
over 1,500 flowers. Its dimensions are six feet in height by seven feet
in diameter; its weight about twelve hundredweight. We understand Mr.
Sander is about erecting a house for its reception, where we suppose it
will figure as a _piece de resistance_ of the establishment.—H. W.

    [Illustration: Pl. 143.
    CŒLOGYNE BARBATA.]




                           CŒLOGYNE BARBATA.
                              [Plate 143.]
                 Native of India: Bhothan, Khasya, &c.


  Epiphytal. _Pseudobulbs_ roundish-ovate, plump, two-leaved, with
  brownish lanceolate bracts at their base. _Leaves_ narrowed below into
  a petiole, elliptic-oblong, with a stout costa, plicate, leathery, one
  and a half-inch wide, and from six inches to a foot long including the
  petiole, of a lively green. _Peduncles_ erect, rigid, springing from
  between the leaves, terete, terminating in a dense raceme of flowers,
  below which are several pairs of abortive imbricated pale brown
  bracts. _Flowers_ large, white, with a peculiar sooty or pitchy stain
  covering the inner side of the lip, breaking out into fine pencillings
  towards the margin; _sepals_ white, oblong-ovate, broadish at the
  base, narrowed to the acute point; _petals_ white, lanceolate acute,
  broadest at the base; _lip_ white, oblong, three-lobed, saccate at the
  base, fringed with brown-based hairs on the anterior margins, and
  bearded with hairs entirely dark brown on the three veins of the disk,
  forming three shaggy crests, the side lobes tinged with pale flesh
  colour or pink outside. _Column_ white, deflexed, bilobed at the end.

  Cœlogyne barbata, _Griffith_, _Itinerary Notes 72_; _Id._ _Notulæ ad
  Plantas Asiaticas_, iii., 280, t. 291, fig. 2; _Lindley_, _Folia
  Orchidacea_, _art._ Cœlogyne, No. 21; _Reichenbach fil._, in _Walpers’
  Annales Botanices Systematicæ_; vi., 229.


Of our present subject Dr. Lindley remarks (_Folia Orchidacea_, l.
c.)—“This is, perhaps, the finest of this fine genus. The coriaceous
leaves are more than fifteen inches long; the scapes are erect, very
stiff, as long as the leaves, and furnished at the apex with an
imbricated sheath of bud scales, out of which appears a flexuous raceme
four to six inches long, composed of very large blunt deciduous bracts.
The flowers are fully two inches and at half in diameter, pure white,
except very long hairy fringes which are brown at their base, where they
border the lip, and wholly brown where they cover the veins, and form
three shaggy crests.” The only figure previously published is a very
indifferent one of Griffith’s quoted above.

In the _Cœlogyne_ we now bring to the notice of our readers we have one
of the most useful species of a comparatively large genus, and one that
blooms during the winter months, when white flowers are sought after. It
is one, moreover, the flowers of which stand well when cut. We are
indebted to Mr. W. Bull, of Chelsea, for the introduction of this
species; which is a free bloomer when the bulbs are strong. It is a
plant which possesses many good qualities, being a free grower as well
as a free bloomer, and having the advantage of bearing fine evergreen
foliage; it will thrive well in the cool house with Odontoglots; and
besides all this, it is a cheap plant, so that everyone having a cool
house can procure and grow it without much expense or trouble. Our
drawing was taken from a specimen which flowered in the Victoria and
Paradise Nurseries.

_Cœlogyne barbata_ is, as we have just said, an evergreen plant, with
short pseudobulbs and stout foliage, which grows about a foot long, and
is of a lively green colour. The sepals and petals are white; the lip is
sepia-brown, distinctly bearded with long fringes of coloured hairs,
which give it a very distinct and quaint appearance, the fringe and
beard contrasting very strongly with the white sepals and petals. It
blooms during the autumn months, and continues flowering for a long
time, if the flowers are kept free from damp. The plant should,
therefore, be placed at the dry end of the house when in bloom, or be
removed to a drier house than that in which it has been grown. We find
it to grow well in a pot, if allowed perfect drainage, and planted in
rough fibrous peat, allowing it a moderate supply of water during the
growing season, but reducing the quantity when the plant is at rest.


There were three very interesting New Orchids exhibited by Sir T.
Lawrence, Bart, M.P., at the meeting of the Royal Horticultural Society
on April 22nd last, all being remarkably distinct and pretty:—


Angræcum fastuosum.—The growth of this species is somewhat similar to
that of _A. articulatum_, but the leaves are rounder and broader. The
spikes are short and drooping, the flowers pure white, sweet-scented,
with the lip larger than the petals; very distinct.


Odontoglossum cinnamomeum.—A new species, much resembling the true and
rare _O. odoratum_. The sepals and petals are, however, broader, and the
markings are much denser; the lip is yellow, with a large brownish
crimson blotch in the centre, and the margin faintly spotted with the
same colour, the whole surface being covered with fine downy hairs; very
strongly scented.


Dendrobium Harveyanum.—This is a great surprise, being in the way of
_Dendrobium Brymerianum_, but it has this peculiarity, that the petals
are fringed in the same way as the lip, thus practically giving to the
flower the appearance of three lips instead of one, although somewhat
modified. The flowers are smaller than those of _D. Brymerianum_, but
the plant resembles it in growth; and, indeed, it was imported with that
species, so that possibly it may be a sport from it, which has become
fixed. This plant has been named in honour of E. Harvey, Esq.,
Riversdale Road, Aigburth, Liverpool, in whose collection it first
bloomed.—H. W.

    [Illustration: Pl. 144.
    CATTLEYA LABIATA PERCIVALIANA.]




                     CATTLEYA LABIATA PERCIVALIANA.
                              [Plate 144.]
                           Native of Brazil.


  Epiphytal. _Stems_ erect, club-shaped, becoming furrowed in age,
  nearly a foot in height, monophyllous, evergreen. _Leaves_
  oblong-obtuse, leathery, dark green. _Scape_ two-flowered, issuing
  from an oblong sheath. _Flowers_ about five inches across, exceedingly
  handsome, the lip being very richly coloured; _sepals_
  linear-lanceolate, entire, the dorsal one recurved, of a soft pale
  magenta-rose; _petals_ much larger and longer, broadly ovate-obtuse,
  the margin slightly wavy, scarcely denticulate, about two and a
  quarter inches broad, of the same pale rosy hue as the sepals, the
  mid-rib strongly developed towards the base; _lip_ comparatively
  small, but intensely rich in colour, bluntly keeled at the back
  towards the base, plane for about half its length, with the margins
  closely folded over the column, rosy at the edge, strongly flushed
  with crimson and veined with golden yellow; the front lobe
  roundish-oblong, one and a half inch wide, its edges meeting over the
  throat, the margin being finely but neatly frilled, as also are the
  sides of the broadly-rounded deeply-emarginate apex; the colour in the
  expanded portion is a very rich velvety crimson in the central area,
  passing near the front edge to a band one-fourth of an inch wide of
  the pale rose of the petals, and continued narrower along the sides,
  the disk and the sides of the tubulose basal portion flushed with
  maroon-crimson, everywhere richly veined with deep yellow, giving the
  appearance of bronzy gold, and having two elevated golden ridges
  extending to the base. _Column_ thick, clavate, white, with a blunt
  keel at the back, extending nearly to the apex, which has a small
  inflexed acute appendage lying between the two blunt lobes of the
  anther bed.

  Cattleya labiata Percivaliana, _Reichenbach fil._, in _Gardeners’
  Chronicle_, N.S., xvii., 796.


There has been much controversy of late respecting this beautiful
_Cattleya_, the true character of the flowers of which will be seen at
once from our Plate, our artist having produced a very faithful
representation of the richly-coloured blossoms. We have seen the flowers
of two successive seasons from the very plant from which our drawing was
taken, and have noted that they keep true to character as regards
colour, and that in the second year the flowers were larger than in the
first, which may be accounted for by the plant having become stronger
and better established, the blossoms partaking of the general
improvement. It must not, however, be expected that every purchaser will
obtain a plant of the some character as that represented in our Plate,
as we have seen but few that have proved to be equal to the one we
figure. There is an abundant supply of plants imported as _C.
Percivaliana_, but they vary greatly in merit—more so in this than in
any other _Cattleya_ that has come under our notice. Many of the species
of _Cattleya_ yield variety both as to the colour and size of their
blossoms, though they are generally all good enough to cultivate or to
use as decorative plants; but in this particular species or subspecies
there are many that prove to be worthless, and unfortunately no one can
tell whether individual plants will be good or had until the flowers
expand. The good ones are really valuable, for there is no other
_Cattleya_ in which the lip and throat are so richly coloured; even in
the small-flowered forms there is a portion of this rich colouration to
be found on the lip.

Mr. Sander, the importer, has been no doubt deceived, and has suffered
great loss through importing a large quantity of plants, of which many
have had to be destroyed owing to their not being worth cultivating,
since the bad forms cost as much to import as the good ones; while the
collectors, when they do not see them in bloom, do not suspect that such
inferior forms can exist amongst the good ones. We have seen other fine
varieties, but none better than the one we have illustrated, and which
we received from the superb collection of R. P. Percival, Esq., of
Birkdale, Southport, after whom it is named. We received the flowers two
years before we ventured to submit the drawing to our readers, and to
vouch for its accuracy. We trust there may prove to be enough of the
better forms imported to supply all who may desire to possess the plant
in its true character.

_Cattleya labiata Percivaliana_ is, like _labiata_ itself, an evergreen
plant, with clavate stems, ten inches in height, bearing dark green
foliage, much resembling that of _C. Mossiæ_. It is a plant of
compact-growing habit, having the sepals and petals suffused with a
delicate magenta-rose colour, while the lip is of an intense magenta,
marginated broadly with pale rosy purple, the throat being deep orange,
veined with brownish purple; the flowers have a most peculiar odour,
similar to that of _Lælia autumnalis_, by which they can be at once
identified. This _Cattleya_ blooms during the winter months, at the same
time as _C. Trianæ_, and lasts in bloom for two or three weeks.

Mr. Beddoes, the gardener at Birkdale, grows this plant in the same
house with _Cattleya Trianæ_, of which Mr. Percival has a remarkably
fine collection. The house in which they are grown, is a good-sized one,
and is so built and glazed that there is plenty of light admitted. It is
also a well ventilated structure, so that plenty of water may be used
about the house in their growing season, when the temperature is right
both inside and outside the house. This a most important item in the
successful cultivation of Orchids, as well as of other plants. Mr.
Percival has evidently studied this point, and good results have
followed, as will have been seen by those who have had the pleasure of
visiting his collection, while those who have not seen it should try to
do so, and judge for themselves. We find rough fibrous peat to suit this
plant, which must have sufficient drainage, and must be grown fully
exposed to light at all times. Mr. Sander informs us that the plants are
found growing on rocks in the full sun, so that they are likely to
require an abundance of light and a good season of rest.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—Silently corrected a few palpable typos, and merged errata into the
  text.

—Added arabic page numbers to non-plate pages.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—The HTML version contains links to previous volumes of _The Orchid
  Magazine_, which can be installed locally:


        Volume 1
        Volume 2








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORCHID ALBUM, VOLUME 3 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


