The Project Gutenberg eBook of Notes on Training for Rifle Fire in Trench Warfare
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Notes on Training for Rifle Fire in Trench Warfare

Creator: Army War College

Release date: December 30, 2019 [eBook #61058]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Brian Coe, and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES ON TRAINING FOR RIFLE FIRE IN TRENCH WARFARE ***

                             _CONFIDENTIAL!
                       FOR USE OF OFFICERS ONLY_




                                 NOTES
                                   ON
               TRAINING FOR RIFLE FIRE IN TRENCH WARFARE


                     COMPILED FROM FOREIGN REPORTS


                            ARMY WAR COLLEGE
                              APRIL, 1917

[Illustration]

                               WASHINGTON
                       GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                  1917




                            WAR DEPARTMENT,
                           Document No. 573.
                   _Office of The Adjutant General._




                                         WAR DEPARTMENT,
                                           WASHINGTON, _April 24, 1917_.

The following Notes on Training for Rifle Fire in Trench Warfare are
published for the information and guidance of all concerned.

[2582933, A. G. O.]

BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR:

                                                  H. L. SCOTT,
                                        _Major General, Chief of Staff_.

 OFFICIAL:
     H. P. McCAIN,
         _The Adjutant General_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




          TRAINING IN THE USE OF THE RIFLE FOR TRENCH WARFARE.


1. Training in the use of the rifle includes that of the bayonet. Fire
action is alone treated in this paper, instruction in the use of the
bayonet having already been discussed elsewhere.

2. The rifleman in the trenches, no less than in the open, requires as
preliminary preparation the courses of individual and combat instruction
prescribed in the Small Arms Firing Manual. The object of this paper is
not to supersede any portion of this manual, but to supplement it by
stressing those features of trench rifle fire that the experience of
actual war has shown to be possessed of an importance that was not fully
appreciated when the manual was prepared. So far as rifle fire
exclusively from trenches is concerned, the importance of _individual
aimed fire_ up to the range of 400 yards is the principal feature that
has been so developed by the peculiar conditions prevailing on the
“western front” during the present European war, and the training that
needs to be stressed naturally comes under the head of “individual
instruction.” There is also a second feature, essential to efficient
_collective_ firing either from trenches or in the open, that has never
received the attention in our authorized manuals that its importance
merits, though that importance has long been recognized and has been
ably treated at the School of Musketry. It is that of the _necessity for
satisfactory working methods of describing targets_. The growth of this
necessity has been coincident with the development of fire discipline,
direction, and control.

3. The special importance of individual aimed fire in trench warfare has
been developed in Europe during the present war in connection with what
is there termed “sniping,” which has become a specially important and
highly technical service, though it is merely a development of what has
long been known and practiced in the United States under the name of
“sharpshooting.” A consideration of some of the conditions under which
“sniping” is conducted will assist in emphasizing its importance and in
indicating the special qualifications and instruction essential to
efficiency.

4. In modern trench warfare, as it exists in Europe to-day, each
belligerent occupies a system of trenches, of which the foremost, or
fire trenches, are frequently separated by only a few yards, and rarely
by more than four or five hundred yards. In rear of the fire trenches
there is a labyrinth of cover, approach, support, reserve, and other
trenches. Each system is strengthened by obstacles, the most formidable
and also the most common of these are the barbed-wire entanglements.
These trenches and obstacles are being continually damaged by the
opposing artillery fire, and every opportunity is seized for raiding
enemy trenches through the openings so made. One of the important
functions of the sniper is that of protecting his own trenches from
enemy raids and his comrades from fire of snipers and the prevention of
repair of enemy trenches and obstacles in order to keep the road open to
raids from his own side. To these ends he endeavors to meet with a
bullet every exposure of even a few square inches of the head or limb of
an enemy and at the same time to conserve his own life. To attain the
first object, that of hitting the enemy, requires the best possible
facilities for observation and fire, coupled with special qualities and
technical skill on the part of the sniper. The attainment of the second
object, that of conserving one’s own life, will depend largely upon the
judgment and skill displayed in selecting and concealing the position of
the firer. Each of these requirements calls for special training and for
special qualities inherent in the sniper. To the training and skill of
the expert game shot must be added the craftiness of the poacher.

5. From the preceding paragraphs it is evident that the service of
sniping can not be conducted in a haphazard way, but, on the contrary,
requires for its efficient conduct a carefully selected, organized,
equipped, and trained personnel.

(_a_) _Organization._—Based upon the best available information from
Europe, there should be organized in each battalion of Infantry a
“sniping” group composed of 1 noncommissioned officer and 24 privates.

(_b_) _Qualifications governing selections._—Each member of the sniping
group should be a well-trained, intelligent, disciplined soldier; a dead
shot at short and mid ranges; brave, yet cautious; cool, observant,
patient, resourceful, and prompt. In addition to the above, the
noncommissioned officer in command of the group should be a competent
instructor in all that is included in the training of the sniper and
should possess good judgment in the selection and preparation of
snipers’ posts.

(_c_) _Training._—In addition to the preliminary training contemplated
in (_b_), the following features should be specially developed:

_Rifle practice._—The sniper must become expert in a broader sense than
is implied by the word as employed in ordinary marksmanship
classification. Ordinarily his target will be a small and fleeting one,
and his training should be such as to enable him to quickly and
accurately deliver a single shot at objects varying from a 4–inch
loophole at 100 yards to those the size of a man’s body at 800 yards.
The small object at short range will be the most frequent target and
indicates the most important rifle training. The character of the target
emphasizes the importance of extreme accuracy of fire, and accuracy of
fire implies, in addition to correctness of aim, correct knowledge of
range, a correct knowledge of external influences, such as light, heat,
moisture, wind, and the personal equation of the firer and the rifle.
The sniper must continually practice both with the military sights and
with the adjuncts supplied him and under conditions closely resembling
those that will obtain in actual trench work. The importance of
concealment will usually result in fire being delivered from rest, and
the handling of the rifle must not be accompanied by exposure of his
position. The soldier who has been thoroughly trained in the courses
prescribed in the Small Arms Firing Manual will have no difficulty in
improvising firing exercises with small bobbing or disappearing targets
that will develop skill along the lines indicated above. In every
exercise the judgment of the firer should be expressed as to the
influence of a cold piece, a hot piece; clouds, heat, moisture, wind; a
worn rifle; fouling; recent cleaning and oiling, or whatever existing
condition may exert an influence on the path of the bullet. The
estimation of ranges and their determination by use of range finders
should form an important part of the training of a sniper.

_Reconnaissance_ and _scouting_.—Under this head is included all manner
of observation with a view to obtaining information. The sniper’s field
of action will be limited, but within its sphere it will be governed by
the same principles that are prescribed for reconnaissance parties and
scouts, and will include the intelligible rendering of reports.

To this end the sniper must be trained in the reading of maps, the
making of sketches, the use of the prismatic compass, the simpler and
more common conventional signs, and the rendering of both verbal and
written reports. That the subject may not seem too large and formidable
to him, his instruction should be progressive and as simple as possible,
with due care to impress him with the necessity for everything he is
required to do. The American soldier will rarely fail to respond if he
can see the reasonableness of the demand made upon him. Let him see that
his own life and that of his comrades may depend upon the accuracy of
his knowledge of the following:

1. The location of our own front line and that of the enemy, so far as
they are within his visual range.

2. The location of any known or suspected enemy sniper’s posts,
machine-gun emplacements, observation posts, listening posts, command
stations, or probable routes of advance.

3. The location and importance of dominating points in either line.

4. The importance of being able to pick out on the ground any points of
special importance or danger indicated on sketches or maps turned over
to him, and to determine from maps drawn to scale the ranges to such
points.

5. How to find his way by the aid of a map or sketch from his post to
any specified point in our own trenches, and back again.

6. The importance of being able to intelligibly record and graphically
represent matters of importance to his commanding officer or to the
sniper who is to relieve him. In this connection the special importance
of exact truth in statements of fact, and of the careful separation of
matters of fact from those of mere report or conjecture, should be duly
stressed. Hearsay and conjecture are often of great importance, but
should be transmitted as such, and in the case of conjecture the reasons
therefor should be stated.

The above are simply a few instances to suggest to the instructor how to
go about the matter of instruction. Many men will be already familiar
with the subject, and the method may be abridged, but in the case of an
entirely uninstructed man a step-by-step method of instruction must be
followed. The training should be such that it will be an entirely
natural matter for the sniper to observe and report as to:

1. The attitude of the enemy (whether aggressive, alert, active, etc.).

2. Description of enemy seen, uniform, arms, etc.

3. Any new work evident; such as trenches and obstacles strengthened,
new emplacements, etc.

4. Position of machine guns, observation posts, sniper posts, etc.,
discovered.

5. Points in our own lines found to be specially dangerous, and points
of enemy line that menace them.

6. Routes known to be used by the enemy.

7. Routes of patrols.

8. Points where ammunition or supplies are believed to be dumped.

9. Ranges to prominent or important points. This information will be
less likely to mislead if the following rules are observed:

Carefully indicate the point from which each range is taken.

Use prominent, easily identified landmarks as reference points.

Indicate by whom and how ranges were determined.

10. Report any repairs needed in trenches or obstacles.

11. Position of suspected mines.

6. _Equipment._—Telescopes, rather low power, are preferable to field
glasses for observation and reconnaissance. Care must be taken to render
them as inconspicuous as possible and prevent their location by the
enemy through reflection of light from the object glass.

Telescopic periscope.

Rifle rest.—Various sorts have been devised, usually not merely to serve
the purpose of a rest, but to expedite resumption of aim and change in
direction or elevation.

Telescopic sights.

Sniperscope.—(A device for aiming with the head below the line of sight.
Reports indicate that with this device the tendency is to shoot high,
and that they are only reasonably accurate up to ranges of 200 yards.
They are usually used over parapets, between sandbags. Proper adjustment
is essential and great care necessary to prevent derangement.)

Steel helmet and mask.

Maps, sketches, note-book, message blanks, pencils, pocket knife.

Each post should have a range chart for use of all reliefs.

The above is additional to the normal equipment of the soldier.

7. _Duties of commander of sniping group_:

(_a_) Training of snipers and maintenance of efficiency.

(_b_) To supervise the work of his unit.

(_c_) Responsibility for care of equipment.

(_d_) To receive and transmit to the proper authority all information
turned over by the posts he relieves and by his own posts.

(_e_) To select the positions for sniper’s posts and supervise the
construction of loopholes and other special arrangements when not
already provided.

[Illustration:

  A SNIPERSCOPE.
]

8. _Location of sniper’s posts._—Though engaged in trench warfare
snipers are not invariably located in trenches. When not so located the
sniper will avail himself of such cover as best suits his purpose. If
practicable he will so dress himself as to blend with his surroundings,
giving particular attention to his face and hands. Masks of
inconspicuous color are sometimes worn. He must study the maps and the
ground and endeavor to determine in advance good localities for
observation and good lines of approach. His line of retreat must also be
decided on as early as possible. The arts of the deerstalker and
poacher, or those practiced in our early Indian troubles will be of
great use under these circumstances, as his success will depend largely
upon his patience and cunning. Houses and other buildings should be
viewed with distrust, as they may be closely observed by the enemy.
Trees will also receive this scrutiny. The best cover will be that which
is least likely to be suspected of affording concealment for a man.

[Illustration:

  THE SNIPER WITH TELESCOPIC SIGHT. HIS OBSERVER WITH PERISCOPE.
]

[Illustration:

  A PREPARED SNIPER POSITION. A SNIPER USING A SNIPERSCOPE.
]

Sniper’s positions in trenches may, according to circumstances, be
located in (_a_) the front line, (_b_) parados, (_c_) approach trenches,
(_d_) connecting trench, (_e_) dummy trench, (_f_) support trenches, or
any others affording the desired facilities. The commander must study
the terrain, the enemy’s trenches, the advantages and disadvantages of
each position considered, both with reference to facilities for
observation, fire, and concealment, and with reference to danger from
the enemy, and select that which will best serve the purpose. He must
then decide as to measures for promoting observation and concealment,
and supervise their execution and the construction of the necessary
loopholes. Loopholes may be arranged of sandbags, iron pipes, boxes,
etc. It is better to have them run obliquely rather than perpendicularly
with respect to the trench line, and a curtain should be provided to
prevent their being discovered by light showing through the hole.
Loopholes near the ground are not as readily seen as those higher up,
and those located among débris and loose earth, leaves, branches,
tumbled sods, etc., are less easily detected than those located in a
smooth slope. When constructing loopholes care should be taken to
disturb previously existing conditions as little as possible lest the
enemy observe the change and profit by the hint. Several loopholes
should be provided for each post as the discovery of one by the enemy
renders it worthless for future use, and continued use of one loophole
will sooner or later result in detection.

The best positions are usually in rear of the first line, so placed as
to command a view of the enemy’s trenches up to at least 400 yards. This
is not always possible and the best possible must be selected. In any
case alternative positions must be arranged. Support trenches may afford
better locations than the fire trenches, but they have the objection of
increasing the range. If the post is detached an important consideration
is whether or not it can be entered or left unobserved during daylight.

9. _Conduct of the sniper._—Snipers should work in pairs, exchanging
duties of observer every 15 or 20 minutes. They should be relieved every
two hours or oftener. It may be advantageous to relieve one every hour.

They will never fire merely to annoy, as this will lead to disclosure of
the position, with no adequate result. They will closely examine their
shelter and see that the fire opening is so constructed as not to be
affected by the blast of the rifle. If shooting through a small aperture
in brickwork, the opening should be kept wet to prevent dust being blown
out by the discharge. Newly constructed loopholes should be left unused
for a time, so as to see if the enemy has detected it. The curtain will
always be kept in such position as to prevent light showing through.
Snipers must not be led by ruses to fire fruitlessly and disclose their
positions. Fire to kill. If a large target is discovered, do not fire if
it is possible to inform the machine guns or the artillery. Search
constantly for machine guns and snipers; smash his periscopes.

Attacks will afford great opportunities for the sniper, as the enemy
will then not be so alert for them, being busy with other matters. Less
caution will therefore be necessary. From a position on a flank or
anywhere that he can fire without interference with our own men, he
selects the most useful targets, such as machine-gun men, officers and
noncommissioned officers, snipers, artillery observers, etc. He closely
observes the flanks, which are favorite places from which to break up an
attack, and endeavors to forestall the enemy’s fire. If the attack
succeeds, he covers the working parties during the organization of the
captured trench and watches for evidences of an intended counterattack.
If this is made, he fires on the enemy as he shows himself in the
approach trenches, picking off leaders when possible.

Much night work for snipers will rarely be advantageous. The targets are
then practically limited to patrols and sentries, and there is great
danger of firing into our own men or being fired on by them. The flash
of the rifle will disclose the position if care is not taken to conceal
it. Avoid the enemy’s listening posts. Learn the hours at which the
enemy repairs the gaps in his obstacles or parapets and watch for him.

10. _Description of targets._—In paragraph 2 reference was made to the
necessity for a satisfactory working system for designating or
describing targets. One of our present embarrassments lies in the
multiplicity of methods and the incident confusion in the mind of the
soldier. Another source of error lies in the tendency of men to fancy
that the _ears_ of listening soldiers take in and digest a description
as rapidly as the _eye_ can travel from point to point. The ear, as
compared with the eye, is very slow. The immediate deduction from this
is that descriptions must be shorn of all unnecessary words, and that
they must be as simple and clear as possible. It also emphasizes the
advantage of following so far as practicable fixed methods of
expression. Recruits should be taught the general plan followed in
describing targets in order that they may waste no time from lack of
comprehension of the relation of the different elements of the
description or the terms employed.

The use of a single form will not suffice, since in some cases the
target is so evident that no mistake can be made, and the simple
designation such as “That troop of white-horse cavalry, range 1,000
yards,” will identify it beyond all question; while in other cases the
particular target may be so obscure and liable to confusion with other
targets that a reference point and some system of coordinates must be
employed.

In general, targets with reference to their designation will fall under
the following heads:

(_a_) Those that stand out so plainly that there can be no possibility
of doubt as the target meant.

(_b_) Those that are plainly visible, but are liable to be confused with
other targets of a similar nature and range.

(_c_) Those less distinctly visible and more difficult to pick up on
account of peculiar background, confusion with other objects, etc.

(_d_) Targets visible only through field glasses, and that may or may
not present the additional difficulties of danger of confusion with
other objects.

Case (_a_) has already been referred to. The system consists in the
simple announcement of: 1. The objective. 2. The range.

Ingenious people sometimes combine horizontal and vertical clock systems
in designating a target whenever possible to do so, but this is a
violation of the rule of simplicity and should never be done unless
evidently necessary. The mere fact that it is necessary or desirable to
use a reference point does not in all cases require use of both systems,
as the reference point may be so evident that no clock coordination is
necessary. When such designation _is_ necessary, the horizontal clock
face is used in coordinating the reference point and the vertical clock
face for locating the subsequent points.

11. Instruction in target description is simple but must be thoroughly
understood. An illustration by means of case (d) will cover the entire
subject so far as necessary.

(_a_) Explain to the recruits the use of the horizontal clock system as
a means of indicating directions. Inform them that they are, in this
system, _always_ at the center of the dial. Call out various hours and
require each recruit to extend his arm in the direction he understands
is indicated. Explain and correct errors.

Explain the use of the vertical clock system, impressing the recruits
with the fact that in this system the _reference point_ is always at the
center of dial. Call out an hour and require the recruit to name some
object that is located on the hand of the clock at the designated hour.
A diagram on paper may be of assistance. Explain and correct errors.

Explain to the recruit that the angle subtended by the width of one
finger at arm’s length from the eye and that subtended by the leaf of
the rear sight to his rifle at 14 inches from the eye has a chord 50
yards long at 1,000 yards distance. The finger width and the sight leaf
thus become known as units, and either may be used in indicating
distances laterally.

Having selected a reference point, name some object near it and require
the recruit to tell you how many units (_fingers_ or _sight leafs_)
apart they are.

[Illustration:

  SKETCH SHOWING GERMAN FIXED RIFLE REST FOR FIRING THROUGH LOOP HOLES.

  (Captured at the Bluff.)

  NOTE.—Both lateral and horizontal movement is given and the rifle can
    be very firmly clamped when the required aim is found.
]


                               CASE (B).

[Illustration:

  HORIZONTAL CLOCK FACE SYSTEM (USED WHEN TARGETS ARE VISIBLE).
]

  ┌─────────────────────┬─────────────────────┬─────────────────────┐
  │       SYSTEM.       │      EXAMPLE.       │      EXAMPLE.       │
  ├─────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────────┤
  │1. Announce direction│Target 2 o’clock     │Target 11 o’clock.   │
  │2. Announce objective│A hostile patrol     │A hostile patrol.    │
  │3. Announce range    │Range 1,000          │Range 900.           │
  └─────────────────────┴─────────────────────┴─────────────────────┘


                               PROCEDURE.

  1. All look along the line pointing toward the indicated o’clock of
  a horizontal clock face whose center is at the firing point and
  whose 12 o’clock mark is directly perpendicular to the firing line.

  2. Look for the objective at—

  3. A point on this line at a distance equal to the designated range.

  NOTE.—The clock here represented must be considered as horizontal,
  not vertical as shown. For the purpose of illustration perspective
  was not considered. The observer occupies the center of clock.


                               CASE (C).

[Illustration:

  VERTICAL CLOCK FACE SYSTEM (USED WHEN TARGETS ARE SMALL OR
    INDISTINCT).
]

 ┌──────────────────┬────────────────┬────────────────┬────────────────┐
 │     SYSTEM.      │   EXAMPLE A.   │   EXAMPLE B.   │   EXAMPLE C.   │
 ├──────────────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┤
 │1. Announce the   │Reference point │Reference point │Reference point │
 │  general         │  at 12 o’clock │  to our right  │  to our right  │
 │  direction of the│                │  front         │  front.        │
 │  reference point │                │                │                │
 │2. Announce the   │Single house    │High peak       │High peak.      │
 │  reference point │  with 2        │                │                │
 │  (the most       │  chimneys      │                │                │
 │  prominent object│                │                │                │
 │  in the zone     │                │                │                │
 │  indicated)      │                │                │                │
 │3. Announce       │Target at 8     │Target at 5     │Target at 4     │
 │  position of     │  o’clock       │  o’clock       │  o’clock.      │
 │  target with     │                │                │                │
 │  respect to      │                │                │                │
 │  reference point │                │                │                │
 │4. Announce the   │Machine-gun     │A hostile patrol│A hostile       │
 │  objective       │                │                │  patrol.       │
 │5. Announce range │Range 1,000     │Range 900       │Range 800.      │
 └──────────────────┴────────────────┴────────────────┴────────────────┘


                               PROCEDURE.

  1. All men look in direction indicated by 1.

  2. Reference point is found in the indicated direction.

  3. A clock face (vertical) is imagined centered on reference point
  and look along the line through the indicated o’clock, and

  4. Find the objective at —

  5. ...... yards from the firing line.


                               CASE (D).

[Illustration:

  SIGHT LEAF, FINGER, OR UNIT SYSTEM.

  (When targets are indistinct or invisible, and to define sectors.)
]

 ┌──────────────────┬────────────────┬────────────────┬────────────────┐
 │      SYSTEM      │   EXAMPLE A.   │   EXAMPLE B.   │   EXAMPLE C.   │
 ├──────────────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┤
 │1. Announce       │Reference point │Reference point │Reference point │
 │  direction of    │  at 12 o’clock │  at 1 o’clock  │  at 1 o’clock. │
 │  reference point │                │                │                │
 │  using horizontal│                │                │                │
 │  clock system if │                │                │                │
 │  necessary       │                │                │                │
 │2. Announce       │House, with     │Distant hill    │Distant hill.   │
 │  reference point │  fence around  │                │                │
 │                  │  it, on hill   │                │                │
 │3. Announce       │Target, 8       │Target, 8       │Target, 5.30    │
 │  position of     │  o’clock 2     │  o’clock 4     │  o’clock.      │
 │  target with     │  units         │  units         │                │
 │  respect to the  │                │                │                │
 │  reference point │                │                │                │
 │4. Announce the   │Line of         │Skirmish line, 2│Skirmish line, 2│
 │  objective       │  intrenchments,│  units         │  units.        │
 │                  │  3 units       │                │                │
 │5. Announce the   │Range 900       │Range 800       │Range 1,000.    │
 │  range           │                │                │                │
 └──────────────────┴────────────────┴────────────────┴────────────────┘

    NOTE.—“Units” mean 50 mils = finger = sight leaf. It is usual to
 indicate in this system the point of the target nearest the reference
                                 point.

When he is fairly familiar with the use of the horizontal and the
vertical clock system for indicating directions, and with the use of
fingers and sight leaf for measuring lateral distances from a reference
point, work him up from simple to difficult examples of target
designation.

With case (_d_) as an illustration, call the _direction_ of the
reference point. See that all look in the right direction. _Name_ the
reference point. Require it to be indicated on paper, _at the center of
a clock dial_. Call, “Target 8 o’clock.” Have a line drawn from the
center of the dial in the proper direction. Announce, “Four units.” Have
these estimated by fingers and with the sight leaf in the proper
direction and endeavor to then locate some object that should serve as a
check on the work. Continue similarly with the actual announcement of
the character of the target: “Skirmish line, etc.”

It may sometimes be advantageous to indicate the range and have the
sights set before describing the target, as men frequently lose the
target while their eyes are off it in sight-setting.

The training necessary to make a “war shot” does not stop with making
the recruits skillful in shooting. Other qualities must receive
attention and be developed. This is accomplished in his other drills.

His development into a war shot must be systematic and progressive. In
the diagram this idea is carried out.

  +----------------+
  |Care of arms,   | |
  |pages 25        |-|--+
  |and 83–84.      | |  |
  +----------------+    |
  |Sighting        | |  |
  |drills,         |-|--|
  |pages 25 to 35. | |  |
  +----------------+    |--+Gallery Practice.
  |Position and    | |  |  |
  |aiming drills,  |-|--|  |
  |pages 35 to 47. | |  |  |
  +----------------+    |  |
  |Deflection      | |  |  |
  |and elevation   |-|--+  |
  |drills, pages   | |     |
  |47 to 50.       |       |
  +----------------+       |--+Known distance
  |Effect of wind  |       |  | practice.
  |and advice to   | |     |  |
  |riflemen, pages |-|-----|  |
  |50 to 51;       | |     |  |
  |78 to 82.       |       |  |
  +----------------+       |  |
  |Self-control.   |-|-----+  |
  +----------------+          |
  |Use of ground   | |        |                   |
  |and cover,      |-+--------+--Combat practice. +-- WAR SHOT.
  |Infantry Drill  | |        |                   |
  |Regulations.    |          |
  +----------------+          |
  |Estimating      | |        |
  |distance,       |-|--------|
  |pages 53 to 57. | |        |
  +----------------+          |
  |Target          |-|--------|
  |description.    |          |
  +----------------+          |
  |Fire            |          |
  |discipline,     | |        |
  |Infantry Drill  |-|--------+
  |Regulations,    | |
  |page 65.        |
  +----------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as
      printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES ON TRAINING FOR RIFLE FIRE IN TRENCH WARFARE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


